Development of a LoRa Wireless Sensor Network
to Estimate Agricultural Risk
Maur´ıcio F. Lima Pereira,1,2 Paulo E. Cruvinel1,3
1Embrapa Instrumentation, S˜ao Carlos, SP, Brazil
2Federal University of Mato Grosso – Computer Science Institute, Cuiab´a, MT, Brazil
3Federal University of S˜ao Carlos – Post Graduation Program in Computer Science, S˜ao Carlos, SP, Brazil
Email: mauricio@ic.ufmt.br, paulo.cruvinel@embrapa.br
Abstract—Sensors are quite important for agricultural risk
monitoring, and the customization of a LoRa wireless network
and its use in rural applications is still a challenge. This paper
presents a data collector system based on a Wi-Fi and Lora
platform. The arrangement includes an ESP32, which is a single
2.4 GHz Wi-Fi and Bluetooth combo chip designed to operate
with ultra-low-power and based on the 40 nm technologies.
Therefore, the module allows using both protocols for Wi-Fi
and LoRa wireless networks. One of the main characteristics,
which was leveraged in this study, is its applicability for long-
range communication in rural areas with low power consumption.
During operation, the proposed receiver node is connected to
the internet, thereby enabling data storage on servers, such as
ThingSpeak, which is an Internet-of-Things analytics platform
service. The results in a controlled-environment test showed
that the connection between the station and receiver was fully
functional at a distance of 500 meters. Besides, once this ad-
vanced data collector, currently under development, is ﬁnished,
interconnection of several stations will be possible, even if they
are remotely located with respect to the receiver node.
Index Terms—Agricultural Sensors; LPWAN; LoRa; Wireless
Sensor Network
I. INTRODUCTION
Agribusiness is an important pillar of the Brazilian economy
encompassing several areas. Automation has recently gained
prominence in an area called precision and decision-making
agriculture. In this scenario, the use of intelligent Global
Positioning System (GPS) guided machines to plant, cultivate,
and harvest accurately is growing in the most advanced areas
of the country, achieving greater savings in inputs, productivity
increase, and sustainability. Thus, it has become a driving force
and an integrator within and outside the production chain.
In addition to the new technologies embedded in agricultural
machinery, the development of low-cost agrometeorological
stations and their connection by building a wireless network
of sensors has proved to be useful in the ﬁeld. This is because,
based on the data generated by such equipment, computational
techniques and statistics can be applied to extract useful
information for the farmers.
In this context, the development of computational tools to
support decisions based on these data is important to reduce
risks and, consequently, losses in agricultural areas. Prelim-
inary discussions about such subject have been presented in
the regional meeting of Computer Brazilian Society [1]
Technologies to integrate microelectronics, collect and com-
pute data, and evaluate ﬁeld conditions based on agrometeoro-
logical data have been developed since the advent of micropro-
cessors and advances in digital electronics [2]. More recently,
however, the Internet-of-Things (IoT) has been playing a key
role in Agriculture 4.0. Several types of sensors can be used
for continuously measuring a great amount of data, assisted
by wireless networks and cloud computing to create evaluation
models for ﬁeld conditions while providing greater safety for
farmers [3].
An important application for sensors in agriculture is di-
rectly measuring soil characteristics through parameters such
as pH, nutrient content, temperature, and moisture, among
other variables of interest.
The results of soil evaluation are important for obtaining
a more precise scenario of the planting area and, therefore,
higher performance and quality. Advanced technology systems
are thus necessary for high-performance yields [4].
Based on this scenario, Figure 1 shows an adaptation of
the structure to agricultural risk models proposed by Cruvinel
and collaborators [5]. In such context, the developed method
exploits smart sensors to measure Soil Quality (SQ) indicators.
SQ is one of the factors that inﬂuence agricultural risk given
that it can inﬂuence the productivity indexes of crops [6]–[9].
In such a context, different protocols for data communi-
cation have been observed in the literature. One example is
the LoRaWAN protocol, which can enable implementation for
long-range networks, avoiding the use of conventional cellular
networks, whose coverage in Brazil in rural areas is still not
ideal.
As part of a broader project in which the development of
agricultural-risk analysis tools based on data from different
sources is being developed, this study presents a new approach
of both climatical and soil data collector system based on a
wireless network, which is intended to be one of those data-
sources for support decision making in agricultural risk [10]–
[12].
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section
II presents the materials and methods; Section III presents the
results and discussions; ﬁnally, conclusion and future studies
are presented in Section IV.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 1. A framework related to the use of geo-technologies and embedded support decision systems for agricultural risk management.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A hardware device based on Arduino Mega 2560 was used
to build the ﬁrst version of the data collector equipment,
connecting sensors to a Heltec Wi-Fi Lora 32 [13], which
contains an ESP32 micro-controller, a Bluetooth low-energy
transmitter, a Wi-Fi transmitter, and a LoRa transmitter, in
a single board. Both boards exchange information through
their serial ports. Data were also received using a Heltec Wi-
Fi LoRa 32 module. The equipment receives, organizes, and
transmits data to a remote server using a dedicated Wi-Fi
network. In the ﬁrst sensor validation stage, data from stations
were stored in ThingSpeak, an IoT platform that enables real-
time aggregation, visualization, and analysis of data ﬂows
in the cloud. Air temperature, humidity, wind speed and
rainfall were initially monitored. Data were also inserted into a
Mosquitto, NodeRed, and Postgres-based platform, which will
be integrated in a high-performance architecture using Apache-
Spark to treat and process data through a risk calculation
algorithm [14].
Figure 2 presents the basic architecture developed for soil
quality risk analysis, in which it is possible to observe not
only the model components but also the LoRa structure and
protocol used for wireless agricultural data communication.
Figure 3 presents the developed concept: a station con-
taining microprocessors, a DS DHT22 sensor, a bascule
pluviometer [15], and an anemometer. Another Wi-Fi LoRa
module was positioned 500 meters away playing the role of a
gateway, receiving data from the station and transmitting them
to ThingSpeak through a dedicated Wi-Fi network.
The following sections describe the experimental organiza-
tion of the equipment, the hardware used for the collector sys-
tem, a brief notion about LoRa networks, and the organization
of the station ﬁrmware.
A. Area and agricultural experiment
The collector system prototype was installed inside a re-
served area of the National Precision Agriculture Reference
Laboratory (Lanapre) from the Embrapa Agricultural Instru-
mentation Center, S˜ao Carlos, Brazil, aiming to build a
database to validate risk calculation models. The agricultural
area was about 80 by 50 meters, having corn (Zea mays.)
planted throughout its extension. The area was divided into 4
plots measuring 20 meters by 50 meters each. Their soil will
receive different amounts of nitrogen; the soil and plants will
be measured over time. As presented in Figure 4(a), the ﬁrst
plot did not receive nitrogen at all (0%), the second received
50% of the amount recommended in the literature, the third
received 100% of the recommended amount, and the fourth
received 200% of that amount. Soil samples were extracted in
three growth stages along the crop cycle from three depths:
0-20, 20-40, and 40-60 centimeters.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 2. Soil quality risk management based on wireless communication and embedded systems for decision support.
Figure 3. Prototype of data collector device based on Arduino Mega and Heltec automation using LoRa to transmit agrometeorological data in the ﬁeld.
The collector system has obtained climate data over a
prescribed experimental period from temperature, humidity,
wind speed, and rainfall sensors to build more accurate agri-
cultural risk models. The objective was to integrate those
pieces of information into an agricultural-risk analysis model.
Figure 4(b) shows the experimental area with corn planted
according to the experiment plan. In addition to various
climate variables from the planting stage, aerial images were
extracted from drones equipped with multi-spectral cameras.
The resulting images also composed the dataset used in the
high-performance processing platform.
B. LoRa and LoRaWAN
LoRa (long-range) is a patented modulation technology for
wireless communications acquired by Semtech Corporation in
2012 [16] [17].
LoRa is a wireless solution for networks below 1 GHz. It
uses frequencies that demand no licensing, e.g., 433, 868, and
915 MHz. This type of networks is used to connect devices in
low-consumption long-range applications because it can reach
15 km in open ﬁeld [18].
A remarkable advantage of LoRa is the high sensitivity
of its sensor and the great capacity of its communication
link, allowing long-range transmissions. Typical SNR levels
for spreading factors 10 and 12 when using LoRa modulation
are -20 dB and -15 dB, obtaining receiver sensitivities of -
134 dBm and -129 dBm, respectively. These values are barely
comparable to the typical sensitivity of Wi-Fi or Bluetooth
receivers, which is often in the range from -40 dBm to -
80 dBm. The main properties of LoRa modulation are 1) its
scalable bandwidth and frequency, enabling easy change from
narrowband to wideband hopping, 2) resistance to Doppler
shift, 3) relatively high immunity to fading or multi-path,
especially in dense scenarios, and 4) robustness to interference.
The LoRa speciﬁcation just provides the physical layer for
radio communication. Besides, the LoRaWAN is the most
popular protocol for wide area networks and it is, funda-
mentally, a network protocol designed with a special focus
on battery-powered devices, as they are the most commonly
used devices with LoRA. Therefore, energy consumption
must be kept as low as possible. The network topology of
LoRaWAN is a star network, in which several end-devices
transmit to a given gateway. In fact, devices broadcast their
transmissions, which might be received by several gateways.
Then, backend servers, which all gateways are connected
to, make an automatic decision on which gateway manages
the received packets. Uplink transmissions are considered
predominant in LoRaWAN, and therefore have preference over
downlink connections. The protocol addresses this aspect by
deﬁning three different classes of connected end-devices with
an incremental number of features: (1) Class-A devices, with
the basic set of features that all devices must implement; (2)
Class-B devices, with scheduled listening windows; and (3)
Class-C devices, for bi-directional communication at any time
[19]–[22]. To meet the different requirements of a wide range
of IoT applications, the LoRaWAN communication protocol
offers three class types for sending and receiving packets, as
shown in Figure 5.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

(a)
(b)
Figure 4.
Experimental area: (a) Design of the plots using an agricultural
data collector system; (b) Corn crop (Zea mays.) according to the plan.
Figure 5. LoRaWAN Classes [23].
C. Heltec Wi-Fi Lora 32 Module
The Heltec Wi-Fi LoRa 32 module presented in Figure
6 stands out for its ESP32 processor from Espressif [24]
with a 32-bit Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC)
architecture, and its dual-processing ultra-low-power core.
The SX1276/SX1278 LoRa chip [25] is also attached to the
module, enabling connections using this type of network. In
addition to LoRa, the module includes Wi-Fi and Bluetooth
connections through their respective antennas. An IPEX inter-
face is available to connect an external antenna for LoRa.
An SH1.25-2 battery interface in the lower portion of the
module with an integrated lithium battery management system
allows controlling charging and discharging, protecting against
overload, and switching between USB and battery sources.
The module also has a 0.96 inch, 128 x 64, organic light-
emitting diode (OLED) display on the top for programming
and operating.
The manufacturer provides libraries for programming in the
native Arduino environment, Platformio, and Visual Code.
Figure 6. Heltec Wi-Fi 32 LoRa module pinout.
D. Structure of the collector station ﬁrmware
All sensors, the Real Time Clock DS3231, and non-volatile
memory modules were connected to Arduino Mega 2560,
while the Heltec Wi-Fi LoRa 32 module managed commu-
nication tasks. Therefore, all the data collection was pro-
grammed into Arduino’s ﬁrmware. At ﬁrst, the ﬁrmware used
the interrupt ports to facilitate processing. The pluviometer
interrupts when a new pulse is detected, which occurs when its
inner recipient reaches a 0.25-mm rain volume, and moves the
weighbridge, generating a 5-V signal in port 47 of the Arduino,
which interrupts its activity to record a ﬂag and an increment
in the number of pulses. The DS3231 was programmed to
ﬁre once a minute in the same ﬁrmware, and all the events of
information data collection from the DHT22, anemometer, and
rainfall were coordinated by this signal, which also determined
when the information had to be packed and sent through the
serial port to the LoRa-WiFi module. The same data were
recorded into the memory card to increase safety.
The Heltec module received data through the serial port
and communicated with the receiving module, sending the
packages from Arduino. The Wi-Fi and Bluetooth networks re-
mained switched off in this module for consumption purposes.
Figure 7 presents the algorithm structure and the parallel
execution of each module.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 7. Data collection ﬂowchart.
The receiving module was programmed to receive data
permanently, unpack the received information, check the type
of data, and transmit it to the correct ThingSpeak channel.
Subsequently, it transmitted the necessary conﬁrmation to the
information sender station.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The corn crop (Zea mays.) is divided into two major phases:
vegetative and reproductive. Each vegetative stage is deﬁned
according to the last fully expanded leaf or out of the cartridge.
The reproductive phases begin with mating and go on to
physiological maturation, stage where the grains have a black
layer at the insertion between the grain and the cob.
The growing stage of the maze crop, for the validation of
this development, was deﬁned into a period of time comprised
between 60 and 65 days. Therefore, the complete monitoring
time of climate and soil variables have took from 1440 hours
to 1560 hours, since the night period also requires follow-up.
Thus, for the evaluation of the Lora wireless sensor network
in a rural environment, wireless networks based on ZigBee
(IEEE 802.15.4-based) and Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11-based) were
also tested for comparison purposes. Table I presents compar-
ative information for these wireless network modalities.
In this context, the total energy consumption in kWh and the
range distance in meters have been evaluated, as well as other
parameters of interest. Therefore, for the maize cultivation
monitoring time of 1560 hours a consumption of 0.16 kWh
was observed for the platform based on LoRa, while using
ZigBee and Wi-Fi a consumption of 0.40 kWh and 1.95 kWh
respectively were observed, i.e., based on the use of a +5Vdc
power supply for each of the technologies in order to calculate
the amount of energy consumed during the same period of
monitoring.
On the other hand, the range provided by the use of LoRa
technology was observed to be 150 times superior to ZigBee
and 60 times superior to Wi-Fi use.
The prototype was assembled using a breadboard (Figure 8)
to validate the hardware and ﬁrmware in the laboratory before
building the circuit boards and boxes for ﬁeld application.
During the tests, the collecting and receiving modules were
placed 500 meters apart with a wall between them. There
was no information loss in this distance according to the data
from the memory card and the receiving log ﬁle. Eventually,
some transmission and ThingSpeak failures occurred. Code
improvements to allow resending and checking the Wi-Fi
network were proposed to reduce failures.
Figure 9 shows a section of code conﬁguring the use of a
LoRa module in the Heltec Wi-Fi LoRa 32 board, speciﬁcally
in the data receiving module. This conﬁguration allows data
exchange using both LoRa and Wi-Fi networks.
Table I
MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TECHNOLOGIES ZIGBEE, WI-FI , AND
LORA [26]–[28]
Indicator
Wireless Network’s Technologies
ZigBee
Wi-Fi
LoRa
Range
up to 100m
up to 250m
up to 15 km
Average
Power
52 mA
251mA
20 mA
Consumption
Baund
up to 250 Kbps
3 Mbps up to
up to 50 Kbps
Rate
866 Mbps
Robustness
High
Medium
High
Network
mesh
start, mesh
star-of-stars,
topology
mesh
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

(a)
(b)
Figure 8.
Prototypes for collecting and transmitting data through a LoRa
network: (a) Network data receiver module; (b) Collector device board
installed in the ﬁeld.
Figure 9. A section of the data receiving code.
Furthermore, experimental tests have allowed recording data
into ThingSpeak, which can be analyzed using its tools. The
charts in Figure 10 present an example for a period of 12
hours of data temporal series from both air humidity and
air temperature in the agricultural area. Some data correctly
transmitted using the LoRa network were not retransmitted to
ThingSpeak.
(a)
(b)
Figure 10. An example for a period of 12 hours of data temporal series from
both air humidity (a), and air temperature (b) in the agricultural area. Such
data are part of the variables set data vector for the evaluation of the soil
quality analysis, which also uses the wind speed, rainfall, pH and the % of
organic matter measurements from each plot.
During operation, it was observed that some data was not
properly retransmitted. After veriﬁcation, it was found the
occurrence of interruption in the use of the Wi-Fi module
due to the momentary unavailability of the Internet in the
rural area. Once that such an occurrence has been veriﬁed, the
algorithm has become reorganized for automatic reconnection
to the network, i.e., when any events of this nature occur
again. Also, energy saving concepts have been used based on
deep-sleep, controlled by the ESP32 microcontroller present
in the Heltec module, i.e., conﬁguring the Real Time Clock
(RTC) DS3231 to signal the moments when the microcon-
troller should actually work. The current consumption for the
microcontroller‘s circuit when in deep-sleep are in the order
of 20µA [29].
The contributions of this work involve the use of a long-
range and low power consumption of agricultural data trans-
mission that is very promising and suitable for application
in the rural environment, mainly for agricultural management
based on precision agriculture, which is an approach to farm
management that uses information from sensors to ensure that
crops and soil receive exactly what they need for optimum
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

health and productivity.
Besides, based on such a concept it is possible to take
into a better manner the risks that occurs in agricultural
production, and their mitigation. However, to achieve this goal,
so fundamental for production, it is necessary to monitor the
behavior of soil, climate and plant variables, their values and
ranges, as well as the dynamics for decision making in real
time.
In this study, the risk modeling has referred to the risk on
soil quality, one of the essential parts that make up the total
agricultural risk.
Likewise, to establish the soil quality risk behavior, it is
necessary to know the variability of air temperature and hu-
midity, organic matter content, pH and availability of nutrients
in the soil, among others. However, a merit function that can
integrate either a set of variables or information about their
behavior at instants of time has to be considered.
One way found to integrate the variables is the use of
their occurrence probabilities obtained from the time series
of the collected data, which are treated as random variables.
In addition, using a risk model it is possible to meet prevention
and containment strategies, so that as many scenarios as
possible help the promotion of expected result in terms of
number of tons/hectares.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In this present study it has been shown the use of LoRa wire-
less network for agricultural application, i.e., related to risk
analysis. Results have shown that the whole implementations
worked satisfactorily not only at the laboratory but also during
the validation occurred in a corn’s agricultural ﬁeld. In such
a context it has been observed that there are needs for some
ﬁrmware corrections and additional agricultural experiments
in order to increase system reliability to the users. Therefore,
the use of a LoRa network has been proved to be suitable for
agricultural application, with special interest for soil quality
risk analysis.
In addition, another important aspect to be observed in
these conclusions is that the development of a wireless sensor
network based on Lora made it possible to transmit long range
and operating agricultural data at low power consumption,
which is promising for decision support in the rural environ-
ment.
Likewise, the development of the wireless network based
on Lora minimized the limitations regarding the availability
of energy sources and the difﬁculty of accessing the internet
in rural areas, which required seeking customization for real-
time operation considering variables of climate and soil which
can bring impacts to soil quality during agricultural planting.
Future works will take into account the implementation
of pH and organic-matter embedded smart sensors, as well
as algorithms structured using Apache-Spark to operate the
model for agricultural soil quality risk analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was ﬁnancially supported by the S˜ao Paulo Re-
search Foundation (FAPESP), process no. 17/19350-2, through
an agreement involving IBM Brazil and the Brazilian Agricul-
tural Research Corporation (Embrapa). The authors are also
grateful for the institutional support by the Federal University
of Mato Grosso (UFMT).
REFERENCES
[1] M. F. L. Pereira and P. E. Cruvinel, “Development of an automatic
agricultural data collection system based on lora network and esp32
microprocessor (original in portuguese ”desenvolvimento de um sistema
de coleta autom´atica dados agr´ıcola baseado em rede lora e no micro-
processador esp32” ),” in Anais da X Escola Regional de Inform´atica
de Mato Grosso.
SBC, 2019, pp. 43–48.
[2] A. Torre Neto and P. E. Cruvinel, “Use of microcontrollers and virtual
reality in agriculture (original in portuguese: ”uso de microcontro-
ladores e realidade virtual na agricultura”),” Embrapa Instrumentac¸˜ao-
Comunicado T´ecnico (INFOTECA-E), 1997.
[3] S. Monteleone et al., “Exploring the adoption of precision agriculture
for irrigation in the context of agriculture 4.0: The key role of internet
of things,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 24, p. 7091, 2020.
[4] S. Navulur and M. G. Prasad, “Agricultural management through wire-
less sensors and internet of things,” International Journal of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, vol. 7, no. 6, p. 3492, 2017.
[5] P.
E.
Cruvinel,
J.
M.
Naime,
J.
D.
C.
Pessoa,
J.
M.
G.
Beraldo,
L.
M.
Rabello,
and
S.
Crestana.
(2017)
Advanced
digital
tool
for
the
agricultural
risk
management
(original
in
portuguese:
Ferramenta
digital
avanc¸ada
para
o
gerenciamento
de
riscos
agr´ıcolas).
[retrieved:
June,
2021].
FAPESP
-
PITE.
[Online].
Available:
https://bv.fapesp.br/pt/auxilios/100768/
ferramenta-digital-avancada-para-o-gerenciamento-de-riscos-agricolas/
[6] D. Karlen, S. Andrews, and J. Doran, “Soil quality: current concepts
and applications,” Advances in Agronomy, vol. 74, p. 40, 2001.
[7] V. P. Obade and R. Lal, “A standardized soil quality index for diverse
ﬁeld conditions,” Science of The Total Environment, vol. 541, pp. 424–
434, Jan. 2016.
[8] J. Paz-Ferreiro and S. Fu, “Biological indices for soil quality evalua-
tion: perspectives and limitations,” Land Degradation & Development,
vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 14–25, 2016.
[9] E. K. B¨unemann et al., “Soil quality -– a critical review,” Soil Biology
and Biochemistry, vol. 120, pp. 105–125, May 2018.
[10] W. Zhao, S. Lin, J. Han, R. Xu, and L. Hou, “Design and implementation
of smart irrigation system based on LoRa,” in 2017 IEEE Globecom
Workshops (GC Wkshps).
IEEE, dec 2017.
[11] M. S. Mekala and P. Viswanathan, “A survey: Smart agriculture IoT with
cloud computing,” in 2017 International conference on Microelectronic
Devices, Circuits and Systems (ICMDCS).
IEEE, aug 2017.
[12] C. Pham, A. Rahim, and P. Cousin, “Low-cost, long-range open IoT for
smarter rural african villages,” in 2016 IEEE International Smart Cities
Conference (ISC2).
IEEE, sep 2016.
[13] H.
Automation,
“Wiﬁ
lora
32,”
Dispon´ıvel
em
https://heltec.org/project/wiﬁ-lora-32/, 2019.
[14] M. Zaharia, R. S. Xin, P. Wendell, T. Das, M. Armbrust, A. Dave,
X. Meng, J. Rosen, S. Venkataraman, M. J. Franklin, A. Ghodsi,
J. Gonzalez, S. Shenker, and I. Stoica, “Apache Spark: A Uniﬁed
Engine for Big Data Processing,” Commun. ACM, vol. 59, no. 11, pp.
56–65, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2934664
[15] J. C. Boechat, M. F. L. Pereira, and O. M. Dantas, “Low cost rain
gauge for rain data collection and wireless transmission using the mqtt
protocol (original in portuguese: Pluvi´ografo de baixo custo para coleta
e transmiss˜ao sem ﬁo de dados de chuva, usando o protocolo mqtt,” in
Anais da IX Escola Regional de Inform´atica de Mato Grosso, Barra do
Bugres, Nov. 2018, pp. 48–57.
[16] U. Raza, P. Kulkarni, and M. Sooriyabandara, “Low power wide area
networks: An overview,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 855–873, 2017.
[17] J. P. Queralta, T. N. Gia, Z. Zou, H. Tenhunen, and T. Westerlund,
“Comparative study of lpwan technologies on unlicensed bands for m2m
communication in the iot: Beyond lora and lorawan,” Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 155, pp. 343–350, 2019.
[18] B. Nunes, “Introduc¸˜ao a lora, nb-iot e sigfox,” Dispon´ıvel online em
https://www.embarcados.com.br/lora-nb-iot-e-sigfox/, 2017.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

[19] B. Miles, E.-B. Bourennane, S. Boucherkha, and S. Chikhi, “A
study of lorawan protocol performance for iot applications in smart
agriculture,” Computer Communications, vol. 164, pp. 148–157, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0140366420319575
[20] I. Butun, N. Pereira, and M. Gidlund, “Security risk analysis of lorawan
and future directions,” Future Internet, vol. 11, no. 1, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/11/1/3
[21] G. Codeluppi, A. Cilfone, L. Davoli, and G. Ferrari, “Lorafarm: A
lorawan-based smart farming modular iot architecture,” Sensors, vol. 20,
no. 7, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/
7/2028
[22] R.
K.
Singh,
M.
Aernouts,
M.
De
Meyer,
M.
Weyn,
and
R. Berkvens, “Leveraging lorawan technology for precision agriculture
in greenhouses,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 7, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/7/1827
[23] N. Sornin, M. Luis, T. Eirich, T. Kramp, and O. Hersent, “Lora wan
technical speciﬁcation,” LoRA Alliance Version 1.0, pp. 1–82, 2015.
[24] Espressif,
“Esp32
series
datasheet,”
Dispon´ıvel
online
em
”https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/ﬁles/documentation/esp32
datasheet en.pdf”, Espressif Systems, 2019.
[25] T. Hareendran, “A review of the mini sx1278 lora transceiver mod-
ule,” Dispon´ıvel em https://www.electroschematics.com/14383/rf-radio-
frequency/, Julho 2019.
[26] A. Mahmood, N. Javaid, and S. Razzaq, “A review of wireless
communications for smart grid,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, vol. 41, pp. 248–260, 2015. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032114007126
[27] H. Alobaidy, J. Mandeep, R. Nordin, and N. F. Abdullah, “A review on
zigbee based wsns: Concepts infrastructure applications and challenges,”
Int. J. Electr. Electron. Eng. Telecommun., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 189–198,
2020.
[28] M. Botella-Campos, L. Parra, S. Sendra, and J. Lloret, “Wlan ieee
802.11b/g/n coverage study for rural areas,” in 2020 International
Conference on Control, Automation and Diagnosis (ICCAD), 2020, pp.
1–6.
[29] J. Boechat, O. M. Dantas, and M. F. L. Pereira, “Automatic climate
data collector using wireless networks and mqtt protocol in data trans-
mission (original in portuguese ”coletor autom´atico de dados clim´aticos
utilizando redes sem ﬁo e o protocolo mqtt na transmiss˜ao de dados”),”
in Anais do XII Congresso Brasileiro de Agroinform´atica - IoT na
Agricultura.
SBIAGRO, 2019, p. 2.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

