SAW based CO2 sensor: influence of functionalizing MOF crystal size on the 
sensor's selectivity. 
Meddy Vanotti, Sacha Poisson, Virginie Blondeau-
Patissier. 
Time and Frequency Department (UMR CNRS 6174), 
FEMTO-ST Institute, 
26 Chemin de l’Epitaphe, 25030 Besançon Cedex, France.  
e-mail : meddy.vanotti@femto-st.fr 
Laurie André, Stéphane Brandès, Nicolas Desbois, 
Claude P. Gros. 
Institut de Chimie Moléculaire de l’Université de 
Bourgogne (ICMUB, UMR CNRS 6302), 
Université de Bourgogne Franche-Comté, 
9 Avenue Alain Savary, BP 47870, 21078 Dijon Cedex, 
France.
 
Abstract— The potential impact of indoor air quality on 
human health has become an increasingly important topic of 
public health and, thus, has stimulated an interest in 
hazardous compounds survey such as carbon dioxide. To 
address this issue, we started the development of a Surface 
Acoustic Wave device functionalized with metal-organic 
framework for the selective detection of carbon dioxide. Here, 
we propose preliminary results on the influence of the size of 
the metal-organic framework crystals on the sensor’s 
selectivity and on its evolution with the ageing of the sensor.  
Keywords-Carbon dioxide sensor; SAW device; metal-
organique framework. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Road traffic considerably contributes to the exposure of 
human to air pollutants like carbon dioxide (CO2). In traffic 
environments, the concentrations of traffic related pollutants 
are higher than in other environments and a considerable 
amount of time, on average from 4 % to 8 % of total hours of 
the day, is spent in traffic in developed countries. This points 
to the need for an air quality monitoring system in vehicle 
cabins, especially for CO2. Here we propose preliminary 
results on a Surface acoustic Wave (SAW) based sensor for 
the selective detection of CO2. In this work, we focus on the 
influence of the size of the ZnTACN Metal-Organic 
Framework (MOF) crystals used for the functionalization of 
its surface on the selectivity toward interferent such as 
carbon monoxide (CO) et oxygen (O2). The evolution of the 
calculated selectivity with the ageing of the sensor is also 
discussed. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
We have developed a CO2 sensor based on the potential 
of Surface Acoustic Waves (SAW) to probe mass variations 
[1] in CO2 sensitive porous material. We used Love wave 
based SAW delay line built on a temperature compensated 
substrate of (YXlt)/36°/90° quartz. IDTs were made of 
aluminum and shaped by mean of a lift-off technique using 
negative photoresist. In order to allow the Love-mode 
acoustic wave to propagate at the surface of the device, a 
silica guiding layer was deposited on the top of the chip. We 
have selected a delay line configuration shown in Fig. 1 for 
the sensors because of the large functionalization area that it 
offers. Also, the robustness of such a device allows for the 
deposition of a sensitive layer compatible with its normal 
operating conditions [2, 3]. 
 
 
Figure 1. SAW device used for the manufacturing of the CO2 sensors. 
The SAW device was than functionalized with metal-
organic framework to reach sensitivity toward CO2. The 
ZnTACN MOF represented in Fig. 2 was selected because of 
its high affinity with this gas described in the literature [4].  
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 2. ZnTACN metal-organic framework (b) obtained by self assembly 
of TACN ligand (a) and zinc. 
Depending on the scale of the synthesis, the crystals had 
sizes between 1 µm and 40 µm. The characteristic trigonal 
prismatic-like morphology with curved edges of the 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

ZnTACN MOF was observed by SEM assessing the proper 
synthesis and the functionalization of the surface (Fig. 3). 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 3. SEM images of the ZnTACN MOF with crystal size between 1.3 
µm (a) and 40 µm (b). 
 
 
Figure 4. SEM Adsorption–desorption isotherms for ZnTACN MOF at 298 
K with CO2 (ads: ■, des: □), CH2 (○), CO (●), N2 (◆), and O2 (▲).  
 
The CO2, CO, CH4, O2 and N2 adsorption isotherms at 
298 K are illustrated in Fig. 4. The thin solid lines are related 
to the calculated dual-site Langmuir isotherm model for CO2 
and single-site Langmuir-type isotherms for the other gases. 
Dashed and dotted lines indicate the two contributions for 
the calculated CO2 isotherm. The large uptake of CO2 
compared to other gases, especially in the low-pressure 
range, clearly evidence the selective adsorption of CO2. 
These isotherms were obtained with MOFs whose size is 
between 10 µm and 30 µm. Five sensors were coated with 
MOF of different sizes in the range [1-40] µm. SEM 
observations of the sensor’s surface, shown on Fig. 3, were 
made to assess the presence of the MOF at the surface of the 
device and measure the crystal size. The evaluation of the 
coverage rate of the sensors was also made with a high-
resolution digital microscope 4 K Serie VHX-7000 
KEYENCE. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The sensors were exposed to CO2, CO and O2 diluted in 
pure N2. The phase decrease observed during the exposures 
were characterized by means of the derived phase at the 
beginning of the phase decrease. This derived phase is 
referred to as ’Phase Shift Velocity’ (PSV). This approach 
allows to measure gas concentration within a few tens of 
seconds [1]. The responses are normalized by the coverage 
rate of the sensor’s surface and the gas concentration. The 
measurements of the three gases are plotted against the MOF 
crystals size in Fig. 5. It shows that the sensitivity of the 
sensor to CO2 is inversely proportional to the crystal size. As 
expected from the adsorption isotherms presented in Fig. 4, 
the sensitivity to O2 is virtually null. However, we observed 
an unexpected non-zero sensitivity to CO which tends to be 
linear with the MOF crystal size.  
 
 
Figure 5. Phase shift velocity normalized by surface coverage and gas 
concentration measured under CO2, CO and O2. 
On the basis of these measurements, we estimated that 
the CO2 vs O2 selectivity is virtually infinite since there is 
no measurable signal under O2. The CO2 vs CO selectivity 
was also calculated and plotted against the MOF crystals size 
on Fig. 6. It appears that is the case of brand-new sensor, the 
CO2 vs CO selectivity is inversely proportional to the MOF 
crystal size offering a potentially infinite selectivity in the 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

submicronic range. However, in the studied range, its value 
isn’t quite as high as expected from the measurement made 
on compacted powder (Fig. 4). This will draw our attention 
and further work will be engaged to explain the difference 
in the MOF sensitivity toward CO between the case of a 
compacted powder and the case of fewer crystals deposited 
on a surface. In the case of an aged sensor exposed to 
ambient air for days, the CO2 vs CO selectivity dramatically 
decreases for small crystals. This behavior may be attributed 
to the breakdown of the zinc sites on the MOF structure 
after the exposure to ambient air. 
 
 
Figure 6. Selectivity CO2/CO versus MOF crystal size for new sensors and 
aged sensors. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this work we showed the capability of a SAW based 
sensor 
functionalized 
with 
ZnTACN 
metal-organic 
framework to detect carbon dioxide. Although the 
measurements that were performed on compacted MOF 
powder showed high selectivity for CO2 toward CO, we 
found a significantly lower selectivity for dispersed MOF 
crystals on the sensor’s surface. More interestingly, we 
noticed a virtually infinite selectivity toward O2 in the whole 
crystal size range and for submicronic crystals in the case of 
CO2. These observations induce us to investigate further the 
potential of the ZnTACN MOF for the development of 
selective CO2 sensor. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the ISITE CO2DECIN 
(ANR-15-IDEX-0003), the European Union through the PO 
FEDER-FSE Bourgogne 2014/2020 (Convention n◦2016-
6200FE003S00257) via the CoMICS program, the French 
RENATECH network and its FEMTO-ST technological 
facility. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Vanotti, S. Poisson, V. Soumann, V. Quesneau, S. 
Brandès, N. Desbois, Y. Yang, L. André, C.P. Gros, and V. 
Blondeau-Patissier. (2021). Influence of interfering gases on a 
carbon monoxide differential sensor based on SAW devices 
functionalized with cobalt and copper corroles. Sensors and 
Actuators B: Chemical, 332, 129507. 
[2] M. Vanotti, V. Blondeau-Patissier, V. Moutarlier, and S. 
Ballandras, Analysis of palladium and yttrium–palladium 
alloy layers used for hydrogen detection with SAW device, 
Sens. 
Actuators 
B 
Chem. 
217 
(2015) 
30–35, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2015.02.049. 
[3] P. Zheng, T.-L. Chin, D. Greve, I. Oppenheim, V. Malone, T. 
Ashok, J. Miller, and L. Cao, Langasite SAW device with 
gas-sensitive layer, 2010 IEEE International Ultrasonics 
Symposium 
(2010) 
1462–1465, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ULTSYM.2010.5935779. 
[4] G. Ortiz, S. Brandès, Y. Rousselin, and R. Guilard. (2011). 
Selective CO2 Adsorption by a Triazacyclononane-Bridged 
Microporous Metalo-Organic Framework. Chemistry - A 
European Journal, 17(24), 6689-6695.G. Eason, B. Noble, and 
I. N. Sneddon, “On certain integrals of Lipschitz-Hankel type 
involving products of Bessel functions,” Phil. Trans. Roy. 
Soc. London, vol. A247, pp. 529–551, April 1955.  
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

