Using a Silicon Drift Detector to Improve an Agricultural  
Compton Scattering Tomograph for Soil Compaction Analysis 
 
 
Paulo E. Cruvinel 
 Embrapa Instrumentation, São Carlos, SP, Brazil 
Post-Graduation Program in Computer Science - Federal University of São Carlos, SP, Brazil 
Email: paulo.cruvinel@embrapa.br 
 
Abstract— The use of sensors in farming have become essential 
for soil, plants and environment monitoring in order to greater 
yields, while allowing rational use of inputs and decreasing 
risks. Although many of them are known, still there are 
challenges related to sensor’s development, characterization 
and customization for agricultural use, bringing opportunities 
for research and innovation. This article presents a study for 
the use of a high-performance silicon drift detector in a 
customized Compton scattering tomograph to analyze soil 
compaction in agricultural field. In agriculture the soil 
compaction causes substantial reduction in productivity and 
has always been of great concern for farmers. The use of such 
a methodology enables non-invasive and non-destructive 
measurements of soil compaction directly in the crop area, i.e., 
allowing its mapping. Energy resolution and signal-to-noise 
ratio were evaluated and compared with those from a classic 
scintillation detector. Based on the results, it was concluded 
that such a sensor can improve the effectiveness of a Compton 
scattering 
tomograph 
dedicated 
for 
soil 
compaction 
measurements. 
Keywords-Solid-state sensor; Compton Computed tomography; 
compaction measurements; agricultural sensor; intelligent 
instrumentation; soil analysis. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, sensor-based technologies have emerged for 
use and investigation on several domains of application.  
In the field of tomographic imaging the progress in 
sensors has been leading many scientists, engineers, and 
technicians to present additional interest and to devote 
greater time to their activities.  
This has been enlarging the world evolution for decision 
support systems, which are sensors-technology based. Such 
aspects, have also expanded economy, i.e., with additional 
opportunities for many fields of interest, like medical [1], 
industrial [2], and agricultural [3], among others. 
X and -ray Computed Tomography (CT) was born with 
contributions from both the physicist Allan MacLeod 
Cormack and engineer Godfrey Newbold Hounsfield [4][5]. 
Later, Cormack came to know the work of the Austrian 
mathematician Johann Radon [6], who was the first to 
present 
a 
general 
mathematical 
solution 
for 
the 
reconstruction of a body from its projections in a space of 
order (n) that is, enabling the determination of a density 
function of a studied region through its projections. In fact, 
Cormack has developed equations to reconstruct an area 
considering a finite number of projections. Also, he defined a 
density function, based on the mass attenuation coefficients 
(cm2/g), and used back-projection to obtain photon 
attenuation measurements based on the Beer-Lambert 
equation [7]. 
In 1979, Cormack and Hounsfield shared the Nobel Prize 
in Medicine, due their innovative work based on X-ray 
tomograph. In this context, it is also important to mention, as 
important contribution for such a result the pioneering works 
carried out by Michael Faraday (1831) and Wilhelm Conrad 
Röntgen (1895). Michael Faraday was one of the first to 
study the relationship between electricity and magnetism. He 
discovered, in 1831, that electromagnetic induction and his 
studies are considered key concepts in current physics, 
finding applications in several areas including tomography. 
In 1895, Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen produced and detected 
electromagnetic radiation in different wavelengths, which he 
came to call X-rays. 
There are different instrumental arrangements based on 
the interaction of the ionizing energies with matter, which 
defines the operational modalities for the X and -ray 
tomographs. Here, we are considering two of these 
approaches, i.e., one based on the transmission and other 
related to the scattered photons. Transmission tomography 
uses a collimated beam of radiation, which defines planes as 
thin as the beam itself and, through several parallel 
collimated beams, sets of projections can be defined that are 
taken to image reconstruction algorithms. 
In fact, the study of CT applied to agriculture, has begun 
in the early 1980s, primarily based on transmission 
tomography and focused on the investigation of water 
content (cm3/cm3), soil density and compaction (g/cm3), as 
well as soil porosity (%). 
The first customized X and -ray minitomograph scanner 
for soil science applications was built in 1987 [8]. 
Subsequently, other agricultural tomographs were developed 
to operate at millimeter scale, i.e., considering either photons 
transmission or scattering techniques [9-13].  
Based on scattering photons technique, the Compton 
effect was first presented by Compton and Hagenow 
[14][15].  
In 
fact, 
conventional 
transmission 
tomography 
techniques and conventional tomography models are based 
on the use of source and detector on opposite sides. When 
used appropriately, the benefits of a CT scan far exceed the 
risks. CT scans can provide detailed information to soil 
diagnose. Additionally, the detailed images provided by CT 
scans may decrease the need for agricultural machinery uses 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

for soil management. However, these models cannot always 
be used in agricultural applications, such as, for example, in 
extracting soil measurements directly from either an 
agricultural field or crop area. 
The Compton scattering tomograph has source and 
detector located on the same side in relation to the sample of 
interest to be sampled. In this way, there is no need to open 
trenches for soil analysis, as necessary when using the 
transmission tomographic technique. 
In such field of knowledge, Hanson and Gigante have 
developed a mathematical method to visualize the scattering 
geometry of the energy distribution and the angular variation 
of the Compton scattering [16][17]. However, these authors 
considered the absorption effects to be very small and 
obtained 
toroidal 
surfaces 
of 
constant 
angle 
and 
correspondent energies for scattering. Additionally, they 
emphasized the importance of observing energy contours 
within a scattered volume, as these determined the 
magnitude of geometric effects. They also have shown that 
this type of analysis would be useful as an analytical 
approach to measurements with X-rays using scattered 
photons. Besides, it was important to understand the 
Compton´s 
photopeak 
in 
order 
to 
obtain 
accurate 
measurements. 
In 1992, Cesareo and coauthors published an article on 
the theoretical basis and applications in techniques that used 
the interaction of photons with matter considered a broad 
keV energy range [18]. Analytical applications included 
Compton densitometry, Compton profile measurements, and 
Rayleigh scattering to Compton scattering (R/C) ratio 
measurements. Regarding Compton densitometry, the 
authors emphasized that this method of analysis can be used 
to determine the electronic density of the sample, but not its 
mass density, which can be deduced by knowing the value of 
the relation regarding the atomic number to the effective 
atomic mass of the sample, i.e., the (Z/A) ratio.  
About the Compton profile measurements, they reported 
that the technique was considered an important source of 
information about the modifications of the electron moment 
distributions in the sample. However, the technique had 
difficulties in measurements due multispectral incident beam 
energy and the multiple scattering occurrences. Regarding 
the (R/C) ratio measurement, the authors reported works that 
make such measures feasible. 
Balogun and Spyrou investigated the influence that 
materials with high and low atomic number Z exerted on 
CCT images [19]. These authors used a 662 keV (137Cs) -
ray source with a rectangular collimator, a Phantom 
consisting of a cylindrical aluminum (Al) block with 52 mm 
in diameter and 5 holes arranged in a circle. Two of these 
holes were 1.2 cm in diameter, while the others were in the 
range of 5 and 6 cm in diameter.  
The holes were made to insert rods whose chemical 
composition would be of interest to the research. They 
justified this type of arrangement based on the analysis of the 
contrast and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) evaluation. Such 
analysis has considered an expectation about 60% in contrast 
for reconstructed images from a Phantom having diverse 
materials. The best results for contrast, SNR and accuracy 
were obtained with the inclusion of Lead (Pb, high Z) and 
Cooper (Cu, low Z) in the Phantom, and the author’s 
hypothesis have been proved successfully. Likewise, the 
minimum detectable change in bulk density was equal to 4.2 
g/cm3. 
In 1994, Norton developed a technique for tomographic 
images reconstructing through the number of scattered 
photons as a function of energy and detector positioning 
[20]. The result obtained was an electron density image that 
could be reconstructed by measuring its line integrals over 
various paths. This result presented an analytical solution for 
the idealized Compton image reconstruction problem. 
Norton emphasized that the back-projection method had the 
advantage of being computationally efficient compared to 
methods based on numerical systems of equations. 
Additionally, the author stated that such a solution was based 
on the use of Monte Carlo method, i.e., has been found 
iteratively. 
This paper presents the use of an embedded X and -ray 
high-performance 
detector 
in 
a 
Compton 
scattering 
tomograph, customized for agricultural soil compaction 
evaluations on the crop’s region. After this introduction, 
there are Section II, which presents advances in the use of 
such a technique in agriculture, and Section III with material 
and methods, considering the main aspects. In addition, there 
is Section IV with results and discussions, and finally, the 
conclusions are presented in Section V. 
II. 
EARLY USE OF COMPTON SCATTERING TOMOGRAPH 
IN AGRICULTURE 
The 
scattering 
tomography, known 
as 
Compton 
Computed Tomography (CCT), has being used for imaging 
reconstruction from projections of agricultural soils.  
In fact, Cruvinel and Balogun have developed a dual-
energy Compton scattering tomograph for agricultural 
applications [21][22]. The experimental setup consisted of 
two radioactive sources, one of 662 keV (137Cs) for soil 
density measurements and another of 59.6 keV (231Am) for 
soil water content measurements with 2 mm spatial 
resolution. In such publications, these authors have also 
presented a deep discussion regarding the comparison with 
other methodologies, as well as advantages for soil density 
and water content measurements based on CCT. In such a 
context, they have shown a linear relationship between the 
size of soil aggregates and the Compton measurements with 
a regression coefficient (r2) better than 0.95 for bulk density 
and 0.70 for water content.  
The minimum density detected was 0.13 g/cm3, i.e., with 
an accuracy of 2%. Besides, the minimum value of the water 
content detected was about 0.10 cm3/cm3, i.e., with an 
accuracy of 5%. In 2003, these same authors have presented 
the use of a NaI(Tl) scintillation detector and the 
qualification of the use of a photopeak in the region of 250 
keV to carry out Compton measurements (Fig. 1). In such a 
research work, the Compton images obtained showed good 
resolution contrast, shape and edge definition.  
Additionally, they reported that in Compton scattering 
photon tomography the choice of scattering energy was 
dictated by the scattering angle, materials to be examined 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

and the size or depth of the sample. For soil analysis, the use 
of low energy photons (≤ 60 keV) was indicated for studies 
of surface phenomena, such as soil sealing. In situations that 
require depth information, such as soil compaction, higher 
energy photons would favor the analysis.  
In 2004, Roy and Pratt compared Klein-Nishina cross-
section measurements for the whole atom (energy range 
from 11 keV to 40 keV) with the theory and used a 
synchrotron-type X-ray source [23]. Compton scattering 
measurements were performed with a scattering angle equal 
to 90°. The results showed experimental comparison of the 
cross sections measured with conventional and synchrotron 
sources with the predicted values of the Compton scattering 
factor, that means, an Incoherent Scattering Factor (ISF). 
The measurements made with conventional sources were 
presented in a dispersed way, having a difference in the 
magnitude of the ISF in the range of 5% to 50%, while the 
measurements with the synchrotron fell in a narrow range of 
low percentage of difference. The authors highlighted the 
need for studies on Compton scattering measurements in the 
region below 10 keV in order to confirm the adequacy of the 
theoretical treatment.  
In 2009, Yao and Leszczynski presented an analytical 
approach 
to 
approximately 
separate 
the 
unknown 
information from the Klein-Nishina cross-section formula 
and express it through the primary intensity of X-rays in the 
detector [24]. These authors reported that the spatial 
distribution of the first order Compton scattered could be 
described by the Klein-Nishina cross section formula 
assuming that the source energy spectrum, the geometry of 
the imaging system and the volumetric information of the 
scattering medium were known, including geometry and 
radiation distribution properties. Such information was 
mixed up and generally could not be completely separated. 
The authors also considered an approximate formula in 
which characteristics were separated from the information 
from the X-ray source and the imaging system. The 
approximation obtained was compared with the exact 
solution of the Klein-Nishina cross section and with the 
simulations carried out using the Monte Carlo method. The 
result obtained showed that the approximate relationship 
between the first order scattering and the fluence of the 
primary intensity in the detector was useful in estimating the 
scattered radiation in physical projections of a specimen. 
In 2010, Pratt and co-authors reviewed the standard 
theory on Compton scattering of valence electrons and 
described findings that required modification of the usual 
understanding by looking at the consequences for the 
experiment [25]. In such a work, the authors demonstrated 
that the estimate made by Eisenberg and Platzman for the 
validity of the impulse approximation theory and its 
application to Compton scattering was incorrect, although 
the qualitative conclusion remained intact. They pointed out 
that the impulse approximation provided a good description 
of Compton scattering in the peak region, but failed when 
considering low-energy resulting photons. 
In 2011, Şahin and collaborators measured water 
retention 
in 
soils 
using 
Compton 
scattering. 
The 
experimental arrangement used a -ray source 133Ba (500 
mCi, 356 keV) and a NaI(Tl) scintillator detector [26]. The 
soil used was a Holocene or Fluvial Neosol (Entisol) 
according to the North American classification (USA). 
Additionally, the chosen spreading angle was 90° and the 
soil thickness varied from 5 to 55 mm with a 5 mm pitch. 
The mass attenuation coefficient value obtained was 0.102 
cm2/g and the relationship between the amount of water 
added and the intensity of scattered radiation showed a 
correlation coefficient (r2) equal to 0.99. The authors 
concluded that the performance of the method with Compton 
scattering based on the standard curve showed that the 
results obtained from the evaluation of the analytical 
uncertainties were satisfactory. 
 
  
 
Figure 1. Laboratory version of the Compton CT scanner for agricultural soil 
and water analyzes [21]. 
 
In 2011, Cruvinel and Scannavino Junior have published 
an instrumental evolution on Compton scattering, i.e., the 
development of a field densitometer that uses an X-ray 
source and digital signal processing to measure the soil 
density of arable soils [27]. 
In recent times, one may find progress in agriculture 
technologies, that means, in terms of the use of sensor-based 
techniques for soil analysis. In fact, either nom-ionizing or 
ionizing radiations have been used, and challenges are still 
related to decrease invasiveness of the measure probes for 
data acquisition, as well as improvements in accuracy and 
precision of the measurements.  
Furthermore, also improvements have been required in 
computational models to help decision-making directly on 
farm [28-31]. Likewise, the intelligent agriculture industry is 
expanding quickly, bringing and presenting new solutions to 
the farmers practically daily.  
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Considering the CCT´s instrumentation for soil analysis 
(Fig. 2), the detector positioning is established from the 
selection of the scattering angle, which determines the Klein-
Nishina cross section and the energy of the scattered 
photons. Besides, the collimators diameters of the source and 
detector, together with their lengths, determine the aperture 
half-angles that influence the intersection volume of the field 
of view established between source and detector. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

From a Compton process the scattered photons number 
(dS) can be observed by equation (1), which shows the 
contributions of the linear attenuation coefficients, both for 
the incidence (1) and scattering energy (2), as well as the 
Klein-Nishina differential cross section (dKN/d). Then, in 
order to account for these, we can write, for the number of 
singly scattered photons detected at the detector during a 
counting time of (t) seconds: 
 
 
 
(1) 
where exponential factors are introduced to take care of the 
attenuation of the primary and scattered photons within the 
sample, () is the detector’s photopeak counting efficiency at 
the scattered photon energy, (x1) and (x2) represent the 
photon’s path lengths in the sample, from the source to the 
scattering center and back to the detector, respectively, (0) 
is the incident photon flux of energy (E0), () the soil bulk 
density, (A) the mass number, and (NA) is the Avogadro's 
number. 
Furthermore, a commercially available Silicon-Drift-
Detector (SDD) was used in such instrumental arrangement 
[32-34]. The performance of the SDD can be observed in 
Fig. 3, i.e., efficiency versus energy. The SDD sensor used in 
this study has a discrete external Field Effect Transistor 
(FET) and it uses a dedicated feedback capacitor and a well-
proven method of pulsed charge restoration. This allows 
stability and provide more accurate X and -ray 
measurement.  
In addition, as part of the used methods, the Filtered 
Back-projection Algorithm (FBP) was also considered 
[35][36]. In fact, the tomographic image reconstruction is a 
process to estimate a slice f(x,y) image from a set of 
projections p(t,θ). In such application, each sampled point of 
each projection collected at angle (θ) is correspondent to the 
scanned scattered photons intensity for one of the 
geographical positions of the sampled region. The basis of 
the mathematical model for the Compton`s image 
reconstruction can be such a reconstruction algorithm.  The 
FBP algorithm is often referred as the convolution method 
using 
a 
one-dimensional 
integral 
equation 
for 
the 
reconstruction of a two-dimensional image. This method is 
the most common reconstruction algorithm used today for 
CT application. It uses projections and their Fourier 
Transform (FT), i.e., considering Q(w) as the filtered P(t) 
projection. To get the reconstructed image, the resulting 
projections for different angles (i) are added to estimate 
f(x,y). The reconstruction model can be presented, in its 
discrete form, as follows. 
 
𝑓 𝑥, 𝑦 =
𝜋
𝐾  𝑄𝜃𝑖(𝑥𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃𝑖 + 𝑦𝑠𝑒𝑛𝜃𝑖)
𝑘
𝑖=1
 
 
(2) 
where (K) represents the numbers of the interval of angles 
(i) during the scanning process.  
The interface with the user is performed by a computer 
algorithm developed for communication between the control 
system and the SDD data acquisition, and it is also able to 
reconstructed the CCT images. 
Besides, the algorithm allows to organize tasks to receive 
and collected data of soil compaction and in organizing an 
image bank for future use and analyzes, i.e., interpretation of 
spatial variability of soil compaction in A-horizon of the soil 
landscape. 
For validation, a databank of soil CCT images were 
obtained considering an experimental agricultural plot, 
located at the geographic coordinates 21°57’13.9“S and 
47°51’10.9“W, i.e., at the National Laboratory of Precision 
Agriculture (LANAPRE) in São Carlos, SP, Brazil. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Instrumentation and probe of the customized and portable 
Compton scattering tomograph for soil compaction analysis. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Efficiency versus energy for the SDD. 
 
The mechanical module of the CCT is composed of a 
XYZ table for the spatial localization of the measurement 
Compton`s probe for soil compaction. The XYZ table is 
sustained by fuses and linear shafts of dislocation over the 
support structure. The imaging area of the CCT allows to 
image a Region of Interest (ROI) equal to 1.0 m x 0.50 m. It 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

is sustained by three adjustable legs, with two at each frame 
extremity and one that is centralized on the opposite side to 
facilitate the entire leveling of the structure. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
The used SDD is a state-of-the-art semiconductor 
detector based on the principle of side-ward depletion. When 
it was customized to be used in the CCT a comparison has 
been made with the measuring obtained with a NaI(Tl) 
scintillation detector. As an observed result, the SDD has 
presented advantages in comparison to the use of a NaI(Tl) 
detector. Such a comparison is summarized in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
COMPARATIVE RESULTS FOR THE DETECTORS VARIABLES  
Detector 
Characteristics 
NaI(Tl) 
scintillation 
SDD 
Effective area (mm2) 
16 
100 
Thickness (mm) 
76.2 
0.26 
Energy resolution 
(FWHM) @ 662keV 
(keV) 
46.3 
16.5 
Signal-to-Noise ratio 
(SNR) 
4 
83 
 
It is observed that, the energy resolution for 662 keV 
gamma rays is a function the workable temperature of the 
SDD, when considering the shaping time constants equal to 
0.5 and 1 μ s. It was also observed that cooling reduces noise 
contribution. Nevertheless, an acceptable energy resolution is 
obtained up to SDD temperatures around 50 C, which is 
useful for agricultural field use. Figure 4 shows the CCT 
working region evaluated for the SDD. 
A calibration curve for the pixel value in (kg.m-3) was 
carried out by using a set of well-known soil samples and a 
conventional penetrometer.  
Figure 5 shows, as one example, a 100 mm x 50 mm 
Compton image from the organized databank. It was 
collected for analysis from the agricultural experimental 
field. In such a result the pixel is equal to 2.5 mm2, and the 
total amount of pixels per image is equal to 800 (20x40). The 
source energy used was equal to 662 keV (137Cs). The total 
amount of time to collect all projections and to have a final 
Compton image reconstructed was equal to 30 minutes. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. The CCT working region evaluated for the SDD  
based on 145 eV resolution. 
 
For a given collimator size, length, and, its distance from 
the scattering center, scattering volume increases with 
increasing angle in the back-scattering geometry. The best 
volume resolution was found within the 90°±5° scattering 
angle range. Though volume resolution also decreases 
towards the forward scattering angles, resolution rate loss is 
much more pronounced in the backscatter angles. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. An example of Compton image from the agricultural pilot. 
The pseudo-color scale is calibrated in (kg.m-3) and represents the soil 
compaction presented in the scanned area. From the grid used over the 
image one may have 25 pixels per block. 
 
The use of CCT has enabled non-invasive analysis of the 
interior of the agricultural soil. Therefore, it has allowed the 
evaluation in situ of the A-horizon into an experimental area, 
as well as the information about its spatial soil compaction 
variability.  
Soil compaction can have both desirable and undesirable 
effects on plant growth. A slightly compacted soil can speed 
up the rate of seed germination because it promotes good 
seed-to-soil contact. In fact, as soil compaction increases 
beyond optimum, yields begin to decline. In dry years, soil 
compaction can lead to stunted, drought-stressed plants due 
to decreased root growth. Without timely rains and well-
placed fertilizers, yields will reduce. 
In wet weather, yields decrease with any increase in 
compaction. Soil compaction in wet years decreases soil 
aeration, increasing denitrification. All these factors add 
stress to the crop and lead to yield loss, i.e., favoring food 
insecurity. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We have carried out studies related to the application of 
the SDD, and started its use in a customized Compton 
scattering tomograph for agricultural applications. The 
physics aspects of such a detector, that includes a solid-state 
based-sensor, was also evaluated for its well operation and 
functioning. Besides, result have shown advantages when 
using the SSD in comparison with a NaI(Tl) detector, since it 
presented good energy resolution, high SNR, as well as 
suppression of the Compton background. Further, an 
agricultural validation was considered using a set of 
Compton images for evaluating the spatial variability of soil 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

compaction in kg.m-3. In fact, such a result has proved to be 
possible non-invasive analysis of the compaction level of 
agricultural soil layers, directly on the field. For the future, it 
is planning to include a soil moisture sensor with the 
Compton probe, as well as to use algorithm to support 
decision making to orient agricultural machinery in precision 
soil compactness corrections.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by the Brazilian 
Corporation for Agricultural Research (Embrapa). 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Jung, “Basic physical principles and clinical applications 
of computed tomography”, Progress in Medical Physics, vol. 
32, no. 1, pp. 1-17, 2021.  
[2] U. Hampel et al. “A review on fast tomographic imaging 
techniques and their potential application in industrial process 
control”, Sensors, pp. 2309-2331, 2022. 
[3] T. Kim et al. “Comparison of X-ray computed tomography 
and magnetic resonance imaging to detect pest-infested fruits: 
A pilot study”, Nuclear Engineering and Technology, vol. 54, 
no. 2, pp. 514-522, 2022. 
[4] A. M. Cormack, “Representation of a foundation by Its Line 
with some radiological application”. Journal of Applied 
Physics, vol. 34, n. 9, pp. 2722-2727, 1963. 
[5] G. N. Hounsfield, “Computerized transverse axial scanning 
(tomography). 1. description of system”, British Journal of 
Radiology, vol. 46, pp. 1016-1022, 1973. 
[6] J. Radon, “About the determination of functions by their 
integral values along certain manifolds”, (Original in 
Germany: Über die Bestimmung von Funktionen durch ihre 
Integralwerte 
längs 
gewisser 
Mannigfaltigkeiten). 
In: 
Proceedings... Royal Saxonian Academy of Sciences at 
Leipzig, Mathematical and Physical Section, vol. 69, pp. 262–
277, 1917. 
[7] D. F. Swinehart, “The Beer-Lambert Law”, Journal of 
Chemical Education, vol. 39, pp. 7-333, 1962. 
[8] P. E. Cruvinel, R. Cesareo, S. Crestana, and S. Mascarenhas, 
“X-and gamma-rays computerized minitomograph scanner for 
soil science”, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and 
Measurement, vol. 39, n. 5, pp. 745–750, 1990. 
[9] Á. Macedo et al. “Wood density determination by X and 
gamma ray tomography”, International Journal of the 
Biology, Chemistry, Physics and Technology of Wood, vol. 
56, pp. 535–540, 2002. 
[10] A. Pedrotti et al. “Computed tomography applied to studies of 
a planosoil” (Original in Portuguese: Tomografia compu-
tadorizada aplicada a estudos de  um planossolo). Brazilian 
Agricultural Research Journal, vol. 38, n. 7, pp. 819–826, 
Brazil, 2003. 
[11] P.E. Cruvinel, M. L. F. Pereira, J. H. Saito, and L.F. Costa, 
“Performance 
optimization 
of 
tomographic 
image 
reconstruction based on DSP processors”, IEEE Transactions 
on Instrumentation and Measurement , vol. 58, pp. 3295-
3304, 2009. 
[12] J. M. Beraldo, F. A. Scanavinno Junior, and P. E. Cruvinel, 
“Application of X-ray computed tomography in the 
evaluation of soil porosity in soil management systems”, 
Engenharia Agrícola, vol. 34, n. 6, pp. 1162–1174, 2014. 
[13] M. F. L. Pereira and P. E. Cruvinel, “A model for soil 
computed tomography based on volumetric reconstruction, 
Wiener filtering and parallel processing”, Computers and 
Electronics In Agriculture, vol. 111, pp. 151-163, 2015. 
[14] A. H. Compton, “A Quantum Theory of the Scattering of X-
rays by Light Elements”, Physics Review, vol. 21, pp. 483-
502, 1923. 
[15] A. H. Compton and C. F. Hagenow, “A measurement of the 
polarization of secondary X-rays. Journal of the Optical 
Society of America and review of scientific instruments, vol. 
8, pp. 487-491, 1924. 
[16] A. L. Hanson, G. E. Gigante, and M. Meron, “Contours of 
constant scattering angle”, Physical Review Letters, vol. 61, 
n. 2, pp. 135-137, 1988. 
[17] A. L. Hanson and G. E. Gigante, “Evaluation of geometrical 
contributions to the spread of the Compton-scatter energy 
distribution”, Physical Review A, vol. 40, n. 1, pp. 171-180, 
1989. 
[18] R. Cesareo et al. “Interaction of keV photons with matter and 
new applications”, Physics Reports, vol. 213, n. 3, pp. 117-
178, 1992. 
[19] F. A. Balogun and N. M. Spyrou, “Compton scattering 
tomography in the study of a dense inclusion in a lighter 
matrix”, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics 
Research B, vol. 83, n. 4, pp. 533-538, 1993. 
[20] S. J. Norton, “Compton scattering tomography”, Journal of 
Applied Physics, vol. 76, n. 4, pp. 2007-2015, 1994. 
[21] P. E. Cruvinel and F. A. Balogun, “Minitomography scanner 
for agriculture based on dual-energy Compton scattering”, In: 
Brazilian Symposium on Computer Graphics and Image 
Processing-SIBGRAPI, Proceedings... Los Alamitos: IEEE 
Computer Society, pp. 193-199, 2000. 
[22] P. E. Cruvinel and F. A. Balogun, “Compton scattering 
tomography for agricultural measurements” Journal of the 
Brazilian Association of Agricultural Engineering, vol. 26, n. 
1, pp. 151-160, 2006. 
[23] S. C. Roy and R. H. Pratt, “ Need for further inelastic 
scattering measurements at X-ray energies”, Radiation 
Physics and Chemistry, vol. 69, pp. 193-197, 2004. 
[24] W. Yao and K. Leszczynski, “An analytical approach to 
estimating the first order X-ray scatter in heterogeneous 
medium”, Medical Physics, vol. 36, n. 7, pp. 3145-3156, 
2009. 
[25] R. H. Pratt et al. “Compton scattering revisited”, Radiation 
Physics and Chemistry, vol. 79, pp. 124-131, 2010. 
[26] Y. Şahin et al. “Measurement of soil water using Compton 
scattering”, X-Ray pectrometry”, vol. 40, n. 4, pp. 315-318, 
2011.  
[27] P. E. Cruvinel and F. A. Scannavino Junior, “Evolution of an 
instrument for evaluating the compaction of agricultural soils 
with Compton scattering”, (Original in Portuguese: Evolução 
de um instrumento para avaliação da compactação de solos 
agrícolas com espalhamento Compton), In: Congresso 
Brasileiro de Engenharia Agrícola – CONBEA, vol 40, n. 
TR0713, 2011. 
[28] A. Kaloxylos et al. “Farm management systems and the future 
internet era”, Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 
89, pp. 130– 144, 2012. 
[29] Y. Sato et al. “Remote radiation imaging system using a 
compact gamma-ray imager mounted on a multicopter drone”, 
Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology, vol. 55, pp. 90–
96, 2018. 
[30] A. Plasencia, Y. Shichkina, I. Suárez, and Z. Ruiz, ‘‘Open 
source robotic simulators platforms for teaching deep 
reinforcement learning algorithms’’, Procedia Computer 
Science, vol. 150, pp. 162–170, 2019. 
[31] O. Gonzalez et al. “Development and assessment of a tractor 
driving simulator with immersive virtual reality for training to 
avoid occupational hazards”, Computers and Electronics in 
Agriculture, vol. 143, pp. 111-118, 2017. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

[32] E. Gatti and P. Rehak P, “Semiconductor drift chamber — An 
application of a novel charge transport scheme”, Nuclear 
Instruments and Methods A, vol. 225, pp. 608 – 614, 1984.  
[33] P. Lechner et al. “Silicon drift detectors for high resolution, 
high count rate x-ray spectroscopy at room temperature, 
Nuclear Instruments and Methods A, vol. 458, pp. 281–287, 
2001. 
[34] L. Wang et al. “Design and fabrication of quasi-double-sided 
silicon drift detector for x-ray detection”, Materials Science in 
Semiconductor Processing, vol.155, n. 1, pp. 107201, 2023. 
[35] Oppenheim, A.V., and R.W. Schafer, “Discrete-Time Signal 
Processing”, Prentice-Hall, Hoboken,1989. 
[36] J. Hsieh, “Computed Tomography: Principles, Design, 
Artifacts, and Recent Advances”, Wiley, New York, 2nd ed, 
2009. 
 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

