 
 
Figure 1. Vertical architecture of the textile-based sensor (left) and 
its real appearance indicating variable distances between electrodes 
(right). 
Textile Chemiresistors for Gas Detection – New Materials of Sensitive Layers 
 
 
Martin Vrňata, Eva Marešová, Jan Vlček, Přemysl Fitl, 
David Tomeček  
Department of Physics and Measurements 
University of Chemistry and Technology Prague 
Prague, Czech Republic 
 e-mail: martin.vrnata@vscht.cz 
Michal Novotný 
Physical Institute 
The Czech Academy of Sciences 
Prague, Czech Republic 
 e-mail: novotnym@fzu.cz
 
 
Abstract—The contribution presents novel research of textile 
chemiresistors prepared on textile substrates (Evolon and 
Polyester) equipped with graphite electrodes and sensitive 
layers based on polymer ionic liquid. The polymer ionic liquid, 
i.e. poly(tributylhexylphosphonium 3-sulfopropylacrylate) was 
in-situ polymerized  on the textile substrates. The responses of 
such sensors to toxic gases (10 ppm of methanol, nitrogen 
dioxide, 4-bromoacetophenone and diethylmalonate) were then 
investigated in dc-mode of measurement – the reference was 
"pure" synthetic air. It was shown that sensor dynamics 
depends mainly on molecular weight of the analytes.  
Keywords-chemiresistor; textile substrate; polymer ionic 
liquids; detection of toxic gases. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Application of functional elements and nanostructures on 
flexible substrates is a promising trend in electronics. Also 
for fabrication of chemiresistors, there are intensively studied 
substrates, such as plastic foil, paper and fabric; they seem to 
be a suitable alternative for conventional "hard" alumina 
substrates equipped with metal electrodes. Textiles are 
materials with great potential, whose mechanical properties 
(high strength, large surface area, lightness, flexibility, 
effortless integration into clothing) make it unique even in 
comparison with other flexible substrates [1]. There are 
several ways to add new functionalities to textiles when used 
in sensor applications. The textile substrate can be covered 
with gas sensitive layer by "wet" and "vacuum" coating 
techniques, e.g., ink-jet printing or magnetron sputtering 
technology. A common feature of textile sensors is that they 
operate at either laboratory or at a slightly higher 
temperature. Therefore, organic conductors are preferred to 
be their sensitive layers. 
Polymerized ionic liquids (PILs) have been reported for 
the first time in 1998, and a brief overview of their properties 
can be found, e.g. in [2]. Their electrotransport properties are 
unique (when compared with other organic substances), as 
they are purely ionic conductors. Moreover, majority of them 
can be considered as single-ion conductors. PILs are 
characterized by large capacity to absorb analytes with small 
molecules – especially CO2 and water. After such absorption, 
the internal volume of polymer is modified, hence the 
mobility of ions changes. Such a phenomenon could work as 
a prospective transducer mechanism in chemiresistors. This 
property of PILs is very valuable, because namely CO2 and 
numerous other analytes (whose molecule has neither redox 
properties, nor dipole moments) cannot be detected on 
chemiresistors by any other mechanism. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
This contribution details the development of a gas 
sensing chemiresistor using a non-conductive textile 
(dimensions 10 x 15 mm) as the substrate. The architecture 
of the sensor can be seen in Figure 1. Two kinds of textiles 
of different composition and method of production were 
used: Evolon - non-woven textile (70% polyester/30% 
polyamide) and Polyester. These textiles were first 
continuously cleaned in methanol using Soxhlet extraction 
(10 cycles) then washed with deionized water and finally 
dried at room temperature. In order to improve the 
mechanical flexibility of the sensor, the thermal adhesive 
film (Sealon Co., Ltd.) was laminated on the back side of the 
textile. The film was applied via a Heated Roll Laminator 
(model Titan-110) under the following conditions: adhesive 
bonding temperature of 80°C for 10 s, at a pressure between 
70-140 kPa. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
Figure 2. The deposition of sensitive layer on textile substrate. 
 
Figure 3. Response of sensor with P4,4,4,6SPA to 
various concentrations of methanol. 
 
 
Figure 4. Response of sensor with P4,4,4,6SPA to 10 ppm of yperite. 
 
 
The gas sensitive layer is composed of the following 
polymer ionic liquid: poly(tributylhexylphosphonium 3-
sulfopropylacrylate) abbreviated as P4,4,4,6SPA.  
In the next step, the polymerization mixture was 
prepared, having the following composition: P4,4,4,6SPA 
monomer, photoinitiator (phenylbis (2,4,6-trimethylbenzoyl) 
phosphine oxide) and crosslinker (trimethylolpropane 
ethoxylate triacrylate) dissolved in the solvent mixture 
(deionized water with acetonitrile). This mixture was photo-
polymerized directly onto the surface of the textile substrate. 
Firstly, the mixture was drop-cast onto the surface of the 
textile using a micropipette and subsequently it was 
polymerized using a LMI-6000 Fiber-Lite white light source 
(~200 kLux) for 30 min to create compact sensitive film on 
textile substrate. The process is schematically depicted in 
Figure 2.  
The dc-responses of the prepared sensors were evaluated 
according  to (1):  

SdcRair / Rgas

The symbol Sdc denotes dc-response, Rair steady-state 
resistance value of the sensor in synthetic air and Rgas steady-
state resistance value of the sensor in detected analyte. 
III. 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 
Just a few examples: As for dependence of sensor 
response on concentration of the analyte, an example is 
given on Figure 3, which illustrates detection of methanol 
(MeOH) on sensor based on P4,4,4,6SPA. The grey areas 
correspond to reference atmosphere – synthetic air, the 
white areas to synthetic air with MeOH vapor. What is 
apparent: (i) the sensor baseline (Rair) slightly drifts to lower 
values; (ii) an average value of Sdc achieves 1.05 for 100 
ppb, 1.25 for 1 ppm, 1.29 for 10 ppm and 1.39 for 100 ppm 
of MeOH, respectively; (iii) the sensor output signal 
exhibits a very low level of noise, hence as low 
concentration as 100 ppb of MeOH is above the detection 
limit. 
Figure 4 presents dynamic response of P4,4,4,6SPA sensor 
to 10 ppm of yperite. The meaning of grey/white areas is the 
same as in the previous figure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As for response dynamics: It is apparent that both the 
response- and recovery- time is approximately 5 min when 
detecting yperite and the response dynamics for yperite is 
(in general) slower than that for MeOH.  
The only chemiresistor based on PILs was reported in [3]. 
It  has Rair ≈ 1.7 GΩ, i.e. 2-3 orders higher than our samples. 
Such high baseline brings troubles in practical operation. 
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by COST Action CA15107: 
Multi-Functional 
Nano-Carbon 
Composite 
Materials 
Network (MultiComp), project id.code and title: LTC17 
Nano-Carbon Composite Materials for Thin Film Chemical 
Gas Sensors and Photovoltaics. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. M. Castano and A. B. Flatau, "Smart Fabric Sensors and e-
textiles Technologies: A  Review", Smart Materials and 
Structures, vol. 23, art. no. 053001, pp. 1-27, 2014, doi: 
10.1088/0964-1726/23/5/053001. 
[2] N. Nishimura and H. Ohno, "15th Anniversary of Polymerized 
Ionic Liquids", Polymer, vol. 55, pp. 3289-3297, 2014, doi: 
10.1016/j.polymer.2014.02.042. 
[3] C. Willa and D. Koziej, "When Nanoparticles Meet 
Poly(Ionic Liquid)s: Chemoresitive CO2 Sensing at Room 
Temperature", Advanced Functional Materials, vol. 25, pp. 
2537-2542, 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1002/adfm.201500314.
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

