 
Comparison between MOX sensors for low VOCs concentrations with interfering 
gases 
Frank James, Tomas Fiorido, Marc Bendahan, Khalifa Aguir 
Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, Université de Toulon, IM2NP- UMR 7334, Marseille, France 
 
email : frank.james@im2np.fr 
email : tomas.fiorido@im2np.fr 
email : marc.bendahan@im2np.fr 
Corresponding author, email: khalifa.aguir@im2np.fr 
 
 
Abstract—N-type Metal Oxide (MOX) sensors was developed to 
detect 
Volatile 
Organic 
Compounds 
(VOCs) 
at 
low 
concentration level. Sensitive layer like SnO2, ZnO and WO3 
was deposited by reactive RF sputtering method. The sensors is 
based on a micro heater and a MOX sensitive layer on a silicon 
substrate. Gas sensing properties have been investigated toward 
isobutylene, as a typical VOC. The optimum working 
temperature was experimentally determined at 285°C for 
isobutylene. This work highlights the detection of VOC with 
interfering gas by MOX sensor at low level. This sensor will be 
used for a real time indoor air monitoring. 
Keywords: gas sensor, MOX sensor, isobutylene, carbon 
dioxyde, carbone monoxyde. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Some MOX sensors are investigated in order to detect 
VOCs thanks to their miniaturization and real-time 
monitoring capabilities. In this work, we have chosen three 
main n-type metal oxide used in this field: SnO2 [1], WO3 [2], 
and ZnO [3]. The aim of the comparison between the 
performances of these sensitive materials is to find the best 
sensitive layer for our low VOCs concentrations sensors and 
to evaluate the effect of interfering gases like CO and CO2. In 
the Section 2, we will describe the sensitive layers and the 
sensor and in the Section 3 we will highlight the main results 
of this work. 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
A. Sensitive layer 
The three sensitive thin layers (~50nm) under study are 
deposited by reactive magnetron RF sputtering and annealed 
at 450°C during 1h30 to improve their Nano-crystallization 
and the stability of the sensors response. Fig.1 shows the XRD 
patterns of the three thin film. All the diffraction peaks show 
tetragonal rutile structure for SnO2, monoclinic structure for 
WO3 and hexagonal structure for ZnO (JCPDS cards No 72-
1147, 41-1445, 36-1451 respectively).  
Under isobutylene, the reducing molecules will react with the 
adsorbed oxygen ions and release the trapped electrons back 
to the metal oxide conduction band. This reaction leads to the 
decrease of electron depletion barrier and to increase the 
electrical conduction of the metal oxide.  
 
 
Figure 1.  XRD patterns of a) SnO2, b)WO3 and c) ZnO made by reactive 
RF sputtering 
B. Chip gas sensor 
The gas sensors fabricated with SnO2, WO3 and ZnO 
layers as sensitive material is presented in Fig.2. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-543-2
ALLSENSORS 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
 
Figure 2.  MOX Sensor with Si/SiO2 substrate  
This device has been tested with an automated gas bench with 
isobutylene. We used a power supply to control the operating 
temperature and a source meter for the data acquisition. This 
target gas was injected into a dilution system with or without 
interfering compounds. The outline was connected to a 
thermo-regulated test chamber. For each concentration, the 
sensor was exposed to isobutylene for 1 min then to dry air 
during 10 min. The sensors were maintained at the nominal 
heating voltage in dry air until the baseline was obtained to 
reach the response [4] under a flow rate of 500 sccm. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSIION 
A. Response to isobutylene 
Fig.3 shows a typical responses with a wide range of 
detection from 50 ppb to 500 ppb of isobutylene. The best 
working temperature has been determined at 285°C. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Sensors response for isobutylène  concentrations, from 50 ppb 
to 500 ppb. 
WO3 and ZnO sensors seem to be the best devices for 
isobutylene. We have reached the highest responses from the 
three sensitive layer with low concentrations. 
B. Influence of interfering gases 
We have chosen 10 ppm of CO and 1% CO2 as interfering 
gases concentrations. The Fig.4 shows the comparison of the 
responses of the three materials and for the two gases.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Sensor response under isobutylene and interferring gases 
WO3 and SnO2  show low responses towards CO and CO2  
despite the better response for the target gas.  
With tests under the same experimental conditions we can 
classify the right metal oxide for a target gas like isobutylene 
in presence of interferring gases. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The gas measurement showed fast response / recovery 
times towards isobutylene. The best sensitive layers are WO3 
and ZnO because we have the highest responses for 
isobutylene and the weakest influence towards gases like CO 
and CO2. This is the first step for air gas monitoring. We want 
to improve the selectivity towards others VOCs like benzene 
and toluene. On the other hand and after identifying the 
appropriate sensitive materials, we plan to study the 
improvement of the selectivity of these sensors. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank Antoine Dumas from 
EcologicSense Rousset – France, a company specialized in 
Diagnostics & Monitoring environments, SATT Sud Est a 
technology transfer accelerator company and Mr. A. Combes 
for his technical support in this work.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Z. Tang , G. Jiang, P. C. H. Chan, J. K. O. Sin, S. S. Lau , 
Theory and experiments on r.f. sputtered tin oxide thin-films 
for gas sensing applications, Sensors and Actuators B vol. 43, 
pp. 161-164, 1997. 
[2] M. Bendahan, R. Boulmani, J.L. Seguin, K. Aguir , 
Characterization of ozone sensors based on WO3 reactively 
sputtered films: influence of O2 concentration in the sputtering 
gas and working temperature, Sensors and Actuators B, 
Chemical vol. 100, pp. 320-324, 2004. 
[3] V. Senay et al., ZnO thin film synthesis by reactive radio 
frequency magnetron sputtering, Applied Surface Science 
vol. 318, pp. 2-5, 2014.  
[4] C. Wang, L. Yin, L. Zang, D. Xiang, and R. Gao, Metal oxide 
gas sensors: Sensitivity and influencing factors, Sensors, 
vol. 10, pp. 2088-2106, 2010 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-543-2
ALLSENSORS 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

