The Use of the Arduino Embedded System as a Prototype of a Mobile System
Controlling a Person's Breathing Using a Sensor Printed on a T-shirt
Jarosław Wojciechowski  
Faculty of Material Technologies and Textile Design
Institute of Material Science of Textiles and Polymer
Composites
Lodz University of Technology
116 Zeromskiego Street, 90-924
Lodz, Poland
e-mail: jaroslaw.wojciechowski@p.lodz.pl
Ewa Skrzetuska
Faculty of Material Technologies and Textile Design
Institute of Material Science of Textiles and Polymer
Composites
Lodz University of Technology
116 Zeromskiego Street, 90-924
Lodz, Poland
e-mail: ewa.skrzetuska@p.lodz.pl
Abstract— The aim of this idea is to show an early stage draft
for measuring the electrical resistance in a designed/elaborated
textile printed sensor with a mobile Arduino microcontroller.
The textile sensor was developed by the screen printing
technique based on a water dispersion of carbon nanotubes
printing composition. By stretching and squeezing the T-shirt
during breathing, we change the electrical resistances of the
printed sensor. The measured resistance corresponds to the
number of breaths of a person wearing it. The microcontroller
can calculate the number of breaths as a number of electrical
resistance peaks which can lead to monitoring human live
parameters.
Keywords
-
textile
actuator;
t-shirt;
textronic;
monitor;
microcontroller; Arduino; human body; carbon nanotubes;
screen printing; printing composition; textiles.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Manufacturing textronic systems is not an easy task. In
order for the garment to meet certain properties, it is
necessary to pay attention to a number of factors. When
creating a design of clothes, one cannot forget about the
requirements that accompany electronic products (including
accuracy, measuring range), the behavior of the selected
textile products (including low weight, flexibility), as well as
the applicable principles of materials science and automation.
The proper selection of textiles and electronic systems as
well as their mutual integration is a big challenge for
scientists. With the increase in technology development, the
quality of manufactured systems has improved. Textronic
products are created mainly using everyday clothes by
combining them with a miniaturized electronic system,
sensors, and a power supply system.
The creation of textronic systems is possible due to the
use of sensors. The characteristic properties of some raw
materials from which textile products are made include
piezoelectric and electrostatic properties, as well as shape
memory. Materials using these features are called intelligent
and they combine the functions of both the sensor and the
activator.
The most common sensors are sensors that provide
information in one of the electrical quantities, such as
voltage, current, and electrical resistance. This is due to the
fact that electric current is a signal that is easily amplified,
transmitted over long distances, further processed using
digital techniques and computers, and saved. Their properties
change under the influence of an external stimulus, which
may be e.g. a mechanical stimulus or an electrical impulse.
Several research works [4]-[8] conducted at the Institute
of Material Science of Textiles and Polymer Composites in
Lodz, Poland, showed a real possibility of creating flat fiber
products
with
sensory
properties
containing
carbon
nanotubes. The aim of the presented work is an early stage
draft
for
measuring
the
electrical
resistance
of
the
designed/elaborated printed textile sensor on the chest part of
a garment [6][8], using a mobile Arduino microcontroller.
The measured electrical resistance corresponds to the number
of
breaths
of
a
person
wearing
it.
The
Arduino
microcontroller can calculate the number of breaths as a
number of electrical resistance peaks.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we present the state of the art in the topic of sensors
controlling human live parameters. In Section III, we present
the practical measurement and aim of calculations we may
follow. Finally, we conclude the work in Section IV.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
The idea of using Arduino is not new [1]. [1] describes the
LilyPad Arduino, a fabric based construction kit that enables
novices to design and build their own soft wearables and
other textile artifacts. An assortment of sensors and actuators
elements can be sewn to cloth substrates and each other with
conductive thread to build e-textiles. In [2], the authors
investigate aspects regarding the use of wearable electronic
sensors, embedded in clothing for monitoring the health
using simple electronics such as Arduino board to perform
signal analysis processes. In [3], there is a breathing rhythm
and an electrocardiography (ECG) measured using flexible
substrates on a T-shirt with bi-axial accelerometers involved.
The work in [3] is a slightly similar to ours, but ours is much
easier to do and simpler to use in everyday life.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 1. The microcontroller and textile sensor connection diagram – (own study, Arduino graphics taken from [10])
III.
PRACTICAL MEASUREMENT
A.
Research apparatus

Arduino or Genuino Board connected to
measuring electrodes,

T-shirt
with
print
containing
sensors
receiving and transmitting information about the
tested subject [4].
B.
Idea of research
The aim of the research is to measure the electrical
resistance with the Arduino microcontroller [9][10] of an
elaborated textile sensor for changes of electrical resistance
during normal activity of a human who is wearing a T-shirt.
The number of breaths may be calculated by the logic inside
Arduino by counting the picks of resistance within 60
seconds. An exemplary architecture diagram is showed in
Figure 1. We will use two resistors: the first resistor is 10k
Ω and the second is represented by the textile sensor. From 
the point of view of Ohm's law, it is important that the
resistors are connected in series. The resistor with a known
resistance of 10k Ohm is between the ground and the cable
connected to the A0 pin, while the tested textile sensor
resistor is between the cable connected to the A0 pin and 5V
from Arduino.
According to Ohm’s law, the current flowing in the
system is the quotient of voltage and resistance of a given
system.
I = U / R
(1)
where I is the current, U
is the voltage, and R isthe
resistance.
Our system consists of two resistors connected in series
with values that we will denote by R1 and R2. R1 will be our
known resistor, while R2 will be a textile sensor. Current I
flows through the system. Such current flows through both
R1 and R2. The voltage drop is in the whole system and in
each of the resistors the voltage changes proportionally to its
value. The voltage that falls on the whole system is the
voltage taken from Arduino, i.e., 5V - we will denote it as U.
Having the above in mind, we can determine the following
formula:
U / (R1 + R2) = U1 / R1
(2)
R2 = ((R1 * U) / U1) – R1
(3)
where R1 is the known resistor 10k Ohm and R2 is the
resistance of the textile sensor.
Formula (3) may be calculated inside the microcontroller.
The values can be stored in the Arduino memory for 60
seconds interval. An average value of peaks, corresponding
to the number of human breaths, may be calculated and
displayed on the LCD. By normal breathing, we perform the
change of the textile sensor electrical resistance, we change
the value of resistance which is connected to the center pin
of the resistor series. This changes the voltage at the center
pin. This voltage is the analog voltage that we will read as an
input by the Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC). In case of
difficulties with the calculation of the number of peaks, we
may add a derivative element between the textile sensor at
A0 pin and 5V power pin. The potential use of internal timer
may make the calculations easier. It all depends on how the
measurements proceed.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
Works currently carried out by the authors allow to state
that it is possible to measure breaths of humans by using a T-
shirt textile sensor. The authors are aware of the challenges
of
changing
human
body
size,
ambient
humidity,
temperature, pH of sweat, and the related need to calibrate
the sensor in various atmospheric conditions.
conductive
thread
printed
sensor
15 breaths/ mean
value 19
DC power jack
9 volt battery
Arduino microcontroller in the pocket
pocket
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

As future work, first, we will work on miniaturization,
even by removing the LCD and the big battery, and adding a
Bluetooth module. Secondly, we will build a mobile Android
app to present the data on the smartphone.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Buechley, M. Eisenberg, J. Catchen, and A. Crockett “The
LilyPad Arduino: Using computational textiles to investigate
engagement, aesthetics, and diversity in computer science
education” Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems – Proceedings, pp. 423-432, 2008.
[2]
R. M. Aileni, A. C. Valderrama, and R. Strungaru „Wearable
Electronics for Elderly Health Monitoring and Active Living
(Book Chapter)” Ambient Assisted Living and Enhanced
Living Environments: Principles, Technologies and Control,
pp. 247-269, 2017.
[3]
P. Jourand, H. De Clercq, R. Corthout, and R. Puers “Textile
Integrated
Breathing
and
ECG
Monitoring
System”
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, ESAT-MICAS, Kasteelpark
Arenberg 10, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium, Procedia Chemistry 1
pp. 722–725, 2009.
[4]
W. Urbaniak‐Domagała, E. Skrzetuska, M. Komorowska, and 
I.Krucińska “Development Trends in Electronics Printed: 
Intelligent Textiles Produced with the Use of Printing
Techniqueson Textile Substrates” Published: September 28th
2016 Printed Electronics - Current Trends and Applications.
Edited by Ilgu Yun, ISBN 978-953-51-2527-3, Print ISBN
978-953-51-2301-9, 146 pages, Publisher: InTech, Chapter 7,
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/62962
[5]
I. Krucińska, E. Skrzetuska, and W. Urbaniak-Domagała 
“Printed Textiles with Chemical Sensor Properties” Printed
Textiles
with
Chemical
Sensor
Properties.FIBRES
&
TEXTILES in Eastern Europe 2014; 22, 4(106), pp. 68-72.
[6]
N. T. Furtak, E. Skrzetuska, and I. Krucińska “Development 
of Screen-printed
Breathing Rate Sensors” FIBRES
&
TEXTILES in Eastern Europe 2013, 21, 6(102), pp. 84-88.
[7]
E. Skrzetuska, M. Puchalski, and I. Krucińska “Chemically  
driven printed textilesensors based on graphene and carbon
nanotubes.” Sensors, 2014, Vol. 14, pp. 16816–16828,ISSN:
1424‐8220.
[8]
Nanocyl, Safety Data Sheet for AQUACYL ™ carbon
nanotubes
from
the
NC7000
line,
https://www.nanocyl.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/DM-
TI-02-TDS-NC7000-V08.pdf, date of download 07.11.2019r.
[9]
https://starter-kit.nettigo.pl/2018/10/budujemy-prosty-
omomierz-na-arduino/, last accessed date: 8.12.2019
[10] https://www.arduino.cc/en/Tutorial/AnalogReadSerial,
last accessed date: 8.12.2019.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

