Development of Taste Sensor with High Selectivity and Sensitivity
Yusuke Tahara and Kiyoshi Toko
Research and Development Center for Taste and Odor Sensing
Kyushu University
Nishi-ku, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan
e-mail: tahara@belab.ed.kyushu-u.ac.jp, toko@ed.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract—We have developed a taste sensor for objective taste
evaluations of foods, beverages and pharmaceuticals. The taste
sensor is based on the potentiometric measurement system and
has sensor electrodes with lipid polymer membranes as
working electrodes and as reference electrode. It is desirable
for the sensor to be able to evaluate not only the taste, but also
the aftertaste, similar to the way humans experience it. In this
study, we report relationships between sensor responses, the
amount of adsorbed monosodium glutamate (MSG) onto the
lipid polymer membrane and human sensory score for the
evaluation of the aftertaste of umami.
Keywords-taste sensor; lipid polymer membrane; sensory
score.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In food and beverage industries, it is very important to
evaluate taste for development of new products, market
research and quality control. The main method of taste
evaluation is based on sensory tests that well-trained
panelists actually perform by tasting and evaluating samples.
The sensory tests have some problems, such as low
objectivity
and
reproducibility,
and
the
physical
and
psychological stress imposed on the panelists. To solve these
problems, we have developed a taste sensor based on
potentiometric measurement system [1]-[3]. The taste sensor
has sensor electrodes which use lipid polymer membranes
for the taste sensing part and output a change in the
membrane potential caused by the interaction between the
membrane and the taste substances. There are several kinds
of membranes for evaluations of saltiness, sourness, umami,
bitterness or sweetness. The surface charge density and the
hydrophobicity of each membrane are designed by adjusting
the sorts and amount of lipid and plasticizer on the sensor
membrane,
considering
the
basis
of
physicochemical
properties of substances with each basic taste [4]. The taste
sensor has been widely applied in manufacturing of foods
and beverages such as green tea, milk, rice, soy sauce and
pork [5]. Figure 1 shows a taste map of beer on the market,
which is one of applications using the taste sensor for market
survey.
It is desirable for the sensor to be able to evaluate not
only the taste, but also the aftertaste, similar to the way
humans experience it. Although the taste sensor has been
used for evaluation of aftertaste [2], the interaction between
the membrane of a sensor electrode for umami and umami
substances for evaluating the aftertaste of umami was not
investigated well. In this study, we report relationships
between
sensor
responses,
the
amount
of
adsorbed
monosodium glutamate (MSG) onto the membrane and
human sensory score for the aftertaste of umami. The
aftertaste of umami, which is called “kokumi”, is recognized
as a complicated taste, which is described in various ways,
such as “mouthfulness”, “thickness” and “continuity” [6][7].
II.
MATERIAL AND METHOD
A. Lipid polymer membrane
The lipid
polymer
membrane used
in
the
sensor
electrode for umami used in this study comprises polyvinyl
chloride (PVC) as the supporter constituting the membrane,
trioctylmethylammonium chloride (TOMA) and phosphoric
acid di(2-ethylhexyl) ester (PADE) as the lipids, and dioctyl
phenylphosphonate (DOPP) as the plasticizer. Details on the
preparation of the procedure can be found in a previous
report [2].
B. Measurement of CPA value using taste sensor
Measurements of sample solutions using the sensor
electrode for umami utilize the taste sensor (TS-5000Z,
Intelligent
Sensor
Technology,
Inc.).
Monosodium
glutamate (MSG) was used as kokumi substances. MSG in a
reference solution consisting of 30 mM KCl and 0.3 mM
tartaric acid was used as umami solutions. The change of
membrane potential caused by adsorption (CPA) [1]-[3] is
used as sensor outputs of the samples. The measurement
procedures were performed using the same technique,
following the manual.
Figure 1. Taste map of beer using the taste sensor.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

C. Measurement of the amount of adsorbed MSG
The amount of MSG was measured by an enzymatic
method (L-glutamate kit, Yamasa Co., Japan) and a
spectrophotometer
(UV-1800,
Shimadzu
Corporation).
First, 5 ml of MSG solution with a known concentration
was added dropwise onto a petri dish on which a lipid
polymer membrane had been formed, and left to stand for
30 s to allow MSG molecules in the solution to be adsorbed
onto the membrane. After 30 s, 3 ml of the MSG solution
was taken from the petri dish to measure the absorbance of
the solution. The concentration of MSG in the measured
solution was calculated from the measured absorbance and
calibration curve. The difference between the concentration
of the MSG solution added dropwise and that of the MSG
solution calculated from the absorbance was defined as the
amount of adsorbed MSG.
D. Sensory test of aftertaste of umami
Five well-trained panelists (2 male and 3 female healthy
adults) evaluated the following. The panelists drank each
MSG solutions. Then, they were instructed to answer
questions about the taste (kokumi) at 20 s after drinking.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 2 shows the CPA response values to MSG
solutions using the sensor electrode for umami. The CPA
values increased with increasing MSG concentration from
30 to 300 mM. Figure 3 shows the amount of adsorbed
MSG onto the membrane. The amount of adsorbed MSG
increased with increasing MSG concentration from 30 to
300 mM. These results indicate that the CPA is generated
when a taste substance adsorbs onto the surface of the lipid
polymer membrane and the electrical charge density of the
membrane surface changes. In order to confirm that the
aftertaste of MSG shows kokumi, a sensory test was
conducted.
The
well-trained
panelists
evaluated
the
aftertaste of the MSG solution (10, 100 and 300 mM). They
all answered that MSG solution showed kokumi at 20 s
Figure 2. The CPA values response to MSG solution using sensor electrode
for umami.
Figure 3. The amount of adsorbed MSG onto the membrane.
after drinking the MSG solution and the intensity of kokumi
increased with increasing MSG concentration.
In conclusion, the CPA value by the sensor electrode for
umami showed a good agreement with kokumi by sensory
score. It was suggested that kokumi by MSG could be
evaluated by the sensor electrode for umami.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank laboratory students Mr. C. Liu
and Mr. Y. Liu, Kyushu University, Japan, for their help
with some experiments.
REFERENCES
[1]
K.
Toko,
Biomimetic
Sensor
Technology,
Cambridge
University Press, 2000.
[2]
Y. Kobayashi et al., “Advanced taste sensors based on
artificial lipids with global selectivity to basic taste qualities
and high correlation to sensory scores,” Sensors, vol.10, pp.
3411-3443, 2010.
[3]
Y. Tahara and K. Toko, “Electronic tongues – a review,”
IEEE Sens. J., vol.13, pp. 3001-3011, 2013.
[4]
Y. Kobayashi, H. Hamada, Y. Yamaguchi, H. Ikezaki, and K.
Toko, “Development of an artificial lipid-based membrane
sensor with high selectivity and sensitivity to the bitterness of
drugs and with high correlation with sensory score,” IEEJ
Trensactions on Electrical and Electronic Engineering, vol. 4,
pp. 710-719, 2009.
[5]
K. Toko, Y. Tahara, M. Habara, Y. Kobayashi, and H. Ikezaki,
“Taste sensor: electronic tongue with global selectivity,” in
Essentials of Machine Olfaction and Taste, T. Nakamoto, Ed,
John Wiley & Sons Singapore Pte Ltd., pp. 87-174, 2016.
[6]
M. Imamura and K. Matsushima, “Suppression of umami
aftertaste by polysaccharides in soy sauce”, J. Food Sci.,
vol.78, pp.1136-1142, 2013.
[7]
T. Miyaki, H. Kawasaki, M. Kuroda, N. Miyamura, and T.
Kouda, “Effect of a kokumi peptide, γ-glutamyl-valyl-
glycine, on the sensory characteriscs of chiken consommé”,
Flavour, vol.4, pp.1-8, 2015.
-30
-20
-10
0
CPA value (mV)
1
10
100
1000
MSG (mM)
10
5
0
Adsorbed amount (µg/cm
2)
1
10
100
1000
MSG (mM)
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

