Sensor and Electronic Circuits Development on Flexible Substrates through 
Additive Manufacturing Technologies for Textile Applications  
 
Josue Ferri, Jorge Moreno, Ana Rodes, Elena Mira, 
Jose Maria Garcia 
Smart Textiles and ICT Solution Research Group 
Textile Research Institute (AITEX) 
Alcoy, Spain 
e-mail: josue.ferri@aitex.es, jmoreno@aitex.es, 
arodes@aitex.es, emira@aitex.es, jgarcia@aitex.es 
Eduardo Garcia-Breijo, Raul Llinares 
Instituto Interuniversitario de Investigación de 
Reconocimiento Molecular y Desarrollo Tecnológico 
(IDM), Universitat Politècnica de València 
Departamento de Comunicaciones,  
Universitat Politècnica de València,  
Valencia, Spain 
e-mail: egarciab@eln.upv.es, rllinares@dcom.upv.es
 
 
Abstract—Printed electronics on flexible substrates have 
awakened special interest in the scientific community in recent 
years due to its potential applications. Some of these 
applications are directly connected to the use of textiles and 
fabrics as wearables. The present project has considered all the 
relevant topics that are needed to be taken into account in this 
type of development. The performance and constraints of both 
conductive inks and dielectric materials have been evaluated. 
The results achieved have been used to develop capacitive 
sensors that can bear the flexibility and stretchability 
conditions required by textile substrates, without undergoing 
any damage.  
Keywords - printed electronics; smart textiles; sensors; 
wearables; stretchable; flexible; screen- printing; textile; inkjet; 
flexography. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Electronics that imitate the natural world by bending, 
flexing and stretching are becoming more and more 
significant as the technology is integrated into our lives, our 
environments and even our bodies. One of the most 
challenging applications is the combination of electronics 
with textiles or fabrics. This idea was defined as smart 
textiles [1] or smart fabrics [2]. The elements included in 
these solutions, such as conductive fibers, conductive 
filaments, conductive yarns, together with woven, knitted or 
non-woven structures, are able to interact with the 
environment of users [3]. Smart textiles are normally used as 
sensors and they are combined with external microprocessors 
units, in order to analyse the information and create some 
kind of action, such as an alert or activation. Smart textiles 
sensors can be mainly classified depending on their 
capability to measuring either resistivity or capacitance 
variations. On one hand, resistive sensors measure variations 
of resistance of a conductive structure that can be a wire or a 
conductive stretchable fabric [4]. On the other hand, 
capacitive sensors use more complex structures that allow to 
measure capacitance variations between two conductive 
materials that can be also conductive threads or conductive 
textiles. This idea has been successfully developed in order 
to measure parameters such as strain [5][6], pressure [7][8], 
respiration [9]-[11], humidity [12][13], gas [14] or 
temperature [15], among others. Moreover, sensors based on 
conductive surfaces such as electrocardiogram (ECG) 
[16][17], 
electromyography 
(EMG) 
[18] 
or 
electroencephalogram 
(EEG) 
[19] 
have 
also 
been 
implemented. 
In addition to conductive threads or conductive fabrics, 
conductive particles or materials can also be printed on the 
surface of textiles [20]. Printed electronics [21] on flexible 
substrates [22][23] have drawn the attention of the scientific 
community during the last years, due to the great potential in 
terms of flexibility and possible final applications. 
Furthermore, these electronics have a lower cost than the 
current standard techniques, which is an added value [24], 
since they can be implemented with reel to reel industrial 
machines [25].  
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the 
materials and manufacturing procedures used. Afterwards, 
Section III presents the experimental results and a discussion 
of them. Finally, section IV provides an overview of the 
conclusions. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
During the project, different prototypes have been 
developed using different technologies that can be used in 
smart fabrics. All of them were related to the design and 
development 
of 
fabrics 
with 
intelligent 
properties, 
investigating the scope and limitations of the technologies, in 
order to discover the potential of these applications. 
Most common types of conductive inks are based on 
conductive nanoparticles or microparticles dispersed into a 
polymer matrix. These particles are based on carbon 
particles, metallic particles, such as silver and gold, as well 
as conductive oxides such as ITO or ZnO. These inks are 
usually dried or cured by heating; however, laser or UV 
curing is also possible. When the ink is cured by heat, the 
binder and solvent are removed, forming a conductive layer 
on the surface of the substrate. The required curing 
temperature depends on the type of ink, but the usual range 
covers from 100⁰C to 250⁰C for 5 to 30 minutes. Depending 
on the type of substrate, the curing procedure needs to be 
adjusted.  
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

The use of printed electronics in textiles, despite it is in 
an early stage, is a very promising technology within the 
scope of the smart textiles field. Two critical parameters in 
the global design of the electronic system are the textile 
substrate in which the printing process is carried out, and the 
protection process of the printed ink. Each material or 
element has characteristics that will have an impact on the 
final application. Likewise, the typology of inks, their 
deposition and circuit design, with the added complexity of 
properties such as flexibility and elasticity, pose a challenge 
for their use. In addition, another aspect to consider is the 
interconnection between the flexible electronic and the rigid 
PCB electronic. Therefore, the selection of the connectors 
and the attachment systems are crucial. 
The developed prototypes comply with the requirements 
of functionality and resistance. A careful selection of the 
appropriate materials to use was carried out, as well as the 
optimal conditions of application and manufacture. It should 
be noted that the knowledge acquired throughout the project, 
especially the one derived from the experimentation in the 
application of electronic inks on fabrics, will be very useful 
for future developments. Thus, the results achieved can be 
used in new and more complex applications, or in other 
environments, based on the previous knowledge acquired. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Initially, different ink characterization tests were carried 
out on different substrates, evaluating temperature and 
optimal curing time. These tests were developed taking into 
account the orientation of the tissues in relation to the 
printing direction, as well as other parameters, such as fabric 
roughness, fabric materials and possible surface finishes. 
These tests have been performed using different printing 
technologies depending on the substrate. It can be observed 
that in the case of the fabrics with higher thickness and 
higher diameter of thread, the samples did not show 
electrical conductivity and the values of resistance obtained 
were very high. The rougher a substrate is, the more quantity 
of ink is required during the printing process to reduce the 
negative effect of the substrate surface. In this type of 
substrates, screen-printing technology offers the best 
performance. On the other side, technologies such as 
flexography or inkjet enable a more precise control of the 
quantity of ink added and the line thickness. 
 
 
Figure 1. Conductivity test on a stretchable substrate during a contract and 
relax process. 
In addition, the behaviour of the inks printed on different 
elastic substrates, in terms of their adhesion and 
conductivity, has been evaluated. Stretching percentages 
have also been studied by assessing the variations in 
conductivity produced as a consequence of the undergone 
stretching. These variations in conductivity must be 
considered, in order to minimize the effect in the electronic 
performance. Figure 1 presents the test performed using strip 
lines of conductive material on stretchable substrate. Another 
aspect to consider is the negative effect of the contract-relax 
stretching repetitions, that can produce a considerable 
damage. 
During the project, several prototypes based on 
capacitive sensors have been developed. This type of sensor 
offers the advantage of better supporting the conductive 
limitations than other types of resistive sensors. Initially, a 
study of the relative permittivity of the different materials 
used in this work was carried out. This assessment was 
applied to every non-conductive material, such as fabrics, 
dielectric inks, adhesives and films. The effect of these 
materials has been considered from the fabrication process 
point of view, but also from the sensor performance 
perspective. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The tests carried out with conductive, dielectric and 
resistive inks, that can be stretched or flexed, enable to 
improve the durability of the circuits on flexible substrates, 
such as textiles. For this purpose, a specific selection of 
materials and a proper design of the fabrication process 
needs to be done. In addition, the design process of the 
electronic circuit must consider the existing constraints, in 
order to adjust or minimize the negative effect. On the other 
hand, it was observed that it is possible to reproduce 
electronic circuits on textiles, taking into account certain 
parameters of optimization of ink application and an 
adequate selection of tissues that facilitate the proper 
application and homogeneity. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was funded by the Conselleria d’Economia 
Sostenible, Sectors Productius i Treball, through IVACE 
(Instituto Valenciano de Competitividad Empresarial). 
Application No.: IMAMCI/2020/1. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. C. Das, D. Paul, M. Hasan, and E. H. Nizam, “Smart 
Textiles- New Possibilities in Textile Engineering,” vol. 2013, 
no. November, pp. 1–3, 2013. 
[2] A. Lymberis and R. Paradiso, “Smart fabrics and interactive 
textile enabling wearable personal applications: R&D state of 
the art and future challenges,” Proc. 30th Annu. Int. Conf. 
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. EMBS’08 - "Personalized Healthc. 
through Technol., no. August, pp. 5270–5273, 2008. 
[3] M. Stoppa and A. Chiolerio, “Wearable electronics and smart 
textiles: A critical review,” Sensors (Switzerland), vol. 14, no. 
7, pp. 11957–11992, 2014. 
[4] H. Jin, N. Matsuhisa, S. Lee, M. Abbas, T. Yokota, and T. 
Someya, “Enhancing the Performance of Stretchable 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Conductors for E-Textiles by Controlled Ink Permeation,” 
Adv. Mater., vol. 29, no. 21, 2017. 
[5] C. Mattmann, O. Amft, H. Harms, G. Tröster, and F. 
Clemens, “Recognizing upper body postures using textile 
strain sensors,” in Proceedings - International Symposium on 
Wearable Computers, ISWC, 2007, pp. 29–36. 
[6] T.-W. Shyr, J.-W. Shie, C.-H. Jiang, and J.-J. Li, “A Textile-
Based Wearable Sensing Device Designed for Monitoring the 
Flexion Angle of Elbow and Knee Movements,” Sensors, vol. 
14, pp. 4050–4059, 2014.  
[7] Y. Enokibori, A. Suzuki, H. Mizuno, Y. Shimakami, and K. 
Mase, “E-textile pressure sensor based on conductive fiber 
and its structure,” Proc. 2013 ACM Conf. Pervasive 
ubiquitous Comput. Adjun. Publ. - UbiComp ’13 Adjun., pp. 
207–210, 2013. 
[8] M. Sergio, N. Manaresi, M. Tartagni, R. Guerrieri, and R. 
Canegallo, “5.4: A Textile Based Capacitive Pressure 
Sensor,” Sensors, 2002. Proc. IEEE, pp. 1625–1630 vol. 2, 
2002.  
[9] C. R. Merritt, H. T. Nagle, and E. Grant, “Textile-based 
capacitive sensors for respiration monitoring,” IEEE Sens. J., 
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 2009.  
[10] N. Molinaro et al., “Wearable textile based on silver plated 
knitted sensor for respiratory rate monitoring,” Proc. Annu. 
Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. EMBS, vol. 2018-July, 
pp. 2865–2868, 2018.  
[11] L. Guo, S. Ratnarathorn, L. Berglin, U. Wiklund, and L. 
Sandsjö, “‘ Disappearing Sensor ’ -Textile Based Sensor for 
Monitoring Breathing,” I nt.Conf.Control .Autom .Syst.Eng, p. 
1, 2011.  
[12] C. Gonçalves, A. F. da Silva, J. Gomes, and R. Simoes, 
“Wearable e-textile technologies: A review on sensors, 
actuators and control elements,” Inventions, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 
1–13, 2018.  
[13] B. Li, G. Xiao, F. Liu, Y. Qiao, C. M. Li, and Z. Lu, “A 
flexible humidity sensor based on silk fabrics for human 
respiration monitoring,” J. Mater. Chem. C, vol. 6, no. 16, pp. 
4549–4554, 2018.  
[14] Y. Ju Yun, W. G. Hong, N.-J. Choi, B. Hoon Kim, Y. Jun, 
and H.-K. Lee, “Ultrasensitive and Highly Selective 
Graphene-Based Single Yarn for Use in Wearable Gas 
Sensor,” Sci. Rep., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 10904, 2015.  
[15] R. Polanský et al., “A novel large-area embroidered 
temperature sensor based on an innovative hybrid resistive 
thread,” Sensors Actuators, A Phys., vol. 265, pp. 111–119, 
2017. 
[16] T. Pola and J. Vanhala, “Textile electrodes in ECG 
measurement,” Proc. 2007 Int. Conf. Intell. Sensors, Sens. 
Networks Inf. Process. ISSNIP, pp. 635–639, 2007. 
[17] X. Tao, V. Koncar, T. H. Huang, C. L. Shen, Y. C. Ko, and G. 
T. Jou, “How to make reliable, washable, and wearable 
textronic devices,” Sensors (Switzerland), vol. 17, no. 4, 
2017. 
[18] C. L. Ng and M. B. I. Reaz, “Evolution of a capacitive 
electromyography 
contactless 
biosensor: 
Design 
and 
modelling techniques,” Meas. J. Int. Meas. Confed., vol. 145, 
pp. 460–471, 2019.  
[19] F. Seoane, M. Thordstein, and S. Academy, “Textile 
Electrodes for EEG Recording — A Pilot Study,” pp. 16907–
16919, 2012.  
[20] J. Ferri, J. Lidón-Roger, J. Moreno, G. Martinez, and E. 
Garcia-Breijo, “A Wearable Textile 2D Touchpad Sensor 
Based on Screen-Printing Technology,” Materials (Basel)., 
vol. 10, no. 12, p. 1450, Dec. 2017.  
[21] S. Khan, L. Lorenzelli, and R. S. Dahiya, “Technologies for 
printing sensors and electronics over large flexible substrates: 
A review,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3164–3185, 
2015.  
[22] J. Chang, X. Zhang, T. Ge, and J. Zhou, “Fully printed 
electronics on flexible substrates: High gain amplifiers and 
DAC,” Org. Electron., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 701–710, 2014.  
[23] Z. Li et al., “Highly conductive, flexible, polyurethane-based 
adhesives for flexible and printed electronics,” Adv. Funct. 
Mater., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 1459–1465, 2013. 
[24] V. Subramanian et al., “Printed electronics for low-cost 
electronic systems: Technology status and application 
development,” ESSCIRC 2008 - Proc. 34th Eur. Solid-State 
Circuits Conf., pp. 17–24, 2008. 
[25] B. Salam, X. C. Shan, C. Zhanhong, and B. K. Lok, 
“Multilayer 
Roll-to-Roll 
Screen-Printing 
for 
Printed 
Electronics Applications,” 2018 IEEE 20th Electron. Packag. 
Technol. Conf., pp. 359–362, 2019. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

