Ionic Liquid Based Coulometric Trace Humidity Sensors
Marc Detjens, Carlo Tiebe, and Ulrich Banach
8.1 Sensors, Measurement and Testing Methods
Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing
Berlin, Germany
email: marc.detjens@bam.de, carlo.tiebe@bam.de,
ulrich.banach@bam.de
Uwe Ritter
Institute of Chemistry and Biotechnology
Technical University Ilmenau
Ilmenau, Germany
email: uwe.ritter@tu-ilmenau.de
Abstract—This work presents a first attempt to use ionic
liquids as a new coating for planar coulometric sensors. These
sensors are used for the measurement of trace humidity in
various
gases.
Usually,
the
coating
of
the
sensors
is
tetraphosphorus
decaoxide
and
its
hydrolysis
products.
Instead, a hygroscopic ionic liquid was used as sensor coating
in this work. Generated frost point temperatures tf in the gas
ranged from -80 °C to -30 °C, which is equivalent to vapour
mole fractions xv from 0.5 μmol·mol-1 to 376 μmol·mol-1. In
addition to the coulometric sensors, the generated humidity is
determined by a precision dew point hygrometer as reference.
First results show that it is possible to measure humidity with
ionic liquid based coulometric sensors.
Keywords-Coulometric
sensors;
Sensor
coating;
Trace
humidity measurement; Ionic liquids.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The accurate value of humidity in gases, which are used
in technical and chemical processes, is an important quality
factor. Therefore, it is necessary to measure it accurately and
continuously. Even trace amounts of water vapour can
influence a process negatively and thus its resulting products.
Trace humidity of gases is defined by water vapour mole
fraction
xv
smaller
than
2,000 µmol·mol-1,
which
is
equivalent to a frost point temperature tf below -13 °C. Frost
point temperature is the temperature at which the prevailing
water vapour pressure is equal to the saturation vapour
pressure and at which ice begins to form (constant pressure
p) [1].
Coulometric sensors are an effective tool for trace
humidity measurement in various technical gases, such as
air, helium, argon, chlorine, hydrogen, nitrogen, and nitrous
oxide [2][3]. In general, coulometric sensors are coated with
tetraphosphorus decaoxide (P4O10) due to its hygroscopic
property. One limitation of coulometric sensors is the
measurement in gases which contain ammonia or amines.
These substances can react with the P4O10 and thus influence
the reaction mechanism of the P4O10-H2O-system [4].
In this work, a first attempt is presented to use a
hygroscopic ionic liquid as coating for coulometric sensors.
Section 2 briefly explains coulometric sensors, ionic liquids,
trace
humidity
generation,
and
sensor
integration.
In
Section 3, the obtained measurement results are shown and
Section 4 presents the conclusion.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A.
Coulometric Sensors
Coulometric sensors were described first by Keidel as a
method to determine water content of gases in 1959
[2][4][5].
Figure 1.
Sensor principle of a coulometric sensor; U: voltage,
P4O10: tetraphosphorus decaoxide, H2O: water, O2: oxygen and
H2: hydrogen.
The sensing principle depicted in Figure 1 is based on the
electrolysis of absorbed water in which it is decomposed to
hydrogen and oxygen at a voltage of at least 2 V. Electrolysis
of water can be described by means of Faraday’s law,
see (1), which states a correlation between the amount of
electrical charge Q in C and water substance nWater in mol:
Q = nWater · F · z
(1)
where F is FARADAY’S constant (F = 96485.3 C·mol-1) and z
is the number of transferred electrons per converted molecule
of H2O (z = 2). In equilibrium state, the measured electrical
current I is proportional to the mass of water mWater in the gas
flow as shown in (2).
I  mWater
(2)
Resulting electrical current is influenced by incomplete
water absorption, dependence on the gas flow, given voltage,
gas pressure, temperature, and coating thickness.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

B.
Ionic Liquids
Ionic liquids have a huge potential for nanoparticle
synthesis, electrochemistry, batteries, fuel cells, and for
sensor applications [6]. In general, ionic liquid is a salt in the
liquid state at room temperature and consists usually of an
organic cation and an inorganic anion. Further interesting
properties are electrochemical stability against oxidation and
reduction, electrical conductivity, and non-acid character.
C.
Trace Humidity Generation
Trace humidity generation consists of a gas supply,
dryer, humidifier, pressure controllers, mass flow controllers
and a reference hygrometer. Test gas is generated by mixing
two gas flows: a dry and a wet one. One flow is dried with a
molecular sieve and the other flow is humidified by passing
it through a bubbler filled with pure water. After this, the rate
of both flows is controlled by mass flow controllers and
mixed together resulting in a test gas. Next the generated test
gas is split into four single gas flows: whereby three flows
pass over coulometric sensors and one passes a calibrated
dew point hygrometer (S4000 TRS, Michell Instruments).
D.
Sensor Integration
During the measurements, the coated planar sensor
elements (dr. Wernecke Feuchtemesstechnik GmbH) were
protected by a porous polymer membrane to diminish the
influence of a fluctuating gas flow rate [7]. Furthermore, the
protected elements were embedded in stainless steel cells
with gas inlet and outlet. A multiplexer allowed the
simultaneous reading of the electrical current via a digital
multimeter (3458A, Agilent) and provided the connection to
the voltage supply, which was modified by adding a polarity
reversal [8].
III.
RESULTS
Figure 2 shows the results of a performed measurement
with three coulometric sensors that are dip-coated with an
ionic liquid. The generated humidity in the gas expressed as
frost point temperature ranged from -80 °C to -30 °C.
Figure 2.
Electrical current I in μA of six coulometric sensors (left y-axis) 
and the reference humidity tf in °C (right y-axis) over measuring time t in h.
Electrical current I (sensor signal) of the sensors (one to
three) and reference value of humidity tf (red-dotted line) are
represented on the left and right y-axis, respectively. It is
proved that electrical currents increase with a raise of
humidity in the gas. Converse behavior is shown by a
reduction of the humidity in the gas. However, the results
show obvious deviations of the sensor signals. In total,
sensor one measures higher signals in comparison to sensors
two and three. A feasible explanation for the different signal
intensity could be the unknown thickness of the sensor
coating. Additionally, a distinct drift was observed for all
three sensors.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this work, a first attempt is presented to use ionic
liquids as coating for coulometric trace humidity sensors.
First results show that sensors coated with ionic liquids
response to humidity changes in the gas. However, the
sensor intensities were different and an obvious sensor drift
was
observed.
Further
measurements
are
required
to
understand the reaction mechanism of water vapour and
ionic liquid.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Thomas Bernstein, Sylvia Filarski, and
Jörg Schlischka for technical assistance. This work has been
financially supported by the Federal Ministry for Economic
Affairs
and
Energy
(BMWi)–ZIM-project
No.
2201085KM4.
In memoriam of Dr. Thomas Hübert.
REFERENCES
[1]
VDI/VDE 3514-1:2016-11, Measurement of gas humidity –
Characteristics and symbols, 2016.
[2]
R. Wernecke and J. Wernecke, Industrial Moisture and
Humidity Measurement: A Practical Guide. Wiley, 2014.
[3]
VDI/VDE 3514-1:2013-03, Measurement of gas humidity -
Methods of measurement, 2013.
[4]
J. Mitchell and D. M. Smith, Aquametry: a treatise on
methods for the determination of water. Wiley, 1984.
[5]
F. A. Keidel, "Determination of water by direct amperometric
measurement," Analytical Chemistry, vol. 31, no. 12, pp.
2043-2048, 1959.
[6]
P. Wasserscheid and T. Welton, Ionic Liquids in Synthesis.
Wiley, 2006.
[7]
A. Lorek, A. Koncz, and R. Wernecke, "Development of a
gas flow independent coulometric trace humidity sensor for
aerospace and industry," in First European Conference on
Moisture Measurement, Aquametry 2010, 2010, pp. 289-296:
MFPA Weimar.
[8]
A. Koncz, A. Lorek, R. Wernecke, and V. Schwanke,
"Coulometric humidity sensor and corresponding method",
Patent EP 2264445 B1, 2017.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

