Low Cost Measurement System for the Precise Monitoring of the Instantaneous
Rotational Speed of an Internal Combustion Engine
Dimitrios N. Pagonis, Sofia Peppa
Naval Architecture Department
University of West Attica
Athens, Greece
emails: D.N.Pagonis@uniwa.gr, speppa@uniwa.gr
Grigoris Kaltsas
Electrical and Electronics Engineering Department
University of West Attica
Athens, Greece
email: gkaltsas@uniwa.gr
Abstract— The work presented in this paper concerns the
development of a novel low-cost measurement system for
monitoring with high accuracy the instantaneous rotational
speed of a low power industrial engine. The system has been
successfully employed for monitoring the rotational speed of a
typical four cylinder engine; a speed recording with a
resolution of 0.04 degree of crank angle has been obtained,
revealing
its
suitability
for
fault
diagnosis
and
engine
performance optimization applications. Key features of the
proposed measurement configuration are very high monitoring
accuracy, low-cost and ability to be installed on-site to an
already operating engine with no major modifications; the
above suggest numerous potential applications.
Keywords-measurement
system;
encoder;
instantaneous
rotanional
speed;
3D
printing;
fault
diagnosis;
internal
combustion engine.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Optimizing the performance of an engine has been the
goal of numerous research efforts [1][2], since proper
prediction of its main operation parameters (such as torque
fluctuation during various loading, etc.) can significantly
contribute to efficient fault diagnosis, fuel economy, gas
emissions reduction and optimum engine performance in
general. The value of the instantaneous rotational speed of
the crankshaft is an important parameter employed widely in
engine operation analysis and fault diagnosis [3]-[6], since it
is relatively easily accessible employing low cost equipment.
In general, there are two established methods for measuring
the specific parameter: the timer/counter-based technique
and the Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC) based technique
[7][8].
The vast majority of modern engine speed monitoring
systems are based on the “magnetic pick-up” principle of
operation, which is a timer/counter based method. In order to
detect the engine’s speed, a given number of dents of
appropriate size and geometry are patterned on the surface of
the metallic flywheel of the engine, which is attached to the
rotating shaft; an inductive sensor is then employed to detect
the presence of each dent as the engine is operating (Fig. 1).
The rotational speed is deduced from the sensor’s output
pulse-train signal.
We should note that the maximum resolution of the above
described system (i.e., maximum
number
of
velocity
Figure 1. “Magnetic pick-up” principle of operation.
measurements during a single rotation of the crankshaft) is
mainly affected by the minimum resolution of the sensor,
that is, the minimum size required for each dent in order to
be magnetically detected.
In a typical low power industrial engine [9], the above
setup provides a maximum resolution of 120 measurements
per cycle (i.e., the speed is measured every 3o of crankshaft
rotation). In order to increase that figure, one should
increment the number of dents available on the flywheel,
resulting in an increase of its overall dimensions; thus, the
maximum resolution of such a system is limited by the
available space provided for the flywheel –a constrain that
cannot be altered easily, especially in the typical case of
low/medium power engine.
Although the measuring principle described above is
widely
adapted
regarding
engine
rotational
speed
monitoring, other alternative methods have been reported in
literature. In more detail, angular speed recording with high
accuracy by employing an appropriate optical measurement
system has been successfully performed in a low power four
stroke, four cylinder industrial engine [10], while the
development and installation of a speed monitoring system
which is based on a rotary encoder (on a four stroke, six
cylinder industrial engine) has also been described [11].
Both of the previously mentioned methods lead to
substantial increase of the maximum resolution of speed
Flywheel
attached to
the engine’s
crankshaft
Inductive
sensor
Appropriately
patterned dents
Dent detected
T - not constant
Signal
switching during
one period of the
sensor’s pulse
-train
Sensor’s pulse-train
output signal
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

monitoring
(i.e.
angular
speed
measurements
with
a
resolution of less than 0.5° are reported) compared to the
established “magnetic pick-up” principle of operation. We
should
note
though
that
an
important
constraint
for
employing widely such monitoring systems and rendering
them practically useful to typical industrial engines - already
operating on-site, focuses on the need of altering the initial
engine setup, in order for the measuring system to be
installed. With our proposed method, this constraint is
practically removed.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II,
we present the proposed measurement system, while in
Section III, the obtained preliminary results after applying
the system to a typical industrial engine are discussed.
Finally, we conclude the work in Section IV.
II.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED METHOD
The
proposed
measurement
system
overcomes
the
restriction imposed by the size of the flywheel and the
necessity of altering the initial engine setup in general. This
is achieved by employing an incremental rotary encoder in
order to measure the instantaneous rotational speed which is
mounted directly on the engine’s crankshaft through a
custom-designed coupling, manufactured by a 3D printer.
Figure 2.
Typical low power engine’s flywheel attached to the crankshaft;
the incremental encoder is mounted directly on the flywheel (region A)
through an appropriate/custom-designed coupling.
In more detail, a low-cost commercially available sensor
(IFM electronic, type RVP510) has been employed. The
sensor was mounted on the engine’s crankshaft (Fig. 2)
through an appropriate coupling (Fig. 3) which is designed
and then manufactured by a 3D printer, according to the
specific engine’s crankshaft design. Thus, in the proposed
setup, the maximum resolution of the measurement system
is not limited by the available space provided for the
flywheel as in the case of a typical engine speed measuring
Figure 3.
Appropriate coupling-manufactured by 3D printer; the
encoder’s shaft is visible at the center of the coupling.
system (i.e. the number of dents available to be magnetically
detected) but only by the resolution of the employed
encoder which is directly coupled to the crankshaft. Typical
incremental rotary encoders can easily perform more than
2,000 measurements per revolution [12] while the specific
industrial type encoder that was employed has a maximum
resolution of 10,000 measurements per cycle.
Furthermore, the appropriate coupling –manufactured by
3D printer, can be custom-designed in order to fit to the
crankshaft of basically any low/medium power already
installed and working IC engine that needs to be monitored
in a short time, eliminating the need for performing any
alteration on the initial engine setup; the only addition
necessary is the creation of a mechanical support for the
encoder.
III.
RESULTS
Angular speed monitoring of 9,000 measurements per
crankshaft rotation was successfully obtained employing the
developed system on a typical low power four cylinder
Diesel Engine, installed
in the Department of Naval
Architecture at the University of West Attica (Fig. 4). Note
that all four cylinders firings are clearly noticeable at speed
recording with an angular resolution of 0.04°.
We should point out that the speed profile presented in
Fig. 4 is deduced directly from raw experimental data with
no filtering applied for noise reduction purposes, making the
specific method extremely immune to noise compared to
similar results in literature [11], which are presented in Fig.
5. The above characteristic makes the system particularly
suitable
for
fault
diagnosis
and
engine
performance
optimization applications.
Flywheel
attached to the
engine’s
crankshaft
A
Patterned dents
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 4.
Angular speed monitoring of 9000 measurements per crankshaft
rotation performed on a typical low power four cylinder Diesel Engine.
Figure 5.
Angular speed monitoring before and after filtering at a four-
stroke, six cylinder industrial engine [11].
An initial repeatability investigation has also been
performed by recording rotational speed for a specific
number of consecutive engine cycles. In more detail, the
angular speed of the same engine was recorded for five
consecutive engine cycles (i.e. 720° of crankshaft rotation)
under the same operating conditions. The corresponding re-
Figure 6.
Rotational speed recording for five consecutive engine cycles
(720 samples per crankshaft rotation).
sults are presented in Fig. 6; as we can clearly notice, there
is a high concurrence between the different runs.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
A novel low-cost measurement system for monitoring
with high accuracy, the instantaneous rotational speed of an
internal combustion engine has been developed. The system
has been employed successfully for measuring the rotational
speed of a typical industrial four cylinder engine with a
resolution of 0.04 degree of crank angle, revealing its
suitability for fault diagnosis and engine performance
optimization applications.
The
key
features
of
the
proposed
measurement
configuration are very high monitoring accuracy, low-cost
and ability to be installed on-site, to an already operating
engine with no major modifications, suggesting numerous
potential applications.
Ongoing studies are focusing on fabricating a metallic
coupling for long-term monitoring and also on determining
how effectively the developed sensing arrangement can be
employed in optimizing an engine’s performance and in real-
time fault diagnosis monitoring under different engine load
conditions.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. D. Rakopoulos, E. G. Giakoumis, and A. M. Dimaratos,
“Evaluation of Various Dynamic Issues during Transient
Operation of Turbocharged Diesel Engine with Special
Reference to Friction Development”, SAE Technical Paper
2007-01-0136, doi:10.4271/2007-01-0136, 2007.
[2]
Z. S. Filipi and D. N. Assanis, “A nonlinear, transient single-
cylinder
diesel
engine
simulation
for
predictions
of
instantaneous
engine
speed
and
torque”,
Journal
of
Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, vol. 123, pp. 951-
959, 2001.
[3]
M. Desbazeille, R. B. Randall, F. Guillet, M. El Badaoui, and
C. Hoisnard, “Model-Based Diagnosis of Large Diesel
engines
Based
on
Angular
Speed
Variations
of
the
Crankshaft”, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, vol.
24, pp. 1529–1541, 2010.
[4]
D. Taraza, "Estimation of the Mean Indicated Pressure from
Measurements of the Crankshafts Angular Speed Variation"
SAE Technical Paper 932413, doi:10.4271/932413, 1993.
[5]
N. Cavina and F. Ponti, “Engine torque nonuniformity
evaluation using instantaneous crankshaft speed signal”,
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, vol. 125,
pp. 1050-1058, 2003.
[6]
J. Yang, L. Pu, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, and X. P. Yan, “Fault
detection in a diesel engine by analyzing the instantaneous
angular speed”, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing,
vol. 15(3), pp. 549-564, doi:10.1006/ mssp.2000.1344, 2001.
[7]
Y. Li, F. Gu, G. Harris, A. Ball, N. Bennett, and K. Travis,
“The
measurement
of
instantaneous
angular
speed”,
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, vol. 19, pp. 786–
805, 2005.
[8]
N. V. Kirianaki and S. Y. Yurish, “High Precision, Wide
Speed Range Rotation Sensing with UFDC1”, Sensors &
Transducers, vol. 59, pp. 426-431, 2005.
[9]
ΙVECO 
N45 
MST
technical
manual,
https://www.fptindustrial.com/global/en/engines/construction/
n45, accessed 10/03/2020.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

[10] D. N. Pagonis, G. Theotokatos, and G. Livanos, “Accurate
instantaneous engine speed recording by employing an optical
measurement system-Application to a typical low power
industrial engine”, SAE Technical Papers 2 2013-01-0304,
doi:10.4271/2013-01-0304, 2013.
[11] S. Biocanin and M. Biocanin, “Measurement Crankshaft
Angular Speed of an OM403 Engine”, Serbian Journal of
Electrical Engineering, vol.14 (2), pp. 257-275, 2017.
[12] N. Dumbravescu and S. Schiaua, “Possibilities to increase the
resolution of photoelectric incremental rotary encoders”,
Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing, vol. 3, pp.
557-561, 2000.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

