MRI-Compatible Cascaded Blood Pressure
Microsensor
1st Lodewijk Arntzen
THUAS, Delft, NL
l.h.arntzen@hhs.nl
2nd Daan Boesten
THUAS, Delft, NL
d.boesten@hhs.nl
3th Urs Wyder
Fontys, Eindhoven, NL,
u.wyder@fontys.nl
4th Jan Bernards
Fontys, Eindhoven, NL,
j.bernards@fontys.nl
5th Paolo Sberna
TUD, Delft, NL
P.M.Sberna@tudelft.nl
6th Francesco Stallone
TUD, Delft, NL
f.s.stallone@tudelft.nl
7th Hande Aydogmus
TUD, Delft, NL
h.aydogmus@tudelft.nl
8th Remco Nieuwland
Somni B.V., Delft, NL
remco.nieuwland@somnisolutions.com
9th Marinus van der Hoek
VanderHoek B.V., Vlaardingen, NL,
mj@vanderhoekphotonics.com
10th Henk van Zeijl
TUD, Delft, NL
H.W.vanZeijl@tudelft.nl
11th Jan Schreuder
CDLeycom, Hengelo, NL
j.schreuder@cdleycom.com
12th Guust van Liere
Unitron, IJzendijke, NL
g.vanliere@unitron-group.com
13th John Bolte
THUAS, Delft, NL,
J.F.B.bolte@hhs.nl
Abstract—For the prevention and diagnosis of cardiovascular
diseases, the ability to measure cardiac performance is of great
importance. A new type of sensor compatible for catheterization
is proposed that can diagnose cardiovascular performance while
being immune to Electromagnetic Interference (EMI), as well
as compatible with Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), with
the ability to expand the number of sensors on a single catheter
without additional wires. A prototype consisting of three cascaded
pressure sensors on a single optical fiber has been fabricated,
allowing measurements of important local medical indicators,
such as Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR). The fabricated sensor is
able to measure blood pressure with a resolution of 3.6 mmHg at
a rate of 2 kHz, with room for improvement. Although further
work is needed in the miniaturization and integration of the
sensor in a catheter, preliminary measurements show promising
results.
Index Terms—cardiovascular diseases; blood pressure sensor;
MRI-compatible; optical fiber; catheter.
I. INTRODUCTION
In 2020, in the Netherlands alone, 233,808 reported hospital-
izations due to cardiovascular disease were reported [1]. In that
same year, a total number of 36,579 people died as a result of
cardiovascular disease, representing 22% of the total mortality.
For the diagnosis and prevention of cardiovascular disease,
measurements of cardiac performance are of considerable
importance. To improve diagnostics, accurate and reliable
measurements are critical; for example, to determine cardiac
output, Pressure-Volume (PV) curves are often measured with
piezo-based pressure sensor arrays on a catheter tip. Measuring
pressure in arrays allows measurement of other important
local medical indicators, such as FFR [2]. These indicators
are essential for medical diagnosis, and are currently standard
procedure. However, one of the central problems of piezo
sensors is that the detection technique is based on electrical
signals, which limits precision and reliability due to high static
magnetic fields and EMI. Moreover, it is highly desirable that
future detection techniques can combine diagnostic capabili-
ties with MRI [4]. This implies that the performance of the
sensor must be independent of high magnetic fields, up to 7
Tesla [5]. A different approach was chosen using integrated
optics [3] for the development of a new generation of catheter
sensors. Furthermore, it is desired that the sensor is suitable
for catheters with a diameter of 6 Fr (≈ 2 mm) or less, and a
pressure resolution of 1 mmHg or less. The working principle
is based on a single optical fiber consisting of multiple Fiber
Bragg Gratings (FBG) separated by any adjustable spacing.
Combined with an interrogator, the FBGs measure a shift in
near-infrared electromagnetic wavelength proportional to the
deformations of a Silicon Nitride (Si3N4) membrane at varying
pressures.
II. THEORY
In fluid dynamics, the most simple form of Bernoulli’s Law
states
P + 1
2ρv2 = Constant,
(1)
where P refers to the static pressure, and 1
2ρv2 refers to the
dynamic pressure. This equation is easily derived directly from
energy conservation. It implies that a cascade of microscaled
pressure sensors can be used to trace stenosis in a blood
vessels, as visualized in Figure 1. It also implies that such a
cascade is suitable for verifying correct positioning of a stent
after surgery - since correct stent positioning would directly
cause vanishing blood pressure difference over the stenosis.
Poisseuille-Hagen law describes the pressure difference over
a cylindrical tube of length L, of a fluid in laminar fluid flow
∆P = 8µLQ
A2
,
(2)
where Q refers to the flowrate [ m3
s ], A [m2] the cross-
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Fig. 1. Bernoulli states a direct relation between cross-sectional areas A1 and
A2, static pressures P1 and P2, and flow speeds v1 and v2. If the area reduces,
the static pressure reduces, while the dynamic pressure ( 1
2 ρv2) increases. This
implies that a cascaded pressure sensor can be used to trace stenosis in a blood
vessel.
sectional area of the cylindrical tube, and µ [Pa · s] the dy-
namical viscosity. The assumptions in the derivations set some
limitations using (1) and (2), but the equations are illustrative
for additional applications of a cascaded microscaled pressure
sensor. For instance, the proportion of red blood cells in the
blood (hematocrit) correlates with the viscosity. An increase
of hematocrit leads to a higher viscosity. On average, blood
has a viscosity of approximately three times that of water,
meaning that the driving pressure to pump blood through
the vessels is higher. Polycythemia (or Erythrocytosis) is an
anomaly leading to a enlarged hematocrit that can reach up
to 70% [7]. The viscosity of the blood will then be up to ten
times larger than that of water, making it harder for the heart to
pump blood through the vascular system. Equation (2) shows
that a cascade of pressure sensors fitted in a catheter show
an abnormal pressure decline over the cascade. Additional
diagnostic detection is possible, if the sensor cascade has
sufficient dynamical response. In that case, it will be possible
to analyze the arterial pulse in the time domain, revealing the
performance of the heart and vessels [8]. A typical example
of a study performed exploring pressure curves with a high
precision, is shown in Figure 2. This example shows that
analysing the exact shape of the pressure wave can be used as
a diagnostic tool.
III. FINITE ELEMENT MODELING
To verify the feasibility of the sensor, a simulation of the Si3N4
membrane was performed using a Finite Element Method
(FEM) analysis. In this simulation, the behavior of membranes
with thicknesses ranging from 200 to 400 nm was studied
under different loading conditions. Calculated deformations of
the membranes varied typically from 1.5 to 2.5 micrometers at
Fig. 2.
Typical example of pressure time domain analysis. Analysing the
exact shape and properties, can be used as an diagnostic tool. Adapted from:
[8].
pressures from 50 mmHg to 200 mmHg, respectively. Given
the strain sensitivity of optical fibers with low bend loss,
these values are within the measurement range of commonly
available optical fibers and interrogators [10] [9]. The FEM
model and resulting deformation at a pressure of 200 mmHg
is shown in Figure 3.
IV. FABRICATION
The fabrication of the sensor device consists of the fabrication
of the Si3N4 membrane using photolithographic processes and
the adhesion of the FBG to the Si3N4 membrane.
A. Microfabrication of the Silicon Nitride Membrane
For the microfabrication of the Si3N4 membrane, a 300 µm
double side polished p-type (boron) Silicon wafer with a
<100> orientation is used. Using Low Pressure Chemical
Vapour Deposition (LPCVD) with a mixture of NH3 and
H2SiCl2, a thin film of Si3N4 is deposited on both sides
of the substrate. Si3N4 was chosen because of its relatively
high flexiblity and low etch rate compared to Silicon. The
thickness of the deposited Si3N4 thin film was measured using
an Woollam M-2000 Ellipsometer at a value of 399.47 nm.
The stress of the thin film was measured with the use of a
Flexus 2320-S thin-film stress measurement instrument at a
value of 337.73 MPa. The wafer with a thin film of Si3N4 is
shown in Figure 4, left.
Using an ASML PAS 5500/60 stepper, rectangular patterns
representing the membranes are exposed on a layer of photore-
sist that is deposited to the backside of the wafer. The exposed
patterns are etched away using a Drytek Triode 384T plasma
etcher with a mixture of 90% C2F6 and 10% Cl2 until the bare
silicon of the wafer remains. The resulting exposed patterns
are shown in Figure 4, right. A cavity is created by placing
the wafer in a bath of distilled water with 30% potassium
hydroxide (KOH) until the silicon is completely etched and
only the thin Si3N4 layer on the topside of the wafer remains.
The silicon wafer with an orientation of <100> etches faster
than in the <111> orientation, resulting in a V-shaped cavity
with an angle of 54.7 degrees. The cavity, combined with the
thin layer of Si3N4, acts as a pressure chamber that deforms
dependent on the loading conditions. The Si3N4 membrane
has dimensions of 2.0x0.3 mm. Lastly, the wafer is diced using
a diamond saw resulting in rectangular chips with a size of
10x2.5x0.3 mm (LWH).
B. Adhesion of Silicon Nitride Membrane and FBG
As shown in Figure 3, the deformation of the Si3N4 membrane
is the highest in the center of the membrane. Thus, it is
Fig. 3. FEM model of the Si3N4 membrane showing the deformation at an
applied pressure of 200 mmHg.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Fig. 4. Left: Wafer with a Si3N4 thin film. Right: Wafer with exposed patterns
representing the membranes.
important to align the FBG precisely at the center of the
Si3N4 membrane. For this purpose, an alignment setup is made
consisting of clamps for the optical fiber, a chip housing and an
XYZ micromanipulator with a precision scale of 1.0 µm for the
positioning of the optical fiber on top of the membrane. The
chip housing is made using an Stereolithography (SLA) 3D
printer, and is shown in Figure 5. The aligned optical fiber is
bonded to the Si3N4 membrane using an UV-curable adhesive
with low shrinkage properties [11].
V. MEASUREMENT SETUP
The chip housing not only holds the rectangular chips with the
Si3N4 membrane in place, but also has a built-in provision
for Luer locks for connecting pressure input and output
hoses. The Luer locks allow multiple pressure sensors to be
connected together so that pressure changes can be measured
simultaneously at multiple points along the optical fiber. The
measurement device with three fabricated pressure sensors in
cascade is shown in Figure 6. The optical fiber is connected to
a FAZT I4G interrogator that measures the wavelength shift of
the FBGs at a measurement frequency of 2 kHz with precision
of less than 0.1 pm [10]. Blood pressure signals are generated
with a Biotek Fluke 601A Blood Pressure System Calibrator
that is connected to the measurement device. This device can
emulate heart rhythms at different systolic and diastolic blood
pressure values.
Fig. 5.
Left: CAD drawing of the chip housing. Right: 3D printed chip
housing with an FBG aligned on top of the Si3N4 membrane.
Fig. 6.
Measurement device consisting of three cascaded pressure sensors,
each on a chip housing, with a single optical fiber.
VI. PERFORMANCE AND RESULTS
The characteristics and performance of the three fabricated
blood pressure sensors were determined by applying various
loading conditions and measuring the wavelength shift relative
to a steady state at 0 mmHg. An Atrial tachycardia heart
rhythm at a systolic blood pressure of 140 mmHg and a
diastolic blood pressure of 80 mmHg at a frequency of 120
BPM was applied to the measurement device, the result of
which is shown in Figure 7. The average wavelength shift
of the three sensors is measured at a value of 0.83 ± 0.05
pm due to a pressure change of 60 mmHg, resulting in a
sensor resolution of 3.6 mmHg with the use of an FAZT I4G
interrogator. The dynamic response of the sensors is measured
at a resolution smaller than 50 ms.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this study, an MRI-compatible cascaded blood pressure
sensor suitable for catheterization was designed, fabricated,
and characterized. The dynamic response of the sensors
Fig. 7. Performance of the cascaded pressure sensors on a single optical fiber.
An Atrial tachycardia heart rhythm was emulated at a systolic blood pressure
of 140 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure of 80 mmHg at a frequency of
120 BPM.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

was characterized by applying an emulated atrial tachycardia
cardiac rhythm at a systolic blood pressure of 140 mmHg
and a diastolic blood pressure of 80 mmHg at a frequency
of 120 BPM. The dynamic response (measured at smaller
than 50 ms) is sufficient to see the specific characteristics in
the blood pressure wave. This is an important requirement
for determining the suitability of the sensor to measure the
performance of the heart and vessels.
The average wavelength shift of the three cascaded sensors
is measured at a value of 0.83 ± 0.05 pm shift as a result
of a pressure change of 60 mmHg, translating to an average
sensor resolution of 3.6 mmHg with the use of an FAZT I4G
interrogator. Further work is needed to increase the sensitivity
of the sensors to the desired resolution of 1 mmHg. This
could be achieved by increasing the deformation of the Si3N4
membrane per unit pressure, for example, by increasing the
width of the membrane.
To achieve the desired catheter diameter of 6 Fr (≈ 2mm)
or less, further miniaturization efforts are required to reduce
the size of the chip containing the Si3N4 membrane, i.e.,
by reducing the size of the silicon substrate surrounding
the membrane. In addition, future work is planned to the
integration of the sensor design into a catheter.
Although preliminary measurements were done to verify the
compatibility of the sensors in magnetic fields up to 1.3 T, no
measurements have been done yet to verify compatibility with
high magnetic fields used in MRI scans. Future measurements
are planned to experimentally prove that the fabricated sensor
is compatible with the high magnetic fields used in MR
imaging.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Funding provided by the SIA MKB-RAAK program. We
would like thank former Bachelor Physics students Dorus El-
stgeest, Lennart van der Hengel, Huib Dijkstra, Nils Boertjes,
Lea Visscher, Iris van der Heide and Esther Pot for their
dedicated experimental work as well as FEM simulations.
REFERENCES
[1] Hartstichting,
”Hart-
en
vaatziekten
in
Nederland
2021”,
pp.
4-27,
Dec
2021,
https://hartstichting-hartstichting-portal-p01.
s3.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/2022-11/
hart-en-vaatziekten-nederland-cijfers-2021.pdf?, retrieved: Feb 2023
[2] Kathinka Peels, Nico H.J. Pijls, and Bernard de Bruyne. ”Measurement
of fractional flow reserve to assess the functional severity of coronary-
artery stenoses”, Jun 1996, publisher: N Engl J Med
[3] Fiber Bragg Grating Strain Sensor Incorporated to Monitor Patient Vital
Signs During MRI, 4986, VOL. 13, NO. 12, Dec 2013, publisher: IEEE
[4] Andreas Kumar, David J. Patton, and Matthias G. Friedrich, ”The
emerging clinical role of cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging”,
Jun 2010, publisher: Pulsus Group
[5] UMC
Utrecht,
”7T-MRI”
https://www.umcutrecht.nl/nl/
wetenschappelijk-onderzoek/7t-mri, retrieved: Feb 2023.
[6] ”Venturi Effect”, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venturi effect, retrieved:
Feb 2023.
[7] John E. Hall, ”Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology”, pp.
155-166, 2003.
[8] O’Rourke, M.F., ”Time domain analysis of the arterial pulse in clinical
medicine”, Med Biol Eng Comput 47, pp. 119–129, Feb 2009, publisher:
IFMBE
[9] FBGS, Draw Tower Gratings, Overview, https://fbgs.com/components/
draw-tower-gratings-dtgs/, retrieved: Feb 2023.
[10] Femto
Sensing
International,
FAZT
I4G
INTERROGATOR
Datasheet,
https://femtosensing.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/
FSI-FAZ-I4G-Interrogator-Datasheet-V4.pdf, retrieved: Feb 2023.
[11] Norland Products, Norland Optical Adhesive 65 Technical Datasheet,
https://www.norlandprod.com/adhesives/NOA%2065.html,
retrieved:
Feb 2023.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

