The Use of Bluetooth Low Energy Smart Sensor for Mobile Devices Yields an 
Efficient Level of Power Consumption 
 
Khurshid Aliev, Francesco Rugiano, Eros Pasero 
Department of Electronics and Telecommunications 
Politecnico di Torino 
 Torino, Italy 
e-mail:{khurshid.aliev, francesco.rugiano, eros.pasero}@polito.it 
 
 
Abstract—Mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets 
have already become an integral part of our lives. For example, 
they are widely used throughout society with several 
applications in various business sectors which include smart 
houses, irrigation systems, healthcare and many more. This 
paper proposes a method to improve the use of smartphones 
with a smart wireless sensor network acquisition system 
through Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE). A new BLE Smart 
Sensor, which acquires environmental data was designed. This 
can be used with normal android devices (Smartphones, 
Tablets) to collect information from a smart sensor. Moreover, 
a BLE acquisition algorithm was successfully implemented on 
the firmware of the device. 
Keywords-Bluetooth Low Energy; Wireless Sensor Networks; 
Smartphone applications. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Internet has become an integral part of everyday life 
and this is expected to herald a new era of Internet expansion 
known as the Internet of Things (IoT). Instead of being 
controlled by human beings, sensors, actuators and 
appliances will work directly to measure and respond to a 
wide variety of data such as temperature, how much power is 
consumed, or body functions such as blood pressure or heart 
rate [1][2]. 
Wireless sensor networks (WSN) are a relatively new 
and fast developing area of IoT applications, which can 
provide processed real time data acquisition from sensors 
distributed in remote areas. The sensor nodes deployed on 
the 
specific 
places 
measure 
various 
environmental 
parameters. These measurements can help in making 
decisions on irrigation (automating, semi automating), 
fertilizer and pesticide applications, intruder detection, pest 
detection, yield prediction, plant disease prediction [3][4][5] 
[6]. Hardware is currently an active research area carried out 
in universities around the world and in private companies. 
The possibilities in this field are endless due to the increasing 
demand to look for new sensors for different applications, 
the advances in miniaturization, components to be integrated, 
or new features to save energy. In this sense, WSN 
technology is clearly the most promising candidate to 
significantly improve automation systems of specific areas or 
places. In combination with low-cost communication 
modules and Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) sensor motes, the 
new lower overall costs of WSN for smartphone applications 
are 
driving 
the 
possibility 
for 
more 
cost-effective 
applications than previously reported [7]. 
BLE is expected to appear in billions of devices and 
sensors in the next few years. The issue of power 
consumption of the remote devices is one of the main issues 
of today’s IoT applications; therefore, in December 2009 it 
was introduced by the Bluetooth Special Interest Group to 
address this. The main feature of BLE is the Bluetooth 
specification v4.0. It is a new protocol which allows for 
long-term operation of Bluetooth devices that transmit low 
volumes of data. It enables smaller form factors, better 
power optimization, and the ability to operate on a small 
power cell for several years [8]. 
A different approach was used in [9], where several 
sensors used with different structures. In fact, increasing the 
number of distributed sensors maximizes the lifetime of the 
network, since more failures can be tolerated; this tackles the 
power consumption challenge. Another advantage of 
applying more sensors at the same time is an increased 
reliability of the network. The smartphone application 
manages the sampling frequency and the method of 
connection 
between 
sensors 
using 
an 
independent 
communication with each sensor, without the need for multi-
hop routing to gather environmental information. The data is 
gathered and analyzed directly by the smartphone 
application. A new device was developed for data acquisition 
and improved android application [9] with the possibility of 
acquiring data from several sensors at the same time. 
However, hardware design and power consumption was far 
from optimal. 
In this paper, the authors designed a completely new 
device which has the benefits of low cost and low power 
consumption 
using BLE technology. Moreover, 
we 
developed a new android application with the ability to 
communicate with BLE devices (see Fig. 1.).  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the hardware design and algorithm of the android 
application. In Section III we present the cover box of 
temperature and humidity acquisition system. Section IV 
discusses the future work and new ideas. We close the article 
with acknowledgements. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

II. 
METHODS 
A. Bluetooth Low Energy Smart Sensor  
The authors of [9] presented Classic Bluetooth based 
temperature and humidity acquisition system. They used low 
power components but most of the power consumption was 
due to the classic Bluetooth module. The power consumption 
of the classic Bluetooth is 26 mW while it is waiting 
connection and 90mW during the transmission [9].  
Concerning the power consumption of the device a new BLE 
based temperature and humidity device was designed.  
Figure 1.  BLE-based wireless sensor network to collect environmental 
data for smartphones.  
In order to reduce power consumption on the hardware 
part, we used a low power temperature and humidity sensor 
(SHT21 from Sensirion, temperature range from -40 to 
+125°C and accuracy of 0.3°C, humidity range from 0 to 
100% and accuracy of 2%) [18]. The I2C protocol is used to 
communicate between sensor and microcontroller. For this 
system, a MSP430G2553 microcontroller from Texas 
Instrument MSP430 family has been selected. It is an ultra-
low-power microcontroller. The architecture, combined with 
five low-power modes, is optimized to achieve extended 
battery life in portable measurement applications. The device 
features a powerful 16-bit RISC CPU, 16-bit registers, and 
constant generators that contribute to maximum code 
efficiency. The digitally controlled oscillator (DCO) allows 
wake-up from low-power modes to active mode in less than 
1 μs. In addition, it has a 10-bit analog-to-digital (A/D) 
converter. In order to avoid power consumption, the 
microcontroller switches on the temperature and humidity 
sensor only during the acquisition of the environmental 
parameters; after this it switches for 15 seconds off. In 
addition, the microcontroller puts itself in a low power mode 
between two consecutive measurements in order to save 
power. The reasons for choosing BLE are that it consumes 
less power and costs less compared to the Classic Bluetooth. 
In addition, its simplicity, wide range of users, the capability 
to work in the absence of Wi-Fi and, most importantly, the 
fact that the new models of smartphones support BLE [10] 
[11] [12] are very important factors.  
The BLE module HM-10 from JNHuaMao Technology 
Company was used to design the device. It is compatible 
with the new standard Bluetooth 4.0. BLE is a new short 
range radio technology, optimized for ultra-low power 
applications. It is different from Bluetooth classic 
(BR/EDR), but with same benefits like robustness, 
interoperability, 
royalty 
free 
or 
connectivity 
with 
smartphones and PCs. BLE module consumes 0.01 to 0.5 W 
while transmitting. The BLE module receives data from the 
Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter (UART) 
interface of the microcontroller, and forwards it to a receiver 
using the Generic Access Profile (GAP). GAP is the 
cornerstone that allows Bluetooth Low Energy devices to 
interoperate with each other. It provides a framework that 
any BLE implementation must follow to allow devices to 
discover each other, broadcast data, establish secure 
connections, 
and 
perform 
many 
other 
fundamental 
operations in a standard, universally understood manner. 
There is a button on the device which switches the BLE 
module on only during transmission of the data and turns it 
off after transmission. The designed hardware is powered by 
a 3V lithium coin battery (Energizer CR2032). Typical 
capacity of the battery is 240mAh (to 2.0 volts). 3D version 
and final prototype board of the BLE-based Temperature and 
Humidity acquisition system are shown in Fig. 2. 
A)                                          B) 
    
      
 
C) 
    
 
Figure 2.  (A) 3D version of the electronic circuit BLE-based temperature 
and humidity acquisition system. (B) Prototype Board: Top view 
temperature and humidity sensor, microcontroller and BLE module. (C) 
Bottom view of the device. 
B. Android Application of Bluetooth Low Energy Smart 
Sensor 
An android application for the BLESensor was developed 
on an updated version of Android Studio. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

BLE communication settings and algorithms are 
implemented in application. The software model of BLE is 
described below: 
Client 
A device that initiates Generic Attribute Profile (GATT) 
commands and requests, and accepts responses, for example 
a computer or smartphone. 
Server 
A device that receives GATT commands and requests, 
and returns responses, for example a temperature sensor. 
Characteristic 
A data value transferred between client and server, for 
example the current battery voltage. 
Service 
A collection of related characteristics, which operate 
together to perform a particular function. For instance, 
the temperature and humidity acquisition services include 
characteristics for a temperature measurement value, and a 
time interval between measurements. 
Descriptor 
A descriptor provides additional information about a 
characteristic. 
For 
instance, 
a 
temperature 
value 
characteristic may have an indication of its units (e.g., 
Celsius), and the maximum and minimum values which the 
sensor can measure. Descriptors are optional - each 
characteristic can have any number of descriptors. 
Some service and characteristic values are used for 
administrative purposes - for instance, the model name and 
serial number can be read as standard characteristics within 
the Generic Access service. Services may also include other 
services as sub-functions; the main functions of the device 
are so-called primary services, and the auxiliary functions 
they refer to are secondary services. 
Identifiers 
Services, characteristics, and descriptors are collectively 
referred to as attributes, and identified by UUIDs. Any 
implementer may pick a random or pseudorandom UUID 
for proprietary uses, but the Bluetooth SIG have reserved a 
range of UUIDs (of the form xxxxxxxx-0000-1000-8000-
00805F9B34FB [10]) for standard attributes. For efficiency, 
these identifiers are represented as 16-bit or 32-bit values in 
the protocol, rather than the 128 bits required for a full 
UUID. For example, the Device Information service has the 
short code 0x180A, rather than 0000180A-1000-.... The full 
list is kept in the Bluetooth Assigned Numbers document 
online. 
C. Algorithm of the BLESensor  
The Algorithm of the application: BluetoothLeService 
class provides a service for managing connection and data 
communication with a GATT server hosted on a given BLE 
device. DeviceControlActivity class checks whether there is 
Bluetooth LE communication or not and if yes display data. 
Moreover, this activity provides GATT services and 
characteristics supported by the device. The software 
continuously checks for the availability of the sensor and 
after communication it remembers the last connection [13]. 
The BLESensor application has a menu for discovering 
and selecting the desired BLE-based sensor to get 
characteristics. This part of the application is called Discover 
UUIDs, and, for all primary services, after running the 
application, it tries to find service with a given UUID. The 
software discovers all characteristics for a given service. The 
next step is to find a characteristic matching with a given 
UUID where after application reads all descriptors for 
particular characteristics. 
Finally, GATT offers notifications and indications. The 
client may request a notification for a particular 
characteristic from the server. The server can then send the 
value to the client whenever it becomes available. For 
instance, a sensor (SHT21) server may notify its client every 
time it takes a measurement. This avoids the need for the 
client to poll the server, which would require the server's 
radio circuitry to be constantly operational. 
An indication is similar to a notification, except that it 
requires a response from the client, as confirmation that it 
has received the message. 
The next part of the application is called discovery. 
BLESensor can distinguish between a Bluetooth classic 
based device and a BLE-based device. Sensors will be saved 
as Pair-Sensors after each communication. After selecting 
sensor/s, the process of connecting starts. In some cases, two 
attempts are needed to connect to the sensor. If the standard 
method of connecting fails, the reflection method starts.  
The obtained data stream needs to follow the process of 
tokenization to break desired values of temperature and 
humidity from several lines of data that are read from the 
sensor [10]. Acquired data is computed with the formula of 
the SHT21 sensor from the datasheet. Additionally, all 
sensor data is stored in a text file in the data storage of the 
mobile phone.  The application has a setting to select the 
number of available sensors to follow and the mentioned 
processes will happen automatically. The main interface of 
the BLESensor application is shown in Fig. 3. It illustrates 
how two sensors send indoor and outdoor environmental 
data to the BLESensor mobile application. 
Figure 3.   Main Interface of the BLE-based android application for 
acquiring environmental data. 
III. 
COVER BOX FOR TEMPERATURE AND HUMIDITY 
DEVICE  
One of the issues of the device was protection from 
environmental impacts. Moreover, esthetically it requires 
being attractive and easy to use for users. For that reason, we 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

designed a cover box for the device. The cover box is 
designed in SOLIDWORKS 2015 x64 Edition and used STL 
file to print in 3D printer of Neuronica Laboratory [15]. The 
size of cover box is reduced as much as possible. 3D 
dimension of the cover box is provided in Fig. 4. 
A) 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B)               
                     C)                                                                              
D)                                          E) 
 
 
Figure 4.  (A) Cover box for BLESensor: Button to switch electronic 
device, (B) Assembled parts of box, (C) Case of the box, (D) Cover of the 
case, (E) Final printed product with sensor inside. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION/CONCLUSION  
This paper introduces a device designed with low power 
components which acquires environmental data through BLE 
technology and sends it to an android application developed 
on Android Studio [14].                   
Future work will focus on experiments using a climate 
chamber 
with 
various 
environmental 
conditions, 
to 
determine the accuracy of the sensor within it. At the same 
time, we will test the power consumption of the device 
during each condition to determine if the changes in 
environmental conditions alter the power consumption in any 
way. The amount of power which will be consumed has only 
been theorized at this point in time so physical data to 
coincide with this would confirm our original hypothesized 
consumption levels.  
Another area of our work will focus on Network 
topology for BLE. This is an area of interest because billions 
of sensors and actuators will be deployed in the next few 
years and an emerging trend is to connect sensors with 
Internet of Things (IoT). The low-power radio technology 
has perhaps the highest potential for IoT use. The application 
which is still lacking IP capability is BLE which is expected 
to be incorporated in billions of consumer electronics devices 
around the globe (e.g., smartphones, tablets, Google glass, 
etc.,) [17]. Accordingly, the capability to run IPv6 over BLE 
opens new doors to the IoT and promotes BLE towards new 
application areas. The most important of these areas would 
be to exploit the smartphone as a gateway for providing 
Internet connectivity to surrounding BLE-enabled sensors.  
For instance, this approach allows one to remotely and 
ubiquitously monitor medical parameters from body sensors. 
Another example of the use of this application is with vehicle 
health messages, which can be sent by vehicular sensors 
through the smartphone of the driver to remote Intelligent 
Transportation System (ITS) control centers in order to 
prevent accidents. Similar applications can be found in other 
domains including home, urban and industrial automation. 
Furthermore, enabling IPv6 over BLE contributes to 
interoperability between IoT devices that utilize different 
low-power radio technologies. This is particularly important 
since 
Internet 
Engineering 
Task 
Force 
(IETF) 
standardization work is currently progressing towards 
extending the family of low-power technologies with IPv6 
support [16]. Other experiments have been proposed with the 
goal of implementing different learning machine tools in 
Wireless Sensor Networks in order to predict a sensor data 
will also be investigated. In conclusion, the use of BLE 
technology with our Android system can reduce power 
consumption on the whole system [17]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by TIMUR project funded 
by Erasmus Mundus Action 2 program. Moreover, this 
project was partly funded by Italian MIUR MIE project and 
supported by the Politecnico of Turin NEC laboratory. 
Authors would like to thank Roberto Moncada and Sanwal 
Saleem for their assistance in the project. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Zeeshan and Y. Wonyong, “A Survey on Energy 
Conserving Mechanisms for the Internet of Things: Wireless 
Networking Aspects”, Sensors 2015, 15, pp. 24818-24847.  
[2] A. Zanella, N. Bui, and A. Castellani, “Internet of Things for 
Smart Cities”, IEEE Int. Things J. 2014, 1, 22–32. 
[3] S. Yoo, J. Kim, T. Kim, S. Ahn, J. Sung, D. Kim, A2S 
“Automated 
Agriculture 
System 
Based 
on 
WSN”, 
Proceedings of ISCE 2007, IEEE International Symposium on 
Consumer Electronics, Irving, TX, USA, 2007, pp. 20–23.  
[4] S. K. Kurmi, R. Verma, and A. K. Sharma, “Modern Organic 
Precision E-Agriculture (MOPEA) Using Energy Efficient 
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN),” International Journal of 
Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering.Vol 3, 
2013, pp. 663-667- (ISSN 2250–2459 (Online)) 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

[5] M. Keshtgari and A. Deljoo, “A Wireless Sensor Network 
Solution for Precision Agriculture Based on Zigbee 
Technology,” Wireless Sensor Network, Vol. 4 No. 1, 2012, 
pp. 25-30. 
[6] K. GopalaKrishna Moorthy, C. Yashuwanth, and K. 
Venkatesh, “A Wireless Remote Monitoring Of Agriculture 
Using Zigbee”, International Journal of Engineering and 
Innovative Technology (IJEIT). Vol 2, 2013, pp. 72-74. 
[7] Adam 
Dunkels, 
Programming 
Memory-Constrained 
Networked Embedded Systems. PhD thesis, 2007 
[8] http://developer.android.com/index.html [retrieved: March 2, 
2016] 
[9] S. Aram, A. Troiano, and E. Pasero, "Environment sensing 
using smartphone," Sensors Applications Symposium (SAS), 
2012 IEEE, Brescia, 2012, pp. 1-4. 
[10] S. Aram, A. Troiano, F. Rugiano, and E. Pasero, ”Low Power 
and 
Bluetooth-Based 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Network 
for 
Environmental Sensing Using Smartphones”, Artificial 
Intelligence Applications and Innovations, IFIP Advances in 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology Volume 
382, 2012, pp 332-340. 
[11] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bluetooth_low_energy 
[retrieved: February 25, 2016]  
[12] Bluetooth developper portal. [Online]. Available from:  
https://developer.bluetooth.org/Pages/default.aspx [retrieved: 
February 25, 2016] 
[13] Safari 
books 
online. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.safaribooksonline.com/library/view/getting-
started-with/9781491900550/ch01.html [retrieved: February 
25, 2016] 
[14] Android developpers portal. [Online]. Available from:  
http://developer.android.com/develop/index.html 
[15] Dassault 
Systemes 
SolidWorks 
Corporation. 
[Online]. 
Available from http://www.solidworks.com/ 
[16] IPv6 over Networks of Resource-Constrained Nodes (6lo). 
Proposed 
Working 
Group 
charter, 
2013 
http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/6lo/charter/ [retrieved: March 1, 
2016] 
[17] J. Nieminen, C. Gomez,  M. Isomaki, T. Savolainen, B. Patil, 
Z. Shelby, M. Xi, J. Oller, “Networking Solutions for 
Connecting Bluetooth Low Energy Enabled Machines to the 
Internet of Things”, IEEE Network 28 (2014), pp. 83-90. 
[18] Sensirioin The Sensor Company. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.sensirion.com/products/digital-humidity-sensors-
for-reliable-measurements/humidity-temperature-sensor-
sht2x-digital-i2c-accurate/ [retrieved: March 16, 2016] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

