Autonomous Electrochemical Sensing Systems for Environmental and Bio 
Applications 
Vladimir. I. Ogurtsov*, Karen Twomey and Miomir Todorovic 
Tyndall National Institute, University College Cork, Lee Maltings Complex, Dyke Parade,  
Cork, Ireland 
*e-mail: vladimir.ogurtsov@tyndall.ie 
 
Abstract—The 
study 
describes 
the 
development 
of 
autonomous portable electrochemical sensing systems for 
environmental and bio applications by few examples of 
custom-designed systems. They include a swallowable capsule 
with wireless communication link for in-vivo gastrointestinal 
track investigation, an automatic chemical sensing system 
operating on-board of a robotic fish for detection pollution and 
monitoring of the water quality in seaport areas and 
multichannel electrochemical sensing instrumentation with 
fluidic control of flow-through system for screening the impact 
of nanomaterial on human health and the environment. The 
described apparatuses represent complete sensing systems 
comprising of a portable low-noise anolog front-end under 
microcontroller regulation which work in pare with a control 
PC equipped with corresponding signal processing software 
for handling the signal from a silicon microfabricated chip-
based 
electrochemical 
sensors 
tailored 
to 
application 
specification and requirements. Key principles of the system 
design are considered and the systems operation and 
performance are discussed. 
Keywords-Electrochemical sensing system; electrochemical 
cell; 
microelectrode 
array; 
potentiostat; 
transimpedance 
amplifier; signal processing software. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, the necessity of monitoring and detecting 
different chemical and biochemical components (chemical 
anylytes, contaminants, toxicants, biomarkers, etc.) in 
environmental and bio application areas, such as food 
industry, clinical diagnostics, environmental protection, 
drug development and security has significantly increased 
[1]. Commonly, besides the classical for analytical sensing 
systems requirement on reliable and specific detection of 
extremely small quantities of chemical and biochemical 
targets an additional request on real-time autonomous 
operation at the point of needs moves to the forefront. This 
demand is often accompanied by the requirement that the 
sensing systems should be portable (have low weight and 
size, small power consumption) and be equipped with in-
built signal processing and data interpretation algorithms to 
allow using the analytical system outside of specialised 
laboratories in an automatic mode with no-live operator. 
The role of the intelligent chemical sensing system capable 
of analyte quantification without user intervention is of 
great importance for emerging Internet of Things (IoT) 
devices, where they form an essential part of the IoT 
environment [2].  
The most of traditional analytical methods, which are 
used to detect the chemical targets, are slow, expensive and 
require bulky and power hungry equipment demanding 
dedicated laboratories and highly skilled personnel to 
operate with it. In this regards, electrochemical sensing 
systems are of particular interest for in-situ autonomous 
applications as they can be implemented with relatively 
simple, portable and non-expensive apparatus that can 
provide for rapid and sensitive measurements in automatic 
mode. They can detect solid, liquid or gaseous analytes in 
different mediums including complex bio fluids with simple 
operating procedures without or with limited sample pre-
treatment that is the essential condition for their 
implementation outside of the laboratory environment. 
Emerging microfabrication technologies allowing for 
manufacturing of micro and nano size electrodes and 
sensors are boosted an additional interest to electrochemical 
analytical systems.  
Miniaturised electrochemical sensors offer a number of 
advantages over macroscopic devices including increased 
mass transport and hence improved sensitivity (due to the 
hemispherical diffusion), reduced iR drop and enhanced 
signal 
to 
noise 
ratio 
[3]. 
Thus, 
microfabricated 
electrochemical sensors can achieve the required limits of 
detection that could not be reached for portable in-field 
applications before. Additionally, in regards to bioanalytical 
applications, the micro- and nanobiosensors become 
comparable in dimensions to many of the biological entities 
(cells, enzymes, antibodies) appeared to be the detection 
targets that provides the potential to resolve many of 
currently unsolved challenges in biosensing. 
The described circumstances explain the considerable 
recent attention that has focused on the development of 
analytical systems based on a range of electrochemical 
sensors and microsystems. These devices span diverse 
applications, including clinical diagnostics [4][5], monitoring 
of environmental pollutants [6][7], control of food safety [8], 
detection of bioterrorism agents [9], etc. 
 On instrumentation part there are a number of various 
commercial electrochemical equipment available on the 
market that can be used for lab based applications. At the 
same time, in many cases end-user and application 
requirements related to operability in field conditions,  ease 
of use and maintenance, high reliability, fast analysis time, 
portability (small size, weight and power) and intelligence 
are so specific that cannot be met with available commercial 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

hardware therefore necessitate custom development of the 
sensing system to comply with the application specification. 
In order to match these requirements, very often the full 
scale development of the sensing system should be 
undertaken including design of the electrochemical sensor, 
instrumentation hardware and software [9]-[15]. In the 
current study, the most attention will be given to 
instrumentation aspects of the electrochemical sensing 
systems. 
Although 
in 
recent 
time 
system-on-a-chip 
technologies are increasingly used in the design of the 
electrochemical instrumentation [12][16] the utilizing of-the-
shelf component in the development is still relevant 
especially when a device series is not expected to be high 
and device cost is required to be low. Few examples of such 
custom hardware development are reported below.  
The main problems of the instrumentation analog front-
end design are discussed in section 2. Then the 
electrochemical sensing system development illustrated by 
custom-designed devices, such as a swallowable capsule 
with wireless communication link for in-vivo gastrointestinal 
track investigation, an automatic chemical sensing system 
operating on-board of a robotic fish for detection pollution 
and monitoring of the water quality in seaport areas and 
multichannel electrochemical sensing instrumentation with 
fluidic control of flow-through system for screening the 
impact of nanomaterial on human health and the 
environment.  
II. 
ELECTROCHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION 
In general, an electrochemical sensing system comprises 
an electrochemical cell incorporating a sensor or sensor array 
and a mix signal instrumentation hardware. The latter 
consists of analog front-end, which includes two main 
electronic units, a potentiostat and a Trans Impedance 
Amplifier (TIA), and a microcontroller. The analog front-end 
connects 
to 
the 
microcontroller 
that 
controls 
the 
measurements and provides data acquisition and connectivity 
to 
a 
control 
computer. 
Depending 
on 
application 
requirements the control computer can be a laptop/desktop 
computer (PC) or a single board computer (i.e., Gumstix, 
Raspberry Pi, Aurdino, etc.). The electrochemical cell is 
usually a three electrode structure comprising a Counter 
Electrode (CE), a Reference Electrode (RE) and a Working 
Electrode/electrodes (WE) operating as a sensor, which is 
immersed into or covered by a sample solution to be 
analyzed. The potentiostat is responsible for setting a 
stimulation potential between the working and reference 
electrodes to initiate a redox reaction associated with 
electron transfer processes between the WE and the solution 
under investigation. The RE is used as a point of reference 
in the electrochemical cell; the CE is in charge of closing 
the current loop with the WE; and WE is the electrode on 
which surface the electrochemical reaction is happen. This 
reaction is accompanied with the current related to the target 
concentration. The current is measured by a TIA and after 
corresponding signal processing is used for extracting 
information on target concentration.  
However, the signal processing is complicated by a non-
faradaic current component attributed to charging of an 
electrical 
double 
layer 
capacitance 
and 
adsorption/desorption processes taking place at the interface 
of WE and surrounding solution. The double layer 
capacitance depends on a number of factors including 
electrode potential, temperature, ionic concentrations, types 
of ions, oxide layers, electrode roughness, impurity 
adsorption, etc. Its specific value falls within the range 
between 20 μF and 60 μF per cm2 of electrode. Thus, the 
double-layer capacitance of a 1mm radius disk electrode can 
be between 0.6 μF and 1.9 μF. This is a significant value 
that has noticeable effect on performance of the analog 
front-end and extracting the Faradaic current which is a 
signal of interest for a great deal of applications.  
On signal processing part a number of different 
electrochemical techniques were suggested to decrease 
masking effect of the charging current. These techniques use 
different shapes of the stimulation signal (e.g., DC for 
amperometry, staircase, square wave, etc. for voltammetry) 
and perform the current measurement (for voltammetric 
techniques) at the times when the charging current is 
significantly decayed after abrupt changes in the stimulation 
signal. On instrumentation part occurrence of the significant 
electrode capacitances connected to the analog front-end 
inputs lead to limitations in the circuit performance and can 
result in the circuit instability. Therefore, the circuit design 
should be performed with taking this circumstance into 
account.  
A simplified schematic of the analog part of the 
electrochemical sensing system is shown in Figure 1 
 
OP AMP 3
+E
-E
OP AMP 1
CE
_
+
Vst
RE
WE
+E
-E
OP AMP 2
_
+
-E
+
_
+E
RF
CF
Vout
Electrochemical cell
Potentiostat
Transimpedance amplifier
 
Figure 1. Simplified schematic of the potentiostatic sensing system 
 
The potentiostat is composed of Operational Amplifiers 1   
(OP AMP1) and 2 (OP AMP2). The OP AMP1 is the main 
amplifier that supplies current into the cell; the OP AMP2 
serves as a voltage repeater that has high input impedance to 
eliminate a current flow through the RE. The feedback of 
the potentiostat is formed by a voltage divider made by the 
impedance Zc (between the CE and the RE) and impedance 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Zw (between RE and WE) followed by the voltage repeater. 
If there is no Faradaic reaction on the electrodes, an 
equivalent circuit of impedances Zc and Zw can be 
represented by serial connection of the corresponding 
double layer capacitances associated with the corresponding 
electrodes and liquid resistance between counter or working 
and reference electrodes. The liquid resistance depends on 
solution, type of analyte and its concentration, temperature, 
and the geometry of the electrode system (shape, area and 
the distance between electrodes). It increases if the distance 
increases and the electrode area decreases. The potentiostat 
transfer functions of the stimulation signal to the counter 
and the reference electrodes are described by eq. (1) and   
eq. (2) where G1 and G2 are frequency dependent open gains 
of the corresponding OP AMPs, and Zo is output resistance 
of OP AMP1.  
2
1
1
1
1
1
1 1
CE
Zc
Zc
Zo
G
Zw
G
G
Zw
























  
  (1) 
2
1
1
1
1
1
1 1
GRE
Zc
Zo
G
G
Zw







 








  
       (2) 
Due to serial connection of the two operational amplifier 
the phase margin can reduce and cause ringing and even 
instability of the potentiostatic circuit. To avoid it, the 
repeater amplifier should have the bandwidth significantly 
larger than the main amplifier. If the circuit stability is 
secured and DC gains for OP AMPs are significant (|G2|>>1 
and |G1|>>|1+(Zc+Zo)/Zw|, the signal at reference electrode 
will follow stimulation signal with a small shift that is the 
smaller, the larger G2 and G1. In this case, the signal at the 
counter electrode will be defined by 1+Zc/Zw and therefore 
it can exceed the stimulation signal (if |Zc/Zw |>>1). Thus 
the electrochemical cell should be designed in such a 
manner that to avoid it.  
The presence of the large capacitance in the impedance of 
the WE connected to the input of the transimpedance 
amplifier is also can cause instability and ringing of the 
circuit. The standard approach to optimize the TIA 
performance is to add a bypass capacitor CF in parallel with 
the TIA feedback resistance RF in order to compensate 
phase shift and to guarantee sufficient phase margin for 
stable operation of TIA [17]. However, overcompensation 
reduces the usable bandwidth of the amplifier thus in case of 
application requirement on frequency bandwidth the 
selection of the CF should be made very carefully.  
 
III. 
EXAMPLES OF THE ELECTROCHEMICAL SENSING 
SYSTEM 
Electrochemical 
sensing 
system 
with 
wireless 
communication link implemented in a swallowable capsule 
format [15] was developed for in-vivo investigation of 
gastrointestinal track (GI). The capsule approach, which is as 
an alternative to the classical invasive methods of GI tract 
analysis such as endoscopy and colonoscopy, is receiving 
more research attention in recent years [18]. The suggested 
solution differs from other capsule based technologies and 
proposes for examination of GI status to use an 
electrochemical signature of different GI tract areas instead 
of taking their images. The solution is represented a 
complete electrochemical sensing system comprising of 
electrode system on chip, analog front-end discussed above, 
microcontroller, wireless transmitter with antenna, and 
power unit with a single lithium-ion cell battery. These 
functional units integrated were assembled on a polyimide 
flexible substrate which was arranged in a fold manner and 
encapsulated in polyether ether ketone (PEEK) material to fit 
a capsule with dimensions 12 mm in diameter and 28 mm in 
length (volume is 3.2 cm3, weight is 7.4 g) (Figure 2). The 
sensing electrode structure was realized as a 6 x 6 mm2 
square silicon die. The largest electrode is a counter 
electrode. It is a 2 mm diameter disk made of platinum. Four 
smaller electrodes are 1 mm disks made of gold. Three of 
these small electrodes connected together were played role of 
the working electrodes; the fourth disk was plated with 
platinum and was used as a pseudo reference electrode. The 
analog front-end of the system was realized with low power, 
precision JFET AD8643 amplifiers; the microcontroller was 
PIC18F microcontroller that was chosen for design due to its 
small package size (6×6 mm2) and low power consumption; 
wireless communication link was performed with the help of 
TH72015, which is a Melexis communication solution 
implemented in a 3×3 mm2 QFN package. It has integrated 
PLL and operates with frequency shift key modulation in the 
433 MHz ISM band. The developed capsule was capable of 
performing cyclic, differential pulse voltammetries in 
autonomous mode. 
 
 
Figure 2. Electrochemical sensing system with wireless communication 
implemented in capsule format 
Laboratory 
evaluation 
of 
the 
capsule 
performance 
confirmed that it could operate over 72 h (estimation of the 
maximum time of capsule passage through GI tract) and 
provide at least 500 measurement cycles followed by 
corresponding wireless data transmission from inside of 
body at a distance of 1.5 m from the patient. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

The smart chemical sensing system (Figure 3) capable of 
autonomous operation on-board of a robotic fish for 
monitoring and detection pollution in water area of seaports 
was developed to provide real time in-situ detection and 
measurement of contaminants including heavy metals (ions 
of Cu2+) and phenol derivatives and sea water quality 
parameters: dissolved oxygen, oxidation-reduction potential 
(ORP) and sea water conductivity [14]. The sensing system 
consisted of four channel potentiostatic system for 
quantification of chemical analytes, impedimetric circuitry 
for evaluation of sea water conductivity and low noise high 
impedance voltage repeater for measurement of ORP. 
Multiparametric sensing device was implemented onto a 
single micro fabricated silicon chip with 20×30 mm2 
dimensions. The chip contained two platinum counter 
electrodes 
electrically-connected 
in 
parallel, 
three 
rectangular Pt microdisc arrays and a rectangular Ag 
microdisc array, which played a part of the working sensing 
electrodes, a circular silver-based reference electrode, which 
was common for all working electrodes, a Pt interdigitated 
electrodes for impedimetric measurement and an ORP 
electrode. For improving sensor sensitivity the working 
electrodes were realized as a microdics array. Sixty four 
discs of 30 m diameter and separated each other by 300 m 
were arranged in a hexagonal structure [14]. The 
impedimetric sensor for conductivity measurements was 
made of two interdigitated electrodes. Number of electrode 
pairs was 40, the electrode width and length was 20 m and 
1500 m correspondingly, inter electrode distance was 40 
m. Selection platinum rather than gold as material for 
working electrodes was related to the better stability of Pt to 
the impact from seawater. The control computer was 
Gumstix. The system was of 152×52×26 mm3 dimensions 
and provided for the autonomous measurements of all 
parameters in real time with pollution detection limit of 0.2 
M for cupper and 11.2 M for phenol. 
Comprehensive 
multichannel 
scalable 
instrumentation for toxicity assessment is a main part of the 
smart non-animal high throughput platform for screening the 
impact of nanomaterials on human and environment. The 
sensors are based on biological objects including DNA, 
miRNA, membrane lipids, single cells and lung, intestine, 
liver, kidney and placenta cells. Each channel includes a 
wafer-based sensor located inside of a flow chamber of the 
microfluidic module shown in Figure 4.  
Fluidic hardware of the module comprises of 13 
solenoid pinch valves, peristaltic and vacuum pumps 
providing capability of implementation different fluidic 
protocols including: System filling, Cells cultivation, 
Exchange („harvesting“). The design of the fluidic system 
allows for combination of fluidic modules in a complex 
system to simulate bio interaction between different organs. 
Instrumentation provides full automated multichannel fluidic 
flow control synchronized with electrochemical examination 
of the cell-based sensors. The channel hardware consists of 
Microfluidic Control Unit (MCU) and Electrochemical 
Sensing Unit (ESU) each of 60 x 105 x 165 mm3 dimensions. 
MCU and ESU units are equipped with corresponding user-
friendly software (Figure 5) with in-built signal processing to 
automate toxicity assessment and simplify its protocol 
development.  
 
 
b) 
c) 
Microdisk array 
Pt disk of 30 m 
a) 
Figure 3. Robotic fish (a) with smart electrochemical sensing instrumentation hardware (b) and packaged sensor chip (c) 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
 
Figure 4. Microfluidic module with fluidic hardware. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. User-friendly software by an example of fluidic diagram tab of 
MCU module 
 
The number of channels corresponds to the number of the 
microfluidic 
modules; 
channel 
measurements 
are 
synchronised with operation of corresponding microfluidic 
flow module. Extension of the channels is performed by 
cable connection of the modules to the common SPI bus.The 
key features of electronic instrumentation are easy channel 
extensions, independent or synchronised work MCU with the 
sensing instrumentation, intelligence, possibility to work 
under main PC operational systems and in different 
environments (i.e., NET, LabVIEW, MATLAB). The 
microfluidic control unit besides of providing full pumping 
and valve switching control is allowed for decreasing   power 
consumption, smart control of the fluidic hardware command 
fulfilment, overheating, overcurrent and short circuit 
protections, module current and temperature monitoring. 
Electrochemical sensing unit is realized as a multichannel 
mix signal scalable system. It is implemented with the 
following 
key 
off-the-shelf 
electronic 
components: 
microcontroller Atxmega128A1U and 16 bit DAC LTC2641 
(the digital part), ADA4807 and AD8622 (potentiostat) and 
ADA4350 and AD8253 (TIA) OP AMPs for the analog 
front-end of the channel hardware. The potentiostat is 
capable of provided stimulus signal with scan rate up to 
100V/s in the in -3V – +3V range; transimpedance amplifier 
secured the frequency bandwidth of 41.28 kHz with WE 
capacitance CS = 10nF with RF = 1M and CF = 4pF 
(expected bandwidth calculated according recommendation 
[17] was 40 kHz). Each ESU channel/module acts as a low 
noise, analog front-end highly sensitive measurement unit 
under microcontroller control capable of simultaneous and 
independent from other channels operation. The ESU 
module provides voltammetric or impedance measurements 
in three or two electrode configurations correspondingly. 
Example of voltammetric measurements obtained with the 
developed ESU for a three electrode electrochemical cell 
(CE - Pt wire, RE - Silver/Silver chloride, WE  - 40 um 
microdisk gold electrode array) in solution of 0.1M 
Ferrocyanide in 0.1M KCl at scan rate of 100 mV/s is shown 
in Figure 6. 
Potential [V]
Current [A]
 
Figure 6. Voltammogram obtained by developed electrochemical sensing 
module with 40 um gold disk array in 0.1M Ferrocyanide in 0.1M KCl at 
scan rate of 100 mV/s.  
 
As one can see the voltammogramm has a sigmoidal shape 
as expected in case of microdisc electrodes. Comparison of 
the results obtained with the developed sensing system and 
with a commercial electrochemical station CH 620a showed 
their good agreement. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Nowadays, electrochemical sensing systems are rapidly 
transforming from the research laboratory based bulky 
equipment in autonomous portable systems capable of 
working at point of needs in an automatic mode with no-live 
operator. Such platforms are key of importance for 
environmental and bio applications as they often require real 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

time continuous monitoring and detection different targets 
in complex media in field conditions. The combination of 
emerging silicon based sensing microfabricated platforms, 
state of art electronic instrumentation, microcontroller and 
signal processing technologies promise to address main 
challenges of such systems such as sensitivity, portability 
and intelligence to enable the whole systems to provide 
required multiparametric real time sensing. The presented in 
the study examples of custom-designed systems including a 
swallowable capsule with wireless communication link for 
in-vivo gastrointestinal track investigation, an automatic 
chemical sensing system operating on-board of a robotic 
fish for detection pollution and monitoring of the water 
quality in seaport areas and multichannel electrochemical 
sensing instrumentation with fluidic control of flow-through 
system for screening the impact of nanomaterial on human 
health and the environment demonstrate possible  directions 
for implementing of these system in practical environmental 
and bio applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Financial support of this work by European Commission 
National Development Plan and Enterprise Ireland (project 
CFTD05/112 DIACAPS (DIAgnostic CAPSule), European 
Commission (projects FP7-ICT-231646 “SHOAL: Search 
and monitoring of harmful contaminants, other pollutants 
and leaks in vessels in port using a swarm of robotic fishes” 
and H2020-NMP-29-2015 “HISENTS: High level Integrated 
SEnsor 
for 
NanoToxicity 
Screening”) 
is 
gratefully 
acknowledged. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Fraden. Handbook of Modern Sensors. Physics, Designs, 
and Applications. , Springer, 2016. 
[2] Smart Sensors at the IoT Frontier, Editors H.Yasuura, Ch-M. 
Kyung, Y. Liu, and Y-L. Lin, Springer, 2018. 
[3] D. W. M. Arrigan, “Nanoelectrodes, Nanoelectrode Arrays 
and Their Applications”, Analyst, vol. 129, pp. 1157–1165, 
2004 
[4] T. Bryan, X. Luo, P. R. Bueno, and J. J. Davis, “An optimised 
electrochemical biosensor for the label-free detection of C-
reactive protein in blood”, Biosensors and Bioelectronics, vol. 
39(1), pp. 94–98, 2013 
[5] J. V. Rushworth, A. Ahmed, H. H. Griffiths, N. M. Pollock, 
N. M. Hooper, and P. A. Millner “A label-free electrical 
impedimetric biosensor for the specific detection of 
Alzheimer’s 
amyloid-beta 
oligomers”, 
Biosensors 
and 
Bioelectronics, vol. 56, pp. 83–90, 2014 
[6] X. Wang, X. Lu, and J. Chen  “Development of biosensor 
technologies for analysis of environmental contaminants”, 
Trends in Environmental Analytical Chemistry, vol. 2, pp. 
25–32, 2014 
[7] W. Moujahid, P. Eichelmann-Daly, J. Strutwolf, V. I. 
Ogurtsov, 
G. 
Herzog, 
and 
D. 
W. 
M. 
Arrigan, 
“Microelectrochemical Systems on Silicon Chips for the 
Detection of Pollutants in Seawater”, Electroanalysis, vol. 23 
(1), pp. 147 – 155, 2011 
[8] R. Ramesh, P. Puhazhendi, J. Kumar, M. K. Gowthaman, S.  
F. D'Souza, and N. R. Kamini, “Potentiometric biosensor for 
determination of urea in milk using immobilized Arthrobacter 
creatinolyticus urease”, Materials Science and Engineering: 
C, vol. 49(0), pp. 786-792, 2015 
[9] V. I. Ogurtsov, K. Twomey, and J. Pulka, “A Portable 
Sensing System for Impedance based Detection of Biotoxin 
Substances”, Proceedings of the 10th International Joint 
Conference on Biomedical Engineering Systems and 
Technologies, vol1: BIODEVICES, pp. 54-62, 2017, Porto, 
Portugal 
[10] V. Beni, V. I. Ogurtsov, N. V. Bakounine, D. W. M Arrigan 
and M. Hill, “Development of a portable electroanalytical 
system for the stripping voltammetry of metals: determination 
of copper in acetic acid soil extracts”, Anal. Chim. Acta, vol 
552 (1-2), pp. 190-200, 2005. 
[11] V. I. Ogurtsov et al., “Miniaturized Electrochemical Sensing 
System for in Vitro and in Vivo Biomedical Applications”, 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Biomedical 
Electronics and Devices, pp. 83 – 87, Porto, Jan 14-17 2009. 
[12] C. Mc Caffrey, J. Doyle, V. I. Ogurtsov, K. Twomey, and D. 
W. M. Arrigan, “Development and evaluation of an on-chip 
potentiostat for biomedical applications”, Procedings of the 
3rd International Conference on Biomedical Electronics and 
Devices, BIODEVICE, pp. 103-107, Valencia. Spain,  2010 
[13] V. I. Ogurtsov, K. Twomey, and G. Herzog, “Development of 
an Electrochemical Sensing System for Environmental 
Monitoring of Port Water Quality to Integrate On-board an 
Autonomous Robotic Fish”, Chapter in Comprehensive 
Materials Processing Technology, vol. 13, Sensor Materials 
and Technologies, Elsevier Science, pp. 317–351, 2014 
[14] G. Herzog, W. Moujahid, K. Twomey, C. Lyons, and V. I. 
Ogurtsov, 
“On-chip 
electrochemical 
microsystems 
for 
measurements of copper and conductivity in artificial 
seawater”, Talanta, vol. 116, pp. 26–32, 2013. 
[15] C. Mc Caffrey, K. Twomey, and V. I. Ogurtsov.  
“Development of a Wireless Swallowable Capsule with 
Potentiostatic Electrochemical Sensor for Gastrointestinal 
Track Investigation”, Sensors & Actuators: B. Chemical, vol. 
218, pp. 8-15, 2015. 
[16] Y-T. Liu, M. Chen, Z-C. Li, Y. Wang, and J. Chen, “A high 
dynamic range analog-front-end IC for electrochemical 
amperometric and voltammetric sensors”, Microelectronics 
Journal, vol. 46(8), pp. 716-722, 2015 
[17] J. G. Graeme, “Photodiode Amplifiers: OP AMP Solutions”, 
McGraw-Hill, Inc. New York, NY, USA, 1996 
[18] M. Naoki, T. Kumiko, T. Satoshi, and T. Tetsuji. “Colon 
capsule endoscopy: toward the future”, Clinical Journal of 
Gastroenterology, vol. 10 (1), pp. 1-6, 2017. 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

