Driver Body Information Analysis with Near-miss Events 
 
Momoyo Ito 
Institute of Technology and Science, 
The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima, Japan 
momoito@is.tokushima-u.ac.jp 
Kazuhito Sato 
Faculty of Systems Science and 
Technology, 
Akita Prefectural University, 
Yuri-Honjyo, Akita, Japan 
ksato@akita-pu.ac.jp 
Minoru Fukumi 
Institute of Technology and Science, 
The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima, Japan 
fukumi@is.tokushima-u.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—This study examines safety verification behaviors 
associated with near-miss events at nonregulated intersections 
with poor visibility. From an assessment of a driver’s eye-gaze 
movements and facial orientation associated with the sudden 
appearance of bicyclists encountered while approaching a 
nonregulated intersection, we attempt to analyze the distinctive 
motion of the safety verification behaviors before and after 
near-miss events. Finally, the experimental results suggest that 
the sudden appearance of a bicyclist in the vehicle path has an 
increased chance of becoming a near-miss event. Specifically, 
the trajectory characterized by the eye-gaze movements and 
facial orientations of the driver before and after near-miss 
events show close correlation with the interview results of 
daytime on a sunny day. 
Keywords-driving behavior analysis; facial orientation; eye-
gaze movements; near-miss event. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In Japan, the proportion of fatal bicycle accidents is low. 
However, there are about 120,000 bicycle-related nonfatal 
casualties, which is about 20% of the total vehicle-related 
casualties [1]. Although, from a recent survey [2], the 
proportions of casualties appear to be decreasing, a serious 
situation exists. 
In this study, we focus on near-miss events and safety 
verification 
behaviors 
at 
nonregulated 
intersections. 
Specifically, by devoting attention to the facial orientation 
and eye-gaze movements of a driver before and after near-
miss events involving the sudden appearance of a bicyclist at 
an intersection, we attempt to analyze the causal relations 
between the distinctive safety verification behaviors, and 
interview . 
According to statistics, about 3/4 of the human errors in 
crossing collisions in nonregulated intersections where many 
crossing collisions have 
occurred 
involve cognitive 
distraction states. However, cognitive distraction depends on 
changes in a driver’s internal state, and external observation 
of the distraction is difficult. A method of estimating 
distraction has not yet been established. 
Several methods of detecting distraction have been 
proposed by Dong et al. [3] and classified into four types 
based on the modalities of measurement [4]. The application 
of what Dong et al. defined as “subjective evaluation” and 
“physiological information” for actual driving situations is 
not realistic because of the burden these methods place on 
the driver. Furthermore, the “operation information” that the 
authors defined as steering or braking lead to accidents 
directly, and when the distracted state appears in the 
operation information, there is a possibility to miss the 
accidents avoiding. 
In related studies of the estimation of driver distraction, 
Abe et al. [5] examined what they referred to as the driver’s 
“thinking state”, and Honma et al. [6] discussed what they 
referred to as the “blank states”. These studies not only have 
confirmed the basic characteristic scene wherein discovery 
delay occurs but also overlooked changes in ambient 
conditions. In this study, we focus on the following three 
types of distraction states, i.e., thinking states and blank 
states reflecting how attention resources are distributed, and 
“impatience and frustration states” where the driving task 
occurs under time constraints. 
In Section II, experimental procedure is described. In 
Section III, we show the experimental results focusing on 
facial orientation and eye-gaze movements. Section IV 
concludes this study and indicates the future plans. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE 
A. Experimental system 
This study employs a driving simulator (DS), which is 
able to freely design load environments and traffic conditions 
and 
to 
measure 
driving 
behaviors 
under 
different 
environments. 
Fig. 1 illustrates the experimental system architecture. 
The DS used for these experiments is composed of a control 
device, the size of which is equal to a standard-sized vehicle, 
Figure 1. Experimental system for measuring driver behaviors. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

and a compact 6-axis motion platform (SUBARU design). 
The system includes three color liquid crystal displays 
(LCD) at the front of the cabin, and these are capable of 
freely displaying the horizontal viewing angle and driving 
environments. To achieve unconstrained monitoring and 
measuring of the driver’s head motions, facial orientations, 
and eye-gaze movements, we set two camera heads on the 
right and left side of the center LCD, and an infrared pod at 
the upper center front of the cabin, as shown in Fig. 1. 
B. Near-miss events and running scenarios 
Fig. 2 depicts the driving route and the two definitions of 
near-miss events due to the sudden appearance of a bicyclist 
at an intersection. At intersection-1, a bicyclist suddenly 
appears from the right front of the vehicle and passes through 
sthe intersection (route-1). At intersection-2, a bicyclist 
appears suddenly from the left front side of the vehicle and 
interferes directly in the vehicle’s path (route-2). 
Subsequently, an overview of the various running 
scenarios is as follows. The fundamental scenario is to run 
three laps of the driving route described in Fig. 2-(a). We 
performed a control of the near-miss events as follows. The 
first lap is made without near-miss events at intersections. 
During the second lap, the driver encounters the crossing 
bicyclist indicative of route-1 at intersection-1, in addition to 
the bicyclist defined by route-2 at intersection-2. Specifically, 
we constructed four types of running scenarios at varying 
 
 
 (a) Running route for simulation 
 
 
(b) Sudden appearance of bicyclist at intersection-1 
 
 
(c) Sudden appearance of bicyclist at intersection-2 
 
Figure 2. Simulation course with two types of near-miss 
events (Route-1/Route-2). 
 
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
(1-2)Turn right of oncoming...
(1-3)Crossing of car
(2-1)Crossing of bicycle
(2-2)Running out of bicycle
(2-4)Turn left of the car
(3-1)Straight ahead of onco...
(3-2)Crossing of car
(3-3)Crossing of car
Response level(Average)
 
(a) Daytime on a sunny day 
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
(1-2)Turn right of oncoming...
(1-3)Crossing of car
(2-1)Crossing of bicycle
(2-2)Running out of bicycle
(2-4)Turn left of the car
(3-1)Straight ahead of onco...
(3-2)Crossing of car
(3-3)Crossing of car
Response level(Average)
 
(b) Daytime on a rainy day 
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
(1-2)Turn right of oncoming...
(1-3)Crossing of car
(2-1)Crossing of bicycle
(2-2)Running out of bicycle
(2-4)Turn left of the car
(3-1)Straight ahead of onco...
(3-2)Crossing of car
(3-3)Crossing of car
Response level(Average)
 
(c) Nighttime on a sunny day 
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
(1-2)Turn right of oncoming...
(1-3)Crossing of car
(2-1)Crossing of bicycle
(2-2)Running out of bicycle
(2-4)Turn left of the car
(3-1)Straight ahead of onco...
(3-2)Crossing of car
(3-3)Crossing of car
Response level(Average)
 
(d) Nighttime on a rainy day 
Figure 3. Interview results of traffic events at intersections  
(1, 2, and 3). 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

times of the day (i.e., day or night) and under various 
weather conditions (i.e., sunny or rainy) by designing near-
miss events involving the two intersection types, which 
control the timing and routes for suddenly appearing 
bicyclists. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The subjects were 5 men (Subject D and Subject E were 
21 years old, whereas subjects A, B, and C were 22) and one 
woman (Subject F was 23 years old), all of whom were 
university students and had driver’s licenses for ordinary 
vehicles. During test runs, we instructed all subjects to 
maintain standard speeds and traffic rules, such as pause, etc. 
A. Interview results of near-miss events 
We interviewed all subjects to assess the response level 
of surprising near-miss events occurring in nonregulated 
intersections 
(i.e., 
intersection-1, 
intersection-2, 
and 
intersection-3) using a method including four scenarios. The 
interview results in sunny-daytime, rainy-daytime, sunny-
nighttime, and rainy-nighttime are shown in Fig. 3-(a), Fig. 
3-(b), Fig. 3-(c), and Fig. 3-(d), respectively. The results 
indicate that the route-2 near-miss event in which a bicyclist 
                  
 
         (a) Eye-gaze movements from approach to intersection-1 to pause        (b) Facial orientations from approach to intersection-1 to pause 
 
                 
 
           (c) Eye-gaze movements from safety check to turn right                          (d) Facial orientations from safety check to turn right 
 
Figure 4. Sudden appearance of bicyclist crossing right to left at intersection-1 (subject C: daytime on a sunny day). 
 
 
 
                 
 
(a) Eye-gaze movements from approach to intersection-2 to pause      (b) Facial orientations from approach to intersection-2 to pause 
 
                 
 
(c) Eye-gaze movements from safety check to turn right                  (d) Facial orientations from safety check to turn right 
 
Figure 5. Sudden appearance of bicyclist interfering with the vehicle path at intersection-2 (subject C: daytime on a sunny day). 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

suddenly appears in the path of the vehicle, as shown in Fig. 
2-(c), was confirmed as the most effective for all subjects.  
B. Analysis of facial orientation and eye-gaze movements 
We 
targeted 
near-miss 
events 
at 
nonregulated 
intersection-1 and intersection-2 with poor visibility, and 
classified driver behavior according to two segments. The 
first and the second segments are defined as the period from 
the approach to the intersection to pausing for the oncoming 
bicyclist and the period from the safety verification to 
turning right to avoid collision, respectively. Focusing on the 
gaze movements and facial orientation measured by the 
head-gaze tracking device (FaceLAB), we portray the results 
of intersection-1 and intersection-2 for Subject C driving on 
a sunny day as scatter diagrams, as shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 
5, respectively.  
First, we focus on the eye-gaze movements and facial 
orientations in the case of encountering the sudden 
appearance of the bicyclist defined by route-1, as shown in 
Fig. 4. In the first segment, the driver is aware of the stop 
position of intersection-1, gazing toward the front of vehicle 
path. The scatter diagrams of gaze movements and facial 
orientation are concentrated in the center of the screen, as 
shown in Fig. 4-(a) and Fig. 4-(b). In the second segment, the 
driver visually confirmed the crossing bicyclist by safety 
verification after a pause, and then the driver was tracking 
the bicycle route. The scatter points of the facial orientations 
are distributed to the left and right of the screen, as shown in 
Fig. 4-(c) and Fig. 4-(d). We believe that these results 
quantitatively support the safety verification behavior against 
the near-miss event defined by route-1.  
Next, Fig. 5 shows the scatter diagrams of eye-gaze 
movements and facial orientations in the case of 
encountering the sudden appearance of the bicyclist defined 
by route-2. During the first segment, the driver visually 
confirmed that a bicyclist suddenly appeared from the front 
left of the vehicle path, and then the driver was tracking the 
bicycle route. The scatter diagrams of gaze movements and 
facial orientations form trajectories that are continuous from 
the center of the screen to the right side, as presented in Fig. 
5-(a) and Fig. 5-(b). In the second segment, safety 
verification behavior after a pause is concentrated on the left 
side of the intersection where the sudden appearance of the 
bicyclist has occurred. The scatter points of the facial 
orientations formed a trajectory that is continuous to the left 
side while concentrating on the center of the screen, as 
shown in Fig. 5-(d). This result quantitatively supports the 
safety verification behavior against the near-miss event 
involving the sudden appearance of a bicycle along route-2. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION  
In this study, we concentrated on the facial orientation 
and eye-gaze movements of a driver before and after near-
miss events involving the sudden appearance of a bicyclist at 
a nonregulated intersection. Our results provide the 
following points. 
1) The sudden appearance of bicyclists in a vehicle’s path 
indicates that the probability of a near-miss event is 
likely to be high. 
2) The trajectory characterized by the eye-gaze 
movements and facial orientations of the driver before 
and after near-miss events show close correlation with 
the interview results of daytime on a sunny day. 
In future work, we will add the number of subjects and 
experiments, and a quantitative analysis of relation between 
the near-miss event and the safety verification behavior will 
be carried out. Moreover, we are planning analysis of 
influence of the driving style and the workload sensitivity for 
driving behaviors.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
The Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department, “The situation of bicycle 
accidents,” 
http://www.keishicho.metro.tokyo.jp/toukei/bicycle/bicycle.htm (in 
Japanese)  (April, 2014). 
[2] 
The National Police Agency, “Statistical information of traffic 
accidents in Japan,” https://www.npa.go.jp/toukei/index.htm (in 
Japanese)  (May, 2014). 
[3] 
Y. Dong, Z. Hu, K. Uchimura, and N. Murayama, “Driver inattention 
monitoring system for intelligent vehicles: A review,” IEEE Trans. on 
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 596–614 (2011). 
[4] 
T. Hirayama, K. Mase, and K. Takeda, “Timing analysis of driver 
gaze under cognitive distraction toward peripheral vehicle behavior,” 
The 26th Annual Conference of the Japanese Society for Artificial 
Intelligence, pp. 1–4 (2012). 
[5] 
G. Abe, K. Kikuchi, R. Iwaki, and T. Fujii, “Effects of cognitive 
distraction on driver’s visual attention,” Transactions of the Japan 
Society of Machanical Engineers. C, vol. 76, no. 767, pp. 14–20 
(2010) (in Japanese). 
[6] 
R. Honma, G. Abe, K. Kikuchi, R. Iwaki, and T. Fujii, 
“Characteristics of visual attention while driving under the state of 
drowsiness,” Journal of Society of Automotive Engineeris of Japan, 
vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1217–1222 (2011) (in Japanese). 
[7] 
M. Ishibashi, M. Okuwa, and M. Akamatsu, “Development of 
Metrics for Driver’s Individual Characteristics”, Matda Technical 
Review, no. 22, pp. 155-160 (2004) (in Japanese). 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

