Development of the Future Body-Finger 
A novel travel aid for the blind 
 
Kiyohide Ito 
Department of Media Architecture 
Future University Hakodate 
Hakodate, Japan 
itokiyo@fun.ac.jp 
Junichi Akita 
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Kanazawa University 
Kanazawa, Japan 
akita@is.t.kanazawa-u.ac.jp 
Akihiro Masatani 
Graduate School of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Kanazawa University 
Kanazawa, Japan 
masatani@ifdl.jp 
Makoto Okamoto 
Department of Media Architecture 
Future University Hakodate 
Hakodate, Japan 
maq@fun.ac.jp 
 
 
 
Yoshiharu Fujimoto 
Department of Media Architecture 
Future University Hakodate 
Hakodate, Japan 
fujimonia@gmail.com 
Ryoko Otsuki 
Department of Media Architecture 
Future University Hakodate 
Hakodate, Japan 
g2112008@fun.ac.jp 
Takanori Komatsu 
Faculty of Textile Science and Technology 
Shinshu University 
Ueda, Japan 
tkomat@shinshu-u.ac.jp 
Tetsuo Ono 
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology 
Hokkaido University 
Sapporo, Japan 
tono@complex.ist.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
 
 
Abstract—We have developed a device with a haptic interface 
that enables blind persons to perceive the environment. The 
device, which we call the Future Body-Finger (FB-F), measures 
the distance between a person and an object using an infrared 
sensor and transmits distance information to the user's haptic 
sense by the angular motions of a link. In this report on the 
FB-F, we (1) outline its concept, (2) describe its mechanism, 
and (3) demonstrate its usability by comparing it to 
commercially available products. 
Keywords-haptic interface; electric travel aid; perception  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Human beings are often said to obtain almost all of their 
information via the visual modality. However, nonvisual 
modalities can also provide rich information. Therefore, 
shedding light on the positive use of nonvisual modalities for 
exploring our surroundings is an important issue. In addition, 
we assume that a novel subjective experience of the 
environment (e.g., that of an “extended mind” [1]) could be 
realized by means of devices that function as parts of our 
body and endow us with “embodied cognition.” We have 
been working to develop devices that harness this form of 
cognition. We refer to a device that enables us to have an 
“extended mind” experience as a “Future Body.” As a first 
step, we have developed a device called the “Future 
Body-Finger” (hereafter, “FB-F”) that enables visually 
impaired people (hereafter, “the blind”) to perceive their 
surroundings. 
Numerous devices called electric travel aids (ETAs) [2] 
have been introduced to assist locomotion of the blind. In 
order to ensure the safety of locomotion, ETAs have 
incorporated functions that obtain information on orientation. 
For example, ETA sensors determine a user’s location, the 
direction in which the user moves, and the distance of nearby 
objects. 
ETAs are categorized into two types based on their 
output modality: auditory and haptic. Devices of the former 
type transform spatial information into audible sound [3]. 
For example, Tri-sensor [4] and Miniguide [5] measure 
distance via ultrasonic waves, convert the data into sound, 
and convey information on the distances of objects around a 
user. These devices emit a low-pitched sound when an object 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

is distant from the user and a higher-pitched sound when the 
object approaches. 
Devices of the latter type, which use haptic output [6], 
typically convert spatial information into vibration. The 
intensity and frequency of the vibration are conveyed as 
information via the user’s skin sense. For example, the 
vibration frequency of such a device increases when a user 
approaches an object. Users become accommodated to the 
skin stimulation provided by this type of haptic output 
because the threshold of vibration sensitivity becomes 
increasingly high as users are exposed to the same vibration 
stimulus for increasingly longer times. 
Unfortunately, the aforementioned ready-made devices 
are difficult to handle skillfully. For example, the blind need 
to develop higher cognitive abilities to comprehend the 
information conveyed by sound or vibration, i.e., they must 
interpret the sound and vibration signals by learning to 
associate a sound of a certain pitch or arbitrary vibration 
frequency with the distance to an object. Otherwise, they will 
fail to infer the locations of objects. In this sense, blind 
children will have difficulty managing these devices because 
their abilities in higher-order cognitive processing are not 
fully developed. Furthermore, adventitiously blind persons 
may have to make greater efforts to use ETAs because they 
have difficulty in discriminating sound pitch as well as the 
intensity and frequency of vibration compared with 
congenitally blind persons. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Polar planimeter 
 
 
II. 
CONCEPT OF FB-F: A “SMART” MECHANISM 
III. 
HARDWARE CONFIGURATION 
We designed the FB-F in order to solve the problems of 
usability mentioned in the previous section. FB-F is expected 
to enable users to obtain spatial information such as the 
direction and distance to an object intuitively according to 
the user’s exploratory actions without the use of cognitive 
inference. 
The FB-F is characterized by its haptic “smart” user 
interface. Users do not need mathematical calculations, 
mental inference, or higher-order cognitive processing to 
recognize the distance to an object, whether moving or not. 
The hardware architecture of the prototype FB-F is 
shown in Figure 2. The developed FB-F consists of three 
functional blocks—a controller, sensor, and actuator 
units—which are connected to a common communication 
channel. Each unit has microcontroller (MCU, Cypress 
CY8C21123). The sensor unit has a position-sensitive device 
(PSD)-type distance sensor that radiates infrared rays toward 
an object; it detects the reflection position of the received 
rays by using a PSD that implements a trigonometric 
distance measurement technique. The microcontroller on the 
sensor unit calculates the distance from the FB-F to the 
object. The actuator unit has a servo motor equipped with a 
55-mm-long lever to form a 1-DOF (one degree-of-freedom) 
link. The microcontroller on the actuator unit controls the 
servo motor according to the received angular information. 
The controller unit periodically requests distance information 
from the sensor unit, converts the measured distance to 
angular information, and transmits it to the actuator unit; this 
chain of operations forms the sensor-actuator system. The 
angle of the link increases when the distance between the 
FB-F and an object decreases (e.g., when an object 
approaches), whereas it decreases when the distance 
increases. Users hold the FB-F (Figure 3) and place their 
forefinger on the link. The finger bends or extends depending 
on the link’s angular motion. The angle changes from 0 to 
70° in correspondence with the metric distances between a 
user and an object. The FB-F can provide users with distance 
information because the extent that the user bends his/her 
forefinger is directly associated with the link movements. 
As suggested by Runeson [7], we define a “smart” 
mechanism as a mechanism that directly registers complex 
variables. We adopted this concept to develop the FB-F. To 
provide an example of a “smart” mechanism, we begin by 
explaining how a polar planimeter works (Figure 1). A polar 
planimeter is a tool to measure the area of irregular shapes, 
which requires the calculation of complex variables. When a 
user moves the tracer arm, an attached measuring wheel 
carefully traces the outline with an index to calculate the area 
(a complex variable) automatically. The length and angle 
measured by the polar planimeter are directly proportional to 
the area. The device is so simple to use that those who have 
no knowledge of the calculations (e.g., summing up small 
pieces of a figure) can easily determine the area. Therefore, 
the advantage of this “smart” mechanism is that it does not 
require any calculating ability. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

The hardware specifications of the prototype FB-F are as 
follows: weight, 60 g; height, 7.5 cm; width, 4.5 cm; and 
depth, 3.5 cm. The distance measured varies from 1,000 to 
2,800 mm as the link angle changes from 70 to 0°. The 
distance-angle coefficient is –7°/180 mm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. 
PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY ON ACCURACY OF 
ESTIMATED DISTANCE BY FUTURE BODY-FINGER 
A. Purpose 
We 
conducted 
a 
psychological 
experiment 
to 
demonstrate that the FB-F enables users to perceive distance 
to an object more accurately than commercially available 
products. 
B. Method 
Participants: 16 persons, blind or sighted, participated in 
the experiment. Eight blind adults, four congenitally and four 
adventitiously, participated in the blind group. Their ages 
were between 28 and 57 (mean = 43; SD = 9.50). Eight 
sighted adults (range, 20–22; mean = 20.75; SD = 0.89) 
participated in the sighted group. 
Stimuli: A piece of cardboard adhered to a whiteboard 
(1.6 m × 1.0 m × 0.02 m) was used as the object. We used a 
standard stimulus and 5 test stimuli for the trials. The object 
was presented at a distance of 1.0 m from an FB-F device 
fixed on the table (“standard stimulus”) or at one of 5 
positions ranging between 1.0 and 2.6 m from the table (“test 
stimuli”). The distance between each pair of adjacent test 
stimuli was 0.4 m. 
Device Conditions: The type of ETA (the FB-F, a 
Vibratory device, and a Sonar device) was varied as a 
within-subject factor. Participants were asked to estimate the 
distance to stimuli under different device conditions (i.e., 
three types of ETAs). The Vibratory and Sonar devices were 
commercial products. The Vibratory device (7.0 cm × 4.0 cm 
× 2.5 cm) had a haptic interface that transformed measured 
distances into vibratory signals. The Sonar device (6 cm × 
3.5 cm × 1.5 cm) transformed measured distances into 
audible sounds (i.e., sounds with a specific pitch). Both 
devices used ultrasonic waves to detect the distance to an 
object. 
Procedure: Figure 4 shows the experimental setup. In 
each trial, participants were asked to use an ETA device to 
detect the distance to a stimulus that was presented for 3 s. 
Initially, the standard stimulus was presented, after which 
one of the five test stimuli was randomly presented. The 
magnitude estimation method was used to estimate the 
distance to the presented stimulus. In this method, a 
participant was asked to report the magnitude of a stimulus 
that corresponded to some proportion of the standard. The 
participant estimated his/her subjective experience by 
assigning numbers to the stimuli so that they reflected the 
judged magnitudes of his/her experiences. In magnitude 
estimation, each stimulus was assigned a number that 
reflected its distance as a proportion of that to the standard. 
The standard stimulus was set as “100.” If a test stimulus 
was subjectively twice as far as the standard, a participant 
was required to assign it a magnitude of “200.” Under the 
three device conditions, each participant performed five trials 
for each of the five stimuli. 
Analyses: For each ETA device, the product-moment 
correlation coefficient (r) between the presented distance (i.e., 
the stimulus actually presented) and the estimated distance 
was computed. Additionally, the determination coefficient 
was computed based on linear regression analysis. 
 
Figure 2.  Block diagram of Future Body-Finger 
Figure 3.  Operation of Future Body-Finger 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Experimental setup 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

C. Result 
Figure 5 shows the correlations between the presented 
and estimated distances measured by each device. As the 
lines can be seen in Figure 5, the product-moment correlation 
coefficients of the FB-F, Vibratory device, and Sonar device 
were 0.917, 0.498, and 0.396, respectively. This indicates 
that the FB-F provided participants with the most accurate 
estimation of distance to the presented stimuli. 
Figure 6 shows the mean determination coefficients of 
each group in the three device conditions. A two-way 
analysis of variance was conducted with group (blind and 
sighted) and device condition (FB-F, Vibratory device, Sonar 
device) as the between- and within-subject factors, 
respectively. The main effect of device condition was 
significant (F(2, 28) = 66.68, p < 0.01). Multiple comparison 
tests between the three device conditions showed significant 
differences between the devices. By contrast, there was no 
significant difference between the blind and the sighted 
groups.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 ETAs have three requirements. First, they should be 
portable and one-handed so that users can carry them easily 
while locomoting. Second, ETAs should be able to detect the 
distance and direction to surrounding objects accurately. 
Such spatial information will allow users to make decisions 
such as avoiding collisions with obstacles and approaching 
objects. Third, they should be manageable by anyone 
regardless of age or cognitive ability so as to provide users 
with information on the direction of or distance to objects 
intuitively or directly. In this study, we ascertain that the 
FB-F satisfies these three requirements from the results of a 
psychological experiment. To enhance the usability of the 
FB-F, we will continue experimental studies to evaluate its 
efficiency in traveling. Specifically, we are conducting a 
psychological experiment in which the FB-F allows blind 
persons to reach a destination by using an experimental maze. 
We will make necessary improvements by evaluating the 
results collected in experimental settings. We hope that our 
device, which realizes the idea of a “Future Body,” will 
allow both visually impaired and healthy persons to extend 
their capabilities for exploring surroundings. 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We wish to extend our special thanks to those who 
volunteered to participate in our experiment. Our research on 
the development of the Future Body-Finger was supported 
by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry 
of Education, Culture, Sports and Technology, Japan. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Clark and D. Chalmers, “The extended mind,” in Analysis, 
vol. 58, pp. 7-19, 1998. 
[2] B. B. Blasch, W. R. Wiener, and R. L. Welsh, Foundations of 
Orientation and Mobility, 2nd ed. New York: AFB Press, 
1997. 
[3] C. Carter and K. A. Ferrell, The Implementation of 
Sonicguide  with Visually Impaired Infants and School 
Children, Sensory Aids Corporation, D. W. Campbell, Ed. 
Ill: Bensenville, 1980.  
 
Figure 5.  Correlation between estimated and 
presented distance (n = 400) 
 
 
[4] L. Kay, “A sonar aid to enhance spatial perception of the 
blind: engineering design and evaluation,” in Radio and 
Electronic Engineer, vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 605-627, 1974. 
 
[5] L. Kay, “Acoustic coupling to the ears in binaural sensory 
aids,” Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, pp. 12-16, 
1984. 
[6] L. A. Johnson and C. M. Higgins, “A navigation aid for the 
blind using tactile-visual sensory substitution,” in Proc. 
EMBS ’06, IEEE 2006, vol. 6, pp. 6289-6292. 
[7] S. Runeson, “On the possibility of 'smart' perceptual 
mechanisms,” in Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, vol. 18, 
pp. 172-179, 1977
 
Figure 6.  Mean determination coefficients in three devices for 
the blind and sighted groups 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

