SMILA: Design and Evaluation of a Smart Mirror for Monitoring Health 
 
Karl Kreiner 
Center for Health and Bioresources 
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH 
Graz, Austria 
e-mail: karl.kreiner@ait.ac.at 
Svenja Schröder 
Research Group Cooperative Systems (COSY) 
University of Vienna 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: svenja.schroeder@univie.ac.at 
Kristina Reiter 
Center for Health and Bioresources 
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH 
Graz, Austria 
e-mail: kristina.reiter@ait.ac.at 
Christian Löw 
Research Group Cooperative Systems (COSY) 
University of Vienna 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: christian.loew@univie.ac.at 
Markus Falgenhauer 
Center for Health and Bioresources  
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH 
Graz, Austria 
e-mail: markus.falgenhauer@ait.ac.at 
Kurt Edegger 
Center for Health and Bioresources 
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH 
Graz, Austria 
e-mail: kurt.edegger@ait.ac.at 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— Chronic diseases among elderly people have an 
increasing 
impact 
on 
healthcare 
systems. 
Telehealth 
interventions using smart phones and low-cost sensors have 
been shown to potentially increase quality of life and reduce re-
hospitalization rates. While usage of Internet and smart 
phones is generally increasing in elderly people, there is still a 
digital divide between younger and older users making 
usability a key aspect of telehealth intervention design. In this 
work, we introduce SMILA, an interactive, voice-controlled 
smart mirror supporting elderly people in self-monitoring of 
parameters relevant to chronic heart failure. We present the 
design, construction, user identification using wrist-bands and 
linkage of the mirror to a telehealth service based on the 
Internet of Things mediation framework symbIoTe. Finally, we 
present initial results from a pilot study evaluating user 
acceptance and usability.  
Keywords- smart mirror; telehealth; human-computer 
interaction; smart home; Internet of Things. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The economic policy committee estimated that in 2050, 
one in three Europeans will be older than 65 years [1], with 
the process of aging being influenced by various factors, 
such as employment, education lifestyle and presence or 
absence of chronic diseases. Especially cardiovascular 
diseases have a huge impact on quality of life and 
hospitalization rates. The rise of smartphones and low-cost 
sensors has led to new health interventions referred to as 
telehealth, allowing patients to track health parameters at 
home using a smartphone, feeding this data into health data 
centers for inspection by health professionals. Telehealth 
interventions have shown to reduce hospitalization rates [2] 
and - by promoting self-management knowledge and skills - 
support preventative approaches that are key to managing 
chronic disease [3]. 
    While the use of Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT) is generally increasing in elderly 
people, it has been shown that there is a digital divide 
between young and elderly people when it comes to ICT 
usage, especially in elderly people with low education and 
income, as well as physical frailty status being directly 
related to ICT usage [4]. 
    Aside from smartphones, the last decade saw a rise of 
smart objects commonly referred to as Internet of Things 
(IoT) especially in the area of health. Examples include 
fitness wristbands measuring heart rate, sleep duration and 
quality and daily activity. From a technical perspective, 
these devices are usually tied to vendor-specific IoT 
platforms leading to a large fragmentation of the IT 
landscape. The EU-funded project symbIoTe (symbiosis of 
smart objects) [5] seeks to implement a mediation 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

framework between these platforms providing application 
developers with unified interfaces across different IoT 
platforms on various levels, such as hardware and software 
and the network layer.   
    Against the backlight of these developments, the 
objective of our work is to investigate how an unobtrusive 
telehealth intervention in the area of cardiovascular disease 
can be designed and built on top of the symbIoTe mediation 
framework.   
    We introduce Smart Mirror Integrated Living Assistant 
(SMILA), an interactive smart mirror for assisting elderly 
people with daily measurements of physiological parameters 
relevant for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases.  
“Smart mirrors” are devices mounted to the background of a 
semi-transparent mirror in order to augment the reflective 
surface of the mirror with digital information.  
    The use of smart mirrors in a health context is interesting 
as people use a mirror on a daily basis. The use of smart 
mirrors in the context of health has been investigated in a 
number of scenarios: “Fit Mirror” [6], a smart mirror using 
gesture control to provide physical exercises to elderly 
people, “Wize Mirror” [7] using 3D optical sensors, 
multispectral cameras and gas detection sensors to derive a 
wellbeing Index and a non-contact health monitoring system 
[8] analyses facial expressions, posture and voice changes.  
    The contribution of our work to this field is two-fold: (1) 
we merge the concepts of telehealth interventions in the area 
of cardiovascular disease with the smart mirror concept and 
(2) we aim to investigate end-user acceptance with two 
stakeholder groups (a) eldery people and (b) young people 
in order to explore differences in user interaction between 
these two groups. 
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows: First, we 
describe the design of the interactive mirror. Second, we 
describe how the end-user evaluation design has been setup. 
Third, we describe the overall interaction workflow and 
discuss results from an initial user evaluation. 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Smart mirror 
SMILA was constructed of a wooden frame (40x30x4 
cm, gross weight 2,5kg) housing the semi-transparent mirror 
hiding a Samsung Galaxy Tab A 10.1 Android tablet. The 
idea for constructing the smart mirror from scratch and not 
taking a commercially available product was primarily 
economically driven. By using off the shelf materials and 
simple constructions, the total costs for one smart mirror 
could be held below 300€.   
       In idle mode, the mirror displays the current time and 
the weather situation at its current location. We decided 
against showing more information for several reasons: (1) to 
prevent information overload and to only provide context-
relevant information and (2) to keep battery and bandwidth 
usage low.  
B. Sensors and user-recognition 
As we chose the area of cardiovascular diseases, a 
number of vital parameters are interesting facing the 
telehealth perspective: regular measurements of heart rate, 
blood pressure, body weight and daily activity are relevant 
to the therapy in order to assess effectiveness, as well as to 
detect any deterioration in a person’s health status. For 
initial evaluation, we chose connecting the smart mirror to a 
Bluetooth-enabled scale for two reasons. (1) a scale is most 
likely to be found in bathrooms and (2) a sudden increase in 
weight is an indicator for hospitalization [9]. Moreover, 
SMILA uses voice input to collect information on personal 
well-being using Google’s Cloud Speech Application 
Programming Interface (API). 
    Another important aspect is user identification, as most 
likely many people are living in a two-person household. 
We considered several options for user identification: (1) 
identification and authorization by a separate device using 
PIN codes once the device is close to the mirror (2) facial 
recognition and (3) wearable Bluetooth low energy beacons 
for identification.  
    Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) beacons are devices 
transmitting signals containing their ID along with other 
technical information on a regular interval. Devices such as 
smartphones or tablets can identify these radio signals 
within a limited range and apps can react to the presence of 
such beacons. We favored this approach especially to 
biometric identification as it is (1) more privacy-preserving 
and (2) BLE beacons can be exchanged by fitness 
wristbands, thus combining identification with reading 
further health measurements. BLE beacons have been used 
in various scenarios, most prominently in eCommerce 
settings offering consumers guide within shops. For our 
initial evaluation, we decided to use wristband type beacons 
or devices that can be attached to a keychain (D15 UFO 
Bluetooth). The latter can be incorporated in a necklace as 
well.  
    SMILA is connected to the KIOLA telehealth platform, a 
data collection framework and therapy management system 
for various chronic diseases [10]. Weight measurements and 
personal well-being are collected through SMILA and then 
transmitted to KIOLA. To provide interoperability to other 
platforms 
(e.g., 
consumer 
health 
platforms), 
data 
transmission and retrieval is handled through the symbIoTe 
mediation 
framework 
using 
standardized 
RESTful 
interfaces. 
C. End-user evaluation design 
End-user evaluation of SMILA was conducted at the 
COSY Living Lab at the University of Vienna, a multi-
purpose user study laboratory equipped with furnishing and 
technical set-up to support a home-like test-setting that is 
observable through semi-transparent windows and audio-
visual equipment. We designed a lab-evaluation concept 
that aims at collecting overall usability feedback to the 
SMILA prototype as well as inquiring the participant’s own 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

experience with health monitoring tasks and relating the 
SMILA concept to it. We conducted semi-structured 
interviews [11] that establish such personal experience 
regarding medical monitoring and self-management with 
chronic disease as well as regarding technology usage in this 
context and generally, in order to answer the research 
question: Can SMILA support the way the participants 
manage self-monitoring tasks with chronic conditions? This 
was followed by observation of participants using SMILA 
in the Living Lab while they complete a pre-defined task of 
monitoring their weight and overall well-being as well as a 
concluding survey on experience and usability of the smart 
mirror’s audio-visual interface and interaction, utilizing the 
System Usability Scale (SUS) [12].  
    The evaluation was carried out in two phases: first, the 
prototype was tested with university students to gain initial 
feedback and test feasibility of the system. Second, the 
prototype was tested following the same schema with 
elderly people.  
III. 
RESULTS 
A. Overall workflow 
The end-user wears a BLE-enabled wristband and enters 
the bathroom. In idle mode, SMILA constantly scans for 
BLE signals and reads the ID of recognized beacons. Using 
this ID it queries the symbIoTe mediation framework, 
receives an access URL for the KIOLA tele-health platform 
and receives personal information on the user resulting in an 
acoustic personal greeting. It then asks the end-user to step 
on the scale performing the measurement (see Figure 1). 
While standing on the scale, SMILA displays the current 
weight (as seen in Figure 2) on the display. Once the 
measurement is taken, SMILA finishes asking for the 
personal wellbeing with the-end-user answering using 
voice-input. Finally, using the ID of the scale, SMILA 
queries the symbIoTe mediation platform for an end-point 
and transmits the data to the KIOLA telehealth platform. 
The whole process is guided through voice output.   
 
 
 
Figure 1. From left to right: (1) Living lab evaluation scenario; (2) SMILA 
and (3) user interacting with the device 
 
    
    
 
Figure 2. From left to right: (1) mirror idle – showing time and 
temperature; (2) greeting specific user and guiding through the workflow; 
(3) SMILA showing the result of a weight measurement 
B. Evaluation results 
The user evaluation was conducted in two phases with 
18 participants providing initial insights on the technical 
feasibility and basic usability of the SMILA prototype. 
Evaluation was conducted in two groups with group A 
consisting of 11 participants (4 female / 7 male; 18-35), all 
students of computer science. Group B consisted of 7 
participants (6 male / 1 female; 60-69 years old).  During 
the test, the participants had to follow SMILA’s vocal 
instructions of stepping on the scale and getting their 
weight, as well as entering their current state of being via 
voice input. 16 out of 18 tests were completed successfully. 
Personal well-being has been correctly translated into text in 
9 out of 10 cases with the speech recognition API providing 
a confidence score (a score between 0 and 1) of 0.83 (±0.13) 
on average. Average length of inputs was 3.81 (±2.72) 
words.  
    When asked if users could picture themselves using the 
device at home, 10 answered with yes, 4 with maybe and 4 
could not think of using the device at home.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION  
Interviews revealed potential usability improvements, 
such as a perceived lag between stepping in front of the 
mirror and being identified, as well as uncertainty when 
voice 
input 
was 
possible. 
Moreover, 
participants 
complained about the “robotic voice” as provided by voice 
output. Feedback on design included the incorporation of 
the bracelet into jewelry (e.g. a brooch) and both groups 
suggested face recognition or voice recognition as 
alternative form of user recognition though both groups 
raised privacy issues. When asked for additional usage 
scenarios for the mirror, elderly people named (a) support in 
management 
tasks 
(blood 
pressure 
measurements), 
assistance with medication intake and medication reminders, 
as well as support of scheduling appointments with 
physicians. In terms of the overall interactional quality, 
elderly participants consistently voiced their preference for 
such technology to have a “companion-like” quality they 
can have a trusted relationship with, rather than a tool for 
easy communication with medical and care professionals. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

University students named benefits in supporting adherence 
to fitness goals.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
We presented a smart mirror for self-monitoring of health 
parameters relevant to cardiovascular therapy. User 
identification using BLE-wristbands is feasible and initial 
evaluations showed that the method is reliable, though a 
higher responsiveness of the system is required. Moreover, 
using BLE wristbands has security implications that need to 
be addressed in further research. Using voice recognition for 
recording personal well-being proved to be sufficiently 
accurate in a controlled environment.  
    Next steps include the extension of workflow to include 
smart watches as mode of user recognition and the inclusion 
of fitness data for display on the mirror. This setting will be 
tested in another trial, where users can test the device over 
the period of one week.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
    This work is supported by the symbIoTe project, which 
has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 
2020 research and innovation program under grant 
agreement No 688156. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Economic Policy Committee. Impact of ageing populations 
on public spending on pensions, health and long-term care, 
education and unemployment benefits for the elderly. 
[Online]. Available from: https://europa.eu/epc/, 2018.10.29 
[2] 
S. Scalvini et al., "Effect of home-based telecardiology on 
chronic heart failure: costs and outcomes." Journal of 
telemedicine and telecare vol. 11, pp. 16-18, 2005. 
[3] 
M. Solomon, S.L. Wagner, and J. Goes, "Effects of a Web-
based intervention for adults with chronic conditions on 
patient activation: online randomized controlled trial." 
Journal of medical Internet research vol. 14, 2012. 
[4] 
N.S. Keränen, M. Kangas, M. Immonen, H. Similä, H. 
Enwald, R. Korpelainen, et al., "Use of information and 
communication technologies among older people with and 
without frailty: a population-based survey." Journal of 
medical Internet research vol. 19, 2017. 
[5] 
M. Jacoby, A. Antonić, K. Kreiner, R. Lapacz, and J. Pielorz, 
"Semantic Interoperability as Key to IoT Platform 
Federation." International Workshop on Interoperability and 
Open-Source Solutions. Springer, Cham, 2016, pp. 3-19. 
[6] 
D. Besserer, J. Bäurle, A. Nikic, F. Honold, F. Schüssel, and 
M. Weber, "Fitmirror: a smart mirror for positive affect in 
everyday user morning routines." Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Multimodal Analyses enabling Artificial 
Agents in Human-Machine Interaction. ACM, pp. 48-55, 
2016. 
[7] 
S. Colantonio et al., "A smart mirror to promote a healthy 
lifestyle." Biosystems Engineering vol. 138, pp. 33-43, 2015. 
[8] 
N. Yang, X. Zhao and H. Zhang, "A non-contact health 
monitoring model based on the internet of things" Eighth 
international conference on natural computation (ICNC), pp. 
506-510, 2012. 
[9] 
S.I. Chaudhry, Y. Wang, J. Concato, T.M. Gill, and H.M. 
Krumholz, 
"Patterns 
of 
weight 
change 
preceding 
hospitalization for heart failure" Circulation vol. 116, pp. 
1549-1554, 2007. 
[10] M. Drobics, K.Kreiner and H. Leopold, "Next Generation 
ICT Platform to Harmonize Medical, Care and Lifestyle 
Services." ICT Innovations 2015. Springer, Cham, 2016, pp. 
275-283, 2016. 
[11] J. M. Carroll, Making Use: Scenario-Based Design of 
Human-Computer Interactions. Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
MIT press, 2000. 
[12] A. Blandford, The Encyclopedia of Human-Computer 
Interaction. 
Aarhus, 
Denmark, 
Interaction 
Design 
Foundation, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

