Real-Time Environmental Sensing 
 
Adaptive Surfaces for Architecture 
 
Nancy Diniz 
Department of Architecture 
Xi’an Jiaotong – Liverpool University 
Suzhou, China 
nancy.diniz@xjtlu.edu.cn 
Hai-Ning Liang 
Department of Computer Science and Software 
Engineering 
Xi’an Jiaotong – Liverpool University 
Suzhou, China 
haining.liang@xjtlu.edu.cn
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we present a case for the design and 
implementation of responsive, dynamic architectural surfaces 
[2] as potential instruments to provide a structural function 
together with an aesthetic purpose and informative one. 
Responsive architectural surfaces are those than provide a 
dynamic structure—that is, it can change in terms of its 
appearance and content displayed on it according to different 
environment factors. These factors include how many people 
are around a structure and how they behave with and around 
it. In addition, environment information such air quality, 
temperature, noise level, sunlight quantity, and humility can 
all be captured, transformed, and returned in way the is 
perceivable by people, with the aim of highlighting different 
aspects of the information. An end goal, for example, may be to 
use these systems to raise awareness about a sensitive public 
issue (e.g., air and sound pollution level in an environment) in 
a subtle, implicit manner. In this paper, we describe three 
working systems, their purpose and technological features. In 
addition, we present a system we are currently developing. 
With these four example systems, we hope to provide a deeper 
understanding of what responsive, dynamic architectural 
surfaces can be useful for and their implementation challenges. 
Keywords-Responsive systems; Smart materials; Energy 
efficiency; Responsive architecture; Ubiquitous systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The main goal of this research is to explore the use of 
architectural surfaces to communicate in a dynamic way and 
using different types of environmental information from the 
surroundings and biometric information from nearby people. 
We aim to develop affordable artifacts and systems that 
serve two dual functions: architectural and informational. 
The first function requires the system to have a permanent, 
stationary role, while the second function will need the 
system to have the ability to be dynamic and responsive to 
the changes in the information it receives. Our focus is on 
dynamic architectural surfaces, or membranes. A dynamic 
membrane represents an approach to augment the 
capabilities of architectural structures by enabling them to 
sense their environment. In this way, they can capture 
different types of analog information and, through a 
transformative process, return the information back for 
people to see. At the end of this process, we want to reshape 
how people perceive their environment and to elicit a 
reactive and affective effect from the observers. 
In this paper, we provide a rationale for the need to have 
these dynamic membranes, describe challenges in their 
design and implementation, and propose some potential 
solutions. We will use some systems we have developed in 
the past and one currently under development to frame our 
discussions. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, 
we examine related work, especially from the artistic and 
architectural domains. In Section III, we describe three 
dynamic membrane systems we have worked on. In Section 
IV, we present our work on a current system being 
developed. Finally, in Section V, we summarize the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Architectural surfaces are everywhere and are hence 
perceive with regularity by people. Often, these surfaces are 
simply empty, with no useful information displayed on them. 
Sometimes, they have some limited information on then, but 
it is often in a static form (e.g., graffiti or a poster). A direct 
relation can often be observed between human activities and 
what is manifested on architectural surfaces. These surfaces 
do not only serve as a means for human expression, they can 
be important instructions to communicate information to 
people.  
Influential thinkers in the area of cybernetics, the study of 
regulatory, feedback based systems, their structures, 
constraints, and possibilities, such as Norbert Wiener [11], 
John von Neumann [10], and Gordon Pask [9] have 
considered buildings or their structural components as 
feedback, reactive systems rather static objects. Architects 
have also conceptualized buildings as dynamic, evolving 
structures. For example, John Frazer created a whole new 
lexicon towards an evolutionary architecture with many 
experimental projects with his colleagues to investigate 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

fundamental form-generating processes and morphable 
structures [4]. Similarly, Cedric Price (cited in [2]), one of 
the first architects who actually formulated this dynamic 
model of buildings, proposed “The Fun Palace”. Although 
never built, it was one of his most influential projects. The 
idea central to Price’s practice was the belief that through the 
correct use of new technology the public could have 
unprecedented control over their environment, resulting in a 
building which could be responsive to visitors’ needs and the 
many activities intended to take place there. The building 
constitutes an open framework into which modular, pre-
fabricated elements can be inserted and removed as required 
according to need. For Price, time was the fourth spatial 
dimension, with length, width and height being the other 
three. Oosterhuis [8] presents the design of a pair of 
buildings known as the “Salt-Water” and “Fresh-water” 
pavilions which incorporated numerous electronic sensors 
into their designs to gather information about both interior 
and exterior changes. Although the changes were mere 
virtual projections, the incorporation of computer sensing 
and display technology in the design of the buildings was a 
touchstone in the architectural discourse of computationally 
enhanced environments in which the building is loosely 
defined as an Interface. Goulthourpe’s system “Aegis Hypo-
Surface” (cited in [2]) built in 2001 is perhaps the world’s 
first reactive wall. The piece is a triangle metallic surface 
that has potential to deform physically in response to 
electronic stimuli from the environment (movement, sound, 
light, etc.). Driven by a bed of 896 pneumatic pistons, the 
effects are generated as real-time calculations. This project 
has potential for information to literally translate into form, it 
offers an entirely new medium, digitally dynamic yet 
materially tactile. Any digital input (microphone, keyboard, 
movement sensor) can trigger any physical output (a wave or 
pattern or word). In this Aegis has potential beyond that of a 
screen to being a fully 'architectural' (i.e., social, physical) 
interface, where activity (sound, movement, etc.) translates 
into form (Leach 2002). Another system, “Pixel Skin” [1], is 
a heterogeneous smart surface that could be used to generate 
low resolution images, low refresh rate videos or graphical 
patterns. The interactive wall uses shape memory alloys to 
actuate each of the 4 triangular panels. The simulation 
controls the pattern type in response to live weather 
prediction for the day. This project deals with finding a 
solution to contemporary architectural surfaces, where 
conventional windows have to compromise between 
providing a natural light source and climate protection versus 
facilitating advertising and information display. 
Our research on responsive, dynamic architectural 
surfaces is inspired by the above work. In the next section, 
we present three systems we developed. In the section after, 
we present an ongoing project with an expanding aim and 
discuss the complexity of implementing it. 
III. 
THREE EXAMPLES OF AUGMENTED, 
RESPONSIVE ARCHITECTURAL SURFACES  
In this section, we present three systems that are based on 
the idea of dynamic, responsive surfaces. “Morphosis”, “Life 
Speculatrix” and “Nausea Transformer” [2,3,4,5] are 
working prototypes that physically respond to local and 
global external stimuli (movement, light and sound). That is, 
they 
“interact” 
spatially 
and 
temporally 
with 
the 
environment and its inhabitants. All the three systems have 
responsive membranes controlled by genetic algorithms 
which reconfigure their behaviours according to different 
stimuli and learn how to adapt themselves continually to the 
evolutionary properties of the environment. The dynamics of 
the materials in the three prototypes is produced by dozens of 
actuators made by Shape Memory Alloys (SMAs) and LEDs 
which react in real time to change the behaviour of the 
membranes, thereby providing a different visual and sensory 
feedback to people around them and eliciting different 
emotional responses from them. 
A. 
Morphosis 
One of the first prototypes we developed is Morphosis [6] 
(see Figure 1), a reconfigurable visual system, which is 
inspired by the manner in which an organism, or any of its 
parts, evolve and change form in a short lapse of time, 
triggered by some combination of external stimuli in the ever 
changing surrounding environment. It is designed as a model 
to be suitable for execution of a responsive architecture 
material and to enable the development of transformable 
architectural surfaces. Also, by developing Morphosis we 
wanted to investigate how the learning qualities of a material 
could be used to improve communication between buildings 
and its inhabitants. We then continued building upon this 
experiment to create other variations with the same design 
concept (see Figure 1). The several prototypes’ behaviours 
are the result of complex system composed by sensors, 
microphones, webcams, shape memory alloys actuators, 
LED’S and a Genetic Algorithm (GA) component. 
The main sensory unit is a webcam and a video analyzing 
program that determines the “empathy” or “repulsion” 
regarding the current skin behavior by noticing at any given 
time how close viewers get to the wall. This is actually the 
Genetic Algorithm fitness function: how bright is the picture 
captured by the camera. By placing the camera looking down 
at an angle from the top of the wall, when a viewer comes 
into the field of view the images gets brighter and the fitness 
increases. Four input devices inform the computer of the 
status of the surrounding environment: a webcam, a vibration 
sensor, a proximity sensor and a light sensor. These sensors 
are unobtrusively included in the wall and “feel” the 
environment informing the wall: (1) whether loud music is 
playing or someone is walking around (vibration sensor); (2) 
whether there is a rapid change in the ambient light levels 
(light sensor – web camera); (3) if someone approaches the 
wall in a touching distance (web camera). These inputs 
change the behavior of the membranes in shape, trigger 
sound, motion and light and can create random patterns on 
the surface, making the surface a responsive part of space, a 
lighting element, a functional architectural element and a 
performance piece. 
The membranes start its learning process by responding 
to “empathy” or “repulsion” from the people around it. The 
environment feeds are inputs for the genetic variations. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

These inputs change the sound response behavior of the 
membrane, change its shape, and trigger motion and light, 
making the wall a performance piece. The membrane is 
always aware of its own shape at any given moment because 
the data is store centrally: the genome and each membrane 
pixel position. Therefore, when a fitness input is given (via 
web cam for example), the genetic algorithm knows the 
current behavior being exhibited by the membrane and thus 
knows how to correctly classify it.  
 
Figure 1.  Morphosis prototype #1 with its SMA levers above and with 
membrane below 
B. 
Life Speculatrix 
Life Speculatrix [6] (see Figure 2) takes inspiration on 
Grey Walter’s “Machina Speculatrix”, three wheeled, turtle 
like, mobile robotic vehicles built between 1948 and 1949. 
Even with a simple design, Grey demonstrated that his 
turtles exhibited complex behaviours. He called his turtles 
“Machina Speculatrix” after their speculative tendency to 
explore their environment. Life Speculatrix is a kinetic 
evolutionary physical skin based on digital environmental 
feedback retrieved through the webspace. RSS/Atom 
Environmental feeds, like pollution levels, climate features, 
sound, from around the world will affect its performance as 
it continually interacts spatially and temporally with the 
environment and their inhabitants. The fundamental idea is 
to create an online project as a living, evolving tangible 
experience.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  ‘Life Speculatrix’ prototype 
C. 
Nausea Transformer 
The word "noise" comes from the Latin word nausea 
meaning "seasickness", or from a derivative (perhaps Latin 
noxia) of Latin noceō = "I do harm", referring originally to 
nuisance noise. For the purpose of this experiment, we 
consider, all non-musical sounds are to be noise. Noise is a 
complex concept and source material to deal with; it is an 
invisible architectural element with an undefined aesthetics. 
It deeply affects people and yet people feel very powerless to 
interact with or control it. The fundamental idea of Nausea 
Transformer (see Figure 3) is to turn noise into a reprocessed 
living, evolving and tangible experience, by interacting 
spatially and temporally with the environment and its 
observers. The purpose is to raise people’s awareness to 
sound, in all its forms: speech, non-speech sound (sound 
pollution sources) or natural sound, and treat it like data with 
a corporeal dimension. We aspire to convey an embodiment 
to an often neglected “hidden dimension”, by adding it to a 
phenomenology and a poetics of visual space. Nausea 
Transformer [4] is thus a sound reprocessed machine that can 
unexpectedly create pleasant behaviours by recycling noise 
into pleasant sound, therefore promoting new interactive 
experiences to a nearby audience. In other words, it is a 
reconfigurable acoustic and visual system that records the 
environmental sound feeds in cycles of a certain time In the 
next section (i.e., 10 seconds), then, filters that sound and 
delivers it to the audience with a physical response. The 
dynamics of the system, materialized as a responsive wall, is 
made of robotic levers, a latex membrane, sound sources and 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

LED’s which react in real time to change the behaviour of a 
membrane (Figure 4). The system, creates an evolutionary 
set of rules for what it considers a “perfect sound 
environment” and reacts accordingly with a sound source 
and a physically manifestation. If, for example, the system 
receives “disturbing” levels of sound, it reacts in 
“resentment” 
with 
a 
louder 
cacophony 
feedback. 
Simultaneously, it exhibits a physical relation creating 
“noisy” patterns on the surface through its actuators. If the 
input harmonizes with the set of rules of the moment, the 
output can be musical, pleasant and/or humorous. A pleasant 
sound is defined by low amplitude (not very loud) and by a 
small difference in frequency between two consecutive 
samples averaged for a number of samples. The membrane 
will try to find a behavior that will lower the “noise” (or 
sound level) made by the viewers by attracting their attention 
towards it. This is a similar approach to the one previously 
described for using a webcam.  
 
Figure 3.  . “Nausea Transformer” actuators changing the membrane shape 
according to sound input. 
IV. 
AIRQ WALL: “A WALL THAT TELLS WHAT 
YOU ARE BREATHING” 
A. 
Purpose and aims 
The idea behind AirQ is to explore architectural systems 
that can adapt and transform themselves in response to the 
constant change of the conditions of our surroundings, in 
particular air quality (see Figure 4 for a conceptual 
representation of the system). We want to develop a system 
which can achieve three goals: (1) to improve the energy 
performance of existing glass-curtain facades; (2) to increase 
social engagement on the subject of air quality; and (3) to 
provide a better ambiance to nearby people by informing 
them the conditions of the environment (e.g., noise and 
humidity levels, temperature, etc.) using subtle changes in 
LED light-based displays. The issue of deteriorating air 
quality is important in many places (e.g., in developing 
countries such as China and India), and it is this very 
pertinent to raise awareness on this issue. In addition, in 
places where air pollution is serious, production of energy is 
a key contributor. As such, AirQ will fit suitably to be used 
in these environments. 
AirQ is more challenging to develop than the three 
systems described earlier. We want AirQ to be a self-
sustaining system. That is, it can monitor air quality but with 
a self-harvest capacity to power itself. The system will be 
composed of a matrix of units. These units are moveable and 
detachable components of a glass-curtain wall. They are 
double sided and have two complementary components on 
each side: one to harvest solar energy; and the other to 
display ambient light of different types to provide 
information about the indoor air quality. In this way, the 
surface will (1) harvest solar power, (2) control the amount 
of light coming in, and (3) provide subtle information about 
air quality levels and other environmental conditions. 
A conceptual diagram of AirQ as a dynamic curtain wall 
which on one side can capture solar energy and on the other 
side can provide pollution and other environmental 
information to people by changing its LED colour and 
pattern display. 
Figure 4.   Conceptual diagram of the AirQ wall components. 
The system will react locally and remotely to light and 
air quality data being sent by sensors wirelessly. The solar 
harvesting unit powers the display surface of the unit. The 
cells  are designed in a matrix where visual patterns will be 
displayed against “an environmental performance criteria 
framework” simulated and evaluated according to multiple 
environmental and social criteria including thermal comfort, 
day lighting quality, air quality, variable privacy and 
dynamic visual effects.  
The system will reacts locally and remotely to light and 
air quality data being sent by sensors wirelessly. The solar 
harvesting unit powers the display surface of the unit. The 
cells are designed in a modular system. The design 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

methodology focuses on the performance requirements 
through a 1:1 experimental prototyping and evaluation 
within a glazed surface in a university campus building in 
China. 
 
 
Figure 5.   From top to bottom. Prototype as part of a modular assemble. 
Close up view of the main sensing and display components and bellow the 
prototype hardware components. 
A. Implementation 
To implement the system envisaged, there are several 
technical and hardware issues that need to be considered.  
1) Topology of the communication network 
Given that we need to capture different environmental 
data, different sensors will be required. These sensors will 
have to be connected one receiver. To minimize the amount 
of physical elements we need to use, we are opting to use 
wireless components. In this case, the receiver will have to 
be a transmitter so that it can send the data collected from the 
sensors. Given that there will be several wireless transmitters 
(e.g., groups of xBees), we need to have a suitable topology 
for the network. We have chosen to adopt a Mesh tree 
network for the system. In this network, there is one 
coordinator which has to be placed at the right position and 
distance so that the signals from the transmitters are able to 
reach it. About six other routers are deployed in the network 
to relay the signals.  
1) Hardware components 
Coordinator: The coordinator consists of an xBee 
module, an adapter for usb-xBee connection, and a cable 
connected to our server (see Figure 6). Our server is a 
processing center for collecting and sending management 
commands for the end user device. 
 
Figure 6.   The xBee wireless component serving as the coordinator. 
Control Board: The control board is one of the main 
parts of the system. We have chosen an Arduino-based 
controller board. It performs the control and coordinating 
function for the other devices. Slotted on top of the Arduino 
board we have placed an xBee-shield to connect the other 
xBee transmitters with the arduino board (see Figure 7). 
 
Figure 7.   The control board with an xBee-shield attached. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.   The traffic of data and the components involved in the process: 
(left) a sensor; (center) the Arduino board; (right) the LED lights. The 
arrows indicate the flow of information between the components. 
The onboard program reads the data from the sensors and 
compares the data with onboard parameters. After the 
comparison, the program decides what LED lights to turn 
on/off and their value (see Figure 8). The whole hardware set 
up is shown in Figure 5. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A small scaled system with its separate connected individual 
components is working according to our designs and plans. 
It can capture pollution, noise, humanity, and temperature 
data at the same time. In addition, the lights are responding 
to the different parameters set in the program and are able to 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

provide a variety of responsive color patterns and degrees of 
light intensity.  
We are currently looking at the energy aspects of the 
system. As stated, we want our system to be energy efficient 
and also to be as green as possible. In terms of energy 
efficiency, we are looking into components that are simple 
and with low energy consumption. At the software level, we 
are attempting to design efficient algorithms and make 
smart use of its hardware components. For example, 
although the energy consumption of xBee modules is low, 
one can further reduce its energy use by leveraging its sleep 
mode. When used properly, power usage can be further 
reduced. 
In terms of making our system as green and 
environmentally friendly as possible, we are in the process of 
attaching small, portable, and efficient modular film solar 
panels to our working prototype. We aim to find an optimal 
solution so that the number of solar panels is keep to a 
minimum; yet, we can obtain a stable and reliable quantity of 
energy which is enough to power our full fledge system. 
As this research attempts to address pertinent issues of 
energy performance and air quality monitoring, which is 
very much on the agenda of sustainable problematics of 
contemporary societies for both developed and developing, 
we seek answers to the following research questions: (1) Can 
real time sensing technologies be used effectively for energy 
efficiency in existing glazing facades? (2) By integrating air 
quality monitoring and its visual manifestation in buildings, 
can we provoke new types of social and collective 
engagement with issues of sustainability? And (3) how can 
real-time, responsive sensing technology become a source of 
inspiration, a conceptual framework for designers and 
engineers to build upon? 
The first question is technology-centered, and the last two 
are more people-centric and require examination of the 
people’s perceptions, feelings, and opinions. To obtain 
answers for the last two questions, we need to exhibit the 
system to people and obtain their subjective responses to it. 
Once a complete, full fledge working system is in place, we 
will have it on permanent display intermittently during 2 
months in total in a series of fine-tuning sessions in a glazed 
surface in selected private places (e.g., offices) as well as a 
public area of buildings (e.g., hallways with high traffic) at a 
University located in a medium size Chinese city. An 
evaluation period involving observation and questionnaires 
is applied to collect information about performance and 
users’ response. 
In this paper, we have attempted to make an argument for 
the use of responsive, dynamic surfaces in architectural 
structures. Architectural surfaces are all around us, but are 
non-responsive 
and 
serve 
only 
a 
structural/functional/decorative purposes. Our goal is to add 
an additional dynamic dimension to these surfaces by 
leveraging the power of embedded sensors and computing 
technologies. By adding this dimension, the usefulness and 
utility of these surfaces can be expanded. Some uses can be 
based on improving the aesthetics of the structures. Other 
uses can be about raising awareness on certain issues. Three 
working example systems are described in this paper. A 
further system that is currently under development is also 
presented to highlight the implementation issues and propose 
some hardware and software solutions. It is hoped with this 
paper that researchers from different areas, such as 
architecture, computer science, and engineering, can work 
together and study deeper further applications for these 
dynamic architectural surfaces to make better use of such 
rich and widely available resources in the form of 
“augmented architectural functional walls”.  
We are developing a prototype for an ergonomic box to 
carry the sensing pack, making the data collection less 
cumbersome for users. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Anshuman and B. Kumar, Architecture and HCI: a review of 
trends towards an integrative approach to designing responsive space, 
International Journal of IT in Architecture, Engineering and 
Construction, 2(4), 2004. 
[2] 
N. Diniz, “Augmented Membranes", in Proceedings of Ubicomp 
2007, "Transitive Materials" Workshop, Innsbruck, Austria, 2007. 
[3] 
N. Diniz, and C. Branco, “An Interactive membrane: Envisioning 
Physically Mutable Materials for Architecture”, in Proceedings for 
Gero, JS (ed) Design Computing and Cognition '06, 2006. 
[4] 
N. Diniz, C. Branco, M. Dias, and A. Turner, “Morphosis: An 
Interactive membrane”, in Proceedings for Dong, CAAD Futures ‘07,  
Sydney, Australia, 2007.  
[5] 
N. Diniz, C. Branco, and M. Dias, “Life Speculatrix”, Dislocate 2007, 
Exhibition and Symposium, Tokyo, Yokohama, 23 July-5th August 
2007. 
[6] 
J.H. Frazer, An Evolutionary Architecture, Architectural Association, 
London, 1995. 
[7] 
E.G. Lim, J.C. Wang, Z. Wang, G. Juans, T. Tillo, K.L. Man, and M. 
Zhang. Wireless Capsule Antennas. In Proceedings of The 
International MultiConference of Engineers and Computer Scientists, 
pp. 726-729, 2013. 
[8] 
K. Oosterhuis, Liquid Architecture, Archis 11, 1995. 
[9] 
G. Pask, The Architectural relevance of Cybernetics, Architectural 
Design, 7(6): 494-496, 1969. 
[10] J. von Neumann, Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata. University 
of Illinois Press, 1966. 
[11] N. Wiener, Cybernetics: Control and Communication in Animal and 
Machine, The MIT Press, Cambridge, 1967. 
 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

