Mobile Low Cost System for Environmental Monitoring in Emergency Situations 
 
1Virginia Perez-Garrancho, 2Laura Garcia, 1,2Sandra Sendra, 2Jaime Lloret 
1Dep. of Signal Theory, Telematics and Communications (TSTC), Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain. 
2Instituto de Investigación para la Gestión Integrada de Zonas Costeras, Universitat Politècnica de València, València, Spain 
email: virginiaqsd@gmail.com, laugarg2@teleco.upv.es, ssendra@ugr.es, jlloret@dcom.upv.es 
 
Abstract— Each year forest fires destroy large forest areas 
damaging the ecosystem they held. When these fires occur in 
residential areas, they also present a big danger to the 
inhabitants of the area, who must find a way to escape 
themselves from fire. Emergency services should also be able to 
determine possible access and evacuation routes. It is very 
difficult to have deployed networks that remain active, so in 
this paper, we propose the use of citizens' private vehicles to 
install sensor nodes capable of collecting data from the 
environment and send this data, through the telephone of their 
drivers to a database. This database can be consulted by 
citizens and emergency services. The system consists of a 
wireless sensor node equipped with several sensors that will 
communicate via Bluetooth with the Smartphone driver. A 
Smartphone 3G / 4G connectivity is used to send alarm 
messages, through Internet, to a central database. Finally, the 
system is tested in different conditions to check its 
effectiveness. With the use of this system, emergency services 
would be able to define escape routes for citizens who might be 
caught in a fire. 
Keywords-environmental monitoring; arduino; Android App; 
sensors; fire detection; mobile nodes; emergeny situations. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, the world is suffering from numerous 
wildfires. Year by year, thousands of hectares are destroyed. 
The consequences are terrible for the ecosystem and the 
economy of that area. In the most serious cases, forest fires 
cause the death of the inhabitants of the affected zone [1]. 
Active fires in California (USA), Portugal and Spain (EU) 
have killed more than 60 people [2][3]. Part of the people 
who died in those fires did so trying to escape from the fire 
by using rural roads. Unfortunately, the fire managed to trap 
them while they were on the road. This type of accidents is 
very hurtful for people as many of them could have been 
avoided. Detecting a fire on time and knowing the best 
escape routes to avoid it are of great importance in order to 
save the life of both citizens and fire fighters. 
There are many systems that are employed for ambient 
and environmental monitoring [4]; however, most of them 
are developed for cities or are centered in measuring air 
pollution [5][6]. Cities allow an easy access and connection 
to the electricity grid for the devices employed for those 
purposes but, rural areas present more difficulties. Although 
there are many wildfire detection systems, they are based on 
image processing [7][8] or they require the deployment of 
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) nodes over the expanse of 
the forest to obtain information on temperature and humidity 
[8]. These solutions are costly because they need a great 
quantity of nodes to be deployed over thousands of hectares 
in forest where access is very difficult. Moreover, the effort 
of charging the batteries of all nodes would be massive. 
Deploying fire detection systems in vehicles can help to 
avoid accidents where the occupants of a vehicle get trapped 
by fire by alerting the driver. In this paper, a cooperative 
system for vehicles that measures ambient conditions and the 
state of the vehicle is presented. The system monitors air 
quality, the presence of fire, Global Positioning System 
(GPS) position of the vehicle and the state of the vehicle, 
meaning whether the vehicle is upside down, blocking the 
road or if it is functioning as it should. The information from 
all vehicles that get installed the system is then forwarded to 
a server in order to determine the best escape routes 
considering the roads of the area. This system can be 
employed by civilians and emergency responders in order to 
ensure their safety in light of extreme wildfire related 
circumstances.  
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II 
shows some previous works where previous proposals are 
presented. This system is composed by an electronic device 
based on an Arduino board, a smartphone and several 
software parts that control its operation. Thus, Section III 
shows the design of our prototype and it implementation. 
The results of our test bench to check the proper operation of 
our low-cost system are shown in Section IV. Finally, 
conclusion and future works are exposed in Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The use of sensors for monitoring purposes is increasing 
constantly. Particularly, many are being employed as part of 
WSN to monitor environmental parameters. Ferdoush et al. 
employ in [10] Arduino and Raspberry Pi open source-
hardware for environmental monitoring purposes. Their 
system includes a database and a web server to store and 
access the temperature and humidity data gathered by the 
sensor. Internet of Things (IoT), cloud computing and a GPS 
module are employed in [11] to monitor climate change and 
its effects. Another environmental monitoring system that 
employs WSN to gather data is presented in [12]. The 
presented sensing station costs around 900€ and employs a 
solar panel and two batteries as a power source. 
As a result of the increasing cases of wildfires, the 
number of wildfire detecting and wildfire fighting systems 
are on the rise. Many of them employ cameras to detect 
when a fire has started. Bosch et al. present in [13] a system 
that employs thermal imaging to detect wildfires. They use a 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-601-9
AMBIENT 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

WSN with sensors composed of a visible and a thermal 
camera and a motor, in order to be able to cover wider areas. 
The cameras do not need to be high resolution nor does the 
system require knowing the temperature. When a fire is 
detected, the system sends an alarm. It also sends an alarm 
when the wildfire is increasing in size or when it is 
persistent. This technique is also used to determine the 
presence of anomalies as diseased in grapes and/or its leaves 
[14]. Other solutions are employed after the fire detection 
and progress monitoring, such as the one proposed in [15]. 
The system is a co-operative control framework for 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) and Unmanned Ground 
Vehicles (UGV). It employs a hierarchical structure and It 
can design mission plans, allocate tasks and manage the 
activities of all the vehicles.  
The concept of using cars as a source for sensing, data 
transfer and storage, computing, location and providing 
information and entertainment is getting more popular 
nowadays. Abdelhamid et al. name it in [16] as Vehicle as a 
Resource (VaaR). They also introduce the challenges of such 
technologies such as privacy, data quality or redundancy. 
One of its applications is monitoring different aspects in a 
car. In order to do so, sensors are being highly employed. 
Specifically, avoiding, assessing and aiding emergency 
situations are some of the most researched topics. A system 
that detects fatigue in drivers is presented in [17]. The 
system employs several sensors that measure movement, 
pressure, temperature, proximity and shocks to determine 
when the driver could be tired. If the system detects fatigue 
in the driver, a sound alarm, that the driver must disable 
pressing a button, is generated. A system that detects and 
estimates the severity of road accidents is proposed in [18] 
by Fogue et al. They consider vehicle and impact speed, state 
of the airbag and vehicle type. Impacts, high temperatures 
and water inside the cabin are detected by the sensors 
deployed inside a car on the system designed in [19]. In case 
of accident, the system forwards a message to a police 
station or hospital, and a family member. The message 
contains the location of the vehicle and its registration 
number. 
Although systems that monitor the environment, detect 
fires and help drivers in emergency situations exist 
independently, there is no other system that combines all 
three applications into one system that helps drivers to detect 
when a wildfire has started and provides an escape route. 
III. 
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION AND IMPLEMENTATION 
This section explains the architecture that includes our 
mobile low cost system for environmental monitoring in 
emergency situations. It also includes a detailed explanation 
of system and its main parts.  
A. System description and propodsed architecture 
In a forest fire near to residential areas, one of the main 
goals is to ensure the evacuation of people through a secure 
way. For this reason, it is mandatory to establish a set of 
parameters to be monitored and shared along the network. 
After analyzing the last forest fires in Portugal and Spain, 
with fatalities, we have established the following parameters: 
• GPS position and vehicle tracking. 
• Vehicle status, i.e., if it has suffered an accident or it is 
blocking an escape routes.  
• Presence of fire. 
• Presence of Carbon dioxide or a poor quality of air that 
difficult the breathing. 
• The system must be installed in a vehicle, without having 
to make any type of modification in its manufacture. 
The proposed architecture is based on a set of mobile 
nodes provided with a set of sensors. These mobile nodes are 
connected via 3G / 4G technology (since we use the 
smartphone to transmit the data) to the Internet in order to 
send data to the central database unit (CDBU). CDBU 
contains the data from all vehicles that compose the 
cooperative network and provides data to a web site that 
dynamically changes as a function of the received data. To 
tag a route as available, the system has to consider the 
number of vehicles is driving along this route. In a scenario 
where all vehicles have this system, it is easy to obtain this 
parameter. Furthermore, the system should provide some 
alternative route to facilitate evacuation. The information is 
easily accessible by emergency/rescue services and citizens. 
There, we can see in different colors the possible available 
routes. The data gathered by sensors is locally stored in each 
node and shared through Internet. Finally, these data should 
be stored in a CDBU. The proposed architecture is shown in 
Figure 1. Although, the system is currently based on 3G / 4G 
networks since they are nowadays standardized and extended 
among users, it can be easily migrated to 5G technology 
when it will be standardized, deployed and extended among 
users.  Additionally, the system should be able to send some 
alarm message (as a broadcast message or similar) in order to 
quickly inform about the problems in the escape route or 
rescue way. To process this alarm, we have developed a 
control algorithm that takes into account the data from all 
sensors (see Figure 2). As one can see, the node sensor is 
waiting to receive some connection request. When a user, 
through his smartphone requests to connect to it, the node 
accepts its connection. At this point, the node is ready to 
receive the location and current time. Data are directly 
extracted from the smartphone and locally stored on the 
node. Periodically, the node checks that the Smartphone is 
still available. If not, the node will log an error and return to 
the initial state. If any of the measured parameters exceeds 
the established security thresholds, the system saves the data 
and creates a text message with the detected event 
information. 
Air Quality
Fire Detection 
Sensor
Vehicle status 
Sensor
Location
3G/4G/5G
INTERNET
CDBU +
3G/4G/5G
Data from all cars
Not recommended route
Recommended route
Not available route
 
Figure 1.  Proposed Architecture for the system. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-601-9
AMBIENT 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

B. Design and implementation 
In order to design the system, we have set up some 
premises that this system should satisfy. The system should 
be: 
• 
Cheap and easily installable in a vehicle. 
• 
Versatile and should be independent from the vehicle 
brand.  
• 
Able to take data on geographical position from the 
smartphone the driver has.  
• 
The data exchange between drivers’ smartphone and the 
system should be through permanent Bluetooth 
connection. 
The whole system (see Figure 3) is composed by a 
microcontroller board and a Bluetooth module, which is 
connected to the Smartphone that drivers usually have. There 
are several possible commercial microcontroller boards but 
in our case, we have used an Arduino module since this 
platform is very cheap and easy to configure. The system 
works as follows. On the one hand, the smartphone receives 
the GPS positioning data from the satellites intended for it. 
This information is sent to our device via Bluetooth 
combined with the reference of the current time. In this way, 
our device can keep a record with the data from sensors and 
store the vehicle GPS position with and actual reference time 
in a Secure Digital (SD) card. On the other hand, when a 
sensor detects some anomaly in the sensors value, it sends an 
alarm code via Bluetooth to our mobile phone, which the 
Android application recognizes and acts accordingly. 
The system is composed by a set of sensor that Table I 
summarizes. The connections schema of the system and the 
different modules used to compose our mobile low-cost 
system for environmental monitoring in emergency 
situations is shown in Figure 4. 
C. Android Graphical User Interface 
In order to carry out the communication between the 
Arduino module and the Smartphone, we have developed an 
application called CarAppCident for the Android platform 
with a simple user interface, prepared for future 
incorporation of new sensors. 
After installing our application, we should run it. We will 
see the main screen (Figure 5a) where we can press 
“Bluetooth Device” to start the scan for available Bluetooth 
devices. After pressing it, we access to a black screen with a 
list of detected devices (Figure 5b). From this list, we can 
select our Arduino device, which is identified as ArduinoR.  
If we click on the name of the device, we will be 
connected and prepared for sending and receiving 
information. Once connected, our Smartphone starts sending 
location and time data to our Arduino module since the 
application is running in the background. At this time, we 
could stop managing the application. However, if we want to 
know our position we can press the button "My Position" and 
the coordinates, i.e., latitude, longitude and height, of our 
position will appear. In addition, an approximate address to 
where we are is provided. This is a quick way to self-locate, 
if this information should be provided for requesting help or 
in any other situation (see Figure 6). 
In addition, with the indicator of passengers (function 
that will be enabled in future versions), the system can save 
the data in regard to the number of vehicle's passengers. This 
information can be useful when emergency services should 
rescue a damaged vehicle and determine if all of the vehicle's 
passengers have been located and assisted.  
To program the necessary code to gather data from 
sensors and establish the connection, the App Inventor 
application has been used. One of the main parts of the 
program is the Bluetooth connection (see Figure 7). 
Before 
pressing 
“Bluetooth 
Device” 
button, 
the 
smartphone check if Bluetooth clients are available and 
displays them. If the connectivity with the Bluetooth client is 
lost or the device is no longer available, the system will 
shows us an error. After pairing both devices, the 
smartphone starts to send the time reference, GPS position 
and current address. As Figure 8 shows, each parameter is 
sent separately. Parameters are sent separated by a space 
since it is easy to be processed. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
After the programming the system, we need to check its 
correct operation. To do it, the different sensors have been 
tested. This section shows the results obtained during the test 
bench. 
A. GPS position 
The first test is focused on determining the geographical 
position of our vehicle. To do so, the vehicle where the 
system has been installed has performed a trip. 
Start
Listening for
connection requests
Request to 
connect?
No
Establish connection
with Smartphone
Yes
Receiving GPS 
coordinated from
Smartphone
Store data in 
microSD card
when no Alarm
Node available?
Send SMS Alarm
message
No
Yes
Values inside
threshold?
Store data on
microSD card
when Alarm
Yes
Error
No
 
Figure 2.  Operation Algorithm. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-601-9
AMBIENT 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

TABLE I.  
COMPOMENTS USED BY THE SYSTEM 
 
Components used by the system 
Function 
Data Processing 
Air Quality 
Fire presence 
Gyroscope 
Bluetooth 
Data Storage 
Component 
Arduino UNO. 
rev. 3 
MQ-2 Sensor 
KY-026 
sensor 
MPU-6050 GY-521 
sensor 
HC-06 Module 
MicroSD module and 
MicroSD Card 
Price ($) 
25 
3 
7 
2 
7 
10 
 
 
Data from sensors
Time reference and 
GPS Position
+
Arduino module + 
environmental Sensors
Drivers’ 
Smartphone
 
SD Card Module
Bluetooth Module
Arduino Module
Giroscope
Module
Fire
detection
Module
Air Quality Module
 
Figure 3.  Schema of connection for the system. 
Figure 4.  Microcontroller  and sensors connection 
Bluetooth Device
PASSENGERS
My Position
LATITUDE:
LONGITUDE
HIGH:
 
 
 
Bluetooth Device
PASSENGERS
My Position
LATITUDE: 
37.17675
LONGITUDE:
-3.61049
HIGH:
729
Street: Santiesteban Márquez, 2. 18003. 
Granada, Spain
 
Figure 5.  Position reception 
 
 
Figure 6.  Main screens of CarAppCident application 
Figure 7.  Program for sending GPS Position through Bluetooth 
 
A smartphone with GPS connection has also been used to 
provide the data of latitude and longitude. Measurements are 
taken every 30 seconds. These data is sent to the Arduino 
module and stored as a file text in the microSD Card. An 
example of this text file is shown in Figure 9. Finally, the 
collected data has been placed on a map in order to see the 
path followed by the vehicle (see Figure 10). 
B. Vehicle status 
To check how the gyroscope sensor works, the system is 
installed in a platform which emulates the movement of a car 
when it dumps. We emulate that a car has suffered an impact 
and has undergone a turn until it is positioned on one of its 
sides. The sampling frequency is 4 samples per second. The 
results obtained are shown in Figure 11. 
As one can see, up to 3 seconds, our vehicle is in the rest 
position. From this moment, the vehicle begins to vary its 
position, making a sharp turn toward the +X-axis. We 
establish an alarm threshold (20º), from which we consider 
that the car has overturned. This type of sensors does not 
have an immediate response. As we can observe, when 7 
seconds have elapsed, the system has exceeded the specified 
threshold. When 12 seconds have elapsed, both axes have 
exceeded the threshold and therefore the alarm is generated. 
In this case, the system has taken 9 seconds since the vehicle 
begins to vary its position until it blows the alarm due to a 
dangerous position. These values have been selected only for 
the purpose of presenting how the alarm is generated as a 
function of the car movement. However, these values are 
easily adjustable.  
(b) 
(a) 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-601-9
AMBIENT 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

C. Fire detection 
As we explained before, the system should be able to 
detect the presence of fire in the surrounding areas of our 
vehicle and activate the alarm. The results offered by the 
sensor are shown in Figure 12. During this test, we kept the 
sensing far from the fire during the first 8 seconds. From this 
moment, we have approached the fire and stepped back from 
it several times. We could observe that when there is no fire, 
the voltage value of the fire sensor is approximately 4.92 
volts while lower values meant that there was presence of 
flames near the vehicle, and therefore, the place where we 
were cannot be considered as a safe escape route. It is easy to 
see that the voltage registered by the sensors decreases when 
fire is detected near the car. So, we establish the threshold at 
4.5V. From this point, the system will consider a fire is 
detected. 
D. Smoke detection 
The operation of the smoke/gas sensor is very simple. 
When it detects some type of gas, specifically Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas (LPG), propane, methane, alcohol, hydrogen 
or smoke, the internal system of the sensor begins to warm 
up and its temperature increases, which implies an increase 
in the reading of the analog value. In addition, the sensor 
needs few seconds since it is started up until it is able to 
reliably take measurements. In order to test the operation of 
the sensor, our sensor is subjected to various bursts of butane 
gas. The results obtained are shown in Figure 13. As one can 
see, the sensor needs approximately 10 seconds to stabilize 
its resting value, which is around 0.8 V. 
When the gas/smoke concentration increases near to our 
sensor, the voltage also increases. One can see two peaks at 
80s and at 135s. The values of output voltage of sensor in the 
presence of gases detected are higher than 1.1V. So, we can 
establish the threshold at 0.85volts. 
E. Alarm messages 
Finally, Figure 14 shows an example of a text message 
generated when fire is detected near to the car at a particular 
location. As noted, the message contains information about 
the event which generated the alarm, the time it was 
generated and the GPS location where this event was 
detected. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have presented a mobile low cost 
system for environmental monitoring in emergency 
situations. The novelty of this system is that we use the 
private cars to have several nodes taking data from the 
environment. The system is composed by a sensor node, 
which is connected to a smartphone to take advantage of the 
3G / 4G connectivity. According to our result, the system 
can be very useful to determine possible evacuation routes to 
rescue stranded citizens, in emergency situations, such as 
forest fires. In this way, many deaths of people who attempt 
fires along roads that are unaware of their condition could be 
avoided. 
As future works, we would like to integrate some more 
sensors in the vehicle. These sensors will provide 
information to the emergency services about the vehicle 
status in order to better plan the rescue tasks 
 
 
Figure 8.  My Position programation 
 
 
Figure 9.  Text file with GPS coordinate 
Figure 10.  Position information placed on a map. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Angle (degree)
Time (s)
X-axis
Y-axis
 
4.78
4.8
4.82
4.84
4.86
4.88
4.9
4.92
4.94
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Voltaje (V)
Time (s)
No Fire
Fire at different distances
 
Figure 11.  Measurements of vehicle position with measurements each 0.25s 
Figure 12.  Measurements of fire detection 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-601-9
AMBIENT 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
Voltage (V)
Time (s)
Too high smoke concentration
 
Now
20:15:38 FIRE DETECTED -
Latitude: 37.17679 Longitude: -3.61009
20:15:38 FIRE DETECTED -
Latitude: 37.17679 Longitude: -3.61009
 
Figure 13.  Measurements of smoke detection 
Figure 14.  SMS reveived when fire is detected. 
 
We would also ensure the security of data stored in the 
CDBU through the last techniques [20] to be sure that 
nobody uses them in a criminal way. Finally, the system is 
transmitting the data through 3G / 4G networks. As future 
actions, we would like change the connectivity to 5G 
networks [21].  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the “Ministerio de 
Economía y Competitividad”, through the “Convocatoria 
2014. Proyectos I+D - Programa Estatal de Investigación 
Científica y Técnica de Excelencia” in the “Subprograma 
Estatal de Generación de Conocimiento”, (Project TIN2014-
57991-C3-1-P) and through the “Convocatoria 2016- 
Proyectos I+D+I - Programa Estatal De Investigación, 
Desarrollo e Innovación Orientada a los retos de la 
sociedad”(Project TEC2016-76795-C6-4-R). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Lloret, M. Garcia, D. Bri, and S. Sendra, “A wireless sensor 
network deployment for rural and forest fire detection and 
verification”, Sensors, vol. 9, no. 11, 2009, pp. 8722-8747. 
[2] M Garcia, D Bri, S Sendra, J Lloret, “Practical deployments 
of wireless sensor networks: A survey”, Int. J. on Advances in 
Networks and Services, vol. 3, no. 1-2, 2010, pp. 170-185 
[3] CNN, “More evacuations ordered as deadly wildfires scorch 
Northern 
California”. 
Available 
at: 
http://edition.cnn.com/2017/10/10/us/california-fires-
napa/index.html (Last accessed: Oct. 26, 2017). 
[4] El País, “Why wildfires in Portugal are so lethal?”. Available 
online: 
https://elpais.com/internacional/2017/10/19/actualidad/15084
10409_311317.html (Last accessed: Oct. 26, 2017). 
[5] B. Manlio, D. Franca, F. Erina, and G. Alberto, 
“Environmental Monitoring for Smart Cties”, IEEE Sensors 
Journal, no. 99, July 2017, pp. 1-8. 
[6] F. Zeiger and M. F. Huber, “Demonstration Abstract: 
Participatory Sensing enabled Environmental Monitoring in 
Smart Cities”, 13th Int. Symp. on Inf. processing in sensor 
networks, Berlin, Germany, 15-17 Apr. 2014, pp. 337-338. 
[7] R. D. Labati, A. Genovese, V. Piuri, and F. Scotti, “Wildfire 
Smoke 
Detection 
Using 
Computational 
Intelligence 
Techniques 
Enhanced 
With 
Synthetic 
Smoke 
Plume 
Generation”, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 43, no. 4, 2013, pp.1003-1012. 
[8] J. Park, B. Ko, J. Nam, and S. Kwak, “Wildfire Smoke 
Detection Using Spatio Temporal Bag-of-Features of 
Smoke”, IEEE Workshop on Applications of Computer 
Vision, Tampa, Florida, USA, 15-17 Jan.  2013, pp. 200-205. 
[9] A. R. Ulucinar, I. Korpeoglu, and A. E. Cetin, “A Wi-Fi 
Cluster Based Wireless Sensor Network Application and 
Deployment for Wildfire Detection”, Int. J. of Distributed 
Sensor Networks, vol. 10, no. 10, 2014, pp. 1-12.  
[10] S. Ferdoush and X. Li, “Wireless Sensor Network System 
Design using Raspberry Pi and Arduino for Environmental 
Monitoring Applications”, Procedia Computer Science, vol. 
34, 2014, pp. 103-104. 
[11] S. Fang et al., “An Integrated System for Regional 
Environmental Monitoring and Management Based on 
Internet of Things”, IEEE Transactions on Industrial 
Informatics, vol. 10, no. 2, May 2014, pp. 1596-1605. 
[12] G. Barrenetxea, F. Ingelrest, G. Schaefer, and M. Vetterli, 
“SensorScope: Out-of-the-Box Environmental Monitoring”, 
Int. Conf. on Information Processing in Sensor Networks, St. 
Louis, MO, USA, 22-24 April 2008, pp. 332-343. 
[13] I. Bosch, A. Serrano, and L. Vergara, “Multisensor Network 
System for Wildfire Detection Using Infrared Image 
Processing”, The scientific World Journal, vol. 2013, 2013, 
pp. 1-10. 
[14] J. Lloret, I. Bosch, S. Sendra , and A. Serrano, “A Wireless 
Sensor Network for Vineyard Monitoring That Uses Image 
Processing”, Sensors, vol. 11, no. 6, 2011, pp. 6165-6196. 
[15] C. Phan and H. H. T. Liu, “A Cooperative UAV/UGV 
Platform for Wildfire Detection and Fighting”, 7th 
International Conference on System Simulation and Scientific 
Computing, Beijing, China, 10-12 October 2008, pp. 494-498. 
[16] S. Abdelhamid, H. S. Hassanein and, G. Takahara, “Vehicle 
as a Resource (VaaR)”, IEEE Network, vol. 29, no. 1, Jan. 
2015, pp. 12-17. 
[17] S. Sendra, L. García, J. M. Jimenez, and J. Lloret, “Low-Cost 
Vehicle Driver Assistance System for Fatigue and Distraction 
Detection”, Int. Conf. on Future Intelligent Vehicular 
Technologies, Porto, Portugal, 15 Sep. 2016, pp. 69-78. 
[18] M. Fogue et al., “A system for Automatic Notification and 
Severity Estimation of Automotive Accidents”, IEEE 
Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 13, no. 5, 2014, pp. 
948-963. 
[19] S. Chaklader, J. Alam, M. Islam, and A. S. Sabbir, “Black 
Box: An Emergency Rescue Dispatch System for Road 
Vehicles for Instant Notification of Road Accidents and Post 
Crash Analisys”, Inte. Conf. on Informatics, Electronics and 
Vision, Dhaka, Bangladesh, 23-24 May 2014, pp. 1-6. 
[20] R. Kamatchi, K. Ambekar, Y. Parikh, “Security Mapping of a 
Usage Based Cloud System”, Network Protocols and 
Algorithms, vol. 8, no. 4, 2016, pp. 56-71. 
[21] H. N. AL-Hashimi and W. N. Hussein, “PMIPv6 Assistive 
Cross-Layer Design to reduce handover latency in VANET 
Mobility for Next Generation Wireless Networks”, Network 
Protocols and Algorithms, vol. 7, no. 3, 2015, pp.1-17. 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-601-9
AMBIENT 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

