Analysis of Psychological Stress Factors and Facial Parts Effect on Intentional 
Facial Expressions 
 
Kazuhito Sato  
Department of Machine Intelligence and Systems 
Engineering, 
Faculty of Systems Science and Technology, Akita 
Prefectural University 
 Yurihonjo, Japan 
ksato@akita-pu.ac.jp 
Hirokazu Madokoro 
Department of Machine Intelligence and Systems 
Engineering, 
Faculty of Systems Science and Technology, Akita 
Prefectural University 
 Yurihonjo, Japan 
madokoro@akita-pu.ac.jp 
Hiroaki Otsu  
Department of Machine Intelligence and Systems 
Engineering, 
Faculty of Systems Science and Technology, Akita 
Prefectural University 
 Yurihonjo, Japan 
m13a006@akita-pu.ac.jp 
Sakura Kadowaki 
 Smart Design Corp. 
 
Akita City, Japan 
sakura@smart-d.jp
 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a gender-specific stress model 
to analyze the psychological stress factors on intentional facial 
expressions. We have focused on the relationship between 
facial expression intensity and Stress Response Scale (SRS-18). 
In this paper, we extract three facial expressions (i.e., 
happiness, anger, and sadness) from the basic six facial 
expressions defined by Ekman, and then represent a graphical 
model of the relationship between these three facial expressions 
and the psychological stress factors (i.e., "depression and 
anxiety", "displeasure and anger", and "lassitude"). In the 
experiment, we created an original facial expression dataset 
consisting of three facial expressions and a psychological stress 
dataset by SRS-18 obtained from 10 subjects during 7-20 
weeks at one week interval. As the results of probabilistic 
reasoning based on the observed values of each facial 
expression, such trends were obtained as follows. BNs shows 
trends of different stress factor between men and women in 
relations of expression levels and psychological stress. Stress 
models appeared on happiness faces of "lassitude" factor in 
men, the anger faces of "displeasure and anger" were affected 
with stress factors in women. 
Keywords-Bayesian networks; Expression levels; SRS-18; 
Intentional facial expressions. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Modern society is full of stress. Numerous people live 
their lives with a variety of stressors. Stress is a biological 
reaction that develops when we confront a psychological or 
spiritual stressor [1]. Reactive processes of people 
interacting with the environment signify individual 
cognitive processes involved in biological reactions and 
physiological processes. There are three indexes of 
biological bodies, psychology, and action that demand the 
consideration of individual processes when subjected to 
stress. Usually, the human brain effectually responds to 
maintain mental and physical balance. However, excessive 
stress can trigger mental illness such as depression [1]. 
Because it can be difficult to conceal stress, faces are often 
called a window by which one can discern information of 
various types such as the modality of a person's mind, and 
health condition. Especially, facial expressions can show 
aspects of internal psychology, reflective emotions such as 
delight, anger, sorrow, pleasure, and the existence of stress. 
Close friends and family members communicate while 
interpreting stress from conditions and changes of facial 
expressions. 
For this study, we specifically examine intentional facial 
expressions. Moreover, we set the upper part, lower part, 
and whole parts of the face as regions of interest (ROI) to 
address static and dynamic diversity, as defined by 
Akamatsu [2]. We quantify the relation between facial 
expressions and psychological stress by employing   
Bayesian networks (BNs), which can describe stochastic 
relations of events as a graphic structure. In our evaluation 
experiment, we create stress models by gender, and then 
analyze stress factors and stress elements in facial 
expressions of various types: happiness, anger, and sadness.  
II. 
RELATED STUDIES 
Existing methods for measuring stress are divisible into 
two types: a contacted type and a noncontact type. By using 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

the findings that stress can affect amylase secretion in saliva, 
methods for quantifying stress have been proposed and 
many products are marketed based on the findings [3] [16]. 
In association with the autonomic nervous activity and 
stress, many analytical studies of the heart rate variability 
have been performed. At present, various devices have been 
developed and are used in research and clinical practice [4] 
[17]. There are many reports on the correlation between 
stress and neural activity of the cerebrum, In particular, 
Electroencephalography (EEG) is one of the indicators that 
have been studied for many years, researches using EEG 
have been performed on the context of the psychological 
state, such as attention and concentration, stress and anxiety 
[5] [18]. As a new functional brain analysis method, Near-
infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) for measuring the cerebral 
blood volume changes locally non-invasively is also 
attracting attention as a stress measuring method, which 
indicates that the activity of the prefrontal cortex is changed 
significantly [19]. However, the objective comparison 
related to identify the most suitable approach for stress 
measurements is very complex, because each researcher has 
a different story, e.g., the type of stressor used in their 
experiments is different for each approach. In addition, 
these methods of contact type are susceptible to contact 
interface generally. 
Stress measurement checking using a questionnaire form 
is a noncontact popular measurement method. The Profile of 
Mood States (POMS) [6] is an inventory that is recognized 
worldwide, although its results cannot generally be 
compared because the target attributes differ. POMS consist 
of 65 items. The brief version of POMS consists of 30 items 
[7]. POMS becomes extremely burdensome if we take 
images of facial expressions together. Suzuki et al. 
developed the Stress Response Scale-18 (SRS-18) [8], 
which is useful for a wide range of subject ages. SRS-18 
comprises 18 items. SRS-18 measures psychological stress 
encountered over a short time. Moreover, SRS-18 shows 
highly discriminative capability in high stress and low stress 
groups. Numerous question items are available on SRS-18 
related to an event that a normal person encounters daily 
while most existing stress evaluations are aimed at the 
assessment of clinical conditions. We regard SRS-18 as an 
optimal and helpful inventory to be used to assess facial 
expressions because of the measurement of physical and 
mental reactions and smaller number of question items. 
III. RELATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESS                                     
AND FACIAL EXPRESSIONS 
A suitable amount of stress improves activation and leads 
to work efficiency. However, excessive stress produces 
psychosomatic abnormalities because of humans' limited 
adaptive capability. How one feels stress effects is reported 
to vary delicately in similar environments because of 
individual differences from conditions and tolerance of 
stress [9].  
Therefore, it is necessary to measure a state of stress in 
individuals. Furthermore, we must take steps to improve a 
bad stress state soon after it occurs [1]. Therefore, we must 
become able to grasp a person's emotional state considering 
corresponding relations to biology, psychology, and action 
for stressors of various kinds. The relations between the 
changing expression intensity and psychological stress with 
facial expressions can be verified from their psychological 
and behavioral aspects. We can assess expressions of 
individual facial expressions using Facial Expression Spatial 
Charts (FESCs) [10]. Our experiment results suggest the 
influence of psychological stress on facial expressions. For 
this study, we create a model of stress elements for 
individuals of both genders using BNs. Then, we 
graphically 
analyze 
the 
interdependence 
between 
psychological stress and facial expressions. For this study, 
we designate a parameter of expression intensity that 
quantitatively expresses facial expressions. 
IV. 
 DATASETS 
For this study, we constructed a dataset to assess facial 
expression changes. We measured the psychological stress of 
a subject showing facial expression changes by using SRS-
18 and comparing the results to the facial expressions. 
A. Facial Expressions Images 
We set the term during which we measured facial 
expressions to construct individual models of stress 
elements. We constructed an original and long-term dataset 
for the specific facial expressions of one subject. For the 
experiment, we created original facial expression datasets 
from 10 subjects, with each dataset including images with 
three facial expressions: happiness, anger, and sadness 
obtained at one-week intervals during 7-20 weeks. The 
subjects were five women (Subjects A, B, C, and D were 
19; Subject E was 21) and five men (Subjects F and J were 
19; Subjects G, H, and I were 22), all of whom were 
university students. The order of facial expressions in a 
single measurement is in the order of happiness, anger, 
sadness. When taking images of each facial expression, the 
same expression is repeated 3 times on the basis of neutral 
facial expressions during the image-taking time of 20 
seconds. We previously instructed subjects to express an 
emotion 3 times during the image-taking time. One set of 
data consisted of 200 frames with the sampling rate of 10 
frames per second. 
We set the Region of Interest (ROI) to 90 x 80 pixels, 
including the eyebrows, which all contribute to the 
impression of a whole face as facial feature components. 
We set the ROI of the upper part to 40 x 80 pixels including 
the eyebrows, which contribute to the impression of upper 
facial parts as facial feature components. We set the ROI of 
the lower part to 50 x 80 pixels including the mouth, which 
contributes to the impression of lower facial parts as facial 
feature components. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

B. Target Facial Expressions 
We set three facial expressions of object facial 
expressions because the facial expressions are acquired over 
a long term for our study. We sought to reduce the load on 
subjects. We selected happiness, anger, and sadness from 
six basic facial expressions by Ekman [11]. He pointed out 
that Japanese people show disgust by smiling to conceal 
their true emotions. Therefore, we consider that it is difficult 
for subjects participating in this study to express disgust. 
The emotion of fear is a rare feeling in daily life. In the 
opinion of subjects, it was often stated that they are not 
aware of how they appear when feeling fear. Therefore, we 
do not record fear among the facial expressions. Surprise 
can readily occur along with fear, happiness, solace, anger, 
and despair [11]. Therefore, we do not include surprise 
among the recorded facial expressions because it invariably 
translates into complex facial expressions. 
Our target facial expressions are therefore happiness, 
anger, and sadness, which include the geometry of each 
quadrant of Russell's circumplex model [12]. 
C. Stress Measurement 
Psychological stress reactions are anxiety, anger, 
lassitude and difficulty in concentrating, which are 
encountered on a daily basis when one is affected by 
stressors. Our measurement contents are three robust stress 
factors: "depression and anxiety", "displeasure and anger", 
and "lassitude". Subjects respond on the check sheet along a 
four-response method for 18 items, answering with 
responses from "Completely different" to "It's correct". 
Each answer receives a score of 0-3. High point totals 
signify a higher degree of stress. Moreover, stress levels are 
represented by consultation value Level 1 (i.e., weak), Level 
2 (i.e., normal), Level 3 (i.e., slightly strong), and Level 4 
(i.e., strong). For this paper, we define the reported values as 
stress levels. For this experiment, we measured stress values 
using the SRS-18 and took facial expressions of 10 subjects. 
To avoid influencing the facial expressions, we reported no 
scores to subjects. Moreover, subjects wrote their responses 
to SRS-18 before recording facial expressions. 
D. Extraction of Facial Expressive Intensity 
Figure 1 shows a flow chart of our proposed method. 
Features are emphasized using Gabor wavelet filters as the 
preprocessing of input images. We reduce noise and 
constrict the amount of information using time-series 
images decorated with Gabor wavelets and processing 
coarse graining. We extract the topological variation of 
facial expressions and normalize constriction to the time 
direction using coarse graining data. Therefore, we classify 
images into patterns of facial expression categories 
depending 
on 
Self-Organizing 
Maps 
(SOMs) 
[13]. 
Moreover, we reclassify facial expressions images using 
SOMs and Fuzzy Adaptive Resonance Theory (ART) [14] 
of adaptive learning algorithm with stability and plasticity. 
SOMs set a mapping space by categorization of some items 
relative to others. However, Fuzzy ART can categorize 
same standards because it categorizes definite granularity 
using 
vigilance 
parameters. 
We 
rearrange 
the 
reclassification of categories based on neutral facial 
expressions. We consider that the categories show the 
influence of facial expressions. 
Figure 2 shows the expression intensity, which quantifies 
the strength of expression. SOMs of unsupervised learning 
are eminently useful for clustering and visualization. We 
classified facial expression patterns using SOMs to extract 
the facial expression topology. Fuzzy ART is an 
unsupervised learning neural network of incremental 
learning that can learn new patterns while maintaining past 
memories. Therefore, we regard ART as the optimal method 
for pattern learning of individual facial expressions. For our 
method, we reclassify facial expression images using Fuzzy 
ART 
in 
classification 
using 
SOMs. 
The 
pattern 
classification using SOMs categorize in set mapping space. 
Therefore, classification results are relative. However, we 
consider reclassification of constant granularity using Fuzzy 
ART as an extractive method to infer the individual 
expression intensity. 
V. 
 MODEL OF STRESS ELEMENTS 
 
 
Figure 1. Procedure of the proposed method  
 
 
Figure 2. Expressive intensity  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

A Bayesian network is a state-of-the-art knowledge 
representation scheme dealing with probabilistic knowledge 
[15]. Its nodes and arcs connect together forming a directed 
acyclic graph. Each node can be viewed as a domain 
variable that can take a set of discrete values or continuous 
value. An arc represents a probabilistic dependency between 
the parent node and the child node. We illustrate the 
graphical-modeling approach using a real-world case study, 
such as modeling and inferring human psychological stress 
by 
integrating 
information 
from 
intentional 
facial 
expressions and four grades, three stress factors, 18 stress 
attributions of SRS-18. A probabilistic psychological stress 
model based on the BNs is the best option to deal with the 
relationship between facial expressions and 
human 
psychological stress. We created a model of stress elements 
using BNs based on stress factors, stress elements, and 
facial expression intensities. 
A. Definition of Variable Nodes 
The stress model used in our experiment comprises 25 
nodes. A stress element model was constructed from 18 
stress elements, 3 stress factors, 3 facial expression 
intensities, and one total stress level. "depression and 
anxiety", "displeasure and anger", and "lassitude" of stress 
factor accommodate parent nodes for the six stress elements. 
The stress factors are parent nodes to the total stress level 
nodes, which are the child nodes. We set relations manually 
between the parent and child of facial expression intensities 
and stress factors. We set stress factors and expression 
intensity respectively as parent and child nodes based on 
preconditions for psychological stress influence to facial 
expressions. Furthermore, we set directed links for stress 
elements six nodes to each stress factor based on a 
precondition that stress elements trigger stress factors. 
The 18 nodes of stress elements are assigned 0-3 points 
with four items: "Strongly No", "Yes a little", "Yes", and 
"Definitely Yes". All stress factor nodes have four grades: 
Level 1(i.e., weak), Level 2(i.e., normal), Level 3(i.e., 
slightly high), and Level 4(i.e., high). 
VI. 
ANALYSIS OF STRESS ELEMENT MODEL 
For the analysis described in this section, we built two 
models given constraints on different nodes of stress factors 
to obtain a single simple model for which effects of stress 
are noticeable. Using the selected model, we attempt to 
analyze the type of facial expressions that are easily 
influenced by stress. Then, we shall analyze the stress 
factors and stress elements supporting them. To study 
differences in stress susceptibility by gender, we compare 
the results of analysis of stress elements in men and women. 
A. Model Construction 
As a preliminary experiment, we constructed models of 
stress elements under two constraints: "with constraints, 
where each factor is independent"; and "without constraints, 
allowing relations among elements". As it might be inferred 
from the contents of the preliminary experiment, no need 
exists to define an exact correlation between stress elements 
 
 
Figure 3. Stress elements model of male 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

because a tendency is apparent by which the probability 
distributions of the stress levels and expressive intensities 
are similar, irrespective of the presence or absence of 
constraints. However, the probability distribution of the 
model without constraints is an important characteristic for 
the analysis of stress elements. It is regarded as more 
effective when performing probabilistic inference. 
Therefore, for the following experiments, we use the 
stress element model without constraints, allowing their 
relation among elements. 
B. Analytical Procedures 
The stress element models of men and women are 
presented in figure 3 and figure 4. Each node in stress 
factors, such as "depression and anxiety", "displeasure and 
anger", and "lassitude", has directed links of six items of 
stress elements as parent nodes. The directed links signify 
that nodes connected with them are optimized for better 
inferential accuracy. Therefore, a strong mutual relation 
exists between nodes that are connected by directed links. 
The analytical procedures of stress factors that affect the 
facial expressions are described in the following based on 
the stress element models. As the flow of the entire analysis, 
by giving evidence to the degree of stress response, and by 
comparing the probability distribution of the expressive 
intensities "happiness", "anger" and "sadness", we strive to 
identify facial expressions that are sensitive to stress.  
Additionally, we verify any stress elements in terms of 
whether they affect the expressive intensities of the facial 
expression. 
First, we calculate the expressive intensities of three 
facial expressions by giving evidence to the stress response 
degree as "weak". Conducting stochastic reasoning based on 
the probability distribution of each expressive intensity, the 
most sensitive stress is likely to appear in any facial 
expression was determined. Next, we assessed the degree of 
stress responses of "slightly strong" and "normal" using the 
same procedures. We specifically examine the probability 
distribution of expressive intensities in three facial 
expressions. 
Furthermore, 
even 
for 
stress 
elements 
corresponding to each stress factor, using the same 
procedures as stochastic reasoning, we identify the stress 
factors and elements that affect expressive intensities in 
facial expressions. 
C. Male Model 
Figure 5 presents a probability distribution of the 
expressive intensities corresponding to each stress response 
degree in the male model. Giving evidence to the stress 
response degree as "weak", the probability value was also 
larger because the expressive intensity increases. For the 
case in which the stress response degree is "normal" 
compared to "weak", the probability value is greater when 
the expressive intensity is small. Moreover, in the case of 
"slightly strong", probability values tend to be large in all 
 
 
Figure 4. Stress elements model of female 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

three facial expressions, when expressive intensities are 
small. The results are shown as described above: when the 
confirmed. Estimating the expressive intensity 
corresponding to stress response degree is particularly 
difficult for facial expressions of "anger" and "sadness" 
because it is small in the state of "normal" stress. 
Therefore, we will strive to conduct analyses particularly 
addressing the "happiness" facial expression, for which the 
probability value of expressive intensity is changing related 
to the stress response degree. To analyze the stress factors 
and stress elements that support them on the "happiness" 
facial expression, by giving evidence sequentially from 
"Level 1" to "Level 4" for total stress levels, we identify the 
stress factors affecting facial expressions from their 
probability 
distributions 
of 
expressive 
intensities. 
Furthermore, we examine the link structure of the stress 
elements related to the stress factor that has been identified. 
Figure 6 depicts a probability distribution of the stress 
level in each stress factor. As the stress response degree 
becomes higher, the level of the stress factor "depression 
and anxiety" indicates a high value. This phenomenon 
appears most significantly on the estimated value of the 
probability distribution. However, for the stress factors of 
"lassitude" and "depression and anxiety", characteristic 
changes are not observed in the estimated value of the 
probability distributions at respective stress levels. 
Therefore, in the male model, we consider that the factor 
of "depression and anxiety" affects the facial expressions of 
"happiness" as a stress factor. Then, as targeting the six 
stress elements characterizing the factors of "depression and 
anxiety", we attempt to identify the stress factors for 
supporting the relevant factor. We set evidence for the stress 
response degrees of "normal", "weak", and "slightly strong". 
Figure 7 shows the probability distribution of stress elements 
for each stress level. For "normal" and "weak" as stress 
response degrees, the highest probability value of "strongly 
no" denying the stress elements was identified, other 
probability values were less than 0.3. For "slightly strong" as 
a stress response degree, stress elements of "sad mood", 
"crying", and "disheartened" showed high probability values 
together for support of the cause of "definitely yes". 
D. Female Model 
Using the same procedure as that used for the men, we 
analyzed the relations between stress factors, stress elements, 
and expressive intensities of three facial expressions for 
women. In the female model, a marked change was 
 
(a) Stress response degree : weak  
 
(b) Stress response degree : normal  
 
(c) Stress response degree : slightly strong  
 
Figure 5. Probability distribution of the expressive intensities 
corresponding to each stress response degree in male model 
 
 
(a) Stress response degree : weak  
 
(b) Stress response degree : normal  
 
(c) Stress response degree : slightly strong  
 
Figure 6. Probability distribution of the stress levels with emphasis on 
the facial expression of  "happiness " 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

recognized in the probability distribution of expressive 
intensity of "sadness", as presented in figure 8. 
Figure 9 presents a probability distribution of stress levels 
with emphasis on the facial expression of "sadness" in each 
stress factor. As it might be understood from the contents of 
figure 9, particularly addressing the probability distribute-on 
of the factors of "lassitude" and "depression and anxiety", a 
considerable change is apparent with the difference of stress 
response degree, i.e., "weak", "normal", and "slightly 
strong". The probability distributions of the stress elements 
characterizing the factor of "depression and anxiety" are 
presented in figure 10. As a stress element giving influence 
to the factor of "depression and anxiety", the influence of 
"disheartened" exists to a slight degree. However, no 
distinctive element to support the factor of "lassitude" is 
found anywhere because the probability distribution shows a 
similar tendency to that of the change of the degree of stress 
response. 
Based on the experimentally obtained results presented 
above, we conduct an examination from the perspective of 
stress factors and stress elements giving influence to them, 
specifically examining the relation between psychological 
stress and three facial expressions for men and women. 
Some facial expressions appear easily, but others are 
difficult to assess in psychological stress. In the male model, 
facial expressions of "happiness" show marked changes 
attributable to differences in the stress-response degree, but 
characteristics of the probability distribution of expressive 
intensities are similar in facial expressions of "sadness" and 
"anger". Expressive intensities become slight with the 
increase of stress response degree as an overall trend. In the 
female model, a change was observed in the characteristics 
of the probability distribution of expressive intensities, only 
the facial expression of "sadness", by setting evidence to the 
stress response degree as "slightly strong". 
Therefore, we inferred that the influence of psychological 
stress appears easily, respectively, in the expression of 
"happiness" for men, and in the expression of "sadness" for 
women. In addition, the factor of "depression and anxiety" 
as a stress factor influences the facial expressions of 
"happiness". Then, as stress elements which support it, three 
items exist for men: "sad mood", "feel like crying", and 
"disheartened". Although significant changes were observed 
in the probability distribution of the factors of "lassitude" 
and "depression and anxiety", the female model did not 
 
(a) Stress response degree]e : weak 
 
 
(b) Stress response degree : normal 
 
 
(c) Stress response degree : slightly strong 
 
Figure 7. Probability distributions of the stress elements 
characterizing the factors of "depression and anxiety" in male model 
 
(a) Stress response degree : weak  
 
 
(b) Stress response degree : normal  
 
 
(c) Stress response degree : slightly strong  
 
Figure 8. Probability distribution of expressive intensities 
corresponding to each stress response degree in female model 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

engender specific stress elements to support those stress 
factors. 
VII. STRESS FACTORS AND EFFECT OF FACE REGION 
In this section, we first classify the state (slightly high) of 
levels 3–4 and the state (weak) of level 1 for which each 
stress factor holds the state of "Level 4" from "Level 1". 
Next, by probabilistic reasoning of giving evidence in these 
two states, we strive to identify the face region (upper face, 
lower face) in which psychological stress effects readily 
appear. For this experiment, we use the model of stress 
elements for the entire subject, i.e., the 10 university student 
subjects comprise 5 men and 5 women. 
A. Factor of ‘depression and anxiety’ 
Figure 11 shows expressive intensities of parts of the face, 
where we set evidence to the state (slightly high) of levels 
3–4 and the state (weak) of level 1, assessing the factor of 
"anxiety-depression". Estimation results of stress levels and 
expressive intensities are presented in figure 11(a). The 
relation between types of facial expression and the 
differences of expressive intensity are presented in figure 
11(b). These two figures are summaries for the respective 
face regions. The vertical axes in the figures respectively 
show the expressive intensity and the difference of 
expressive intensity. It is noteworthy that the difference of 
expressive intensity shows the absolute value of the 
difference between the expressive intensities levels "3-4" 
and "level 1" in respective states. 
Specifically, assessing the differences of expressive 
intensity in "happiness", "anger", and "sadness", the 
respective values of the upper face are 0, 3, and 2. In 
contrast, the respective values of the lower face are 1, 3, and 
0. In the case in which the stress factor of "anxiety-
depression" acts significantly, large values have been 
identified for the upper and the lower face at expressing 
"anger". Therefore, the influence of "anxiety-depression" 
readily appears at expressing ‘anger’. In addition, we infer 
that the influence affects the entire face region. These 
analytical results are consistent with the contents of the 
previous study described in 18), i.e., the emotional states of 
mind stimulated "anger" and "depression" are similar. 
 
(a) Stress response degree : weak  
 
 
(b) Stress response degree : normal  
 
 
(c) Stress response degree : slightly strong  
 
Figure 9. Probability distribution of stress levels with emphasis on the 
facial expression of "sadness" 
 
(a) Stress response degree : weak  
 
 
 
(b) Stress response degree : normal  
 
 
 
(c) Stress response degree : slightly strong  
 
Figure 10. Probability distributions of the stress elements characterizing 
the factors of "depression and anxiety" in female model 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

B. Factor of ‘displeasure and anger’ 
Figure 12 represents the expressive intensities of each 
face region based on the stress factors of "displeasure and 
anger", as presented in the preceding section. Specifically 
examining the differences in expressive intensity in 
"happiness", "anger", and "sadness", the respective values of 
the upper face were 2, 1, and 4. In contrast, the respective 
values of the lower face are 0, 1, and 2. Accordingly, we 
consider that the following analysis is reasonable, i.e., the 
influence of "displeasure and anger" readily appears at the 
upper face of expressing "anger". 
In addition, because we are conducting the operation of 
"glared" to intimidate an opponent expressing "anger", this 
analytical result matches a case study in which changes 
occur during that process, such as "eyebrows down" or 
"upper eyelid is raised". Consequently, the effect readily 
appears strongly in the upper face of the facial expression 
"anger", in the case in which the stress factor of "displeasure 
and anger" is readily apparent. 
C. Factor of ‘lassitude’ 
Figure 13 exhibits expressive intensities of respective 
face regions based on the stress factor of "lassitude". 
Specifically examining the differences of expressive 
intensity in "happiness", "anger", and "sadness", the 
respective values of the upper face are 5, 3, and 2. In 
contrast, the respective values of the lower face are 1, 3, and 
4. Accordingly, we regard the following analysis as 
reasonable: the influence of "lassitude" readily appears at 
the upper face expressing "happiness", and the lower face 
expressing "sadness". 
 
(a) Estimation of stress levels  
 
 
(b) Difference of expressive intensity each face part 
 
Figure 11.  Expressive intensities of parts of the face 
 
 
(a) Estimation of stress levels  
 
 
(b) Difference of expressive intensity each face part  
 
Figure 12. Expressive intensities of each face region based on the stress 
factors of "displeasure and anger" 
 
 
 
(a) Estimation of stress levels  
 
 
(b) Difference of expressive intensity each face part  
 
Figure 13. Expressive intensities of respective face regions based on the 
stress factor of "lassitude" 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

In general, changes in facial expressions are poor during 
the state of "lassitude". Therefore, a tendency to fall 
"expressionless" might be confirmed. However, results 
indicate that the influence appears strongly on the lower face 
for the expression of "sadness" and the upper face of the 
expression ‘happiness’ in this analysis. For this study, we 
adopted an experimental protocol in which all subjects 
intentionally express three facial expressions of "happiness", 
"sadness", and "anger", even when they are in the state of 
"lassitude". Therefore, these reasoning results reflect the 
characteristics of datasets based on the experimental protocol. 
Although the factor of "lassitude" contributes significantly, 
we have found out that the effect readily appears at the lower 
face of the expression "sadness" and the upper face of the 
expression ‘happiness’ on intentional facial expressions. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study, which analyzed stress factors and elements of 
psychological stress on intentional facial expressions using 
BNs, was conducted to identify the types of facial 
expressions and facial parts which readily manifest the 
influence of psychological stress. In our evaluation 
experiment, we conducted stochastic reasoning to build 
stress elements models for all subjects, men and women, 
providing evidence to the stress response degree and stress 
factors. 
Results revealed the following points. 
1) The factor of "anxiety-depression" affects the facial 
expression of "happiness" in men. 
2) The factors of "anxiety-depression" and "lassitude" 
affect the facial expressions of "sadness" in women. 
3) The influences of "depression and anxiety" readily 
appear when expressing "anger", and affect the entire 
face. 
4) The influence of "displeasure and anger" readily 
appears at the upper face when expressing "anger". 
5) The influence of "lassitude" readily appears strongly in 
the lower face of the expression of "sadness", with the 
upper face of the expression of "happiness". 
We will estimate models of stress elements longitudinal 
and transversal data to increase the number of subjects and 
the photography period. Furthermore, we will improve our 
method to address both intentional facial expressions and 
natural expressions that will be exposed unconsciously. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI Grant Number 
25330325. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Yata, H. Sannohe, M. Nakasako, and M. Tao, “How to 
cope with stress,” Yuhikaku, 1993. 
[2] S. Akamatsu, “Recognition of Facial Expressions by Human 
and Computer [I]: Facial Expressions in Communications and 
Their Automatic Analysis by Computer, ” The Journal of the 
Institute of Electronics, Information, and Communication 
Engineers, Vol. 85, no. 9, pp. 680-685, Sep. 2002. 
[3] H. Shimomura, K. Kanamori, J. Nishimaki, and K. Shiba, 
“Usefulness of salivary amylase and cortisol measurement as 
stress markers at educational sites, ” ISSN, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 
247-254, 2010. 
[4] Medicore Co., Ltd., Body Checker (Cardio Monitor), 
http://www.medi-core.com/ [retrieved: July, 2013] 
[5] Brain Function Research Center, Alphatec-IV, http : 
//www.alphacom.co.jp/  [retrieved: July, 2013] 
[6] D.M. McNair, J.W.P. Heuchert, E. Shillony, Research with 
the Profile of Mood States (POMS), Toronto, Canada: Multi-
Health Systems, 1964-2001. 
[7] Comprehensive 
Support 
Project, 
“ISTRESS 
Scale 
Guidebook, ” Jitsumu Kyouiku, 2004. 
[8] S. Suzuki, “Stress Response Scale-18,” Kokoronet, Jul. 2007. 
[9] Mechanical Social Systems Foundation, “Surveillance study 
to security precaution of stress instrumentation technology on 
possible application, ” 2004. 
[10] H. Madokoro, K. Sato, and S. Kadowaki “Facial Expression 
Spatial Charts for Representing Time-Series Changes of 
Facial Expressions, ”' Japan Society for Fuzzy Theory, vol. 23, 
no. 2, pp. 157-169, 2011. 
[11] P. Ekman, “Emotions Revealed: Understanding Faces and 
Feelings, ” Kawade Shobo Shinsha, 2004. 
[12] J.A. Russell and M. Bullock, “Multidimensional Scaling of 
Emotional Facial Expressions: Similarity From Preschoolers 
to Adults, ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 
48, pp. 1290-1298, 1985. 
[13] T. Kohonen, Self-organizing maps, Springer Series in 
Information Sciences, 1995. 
[14] G.A. Carpenter, S. Grossberg, and D.B. Rosen, “Fuzzy ART: 
Fast Stable Learning and Categorization of Analog Patterns 
by an Adaptive Resonance System, ” Neural Networks, vol. 4, 
pp. 759-771, 1991. 
[15] Y. Motomura, “Probabilistic reasoning algorithms and their 
experiments in Bayesian network”, IEICE, pp.157-162, 2004.  
[16]  N. Takai, M. Yamaguchi, T. Aragaki, K. Eto, K. Uchihashi, 
and Y. Nishikawa, “Effect of psychological stress on the 
salivary cortisol and amylase levels in healthy young adults”, 
Arch Oral Biol., vol.49, no.12, pp. 963-968, 2004. 
[17]  M. Malik, “Heart rate variability: standards of measurement, 
physiological interpretation, and clinical use”, European Heart 
Journal, vol.17, pp. 354-381, 1996. 
[18]  R. S. Lewis, N. Y. Weekes, and T. H. Wang, “The effect of a 
naturalistic stressor on frontal EEG asymmetry”, Biological 
Psychology, vol.78, pp. 239-247, 2007. 
[19]  I. Akirav and M. Maroun, “The role of the medial prefrontal 
cortex-amygdala circuit in stress effects on the extinction of 
fear”, Neural Plast. 2007; 2007: 30873. Published online 2007 
Jan. doi: 10.1155/2007/30837. 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

