Customizability in Preventing Loss of Interest
in Ambient Displays for Behavior Change
Shiori Kunikata
Grad. School of Bio-Functions and Systems Science
Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology
Tokyo, Japan
email: rkabupg.ono.04@gmail.com
Kaori Fujinami
Div. of Advanced Information Technology and Computer Science
Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology
Tokyo Japan
email: fujinami@cc.tuat.ac.jp
Abstract—Ambient displays are effective for behavior change;
however, their prolonged use may cause users to lose interest
in the content and fail to change to desirable behavior. We
investigate two methods of presentation customization to address
loss of interest caused primarily by habituation to the system:
1) incremental and ad hoc customization and 2) initial and goal
customization. These methods were incorporated into a prototype
system designed to avoid a sedentary lifestyle at home. A 36-
day user study revealed that effective methods varied depending
on users’ motivation for using the system. Issues related to
customization and user feedback and directions to improve the
loss of interest caused by distrust of the system were identified.
Keywords—ambient display; behavior change; customization.
I. INTRODUCTION
People are encouraged to change their behaviors in everyday
situations, such as behaviors to prevent the spread of CoVID-
19, promote health (e.g., dieting and smoking cessation), and
save resources to avoid global warming. To positively change
their behavior, they must be appropriately motivated according
to their current situation. Target behaviors can be quantitatively
monitored using sensors installed in wearable devices and
the environment. However, this information must be easily
accessible, and motivating factors should be communicated
for effective behavior change.
Several studies on ambient displays exist [1], intuitively
making information understandable by mapping it onto virtual
creature illustrations, light and sound patterns, and physical
form changes, rather than numerical values or graphs. An
ambient display is recognized as a part of an environment,
such as an object or a painting, which is always activated as an
independent system, rather than being used as an application
that is activated each time information is checked. Ambient
displays are widely used in behavior change because they can
convey information without interrupting other daily tasks, and
users can receive information positively through a pleasing
design [2]–[6]. Ambient displays’ novelty may attract users
initially; however, they may gradually lose interest and stop
paying attention to the display [2] because of the calm manner
of information presentation, causing a reduction in the effec-
tiveness of persuasion [3]. Furthermore, system malfunctions
can present results that fail user expectations, resulting in loss
of interest and abandonment of the system [4] [7]. To our
knowledge, few studies have aimed to solve these problems in
the context of behavior change. Studies on user interest esti-
mation and its applications have used eye gaze information [8],
head pose [9], user personality [10], and speech information
[11]. These studies have dealt with users’ temporary interests
and preferences. However, ambient displays must handle long-
term user interests, which is challenging. Here, based on a
model of losing interest over a long period, we investigate
two methods of customizing persuasive ambient displays to
avoid losing interest in displays’ content. The methods were
implemented in a persuasive ambient display system that aims
to encourage the user to be active at home and were evaluated
in a 36-day test.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II presents a model of losing interest. A customizable persua-
sive ambient display is designed and implemented in Section
III. Section IV presents a user study, and Section V concludes
the paper.
II. A MODEL OF LOSING INTEREST
Referring to previous study that modeled the mental states
of children playing with robots [12], we proposed a model
that adds the two states of habituation and distrust that occur
with the long-term use of ambient displays (Figure 1) [13].
Figure 1. A model of losing interest
In the fresh state, the system is unknown to the user.
Therefore, the interest level and use frequency are high. Users
find their own way of using the system and thus enjoy the
changes in information at their own pace. This period increases
depending on the functionality and variations of the system.
With system usage, a state of habituation occurs wherein
the users gradually lose interest in the system because they
feel that all the functions and patterns have been explored.
If the system continues to present similar information for an
extended period, users will perceive it as “background” infor-
mation. Thus, users will eventually ignore it. This phenomenon
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-992-8
AMBIENT 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

has been often noted in previous studies that conducted long-
term user evaluation experiments (e.g., Bauer et al. [14]).
Additionally, a state of distrust emerges when users feel that
the system does not follow their wishes or information and
its representation methods are inaccurate. This occurs, for
example, when the user’s activity information is not accurately
reflected on the display [4] [7], or the design is not to the
user’s liking. We believe that distrust increases the tendency
to intentionally avoid using the system. Consequently, the
user finally reaches a state of loss of interest and ignores the
display. Therefore, we detect the emergence of habituation or
distrust as a sign of loss of interest and intervene by returning
the user to the enjoyment state. Here, we mainly dealt with
the habituation issue.
III. CUSTOMIZABLE AMBIENT DISPLAY FOR ACTIVE
LIVING IN THE HOME
A. Overview
A prototype system that motivates the user to be active, for
example, moving around and performing exercises to prevent
excessive sitting while working at home, and incorporates
the above intervention concepts, was developed. The system
employs a growth metaphor in which a virtual tree grows when
the non-sedentary time per hour exceeds a certain ratio. This is
aimed at improving behavior through the aspiration to increase
tree growth. Two types of active involvement strategies were
introduced to facilitate long-term engagement with the system:
1) incremental and ad hoc customization and 2) initial and goal
customization.
B. Major components
Figure 2 illustrates the major functional components of the
system, which consist of 1) home activeness calculation, 2)
basic feedback, 3) interest level estimation, and 4) customiza-
tion. The system ran on a Raspberry Pi 4 (RP4) with a 7-
inch touch display. An OMRON Human Vision Components
(HVC)-P2 [15] was connected to RP4 as a gaze detector to
estimate the level of interest. Home activeness is judged by
integrating the information from Fitbit Charge 4 worn by the
user and a smartphone connected to a WiFi Access Point (AP)
in their home.
1) Home activeness calculation: Home Activeness (HA) is
defined as the ratio of the active time at home to the time spent
at home, which is calculated every hour and is represented
by (1). The active time at home in the past hour from time
h was obtained as the difference between the time spent at
home (thome,h) and the inactive time at home (tinactive,h).
The value of thome is measured by accumulating the duration
of the user’s smartphone being connected to a home WiFi AP,
while we retrieved values using an activity type of “sedentary”
in the Fitbit API for tinactive. Note that the value of thome,h
is 60 min unless the user leaves home between times h and
h + 1.
HAh = thome,h − tinactive,h
thome,h
(1)
2) Basic feedback: A tree growth metaphor was used. The
tree begins to grow from a seed, and HAh (1) is evaluated
every hour (h). Positive feedback is when the tree grows by
one stage if the value exceeds a certain threshold value (Figure
2 (b1)). In our earlier prototype system [13], the frequency of
evaluation was set to once per day; however, the study partici-
pants were unmotivated by the lack of changes in the feedback.
Thus, we chose once per hour as the evaluation frequency for
the new system. Furthermore, to ensure that the growth was
not easily completed during the experimental period of 12
days per condition (Section IV-A), images of the grown trees
were prepared for approximately 100 stages. Contrarily, the
tree becomes thinner by one stage if the evaluated value of
HA does not exceed the threshold value, and the tree breaks
at the fourth stage (Figure 2 (b2)), which we call negative
feedback. An early prototype system did not employ negative
feedback to ensure that the users did not quit using the system
because of sympathy for the weakening virtual creature [16];
however, we found that the motivational elements were not
enough with only positive feedback [13]. Thus, we decided
to introduce both positive and negative feedback while taking
care to ensure that the degree of negative feedback was not
too strong; for example, the tree did not suddenly break but
gradually thinned before breaking, and the update interval was
set to 12 h instead of 1 h.
The threshold for positive/negative feedback was set to 3/60,
which assumes at least 1–2 min of movement every 30 min
based on the recommendation for interrupting long periods of
sedentary behavior every 30 min by light movement [17]. Note
that in a full-scale operation for health promotion, the target
value should be set appropriately.
3) Interest level estimation: We hypothesized that the fre-
quency of screen viewing would decrease as the level of
interest decreased and attempted to model the correlation. In
our previous work, we simply used the distance between the
user and the display obtained from an infrared distance sensor
[13]; however, this method caused frequent misdetections.
Thus, we opted to use the frequency of eye gaze falling within
the display area using the gaze detector HVC-P2 (Figure 2 (c)).
A preliminary experiment, which is briefly described below,
was conducted to test this hypothesis.
Nine university students in their twenties used an ambient
display set up in their homes, illustrating a tree. The fact
that only the background color changed over time was not
mentioned to the participants. They indicated the level of
habituation and distrust on an 11-point scale from 0 to 10,
with a frequency of once per hour. Lower values indicate lower
levels of these states. The experiment continued until one of
these levels reached the maximum value of 10. Although the
individual completion times of the experiment ranged from 1
day to 2 weeks, the results of all nine participants showed
the same tendency. Specifically, with the exception of one
participant, a negative correlation with an average value of
–0.60 and a standard deviation of 0.39 existed between the
frequency of viewing and the level of habituation or distrust.
The frequency of screen viewing was obtained by averaging
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-992-8
AMBIENT 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Figure 2. Major Functional Components of of the Prototype System
the number of times the participants viewed the screen at least
once per hour over the time they spent in the room per day.
For example, the value is 0.5 if a user spends 4 h at home
and views the display twice, zero times, three times, and zero
times each hour.
4) Customization: In our early prototype system, two types
of involvement strategies were proposed: active and passive
involvement [13]. Active involvement allows users to cus-
tomize the appearance of the tree and change their daily
goals, which is based on the self-determination theory that
the users can be motivated in the long term by increasing
their self-determination [18]. Conversely, passive involvement
was designed to attract the user’s eyes to the display [19]
by animation, which changes the speed of swaying the tree
according to the distance from the user. A comparative user
study showed that active involvement tended to keep users’
interests relatively high, whereas a monotonous system was
not suitable for maintaining user interest over a long period,
even with active involvement. Therefore, we implemented two
types of active involvement approaches, which differ in the
timing and target of customization.
First, the number of customizable parts increases as the
tree grows to give the system an “unknown” element and
create a sense of anticipation of what might happen next.
For example, only the color and shape of leaves could be
changed immediately after sprouting, while the colors of the
trunk and fruit could be changed after some stages of growth.
This is because the user will quickly become habituated to the
functionality and lose interest if everything is customizable
from the beginning. The user can change the color at any
time by tapping any part of the presented image, such as
the ground and background (Figure 2 (d1)). The shape of the
leaves and the spread of branches can also be changed (Figure
2 (d2)). Additionally, the system prompts customization if the
user’s interest falls below a certain level and the user passes
in front of the display. Such an approach from the system
side is intended to make the user aware of the display even
if the user’s interest in it declines and to regain their interest
by redecoration. The threshold for prompting customization
was set to 0.516. The value was obtained as the ratio of the
average frequency of viewing by nine participants when the
level of either habituation or distrust reached 9 out of 10 to the
frequency of viewing on the first day when the interest should
be the highest. We call this type of customization incremental
and ad hoc customization, or simply ad hoc customization.
Second, the appearance of the final stage was customized at
the beginning (Figure 2 (e)). Some people may want to have a
sense of “working toward a goal” through customization at the
beginning. Once the goal appearance is set, the system starts
with a “seed” view, and the user spends time at home toward
a tree with the specified appearance. The second approach is
designed to motivate the user to grow the tree toward the goal
appearance, which we call initial and goal customization or
simply goal customization. In this approach, no suggestions
for customization were made by the system.
IV. EXPERIMENT
A. Methodology
A user study was conducted to investigate the effectiveness
of the proposed behavioral feedback and customization meth-
ods with six university students in their 20s (two females and
four males). They were each asked to use the system under
three conditions for 12 days: 1) with ad hoc customization,
2) with goal customization, and 3) without customization
as a baseline. The participants did not receive any specific
instructions regarding their time at home, and the order effect
was counterbalanced.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-992-8
AMBIENT 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Home activeness and frequency of viewing the display were
analyzed. As qualitative data, the participants were interviewed
at the end of each system condition usage to collect the
perceived interest in and distrust of the system. Furthermore,
another interview aimed at comparing the three conditions was
conducted at the end of the entire experiment.
B. Results and Discussion
1) Feedback method: Some participants felt that the mea-
sure of activity was well reflected in the growth of the trees,
whereas others did not. This contradiction might be because
the tree growth rate depended on the participants’ daily home
time, as tree growth was determined once every hour. For
example, if they stayed at home all day, the tree grew by about
five stages in one day if the HA reached the threshold every 3
h. However, if they went out in the morning and returned home
at 22:00, the tree grew by only about two stages, even if they
were active after returning home. Hence, they felt that their
efforts were not reflected, which is likely to increase distrust
of the system. Thus, various scenarios should be handled by
changing the speed of tree growth according to the user’s
daily rhythm and the amount of time spent at home. That
is, the user’s preferences and lifestyle and behavior should be
considered for more effective feedback.
Negative feedback was invoked by three participants. One
participant stated that negative feedback made her more aware
of the need to improve her behavior, which we confirmed as
an increase in HA. However, other two participants stated that
they had already lost interest in the system and thus did not
feel the need to improve their behaviors. This suggests that
negative feedback is ineffective if the user reached the state of
loss of interest. Negative feedback is invoked if an HA below
a threshold is detected for half a day. Consequently, the user is
likely to have lost interest in the system and may abandon the
use thereof if the tree breaks under such conditions. Therefore,
the use of negative feedback may not be effective, especially
for users who lost interest in the system.
2) Effective customization method by user type: The par-
ticipants used the three types of system conditions consec-
utively for more than one month, and the degree of loss
(or continuation) of interest varied depending on individual
characteristics. Therefore, we classified the participants into
three types based on the interview results: 1) Highly Motivated
(HM), 2) Gradually UnMotivated (GUM), and 3) Poorly
Motivated from the beginning (PM).
Three participants fell into the HM type and continued to
use the system throughout the experimental period without
a significant decrease in the frequency of screen viewing or
the duration of their activities, although some differences exist
in their tendencies. Figures 3a and 3b present an example of
the time trend in home activeness and frequency of viewing,
An example of time trend in home activeness and frequency
of viewing are shown in Figures 3a and 3b, respectively.
All participants in this type preferred ad hoc customization
followed by goal customization and then the baseline. They
tended to be more motivated by the metaphor of tree growth,
suggesting that the presence or absence of a goal did not
affect the results. Additionally, because participants regularly
checked the display, we considered it a good match with
the customization method, allowing them to customize the
visualization at any time. They would not use the system if
they were not interested in it, because operations were required
to customize the display. Therefore, the participants in this
category were highly interested in the display, and the nature
of the display being customizable at any time may have led
to the continuation of their interest.
(a) Home activeness
(b) Frequency of viewing
Figure 3. Time trends of a participant in the HM type who
used the system without customization (baseline) for the third
option.
Two participants belonged to the GUM type, showing a
gradual weakening of their motivation. Figures 4a and 4b
show the time trends in the home activeness and frequency of
viewing of a participant who first used goal customization. The
frequency of viewing gradually declined as days progress 4b,
indicating that the level of interest was decreasing. Moreover,
home activeness was not as high as in the case of HM. The
other participant showed a similar tendency. All GUM-type
participants used the ad hoc customization type as the second
or third option; however, they never used the customization
functionality because they had already lost interest in the
system or did not see any tree growth, according to the
interview results. Interestingly, they agree that they preferred
goal customization, allowing them to set a goal tree first.
That is, we consider that GUM-type participants had difficulty
maintaining their motivation with only the metaphor of tree
growth and customization of visual elements. However, they
were facilitated to make efforts to reach the goal since their
goals were made more concrete. Therefore, we believe that an
approach that encourages voluntary operation is not effective
for participants who show a strong tendency to lose interest.
Any functionality might be utilized after a complete loss of
interest; therefore, this issue should be addressed at an earlier
stage.
One participant was classified as the PM type, who had
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-992-8
AMBIENT 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

(a) Home activeness
(b) Frequency of viewing
Figure 4. Time trends of a participant in the GUM type who
used the system with goal customization as the first option.
low interest in the system and low awareness of behavior
change from the beginning and tended not to utilize the system
continuously. Figures 5a and 5b show the time trends of home
activeness and frequency of viewing for this participant using
goal customization as the second option. According to the
participant, the confirmation of tree growth did not inspire
him to change his behavior, nor did he notice any particular
difference between the systems. The possible reason is that
the participant was unaware of the risk of being sedentary at
home and was not conscious enough to change his behavior
through an ambient approach. Thus, for participants who are
not interested in changing their activity level, their conscious-
ness are challenging to change through customization, and
a stronger approach or information other than activeness is
considered necessary. For example, indirectly activating par-
ticipants’ interests by simultaneously displaying their interests
and information may be effective.
(a) Home activeness
(b) Frequency of viewing
Figure 5. Time trends of a participant in the PM type who
used the system with goal customization as the second option.
Thus, we consider that effective approaches differ depend-
ing on the level of motivation that users have to use the system,
which is in line with [20] [21]. Previously, our research group
has attempted to estimate the stages of behavior change in the
transtheoretical model [22] as levels of motivation. We wanted
to change motivational strategies according to these stages and
apply them to a system for promoting energy-saving behavior
[23]. The motivational stages were estimated by a decision
tree classifier that used the data on electricity consumption and
usage status of an information presentation system as inputs.
The results suggest the possibility of a motivation-aware
behavior-changing system. If behavioral features representing
motivation level and a sufficient number of correct labels
are obtained, the motivation level can be estimated through
machine learning, and users of GUM and PM can be covered
for the type of activity time considered in this study.
3) Customization method: As discussed in Section IV-B2,
the ad hoc customization feature tended to be effective in
maintaining users’ interest who were mainly motivated to
increase their activity level. Although the method could prompt
users to customize the tree visualization if a decrease in
interest was detected, the functionality was only invoked once
for one participant during the experiment, making it difficult
to evaluate the effectiveness of the recovery process. The
determination of the reference value for invoking this process
was based on viewing the display on the first day of the
ad hoc customization. Users who did not start with the ad
hoc customization started with a certain degree of loss of
interest initially. Thus, the threshold is quite small, and we
consider that HA rarely falls within the thresholds. Therefore,
the threshold should be determined based on data from the
first day of using any of the systems.
Regarding goal customization, some participants insisted
that they would like to see the gap between their current
situations and their goals. Others wanted to confirm the
goals that were initially set whenever they wanted. These
functionalities would be useful because forgetting the goal
appearance throughout long-term use is reasonable.
4) Distrust in the system: From the interview results, we
confirmed the occurrence of distrust of the system owing to the
failure in retrieving data from Fitbit. This is because the data
on the Fitbit cloud service sometimes failed to synchronize
with the measurement data on the Fitbit wearable device,
resulting in delayed or no update of the feedback. However,
distrust, to some extent, can be addressed by making the
internal status of the system (e.g., communication status and
data freshness) naturally transparent on the feedback screen.
V. CONCLUSION
We investigated two methods of display content customiza-
tion to prevent loss of interest caused mainly by habituation
during prolonged use of ambient displays. A prototype sys-
tem aiming to motivate people to be active at home was
implemented and evaluated in a 36-day user study with six
participants. The implications of this study are as follows:
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-992-8
AMBIENT 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

• The negative feedback in the tree growth metaphor did
not work effectively, especially for those who lost interest
in the system. Negative feedback’s timing or degree
should be reconsidered.
• The effective customization methods varied depending on
the motivation level of users for the use of the system:
highly motivated users preferred ad-hoc customization;
goal customization seemed to work for moderately moti-
vated users, but they gradually became unmotivated; and
poorly motivated users needed an approach other than
customization.
• Although a function for prompting users to customize the
display was implemented based on a preliminary exper-
iment, it worked only once because of the inappropriate
setting of a threshold value. Thus, the threshold must be
redesigned.
• Distrust of the system was found in terms of the feedback
rule (i.e., tree growth is only for time spent in the house)
and system malfunction (i.e., failure in synchronizing
between devices). These issues should be addressed to
prevent loss of interest.
We will address these issues with a special focus on the
functionalities of prompting the user based on the frequency
of display viewing and relaxing distrust.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Wisneski et al., “Ambient displays: Turning architectural space
into an interface between people and digital information,” in Proc.
the 1st International Workshop on Cooperative Buildings, Integrating
Information, Organization, and Architecture (CoBuild ’98),
Springer-
Verlag, 1998, pp. 22–32.
[2] S. Consolvo et al., “Activity sensing in the wild: A field trial of
ubifit garden,” in Proc. the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’08),
ACM, 2008, pp. 1797–1806.
[3] J. Froehlich et al., “Ubigreen: Investigating a mobile tool for tracking
and supporting green transportation habits,” in Proc. the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’09),
ACM, 2009, pp. 1043–1052.
[4] K. Fujinami, “A case study on information presentation to increase
awareness of walking exercise in everyday life,” Int. J. Smart Home,
Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 11–26, 2011.
[5] K. Fujinami, S. Kagatsume, S. Murata, T. Alasalmi, J. Suutala, and
J. R¨oning, “An augmented refrigerator with the awareness of wasteful
electricity usage,” Int’l J. Internet, Broadcasting and Communication,
Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 1–4, 02 2014.
[6] K. Fujinami, “Facilitating unmotivated tasks based on affection for
virtual pet,” in 2019 IEEE 1st International Workshop on Pervasive
Persuasive Systems for Behavior Change (PerPersuasion’19), 2019, pp.
736–741.
[7] S. Consolvo et al., “Flowers or a robot army? encouraging awareness
activity with personal, mobile displays,” in Proc. the 10th International
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’08),
ACM, 2008,
pp. 54–63.
[8] S. Castagnos, F. Marchal, A. Bertrand, M. Colle, and D. Mahmoudi,
“Inferring art preferences from gaze exploration in a museum,” in
Adj. Proc. of the 27th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and
Personalization (UMAP’19 Adjunct),
ACM, 2019, pp. 425–430.
[9] E. Kinoshita and K. Fujinami, “Impressive picture selection from wear-
able camera toward pleasurable recall of group activities,” in Universal
Access in Human–Computer Interaction. Human and Technological
Environments, Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 446–456.
[10] S. Dhelim, H. Ning, N. Aung, R. Huang, and J. Ma, “Personality-aware
product recommendation system based on user interests mining and
metapath discovery,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst., Vol. 8, No. 1,
pp. 86–98, 2021.
[11] M. Inaba and K. Takahashi, “Estimating user interest from chat dialogue
using neural networks,” Trans. Jpn. Soc. Artif. Intell., Vol. 34, No. 2,
pp. E–I94 1–9, 2019.
[12] K. Abe et al., “Robots that play with a child: Application of an
action decision model based on mental state estimation,” Journal of
the Robotics Society of Japan, Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 263–274, 2013.
[13] S. Kunikata, A. Tsuji, and K. Fujinami, “Involvement of a system to
keep users interested in the contents of ambient persuasive display,” in
IEEE 10th Global Conference on Consumer Electronics (GCCE2021),
2021, pp. 37–38.
[14] J. S. Bauer et al., “Shuteye: Encouraging awareness of healthy sleep
recommendations with a mobile, peripheral display,” in Proc. the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
’12),
ACM, 2012, p. 1401–1410.
[15] OMRON, Co., “White paper: Image Sensor for Human Recognition.
Human Vision Components, HVC-P2,” June 2022.
[16] J. J. Lin, L. Mamykina, S. Lindtner, G. Delajoux, and H. B. Strub,
“Fish’n’steps: Encouraging physical activity with an interactive com-
puter game,” in Proc. the 8th International Conference on Ubiquitous
Computing (UbiComp2006),
Springer, 2006, pp. 261–278.
[17] N. Fukushima and S. Inoue, “Association between sedentary behavior
and health outcome,” Zasshi Tokyo Ika Daigaku, Vol. 76, No. 1, pp.
33–37, 2018.
[18] R. M. Ryan, H. Patrick, E. L. Deci, and G. C. Williams, “Facilitating
health behaviour change and its maintenance: Interventions based on
self-determination theory,” Eur. J. Health Psychol., Vol. 10, No. 1, pp.
2–5, 2008.
[19] W.-C. Fang and J. Y.-J. Hsu, “Design concerns of persuasive feedback
system,” in Proc. the 7th AAAI Conference on Visual Representations
and Reasoning (AAAIWS’10-07),
AAAI Press, 2010, pp. 20–25.
[20] R. Orji, J. Vassileva, and R. Mandryk, “Modeling the efficacy of
persuasive strategies for different gamer types in serious games for
health,” User Model. User-Adap. Inter., Vol. 24, pp. 453–498, 2014.
[21] S. Berkovsky, M. Kaptein, and M. Zancanaro, “Adaptivity and person-
alization in persuasive technologies,” in Personalization in Persuasive
Technology Workshop, pp. 13-25, 2016.
[22] J. O. Prochaska, C. C. Diclemente, and J. C. Norcross, “In search of
how people change. applications to addictive behaviors.” Am. Psychol.,
Vol. 47, No. 9, pp. 1102–1114, 1992.
[23] H. Taguchi, “A study on adaptive eco-persuasion strategies based on
the stages of behavioral change,” Master’s thesis, Graduate school of
Engineering, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, 2014.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-992-8
AMBIENT 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

