Expressing the Personality of an Intelligent Room
through Ambient Output Modalities
Jean-Paul Sansonnet and Yacine Bellik
LIMSI-CNRS
BP 133, 91403 Orsay Cedex France
Email: {jps;bellik}@limsi.fr
Abstract—This paper deals with user friendly interfaces in
ambient computing and its applications. In order to build more
friendly ambient systems, some authors have proposed that the
agent controlling the system should be provided with a mental
model and should express personality traits and emotions “as
if it were a person”. Recent research in this domain is mainly
based on the mediation of the ambient system by an animated
virtual character, often endorsing the role of assistant. However,
users can be distracted and side-tracked by such characters and
even feel that they lose the control of the system. We explore
here the feasibility of the direct expression of the emotional
states and personality traits of the mental model of an ambient
agent directly through the speciﬁc output physical modalities.
First, we propose an alternative to the mediated architecture
together with its speciﬁc agent model. Then, through two typical
examples, we show how emotions and traits can be mapped onto
ambient output modalities.
Keywords
—
Personiﬁcation,
Ambient
output
modalities,
Expression of emotions and traits.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In this paper we rely on researchers that have claimed and
showed that there is a usefulness of an intelligent environment
to show psychological features such as emotions and traits.
For example, in their 2005 survey on new technologies for
ambient intelligence [1], Alcaniz and Rey discuss the impact
of the implementation of psychological notions in future
Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI): “The persona of an agent is
the visible presence of the agent from the users perspective”.
The idea that an ambient should be perceived, hence reiﬁed as
a personiﬁed agent, is currently growing. For example, Benyon
has introduced the term ‘personiﬁcation technology’, based on
the notion of anthropomorphism [5].
In such ambient systems, we deal with three main entities:
one or several human users; a physical environment capable of
interacting with users through input/output modalities; a soft-
ware agent controlling the physical environment and managing
its interactions with users, hence called the ambient agent. In
ﬁrst ambient systems, the ambient agent was simply viewed
as a global software controller. However, the need for more
user friendly interface raises the issue of the relationships
between the ambient agent and the users that is a) how the
agent is presented to the users and b) how the users perceive
the ambient agent. Two main strategies are:
— Mediated personiﬁcation: the agent is represented by the
introduction in the environment of a physical entity (a virtual
character or a robot; being anthropomorphic or not) endorsing
the role of the ambient system;
— Direct personiﬁcation: the agent has no explicit physical
presentation. Hence, it must be directly perceived and catego-
rized through the output modalities of the system.
The advantage of mediated personiﬁcation is that users
are prompted to think that there is an intentional entity in
the environment but they can fail to link it to the ambient
agent (e.g., considering it is another kind of user). The direct
personiﬁcation avoids this problem but raises another issue:
how can we transfer the expression of psychological features
of the ambient agent onto output modalities. In this paper, we
explore a model of mapping emotions and personality traits
upon the output modalities provided by an intelligent room.
The outline of the paper is as follows: In Section II,
we present a short review of current research works dealing
with the notion of personiﬁcation. Section III describes our
model for ambient personality, which implements two main
notions: basic emotions and more complex personality traits.
Section IV describes how actual output modalities of an
intelligent room can be exploited to express the personality of
a given ambient agent. Section V present a case-study upon the
direct implementation of two psychological inﬂuence operators
and shows their distinct impact on the execution of four actions
in the ambient system. In Section VI, we open a discussion
upon the propositions of Section IV and we sketch further lines
of research stemming from this work.
II.
RELATED WORKS
A. Mediated personiﬁcation
According to Benyon [4], mediated personiﬁcation tech-
nologies include on-screen avatars, robots and other au-
tonomous systems imbued with character that demonstrate
intelligence and affect, that know their ‘owner’ personally.
Indeed many authors are developing virtual graphical char-
acters that can express human emotions. In the late decade,
Conversational Assistant Agents (CAA) technologies [6] have
produced some interesting results on factors such as entice-
ment, believability, efﬁcient understanding [21]. For example,
in the IROOM project at CNRS [3], a virtual character interacts
with users, as shown in Figure 1. However, Alcaniz and Rey
note that several authors are opposed to agent based interface
solutions and particularly to the personiﬁed type, claiming they
remove user control and are distracting.
Among others, Nuttin et al. [20] have explored various
interactional situations involving a robotic assistant agent for
ambient environments. Note that in the particular case of a
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Fig. 1.
Virtual assistant agent Elsi of the IROOM project. right) Elsi can
explain (using text-to-speech) how ambient devices work through on-screen
help; left) Elsi can ﬁnd, point at and operate physical devices in ambient.
home room, they claim that “The domestic robot in this case,
is a personiﬁcation of the intelligent environment” on the basis
that the robot is able to control the whole ambient, for example
on behalf of users. Hence, the robot is supposed to be perceived
by users both as a physical part of the ambient and also as the
whole ambient. Indeed, it raises issues about users’ cognitive
representation of the ambient.
B. Direct personiﬁcation
The
difﬁculties
with
mediated
personiﬁcation
have
prompted a more direct method. For example, Richard [32]
has proposed an approach to the personiﬁcation of various
kinds of data structures through the metaphor of “Subjectiﬁed
personiﬁcation as design strategy in visual communication”,
that is mainly seeing non human-like objects (e.g., statistical
data) as if they had human characteristics so that ordinary
people can have a personal/immediate perception of them
rather than logical/rational. Recently, a group of researchers
have put forward the notion of Persuasive Feedback Systems
(PFS), in the context of ambient environments. Persuasive
systems aim at enticing people to modify their habits, not
through authority exertion but through enticement and direct
interaction with the system [25]. For example, Ko et al. [17]
developed MugTree, that encourage people to drink water
regularly and to keep a good water-drinking habit. Authors
such as Fang and Hsu have showed in a survey [10] the
positive inﬂuence of factors such as: attention calling (the way
the system presents data meant to call attention to a user);
aesthetic of the system; emotional engagement with the system.
Also, systems have been developed to entice people to reduce
their individual energetic consuming, for example by adding
sparkling colored lights to the power cord of a device [13].
While the usage and the efﬁciency of virtual agents in
order to personify ambient entities is still controversial, authors
agree on the fact that ordinary people placed in an ambient
environment, especially in small spaces, need to establish a
personal and affective relationship (as in Affective Computing
of Picard [23] or Computers As Social Actors of Nass et
al. [19]) with the system as a whole.
III.
A MODEL FOR AMBIENT PERSONALITY
A. Architecture
In this section, we describe the general architecture ded-
icated to the personiﬁcation of an ambient agent. Here we
only sketch its mains elements, focusing on the parts actually
used in the Section IV. As stated above, two main strategies
can used, involving either a mediated or a direct support of
the personiﬁcation of the ambient agent. These strategies are
Knowledge base
Natural language
& gestural manager
Controller of
services/devices
Virtual
character
Ambient
devices
Non Verbal Interaction
System
inputs     outputs
Verbal Interaction
User
Ambient Agent
U
S
A
Knowledge base
Controller of   services/devices
Reasoning
Ambient  devices
System
Input modalities
User
Ambient Agent
U
S
A
Output modalities
Verbal
Verbal
Physical model
Mental model
Physical model
Mental model
Tasks in ambient
Character behaviors
Tasks in ambient
Ambient Behaviors
Reasoning
Fig. 2.
Two main architectures for ambient agent personiﬁcation. The per-
soniﬁcation process is enlightened in gray. Left) Mediated approach involving
a virtual character; Right) Direct approach using ambient devices modalities.
illustrated in Figure 2 in order to facilitate their comparison.
They share three main entities:
U: the User is an ordinary person who desires to use the
ambient system.
S: the System is the physical part of the ambient environment.
A: the Agent is a software tool that endorses a role in a given
ambient situation: helper, butler, partner etc.
In the mediated approach, personiﬁcation is mainly sup-
ported through natural interaction with a virtual character. The
management of the mental model of the ambient agent involves
two speciﬁc modalities: dialog with the character in spoken
language and expression of emotions and personality through
gestural/facial animations of the virtual character. In this
architecture, natural language is distinguished from devices
input/output modalities; together with character animations, it
prompts the user to categorize the character as an entity distinct
from the ambient itself.
In the direct approach, personiﬁcation is mainly supported
through the modalities of the ambient devices. Note that
input/output spoken natural language can be used but it is not
a distinguished modality. The advantage of this architecture is
that users are not distracted or side-tracked by the character.
However, the direct approach raises the challenge of the
feasibility of the expression of the mental model of the ambient
while only using the output modalities of the ambient devices.
In Section IV, we give two typical examples showing how
such a mapping is possible.
B. Contribution of psychology on personality traits
Several theoretical domains pertaining to the personality
of an individual have been developed over years: Freudian
psychoanalysis; taxonomies of personality traits, Maslow and
Rogers’ humanistic psychology, Bandura’s social-cognitive
theory, etc. Among them, taxonomies of personality traits
have been widely used as a ground for studies in affective
computing [26] and cognitive agents [12]. This is the reason
why we will rely on them in this study.
1) The Five Factor Model (FFM): Historically, traits tax-
onomies have been synthesized according to two main ap-
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

TABLE I.
NEO PI-R FACETS FOR THE FFM PERSONALITY DOMAIN.
FFM NEO PI-R
Each facet is deﬁned by a single
traits 30 facets
gloss describing its +pole
Openness
Fantasy
receptivity to the inner world of imagination
Aesthetics
appreciation of art and beauty
Feelings
openness to inner feelings and emotions
Actions
openness to new experiences on a practical level
Ideas
intellectual curiosity
Values
readiness to re-examine own values and those of authority
Conscientiousness
Competence
belief in own self efﬁcacy
Orderliness
personal organization
Dutifulness
emphasis placed on importance of fulﬁlling moral obliga-
tions
Achievement-
striving
need for personal achievement and sense of direction
Self-
discipline
capacity to begin tasks and follow through to completion
despite boredom or distractions
Deliberation
tendency to think things through before acting or speaking
Extraversion
Warmth
interest in and friendliness towards others
Gregariousness preference for the company of others
Assertiveness
social ascendancy and forcefulness of expression
Activity
pace of living
Excitement-
seeking
need for environmental stimulation
Positive-
emotions
tendency to experience positive emotions
Agreability
Trust
belief in the sincerity and good intentions of others
Straight-
forwardness
frankness in expression
Altruism
active concern for the welfare of others
Compliance
response to interpersonal conﬂict
Modesty
tendency to play down own achievements and be humble
Tender-
mindedness
attitude of sympathy for others
Neuroticism
Anxiety
level of free ﬂoating anxiety
Angry-
Hostility
tendency to experience anger and related states such as
frustration and bitterness
Depression
tendency to experience feelings of guilt, sadness, despon-
dency and loneliness
Self-
consciousness
shyness or social anxiety
Impulsiveness
tendency to act on cravings and urges rather than reining
them in and delaying gratiﬁcation
Vulnerability
general susceptibility to stress
proaches: 1) Questionnaires to assess the personality of an
individual (generally, yes/no questions) have been used by by
Eysenck’s Personality Questionnaires (EPQ) [9]; 2) Lexical
resources use glosses of personality adjectives found in dictio-
naries. They have resulted in the FFM taxonomy [11]. When
one is interested in the taxonomy of the psychological phe-
nomena, especially those related to personality traits, FFM is
the most prominent taxonomy in the context of computational
studies [14]. FFM is composed of ﬁve main classes, listed in
the ﬁrst column of Table I).
2) The facets of FFM/NEO PI-R: The FFM taxonomy being
a very generic classiﬁcation, several authors have tried to reﬁne
this taxonomy by dividing its classes into so-called facets [7],
[29], [31]. The number of facets can vary from 16 in [29]
to 30 in the so-called NEO PI-R taxonomy (NEO PI-R stands
for Neuroticism Extraversion Openness Personality Inventory-
Revisited) proposed by Costa and McCrae [7]. In the FFM/NEO
PI-R taxonomy, each facet is bipolar, i.e., associated with a
concept (pole +) and its antonym (pole-). The 30 bipolar facets
of FFM/NEO PI-R are listed in the second column of Table I,
together with their gloss. FFM/NEO PI-R is a long standing
model that provides a very precise facet list, hence we will
rely on it in this study.
TABLE II.
TAXONOMY OF MENTAL STATES.
Arity
Dynamicity
Unary
Binary
Static
Trait ΨT
Role ΨR
Dynamic
Mood Ψm
Affect Ψa
C. Mental model
We only describe the content of the sub part of the
symbolic structure that is associated with the agent psychology.
Moreover, we deﬁne a speciﬁc mind model simple enough to
support the examples presented in section IV. It covers most
signiﬁcant notions discussed in the literature about mental
states modeling [22], with some simpliﬁcations (e.g., we
consider traits and roles are static during a session). This model
distinguishes four types of mental states according to their
dynamicity and to their arity, as shown in Table II.
Each of them is associated to a weight w ∈ [−1, 1],
where [0, 1] denotes the intensity of the concept, [−1, 0] is the
intensity of the antonym of the concept and 0 the “neutral”
position (neither the concept nor its antonym stand).
Traits (ΨT ) correspond to typical personality attributes in
FFM/NEO PI-R, considered as stable during the agent’s lifetime.
Roles (ΨR) represent a static relationship between the agent
and another entity in the ambient (typically the user). We deﬁne
two main categories of roles:
— Authority: the right the agent feels to be directive toward
the user and reciprocally to not accept directive behaviors from
the user This role is often antisymmetric such as: Authority(X,Y)
= -Authority(Y,X) where ‘-’ denotes the antonym relation.
— Familiarity: the right the agent feels to use informal
behaviors towards the user. This role is often symmetric.
Moods (Ψm) represent factors of an agent varying with time
thanks to heuristics and biases, according to previous mental
state of the agent and to the current state of the world. Moods
are dynamic mental states that are often expressed through a
set of simple emotions, as deﬁned by Eckman [8].
Affects (Ψa) in this study, they will denote the dynamic
relationships between the agent and the user. We distinguish
at least three kinds of affects:
— Dominance: the agent feels powerful relatively to the
user. It is often antisymmetric such as: Dominance(X,Y) = -
Dominance(Y,X);
— Cooperation: the agent tends to be nice, caring and helpful
with the user. It is not necessarily symmetric;
— Trust: the agent feels it can rely on the user. It is not
necessarily symmetric.
IV.
MODAL EXPRESSION OF AMBIENT PSYCHOLOGY
A. Assistant agents for ambient environments
In recent work at CNRS, we have implemented Conversa-
tional Assistant Agents in an ambient system [3]. Presently,
in the IROOM project, agent/user interactions are supported by
two main modalities:
— Natural language for control/command and assistance is
based on Speech Recognition (SR) and Text to Speech (TTS).
— Personiﬁcation is based on the display of virtual animated
characters, on various kinds of screens, as illustrated by the
ambient layout, shown in Figure 3.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Fig. 3.
Layout of LIMSI IROOM project.
Our main objective was to provide ambient systems with
assistance capabilities exhibiting two main characteristics:
— Rational assistance is supported by an assistant agent about
the control/command of the system;
— Psychological behavior associated with moods and traits,
is performed by the agent in order to increase two important
interactional factors: acceptability and naturalness.
However, the presence of a virtual agent on screen was
interpreted by most users as the existence of an entity separated
from the ambient system, hence prompting the user’s mental
scheme ⟨User, Ambient, Agent⟩. In this tripartite model, the
agent is not viewed as consubstantial of the ambient system
and this can lead to misunderstandings in user/agent interac-
tion. This is especially serious in a situation where the user
seeks help about the ambient that is already suffering from
cognitive overload.
This is the reason why in this study, we propose a frame-
work capable of prompting a bipartite user’s mental scheme
⟨User, Ambientagent⟩. In this model, the user interacts di-
rectly with the ambient system “as if it were a person”, hence
called the Ambientagent, having the new requirements:
— Natural language in oral mode, becomes a prominent
modality, though it remains globally unchanged;
— Personiﬁcation is no longer supported by a virtual character;
— Rational assistance is unchanged;
— Psychological behavior is no longer expressed through
virtual character modalities, hence it is necessary to ﬁnd
alternative modalities to express moods and traits.
In summary, the feasibility of such a direct mode of
interaction relies on the possibility to express psychological
behaviors in terms of ambient modalities, especially output
modalities. In the following, we will focus upon the expression
of moods and traits.
B. Expression of Ambientagent’s moods
1) Ekman’s basic emotions: As stated in Section III-C,
moods are dynamic mental states that are often expressed
TABLE III.
OUTPUT MODALITIES OF THE IROOM ENVIRONMENT.
Devices
Activities
-
Character display
also used for information display
Text to Speech
Agents’ oral expression
Screens
TV, mural screen, touch PC etc.
Devices
producing an output effect
Air control
fan, heater, cooler*, scent dispenser*
Light control
lamps, electric curtains*
Sound control
music loudspeakers, alarms
Static appliances*
coffee-machine, cooker, fridge etc.
Robots
autonomous moving machines
Atmosphere
main components
Luminance
level, color (hot, cold, red, green. . . )
and dynamics (waves, ﬂash)
Music (backgd)
level and mood (chill, cheer, sad . . . )
Alarm
level, type and dynamics (bip, honk. . . )
Temperature*
level
Scent*
level and theme (spring, gas, sweat. . . )
Devices
force and speciﬁc action
*Not yet implemented.
through emotions, hence we restrict here to the expression
of moods as emotions. Research on human psychology has
developed several models of emotions. Typically, emotional
states refer to Paul Ekman’s six basic emotions [8] (see their
list in Table IV-left) even if other authors, e.g., Frijda, have
proposed more advanced models.
2) Expression of Eckman’s emotions through output modal-
ities: In this case, we consider the output modalities of class
atmosphere as in Table III. We ﬁll one or more features
(level, theme, type, etc.) in order to express Ekman’s emotions.
Table IV reveals two main results:
1. any atmosphere component is used, at least three times;
2. any emotion can rely on several modalities (at least three).
This shows that ambient output modalities can support the
expression of basic emotions. Note that it does not imply that
people would actually perceive and categorize them correctly.
C. Expression of Ambientagent’s personality traits
1) The R&B framework: Previously, we have proposed
a framework, called R&B (for Rational and Behavioral
agents) [27], in order to express personality traits in terms
of their psychological inﬂuences/alterations over the rational
process of an artiﬁcial agent achieving a particular goal γ.
This research is based on the principle of sub determination
of plans: it states that for a goal γ, the planning module of
a rational agent often produces several plans πi ∈ Πγ that
achieve γ. Typically a ‘best’ plan π⋆ is chosen in Πγ by adding
cost functions that rank πi and sort Πγ.
In the R&B framework, plan sub determination is preserved
thus making it possible for Πγ to be submitted to the inﬂuence
of so-called psychological operators ωi ∈ Ω. For example, the
deliberation cycle of BDI agents [24], prompts a set ΩBDI
that can be partitioned into eight main classes: preference
upon goals; preferences upon actions; norms and duty ﬁltering;
scheduling heuristics; modalities of action execution; optional
actions; expectations (hopes, fears); appraisal of results of
actions. (see [27] for a list of 30 operators associated with
trait Conscientiousness).
2) Deﬁnition of a personality: Considering the FFM/NEO
PI-R taxonomy, it is possible to deﬁne the personality P(x)
of a person x as a set of facets, activated in +/- mode. For
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

TABLE IV.
EXPRESSION OF EKMAN’S EMOTIONAL STATES.
Mental states
Luminance
Music
Alarm
Temp.
Scent
Device
None
= neutral
= chill
0
=
0
= unspeciﬁc
Joy
+ hot
+ cheer
0
=
+ spring
+ Robot.move
Sadness
- cold
- sad
0
-
0
- Robot.move
Fear
+ red blink
0
+ danger *
+
+ gaz
+ Robot.hide
Surprise
+ neutral ﬂash
0
+ oops 1
=
0
0 Robot.stop
Anger
+ red
+ harsh
+ rap *
+/-
+ sweat
+ Fan.run
Disgust
- Gloomygreen
0
0
-
0
= unspeciﬁc
0 is none = is neutral + is higher than neutral or none (- is lower). 1 executed once; * denotes repetition.
example, suppose Paul is lazy and easily stressed whereas Lucy
is a hard-worker, trustful and modest. Their personality can be
transcribed in FFM/NEO PI-R facets (see Table I):
P(paul) = {C−selfdiscipline, N+vulnerability}
P(lucy) = {C+selfdiscipline, A+trust, A+modest}.
3) Example of operators of inﬂuence: Each facet in P(x)
activates a set of psychological operators ωi ∈ Ω that inﬂu-
ence plans (and actions in plans) when they are performed
by x. Among operators associated with FFM/NEO PI-R facet
C+selfdiscipline an obvious one is ωhardworker, which is a
hyponym of +pole deﬁnition: “capacity to begin tasks and
follow through to completion despite boredom or distractions”
(Table I) resp. ωlazy is a hyponym of the -pole facet. We have
extensively detailed how facets are linked to psychological
operators in previous works [27] [28], but this discussion is
beyond the scope of the paper.
V.
CASE-STUDY
A. Implementation of inﬂuence operators
Considering the classes deﬁned in Section IV-C1, we
restrict for this example to two kinds of inﬂuences that are
complementary:
1) Plan alteration: the Ambientagent has the capability to
avoid performing an action ai part of a plan π either by
providing the user with a dialogical Rebuke or by substi-
tuting a less-hard-to-perform Alternative action. Respectively,
the Ambientagent can add optional actions. For example:
pleasant actions; cleaning-up etc. (Note that an optional action
must not prevent a plan to achieve its goal).
2) Action manners: the Ambientagent has the capability to
perform an action ai in a Partial manner or in a Slack manner.
Respectively, actions can be executed in an Exceed manner
(make more coffee than asked) or in an Efﬁcient manner (e.g.,
focused, precise, quick).
B. Example: a lazy vs hardworker ambient
As an example, we will contrast the actual behavior of an
agent associated with operators of inﬂuence associated with
the positive pole and respectively the negative pole of facet
Self-discipline of trait Conscientiousness of the FFM/NEO PI-R
taxonomy: operators ωlazy and ωhardworker.
— Table V implements an ambient associated with operator
ωlazy. In column 1, are listed four examples of actions that
can be performed by an ambient agent associated with the
IROOM. For each action, two alterations (Rebuke, Alternative)
and two manners (Partial , Slack) are used. For example, a
“lazy ambient”, when requested to open a room’s curtain, will
react by executing one or several inﬂuences described in Table
TABLE V.
INFLUENCES OF ωlazy UPON FOUR ACTIONS IN AMBIENT.
Ambient Actions
Rebukea
Altern.
Partial
Slack
Open a curtain
too shiny!
lamp on
yes
yes
Play music
.b
.
yes
.
Set timeout
.
post it
.
.
Clean ﬂoor
bag full!
.
yes
yes
battery low
a Rebukes are expressed in spoken modality (abridged here).
b no inﬂuence is applicable.
TABLE VI.
INFLUENCES OF ωhardworker UPON ACTIONS.
Actions
Pleasant
Clean-up
Exceed
Eff.
Open
a
curtain
add comment
on weather
switch
off
lights
open other
curtains
yes
Play
music
choose joyful,
add light...
class CDs
set
sound
very loud
.
Clean a
ﬂoor
add
scent,
music, light...
clean tools
(broom)
clean other
ﬂoors
yes
V: saying “it is too shiny outside!”; propose to switch on a
lamp; just open the curtain just a little and/or slowly.
— Table VI implements ωhardworker, using in this case two
alterations (pleasant, Clean-up) and two manners (Exceed,
Efﬁcient). Hence, when asked to open a curtain, a “hardworker
ambient” will react in a very different way. It will efﬁciently
do: comment on the weather, switch off active lamps, and also
open other curtains.
VI.
DISCUSSION
Table IV reveals two main results: a) any atmosphere
component is used, at least three times b) any emotion can
rely on several modalities (at least three). This shows that
ambient output modalities can support a form of expression
for basic emotions (resp. for personality traits). Indeed, it does
not imply that people would actually perceive the modalities
and moreover, would correctly categorize expressed emotional
states and personality traits. Further experiments with subjects
placed in the IROOM environment are required. For example,
one could experiment how user’s proﬁles (sex, culture, age,
etc.) inﬂuence the perception of ambient emotional states.
In this line, psychologists already have endeavored since
the ’70, a lot of research about the impact of ambient outputs
upon people: Ambient temperature related with aggressive
behavior [2] ; it has also been studied in conjunction with horn
honking [15]. The inﬂuence of ambient odors on creativity,
mood, and perceived health has been investigated by many
authors since Knasko [16]. All these works bring a conver-
gent positive pattern that people effectively perceive ambient
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

physical output modalities and that their behaviors are altered
by them. Hence, we think that there is a case for further
investigating the direct personiﬁcation hypothesis.
Moreover, people do not react uniquely to ambient modal-
ities. This has been successfully addressed by psychologists
working in the ambient context: Ethnic differences [30]; FFM
model-based differences [18], etc. Actually, what people make
of the cues sent by the environment entails a new area of
research.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we have proposed a framework to express the
emotional states and personality traits of an ambient environ-
ment directly through its output modalities, as an alternative
to the mediation of the ambient by a virtual conversational
agent. Our approach is based on three supports: 1) the well-
used models for emotions (Ekman) and traits (FFM/NEO PI-
R); 2) the R&B framework stating how psychological features
can be implemented in terms of inﬂuence operators over the
rational decision making process of artiﬁcial agents; 3) the
experimental ambient environment (IROOM project at CNRS)
providing a set of output modalities. We have shown the
feasibility of the approach through an illustrative example. In
future works, we are going to extend this framework to the
handling of roles and affects and to carry out experiments,
involving subjects in the IROOM, in order to assess to what
extent users perceive the psychological expression of the
Ambientagent.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Alcaniz and B. Rey. New technologies for ambient intelligence. In
G. Riva, F. Vatalaroa, F. Davide, and M. Alcaniz, editors, Ambient Int.,
pages 3–15. IOS Press, 2005.
[2]
C. A. Anderson, K. B. Anderson, N. Dorr, K. M. DeNeve, and
M. Flanagan. Temperature and aggression. Advances in Experimental
Social Psy., 32:63–132, 2000.
[3]
Y. Bellik, I. Rebai, E. Machrouh, Y. Barzaj, C. Jacquet, G. Pruvost,
and J. P. Sansonnet.
Multimodal interaction within ambient envi-
ronments: an exploratory study.
In 12th IFIP TC13 Conference in
Human-Computer Interaction, INTERACT’09, volume 5727, pages 89–
92, Uppsala, Sweden, 2009. LNCS.
[4]
D. Benyon, K. H¨o¨ok, and L. Nigay. Spaces of interaction. In Proceed-
ings of the 2010 ACM-BCS Visions of Computer Science Conference,
ACM-BCS ’10, pages 2:1–2:7. British Computer Society, 2010.
[5]
D. Benyon and O. Mival. Landscaping personiﬁcation technologies:
from interactions to relationships. In CHI ’08 extended abstracts on
Human factors in computing systems, CHI EA ’08, pages 3657–3662,
New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[6]
J. Cassell, J. Sullivan, S. Prevost, and E. Churchill, editors. Embodied
Conversational Agents. MIT Press, 2000.
[7]
P. T. Costa and R. R. McCrae. The NEO PI-R professional manual.
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources, 1992.
[8]
P. Ekman, W. V. Friessen, and P. C. Ellsworth. Emotion in the human
face. Pergamon Press, 1972.
[9]
H. J. Eysenck and S. B. G. Eysenck. Manual of the Eysenck Personality
Questionnaire. London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1975.
[10]
W. C. Fang and J. Y. Hsu. Design concerns of persuasive feedback
system. In Proceeding of the AAAI Workshop on Visual Representations
and Reasoning, july 2010.
[11]
L. R. Goldberg. Language and individual differences: The search for
universal in personality lexicons.
Review of personality and social
psychology, 2:141–165, 1981.
[12]
J. Gratch and S. Marsella.
A domain-independent framework for
modeling emotion. Journal of Cognitive Systems Research, 5(4):269–
306, 2004.
[13]
A. Gustafsson and M. Gyllensw¨ard.
The power-aware cord: energy
awareness through ambient information display. In CHI ’05 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI EA ’05, pages
1423–1426, New York, NY, USA, 2005. ACM.
[14]
O. P. John, R. W. Robins, and L. A. Pervin, editors.
Handbook of
Personality: Theory and Research.
The Guilford Press, 3rd edition,
2008.
[15]
D. T. Kenrick and S. W. MacFarlane. Ambient temperature and horn
honking: A ﬁeld study of the heat/aggression relationship. Environment
and Behavior, 18(2):179–191, 1986.
[16]
S. C. Knasko. Ambient odor’s effect on creativity, mood, and perceived
health. Chemical Senses, Oxford University Press, 17(1):27–35, 1991.
[17]
J. C. Ko, Y. P. Hung, and H. H. Chu.
Mug-tree: a playful mug
to encourage healthy habit of drinking ﬂuid regularly.
In Proc. of
UBICOMP’2007, page 2007, Innsbruck, Austria, 2007.
[18]
M. R. Mehl, S. D. Gosling, and J. W. Pennebaker. Personality in its
natural habitat: Manifestations and implicit folk theories of personality
in daily life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90(5):862–
877, 2006.
[19]
C. Nass, Y. Moon, E. Kim, and B. J. Fogg. Computers are social actors:
A review of current research. In B. Friedman, editor, Moral and Ethical
Issues in HCI, pages 137–162. Cambridge University Press and CSLI
Publications, 1997.
[20]
M. Nuttin, D. Vanhooydonck, E. Demeester, and H. Van Brussel. A
robotic assistant for ambient intelligent meeting rooms.
In Ambient
Intelligence, volume 2875 of LNCS, pages 304–317. Springer, 2003.
[21]
A. Ortiz, C. M. Del Puy, D. Oyarzun, J. J. Yanguas, C. Buiza,
M. Gonzalez, M. Feli, and I. Etxeberria.
Elderly users in ambient
intelligence: does an avatar improve the interaction? In Proceedings of
the 9th conference on User interfaces for all, ERCIM’06, pages 99–114,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer-Verlag.
[22]
A. Ortony. On making believable emotional agents believable. In Robert
Trappl, Paolo Petta, and Sabine Payr, editors, Emotions in humans and
artifacts, pages 189–211. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[23]
R. W. Picard. Affective computing. MIT Press, 2000.
[24]
A. S. Rao and M. P. Georgeff. BDI agents: From theory to practice. In
Proc. First Int. Conference on Multi-agent Systems (ICMAS-95), pages
312–319, 1995.
[25]
W. Reitberger, M. Tscheligi, B. de Ruyter, and P. Markopoulos. Sur-
rounded by ambient persuasion.
In CHI ’08 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI EA ’08, pages 3989–3992,
New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[26]
P. Rizzo, M. V. Veloso, M. Miceli, and A. Cesta. Personality-driven
social behaviors in believable agents. In AAAI Symposium on Socially
Intelligent Agents, pages 109–114, 1997.
[27]
J. P. Sansonnet and F. Bouchet. Expression of behaviors in assistant
agents as inﬂuences on rational execution of plans. In Intelligent Virtual
Agents (IVA 2010), volume 6356 of LNAI, pages 413–419, Philadelphia,
PA, 2010. Springer-Verlag.
[28]
J. P. Sansonnet and F. Bouchet.
Extraction of agent psychological
behaviors from glosses of wordnet personality adjectives. In Proc. of
the 8th European Workshop on Multi-Agent Systems (EUMAS’10), Paris,
France, 2010.
[29]
G. Saucier and F. Ostendorf. Hierarchical subcomponents of the big ﬁve
personality factors: A cross-language replication. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 76(4):613–627, 1999.
[30]
M. Schaller, J. H. Park, and A. Mueller. Fear of the dark: interactive
effects of beliefs about danger and ambient darkness on ethnic stereo-
types. Pers Soc Psychol Bulletin, 29(5):637–49, 2003.
[31]
C. J. Soto and O. P. John. Ten facet scales for the big ﬁve inventory:
Convergence with NEO PI-R facets, self-peer agreement, and discrim-
inant validity. Journal of Research in Personality, 43(1):84–90, 2009.
[32]
R. The.
Subjectiﬁed personiﬁcation as a design strategy in visual
communication. In Master of Science report. School of architecture
and planning, MIT, 2010.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

