Review of User Interfaces for Caregivers
in Ambient Assisted Living
Alena Brennan∗, Keara Barrett∗, Caroline Byrne∗, Gregory M. P. O’Hare† and Ailish Kavanagh∗
∗Department of Computing
Institute of Technology Carlow, Co.Carlow, Ireland
Email: {c00187707, keara.barrett, caroline.byrne, c00206130}@itcarlow.ie
†School of Computer Science
University College Dublin (UCD) Belﬁeld,
Dublin 4, Ireland
Email: gregory.ohare@ucd.ie
Abstract—As the world’s population ages, Ambient Assisted
Living becomes a topic of considerable interest. At present,
multimodal user interfaces in Ambient Assisted Living systems
are an important research area. The contribution of this paper
is to ascertain the needs of caregivers and family members,
pertaining to the activities of daily living information of the
elderly, discuss how these needs are best presented, and analyse
existing user interfaces in Ambient Assisted Living systems based
on the identiﬁed criteria. This paper concludes by highlighting
the scarcity of research in the area of user interfaces and outlining
future work to enrich the design of user interfaces.
Keywords–Ambient Assisted Living; User Interfaces for Care-
givers; Activities of Daily Living.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The world’s population continues to age rapidly as people
live longer. It is predicted that by 2050 the number of people
aged 65 years and over will exceed the younger population for
the ﬁrst time in history [1]. In this context, Ambient Assisted
Living (AAL) extends the time period during which the elderly
can live independently in their homes using Information Tech-
nology and reduces the overall burden on family caregivers.
Numerous AAL projects facilitate independent living for
the elderly. The User Interface (UI) is an integral part of
these projects, as UIs facilitate interaction between the user
and the AAL system. The majority of users’ interaction with
computing systems occurs through a graphical UI [2]. UI
design that addresses the needs of caregivers is critical to
technology acceptance, adoption and consumer satisfaction [3].
UI design requirements are dependent on the type of users
for which the interface is intended. In AAL, several types of
users, or stakeholders, are distinguished [4]:
•
The elderly: people who need assistance to live in-
dependently. They are considered to have the greatest
stake in the success of the AAL vision;
•
The family members and the elderly person’s loved
ones: they act as informal caregivers. The responsibil-
ity for caring for the elderly often falls upon them;
•
Formal medical caregivers: people who are paid to
give care. AAL helps the caregivers to use their limited
resources in a more effective manner.
The needs of the ﬁrst group of stakeholders, the elderly,
have been studied thoroughly. For example, Johnson and Finn
[5] present an extensive study of age-related changes in vision,
motor control, hearing, speech, cognition, and they offer UI
design guidelines. Dodd et al. [2] identify the physical, cogni-
tive, and computer-related issues the elderly experience with
UIs created to assist them and review the existing solutions.
However, UI research is limited for caregivers/family mem-
bers, even though caregiving is regarded as a complex or
even stressful activity and can cause adverse physical and
mental health consequences [6]. Therefore, these technologies
for helping caregivers/family members require more attention,
as they offer a technological aid which may enable them
to concentrate on their unique health needs and achieve a
healthier lifestyle.
This paper will concentrate on caregivers/family members
and their needs in AAL UI design. The contribution of this pa-
per is to review, evaluate, and critique UIs for caregivers/family
members in AAL systems that present summarised Activities
of Daily Living (ADLs) information in an effective way. This
paper is organised as follows. Section II deﬁnes the kind of in-
formation caregivers/family members need for reassurance that
their elderly loved ones are undertaking their daily routines.
Section II further describes how these needs are best presented
in UIs for caregivers in AAL. Section III presents the UIs
in AAL systems that provide assistance to caregivers/family
members of elderly people, and analyses them based on the
criteria described in Section II. The conclusions and future
work are outlined in Section IV.
II.
ADL INFORMATION AND PRESENTATION METHODS
FOR CAREGIVERS OF THE ELDERLY
The ﬁrst subsection will discuss the needs of care-
givers/family members pertaining to the ADL information
that UIs in AAL present. The visual methods which can be
employed to present ADL information will be discussed in
the following subsection.
A. ADL Information for Caregivers/Family Members
ADLs are routine actions that are performed by individuals
every day and are essential for independent life. Correct ADL
measurement is signiﬁcant for the management of healthcare
in aging societies.
1) Sleep: Sleep is vital for overall health at any age. The
elderly who do not acquire good-quality sleep can suffer from
a range of sleep disorders, for example, insomnia and sleep
apnoea. Family members wish to be aware of their loved ones’
quality and quantity of sleep as poor sleeping patterns have
health implications. If an elderly person experiences multiple
consecutive nights of poor sleep, their family members want
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

to be informed, so that they can intervene if necessary [7].
Poor quality sleep reduces mobility, communication, and social
contact with other people. The duration of day sleep, the
length of uninterrupted sleep at night, the number of times,
and for how long the elderly person gets up in the night are
characteristics of the quantity of sleep [8]. To collect sleep
data the following information needs to be logged: time of day
when alarm is set, scheduled wake up time, time of day when
the elderly person goes to bed, sleep duration, sleep efﬁciency,
amount of times alarm is set to snooze function, duration of
snooze periods, and time of day when alarm is deactivated.
2) Medication adherence: A high percentage of elderly
people recently discharged from hospital do not understand the
purpose of their medications. Therefore, the increasing number
of drugs prescribed at hospital discharge is correlated to low
medication adherence or complete non-adherence. It creates
a real problem, especially for the elderly person receiving
multiple drugs to treat a single condition [9]. This highlights
the importance of knowing about medication adherence as
well as the elderly person’s medication list and regime for
caregivers [7]. Caregivers/family members are worried about
health problems aggravated by elderly people forgetting to
take medication, accidentally taking too much, or even taking
someone else’s medication. Medication tracking is difﬁcult if
the elderly person lives alone. There is no perfect solution to
this issue at the moment [10]. Besides accessing adherence
statistics and information about medications taken or missed,
caregivers/family members will beneﬁt from a reﬁll reminder
feature [11].
3) Activity and Physical Exercise: Aging is one of the
risk factors of physical and cognitive decline and physical
activity is an additional effective non-pharmaceutical measure
against aging. The elderly who stay active have reduced risk of
such diseases as ischemic heart disease, stroke and diabetes.
There is no evidence of physical exercise having a negative
impact on cognition [12]. The amount of activity and physical
exercise undertaken by the elderly person is of interest to
caregivers/family members. For example, they want to know
whether the elderly in their care exercise sporadically or on
a regular basis. Some caregivers add that it is important for
them to know certain metrics of physical ability such as
strength and balance [7]. To comprehensively present activity
and physical exercise information, such features as activity
type, its duration, frequency, and intensity need to be logged.
4) Falls: A fall is an emergency situation and a source of
danger to the elderly. Falls are a leading cause of unintentional
injury among adults aged 65 and over. Even ground-level falls
can result in multiple severe injuries. There are additional dan-
gers if the elderly person lives alone. Most caregivers/family
members have to ask the elderly person to carry their mobile
phone around the home. The current technology required to
detect falls invades the privacy of the elderly person (for
example, cameras) while motion sensors may have difﬁculties
detecting falls [8]. A UI fall detection system needs to be able
to register an event, correctly identify whether it is a fall, and
alert the caregivers/family members if necessary.
5) Localisation: Localisation of the elderly is of high
interest to caregivers/family members. They ﬁnd it important
to be aware of the elderly’s location in the home and to be
notiﬁed in case they leave the house unattended to avoid the
issue of wandering. Wandering is a very problematic and dan-
gerous type of behaviour of the elderly, which could aggravate
possible risks of suffering serious injuries as a result of the
disorientation. A series of interviews with family members and
with professional caregivers established that both groups of
stakeholders prefer to be notiﬁed if the elderly person leaves
the home for any reason [10]. Despite the fact that a situation
where an elderly person leaves the house is not an emergency,
compared to a situation where a dangerous fall occurs, it
can still lead to hazardous consequences. Additionally, family
members, even those who have their elderly relatives living
with them in their own homes, expressed an interest in being
aware where their elderly relative was in their home at any
given point in time. The reasoning behind this is the fact that
some areas of the house are not safe (sharp objects in the
kitchen, slippery tile ﬂoors in the bathroom, etc.) [8]. Thus,
information about the elderly’s location, duration of stay, and
time of entering/leaving the location is essential in a UI.
B. ADL Presentation Methods
ADL data collected from multiple sources over long peri-
ods can be a challenge to present efﬁciently. Which types of
presentation convey ADLs in the best way, and how to visu-
alise the relevant information for caregivers/family members,
is still relatively unexplored [13]. The goal of using visual
displays is to reduce the cognitive load of information and
allow users to easily interpret large amounts of data [14].
Modern methods for visually presenting summary statistics in-
clude tables, charts, and graphs. They subsequently divide into
column, bar, and pie charts, to name but a few. These diagrams
are designed to show a considerable amount of information
in a concise way, that allows for quick interpretation and
understanding [15]. All of these methods could be deployed
for presenting ADLs in UIs for caregivers/family members.
Colour carries an important meaning and has an impact on
people’s cognition and behaviour. Red is implicitly associated
with failure and danger [16] and can even undermine perfor-
mance on challenging tasks that require mental manipulation
and ﬂexibility [17]. Yellow is commonly used to indicate
caution (e.g., brake lights). Blue and green are associated with
positive content and are thought to be experienced as relaxing
or cool, encouraging a calm and stable action [18].
Differing fonts have speciﬁc emotional and persuasive as-
pects. In a UI the size and type of font inﬂuences its readability.
14-point fonts are found to be more legible, promote faster
reading and thus are recommended for presenting online text to
users aged 60 years and over. There is no signiﬁcant difference
between the readability of serif (Arial, New Roman) and sans
serif (Verdana, Georgia) fonts [19].
Taking into consideration the fact that many caregivers are
themselves older [20], a UI must be as easy and user-friendly
as possible. Simple ways of delivering ADL information to
caregivers/family members are essential.
1) Sleep: Caregivers/family members need to see a detailed
sleeping proﬁle which includes the average sleep, sleep efﬁ-
ciency, duration, states and events detected overnight. Addi-
tional information such as the number of sleep interruptions,
wake-up time, and bedtime can even be switched to another
display and different colours for day and night time can be used
[21]. Actigraphy is a major assessment tool in sleep research
since it can identify changes over time by recording time in
bed, total sleep time, sleep efﬁciency and detect sleep patterns
associated with speciﬁc sleep disorders [22]. In a UI actigraphy
data can be visualised in multiple ways: data plot, velocity
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

plot, acceleration plot, etc., however a typical display includes
spikes to signify different activity levels over a horizontal axis
which represents a speciﬁc time (e.g., 24 hours or a week).
These activity levels can be highlighted in different colours,
e.g., red to indicate the period when the elderly person is
awake, blue to indicate movement while asleep, green as a
start of a new event (going to bed or getting out of bed).
2) Medication adherence: An alert as a text message to a
mobile phone of a caregiver/family member is a convenient
means for informing them of the elderly person’s medication
adherence or non-adherence [23]. A nonintrusive alternative
to a mobile text message is a UI reminder which does not
have to be ‘pushed’, forcing caregivers/family members to
interrupt their current activity, since missing a medication is
not an emergency situation. Instead the UI can indicate that a
reminder can be retrieved and read when it is convenient, so
that caregivers/family members will be able to defer follow-
up action after receiving such a reminder. Other medication
adherence features in a UI, such as adherence statistics viewing
and taken/missed medication tracking, can be presented as
calendars or timetables with the days highlighted in different
colours depending on the type of event. As timetables are used
for managing scheduled tasks, it would be possible to check
what medication needs to be taken and when it needs to be
taken. Highlighting the missed medication in a different colour
would allow caregivers/family members to track the adherence
statistics. A reﬁll reminder might be another useful feature
[11]. It can be visualised as a pop-up text message similar to
that of a missed medication.
3) Activity and Physical Exercise: Activity and physical
exercise can be presented in several ways in AAL UIs.
Traditionally charts, metaphors, and numbers are the most
popular techniques to visualise physical activity information
[24]. Daily activity can be visualised in the form of a calendar,
which interprets the usual patterns of activity as normal,
requiring minimal attention from caregivers/family members.
If an unusual event occurs, it could be depicted by a different
colour (i.e., red instead of green). For example, Tong et
al. [25] describe examples of activity and physical exercise
visualisation where the data is represented in the form of a
clock dial with a circle representing a time span. Each circle
represents one month of time and each ring within that circle
represents a day. Rings are then divided into 5 minute slots.
If the user is active, the slots corresponding to relevant time
become brighter in colour. If a caregiver/family member points
the mouse over a particular time slot, information on the exact
physical activity undertaken, and the time of that activity, is
displayed.
4) Falls: The primary UI response to a fall should be an
alert to a caregiver/family member. The image-based fall de-
tection system FEARLESS [26] alerts caregivers automatically
and the elderly are not required to take any action. The fall
detection system developed by Wu et al. [27] sends a fall
alarm text which contains fall location URL. By clicking the
URL, caregivers/family members will see a map in a web
browser where the fall location is tagged. However, a text
message might not be enough. A notiﬁcation in the form of an
alarm seems appropriate in this case. There is no doubt that it
has to be intrusive and interrupt the current caregiver’s/family
member’s activity, forcing them to take immediate action
before returning to whatever they were doing. This alarm has to
be actively ‘pushed’ to a caregiver/family member, rather than
simply be made available, so that it is retrieved, or ‘pulled’,
at the recipient’s convenience. Moreover, the alarm has to
continue until it is manually stopped, which ensures that the
caregiver/family member is aware of the fall.
5) Localisation: One needs to distinguish between visu-
alising outdoor and indoor localisation of the elderly. For
outdoor localisation, Faria et al. [28] propose a mobile mon-
itoring system for elderly people. Once the location of the
elderly person is detected, the UI displays a web page and
a caregiver/family member is able to see the corresponding
geographical map, where a red asterisk marks the exact lo-
cation. Indoor positioning should work continuously in real-
time and provide the locations of the elderly person in indoor
areas [29]. To capture and depict this data, the UI has to be
updated on a minute-by-minute basis. One of the options to
present visualisation is a line chart with different colour lines
representing different locations along the X axis, which is
the timeline. Caregivers/family members would be able to see
daily patterns and abnormalities within these daily patterns,
e.g., if the time spent in bed is unusually long, it will be
depicted by a long line in the chart. A pie chart could be
an alternative option to visualise the indoor localisation of the
elderly. Pie chart slices could represent the different locations
of the house, so that caregivers/family members will be aware
how much time per day their elderly loved one spends in each
room.
III.
COMPARISON AND EVALUATION OF UIS FOR
CAREGIVERS
In this section, the UIs for caregivers of the following AAL
systems will be reviewed:
1)
HealthKiosk [30],
2)
An Intelligent System For Assisting Family Care-
givers Of People With Dementia [20],
3)
GiraffPlus [31][32],
4)
A Home Health Monitoring System Designed To
Support Carers In Their Caring Role [33], and
5)
A Monitoring System That Provides Feedback Re-
garding Physical Functioning [34].
Each of these systems is aimed at facilitating the every-
day life of the elderly and their caregivers/family members.
HealthKiosk is designed by IBM Research in China. It is a
family-based healthcare system for health monitoring. It pro-
vides continuous monitoring of patients via a user-friendly in-
terface, and can potentially reduce the effort required from care
professionals. The Intelligent System For Assisting Family
Caregivers Of People With Dementia is designed by Fukuoka
University, Japan. It is an easy-to-run and easy-to-maintain
system that monitors dementia patients, assessing their activ-
ity. It enhances the caregiver’s monitoring ability, memory,
problem solving and mobility. GiraffPlus is a collaboration
between ¨Orebro University, Sweden, Malaga University, Spain,
and Lund University, Sweden. It is a telehealth system which
supports independent living by the elderly, by addressing a
number of issues aiming to enhance their well-being and
extend the period of time for which they can live indepen-
dently. The Home Health Monitoring System is developed by
Distance Lab in Forres, Scotland. It allows people to record,
track, and share their physiological health, mood, and calendar
events. It is intended for use within informal support networks.
The Monitoring System That Provides Feedback Regarding
Physical Functioning is developed by Maastricht University,
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

the Netherlands, and by the Institute Charles Delaunay at the
Universit´e de Technologie de Troyes in France. It provides
feedback to elderly people and to their caregivers/family
members, regarding the elderly person’s physical functioning.
Out of these ﬁve AAL systems, only two have been piloted
and deployed: HealthKiosk at the Peking University People’s
Hospital, China and GiraffPlus in real homes in Sweden, Italy
and Spain. The remaining three are prototypes in various stages
of development.
Figure 1. HealthKiosk [30].
In HealthKiosk UI, blue colour is used as a main back-
ground (Figure 1). The size of the font is big enough to be
convenient to read. It is white against a blue background,
and it changes to blue or black if the background is white.
On the welcome page, the names of the buttons for different
options (settings, blood pressure, blood glucose, community,
and healthy tips) are complemented by symbols, e.g., a heart
symbol for blood pressure. HealthKiosk offers an easy-to-use
UI to interact with the biomedical sensors. The welcome page
provides a summary of the functions in a user-centric and
service-oriented manner. Users can set their personal settings,
take their blood pressure and glucose levels, and browse
healthy tips and community suggestions. To view the blood
pressure visualisation graphic, the user has to set start and end
dates ﬁrst. Blood pressure is presented as a line graph, with
red and blue lines representing systolic and diastolic pressure.
Figure 2. An Intelligent System For Assisting Family Caregivers Of People
With Dementia [20].
The web-based UI of the Intelligent System For Assisting
Family Caregivers (Figure 2) is minimalistic. When set in
the Monitoring mode, it displays a real-time depiction of
user’s room in the upper left corner of the screen. Clear
text on the right states the type of event (e.g., fall) and
the place it occurred. The text in the frame shows the pre-
scheduled actions. The red bar at the top right displays the
level of emergency; the longer the bar, the higher the level
of emergency. Below the visual depiction, there are buttons
to activate audio communication and to deactivate an alarm.
The four buttons at the bottom switch the display window
between the Setting, Monitoring and Review operation modes,
and access the emergency contacts if necessary. Red or orange
text is used for warning or alarm messages, whereas non-alarm
messages are shown in green or black. The UI is designed to
be easy to understand and to operate.
The Intelligent System For Assisting Family Caregivers
provides automatic, unobtrusive 24/7 monitoring, records the
elderly person’s movement, and it monitors sleep as the
sensor network includes a bed sensor. The system allows for
medication reminders. It logs the activity of the elderly person,
and allows caregivers/family members to view the information
for a speciﬁed time interval (hour, day, month and year), in the
form of graphic or raw data (time, place, activity, generated
message). The system is able to detect falls. If a fall occurs,
the UI displays a real-time visual of the event on the screen.
A text describes the level of emergency and where the event
happened. The options for caregivers/family members include
activating audio communication with the elderly person, de-
activating the alarm, and accessing the emergency contacts
if necessary. The system provides monitoring of the elderly
person with dementia in their room or ﬂat. Caregivers/family
members are able to establish real-time visual and audio
communication with the elderly. They can see the frequency or
duration of activities such as leaving the room, approaching the
entrance door, visiting the toilet, or staying in bed for longer
than normal.
Figure 3. Giraffplus [32].
The UI of Giraffplus (Figure 3) has yellow as its dominat-
ing colour and a depiction of a giraffe as its logo. The menu
tabs (Monitor, Reports, People, and House) are in the top left
corner. The size of the font is quite small; the user would need
good eyesight to read the text. The system allows video calls.
A Skype-like interface is used: the caller sees the person they
are calling, at the same time as seeing themselves on the same
screen.
GiraffPlus is able to collect data and analyse long-term
patterns in physiological parameters. Sleep and other activities
in GiraffPlus are visualised using a line graph, where each
activity is represented by different-coloured lines. The green
line indicates sleeping, the orange line indicates the elderly
person is in the bedroom, the light blue line indicates they
are in the bathroom, the light red line indicates they are in
the kitchen, the dark red line indicates the elderly person is
cooking, the dark blue line indicates they are in the living
room, and the yellow line indicates they are watching TV.
Giraffplus does not have a medication reminder system, but
it is able to present long term data that can show health
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

deterioration. The system does monitor daily activities and the
physiological parameters of the elderly person, and it presents
a reliable view of their health status for caregivers/family
members, as well as for the elderly person themselves. It is
also able to detect falls, using its network of home sensors.
If an event is recognised as a fall, the alarm is triggered.
GiraffPlus detects where the elderly person is, whether he or
she is sitting on the couch or lying in bed, using electrical
appliances, opening cupboards or the fridge.
Figure 4. A Home Health Monitoring System Designed To Support Carers
In Their Caring Role [33].
The Home Health Monitoring System is created to support
family members (Figure 4). The UI consists of several pages;
the home page gives an indication of the current mood and
health status of the elderly person via an appropriate colour
(red, amber, green) and a corresponding smiley face. It is also
possible to access the calendar and the settings from the home
page. Besides standard trafﬁc-light coding colours, blue and
grey are used as neutral colours. The buttons and font are
intentionally large to promote quick readability. The system
provides a health summary, which lists vital signs, along with
the current day’s notes. Users are able to enter new readings,
view trends (history) graphs, and to compare graphs, which
will allow the user to track mood and physiological health over
time. The graphs show a week-to-view and plot the average
value per day. The system includes a calendar where users can
enter events by touching the relevant day. The repeat function
can be used for events that happen on a recurring basis such
as medication reminders.
Figure 5. A Monitoring System That Provides Feedback Regarding Physical
Functioning [34].
The UI for the Monitoring System That Provides Feedback
Regarding Physical Functioning (Figure 5) was designed for
a smartphone. The start screen has ﬁve large buttons (Weight,
Balance, Grip Strength, Activity, and Settings). The text is
clearly visible and easy to read. The navigation buttons (Back,
History, Home) are clearly marked with appropriate symbols.
The background colour of the UI is dark grey, and the buttons
are of different colours: green, red, and white.
The UI of the system consists of three layers. The ﬁrst
layer, which is the start screen of the interface, consists of
ﬁve buttons. When users touch one of the buttons, they enter
the second layer, where they receive feedback regarding the
measurement they performed. The History button represents
the third layer, which provides an overview of the last six
balance measurements in the form of a bar chart. The overview
time can be set to 2 weeks, 1 month, 3 months, or 6 months, by
touching the bar above the graph. When changes are positive,
a green background and a smiley face accompany positive
feedback messages. If changes are negative, an orange or
red background is displayed, combined with an explanatory
feedback message.
Out of the ﬁve AAL systems, sleep data is presented
by the UIs of the Intelligent System For Assisting Family
Caregivers, and by Giraffplus. Only the users of the Intelligent
System For Assisting Family Caregivers can set reminders
for taking medication. Giraffplus, the Intelligent System For
Assisting Family Caregivers, and the Monitoring System
That Provides Feedback Regarding Physical Functioning track
physical activity. Physiological parameters are collected and
displayed by the UIs of four systems with the exception of
the Intelligent System For Assisting Family Caregivers. Out
of these four systems, Healthkiosk, Giraffplus, and the Home
Health Monitoring System monitor blood pressure and glucose
levels, while the Monitoring System That Provides Feedback
Regarding Physical Functioning measures weight, balance,
and grip strength. Only the Intelligent System For Assisting
Family Caregivers and Giraffplus recognise falls and alarm
caregivers/family members. They also track the localisation of
the elderly person, moreover, only these two systems are able
to establish video communication between the stakeholders.
TABLE I. ADL UI USABILITY ASSESSMENT.
Sleep
Medic.
Act.
Falls
Loc.
Phys.Data
HealthKiosk [30]
X
Intelligent Sys [20]
X
X
X
X
X
GiraffPlus [31] [32]
X
X
X
X
X
Home Health Sys [33]
X
X
Monitoring System [34]
X
X
As can be seen (Table I), each UI of the evaluated systems
delivers a set of functions. They coincide to a degree, but
hardly include an exhaustive list of features that represents all
the needs of caregivers/family members. Yet many people ﬁnd
themselves in a situation where an elderly relative living alone
requires more and more attention. This forces the caregiver
to look for a compromise, in order to combine their life
(which typically includes working and raising children), and
caregiving. Usually, personal development, hobbies, and social
activities are sacriﬁced ﬁrst of all. There exists an obvious
demand for a UI which could comprehensively present ADLs,
in order to provide a window into the elderly person’s daily
regime. By remotely visualising ADL information to the
caregiver, the UI would provide reassurance that their elderly
loved one is functioning normally, thus relieving the caregiver
of constant worry about the elderly person’s ability to continue
living independently.
IV.
CONCLUSION
As the world’s population inevitably ages, various AAL
systems facilitate the independent living of the elderly. They
offer support to caregivers/family members, and help alleviate
their burden, by presenting some of the elderly person’s ADLs
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

in a UI. This paper evaluates a number of UIs in AAL systems
in order to compare the main features. The evaluation is based
on identiﬁed criteria (sleep, medication adherence, activity and
physical exercise, falls, localisation) and on the overview of
methods that are employed to present ADLs.
It is outlined that the existing UIs meet caregivers’/family
members’ needs partially. Therefore, for their future work,
the authors intend to propose a design of a personalised UI,
speciﬁcally created to cater for their needs. This UI will be able
to track the ADLs of the elderly person, and present them to the
caregiver/family member in a simple but meaningful manner,
so that they can be reassured that the elderly person is setting
about their daily activities.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Monekosso, F. Florez-Revuelta, and P. Remagnino, “Ambient as-
sisted living [guest editors’ introduction],” IEEE Intelligent Systems,
vol. 30, no. 4. IEEE, 2015, pp. 2–6.
[2]
C. Dodd, R. Athauda, and M. T. Adam, “Designing user interfaces for
the elderly: A systematic literature review,” Australasian Conference on
Information Systems, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[3]
A. S. Hwang, K. N. Truong, and A. Mihailidis, “Using participatory
design to determine the needs of informal caregivers for smart home
user interfaces,” in Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare
(PervasiveHealth), 2012 6th International Conference. IEEE, 2012, pp.
41–48.
[4]
M. J. O’Grady, C. Muldoon, M. Dragone, R. Tynan, and G. M. O’Hare,
“Towards evolutionary ambient assisted living systems,” Journal of Am-
bient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, vol. 1, no. 1. Springer,
2010, pp. 15–29.
[5]
J. Johnson and K. Finn, Designing User Interfaces for an Aging
Population: Towards Universal Design.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2017.
[6]
S. Reinhard, B. Given, N. Petlick, and A. Bemis, “Chapter 14: Sup-
porting family caregivers in providing care,” Patient safety and quality:
An evidence-based handbook for nurses. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (US), 2008. http://www. ncbi. nlm.
nih. gov/books/NBK2665 [Retrieved: September, 2018].
[7]
S. S. Williamson, P. N. Gorman, and H. B. Jimison, “A mobile/web app
for long distance caregivers of older adults: functional requirements
and design implications from a user centered design process,” in
AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, vol. 2014. American Medical
Informatics Association, 2014, p. 1960.
[8]
A. L. Zulas, A. S. Crandall, and M. Schmitter-Edgecombe, “Caregiver
needs from elder care assistive smart homes: Children of elder adults
assessment,” in Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society Annual Meeting, vol. 58, no. 1.
SAGE Publications Sage
CA: Los Angeles, CA, 2014, pp. 634–638.
[9]
L. Pasina et al., “Medication non-adherence among elderly patients
newly discharged and receiving polypharmacy,” Drugs & aging, vol. 31,
no. 4. Springer, 2014, pp. 283–289.
[10]
A. L. Zulas and A. S. Crandall, “Assessing professional caregiver needs
in assistive smart homes,” Handbook of Smart Homes, Health Care and
Well-Being. Springer, 2017, pp. 121–131.
[11]
K. Santo et al., “Mobile phone apps to improve medication adherence:
a systematic stepwise process to identify high-quality apps,” JMIR
mHealth and uHealth, vol. 4, no. 4, 2016, pp. 1–10.
[12]
K. F. Felsted, C. Marquez, and D. M. Wischenka, “Beneﬁts of physical
activity on cognitive functioning in older adults,” Annual Review of
Gerontology and Geriatrics, vol. 36, no. 1. Springer, 2016, pp. 103–
122.
[13]
G. Demiris and H. Thompson, “Smart homes and ambient assisted liv-
ing applications: from data to knowledge-empowering or overwhelming
older adults,” IMIA Yearbook, vol. 6, no. 1. Schattauer Publishers, 2011,
pp. 51–57.
[14]
L. Chittaro, “Visualizing information on mobile devices,” Computer,
vol. 39, no. 3. IEEE, 2006, pp. 40–45.
[15]
K. Potter, H. Hagen, A. Kerren, and P. Dannenmann, “Methods for
presenting statistical information: The box plot,” Visualization of large
and unstructured data sets, vol. 4. Citeseer, 2006, pp. 97–106.
[16]
R. Mehta and R. J. Zhu, “Blue or red? exploring the effect of color on
cognitive task performances,” Science, vol. 323, no. 5918. American
Association for the Advancement of Science, 2009, pp. 1226–1229.
[17]
A. J. Elliot, M. A. Maier, A. C. Moller, R. Friedman, and J. Meinhardt,
“Color and psychological functioning: The effect of red on performance
attainment.” Journal of experimental psychology: General, vol. 136, no.
1. American Psychological Association, 2007, p. 154.
[18]
A. J. Elliot and M. A. Maier, “Color psychology: Effects of perceiving
color on psychological functioning in humans,” Annual review of
psychology, vol. 65. Annual Reviews, 2014, pp. 95–120.
[19]
M. Bernard, C. H. Liao, and M. Mills, “The effects of font type and
size on the legibility and reading time of online text by older adults,”
in CHI’01 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems.
ACM, 2001, pp. 175–176.
[20]
V. Moshnyaga et al., “An intelligent system for assisting family care-
givers of dementia people,” in Computational Intelligence in Healthcare
and e-health (CICARE).
IEEE, 2014, pp. 85–89.
[21]
T. Hao, G. Xing, and G. Zhou, “isleep: unobtrusive sleep quality
monitoring using smartphones,” in Proceedings of the 11th ACM
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems.
ACM, 2013,
p. 4.
[22]
A. Sadeh, “The role and validity of actigraphy in sleep medicine: an
update,” Sleep medicine reviews, vol. 15, no. 4. Elsevier, 2011, pp.
259–267.
[23]
J. Thakkar et al., “Mobile telephone text messaging for medication ad-
herence in chronic disease: a meta-analysis,” JAMA internal medicine,
vol. 176, no. 3. American Medical Association, 2016, pp. 340–349.
[24]
C. Fan, J. Forlizzi, and A. K. Dey, “A spark of activity: exploring
informative art as visualization for physical activity,” in Proceedings of
the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing.
ACM, 2012,
pp. 81–84.
[25]
X. Tong, D. Gromala, L. Bartram, F. Rajabiyazdi, and S. Carpendale,
“Evaluating the effectiveness of three physical activity visualization-
show people perform vs. perceive,” IEEE VIS Electronic Proceedings,
2015, pp. 1–4.
[26]
H. Weegh and M. Kampbel, “Acceptance criteria of ambient assistant
living technologies,” Studies of Health Technology and Informatics, vol.
217, 2015, pp. 857–864.
[27]
F. Wu, H. Zhao, Y. Zhao, and H. Zhong, “Development of a
wearable-sensor-based fall detection system,” International journal of
telemedicine and applications, vol. 2015, Hindawi Publishing Corp.,
2015, p. 2.
[28]
S. M. Faria, T. R. Fernandes, and F. S. Perdigoto, “Mobile web server
for elderly people monitoring,” in Consumer Electronics, 2008. ISCE
2008. IEEE International Symposium on.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–4.
[29]
Z. Wang, Z. Yang, and T. Dong, “A review of wearable technologies for
elderly care that can accurately track indoor position, recognize physical
activities and monitor vital signs in real time,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 2.
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 2017, p. 341.
[30]
C. H. Liu, J. Wen, Q. Yu, B. Yang, and W. Wang, “Healthkiosk: A
family-based connected healthcare system for long-term monitoring,” in
Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2011
IEEE Conference.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 241–246.
[31]
S. Coradeschi et al., “Giraffplus: a system for monitoring activities
and physiological parameters and promoting social interaction for
elderly,” in Human-Computer Systems Interaction: Backgrounds and
Applications 3.
Springer, 2014, pp. 261–271.
[32]
S. Coradeschi, A. Cesta et al., “Giraffplus: Combining social interaction
and long term monitoring for promoting independent living,” in Human
system interaction (HSI), 2013 the 6th international conference. IEEE,
2013, pp. 578–585.
[33]
A. Taylor, R. Wilson, and S. Agamanolis, “A home health monitoring
system designed to support carers in their caring role,” in eHealth,
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2009. eTELEMED’09. Interna-
tional Conference.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 194–199.
[34]
J. Vermeulen et al., “User-centered development and testing of a moni-
toring system that provides feedback regarding physical functioning to
elderly people,” Patient preference and adherence, vol. 7. Dove Press,
2013, p. 843.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

