Cross-Device Interaction 
Definition, Taxonomy and Applications 
 
Florian Scharf, Christian Wolters, Michael Herczeg 
Institute for Multimedia and Interactive Systems (IMIS) 
University of Luebeck 
Luebeck, Germany 
{scharf, wolters, herczeg}@imis.uni-luebeck.de 
Jörg Cassens 
Institute for Mathematics and Applied Informatics 
University of Hildesheim 
Hildesheim, Germany 
cassens@cs.uni-hildesheim.de
 
 
Abstract—This 
contribution 
proposes 
a 
definition 
and 
taxonomy of the often used term cross-device interaction. 
Despite of technical progress, systems and interfaces that 
integrate into the environment are still the subject of intensive 
research. We still live in a world where devices reside in the 
foreground and present themselves and their interaction 
capabilities to the user. At the same time, computing devices 
become an integral part of our environment, be it in the form 
of public displays or mobile computers. Furthermore, the 
number of devices a user owns or has access to is increasing. 
Humans interacting consciously with multiple devices can be 
seen as an intermediate stage towards ambient environments 
or ubiquitous computing. The term cross-device interaction 
(XDI) is often used to refer to the underlying interaction 
paradigm in such environments. Unfortunately, the term still 
lacks consistent and concise definitions. This can be a problem 
as different authors use the term XDI with divergent meanings 
within a wide variety of application contexts.  To mitigate this 
problem, we propose a taxonomy and give a user-, space- and 
interaction-centric definition for XDI. Additionally, we make 
use of this taxonomy to classify XDI-scenarios found in the 
literature and the concepts of XDI they exhibit. 
Keywords-human computer interaction; computer interfaces; 
context awareness; collaborative work; ambient computing. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Although we are still far away from the all-embracing 
vision of ubiquitous computing, the future as discussed by 
Weiser [22], Norman [14] and others slowly finds its way 
into the world. However, computers still do not “weave 
themselves into the fabric of everyday life until they are 
indistinguishable from it” [22], but they are getting smaller 
and are potentially hidden within other technologies or 
environments. However, unlike described in the visions, in 
most cases they are still perceived as electronic, computer-
driven devices that need to be configured, networked and 
used in some peculiar way. The actual state we are in has 
been described by Weiser as Phase I of ubiquitous 
computing. It is a phase, which is said to be “unlikely to 
achieve optimal invisibility, but is a start down the radical 
direction, for computer science, away from attention on the 
machine and back on the person and his or her life in the 
world of work, play, and home” [21]. 
Information Appliances as described by Norman [14] 
have been with us for some time now and their number is 
increasing. Today, many people own more than one device. 
Besides traditional computers like desktop PCs or notebooks, 
they use computers for home entertainment, powerful 
smartphones and other mobile devices like tablet PCs as well 
as special-purpose devices like music-players or e-book 
readers. Computer devices even enter their clothes and 
bodies as biomedical or special purpose communication 
devices. As the number of devices grows, so does the need to 
exchange information and mediate interaction between them. 
People increasingly express their frustration about the lack of 
integration between devices and see the need for network 
standardization and connectivity [20]. While some of the 
technical interconnectivity problems have already been 
tackled by different industrial groups like Digital Living 
Network Alliance (DLNA) [3], others are still open. Of 
particular interest are changing patterns of use. 
Computers are used today in more varying contexts than 
ever before, ranging from highly structured work to more ad-
hoc use of independent, simple tools. They are used in work 
settings as well as for leisure activities. Computers are, in 
addition to serving as tools, means of communication and 
interaction. Some of them just emerge as media in the 
strongest sense, bridging into rich application worlds. When 
it comes to information and entertainment usage, the general 
purpose computer in many cases has been replaced or at least 
augmented by specific computing devices. Movies are 
watched and books are read via special computer devices 
like Blue-ray players or e-book readers, or computers act as 
cloud devices for public as well as personal media content. 
If users control more than one computer, they have to 
look into issues of whether and how different devices should 
be and can be connected. This also involves the technical 
realization of high-speed, high-bandwidth interconnections, 
but even more so questions of usage patterns, user 
requirements and user behavior. 
Naturally, different devices have different capabilities. 
Mobile phones for example have computing and storage 
power that exceeds recent personal computers. They are 
often considered as very personal items and are always 
available. Not only are contacts, private photos or calendars 
being stored, but smartphones also give access to a variety of 
services. Moreover, as a result of improved wireless 
interconnectivity, smartphones are often connected to the 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Internet permanently, making them a premier point of access 
to data stored in the cloud or being used as IO-devices to 
interact with other systems. As they can be carried around 
and identified uniquely, they may even serve as tokens 
indicating the location and even the identity of the user. A 
wide variety of location-based services has been suggested 
and many of them have been implemented [8]. The 
underlying assumption is that the location of the user is an 
important part of the user’s context. 
Not only mobile phones but all devices should be able to 
connect to each other as all devices have their advantages 
and disadvantages compared to other devices, e.g., with 
respect to display size and resolution, presentation 
capabilities or input modalities. Cross-device interaction 
(XDI) may help to overcome these obstacles through 
interconnection and seamless integration of different devices 
in a predefined or ad-hoc manner. 
This contribution is structured as follows: first, we will 
discuss our understanding of XDI and the relation of XDI to 
current computing paradigms. From this analysis, we derive 
a definition for XDI and propose a taxonomy to classify 
different XDI scenarios. Then, we relate examples of XDI in 
the literature to this definition and discuss how they fit into 
our understanding of XDI and the taxonomy. 
II. 
CROSS-DEVICE INTERACTION 
In environments where humans interact with multiple 
devices, the term cross-device interaction (XDI) has often 
been used to describe the underlying interaction paradigm 
but without a proper definition. This can be problematic as 
there is no consistency in how the term XDI is used by 
different authors and in varying application contexts. For 
example, it is used to describe different forms of interaction 
with multiple devices [5, 9, 13, 15, 16] or menu navigation 
[24] up to simple synchronization of history between 
multiple devices [1, 18, 19]. Even within the areas of those 
examples, the use of the term differs severely. Therefore, we 
propose a more structured definition of XDI. 
In most cases, when we deal with computers, we are 
quite aware of the devices that we interact with. A common 
approach for interaction is Direct Manipulation, where input 
and output processing meets in a close and consistent 
regulation loop [7, 17]. Gesture-based approaches, e.g., 
interacting in front of public or shared displays [12] or using 
multitouch devices, try to close the gap between input and 
output.  
However, there are certain situations where users can 
take advantage of non-direct interaction, e.g., if output 
devices are spatially separated from users or do not offer 
interfaces between each other, it is hard to interact with them 
at all. Users can get handicapped by devices if they are not 
familiar with the input modalities. Also, handling private 
data can be problematic, if the interaction device is publicly 
accessible. Not all devices are capable of displaying every 
type of media like audio, images, videos, 2D- or 3D-objects 
and thus the information sometimes has to be visualized by 
specialized devices. In all these examples, it can be helpful 
or even necessary to interact with other devices available in 
the spatial context, which are enabled for certain media or 
certain kinds of interaction modalities. These are typical 
situations where XDI is required.  
In the following, we will clarify the term cross-device 
interaction in order to give a better understanding of the 
concept and to prevent misunderstandings. 
A. Devices 
XDI takes place between devices. It is important to 
explain our use of the term in order to be able to limit the 
scope of XDI. Generally, we have three classes of devices: 
input-, output- and mixed-devices. 
 
Input devices take any form of user input in order to pass 
control signals onto application systems for further 
processing or execution. Depending on the device modality, 
there are different subclasses to refer to. We are talking of 
mainly visual, sensor, auditory and haptic input devices. 
Visual input devices consist for example of person-, gesture-, 
or eye-trackers and pointer-based input. Sensor input devices 
also track users, but with a multitude of different sensors, 
despite the mentioned ones. Auditory input devices react to 
auditive input and haptic devices react to grasp or touch 
input, e.g. tangibles or touchscreens. Input devices provide 
the communication interface to computers and act as 
controllers. Here, the actions of a user are passed on to the 
computer, processed in applications and the result is usually 
passed on to output devices. The user either interacts directly 
with the input device itself, e.g., with mouse, keyboard and 
touch-input or from a distance, e.g., with trackers or speech-
input. 
 
Output devices render and present any kind of 
information. The output itself can take place in any form that 
human senses are able to perceive. This ranges from visual to 
haptic or auditory feedback that the user is able to interpret 
and can also be multimodal. Common output devices are 
displays, printers or sound systems but they can also create 
physical movements such as motors or vibrators or distribute 
materials like water [2] or even odors. 
 
Mixed devices incorporate both input as well as output, 
within one device. Combined with processing units, they can 
act as stand-alone devices. Touch-screens, especially 
multitouch tables, smartphones or tablet PCs for example 
belong to the class of mixed devices. Although personal 
computers consist of different input and output hardware like 
mice, keyboards, monitors or sound systems they are often 
perceived as one coherent integrated sensomotorical system 
by their users. 
 
Apart from this classification, devices can be of different 
nature to the user. Here, we especially consider the 
ownership and access of devices. 
 
The ownership of devices will be an important factor for 
XDI settings as it has an impact on the content and the 
collaboration potential of a particular setting. We see three 
basic situations: 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

• Personal: Devices that belong to a specific user and are 
configured and used only by him or her can be seen as 
personal devices. They are potentially carried along and 
can then be used as a unique token to access user specific 
settings and content. Another important aspect of 
personal devices is that owners are usually quite familiar 
with the handling and the specific interaction techniques 
of their device. For this reason it may be beneficial to 
incorporate well handled personal devices in the design 
of interaction scenarios instead of unfamiliar ones. 
 
• Group: If the person belongs to a group or explicitly 
invites others to share the device, we will call them group 
devices, whereas groups may have different meanings, 
e.g., memberships or ad-hoc pairing. 
 
• Open: When devices can be used by anyone who can 
access the space, we will call them open devices. Those 
devices do not have a specific owner. 
 
The access to devices is depending on the location and 
the context in which devices are used within XDI. We 
distinguish between three forms of use of devices: 
 
• Private: If a device is controlled by and displays for 
exactly one person, we will call this private access. This 
person is the only one interacting with them and his or 
her actions and information cannot be observed directly 
by others. 
 
• Public: If a device displays for more than one person, but 
is still controlled by only one person, we speak of public 
access. However, observers other than the owner will not 
be able take direct influence into the actions or to the 
information displayed. 
 
• Shared: The third option includes several people who 
take part in the interaction through a certain device. If at 
least two persons have access to and control the same 
device, we speak of shared access. 
B. Interaction 
The question arises how interaction in XDI scenarios 
differs from other kinds of interaction with multiple devices. 
In order to delimit XDI from other forms of interaction, 
some rules must be provided. We extracted distinctive 
features of scenarios proposed in different research papers. 
Then we examined these features from an HCI perspective 
with regard to the following aspects. How do humans 
interact with devices within each scenario, e.g., whether a 
device is touched or just looked at? What kind of relation do 
devices establish between each other, e.g., input, output, 
distributed interfaces? 
For a typical XDI scenario, we assume that a user 
directly and consciously uses an input device to manipulate 
content on some output device. This stands in contrast to 
systems in ambient environments that may track users and 
get implicit feedback from them. With XDI input and output 
take place on different devices, independent of being mixed 
devices or separated input and output devices.  
When we speak of XDI, we presume that a user 
indirectly interacts with an output device. He or she uses 
input devices within his or her reach in order to control 
output devices. We will not use the term XDI when input 
and output take place on the same device (mixed device). A 
desktop computer system with mouse and display for 
example could be seen as a simple form of XDI, because a 
peripheral input device is used to manipulate a separate 
output device. A tablet PC in contradiction has no periphery 
and utilizes direct manipulation right on the display, which 
also functions as output device. Thus, we only focus on 
scenarios where input and output devices are from a user’s 
perspective separate from each other. 
Within XDI, input is closely connected with output. That 
means that commands executed over an XDI system will 
create an immediate and explicit response and the user is 
able to perceive feedback to the action on the target systems 
without noticeable delay (cf. Direct Manipulation). This does 
not necessarily apply to the output time characteristics of the 
controlled media itself, which can be delayed, e.g., when 
rendering takes longer. 
C.  Crossing and Distance 
Devices and interaction are closely linked with each 
other. The interaction within XDI happens across all kind of 
input, output and mixed devices and not only on some 
specific device itself. This involves devices like tablets, PCs, 
smartphones, TVs, presentation computers or even smart 
items or objects. As our interaction criteria show, XDI is a 
kind of proxemic interaction between devices where users 
are located inside some well-defined or user perceived 
activity space. Within this space, users may connect and use 
devices with different capabilities in order to utilize features 
for varied presentation, handling or manipulation of 
information. The response to input is linked with visible, 
audible or otherwise perceptible output. Therefore, input and 
output devices have to be situated in such a way that the user 
can perceive the results of the action immediately. We do not 
distinguish between rooms, but between activity spaces, e.g., 
because the disposition of devices and furniture inside rooms 
determines activity spaces. It is important to point out the 
interaction and user-centered focus of XDI. Therefore, XDI 
is bound to explicit sensomotoric feedback, e.g., applications 
with feedback on a functional or application level are not in 
the scope of XDI. 
III. 
XDI AND KNOWN COMPUTING PARADIGMS 
Many researchers have been concentrating on computing 
paradigms like ambient computing, ubiquitous computing, 
pervasive computing and cloud computing. Several aspects 
of those paradigms are influencing XDI. In the following, we 
will discuss relations between XDI and these current 
computing paradigms.  
A. Ambient Computing. 
Within ambient computing, the environment observes 
and tracks the users and their actions with the help of sensors 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

and reacts either explicitly but mostly implicitly like 
anticipated by the users (or the developers). As in the vision 
of ubiquitous computing, computers are integrated in the 
environment and reside in the background, even more so, 
they do not show up at all as they are not meant for direct 
interaction. XDI can benefit from ambient computing from 
being more aware of the activities of its users and devices. It 
can be helpful to know about the context of a user, which is 
relevant for information retrieval or to know about his or her 
environment. This allows, for example, that devices in reach 
can be located or information to be linked to previous 
activities. Here again, XDI requires explicit interaction with 
devices and also explicit response of systems. 
B. Ubiquitous Computing. 
The vision of ubiquitous computing, as already 
discussed, includes the omnipresent availability of computers 
that are preferably not distinguishable from everyday objects. 
In conjunction with ubiquitous computing, Weiser talked 
about “calm technology”, where technology resides in the 
periphery, playing a non-dominating role in a user’s life [23]. 
The general availability of devices and computing power is 
important for XDI, but here, the perception of devices plays 
a major role. As outlined before, we are still in Weiser’s 
Phase I of ubiquitous computing, and within our XDI 
settings people consciously use devices that are in their main 
focus in order to control remote devices. 
C. Pervasive Computing. 
Pervasive computing is often used in conjunction with or 
even synonymous for ubiquitous computing, although it is 
not the same. Pervasive computing deals with the 
connectivity and interfacing of participating devices within a 
network. This is basically a technical point of view [10]. 
Pervasive computing provides a technological background of 
seamless network infrastructures, which is important for 
XDI, while XDI itself is concerned about the interaction of 
humans with their devices. 
D. Cloud Computing. 
“Cloud Computing refers to both the applications 
delivered as services over the Internet and the hardware and 
system software in the datacenters that provide those 
services” [4]. Cloud computing provides data consistency 
among different devices and the users gain flexibility as they 
are able to access their data anytime from different locations. 
This also supports unplanned activities, e.g. in ad-hoc 
situations [1]. XDI also benefits from an omnipresent 
availability of data. Handling multiple devices needs access 
and consistency of information distributed among all 
participating devices. What cloud computing does not cover, 
is the interaction of users with multiple devices. XDI has its 
focus on interaction with information, whereas cloud 
computing defines storage, accessibility and data services. 
 
As can be seen, XDI references all of these computing 
paradigms. It can be seen as a method to access information 
and interact with endpoints in each paradigm. Furthermore, 
XDI may be a way to create additional personal interfaces 
for environments that would normally rely on implicit 
interaction only. This could help users to reach a better 
understanding of their surrounding environments. 
IV. 
A TAXONOMY FOR CROSS-DEVICE INTERACTION 
Our research helped to identify important distinguishing 
features that delimit XDI from other forms of interaction 
with multiple devices. In the following, we summarize our 
understanding of XDI as outlined in this paper by presenting 
a definition and a taxonomy for classifying different 
scenarios of XDI. Our definition of XDI is based on this 
proposition of a discriminatory subset of distinguishing 
features as mandatory criteria. 
 
• Direct Interaction with Input Devices: The interaction 
with an input device in order to manipulate content on 
output devices. 
 
• Mediated Interaction: The use of an input device in order 
to control separate output devices. 
 
• Perception of Output Devices: Devices have to be within 
an activity space of a user that connects multiple devices 
within an area of perception. 
 
• Immediate and explicit Feedback: Users get an 
immediate explicit response on their commands and are 
able to see and regulate feedback to the action on the 
target systems without noticeable delay. 
 
Resulting of our research and reflection above, we define 
XDI as follows: 
Cross-device interaction (XDI) is the type of interaction, 
where human users interact with multiple separate input 
and output devices, where input devices will be used to 
manipulate content on output devices within a perceived 
interaction space with immediate and explicit feedback. 
Within this definition, there are various possible scenarios 
of XDI. 
 
Figure 1. Taxonomy for XDI devices 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

To address more detailed characteristics we present a 
first taxonomy that focuses on attributes of devices: 
ownership, access and distance (Figure 1). These attributes 
can be used for further characterization of XDI scenarios. 
V. 
XDI IN THE LITERATURE 
After we defined XDI and provided some further refining 
criteria and parameters in the preceding section, this section 
will present related work in the field of XDI. The term XDI 
has often been used in conjunction with many kinds of 
communicating devices, while the form of interaction has not 
always been stated clearly [6]. Some work also uses the term 
XDI, but is difficult to categorize. We outline some 
approaches that give more detailed information about certain 
XDI approaches within the field of private and public spaces, 
ad-hoc situations, control of multiple devices, task continuity 
and web-history and classify them in terms of our 
understanding of XDI. This serves to test the robustness of 
our definition and clarify the boundary to other concepts. 
A. Case 1 
Schmidt et al. [15] introduce XDI as a solution to several 
problems when using mobiles and multitouch tables. They 
identify some issues in connection with the use of 
multitouch-tables and propose six input attributes for 
interaction as solutions. Thereby, they target the six 
problems concerning data transfer, personalization, user 
interface composition, authentication, localized, private 
feedback and input expressiveness. Their approaches are 
based on the identification of mobile phones, some combined 
with touch-input. Within their scenarios, they fulfill the 
given mandatory criteria for XDI. There are at least two 
devices involved, as the interaction always takes place 
between mobile phones and multitouch tables. The 
interaction of the user and the system feedback are explicit 
and immediate and the user is always in line-of-sight with 
the output device. Their scenarios are good examples for 
XDI within private, public and shared spaces as well as using 
personal and group devices. Personal devices are used as 
secure input devices for public displays. For example, 
passwords can be entered by selecting the password field on 
a multitouch-table with a mobile phone, typing the password 
concealed from others into the designated field on the mobile 
and transferring it back to the multitouch. 
B. Case 2 
A system that utilizes Personal Digital Assistants (PDA) 
to control applications running on other computer systems is 
realized in the Pebbles project by Myers et al. [13]. One of 
the applications implemented within Pebbles is the 
SlideShow Commander. With the SlideShow Commander, 
one can control PowerPoint presentations given with desktop 
or laptop computers from one’s own PDA. One can not only 
move forward and backward in the presentation, but also 
scribble on slides images presented on the PDA, while 
annotations are shown on the presentation for the audience. 
Another interaction opportunity is given by the fact that the 
user can switch between different applications on the 
presentation device from his handheld computer. In 
principle, it is possible to use SlideShow Commander in 
collaborative settings, where different members of the 
audience take turn in controlling the application or share 
annotations. This setting also inherits all mandatory criteria 
for XDI. One device is used to control a presentation 
platform that is nearby and visible to the user, whereas the 
given feedback reacts immediately to the users input. 
C. Case 3 
Among the interesting topics in the field of XDI are ad-
hoc situations. Depending on the situation, XDI can either 
happen within a static environment with fixed devices or ad-
hoc, when people meet coincidentally in unknown 
environments or like to connect personal devices such as 
mobile phones with devices in these environments. Devices 
form new constellations when brought together that 
influence how they are used. Gellersen et al. [5] observe 
situations 
with 
interaction 
across 
devices 
where 
“spontaneous interaction enables users to associate their 
personal devices with devices encountered in their 
environment”. They want to facilitate remote interaction 
with unknown devices, public displays as well as data 
exchange 
between 
mobile 
devices. 
Their 
RELATE 
interaction model supports the discovery of devices and 
services within sight in the near environment and proposes 
the connection of mobiles with those devices. A major topic 
they discuss is the identification and discovery of 
participating devices within the immediate environment of a 
user. In our sense, their work is located in the field of XDI 
insofar as their design supports the use of mobile devices in 
ad-hoc situations in order to control other nearby devices 
with the help of direct manipulation techniques, e.g., pick-
and-drop for transferring objects between computer or 
eSquirt “a point and click technique for metaphorical 
squirting of data from one device onto another”. 
Unfortunately, 
they 
do 
not 
give 
hints 
about 
the 
responsiveness of output devices. 
D. Case 4 
Another example for XDI is discussed by Kimman et al. 
[9]. They discuss a design-study for a remote control, which 
can also be seen as residing within the field of XDI. The 
remote is used to manipulate multiple different output 
devices in order to reduce the number of input devices. They 
use explicit input to control spatially separated devices. This 
is a borderline case in terms of our classification as it is not 
quite clear whether the output devices are within area of 
perception and give immediate feedback. 
E. Case 5 
Approaches where several devices are coupled to present 
one input and output area, as done by Schmitz et al. [16] for 
mobile phones, are difficult to interpret and classify. From a 
technical point of view their system shows a kind of XDI. 
Multiple devices can connect in ad-hoc situations and one 
device can be used to manipulate content seen on another in 
real-time. Seen from an HCI point of view, the intention of 
using multiple devices in order to build one large mixed 
device eliminates the use for XDI as there is only one logical 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

device left to communicate with. If anything, this system has 
to be categorized as a borderline case of XDI. 
F. Case 6 
Yin 
and 
Zhai 
initiate 
an 
instant 
messaging 
communication to display menu choices during phone 
conversations with an interactive voice response (IVR) 
system [24]. Their work is interesting for XDI insofar, as 
they interact directly with a mobile phone to navigate 
through a menu displayed on a remote computer. Their 
interaction also causes immediate and explicit feedback. The 
proposed system is a good example of XDI, although the 
user controls a remote system (IVR). The important aspect 
here is that the feedback is perceivable on a nearby device, 
the user’s PC. 
G. Case 7 
There is also other work that seems to be located in the 
field of XDI, but does not meet our definition. Studies of 
Sohn et al. from Nokia Research [1, 18, 19], for example, 
show research in the field of continuous workspaces or web-
migration. They deal with access to information at different 
locations with different devices. Users are enabled to browse 
web pages with one device and proceed with their work later 
on another device, based on their web-history. While there is 
communication between devices involved, important criteria 
for XDI are missing. The distance between user and output 
device as well as the response time to the user’s interaction 
does not matter in their case. It is possible to use a device 
and pick up the work later at any time, any place on another 
device. Here, devices are not used to control other devices, 
but to synchronize information between them. 
H. Case 8 
Marquardt et al. [11] explore cross-device interaction in a 
setting of co-located users interacting collaboratively across 
handheld devices and using those with wall-mounted 
displays. Their research focuses on interaction techniques 
that leverage the spatial relationship between people that are 
interacting with each other as well as proxemics of devices 
used in their application. The presented interaction 
techniques aim to ease manipulation of digital information 
across nearby federated devices and thereby meet our 
definition of XDI on a general level. There is a slight 
difference in the basic setting that incorporates collaborating 
users. From our point of view, this is not a limitation but 
rather a broader understanding of XDI. At this moment we 
consider scenarios starting on a personal input device, ending 
on another nearby output device, independent of any other 
user at this endpoint. There may be other users and they are 
affecting XDI but only as an influence and not as a 
protagonist in such interaction scenarios. 
 
These eight cases delivered an insight into the broad 
understanding of cross-device interaction that motivated us 
to clarify and refine the term. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
So far, the term cross-device interaction (XDI) has been 
used quite often, but a clear and consistent definition is still 
lacking. In this paper, we have proposed a basic definition 
for XDI. Our taxonomy contributes to delimit the realm of 
XDI by introducing the dimensions of ownership and access. 
Our work furthermore allows classifying or constructing 
different scenarios within this scope in a user- and 
interaction-centered manner. We exemplify our approach by 
examining eight cases of potential XDI use found in the 
literature. We have shown that our taxonomy is widely and 
practically applicable. However, some special cases that 
could not be classified properly have shown that there is still 
potential to further refine the definition and taxonomy. 
In our own work, we make use of this definition to guide 
our investigation of novel ways to make use of the increasing 
availability of computing devices. For example, we have 
developed a system for location-centric access and control of 
presentation systems with the help of personal mobile 
devices. We have furthermore developed an electronic 
whiteboard application for collaborative work in shared 
activity spaces. Work is ongoing of accessing this 
whiteboard with personal mobile devices as well. Last but 
not least, we have introduced frameworks for contextualized 
computer systems as well as media delivery and 
manipulation on a wide range of devices, from personal 
mobile devices to open public displays. We refrained from 
describing these systems in detail since our focus in this 
contribution has been set on the taxonomy and definition. 
In the future, we will further investigate different 
scenarios of use in the context of cross-device interaction. 
We expect our definition to evolve to take both the empirical 
evaluation of our own research systems as well as new 
literature into account. Our hope is that the taxonomy 
proposed will help to clarify the research questions involved 
and to distinguish XDI as a field of research that is distinct, 
but has close connections to other HCI research areas. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Bales, T. Sohn, and V. Setlur, "Planning, Apps, and the 
High-end Smartphone: Exploring the landscape of modern 
cross-device reaccess," Pervasive Computing, 2011, pp. 1–18. 
[2] Bit.Fall: http://sphericalrobots.org/, retrieved: Feb., 2013. 
[3] Digital Living Network Alliance: http://www.dlna.org/, 
retrieved: Aug, 2012. 
[4] A. Fox and R. Griffith. Above the clouds: A Berkeley view of 
cloud computing. University of California, Berkeley, 2009. 
[5] H. Gellersen, et al. "Supporting device discovery and 
spontaneous interaction with spatial references," Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, Jul. 2008, pp. 255–264. 
[6] F. Geyer and H. Reiterer, "A cross-device spatial workspace 
supporting artifact-mediated collaboration in interaction 
design," Proceedings of the 28th of the international 
conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing 
systems - CHI EA, 2010, pp. 3787-3792. 
[7] E. 
Hutchins, 
J. 
Holland, 
and 
D. 
Norman, 
"Direct 
Manipulation Interfaces," User Centered System Design. ed. 
D. Norman and S. Draper, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 
1986, pp. 87–124. 
[8] I. Junglas, "On the usefulness and ease of use of location-
based services: insights into the information system 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

innovator’s dilemma," International Journal of Mobile 
Communications, vol. 5, issue 4, 2007, pp. 389–408. 
[9] F. Kimman, H. Weda, E. van den Hoven, T. de Zeeuw, and S. 
Luitjens, "Spinning in control," Proceedings of the fifth 
international conference on Tangible, embedded, and 
embodied interaction - TEI '11, New York, New York, USA, 
2011, pp. 189-192. 
[10] A. Kofod-Petersen, "A Case-Based Approach to Realising 
Ambient Intelligence among Agents," Norwegian University 
of Science and Technology, 2007. 
[11] N. Marquardt, K. Hinckley, and S. Greenberg, "Cross-device 
interaction via micro-mobility and f-formations," Proceedings 
of the 25th annual ACM symposium on User interface 
software and technology - UIST, 2012, pp. 13-22. 
[12] J. Müller, R. Walter, G. Bailly, M. Nischt, and F. Alt, 
"Looking glass," Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual 
conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI, 
New York, New York, USA, 2012, pp. 297-306. 
[13] B. 
Myers, 
"Using 
handhelds 
and 
PCs 
together," 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 44, issue 11, Nov. 2001, 
pp. 34–41. 
[14] D. Norman, "The Invisible Computer: Why Good Products 
Can Fail, the Personal Computer Is So Complex, and 
Information Appliances Are the Solution," MIT Press, 1998. 
[15] D. Schmidt, J. Seifert, E. Rukzio, and H. Gellersen "A cross-
device 
interaction 
style 
for 
mobiles 
and 
surfaces," 
Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference 
on - DIS, 2012, pp. 318-327. 
[16] A. Schmitz and M. Li, "Ad-Hoc Multi-Displays for Mobile 
Interactive Applications," Eurographics 2010-Areas. vol. 29, 
issue 2, 2010, pp. 45–52. 
[17] B. Shneiderman, "Direct manipulation: A step beyond 
programming languages," ACM SIGSOC Bulletin, vol. 08, 
1981. 
[18] T. Sohn, K. Mori, and V. Setlur, "Enabling cross-device 
interaction with web history," Proceedings of the 28th of the 
international conference extended abstracts on Human factors 
in computing systems - CHI EA, 2010, pp. 3883-3888. 
[19] T. Sohn et al., "Myngle: unifying and filtering web content for 
unplanned access between multiple personal devices," 
Proceedings of the 13th international conference on 
Ubiquitous computing - UbiComp, New York, New York, 
USA, 2011, pp. 257–266. 
[20] C. Sørensen and D. Gibson, "Ubiquitous visions and opaque 
realities: professionals talking about mobile technologies," 
Info. vol. 6, issue 3, 2004, pp. 188–196. 
[21] M. Weiser, "Some computer science issues in ubiquitous 
computing," Communications of the ACM, 1993. 
[22] M. Weiser, "The computer for the 21 st century," ACM 
SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications 
Review. vol. 3, issue 3, Jul. 1991, pp. 3–11. 
[23] M. Weiser and J. Brown, "The coming age of calm 
technology," Xerox PARC, 1996, pp. 1–17. 
[24] M. Yin and S. Zhai, "Dial and see," Proceedings of the 18th 
annual ACM symposium on User interface software and 
technology - UIST, New York, New York, USA, 2005, pp. 
187-190.  
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

