User Privacy in Applications for Well-being and Well-working  
Requirements and approaches for user controlled privacy 
Wouter Bokhove, Bob Hulsebosch 
Novay 
Enschede, The Netherlands 
wouter.bokhove@novay.nl, bob.hulsebosch@novay.nl  
Bas van Schoonhoven, Maya Sappelli 
TNO 
Delft, The Netherlands 
bas.vanschoonhoven@tno.nl, maya.sappelli@tno.nl
Kees Wouters 
Philips Research 
Eindhoven, The Netherlands 
kees.c.b.a.wouters@philips.com  
 
 
Abstract—Well-being applications at work and at home are 
expected to help people to continue contributing to society, the 
marketplace and the economy. To make them adaptive and 
intuitive, and allow them to provide personalized information 
and coaching to the user at the right time requires the 
availability of context information. The use of sensory devices 
for this purpose gives rise to an increased information level 
about users but also poses an increased privacy risk, especially 
when ubiquitous sensors and devices are networked and 
connected to on-line services. This paper describes user-centric 
approaches for protecting the privacy of users when 
applications use sensor data. Moreover, it assesses the 
compliance of these approaches with requirements for user 
controlled privacy and their suitability for well-being and well-
working applications. Based on this assessment a number of 
privacy control approaches have been selected that are suitable 
for well-being and well-working applications.  
Keywords - privacy; context; user-centric; control 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Well-being applications at work and at home assist 
individuals to continue their participation in society. In this 
paper, we advocate that user-centric sensing and reasoning 
techniques improve the efficiency and acceptability of 
applications for physical and mental well-being (mostly in a 
private context) and well-working (in a work context). These 
applications exploit information that describes the current 
context of the user. The availability of up-to-date contextual 
information enables application-developers to develop 
adaptive personalized apps.  
However, this also results in privacy risks. The ubiquity 
of context information, and the relatively easy way of 
sharing this context information, increases the privacy risks 
for users. Data collection and data processing with respect 
for privacy [1] and data protection [2, 3], especially with 
regard to user awareness and control, are essential for 
privacy preservation and ultimately for the acceptance of 
well-being and well-working services. It is, therefore, 
important that the user remains in control of the collection, 
processing and distribution of data that is related to this user. 
In situations where user control is not feasible (e.g., in some 
professional or medical applications where context data is 
required to properly perform a job) users should still be 
informed properly about the way their personal information 
is handled. 
These context-based reasoning systems make it virtually 
impossible for individuals to control access to privacy-
sensitive information. Often, the user may not even know 
about the contextual information that has been sensed or 
inferred about her. In this paper, we argue that software 
frameworks that support context-management must obey two 
design considerations: user control and usability.  
User control means that the user is empowered to decide 
what fragments of context information they consider 
sensitive, and in what situations they are prepared to share it 
with other parties for what purposes and under which 
conditions.  
From the usability perspective, it is required that privacy 
control is user friendly and intuitive so users understand 
what they have specified, and are encouraged to actively use 
these controls instead of relying on default privacy settings.  
Obviously, the trade-off triangle will play an important 
role in these considerations [4]: a balance should be found 
between ease of use, amount of control, and intrusiveness 
towards the user. In many cases, this results in conflicts. 
Privacy control should be considered as a process of 
continuous adaption and conformation of preferences to the 
situational context and social practices. Key elements in this 
dynamic privacy control process are the ability for users to 
gain insight in and control over their current privacy settings 
and to get feedback on the impact of these settings given a 
situational context. These elements are fundamental to 
successful deployment of privacy-preserving well-being and 
well-working applications.  
Improved privacy control and awareness might result in 
modifications of the privacy policies. These modifications 
can be considered as ad-hoc and executed manually by the 
user or automatically by the privacy control system and can 
be considered as part of a single loop learning cycle. As part 
of a so-called second or double loop, awareness could also 
result in a modification of the mindset of the user regarding 
her privacy policy settings, e.g., make them less tight. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

This paper discusses requirements for privacy control in 
context-aware services architectures. In addition, it presents 
the different functionalities needed to facilitate this control. 
The main objective of this control is to assist end-users in 
making decisions regarding privacy-sensitive information 
used by well-being and well-working applications. Although 
the actual privacy settings might be different for each 
application, the requirements for the controls are the same. 
The structure of the paper is as follows. It starts with an 
overview of privacy control requirements followed by an 
inventory of known privacy control approaches is presented. 
Subsequently, each approach is assessed against the 
requirements. Finally, we summarize the outcome of this 
assessment and draw conclusions on the most suitable 
privacy control approaches for well-being and well-working 
applications.  
II. 
PRIVACY CONTROL REQUIREMENTS 
Privacy architectures try to meet the fair information 
practices principles developed since the 1970s [5]. Since 
then, a lot of organizations have come up with privacy 
guidelines, directives, frameworks and/or principles to 
further specify or explain the privacy issues at hand and how 
these should be handled [1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. 
It has been recognized that implementation of privacy 
principles is especially difficult in ubiquitous systems 
involving (large) sensor systems which typically collect a lot 
of context information. Langheinrich [12] has tried to 
develop a comprehensive set of guidelines for designing 
privacy-aware ubiquitous systems based on a number of the 
aforementioned guidelines. Inspired by these privacy 
principles and focussing on user-centric privacy control, 
overview and usability, the following requirements can be 
distinguished. 
A. User-centric privacy control requirements 
1) Users must have privacy control over context 
information. 
Many users don’t mind sharing personal information as 
long as they control how, where, when and with whom 
information is shared [13]. This is not only limited to static 
information like a user’s name, birth date or more dynamic 
information like health records, status updates on social 
networks or the contents of emails, but is also applicable to a 
user’s context. This results in the prime requirement that 
users must have privacy control over their context 
information. 
2) Users must be asked for permission at the time the 
context is requested. 
Users will not be able or willing to configure their 
privacy policies (completely) in advance. When context-
information is requested, the user should be able to give or 
withhold an (informed) consent. Any solution for privacy 
control should thus allow for just-in-time (JIT) context 
requests. By allowing JIT consent requests, privacy policies 
must be applied in real-time. 
This requirement is in direct contradiction with the 
usability requirement of unobtrusiveness (see also C1). A 
solution to reduce the invasiveness of JIT consent requests is 
to let the control system learn from responses and thus 
increasingly develop its privacy policies. 
3) Users must be able to modify and revoke their 
consents. 
When a user gives consent for accessing context-related 
information, the user should be able to revoke or modify this 
consent at any time. If consent is revocable, research [14] 
shows that this can reduce risk perception. In contrast to the 
current practice, where consents are mostly permanent (until 
revoked, if the user is able to find this option), it would be 
better to use access tokens with a limited life span or a 
limited number of uses. 
4) Users must have fine grained privacy control. 
The different attitude towards privacy can also be 
translated to a requirement with respect to the level of 
control that a user wants to exert with respect to privacy 
settings. 
5) Users must be able to define the granularity of the 
context information. 
Besides the level of detail of the privacy control settings, 
also the context information itself can be more or less 
detailed. Users should have control over this granularity. 
With respect to location, users may want to provide their 
exact GPS location or maybe just a (descriptive) derivative: 
home or work, neighborhood or city or region or country. 
Similar granularity levels (Quality of Context) can also be 
defined for other types of context information. This implies 
that the user is able to specify the granularity of the context 
information she is willing to share with a service provider.  
B. Overview requirements 
1) Users must be able to get an overview of all their 
privacy control settings. 
As users might be confronted with context-related 
privacy control issues throughout a long period of time, the 
user should have some way to get an overview of all their 
settings and consents, preferably in a single overview. Such 
an overview must provide insight into the users, applications 
and services that have access to a user’s (aggregated) context 
information (and preferably also into the times and frequency 
this context information is accessed). 
2) Users must be able to get an overview of personal 
data provided to or accessed by a service. 
When users give consent to a service to access some of 
their personal data they may not be aware of the frequency 
this data will be used or the quality of context of the 
information. Therefore, it is required to have the possibility 
of an overview showing what data is used by which specific 
service. A step further would be to get insight in what is 
derived from the collected data by the context information 
consuming and/or aggregating parties. 
C. Usability requirements 
1) Users must not perceive privacy control as annoying 
or interruptive. 
Applications for well-being or well-working may need 
access to several different types of context information at 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

different times and at different frequencies. The user should 
not need to grant or refuse access each and every time access 
is requested as this will make the control over context-related 
privacy settings a full-time job. Each time the user is asked 
to give permission this should be done in a manner which is 
neither interruptive nor annoying to the user. Therefore it 
should be done using a user friendly interface that enables an 
unobtrusive control of the privacy settings. 
2) Users must be able to understand the provided 
privacy controls 
Users must be able to understand what they give consent 
to, or put differently, the consent should be an informed 
consent. Informed consent is one of the requirements of the 
European Directive [2]. Since users have different levels of 
understanding and background knowledge, upholding this 
requirement is far from trivial. 
3) Privacy policies must be personalised. 
Many studies have investigated the attitude of users 
towards privacy issues. It is generally accepted to classify a 
person as being a privacy unconcerned (approximately 25%), 
pragmatist (approx. 50%) or fundamentalist (approx. 25%) 
[15]. Although this classification should not be used as a 
predictor for disclosing location information [16], it is found 
that users have a different attitude towards privacy. 
III. 
PRIVACY CONTROL APPROACHES 
Multiple approaches to privacy control can be found both 
in literature and in the current practice of social networking 
sites. This section describes these approaches. 
A. Quality of Context 
A form of obfuscation of context information is to alter 
its quality [17]. The assumption here is that detailed and 
specific context information is more privacy sensitive. From 
a privacy viewpoint, a user might want to restrict certain 
requesters from accessing very precise information. 
B. Symmetry 
An important approach to maintain privacy in context-
aware environments is the principle of minimal asymmetry, 
which in short states that the ability to obtain information 
should be coupled with the sharing of information between 
the data owner and consumer [18].  
Balancing the amount of information flowing between 
peers is important to maintain the balance in any 
relationship. This is particularly the case for social 
relationships. Social systems often approach the symmetry 
principle by allowing the user to see the status of the other 
users she is connected with. 
C. Lying about yourself 
Adapting data is a method for controlling what 
information that is sent out. A user can plan to lie or adapt 
the data after it is recorded and checked. This method 
reduces the tractability of the user’s actions. Another method 
for lying is by adding fake data to obfuscate the actual 
information. 
D. K-anonymisation / hiding in the crowd 
In essence, the concept of k-anonymity relies on a simple 
protection mechanism: obfuscation. It then measures the 
provided privacy with a single parameter k. The value k 
determines the privacy protection in place: the larger the k is, 
the higher the privacy protection is. The k-anonymity 
scheme for location privacy has become popular, mainly due 
to its simplicity. 
Another method for obfuscation of data is by hiding it in 
the crowd [19, 20]. This is a method based on k-
anonymisation. By adding more or less random data (noise) 
to the signal it becomes more difficult to track down the 
original data. It can be seen as artificially creating other 
persons in the user’s region such that the conditions for k-
anonymity are met automatically.  
E. Anonimysation and pseudonymisation 
Pseudonymity is the ability to prove a consistent identity 
without revealing one's actual name, instead using an alias or 
pseudonym. 
Pseudonymity 
combines 
many 
of 
the 
advantages of both a known identity and anonymity. In 
anonymity, one's identity is unknown, but pseudonymity 
creates a separate, persistent "virtual" identity that cannot be 
linked to a specific person, group or organization. The 
purpose is to render the data record less identifying resulting 
in less customer or patient objections to its use. Data in this 
form is suitable for extensive analytics and processing.  
Anonymity is often used as an underlying building block 
when implementing pseudonymity. In case of anonymity, no 
persistent name is used. It conceals the relationship between 
a particular user and the data about him. User model entries 
can no longer be assigned to a particular user, thus ensuring 
that they will remain secret. As a consequence, an 
anonymous communicating party cannot be remembered. It 
is also known as unlinkable anonymity.  
F. Consent 
Consent is often required by legislation and is part of 
many fair information practices. By asking users for consent 
before 
sharing 
or 
accessing 
personally 
identifying 
information (PII) the user has great control over his privacy. 
In practice, however, most consents are based on ‘take-it-or-
leave-it’ and thus leave little choice and control to the user 
with respect to his or her privacy. Several extensions to the 
‘simple’ user consent questions can be defined, such as the 
option to decide which attributes will be released or the 
option to give only consent for a limited amount of time. 
G. Privacy control layers 
When more control options become available it is likely 
to divide these options into layers where three layers are 
most common. Every layer contains more detailed settings. 
For controlling privacy settings, the top level is roughly 
suitable for users which are unconcerned about their privacy 
while the privacy fundamentalists can use the lowest level to 
configure their settings (almost) on policy level. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

H. Fine-grained control 
Research demonstrates that users have nuanced privacy 
preferences and that providing them with the ability to 
control personal information sharing based on more fine-
grained and expressive privacy controls offers substantial 
benefit over simpler privacy controls. 
There clearly is a need for greater expressiveness in 
privacy mechanisms, which control the conditions under 
which private information is shared on the Web [21]. Any 
increase in allowed expressiveness for privacy mechanisms 
leads to a strict improvement in their efficiency (i.e., the 
ability of individuals to share information without violating 
their privacy constraints), but comes at the cost of user 
friendliness as most privacy preferences will become 
relatively complex privacy. 
I. Grouping 
Grouping attribute, people or service providers can help 
the user defining privacy policies. 
1) Grouping attributes 
The clustering of several personal data attributes for 
which the same privacy policy will hold is a common way 
for current online services to organize consent of users. 
Clustering of attributes offers users a clear overview of 
which attributes will be shared and it provides a fast and easy 
way to give consent. However, in many current services 
users lack the possibility to cluster attributes themselves, or 
to alter the predefined clustering. 
2) Grouping people 
Another way of clustering in privacy settings is to cluster 
people that have access to a particular attribute or several 
attributes. In the EU project PrimeLife [14], the social 
network Clique was developed which was based on this idea 
of clustering. Clustering makes the audience for users who 
see their information more transparent and it allows users to 
keep different parts of their identity separate (for example 
professional and personal life). This type of clustering thus 
allows for audience segregation [22]. Currently several social 
network sites such as Google+ (which named their groups 
‘Circles’), Facebook (at which you can define multiple Lists 
of friends) have incorporated this clustering into their 
privacy settings. 
3) Grouping service providers 
The third way in which privacy settings may be clustered 
is by arranging service providers in groups that may receive 
certain data based on certain characteristics of the service 
provider. A potential issue with this approach is the question 
who is determining in what cluster a service provider fits in.  
J. Removing Policies 
Another privacy control option is to remove existing 
policies. Policies can be rules that the system has learned 
regarding consents the user have given. Kill switches exist 
that revoke all privacy settings at once and can be considered 
to be a batch version of the possibility to remove policies. 
K. Overview 
Awareness starts with having an overview that captures 
the kind of information that is being shared with consuming 
parties (other users or service providers) under what 
conditions. At the moment this sharing information is far too 
scattered. Typically, consent is given once during installation 
of the application and forgotten afterwards. Having an 
overview of all consents given in the past to service 
providers that control certain personal data attributes would 
be an ideal starting point for privacy control. The size and 
complexity of the overview will strongly depend on the 
user’s 
privacy 
attitude: 
unconcerned, 
pragmatic, 
or 
concerned [15]. Overviews could include all given consents, 
which information is available to specific others or when or 
how often a service retrieves specific context information 
and exactly which information is retrieved. The overview 
may lead to an increased user awareness concerning her 
privacy settings and prevention of inadvertent invasions of 
privacy. 
L. Privacy Mirror 
Privacy mirror is a method that makes the user aware of 
what information she is sharing and with whom she is 
sharing it with. It is a method for checking whether your 
privacy controls are working the way you expect them to 
work. 
M. Privacy Quiz 
A privacy quiz can be used to make the user aware of her 
privacy settings. It ensures that the user understands what 
happened to his or her data. The privacy quiz can be 
implemented by asking the user to answer a privacy-related 
question. Depending on the complexity of the privacy 
policies, these questions can be very simple or more 
advanced. Answering the questions should be optional. With 
many policies there are a lot of questions possible that can 
automatically be generated. This is particularly the case if 
context is taken into account in the policy rules. When a user 
answers several questions wrong, she is expected to update 
here privacy settings. 
N. Notifications 
Notifications are part of many privacy regulations and 
fair information policies and play an important role in raising 
and maintaining awareness with the user with respect to his 
or her privacy. The user can be informed of his personal data 
being accessed and used by a service provider in many 
different ways. For example, the user can be notified of each 
of the times a service provider accesses a certain piece of 
privacy information. In some cases, this will probably lead to 
the undesired situation in which the user is constantly being 
notified which will reduce the power of notifications in itself 
and the user intrusiveness is too large. The number of 
notifications can be reduced by notifying a user only when a 
service provider is accessing information in an unusual 
frequency or after a fixed number of times. It could also be 
envisioned that a user is notified only when a service 
provider becomes active after being dormant for some time. 
The opposite is also possible: a user might be notified when 
a service provider has been granted access to personal 
information, but has not actually accessed this information 
for some time. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

O. Making suggestions 
The information gathered from previous behavior 
regarding sharing of information of the user and choices of 
the user made regarding consent can be used to suggest 
privacy settings and specific privacy rules for future 
situations. These suggestions could include a number of 
previously mentioned privacy controls, such as clustering or 
time-based consent.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The many different approaches that were described 
earlier may all help in one way or another in increasing the 
level of awareness of, or control of users over, their personal 
information. However, it is impossible to simply implement 
all of these approaches, as this would result in 
inconsistencies, and may not be necessary to ensure adequate 
privacy protection to start with. To determine which 
approaches are preferred, they are first matched to the 
requirements and then their application for well-being and 
well-working applications is discussed. 
Discussing how the individual approaches relate to each 
of the requirements is not feasible considering the large 
number of combinations that would need to be analyzed and 
discussed. Therefore, as a starting point of the analysis we 
mapped the requirements to the approaches. The result is 
shown in Table I. A ‘+’ indicates that the approach can be 
used to implement a requirement, a ‘−‘ means that it 
conflicts with a requirement, and a ‘0’ means that there is a 
dependency on the actual implementation. Empty cells 
indicate there is no relation between the approach and the 
requirement. 
 
 
TABLE I.  
MAPPING OF PRIVACY CONTROL REQUIREMENTS TO THE DESCRIBED APPROACHES 
Approaches 
Privacy Control Requirements 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
C1 
C2 
C3 
A. Quality of Context 
+ 
+ 
 
+ 
+ 
 
 
0 
+ 
+ 
B. Symmetry 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
+ 
+ 
C. Lying about yourself 
+ 
+ 
 
 
− 
 
 
− 
+ 
0 
 D. K-anonymisation 
+ 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
+ 
− 
+ 
E. Anonymisation and pseudonymisation 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
0 
0 
F. Consent 
+ 
+ 
+ 
0 
 
 
+ 
0 
+ 
 
G. Privacy control layers 
+ 
− 
+ 
- 
 
 
+ 
+ 
0 
+ 
H. Fine-grained control 
+ 
− 
+ 
+ 
 
 
+ 
− 
− 
0 
I. Grouping 
+ 
− 
 
+ 
 
0 
 
+ 
+ 
+ 
J. Removing Policies 
+ 
− 
+ 
 
 
 
+ 
0 
+ 
 
K. Overview 
 
− 
 
 
 
+ 
 
+ 
+ 
 
L. Privacy Mirror 
 
− 
 
 
 
+ 
 
+ 
+ 
+ 
M. Privacy Quiz 
 
− 
 
 
 
+ 
 
− 
+ 
 
N. Notifications 
 
+ 
 
 
 
+ 
 
− 
+ 
+ 
O. Making suggestions 
+ 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
− 
+ 
+ 
 
 
 
Based on the mapping presented in this table, several 
observations can be made. A number of approaches appear 
especially suitable for giving the user control. Asking 
consent to the user before sharing or processing his personal 
data implies that the user has control, and can control the 
handling of his personal data so that it matches his personal 
preferences. Most approaches that give the user control also 
allow a certain level of personalized control. Good examples 
that also provide the user with fine-grained control and fill-in 
a number of other requirements are: Quality of Context, 
Privacy Control Layers, or grouping of attributes, people, 
and service providers. More direct forms of control can for 
example be implemented using a Kill switch. 
Providing the user with a good overview is essential, 
because consent can only be meaningfully given when it is 
informed consent. 
User friendliness is an essential issue here, as some 
awareness approaches do not fit this requirement. This leaves 
approaches such as giving an Overview, or using a Privacy 
Mirror or Privacy Quiz. 
The well-being and well-working applications aim at 
increasing physical and mental well-being of users. The 
unobtrusive nature of these applications that consume 
detailed privacy sensitive information to enhance service 
experience and effectiveness motivates the need for intuitive 
approaches able to cope with the high dynamic nature of 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

situational changes. The approaches are therefore divided 
into three categories depending on how they are suitable for 
this application domain.  
A. Preferred approaches 
Several approaches are very suitable for this application 
domain. 
Quality of context is a very relevant tool, as information 
needs only to be as precise as required by an application, and 
no more. For example, if a person’s heart is being monitored 
using ECG (ElectroCardioGram), it may be not be necessary 
to transmit and process the detailed (and more revealing) 
ECG data. Instead, a derived current heart rate may be 
sufficient. 
Consent is legally and ethically a strong requirement and 
an essential precondition for the user to be in control. The 
way in which the user can give consent is important, 
however. For this, the use of other (more specific) privacy 
approaches is necessary. 
Grouping attributes, people and service providers is 
especially relevant for well-being and well-working 
applications. Using (configurable) clusters of attributes, and 
service providers with which to share personal information, 
provides a level of control that may offer a suitable 
implementation of the “control” approach. A balance will 
have to be found, however, in the level of detail in which 
grouping takes place. Also, grouping has to be done before 
the actual processing is done, putting some limits on its use. 
Privacy control layers are a way to allow users with 
different privacy attitudes to translate their personal privacy 
concerns in a convenient way. As users of well-being and 
well-working applications will have a diverse attitude and 
including context in privacy preferences may lead to 
complex, fine-grained control requirements, privacy control 
layers will be needed.  
Overview is important for users to get an awareness on 
how their personal information is being processed. 
Moreover, for consent to be meaningful it needs to be 
informed consent, so the user must have an understanding of 
what information is shared with whom. 
Notifications may be used to maintain awareness of what 
is happening with the user’s personal information and is a 
suitable tool for use in well-being and well-working 
applications. It may also provide a way to give the user just-
in-time control. Of course care must be taken not to “spam” 
the user with notifications that are not relevant. 
B. Conditional approaches 
Some approaches are suitable only in specific situations 
or when specific conditions have been met. 
Symmetry is a principle which is mainly relevant in 
sharing information with one’s peers. So this may only be 
useful for some specific well-being and well-working 
applications, even though it is largely compatible with the 
requirements. 
Anonymisation and pseudonymisation are powerful tools 
but may be difficult to successfully implement in some 
applications because of the kind of data that may be 
monitored. Essential data items in a well-being and well-
working application include many potentially identifying 
features, such as age, gender, weight, health status, etcetera. 
Fine-grained control can be useful for well-being and 
well-working applications as the number of options, 
especially when a large number of context sources is being 
used, will be quite high. Fine-grained control allows for the 
users of these applications to accurately control their privacy. 
Fine-grained control requires Privacy Control Layers for 
usability reasons. 
Removing policies and a kill switch may be useful for 
providing the user with a high level of control in well-being 
and well-working applications, but depends largely on how 
this is implemented. As many well-being monitoring 
applications may depend on the long-term availability of data 
to discover trends, these may not be suitable control tools for 
some applications. 
A privacy mirror is a potentially very usable tool for 
increasing user awareness, but this depends strongly on how 
it is implemented. Also, some personal information related to 
psychological or mental well-being may not be in a format 
that gives much insight in what is actually being shared (e.g. 
detailed sensor information). 
Making suggestions is an approach that can be used to 
support users in making decisions on their privacy 
“policies”. Although this fits with the well-being and well-
working applications that aim at supporting the user in 
similar ways for other ends, it requires a large amount of 
privacy control settings (particular consents) before 
becoming useful. Making suggestions can be then used to 
optimize and to make privacy control more user-friendly. 
Ask, but don’t tell can be useful for users whose well-
being is constantly being monitored as this approach allows 
them to get off the grid temporarily and thus allows the user 
to protect his or her privacy in a simple way. As medical or 
life-style advice is based on the observed information 
applying this tool frequently could have an adverse effect. 
C. Unsuitable approaches 
Some approaches are generally not useful or difficult to 
implement in the well-being and well-working domain. We 
discuss these below. 
Lying about yourself as a privacy approach in a well-
being of well-working application environment may have 
very undesirable effects, as the quality of guidance provided 
by well-being and well-working applications depend on 
accurate information. Acting after medical or life-style 
advice based on incorrect information may have detrimental 
effects.  
k-anonymisation depends on hiding the user’s personal 
information in a large number of other user’s personal 
information. However, as the well-being and well-working 
applications depend on providing specific users with 
feedback based on their specific personal information, this is 
not a useful technique for such applications. This is also true 
for hiding in the crowd, for the same reason. 
Confronting the user with a privacy quiz is intrusive, and 
therefore useful only in specific circumstances, for example 
for privacy settings that are very important. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented a number of privacy control 
approaches 
which 
are 
mapped 
to 
privacy 
control 
requirements. Also, the suitability for well-being and well-
working applications is discussed. Based on this analysis it 
has become clear that controlling one’s privacy with respect 
to context information, while finding the proper balance 
between being easy to understand for the end-user, being 
fine-grained and being unobtrusive, is not an easy task. 
The logical next step would be to find out if it is possible 
to use the context of the user to automatically make decisions 
about sharing his or her context information, i.e. determine 
the ‘context-awarability’ of the various privacy control 
approaches. If this can be done, this will result in more user-
friendly and adaptive solutions (e.g., the user will not be 
asked for consent while in an important meeting or while 
sleeping). Context-aware adaptive privacy might exploit the 
ability to sense and use contextual information to augment or 
replace traditional user privacy control mechanisms by 
making them more flexible, intuitive and less intrusive. 
Moreover, we also intend to determine which sensors will be 
best suitable for this purpose thereby taking into account the 
quality of the provided sensor information, reliability and its 
dynamicity. This is currently work in progress and will lead 
to the development and user-evaluation of well-being and 
well-working applications that takes into account several 
privacy control approaches that are context aware.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This publication was supported by the Dutch national 
program COMMIT (project P7 SWELL). We thank the 
SWELL members Linda Kool, Saskia Koldijk, Maarten 
Wegdam, 
and 
Wessel 
Kraaij 
for 
the 
inspirational 
discussions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] “OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and 
Transborder Flows of Personal Data”, 2002. 
[2] “Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with 
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data”, EU, 1995. 
[3] “Directive 2002/58/EC concerning the processing of personal 
data and the protection of privacy in the electronic 
communications sector”, EU, 2002. 
[4] M. Wegdam and D.-J. Plas, “Empowering users to control 
their privacy in context-aware systems through interactive 
consent”, Technical Report TR-CTIT-08-66, Centre for 
Telematics and Information Technology University of 
Twente, Enschede, 2008. 
[5] R. Gellman, Fair Information Practices: a Basic History, April 
25, 2012. 
[6] Federal Trade Commision, “Privacy Online: Fair Information 
Practices in the Electronic Marketplace, a report to Congress”, 
2000. 
[7] K. Cameron’Identity Weblog (www.identityblog.com), “The Laws 
of Identity”, 2005. 
[8] NIST, “Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information 
Systems and Organizations”, NIST Special Publication 800-
53, Draft Appendix J, 2011. 
[9] AICPA/CICA, “Generally Accepted Privacy Principles 
(GAAP)”, 2009. 
[10] “APEC Privacy Framework”, 2004. 
[11] U.S. Department of Commerce, “Safe Harbor Privacy 
Principles”, 2000. 
[12] H. Langheinrich, “Privacy by Design – Principles of Privacy-
Aware Ubiquitous Systems”, Proceedings of the 3rd 
international conference on Ubiquitous Computing, pp.273-
291, September 30-October 2, 2001. 
[13] B. Schneier, “Google and Facebook’s Privacy Illusion”, 2010. 
[14] EU, PrimeLife project, see: http://www.primelife.eu 
[15] P. Kumaraguru and L.F. Cranor., “Privacy Indexes: A Survey 
of Westin’s Studies”, Institute for Software Research 
International, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon 
University, Pittsburgh, PA, TR CMU-ISRI-5-138, 2005. 
[16] S. Consolvo, I. Smith, T. Mathews and A. LaMarca, 
“Location Disclosure to Social Relations: Why, When, & 
What People Want to Share”, in CHI '05: Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human factors in Computing 
Systems, New York, NY, 2005. 
[17] K. Sheikh, M. Wegdam and M. van Sinderen, “Quality-of-
Context and its use for Protecting Privacy in Context Aware 
Systems”, Journal of Software, Volume 3:83–93, 2008. 
[18] A. Kofod-Petersen, E. Klæboe, J. Jervidalo, K. Aaltvedt, M. 
Romnes and T.M. Nyhus, ”Implementing privacy as 
symmetry in location-aware systems”, Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Combining Context with Trust, 
Privacy and Security (CAT 2008), volume 371, pp. 1–10, 
Trondheim, Norway, 2008. 
[19] F. Bustamente and L. Amaral, “Software Improves P2P 
Privacy By Hiding In The Crowd”, 2009. 
[20] F. Li, J. Sun, S. Papadimitriou, G.A. Mihaila and I. Stanoi, 
“Hiding in the Crowd: Privacy Preservation on Evolving 
Streams through Correlation Tracking”, ICDE, 2007. 
[21] M. Benisch, P.G. Kelley, N. Sadeh, T. Sandholm, L.F. 
Cranor, P.H. Drielsma and J. Tsai “The Impact of 
Expressiveness on the Effectiveness of Privacy Mechanisms 
for Location Sharing”, CMU-ISR-08-141, 2008. 
[22] E. Goffman, “The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life”, 
New York: Anchor, Doubleday, 1959. 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

