Ambient Traffic Services Based on the Use of  
Agile Warning and Notification System Radio-Help 
Jan Skrbek, David Kubat, Tomas Zizka, Jiri Kviz, Klara Antlova 
Department of Informatics 
Faculty of Economics, Technical University of Liberec 
Voroněžská 13, Liberec, Czech Republic 
jan.skrbek@tul.cz, david.kubat@tul.cz, tomas.zizka@tul.cz, jiri.kviz@email.cz, klara.antlova@tul.cz 
 
 
Abstract - The paper describes an efficient way on how to 
reduce the number of car accidents caused by collision with 
damaged vehicles. It aims at assessing the current situation 
and to identify weaknesses and influence of planned or 
proposed solutions.  The agile “System for Automated 
Forewarning of Vehicle Crashes” is introduced. The input data 
are collected from eCall system. Distribution of warning 
information is provided through Radio-Help broadcasting that 
ensured distribution of warning messages to drivers arriving to 
the place of an accident. With respect to the existing warning 
systems and its weaknesses, the ambient traffic warning service 
would allow us to get proper information on time during any 
kind of road problems. 
Keywords-agile; eCall; crashes; warning; information; 
Radio-Help 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
One of major problems of the contemporary world is a 
steady increase in numbers of vehicles and the associated 
increased load of roads and motorways. Large society of car 
drivers demands such kind of ambient traffic services that 
could efficiently reduce the risk of serious traffic accidents. 
Among most common causes of serious traffic accidents 
associated with injuries and in adverse event with deaths of 
their participants are accidents caused by collision with 
damaged 
vehicles. 
Timely 
distribution 
of 
relevant 
information is a key to reduce the number of traffic accidents 
and economic and human losses in such situations. 
Unfortunately existing warning systems are not capable to 
cover such requirements.  
As a case study model a recent event was used. On 
November 5th, 2011, around 6 p.m., a huge crash involving 
34 vehicles on a highway in Southwestern England killed at 
least seven people and injured 51 [3]. The crash involved 
explosions, and cars and tractor trailers burning "literally to 
the ground." Police expected the death toll to rise and they 
feared they may find more bodies in the wreckage. It was not 
immediately clear what caused the collision on the M5 
highway, but police said foggy conditions and wet road 
surfaces were partly to blame. The affected section of the 
busy highway was closed in both directions as police 
removed all vehicles for forensic examination.  
Chain car crashes are a typical example of situations with 
high 
demand 
for 
crisis 
communication. 
Crisis 
communication can be broadly defined as the collection, 
processing, and dissemination of information required to 
address a crisis situation [2][11]. Let us consider these 
situations as our case study model and compare their real 
progress with the one that would have happened if eCall and 
Radio-Help systems were implemented. 
Currently, the information about a traffic accident is 
reported verbally to the emergency operations centres via 
mobile phones, either by those involved in accidents or their 
witnesses (Fig.1). However, this is associated with problems 
when attempting to explain the given situation and 
determining adequate intervention (the exact position and 
direction of the vehicle, the scope of damage, elimination of 
repeated reports of the same accident, etc.). The speed of 
intervention is a key factor for its success, whereby any 
possible delays influence negatively the outcome of the 
entire rescue operation and the health status of injured 
persons. 
Currently, there are several projects [1][4][10] in various 
stages of development aiming to solve the current traffic 
problems in order to reduce damage to property and to 
protect health and lives of road users. The core of many of 
them is geographical positioning of traffic accidents. This 
data can be used for warning and noticing drivers prior the 
place of traffic accident. 
Next section brings information of current solutions and 
identifies its weaknesses. Section III provides information 
related to proposed solution. Last section brings conclusion 
and our plan for future work. 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF SELECTED TELEMATICS SYSTEMS 
A. Variable information boards 
In Czech Republic, information displayed on the boards 
on motorways is received from the Unified Traffic 
Information System, a joint project of the Ministry of 
Transport, Directorate of Roads and Highways and several 
other bodies and organizations. 
Currently, there are about one hundred of these variable 
information boards installed on motorways in the Czech 
Republic, representing coverage of approximately one board 
per 20 kilometers of a highway or a motorway [5]. There are 
either no or very few smart boards on other roads and streets. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

For example, in extreme traffic conditions during a 
normal working day an average number of 1,400 cars per 
hour passes the 96 kilometers of the D1 motorway. Delayed 
distribution of information in a matter of minutes, which is 
caused by time required for the processing and publishing of 
this information, brings danger for many motorists who can 
never receive information about the event in front of them 
via the variable information boards. 
 
Figure 1.  Transmission and acquisition of information in the event of an accident (Source: Authors) 
B. RDS-TMC 
RDS-TMC (Radio Data System - Traffic Message 
Channel) is a service that provides the drivers with traffic 
and travel information before and during their journey. This 
service integrates all relevant information and gives the 
driver a possibility to optimise the journey. The aim of the 
RDS-TMC is to provide traffic information within the FM 
broadcast band using RDS technology. Information is coded 
using an independent ALERT-C protocol and later on 
transmitted to the users as a silent part of FM broadcasting 
and further processed by the navigation device. According to 
national and international studies the main system benefits 
encompass significant improvement in traffic continuity and 
lower environmental impacts. 
The disadvantage of this system is that a warning symbol 
appears in case a traffic problem occurs anywhere on the 
preselected route. For more information, the driver must 
manipulate the navigation device, which requires his 
attention. In addition, if there are further problems occurring 
on the given route, the warning icon remains unchanged 
despite the possibility that this newer traffic incident may 
have occurred in a location which is even closer in route than 
the originally reported traffic problem. 
C. eCall (Emergency Call System) 
Project co-funded by the European Union aims to create 
a system that enables automated reporting on accidents to the 
European-wide emergency line 112, including accurate 
information about its location. When the eCall device 
installed in a car detects an accident by means of sensors, it 
automatically sends a message to the nearest emergency 
centre, indicating the exact geographical location of the 
accident as well as other data. This system can be activated 
either manually by pressing a button on the dashboard by the 
vehicle passengers or automatically by the vehicle sensors 
triggered during an accident.  After the system is activated, a 
connection with the nearest emergency call centre (PSAP) is 
established transmitting both sound and data flows. The 
sound 
connection 
enables 
vehicle 
passengers 
to 
communicate with professionally trained call operators while 
at the same time data channels are used to transmit data 
messages (MSD) to these same operators. Each message 
contains 43 details about the accident; such as time, exact 
location, car identification, eCall system status (whether the 
eCall was activated manually or automatically) and 
information about possible service providers. Based on this 
information, the operator will liaise with the integrated 
emergency services to direct them to the exact accident 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

location, as well as provide them with an exact description of 
the accident’s severity and the number of injured [12].  
Manual use of the system can be useful when we witness 
a traffic accident [4]. eCall systems should be installed in all 
new cars, at the latest, by 2015 and possibly also installed in 
older cars. 
Although this system brings a clear improvement of the 
current situation in terms of saving lives and providing quick 
health care during accidents, it does not provide a solution 
for distributing information about the accident to the drivers 
approaching the place of accident, i.e., who are potentially in 
danger. When using existing information channels, the 
acquired accident data could be made available in some 5-10 
minutes via motorway information boards, RDS-TMC 
messaging and radio travel news. However, each of these 
distribution channels has specific limitations and based on 
current traffic density, the above-mentioned reporting times 
are clearly insufficient. 
D. Smart Road Restraint Systems 
The project aims - in addition to addressing timely 
reporting of accidents – at eliminating loss of life and 
property through timely preventive distribution of warning 
information. The proposed system obtains information about 
the current situation using existing visual and sensory 
infrastructures (highway camera system, radar system and 
weather condition monitors) and distribute such information 
to drivers. It also seeks to find opportunities for new 
materials to decrease safety hazards (such as better energy 
absorption through deformation zones of transport). This 
project is one of three priorities of the EU on the issue of 
transport in 2020 and is also co-financed from EU funds 
[10].  
III. 
AGILE SYSTEM FOR AUTOMATED FOREWARNING OF 
VEHICLE CRASHES 
Agile approach is based on new practices and techniques 
that make product development more cyclical and 
incremental. It relies on lean governance (management) as 
opposed to more traditional techniques that rely on 
heavyweight governance. Agility is also about empowering 
the team and getting closer to what the customer wants. In 
place of rigorous upfront planning and the phase-based 
process, it offers a dynamic, iterative build-and-test cycle, 
where a change is handled well. One of Agile’s hallmark 
features is that it drives the decision-making process lower in 
an organization, making that organization more responsive 
and adaptive. 
For better and particularly early distribution of warning 
information, a system called “System for Automated 
Forewarning of Vehicle Crashes” (the System), which has a 
data connection to the receiver systems-vehicle emergency 
call (e.g., eCall) could efficiently help. The principle consists 
in full automation of generation and transmission of all 
relevant information about the accident to vehicles moving in 
its vicinity. The process of warning is initiated by the 
crashed vehicle, which generates data about the accident 
using eCall immediately after the collision happens together 
with the exact location of the accident. Information is 
received by the central office of the System which 
immediately generates data and/or voice information about 
the incident, including the positional code of the accident. 
Data are immediately broadcasted via radio session to car 
receivers [1]. 
System receivers (mobile phones, car radios, navigation 
devices) must be equipped with GPS receiver and a 
positional code comparator of an accident positional data 
generated by the positioning system receiver. If the 
comparator evaluates that the position code of an accident 
coincides with the position code of the receiver and vehicle 
movement will be evaluated as being directed to the scene of 
the accident, it will be forced to activate the data reception 
and/or voice session. In practice, we may be able to 
automatically inform road users according to their current 
position and direction of the danger which is coming, almost 
immediately. The system is functional and usable for any 
kind of road or street, thus, not only on highways and 
motorways. 
The System uses HD radio broadcast technology or 
generally 
any 
digital 
radio 
broadcasting 
system, 
supplemented by determining the position through GPS or 
Galileo. If we consider data acquisition for warning from 
eCall, in the event of a major expansion an addressable 
warning system that would significantly limit the creation of 
public transport accidents could be a very effective. Transfer 
of information in the case of using "System for Automated 
Forewarning of Vehicle Crashes” is shown in Fig. 2, where 
solid lines show the flow of information the driver will 
receive in real-time or with minimal delay. 
Detailed principle of radio broadcasting of warning 
information is described in [7] under the working title 
RADIO-H (Radio-Help). It is based on simultaneous 
application of analogue broadcasting technology with 
superposition of digital content (HD RADIO or DRM) or 
full-digital broadcasts with the possibility of defining the 
positional coordinates via GPS [7][8][9]. HD Radio 
technology company iBiquity Digital Corporation was 
selected in 2002 in the U.S. as a key technology for the 
digitization of radio broadcasting. Currently, this technology 
carries a large percentage of U.S. radio stations.  
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 2.  Transmission and acquisition of information in the event of an accident with the use of eCall and Radio-Help (Source: Authors) 
HD Radio technology uses the principle of superposition 
of the digital signal to analogue signal. „Today, there are in 
the USA more than 2,100 stations with HD Radio Broadcast 
Technology… HD Radio™ Technology is available or has 
been announced to be available on 28 different brands of 
new vehicles (Acura, Audi, Bentley, BMW, Buick, Cadillac, 
Chevrolet, Ford, GMC, Hyundai, Jaguar, Kia, Land Rover, 
Lincoln, Mazda, Mercedes-Benz, Mini, Porsche, Ram, Rolls 
Royce, Scion, SRT, Subaru, Tesla, Toyota, Volkswagen, 
Volvo). These announcements represent 148 different 
vehicles with HD Radio Technology, a total of 74 which will 
come with HD Radio Technology as a standard feature 
during 2012 [13]. 
The transmitted relation of Radio-Help uses positional 
codes for identifying areas of compulsory income, i.e., where 
the broadcast is directed. The receiver in the area is 
maintained in a standby mode and captured broadcast on 
fixed rate compares its position according to GPS 
coordinates with areas included in the broadcast. If there is 
compliance, it activates forced broadcast reception session. 
After the broadcasting code ends, the receiver goes into 
standby mode again. Subscribers of Radio-Help that are 
outside the defined zone will not be disturbed by warning 
broadcast sessions. 
This principle implies that it is possible to transmit 
separate sessions to more areas simultaneously. Long wave 
radio 
transmitters, 
which 
with 
new 
higher quality 
broadcasting channels gradually lose their utility, could be 
used for the broadcast. In such a case, it would suffice to 
cover the whole Czech Republic just by one central long 
wave radio sender. 
Due to the development of IT where circuits for 
terrestrial broadcasting and positioning GPS are now 
equipped with most new mobile phones, it should not be 
technically demanding to use it for these purposes. 
There are often doubts about privacy with respect to the 
positional 
information. 
It 
needs 
to 
be 
said, 
that 
the distribution of such information is done by the eCall 
system itself. From that perspective, as the eCall system has 
been already approved, the discussion of privacy would be 
redundant. 
The System for Automated Forewarning of Vehicle 
Crashes is a novelty idea based on some previous work. 
Compared with other systems considering traffic (car 
accidents and similar issues) – only this approach allows 
fully automated warning limiting the influence of human 
factor. This fact provides shorter response time therefore 
better functionality. 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
While the RDS-TMC has long been in operation and 
eCall should be installed in new cars from 2015, a project of 
Smart Road Restraint Systems is still under development. 
Automatic emergency call system eCall is designed 
especially for accelerating action of rescuers and other 
components of IRS (Integrated Rescue System). The 
availability of accurate information about the accident, 
particularly the place of it and some additional information 
like a type of car or extent of the damage, without any 
significant delays will undoubtedly be very beneficial. It 
follows that the introduction of eCall may help reduce 
human losses and reduce the consequences of accidents by 
early intervention emergency services. 
The prevention of subsequent accidents may at least have 
an equivalent effect. If the data from eCall is also used for 
early warning of other potential participants in an accident, it 
can lead to significant lowering of life, health and economic 
losses that could follow in the event of traffic accidents. 
Combining eCall together with the use of “System for 
Automated Forewarning of Vehicle Crashes” can ensure 
real-lime distribution of warning messages to drivers coming 
to the accident. Drivers should have relevant warning 
information in time in case of approaching the accident, so 
they could respond in time. The described combination can 
provide direct transfer of relevant information with minimum 
delay. The system is functional and usable for any kind of 
road or street. In addition, information is sent only to 
specifically defined geographical area - for example, only to 
drivers of vehicles that are closer to the accident than 15 km 
and also go towards this accident. The combination of the 
System with car navigations could deliver the necessary 
information only to drivers approaching the place of the car 
accident. The System has also an ambition to be an ambient 
service for improving the first aid to injured persons.  
As a next step proving the quality of the system there 
have to be done a modeling of the situation with the System 
implemented. It should provide reliable data needed for a 
quality analysis. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The presentation of the paper was supported by the 
project No. CZ.1.07/2.2.00/28.0327 Innovation and support 
of doctoral study program (INDOP), financed from EU and 
the Czech Republic funds. Other support was SGS project 
Agile Approach of Information Support by Solving Non-
Standard Situations. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Brunclík and J. Skrbek, 2010. “Systém automatizovaného 
kritického varování před místem dopravní nehody” [online], 
[retrieved: 
June, 
2012], 
Available 
from 
 
WWW: 
<http://spisy.upv.cz/Applications/2010/PPVCZ2010_0415A3.
pdf>. 
[2] W. T. Coombs and S. J. Holanday, 2010 (ed.). “The 
Handbook of Crisis Communications“, Willey-Blackwell, 
Chichester, 2010, p. 20, ISBN 978-1-4051-9441-9. 
[3] Conservative Refocus News, 2011. “Fiery Chain-Reaction 
Accident Results In 34 vehicle Pile-Up in United Kingdom“,  
[retrieved: 
May, 
2012], 
Available 
from 
WWW: 
<http://www.conservativerefocus.com/blog5.php/2011/11/05/
fiery-chain-reaction-accident-results-in-34-vehicle-pile-up-in-
united-kingdom-at-least-7-dead-scores-injured-video>. 
[4] European Commision, 2010.  “eCall – saving lives through 
in-vehicle communication technology“, [retrieved: May, 
2012]. 
Available 
from 
WWW: 
<http://ec.europa.eu/ 
information_society/doc/factsheets/049-ecall_july10_en.pdf>. 
[5] Ředitelství silnic a dálnic ČR, 2012. “Proměnné dopravní 
značky (PDZ) a zařízení pro provozní informace (ZPI) “, 
[retrieved: 
June, 
2012], 
Available 
from 
WWW: 
<http://portal.dopravniinfo.cz/promenne-dopravni-znacky-a-
zarizeni-pro-provozni-informace>. 
[6] SafetyNet, 2009. “eSafety”, [retrieved:May, 2012]. Available 
from:<http://ec.europa.eu/transport/road_safety/specialist/kno
wledge/pdf/esafety.pdf>. 
[7] J. Skrbek, 2011. “Advanced Ways and Means of Civilian 
Notification in Crisis Situations“. In A. KOCOUREK (ed.). 
Proceedings of the 10th International conference: Liberec 
Economic Forum 2011. 1st edd. Liberec: Technical 
University of Liberec, 2011. pp. 419–426. ISBN 978-80-
7372-755-0. 
[8] J. Skrbek, 2009. “New Possibilities of Information Services 
for Special Situations“, in 17 – th Interdisciplinary 
Information Management Talks, Proceedings (IDIMT-2009), 
pp. 123–130, Trauler Verlag, Linz, ISBN 978-3-85499-624-8. 
[9] J. Skrbek, 2011. “Radio-Help as a Smart Early Warning and 
Notification System“. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual 
Meeting of the International Society for the Systems Sciences, 
14 p, University of Hull Business School, UK, 2011, 
http://journals.isss.org/index.php/proceedings55th/issue/view/
11, ISSN 1999-6918. 
[10] SMART Road Restraint Systems, 2010. Innovative concepts 
for SMART Road Restraint Systems to provide greater safety 
for vulnerable road users, [retrieved: May, 2012]. Available 
from: 
<http://smartrrs.unizar.es/up_files/file/WORKSHOP 
/folleto_smartrrs3.pdf>. 
[11] K. J. Tierney, M. K. Lindell, and R. W. Perry, (2001) (ed.) 
“Facing the Unexpected“, Joseph Henry Press, Washington, 
2001, p. 13, ISBN 0-309-06999-8. 
[12] J. Vávra, 2010. “Systém eCall v konfrontaci s alternativními 
systémy nouzového varování“, DP-EF-KPE-2010-105, EF-
TUL, Liberec. 
[13] iBiquity Digital, “What is HD Radio Broadcasting?”, 
[retrieved: 
May, 
2012], 
Available 
from 
WWW: 
<http://www.ibiquity.com/hd_radio>. 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

