Social Interactions of Artiﬁcial Ventilated Patients in Intensive Care – an Example of a
Monitoring System
Jan Hendrik Röhl
Assistance Systems and Medical Device Technology
Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg
Oldenburg, Germany
email: jan.hendrik.roehl@uol.de
Alexander Gerka
Health / Automation and Integration Technology
OFFIS e. V.
Oldenburg, Germany
email: alexander.gerka@ofﬁs.de
Rebecca Diekmann
Assistance Systems and Medical Device Technology
Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg
Oldenburg, Germany
email: rebecca.diekmann@uol.de
Andreas Hein
Assistance Systems and Medical Device Technology
Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg
Oldenburg, Germany
email: andreas.hein@uol.de
Abstract—Only qualitative data on social interactions between
ventilated patients and their caregivers and families are available
from interviews. To improve sociological research in this highly
sensitive setting, a concept of an observation system is described
and presented. The system will be autonomous and is designed
to collect information for a better understanding of the impact
of using autonomous life-supporting systems like mechanical
ventilation on the social system family with as minimal interfering
as possible to the considered framework. From the analysis of
the pilot study a multi sensor system, which combines Kinect,
infrared-array and sound pressure data of a happening social
interaction, is derived.
Keywords—social interaction; multi sensor system; intensive
home care; artiﬁcial / mechanical ventilation.
I. INTRODUCTION
The demographic change with an increasing number of
older people and people with the need of care leads to a
rising importance of home care services and understanding
of the environment of the patients, their families and nursing
staff. In addition, as people get older, the probability of being
in need of care rises [1]. In Germany, 76% (2.59 million) of
people in need of long-term care were treated outpatient in
2017 [1]. Figure 1 shows the increasing number of ventilated
patients in Germany, which emphasizes the implication of a
growing need for services in intensive care. Lloyd-Owen et al.
(2005) identiﬁed a prevalence of 6.6 out of 100,000 people in
Europe are mechanically ventilated at home [2].
An impact of the afﬁnity to human likeness of assistive
devices like prothetic hands has already been described else-
where [4]. The uncanny valley theory describes that the human
likeness and afﬁnity of industrial robots is low [4]. Moreover, a
toy robot can represent a medium human likeness and afﬁnity.
Whereas, the human likeness of prosthetic hands is high, the
afﬁnity is very low. In addition, a healthy person is highly
human like with a high afﬁnity [4]. This theory of description
might also be applied for other life supporting systems like
mechanical ventilation devices, which changes the perception
of the patient in need of intensive care to their environment. It
2013
2015
2017
0
50.000
100.000
150.000
200.000
250.000
300.000
350.000
Fig. 1. The increasing number of ventilated patients in Germany [5].
might additionally be implied that the social family system and
in particular the social interactions within the family and/or
caregivers might be inﬂuenced by the mechanical ventilation.
So far, no studies have been published in this regard.
Regarding quality of life of invasive ventilated patients, only
few studies are available [6]–[9]. To our knowledge, no studies
dealt with the social life of the ventilated patients, but with
the safety of these patients [10]–[14].
At this point it remains unclear, to what extent intensively-
cared patients or which dimensions of technical realization of
autonomously life-supporting systems change the embedded-
ness of patients in the family context [15].
Artiﬁcial invasive ventilated patients are an example for
people in need of long-term care. [3] describes the connection
of social interaction and nursing procedures as a strong link.
Therefore, they cannot be considered as separated actions.
In Section II, the method is described with the individual
components (pilot study, measurement setup and video anal-
ysis). The results are discussed in Section III, additionally
a concept to collect more detailed information about social
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

interactions in the context of mechanical ventilated patients
with intensive care staff, therapists for artiﬁcial ventilation
and in the best case a social family system is proposed in
Section IV. It has to be kept in mind that most invasive
ventilated patients spend most of their time in bed, which is
caused by their disability and/or the severity of the disease
[13]. Therefore, adapted conﬁgurations for the novel system
are described, which provide the patients intimacy. This is
followed by the conclusion, in Section V.
II. METHODS
A detailed description of the conducted pilot study, measure-
ment setup follows. In addition, the analysis of the generated
data is discussed.
A. Pilot Study
The pilot study was conducted with two professional ther-
apists for artiﬁcial ventilation. These therapists performed the
process of suction via tracheostomy tube and the change
of the tracheostomy tube on a training mannequin (Resusci
Anne). The tracheostomy tube provides a bypass of the larynx
and pharynx area of the throat and is used for the invasive
mechanical ventilation of a patient [16]. In addition, the
process of suction via tracheostomy tube was also performed
on a participant. These nursing processes were in the focus of
this pilot study as they represent typical nursing procedures
for invasive ventilated patients [17] [18].
TABLE I
MEASURED NURSING PROCEDURES AND CONSTELLATIONS
Procedure
RGB-D pos.
Subject
Caregivers
Repetitions
Suction
1
Mannequin
1
7
Suction
1
participant
1
5
Change
2
Mannequin
1 and 2
5
In total, 29 minutes and 45 seconds of data within 17 videos
(see Table I) were recorded during this pilot study.
B. Measurement Setup
In the pilot study, a depth camera (RGB-D), Microsoft
Kinect v2.0, was used for data collection. During the measure-
ments only the points cloud and joint positions were stored.
The RGB-D sensor was placed in two different positions
around the patient’s bed, as shown in Figure 2.
The ﬁrst position was used during the process of suction via
tracheostomy tube, which was performed by one professional
caregiver. In addition, the second sensor position was used
during the process of tracheostomy tube change. This position
was selected based on the fact that two professional caregivers
were executing the tracheostomy tube change together, so that
the RGB-D sensor in position one would have been covered
by a caregiver.
C. Video Analysis
The recorded RGB-D data was analyzed independently by
two researchers to determine the patterns of social interactions
between the patient and caregiver. Therefore, the data was
analyzed by searching for typical patterns and the orientation
Caregiver 1
Caregiver 2
Camera pos. 1
Camera pos. 2
Ventilation
Fig. 2.
Positions of the RGB-D sensor and the caregivers during the pilot
study.
of the caregivers to the participant or training mannequin.
The videos were analyzed regarding the following questions:
• Which patterns represent social interactions?
• Which patterns represent typical nursing procedures?
During the acquisition, only the point clouds of the RGB-D
sensor were saved. The Microsoft Kinect Studio v2.0 delivers
the joint positions out of the point clouds.
III. RESULTS
The processes were divided in two different nursing pro-
cedures. In Figure 3 and Figure 4, the red lines illustrate
the skeleton of the caregiver and the white circle, square and
triangle present the joint positions, delivered by the Microsoft
software Kinect Studio v2.0. The collected data of the pilot
study shows repetitive patterns during the nursing processes
of suction via tracheostomy tube and the change of the
tracheostomy tube. The differences of these procedures are
discussed below.
A. Suction via Tracheostomy tube
Figure 3 presents and describes the process of suction via
tracheostomy tube. This process was performed at a participant
by a therapist. As shown in Figure 2, camera position 1 is used
to document this procedure. The skeleton and joint positions,
delivered by the software, are stable for the upper parts, but
not the (for this process irrelevant) lower body parts, due to the
shadow of the bed, which was placed between the caregiver
and the RGB-D sensor (Figure 3).
The process starts with disinfecting the hands, where the
caregiver was averted from the participant. Afterwards, the
caretaker puts on rubber gloves and a mask, also averted
from the participant. The suction hose gets connected and
the caregiver puts on an additional sterile glove, while facing
the participant. The mechanical ventilation gets disconnected
and the actual process of suction via tracheostomy tube is
performed, the caregiver is as well facing the participant. Then
the mechanical ventilation gets reconnected and the caregiver
is cleaning up, still facing the participant. The last step is the
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

1. Disinfecting the hands. Averted
from the participant.
2. Putting on the rubber gloves.
Averted from the participant.
3. Putting on the mask. Averted
from the participant.
4. Connecting the suction hose and
putting on sterile glove. Facing the
participant.
5. Disconnection of mechanical
ventilation. Facing the participant.
6. Process of suctioning via tra-
cheostomy tube. Facing the partic-
ipant.
7.
Reconnecting
of
mechanical
ventilation and cleaning up. Facing
the participant.
8. Disinfecting the hands. Averted
to the participant.
Fig. 3. Process of suction via tracheostomy tube.
disinfection of the caregivers hands, while averted from the
participant.
As shown in Table II, an interesting behavior by the nursing
staff executing the process of suction via tracheostomy tube at
a participant or training mannequin was found. In this study,
the caregivers were averted from the participant during the
process of hand disinfection before executing the process of
suction via tracheostomy tube four out of ﬁve times, whereas
the training mannequin was faced by the nursing staff ﬁve out
of seven times and the nursing staff was averted only one time.
Being averted from the patient suggests that there is no
evidence of social interaction based on data from a RGB-D
TABLE II
ORIENTATION OF THE CAREGIVER IN RELATION TO THE PARTICIPANT
DURING THE PROCESS OF HAND DISINFECTION.
Type of
Orientation
patient
Averted
Halfway facing
Facing
Training mannequin
1
1
5
participant
4
0
1
sensor.
B. Tracheostomy tube change
Figure 4 shows the process of the tracheostomy tube change.
For this nursing procedure, the camera position 2 was used and
the caregiver 1 and caregiver 2 are performing the nursing
procedure (as seen in Figure 4). In comparison, the nursing
procedure of tracheostomy tube change is more complex than
the procedure of suction via tracheostomy tube. In addition, the
procedure of suction via tracheostomy tube is a sub-procedure
of the tracheostomy tube change. The nursing procedure of
suction via tracheostomy tube is performed by the caregiver
2, during the preparation of tracheostomy tube change by
caregivers 1. Therefore, in Figure 4 only the steps of the
tracheostomy tube change are presented. The change of the
position of the RGB-D sensor did not lead to a better detection
of the lower body skeleton of the both caregivers.
For the tracheostomy tube change the tracheal cuff gets
unblocked and the tracheal collar is changed by caregiver 2,
while caregiver 1 is preparing the actual process. Afterwards
the process of suction via tracheostomy tube is performed by
caregiver 2. Then the new tracheostomy tube is carried to the
participant by caregiver 1 and the actual tracheostomy tube
change is performed by both caregivers. After that caregiver 1
blocks the cuff and caregiver 2 puts the old tracheostomy tube
away and reconnects the mechanical ventilation. Followed by
auscultation with a stethoscope performed by caregiver 2 and
caregiver 1 disconnects a syringe of the cuff. Finally, both
caregivers clean up and get rid of the waste.
No evidence for other anomalies during this nursing
procedure were found. Since there is no data of this
procedure conducted on a participant, no difference in the
behavior of the caregivers could be analyzed.
As no sound pressure was recorded, no evidence of spoken
words or other vocal interaction between caregiver and partici-
pant as an element of social interaction is present, when being
averted. Due to the fact that there is no information about
any vocal interaction the mentioned assumption might not be
true. With the aim to better understand the social interactions
between participants and their families and caregivers in this
sensitive operating ﬁeld a new autonomous system to collect
data is needed. In this concept, camera position 2 should
be used, as this position covers the two nursing procedures
observed in the pilot study. The following section presents
and describes a promising concept for the collection of data
set in a highly sensitive environment like the participant room
of bedridden participants with the need of intensive care.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

1. C2: Unblocking tracheal cuff
and changing tracheal collar.
2. C1: Preparing new tracheostomy
tube. C2: Procedure of suction via
tracheostomy tube.
3.
C1:
Carring
prepared
tracheostomy tube to participant.
4. C1 and C2 performing actual
change of tracheostomy tube.
5. C1 blocking cuff. C2 putting
old tracheostomy tube away and
connecting mechanical ventilation
to participant.
6. C2 auscultating participant with
stethoscope.
7. C1 disconnecting syringe of
cuff.
8. C1 and C2 cleaning up and
getting rid of waste.
Fig. 4. Process of tracheostomy tube change.
IV. CONCEPT
This section describes a concept to collect combined data
of infrared, RGB-D and sound pressure sensors from social
interactions of bedridden patients. This system detects the
quantity of interactions in the patient room. Further, the system
will identify when and where the social interactions happen
in the patient room.
Due to the high sensitivity of the environment in which the
system will operate and collect information, a high standard
to protect privacy and anonymity of the patients, their families
and caregivers must be ensured. In addition, there is the
possibility to choose between three different modes. Firstly,
there is a full recording mode, integrating all in the following
described sensors. Secondly, during the limited recording only
the infrared array sensor, sound pressure and the motion
detection by the passageway and motion sensor is enabled to
collect information. This mode will be implemented to collect
information about sensitive interactions without recording of
video data. The third mode is the passive mode, which disables
the total system for a deﬁned period of time.
The system is set up at the patient’s request, i.e., the patient
can choose between the ﬁrst and second mode as the activated
standard mode. If the ﬁrst mode is chosen as standard, the
system can be switched into the second mode or disabled by
the patient’s choice. In addition, if the second mode is chosen
as standard mode, there will also be the possibility to disable
the entire system for a deﬁned period of time.
Therefore, it will be possible to deactivate the entire system
via a wireless switch. This type of switch is used, because
the system will initially not be installed as permanently. The
system state (active/inactive) will be mirrored via a highly
visible and clear to interpret display with appropriate symbols
and colors.
The multi sensor system will consist out of sensors (hard-
ware), special designed software for the sensor evaluation and
a control system (software).
A. Sensors
In Table III, the sensors used in this setting with their
assigned task are shown. The passageway sensor consists out
of two light barriers, which allow to detect the direction of
movement through the sensors ﬁeld of view. The motion sensor
reacts to the change of the infrared ﬁeld in sight of the sensor.
This sensor can detect motion in a certain area. In addition, the
Grid-EYE infrared array sensor from Panasonic consists out
of an 8x8 matrix infrared array, which delivers the temperature
of each of the 64 measurement ﬁelds [19]. To protect the
mentioned privacy a wireless switch will be installed near the
door of the patient room, which can be used to deactivate
the total system for a deﬁned period of time. Further on, the
sound pressure instrument is a microphone, which records the
loudness of an event and not the actual noise. The Azure
Kinect is a RGB-D sensor from Microsoft. This sensor consists
out of a depth camera, RGB camera and infra red (IR) emitters
[20].
TABLE III
LIST OF SENSORS
Sensor
Function
Passageway sensor
Detect person entering/leaving the room
Motion sensor
Detect person in bed area
Grid-EYE
Detect number of people in the bed area
Wireless switch
Deactivation of the system
Sound pressure instrument
Detect vocal interactions
Kinect 4 Azure
Deliver basis for data labeling
B. Sensor tasks
The tasks mentioned in Table III can be differentiated in two
groups: Firstly, in a group of different start trigger sensors
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

(see Table IV) to detect an event and start up the multi
sensor system. Possible events, which trigger the start of the
system are mentioned in Table IV. These kinds of events
should accompany a social interaction at a high possibility,
like entering the patient room. When the passageway sensor
is located in the door frame, assumptions of people entering or
leaving the patient room are possible. In interaction with the
motion sensor, which is independent of the passageway sensor,
general motions of infrared emitting objects in a certain area
of the patient room can be detected. In addition, the permanent
evaluation of the Grid-EYE data motion of heat sources can
be detected and provide the possibility to identify a moving
source of heat, which may lead to a possible social interaction.
TABLE IV
LIST OF EVENTS USED FOR THE START TRIGGER.
Deployed
Event trigger
sensors
Event
Start
Stop
Passageway sensor
Entering/leaving the room
x
x
Motion sensor
Movement in nursing area
x
Grid-EYE
Min. 2 sources of heat in sight
x
Wireless switch
Manual deactivation
x
Secondly, the recording of sensors can be grouped. When-
ever one of the mentioned start triggers is detecting a possible
social interaction, the recording sensors will start collecting
data. In this case the recording sensors are the sound pressure
instrument, the Grid-EYE and the RGB-D sensor. During the
recording the Grid-EYE sensor is used to determine, whether
a person is laying, sitting or standing in the sensor sight. The
additional usage of a sound pressure instrument enables to
distinguish whether a person is speaking or listening to music,
for example. The RGB-D sensor in this setting is used to
determine if the usage of a RGB-D sensor is needed or the
Grid-EYE sensor is able to provide all needed information of
movements and gestures to analyze social interactions. Using
the RGB-D sensor in this setting might lead to a system
that makes itself independent of a camera to analyze social
interactions.
C. Process of Multi Sensor System
In this section the process chain of the multi sensor system
is proposed. Due to the process chain in Figure 5, the privacy
of the patient, caregiver and family will remain guaranteed.
Whenever one of the above described start triggers (see
Table IV) detects an event, the collection of data will be
started, if the system is not deactivated by the wireless switch.
When the system is active and a start trigger is caused by an
event the recording of the sound pressure, Grid-EYE sensor
and RGB-D sensor will started, if there is more than one
person in the room. In consideration to the high sensitivity
of the operating environment the multi sensor system will
additionally check the deactivation message/bit after each
collected data frame. This way the deactivation message will
be checked two times in different steps of the algorithm. If
the algorithm is collecting data and the deactivation is true,
the system will stop immediately the collection of data and
will wait for a deﬁned period of time to check for a new
event detection of one of the start triggers. The deﬁned period
of time should be long enough to execute sensitive nursing
procedures or interactions in the patient environment.
Min. 2 person 
in the room
Deactivation
System start
Start trigger
Get data frame
Deactivation
Save data frame
Stop data 
collection
False
True
True
False
False
True
Fig. 5.
Design of the proposed system process order to ensure the high
sensitivity.
V. CONCLUSION
These ﬁndings are of great importance as they support the
future development of home care systems and appreciation to-
wards the patient in order to realize family-sensitive technical
systems in the ﬁeld of intensive care.
The importance of ambulant intensive care services, due to
the demographic change with the increasing number of older
people and the higher probability of older people to be in
need of care and intensive ambulant care, is rising. We found
a differentiation between handling a training mannequin and
a participant. This ﬁndings lead to the assumption of using
real patients in future work for further understanding of social
interactions of mechanically ventilated patients. For a better
understanding of the social interactions of patients, who are
mostly bedridden, with their family system and caregivers a
novel concept to collect information about social interactions is
presented. The autonomous system will be used to understand
the impact of using autonomous life-supporting systems like
mechanically ventilation on the social system family with a
minimal disturbance of the considered framework. The pre-
sented multi sensor system combines RGB-D, infrared-array
and sound pressure data with the quantity of social interactions
in a highly sensitive environment. In pursuing studies the
sensors and their positions should be selected in consultation
with the patient. In addition, a wireless deactivation switch
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

should be used to maintain the patient’s intimacy and privacy.
It should also be considered to only use skeleton data, like
joint positions, in future studies. Due to the ﬁndings of this
project we hope to contribute our part in creating a higher
quality of life for these patients and their families.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was founded by the German Ministry of Educa-
tion and Research (BMBF) within the joint project MeSiB
grant 16SV7723 and the Research Training Group (RTG)
"Social Embeddedness of Autonomous Cyber Physical Sys-
tems" (SEAS) funded by the Carl von Ossietzky University
Oldenburg
REFERENCES
[1] destatis.de,
’Press
release
No.
501
of
18
De-
cember
2018’,
Dec
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.destatis.de/EN/Press/2018/12/PE18_501_224.html.
[retrieved: 08, 2020].
[2] S. J. Lloyd-Owen et al. , “Patterns of home mechanical ventilation use in
Europe: results from the Eurovent survey.,” European respiratory journal,
2005, No. 6, pp. 1025-1031.
[3] J.E. Seymour, ´´Critical moments–death and dying in intensive care."
London: Sage, 2001.
[4] M. Mori et al., ‘The uncanny valley,” Energy, Vol. 7., Nr.4„ 1970 p.
33-35, 1970.
[5] de.statista.com,
’Number
of
severely
disabled
ventilated
patients
in
Germany
by
type
of
functional
impairment
in
the
years
2013
to
2017’,
Jan
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/247952/umfrage/anzahl-
der-schwerbinderten-beatmungspatienten-nach-art-der-
funktionsreinschraenkung/. [retrieved: 08, 2020].
[6] S. Euteneuer, W. Windisch, S. Suchi, D. Köhler, P. W. Jones, and
B. Schönhofer, ´´Health-related quality of life in patients with chronic
respiratory failure after long-term mechanical ventilation.", Respiratory
medicine, 2006, Vol. 100., Nr. 3, pp. 477–486.
[7] S. E. Huttmann, F. S. Magnet, C. Karagiannidis, J. H. Storre, and W
Windisch, ´´Quality of life and life satisfaction are severely impaired
in patients with long-term invasive ventilation following ICU treatment
and unsuccessful weaning.", Annals of intensive care, 2018, Vol. 8., Nr.
1, pp. 38.
[8] S. Smith and A. MecLeod, ´´The effect of mechanical ventilation on
quality of life in patients with motor neurone disease.", British Journal
of Neuroscience Nursing, 2015, Vol. 11., Nr. 5, pp. 220-227.
[9] J. Geiseler, O. Karg, S. Börger, K. Becker, and A. Zimolong, ´´Invasive
home mechanical ventilation, mainly focused on neuromuscular disor-
ders.", GMS health technology assessment, 2010, Vol. 6..
[10] E. Lauta, C. Abbinante, L. Maiellaro, R. Rizzi, P. Dormio, and V. De-
ﬁlippis, ´´Improving Homecare Risk Management and Patient Safety.",
Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Public Health, 2019, Vol. 16., Nr. 4
[11] C. Schaepe and M. Ewers, ´´‘I need complete trust in nurses’–home
mechanical ventilated patients’ perceptions of safety.", Scandinavian
journal of caring sciences, 2017, Vol. 31., Nr. 4, pp. 948–956
[12] A. Lang, N. Edwards, and A. Fleiszer, ´´Safety in home care: a broad-
ened perspective of patient safety.", International Journal for Quality in
Health Care, 2008, Vol. 20., Nr. 2, pp. 130–135
[13] C. Lins et. al., ´´Enhancing Safety of Artiﬁcially Ventilated Patients
Using Ambient Process Analysis.", MIE, 2018, pp. 316–320.
[14] W. S. Krimsky et al., ´´A model for increasing patient safety in the
intensive care unit: increasing the implementation rates of proven safety
measures.", BMJ Quality & Safety, 2009, Vol. 18., Nr. 1 pp. 74–80.
[15] R. Evans et al., ´´Family caregiver perspectives on caring for ventilator-
assisted individuals at home", Canadian respiratory journal, 2012, Vol.
19, Nr. 6, pp. 373-379.
[16] R. F. Eisele, ´´Tracheostomy tube", U.S. Patent Nr. 5,067,496, 1991
[17] P. A. Cazzolli and E. A. Oppenheimer, ´´Home mechanical ventilation
for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: nasal compared to tracheostomy-
intermittent positive pressure ventilation.", Journal of the neurological
sciences, 1996, Vol. 139, pp 123–128.
[18] A. C. White, S. Kher, and H. H. O’Connor, ´´When to change a
tracheostomy tube", Respiratory Care, 2010, Vol. 55., Nr. 8, pp. 1069–
1075.
[19] A. D. Shetty, Disha, B. Shubha, and K. Suryanarayana, “Detection and
tracking of a human using the infrared thermopile array sensor—“Grid-
EYE””, 2017 International Conference on Intelligent Computing, Instru-
mentation and Control Technologies (ICICICT), pp. 1490–1495, 2017.
[20] docs.microsoft.com, ’Azure Kinect DK hardware speciﬁcations’, 2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/kinect-
dk/hardware-speciﬁcation. [retrieved: 08, 2020].
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

