An “Internet of Things” Vision of the Flood Monitoring Problem
Massimo Ancona∗, Andrea Dellacasa∗, Giorgio Delzanno∗, Andrea La Camera∗ and Ivano Rellini†
∗DIBRIS, University of Genoa
Genoa, Italy
Email: {massimo.ancona, giorgio.delzanno, andrea.lacamera}@unige.it, andrea@dellacasa.org
†DISTAV, University of Genoa
Genoa, Italy
Email: rellini.ivano@dipteris.unige.it
Abstract—River ﬂood monitoring is a complex problem of max-
imum social relevance in densely inhabited areas. Flash ﬂoods
are becoming more and more dangerous every year due to
an increase of rapid and extreme rainfalls events induced by
climate changes, particularly in Genoa: the rivers ﬂooded twice
in twenty days in two different parts of the town. The complexity
of the problem originates from the diversity of the territory
involved in the monitoring process in regions like Liguria in
Italy: from relatively far mountains (or plain regions) generally
scarcely populated, to densely populated urban areas traversed by
streams, often ﬂowing underground. Environmental monitoring
is classiﬁed at the 14th position among the Top 50 “Internet
of Things” (IoT) applications for a Smarter World. IoT is an
emerging paradigm that combines the main features of Cloud
Computing (pervasive capability of storage and computation via
Internet) with wireless sensor networks that provide cooperative
use of distributed sensors. In addition to these features, IoT often
provides interfaces for data streaming management in real-time,
back end for data analysis and visualization. A IoT approach
to the considered problem seems almost necessary in order to
improve the integration level of the data, sensors and applications
and provide software tools for cooperation of heterogeneous
groups of end-users involving institutions with different level of
responsibilities, knowledge and capabilities (from sensor experts
to non-expert citizens). In the present paper, we redesign previous
experiences based on intelligent wireless sensors network (WSN)
in terms of IoT with the aim of improving its reliability and
efﬁciency and especially of rendering the problem widely scalable.
Keywords–Internet
of
Things;
Communication
networks;
Stream; Flood; Sensor systems.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Flood monitoring is a particularly challenging application
for Internet of Things (IoT). In fact, it offers a complex
scenario for the variety and number of sensors involved, their
location and relative communication problems. The type of
sensors involved in the process and the corresponding type
of installation depend on the kind of collected data and on
their geo-localization (i.e., urban areas, where powering and
communications are relatively simple, or in remote and difﬁcult
to access mountainous or country locations). The kind of data
collected ranges from rain monitoring to river gauging with
several parameters to be monitored and compared. In the case
of rivers, the problem depends on their size and dimension
and geography of the region where they ﬂow, if they are
small creeks or wide rivers, if they ﬂow in a steep or ﬂat
area, in open air or are channeled underground, etc. From
this point of view, we already activated different collaborations
and deﬁnitions of common goals with public administrations
involved in the management of the experimental areas. To
this aim, we designed a general hardware and software IoT
infrastructure and architecture applicable to the environmental
problem mentioned above, but extensible to the more general
problem of monitoring the environment in densely inhabited
areas.
Our research will be an element of great importance to train
speciﬁc risk management and to deliver elements of innovation
and encouragement for the deﬁnition of land management
strategies both on the local and regional scale. Moreover, this
research will help to provide knowledge and tools for effective
decision making and public engagement. In particular, we
detail the sensor classes (their design for the new ones), their
communication mechanisms and associated software services
as components of a general IoT infrastructure. The aim is
to monitor either rainfalls, river discharge and their temporal
correlation in order to obtain early alarming information. In
our IoT approach, all collected data will be continuously
transmitted, through the Internet communication infrastructure,
to software components designed to compute the stream-ﬂow
and to quantify the spatial distribution of ﬂood risk for each
controlled watershed. The computed risks, together with data
coming from other sources (barometric and river discharge
sensors, cameras operators of public organizations, emergency
agencies, private citizens), will be examined by a diagnostic
decision system implementing a risk-alert scheduling strategy,
able to diagnose the health state of the controlled environment
and to deﬁne specialized alarm levels for each potentially
interested area. Finally, the computed risks will be used
for specializing alerting messages, to be sent to all citizens
(ubiquity) present in each selected area only (alerting locality).
The interaction between instrumental data with other
sources of information, including people, is another objective
of our research. A connected aspect of the problem is the
complexity of alarming organization and broadcast mechanism
deriving from the inherent uncertain and aleatory nature of
the estimates that strongly affect the management of related
information [1][2], while the interaction of instruments with
other sources of information, including people, is another
objective of our research. In this paper, we present an approach
based on intelligent WSN [3] in terms of IoT. Our research
is intended for improving its reliability and efﬁciency and
especially for rendering the problem widely scalable, from
small towns to medium and large cities. In Section 2, we
describe the different kind of sensors, and in Section 3 we
present sub-1GHz network and standardization. Section 4 is
dedicated to software needed to run the system. We summarize
the conclusions in Section 5.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-421-3
AMBIENT 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

II.
SENSOR EVOLUTION TOWARDS AN
ULTRA-LOW-POWER ARCHITECTURE AND M2M
CONNECTION TO SUB-1 GHZ IOT NETWORKS
The early warning information is represented by rainfalls
estimation and weather forecasting in a given stream basin.
Flash-ﬂood monitoring requires rainfall control at a dense
spatial grid (1 km or ﬁner) and frequent time-scale intervals
(15-30 min, and even less in urban areas) [4]. Our analysis
is based on the above assumption that impacts the kind
of sensors considered, their communication mechanisms and
management software. The kind of sensors for a near real-time
control should be maintenance free, i. e., free from mechanical
moving parts. Moreover, they should communicate via the
Internet via a machine to machine (M2M) technology, which
is typical in the IoT implementation, adopting an ultra-low-
power management system, in order to operate for months
from remote areas, supplied by small batteries. Note that the
proposed IoT architecture can be extended (by replacing the
speciﬁc sensors) to other environmental problems, e.g. for
controlling landslides, another critical aspect of a territory.
Legacy sensors are not ready for the IoT revolutions, because
of power consumption, lack of wireless communications, and
costs.
A. Rain gauges
If we consider a spatial sensor grid of 1 km the number
of gauges installed grows as n2 requiring 100 gauges for a
grid of 10 km2, a very high number raising cost and network
complexity. This approach requires very cheap and reliable
gauges. Cost reduction suggests to consider non mechanical
(i. e., with no moving parts) rain gauges to reduce the need
of ordinary maintenance of devices often installed in remote
areas. The market is offering several kinds of devices: optical,
ultrasound and based on other measuring principles, but gen-
erally they are not designed for ultra-low-power applications
and Internet access in an IoT M2M connection. Thus, we
have to shield them with an ultra-low-power microprocessor
unit (MPU: a computer processing unit in a single integrated
circuit), a technique used by Arduino and other MPU-based
devices [5] for interfacing with peripheral accessories. Optical
rain gauges (ORG) are able to provide ultra-fast real-time
data about precipitation rate, with minimal maintenance, high
reliability and sensitivity, We found both high precision (3%),
power hungry (12V 1A, or direct AC power line connection),
costly devices (5-7 k$), like the Osi 815-DS [6] and the
All Weather Inc. 6030 [7]; and low power, low cost devices
(50$), like the Hydreon RG-11 [8]. In the last case, errors
usually are small (around 6% in mean) but not granted, and
in some (rare) cases they could reach 30%. There exist also
low cost, accurate ultrasound and electronic gauges; although
they empty themselves automatically, they do not require
adjustments and do not use moving parts. In conclusion, we
can ﬁnd on the market several adequate rain gauges, but we
have to shield them with an ultra-low-power MPUs board
(see Figure 1) for long-time, low power (and long distance)
applications, when gauges are installed in remote areas. ORG
are the more promising devices for several reasons: they are
fast and maintenance free, they can measure true rain rate and
no other gauge comes close to their performance and precision.
Nowadays one of the main applications of low cost ORG is
the automatic control of car wipers: for marketing reasons this
devices will be rapidly improved in the next few years. Almost
all devices communicate via a serial RS232 or 485 interface.
The RG-11 drains 15mA nominal at 12V DC input, but can
be operated also in a slightly less sensitive micro-power mode
that can be set which should allow operation from a 9V battery
at 1.5mA current draw. It does not guaranties a strict accuracy
value below 28-36% of a tipping bucket, but much of the time
it will read very close to it. The RG-11 is great for qualitative
measurements versus quantitative, i.e., you will know when
there is a heavy rain rather than a light mist but not an exact
amount of rain, in other words, it is well suitable for our scope.
By installing a large number of low cost devices alternated with
few high precision gauges we may grant, through statistical
corrections, a good precision at an acceptable cost.
B. River Gauges
The river gauging problem is more complex than the rain
gauging for its intrinsic complexity: most of the short stream
crossing Liguria and other similar hilly regions have an almost
binary behavior. Their ﬂow is extremely small or null for a
large part of the year, while suddenly it becomes very impetu-
ous for short time periods during October and November rain
storms. This behaviour often generates disastrous ﬂash-ﬂoods.
During rain storms periods, ﬂoods eradicate trees, rocks and
instruments working immersed in the water ﬂow and they tend
to modify their bed often in a remarkable way by transporting
stones and trees that could obstruct their ﬂow in a stable way.
Generally, the ﬂood phenomenon (ﬂash-ﬂood) lasts for few
hours and produces incredible disasters. In these conditions,
the river gauging problem represents one of the most critical
part of our research and is, in large part, still an open problem.
The available gauges on the market present several restrictions
on their applicability. Also in this case, we limit our attention
to non mechanical (i.e., with no moving parts) gauges for
maintenance purposes. Moreover, we restrict our attention to
devices not operating immersed in the stream, because their
expected survival should be very short. There are some gauges
that implement, in a single device like the Marsh-McBirney
Flo-Dar [9]area/velocity ﬂow meter, both measurements of
water level and of ﬂow velocity in order to compute stream
ﬂow. Their present limit is that they should be mounted above
the ﬂow at 1-3 m distance (optionally extensible to 6 m,
which is a safe limit for our cases). New approaches based
on particle imaging velocimetry (PIV) that give an accurate
ﬂow measurement, are appearing in literature. A promising
approach based on PIV gauges is proposed in [10] where a
digital camera installed on a roof of a building at 14 m above
the river level and with an incident angle of 60o provides a
maximum error of 38.8% while its mean error is only the 5%.
We plan to extend a PIV gauge with a small Light Detection
And Ranging (LIDAR) (or two micro-cameras) for computing
distance and reconstructing a 2D section of the bed of the
controlled stream during the long no-raining periods when the
stream is near empty. As an alternative, we could use a drone
for reconstructing the complete section of the stream in all its
extension during a single or few drone ﬂies, but this approach
requires operator’s intervention.
C. Integrating gauges in an IoT hardware communication
architecture
Most of the gauges offering the best precision are often
power hungry devices, a defect limiting their installation in
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-421-3
AMBIENT 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

remote locations where power and network are not present.
Indeed a precise information derived by a well distributed set
of gauges could have a higher impact on the whole acquisition
system (following a well geo-located gauge network) [4].
In this case, the IoT technology offers the best solution for
ultra-low-power energy use and communication continuity in
locations uncovered by power and communication lines. The
IoT approach, while minimizing power consume, offers the
advantage of making gauges able to communicate each-other
via Internet in M2M communication mechanism satisfying
an anything-anywhere connectivity framework independently
from the availability of power systems and network access. The
access to the Internet rises security problems that at an early
research stage have a lower priority than the requirements of
minimum power consumption and communication continuity.
Because most of the rain and river gauges available today
are not designed for power saving, the IoT based shielding
approach, shown in Figure 1, solves this problem. A sensor
is activated only for the minimum time needed for making
a measurement, while the ULPM (Ultra-Low Power Micro-
controller) together with other power control circuits manages
the sleeping versus active state between two successive mea-
surements.
Figure 1. Gauge shielding architecture
In Figure 1, the sensor shielding architecture is composed
by the sensor itself, a ULPM, a buck converter (e.g., tps62740
or lt3757a) a boost charger (e.g., bq25504) and a ultra-
low-power wireless communication sub-system (e.g., Texas
Instruments CC3100 for Wi-Fi connection to the Internet).
III.
THE SUB-1GHZ NETWORK AND RELATIVE NEW
STANDARDS
For covering a wide variety of cases, in different parts of
the environment with different communication requirements,
the network must adopt different wireless communication
standards to support M2M connections between two connected
devices, without the assistance of a human. Here, we mention
the more likely to be used: Wi-Fi technology, based on the
IEEE 802.11, today represents the widest wireless protocol
adopted for short distances (100 m). Wi-Fi is so intimately
integrated with the TCP/IP that the Wi-Fi term implicitly mean
that they are also using a TCP/IP for Internet connectivity.
Finally, the new Weightless (expressly designed for M2M
communications), the IEEE 802.11ah and the IEEE 802.11af
standards, all operating in the Sub-1GHz (together with many
proprietary radio systems, and other well established standards
yet working in the Sub-1GHz bands) are on the way [11]. They
are capable to transmit over several km within a simple point-
to-point or star topology all performing with an extremely low
power consumption. To connect to the IoT, Sub-1 GHz systems
require an application-layer Internet gateway that, in our case,
is provided by the ultra-low-power MPU shielding every sensor
and including the communication device itself (e.g., CC3100
or CC430).
Figure 2. Implemented sensor node conﬁgurations
Figure 2 illustrates two conﬁgurations we have imple-
mented for low power remote IoT/M2M connections. The
CC3100 supports Wi-Fi short range connection, while the TI
CC110L implements a long-range Sub-1GHz M2M wireless
connection providing a ultra-low-power several km (up to 10-
25) connectivity with the CC1120/CC1200 [12]. The Sub-
1GHz frequency range is very suitable for rural regions [11].
IV.
SOFTWARE INFRASTRUCTURE
Software requirements for IoT sensors node networks
presents several challenging problems [13][14]. The system
is widely distributed and able to orchestrate a wide variety
of smart sensors, supported by energy harvesting mechanisms
and managed by ULP-MPUs. The system follows an event-
driven architecture centered on near-real-time asynchronous
communication and control mechanisms [15]. The sensor
shielding approach suggests a 2-tear structured network to the
more common 3(or n)-tear layered architecture. Fault-tolerance
is another fundamental requirement, because controlling a
single event requires continuous and autonomous inter-device
communication. The global interaction cannot be interrupted
and must remain operational especially during stormy weather
days, when it is required to be continuously operative. Col-
lected data should be correlated in real-time for computing
the lag time that is the time occurring between a rainfall peak
and the corresponding expected discharge peak.
A. IoT Platforms
The sensor components are designed to be integrated in a
IoT software platform built for integrating different types of
services, sensors and data that could be used for improving the
quality of social and environmental services of urban areas. An
ideal IoT platform for our application domain should provide
the following components:
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-421-3
AMBIENT 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

•
A device management component to handle registra-
tion of new devices, assignment of unique identiﬁers,
format data, etc.
•
Sensor services to provide interfaces to interconnect
in a secure way heterogeneous information sources.
•
Storage services to persistently store data.
•
Analytic services to provide both predeﬁned and cus-
tomizable procedure to elaborate stored and real time
data streams.
•
Visualization services to disseminate collected data
using different formats like visual diagrams, reports,
graphs, etc. For the considered type of application,
it is also important to consider georeferenced data
dissemination of alarms and notiﬁcations.
•
Application and user management to handle in a se-
cure way registrations of users and of new applications
that extend the functionality of the system.
For instance, alarms used in ﬂood monitoring require
real-time processing of data and rapid responses to public
organizations. Furthermore, they require tight integration of
data coming from very different sources (from sensors to sms
sent by citizens via crowd sourcing applications). Another
important aspect is the possibility of extending the set of
available services with new components that could exploit
the data collected by the system. Last but not least, there is
the problem of taking the alarming decision based on ﬂood
forecasting and weather predictions methods [16].
Existing platform like Axeda [17], Thingworx [18],
Thingsquare [19], Eclipse M2M [20], and Xively [21] pro-
vide powerful tools for setting up complex applications that
combine data integration, analysis, and visualization. For in-
stance, Thingworx provides a composer tool that helps the
designer to set up a dashboard with graphical widgets to
visualize the results of analysis of data coming from external
services. Thingworx marketplace can be used to download
and install additional packages, e.g., Google Maps widgets,
device drivers, and database management system (DBMS)
connection libraries. Platforms like Kaa [22], Kinoma [23],
M2MLabs [24], Arduino provide similar features in an open
source environment.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Flash ﬂood alarming systems require a dense network of
rain gauges for monitoring intense local rain storms both to
ensure its survival in case of extreme weather and to have a
more accurate collection of data. Those data have to be inter-
preted by means of empirical and formal models by correlating
in real time the river level and the ﬂow intensity for early ﬂood
forecasting and consequent anticipated alarming. The number
of required sensors, their communication mechanisms and
reliability requirements show that a IoT/M2M approach is able
to resolve the problem, even if today commercially available
gauges are not designed with the speciﬁc objective of ﬂash
ﬂoods control. Their main limits are high power consumption,
inadequate communication mechanisms and costs. However,
by supporting gauges with a ultra-low-power MPU minimizing
gauges operational time, an M2M network with minimal power
requirements can be implemented. Moreover, our research
shows that new rain gauges have to be designed with the
speciﬁc objective of ﬂood control and not for general purpose
applications, like agriculture. Next steps in this project will be:
a deeper testing phase of the network of low cost sensors both
in simulated and real-life scenarios, and an implementation of
the software behaviour in Thingworx or other platforms.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. McMillan, J. Freer, F. Pappenberger, T. Krueger, and M. Clark,
“Impacts of uncertain river ﬂow data on rainfall-runoff model calibration
and discharge predictions,” Hydrological Processes, vol. 24, no. 10,
2010, pp. 1270–1284.
[2]
F. Pappenberger et al., “Visualizing probabilistic ﬂood forecast informa-
tion: expert preferences and perceptions of best practice in uncertainty
communication,” Hydrological Processes, vol. 27, no. 1, 2013, pp. 132–
146.
[3]
M. Ancona et al., “On the design of an intelligent sensor network
for ﬂash ﬂood monitoring, diagnosis and management in urban areas
position paper,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 32, 2014, pp. 941–
946.
[4]
M. Borga, E. Gaume, J. D. Creutin, and L. Marchi, “Surveying
ﬂash ﬂoods: gauging the ungauged extremes,” Hydrological processes,
vol. 22, no. 18, 2008, p. 3883.
[5]
E. Gertz and P. Di Justo, Environmental Monitoring with Arduino.
O’Reilly, 2013.
[6]
“Org-815 - optical scientiﬁc,” http://www.opticalscientiﬁc.com/pdf/
press\ releases/ORG815\ PR%20120529.pdf, accessed: 2015-06-09.
[7]
“6030 optical rain gauge - all weather inc,” http://www.allweatherinc.
com/wp-content/uploads/6030-0411.pdf, accessed: 2015-06-09.
[8]
“Rg-11
-
hydreon,”
http://www.rainsensors.com/docs/rg-11
instructions.pdf, accessed: 2015-06-09.
[9]
“Flo-dar av sensor,” http://www.hachﬂow.com/ﬂow-sensors/ﬂo-dar.cfm,
accessed: 2015-06-09.
[10]
J. Creutin, M. Muste, A. Bradley, S. Kim, and A. Kruger, “River
gauging using piv techniques: a proof of concept experiment on the
iowa river,” Journal of Hydrology, vol. 277, no. 3, 2003, pp. 182–194.
[11]
S. Ajah, A. Al-Sherbaz, S. J. Turner, and P. Picton, “Sub 1ghz
m2m communications standardization: The advancement in white space
utilization for enhancing the energy efﬁciency,” in PGNET Proceedings
of the 15th Annual Postgraduate Symposium on the Convergence of
Telecommunications, Networking and Broadcasting 2014, M. Merabti,
O. Abuelmaatti, and C. Oliver, Eds.
Liverpool, UK: Liverpool John
Moores University, June 2014.
[12]
“Long-range rf communication: Why narrowband is the de facto stan-
dard,” http://www.ti.com/lit/wp/swry006/swry006.pdf, accessed: 2015-
06-09.
[13]
D. Hughes et al., “An experiment with reﬂective middleware to support
grid-based ﬂood monitoring,” Concurrency and Computation: Practice
and Experience, vol. 20, no. 11, 2008, pp. 1303–1316.
[14]
P. J. Smith et al., “Towards the provision of site speciﬁc ﬂood warnings
using wireless sensor networks,” Meteorological Applications, vol. 16,
no. 1, 2009, pp. 57–64.
[15]
S. Gusmeroli, S. Piccione, and D. Rotondi, “Iot@ work automation
middleware system design and architecture,” in Emerging Technologies
& Factory Automation (ETFA), 2012 IEEE 17th Conference on. IEEE,
2012, pp. 1–8.
[16]
“Reliable, low power wireless sensor networks for the internet of things:
Making wireless sensors as accessible as web servers,” http://cds.linear.
com/docs/en/white-paper/wp003.pdf, accessed: 2015-06-09.
[17]
“Axeda,” http://it.ptc.com/axeda, accessed: 2015-06-09.
[18]
“Thingworx,” http://www.thingworx.com/, accessed: 2015-06-09.
[19]
“Thingsquare,” http://www.thingsquare.com/, accessed: 2015-06-09.
[20]
“Eclipse m2m,” http://iot.eclipse.org/, accessed: 2015-06-09.
[21]
“Xively,” https://xively.com/, accessed: 2015-06-09.
[22]
“Kaa,” http://www.kaaproject.org/, accessed: 2015-06-09.
[23]
“Kinoma,” http://kinoma.com/, accessed: 2015-06-09.
[24]
“M2m labs,” http://www.m2mlabs.com/, accessed: 2015-06-09.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-421-3
AMBIENT 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

