 
 
 TeleMedSys - Web-based Telemedicine System to Support Diagnosis  
in Rural Areas
Zoila Gonzalez Videuax  
Departamento de Informática 
Universidad de Oriente (UO) 
Santiago de Cuba, Cuba 
zgv@fie.uo.edu.cu 
Reinhard Langmann  
Competence Center Automation Düsseldorf (CCAD) 
Düsseldorf University of Applied Science (DUAS) 
Düsseldorf, Germany 
langmann@ccad.eu
 
 
Abstract— This article describes the concept for a web-based 
telemedical system for use in rural areas with limited 
communication infrastructures and a lack of medical 
professionals. 
The 
TeleMedSys 
consists 
of 
a 
patient 
management system and a medical device system that are 
available to the doctor and the patient-side assistant during 
treatment via an Internet browser. The combination of local 
and remote web applications enables a seamless integration of 
the medical devices required at the patient’s location into the 
doctor’s remote station based on browser technology. The 
implementation of this system represents an improvement in 
the living conditions of populations in rural areas. 
 
Keywords-Web-based telemedicine; remote medical device; 
distributed medicine system; web technology; rural telemedicine. 
I. 
 BACKGROUND AND STATE OF THE ART 
Significant efforts are currently underway in various 
Latin-American countries (e.g., Ecuador, Cuba, Mexico, 
Brazil) to improve the healthcare situation in hard-to-access, 
rural and underdeveloped regions; using telemedical 
solutions.    
The Foundation for Telemedicine and eHealth in Ecuador 
(FUNDETEL) [26] is an example of an institution that 
together with local universities, is currently working on the 
collaboration and promotion of telemedicine and telehealth 
in Ecuador and internationally, not only as a teleconsultation 
and second opinion tool for rural areas such as the ANDES 
and COASTAL AREAS, but also in the area of training / 
online education in telemedicine, participating in the IDBA 
project for Latin-American Politics and Standards for 
Telemedicine and Telehealth.  
In highly developed industrial countries with an extensive 
medical infrastructure, telemedical systems are mainly used 
to improve the quality of life for older people [1][2], as well 
as in emergency healthcare systems [2][3], and for systems 
used in particular situations (on ships [5], in the space flight 
industry [6][7], and in military applications [8][9]).  
The available telemedical systems are not suited for 
regular and conventional treatment processes with only 
untrained or semi-skilled medical staff available at the 
patient’s location. In addition, the costs of conventional 
systems available on the market by far exceed the cost limit 
for practicable systems in developing countries. The 
technical solutions are based on proprietary and supplier-
specific components, while ICT standard technologies are 
hardly used.    
Some web-based telemedical projects planned to be 
deployed in underdeveloped regions and countries already 
exist [10][11][12]. However, the respective concepts in most 
cases only address the required telemedicine, while not 
considering the actually required telemedical stations, for 
which conventional systems available on the market shall be 
used. Further interesting solutions and discussions about 
telemedicine concerning the topic of this paper you can find 
in [14-25].  
In rural and isolated areas with geographical limitations, 
telemedical stations that take into account satellite 
connectivity, power supply such as solar panels, and ready- 
to-use teleconsultation equipments is urgently needed and 
not easily available or affordable. 
Furthermore, in the year 2008, during the REV conference 
in Düsseldorf, Maria Teresa Mijares presented a keynote 
speech [27] on the benefits and advances of telemedicine. 
This sparked the interest of many of the institutions and 
universities present at the event, in telemedicine.  
Duesseldorf 
University 
of 
Applied 
Sciences 
/ 
Competence Center Automation Duesseldorf (CCAD) 
together with Universidad de Oriente / Centro de 
Neurociencias Procesamiento de Imagenes y Señales 
(CENPIS) / Santiago de Cuba decided to research and create 
a telemedical system (short: TeleMedSys), as an important 
and affordable tool for the application of telemedicine in 
rural and isolated areas. 
The main problem of this research is a lack of a control 
system that allows doctors to take care of patients from 
different rural areas directly from hospitals.  
The current status of TeleMedSys is a demonstration 
example (prototype) that is analyzed and discussed in the 
present article. 
In the next sections of this paper we described different 
aspects of TeleMedSys. First a deep analysis of the main 
Requirements and objetives. The Scientific and Technical 
Solution for the prototype is also made, here is exposed the 
equipment structure of the TeleMedSys, the functional 
structure, problems of data analysis and the design and 
implementation. We finish this paper with the proposal for 
the use of this system in other environments after finish with 
first version. 
 
 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
 
II. 
REQUIREMENTS AND OBJECTIVES 
The main objective of TeleMedSys is to support 
telemedicine and the remote diagnosis of people living in 
rural areas, from the doctor stations. TeleMedSys respects 
the natural and economic conditions of each area and works 
in dependence of it. 
This prototype is not supposed to be a technological 
innovation; we were trying to solve a critical problem in 
rural areas using different technologies, particularly Web-
technologies. 
The main requirements and functionalities of the system 
are listed below. They were defined in agreement with 
FUNDETEL for the new telemedical system (TeleMedSys):  
 
A doctor station (DS), which will be able to 
cooperate with n patient stations (PS) respectively, 
will be set up.   
 
The PS deployment site has no power supply or 
communication infrastructure. The TeleMedSys will 
be transported through harsh terrain to the 
deployment site.    
 
Only medical assistants will be available at the PS 
site, which will have to be guided by the doctor 
during the treatment process.    
 
The TeleMedSys shall be web-based in order to 
integrate simple e-learning elements in parallel 
(work-integrated learning). 
 
95% of the treatment process is performed 
asynchronously between the patient/assistant and the 
doctor while the remaining 5% are performed 
synchronously via video conference and/or real-time 
chat.    
 
The weekly period of use for a PS amounts to 3-4 
hours. The maximum distance between the PS and 
the respective DS is 2,000 km.   
 
The medical examination equipment is connected to 
the PS; it will be unlocked by the DS and operated 
by the assistants according to the doctor’s 
instructions. The measuring data are automatically 
provided to the DS.    
 
The acquisition costs of the TeleMedSys should not 
exceed EUR 20,000. The operating costs should be 
less than EUR 1,000 per month.  
A particular challenge is the asynchronous treatment 
process, because in traditional medical practice such a 
procedure is not required and unknown.  
The Düsseldorf University of Applied Sciences initiated a 
university-internal research project with the involvement of 
the Universidad de Oriente in Santiago de Cuba for 
developing the first prototype in 2011. 
III. 
SCIENTIFIC & TECHNICAL SOLUTION 
A. Equipment structure of the TeleMedSys 
The device-related part of the DS can be realised with a 
standard computer, as the physician has the required 
infrastructure (fixed power supply, Internet access) and no 
medical devices need to be connected. The development of 
the PS was the biggest project challenge. Based on the 
above-mentioned requirements, the PS will therefore be 
equipped with the following components:    
 A robust notebook for use under critical environmental 
conditions (ruggedized). 
 A solar power station featuring a buffered battery 
operation for the power supply (solar output: 28W; 
battery: 15Ah, 12,8V; module output: 15V, 1800mA). 
 Satellite modem (Inmarsat satellites) for setting up 
Internet access with 384 Kbit/s download and 240 Kbit/s 
upload. 
 Medical examination devices with Bluetooth interface. 
The prototype, for the time being, will feature a blood 
pressure measuring device and a 6-channel ECG device.     
Figure 1 shows a picture of the PS device components.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Device components of the Patient Station for the TeleMedSys 
The appropriate technology devices will be implemented 
in accordance with the primary health needs and common 
diseases of the area. For further development the system 
should be connected to at least the following additional 
equipment for medical examinations: 
 
Ultrasonic diagnostic device; 
 
Digital camera; 
 
Body temperature measuring instrument; 
 
Spirometer. 
For all equipment components of the PS, the development 
of a special shipping box that is suitable for transport over 
rough terrain is also being planned. After a field test of the 
prototype, we will also re-examined the appropriateness of 
the used medical devices with Bluetooth connectivity. 
Although the wireless connection of the medical device with 
the PS is a flexible and elegant solution, all units require an 
extra power supply with batteries, which may in some cases 
not be available. Moreover, for the communication interface 
of medical devices (Bluetooth, USB or serial), the respective 
communication protocols and APIs are required. This is 
usually not the case, since the devices commonly come as a 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
 
complete application solution. Exceptions are the devices of  
the German company Corscience [28] which are used in the 
prototype of the PS.  
The serial protocol is published by Corscience and can be 
used very well for development purposes. The protocol is 
designed for simple and memory-saving implementation in a 
microcontroller. The overhead was kept as low as possible. 
The principle of this protocol is basically modeled on the 
PPP (point-to-point protocol), which is often used to 
establish 
modem 
connections. 
Furthermore, 
escape 
sequences are used to filter out reserved bytes (start flag, end 
flag, escape flag) from the data stream. 
B. Functional  structure 
The TeleMedSys software consists of the following three 
key components:   
 
Patient Management System (PMS), 
 
Medical Device System (MDS), and 
 
Online Collaboration System (OCS). 
The prototype requires the PMS and the MDS (only for 
asynchronous operation). Later, the prototype will be 
extended with the OCS.    
Figure 2 depicts the functional software structure of the 
TeleMedSys. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Functional structure of the TeleMedSys 
All patient information is stored by the Patient 
Management System (PMS) on a TeleMedSys server. Both 
the DS and the PS (doctor and assistant) have access via a 
web browser to the PMS database on the TeleMedSys server 
and can edit the information in a Patient Data Record (PDR). 
The DS is working as a client and uses only a web browser. 
The asynchronous patient treatment is the main issue of 
the PMS (see Figure. 3). It requires separating the overall 
treatment session for a patient into individual steps for the 
assistant at the PS and the doctor at the DS. These individual 
steps are performed alternately by the assistant and the 
doctor. The system automatically displays the status of all 
patient sessions and provides information about the next 
required step for each patient through an event screen. 
In principle, the treatment is done in the asynchronous 
mode of operation similar to the remote diagnostic and 
service procedures in a technical system: the entire process is 
well structured and each sub-step ends with a conclusion. 
Completed individual steps are not repeatable in the current 
session.  
A relatively stringent regulation of the treatment steps is 
required because only semi-skilled or non-professional 
medical personnel will be working at the patient's side. A 
field test of the prototype under real conditions will show 
whether this step-by-step process is suitable for medical 
treatment and whether it will be accepted by the participating 
medical staff. 
The doctor can unlock the required medical devices via 
the PMS at the PS site and provide the assistant with 
additional context-related support instructions. The assistant 
at the PS will be also be instructed by the doctor, in order to 
make no mistakes when carrying out the medical 
measurements.  
Figure 3.  Graphic description of the asynchronous mode  
The MDS consists mainly of the following components:  
 
MD driver: Implementation of the Corscience 
protocol interface to medical devices.  
 
MD data server: Recording and preprocessing of the 
measured medical data and implementation of a 
TCP/IP command interface.  
 
MD proxy: implementation of the TCP/IP command 
exchange between the MDS web page and MD data 
server. 
 
MDS web pages: The operation of each medical 
device is made via a web page with an MD device 
operator panel. 
All MDS components are located on the PS and will be 
activated via the MDS web pages in the web browser of the 
PS. For this purpose on the PS is running a local web server 
which is used in order to start the MDS web pages. The PMS 
(loaded from the remote server TeleMedSys) and the MDS 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
 
(loaded from the local web server in the PS) are connected in 
a frame website according the MashUp principle. Only by 
this way is possible for this web page to provide access to the 
peripheral components (medical devices) of the PS. 
Figure 4 shows the frame website of the PS. The visual 
design of the PS website is not yet optimized. At the moment 
it is a design difference between the MDS (right grey part) 
and the PMS (left light-blue part).The reason is these two 
parts are implemented using different web technologies – 
MDS through pure HTML/JavaScript and PMS through 
Flash. The next version of the PS/DS will also have a unified 
user interface design. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  The frame website of the Patient Station in the prototype 
 
In case of a limited data value volume, the MDS transmits 
the measuring data (e.g. blood pressure) in real-time to the 
PMS and stores the data in the database. The real time term 
is just for representing the immediacy of the information in 
the network between the PMS and MDS. In case of larger 
data volumes (e.g. ElectroCardioGram ECG) the data are 
saved locally in a measuring file first and subsequently 
transferred remotely in a corresponding file of the 
TeleMedSys server. In this case, only the name and location 
of the data file (not the data itself) are stored in the database.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Analysis of a 6-channel ECG with a measuring time of 50 s in 
the Doctor Station’s web browser    
C. Problems of data analysis 
The measuring data can be analyzed at the DS. Figure 5 
shows an analysis example for the 6-channel ECG in the DS 
web browser.  
The XY plot object (ActiveX object) from the Iocomp 
visualisation package is used for the graphical ECG data 
presentation [13]. Here, however, a problem arises for the 
visualization of long-term ECG measurement, which has not 
yet been optimally solved: 
The recording of ECG data occurs at a clock rate of 100 
Hz or 500 Hz. A normal stress ECG with e.g. 20 min 
duration and a resolution of 10 ms (100 Hz) results in 
120,000 data values. The representation of these data in the 
XY plot object is in principle not a problem, but the plot 
object requires about 2 ms for the visualization of each data 
point in the XY object. Add to this the retrieval of data from 
the TeleMedSys server, which takes about 30 seconds. For 
the above example a delay of 4.5 min for the initial display 
of the data data thus follows. Once the measurement data in 
the data RAM of the XY plot object are stored, the analysis 
of data can be done quickly and in a very detailed way. 
D. Design and Implementation  
The 
PMS 
realisation 
is 
based 
on 
HTML/Flash 
(Macromedia 
eXtensible 
Markup 
Language 
- 
MXML/ActionScript) in combination with Java for 
accessing a database. mySQL is used as database server and 
the design of the relational database was made according to 
the specification of business applications.  
The MDS is developed with HTML, JavaScript and Java 
applets. The MD server is a Java application that is operated 
via a Bluetooth interface and controlled through TCP/IP 
commands by a Java applet (MD-Proxy, see Figure 2).   
The technology selection for the development of PMS 
was based on capabilities offered to end users as well as 
developers by using Rich Internet Applications (RIA) such 
as Flex Builder 3.0; that was the tool selected for PMS 
implementation. The use of the Web 2.0 tool in a system 
like TeleMedSys; includes the optimization of time and 
resources. The applications development, with RIA, 
provides some advantages to the systems user and reduces 
information traffic on networks, because it is not necessary 
to reload all of the page but just that portion that needs to be 
updated. 
The MDS uses a special Java applet with the Live 
Connect method for communication between the medical 
devices and JavaScript functions on the MDS webpages. 
Originally this Java applet was developed for the remote 
operation of industrial devices by TCP/IP commands 
TeleMedSys 
is 
structured 
according 
to 
classic 
architecture for web systems: architecture of three levels 
supported in a Server – Client architecture. In order to 
ensure the usability of TeleMedSys, the architectural pattern 
Model View Controller (MVC) was selected. This pattern 
guarantees an effective information management; it 
separates the model of the user view layer, using a controller 
to intercede between these two levels. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
 
To ensure the persistence of the PMS the binomial 
Hibernate/Spring framework is used. The main task of 
Hibernate is the Object-Relational Mapping (ORM). This 
makes it possible to store ordinary Java objects with 
attributes and methods in relational databases, and to create 
objects again from these records. Relations between objects 
are mapped to corresponding database relations. This 
guarantees that in the case of  a connection abort or bad 
Internet connection no data are lost during treatment 
process, and the system can reset to the last treatment date.  
The selection of the binomial also guarantees access to 
remote data transparently to the user; all procedures are 
performed using Remote Procedure Calls (RPC). Figure 6 
shows the distribution of the PMS components in the 
TeleMedSys within the MVC pattern. 
An Apache web server is running on the PS as a local web 
server. The PMS uses a Tomcat web server with a Spring 
Framework as  Java application support. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Architecture 
of the PMS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The DS will function as a TeleMedSys server 
simultaneously during a first field test of the prototype. 
Later, the TeleMedSys server will, however, operate on a 
dedicated computer; to provide the required safety and data 
security. For data transmission between the application and 
the server, the protocol implemented by Hibernate to access 
the data base was used. 
TeleMedSys is a data transfer system; it must therefore 
ensure methods that ensure the integrity of these data. The 
system has three different kinds of users:  
 
Doctor user: Access to Patient Data Record (PDR), 
realization of diagnosis, records indications 
 
Assistant user: Access to PDR and MD, execute 
the indications of Doctor and has contact with the 
patient 
 
Administrator: Has the control of the system, adds, 
deletes or updates information about the rest of the 
users and the software configuration. 
Each user can have access to the system using a password 
unique for each one. This password changes every time the 
user logs in the system. This password is encrypted using the 
MD5 algorithm. 
For further versions of this system, we recommend using a 
data encryption algorithm in order to protect the patients’ 
data, as well as the information of the diagnosis and the 
security of the system in general.  
A database was designed in consideration of the data 
integrity. The final design of this database model reaches a 
3rd normal form of normalization level. The design of the 
database takes  into account the requirements of the system 
itself. 
Figure 7 shows the final model design for the database 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Database Entity Relationship Model 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
The article describes a web-based telemedical system for 
use in rural areas. The combination of remote-based and 
local web applications enables direct remote access to 
medical 
devices 
through 
a 
web 
browser 
without 
technological gaps. The doctor station and N distributed 
patient stations are provided with a structured access to all 
patient data through a common web browser, enabling them 
to perform asynchronous treatment procedures.      
Upon completion of the prototype (May 2011), a first field 
test in cooperation with the CENPIS of the Universidad de 
Oriente in Cuba was realized with real patients and the 
positive opinion of the doctors in July 2011. The test results 
showed that TeleMedSys represents a big step for rural 
health, not only because the population will benefit from 
better health conditions, but also from advances in the 
technology. This result will be integrated in a revised 
prototype, which will be deployed in one of the selected rural 
regions in Ecuador in 2012/13. 
The logic distribution and architecture of the components 
of TeleMedSys, make it a simple and useful system that is to 
easy maintain and easily migrated to other media and 
technologies. TeleMedSys is easy to attach to mobile 
platforms. It is therefore conceivable to implement a system 
for remote diagnosis and telemedicine using technology and 
perhaps even mobile telephony. 
In this case, the possibilities offered by these devices 
(cameras, sensors, microphones) will be useful for the next 
versions of TeleMedSys; this would make them practical, 
inexpensive and easy to use for all users. The proposal 
considers that only the PS uses the mobile device and that 
Android is considered as a platform for devices. 
PS will have the following components: Mobile device – 
Smartphone and Web browser with HTML/Flash Player by 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
 
default. The device should also include the software for MD 
and a local Web server. The Web server in PS can be an 
Android Web server (KSW [29] or I-Jetty [30]) or can be 
TomCat. The selection should be accord with the designer 
and also with the priorities of the TeleMedSys. 
The 
implementation 
of 
this 
solution 
brings 
inconvenience to the users, which must be analyzed.  
 The 
connection 
between 
the 
mobile 
device 
(Smartphone) and TeleMedSys server should be using 
Wi-Fi, which means data transfer will be slow and it is 
also possible to lose some information in the process. 
Of course, that depends on the quality of the Wi-Fi.  
 The TeleMedSys server should be near the radio zone 
of the Wi-Fi. 
To put this proposal into practice a number of actions 
must be taken first. For instance, the general security of the 
system must be ensured, because the mobile environment is 
very hostile and vulnerable to attacks. We recommend, once 
the first version of TeleMedSys is complete, that the 
necessary bases for the migration to mobile platform are 
created because of the advantages offered by  it. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Zydacron: Information about CareStation 140. – 
www.zydacron.com, 2009 
[2] Bellazzi, R., et al.: Web-based telemedicine systems for 
home-care: 
technical 
issues 
and 
experiences. 
- 
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 64 
(2001), pp. 175–187 
[3] TMA Medical: Erfolg für Telemedizin und E-health 
durch das Mobile Care Unit. – www.tma-medical.com, 
2010 
[4] MEYTEC: 
Ein 
neuesTelemedizinsystem 
für 
Echtzeitanwendungen 
in 
Rettungsfahrzeugen. 
– 
www.meytec.com, 2010 
[5] GS 
Elektromedizinische 
Geräte 
G. 
Stemple: 
Information  about  corpuls systems. -  www.corpuls.de, 
2009 
[6] Williams, D. R., et al: A Strategic Vision for 
Telemedicine and Medical Informatics in Space Flight. 
- Telemedicine Journal and e-Health, Vol 6, Nov 4, 
2001, pp. 441-448 
[7] Centre Spatial Guyanais: Telemedicine in French 
Guiana. – www.cnes-csg.fr, 2010 
[8] Cali, C.: The Italian Military Medical Services and 
Telemedicine. – Proc. of the Telemedicin Workshop 
and 3rd Meeting of the SIMIHO new Experts technical 
Group, Rome, 7 - 8 July 2003 
[9] Melcer, T., et al.: A Prospective Evaluation of ENT 
Telemedicine in Remote Military Populations Seeking 
Specialty Care. - Journal and e-Health, September 
2002, 8(3), pp 301-311. 
[10] Logan, J. S.: Telemedicine 101: Innovations in Rural 
Health Care Delivery Systems. – Proc. of Cooperative 
Solutions to Rural Health Care Problems: Emergency 
Medical Services,  University of California, Davis 
School of Medicine, June, 1993 
[11] Blue print: The Ohanyido Matrix: Development of a 
Telemedicine 
System 
for 
Nigeria. 
- 
http://ohanyido.tripod.com/id13.html, 2005, 2011 
[12] Pandian, P. S., et al: Store and Forward Applications in 
Telemedicine for Wireless Ip Based Networks. - 
Journal of Networks, Vol. 2, No. 6, Dec. 2007, pp. 58 - 
65 
[13] IOcomp: 
Description 
of 
the 
iPlot 
object. 
– 
www.iocomp.com, 2010  
[14] Estudio de Factibilidad de una Red de Telemedicina en 
la Red Pública del Atlántico. 
http://archivo.revistaesalud.com/index.php/revistaesalud/article/view/
250/566, 2011 
[15] Martínez, Andrés: Evaluación del impacto del uso de 
las tecnologías apropiadas de comunicación para el 
personal     sanitario rural de países en desarrollo. - 
Tesis doctoral, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid,  
2003.  pp. 16-20.  
[16] Arado 
López, 
Annabel: 
Propuesta 
para 
la 
implementación de la telemedicina como sistema a 
partir de la adecuación del soporte de comunicaciones 
de la red Infomed. - Tesis de Maestría, Departamento 
de Telemática, ISPJAE, 2007 
[17] J. Rottger, AM Irving, J. Broere, and B. Tranbmer: Use 
of telecomunications in a rural emergency. - Brain 
surgery by fax!. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 
3, pp. 59-60, 1997 
[18] D. 
Shanit, 
A. 
Cheng 
and 
RA 
Greenbaum: 
Telecardiology: suporting the decision-making process 
in general practice. - Journal of Telemedicine and 
Telecare 2, 1996, pp. 7-13. 
[19] Treatment by telegraph (1917): Excerpt from the 
obituary of John Joseph Holland (1876-1959). Journal 
of Telemedicine and Telecare 3, 1997, pp. 223. 
[20] F. Amenta, A. Dauri, and N. Rizzo: Organization and 
activities of the International Radio Medical centre 
(CIRM). - Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 2, 
1996, pp. 125-131. 
[21] Informatización 
en 
Cuba. 
Disponible 
en: 
http://www.cubaminrex.cu/Sociedadinformacion/Cifras
2005.  
[22] Telemedicina y Bioingeniería. Bioingeniero Eduardo D. 
Lázaro. Disponible en: 
http://www.simiconsultora.com.ar, 
2001  
[23] Revista Cubana de la Informática Medica: Las Nuevas 
Tecnologías de la Información (NTIC) en la medicina: 
la Telemedicina en Cuba. - http://www.cecam.sld.cu/, 2011 
[24] RH Friedman, LE Kazis, A. Jette, MB Smith, J. 
Stollerman, 
J. 
Torgerson,and 
K. 
Carey: 
A 
telecomunications system for monitorin and counseling 
patiens with hypertension. - American Journal of 
Hypertension 9, pp. 285-292, 1996. 
[25] D. 
Shanit, 
A. 
Cheng 
and 
RA 
Greenbaum: 
Telecardiology: suporting the decision-making process 
in general practice. - Journal of Telemedicine and 
Telecare 2, pp. 7-13, 1996. 
[26] Fundatel Blog de los viajes de los integrantes de 
Fundatel, fundación de telemedicina de Argentina, 
aplicando Telemedicina y eSalud por el mundo. 
Avaible in: http://fundatel.blogspot.de/  
[27] M. Mijares: Limitations for the implementation of 
Telemedicine and Telehealth Projects: Based on the 
Ecuadorian experience. Avaible in:  http://www.rev-
conference.org/REV2008/archive/welcome-5.htm 
[28] CorScience- Cardiovascular Innovations. Avaible in: 
http://www.corscience.de/ 
[29] kWS, 
Android 
Web 
Server 
http://www.androidpit.de/de/android/market/apps/app/org.xeustechno
logies.android.kws/kWS-Android-Web-Server 
[30] I-Jetty: 
webserver 
for 
android 
plataform: 
http://code.google.com/p/i-jet
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

