Improvement on K-means and TSP Based Mobility Protocol of Wireless Sensor 
Network 
 
Afef Ghabri1, Monia Bellalouna2, Walid Khaznaji3   
1Laboratory RIADI-GDL, 23Laboratory CRISTAL POLE GRIFT 
National School of Computer Sciences (ENSI) 
Manouba, Tunisia 
e-mail: 1afef2108@hotmail.com, 2monia.bellalouna@ensi.rnu.tn, 3mwkhaznaji@yahoo.fr
 
 
Abstract—Wireless sensor networks are widely used in 
different environments in order to execute diverse tasks and 
applications. In this paper, we will consider problems related 
to the fault tolerance issue and we will present a new version of 
K-means And Traveling Salesman Problem based mobility 
protocol which aims to provide not only better energy 
efficiency within the wireless network, but also better 
reliability compared with the conventional method based on K-
means clustering and the approximate solution for Traveling 
Salesman Problem by using the simple local search algorithm 
"2-Opt". This problem is Non-deterministic Polynomial-time 
hard (NP-hard), so we propose the new approach that 
navigates the mobile sink to go through the cluster centers 
according to the optimized route by implementing the local 
search method "Tabu". Simulation results have demonstrated 
that the solution given by the Tabu heuristic outperforms the 
original solution of K-means and Traveling Salesman Problem 
based mobility protocol in terms of quality. Our goal is to 
propose a much more realistic model that provides less 
execution time than the conventional strategy and an effective 
improvement once the problem is disturbed by the 
breakdowns of some nodes. 
Keywords-Wireless 
sensor 
networks; 
fault-tolerance; 
failures; Tabu; quality; realistic. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The technological advances carried out in the past years 
have allowed the development of new varieties of sensors, 
which 
can 
be 
configured 
and 
used 
for 
wireless 
communication in order to form autonomous networks. 
Indeed, the sensors can send data to all the nodes which are 
connected to the network. They are enormously employed in 
various environments in a random way to perform different 
monitoring tasks such as the delivery, the searching, the help 
in case of disasters and the target tracking [1]. Generally, a 
sensor network is primarily composed of several collector 
nodes that are scattered throughout a sensing field, a data 
processing center and sinks [2]. Each node, randomly 
distributed, is responsible for collecting obtained data from 
its coverage area. The sinks are particular nodes that must 
always be active and whose role is to route recovered data 
coming from sensor nodes. Their number depends on the 
network load and size. These collection points represent the 
interface between the sensing field and the data processing 
center that facilitates data recovery and ensures their 
treatment in order to extract for the user useful information 
[3]. Figure 1 shows this principle. 
 
 Figure 1. Wireless sensor network architecture 
 
Generally, in the case of a large-scale network, data is 
periodically transmitted from source nodes to the sink up the 
tree- structure. Data routing is ensured by intermediate nodes 
that forward the messages until reaching the destination. 
Then, there exist different possible paths in order to derive 
information [4]. This process imposes energy conservation 
and network lifetime prolongation problems. It is thus 
necessary to find the shortest and optimal route in order to 
provide the data routing, within the energy constraints and 
the time of transferring packages [5]. In dealing with this 
problem, we noticed that it leads to a Combinatorial 
Optimization Problem (COP) [6]. In other words, several 
problems to be solved in the Wireless Sensor Network 
(WSN), such as the routing problem which returns to find a 
shorter path, or the minimization problem of energy, 
consumed by the sensors, taking into account several 
constraints as their displacement and their communications, 
can be reduced to optimization problems [7]. Unfortunately, 
the sensors are prone to many intrusions and failures, mainly 
due to physical destructions, depletion of batteries, 
communication 
link 
errors, 
malicious 
attacks 
and 
environmental interferences [8]. Thus, the sensor breakdown 
causes the loss of communication links that leads to a 
significant change in the overall network topology. This can 
affect the network connectivity and decrease its life [7]. 
Failures of sensor nodes should not affect the overall 
network performance. This is a problem of reliability or fault 
tolerance. Fault tolerance is the ability of a network to keep 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-421-3
AMBIENT 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

its functionality without causing interruptions if a sensor 
node stops working. We can say that its objective is to avoid 
the total system flaw despite the existence of errors in a 
subset of its elementary components [9]. The studied 
problem is then reduced to a COP, where the number of data 
is a random variable instead of a deterministic value, and 
thereafter it was more interesting to consider it as being a 
Probabilistic Combinatorial Optimization Problem (PCOP) 
[10]. 
The purpose of this paper is to propose a new strategy 
that guarantees the obtaining of a solution in real time once 
the problem is disturbed by the failures of some nodes, by 
considering the fault tolerance as a PCOP through the K-
means and Traveling Salesman Problem-based mobility 
(KAT-mobility) protocol [11]. The rest of the paper will be 
organized as follows: In Section II, we will present the 
PCOP and particularly the Probabilistic Traveling Salesman 
Problem (PTSP). Section 3 will describe its solving methods. 
A description of the KAT-mobility protocol principle will be 
shown in Section 4. In Section 5, we will propose our 
improved strategy. Section 6 presents the simulation results 
and analysis. Finally, we will conclude the paper in Section 
7. 
II. 
PROBABILISTIC COMBINATORIAL OPTIMIZATION 
PROBLEMS 
In recent years, COPs are considered as a critical issue 
and a very interesting subject of research. The study of these 
problems became one of the most exciting and active areas 
in the field of discrete mathematics [12]. In fact, a COP is 
defined as follows: given n data, a set of configurations S 
and an objective function defined on S in 
,
 the goal is to 
find a configuration s* that minimizes the function f. 
 
 
 
 
This deterministic model is inadequate with reality, 
where the number of data of the studied problem is 
frequently a random variable between 0 and n. Recently, a 
specific family of COPs, characterized by the fact that 
probabilistic elements are included explicitly in the problem 
definitions, has appeared and has been investigated [13]. For 
this reason, they were named PCOPs. There are many 
motivations for studying the effect of probabilistic elements 
inclusion in COPs: among them two are the most significant. 
The first one is the desire of formulating and analyzing 
models which are more convenient for real world problems, 
where randomness exists [12]. The second motivation is the 
possibility to analyze the robustness of optimal solutions for 
deterministic problems, considering the modification of the 
instances for which these problems are solved: disruption by 
the absence of certain data [14]. The PCOP is defined as 
follows: given a random number of data varying between 0 
and n (0 when all the tasks are absent and n when all the 
tasks are present), a set of configurations S, an objective 
function defined on S in  and a modification strategy 
which adapts the feasible solution through S to the new 
subset in order to obtain the realizable solution through the 
set of present tasks, the objective is to find a configuration s* 
which minimizes the functional of f according to this 
strategy. 
 
 
The first studied problem in PCOPs, initially introduced 
by Jaillet [15], was the PTSP [16]. This approach has been 
then extended to other different problems and studies have 
continued in several domains, such as the Probabilistic 
Traveling Salesman Facility Location Problem (PTSFLP) 
[13], the probabilistic longest path problem [17] and the 
probabilistic minimum vertex covering problem [18]. The 
probabilistic approach was extended to combinatorial 
problems that are not defined on graphs, such as the 
Probabilistic Scheduling Problem (PSP) [19] and the 
Probabilistic Bin Packing Problem (PBPP) [20]. There are 
many interesting and important applications of PCOPs, 
particularly in the context of communication systems, 
strategic planning, job scheduling, etc. [21]. To deal with 
these problems, two strategies can be used: the re-
optimization strategy [22] and the a priori strategy [13]. 
A. Solving Strategies 
Frequently in applications, after having solved a 
particular instance of a given combinatorial optimization 
problem, we must solve repeatedly many copies of the same 
problem. These additional instances are generally simple 
variations of the original problem; however, they are 
sufficiently different to require an individual treatment [18]. 
The most natural approach used to address this kind of 
situation consists in solving in an optimal way the different 
potential copies. We call this strategy the "re-optimization 
strategy" [23]. However, it has many disadvantages and the 
most important one is the high cost. For example, if the 
considered COP is NP-hard [24], one could have to solve an 
exponential number of instances of a very hard problem. 
Moreover, in several applications it is required to find a 
solution to each new instance promptly, but one could not 
have the necessary computing or other resources to carry out 
such a task [13]. It is therefore necessary to adopt a different 
strategy. 
Rather 
than re-optimizing 
each 
successive 
exemplary, we can try to determine a priori solution of the 
initial problem that can be successively modified in a simple 
way to solve the following instances. We call this strategy, 
introduced by Jaillet [15][10] and which is less costly in 
terms of computations, the "a priori strategy" [6].  
Different algorithms were implemented for PCOP 
resolution and have shown a satisfactory performance. 
Approximate methods have been used to solve large scale 
PCOPs. Among them, we mention the work of Bertsimas 
[25], in which he proposed and analyzed heuristics for 
PVRP. Many algorithms based on classic heuristics were 
also proposed for the PBPP, in the works of Bellalouna 
[6][22]. Metaheuristics were also employed to solve PCOPs, 
such as simulated annealing and Tabu search, implemented 
in the case of PTSP [22]. A Tabu Search was implemented 
by Gendreau et al. [26] for solving the vehicle routing 
problem with stochastic demands and customers [14]. 
)
(
:
f s
s
S
f



(1) 




  


E f s 
E f s
*  min
(2) 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-421-3
AMBIENT 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
Furthermore, exact methods have been used, such as branch 
& bound algorithm developed by Rosenow [27], to solve 
PCOPs and especially the probabilistic traveling salesman 
problem. 
B. Probabilistic Traveling Salesman Problem 
The PTSP is a variation of the standard Traveling 
Salesman Problem (TSP) [28]. It is essentially a TSP, in 
which the number of nodes that require being visited in each 
problem is a random variable [13]. In fact, for a given finite 
set of points, the TSP consists of finding a tour through the 
points of minimum total length [12], and in the probabilistic 
version of this problem, introduced for the first time by 
Jaillet [15]; only a subset of the nodes may be present in any 
given instance of it. The TSP can then be considered and 
treated as a special case of PTSP. Indeed, the principal 
difference between the two problems is that in TSP the 
probability of each visited node is 1, while in PTSP the 
probability of each visited node is between 0 and 1 [14].  
In other words, consider a routing problem through a set 
of n known points. On any given instance of this problem, 
only a random subset S has to be visited. In many cases, we 
can not have resources to reoptimize the tour for every 
instance, and even if we had them, re-optimization may 
become too time consuming [13]. We wish to find a priori 
tour through all the points. On any given instance, the subset 
of present points will then be visited in the same order as 
they appear in the a priori tour, i.e., we simply skip the 
absent points in that problem instance [21]. The problem of 
finding such a priori tour of minimum expected length 
according to this skipping strategy is defined as a PTSP [12]. 
Figure 2 shows this principle. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. PTSP methodology 
 
What distinguishes the PTSP from other problems is the 
probability distribution (law) that specifies the number and 
the identity of present points that require to be visited on any 
given problem instance. The PTSP can be formulated as 
follows: Consider a complete graph G = (V, E) on n nodes 
and a priori tour R through these points. If every possible 
subset of the node set V = {1, 2…, n} may or may not be 
present on any given instance of the optimization problem, 
for example, on any given day, the traveling salesman may 
have to visit only a subset S (S ⊆ V), then there are 2n 
possible instances of the problem, i.e., 2n is the number of all 
the possible subsets of V [29]. Let P(S) be the probability 
that instance S occurs. Given a method µ for updating a 
priori solution R to this optimization problem on G, µ will 
then produce for S, a feasible solution with the value (cost) 
LR(S). In fact, this solution is a tour through the subset S of 
nodes and LR(S) represents the length of that tour [15][29]. 
Then, given that we have already selected the updating 
strategy µ, the natural choice for the a priori solution is to 
select a tour through all potential nodes that minimizes the 
expected cost with the summation over all subsets of V [29].  
           
 


V
S
R
R
S
P S L
L
( )
)
(
, )
(
, )
(


 
Otherwise, each point i has a probability of presence pi, 
independently of the others. We assume that d (i, j) is the 
distance between points i and j and we suppose that the a 
priori tour is R = (1, 2….., n-1, n, 1), then our problem is 
finding a tour through n nodes, which minimizes the 
expected length of a determined a priori PTSP tour R, 
denoted   [L(R,µ)] [14]. 
    



 


















n
j
j
i
n
j
k
i
k
k
j
i
ji
n
i
n
i
j
j
i
k
k
j
i
ij
R
p
d p p
p
d p p
L
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
( , )
)
1(
)
1(

 
If all the points have the same probability of presence (pi 
= p, ∀ i), the expected length   [L(R,µ)] can be expressed 
using the following formula [6]: 
        






, )
(
2
2
( , )
)
1(
R
n
R
L
p
p
L




 
Where 



n
i
R
i
d i R
L
1
( , )
( ))
( ,

 
 
Rτ comprises pgcd (n, τ+1) sub-tours. It consists in 
jumping τ points from the initial tour R. Rτ(i) represents the 
point after i along the permutation Rτ, so L(R,µ)
τ is the 
permutation length. We note that R0 is the tour R and L(R,µ)
0 
is the length of the tour R [14][15].  
There are several methods for solving PTSPs. A wide 
variety of approximate and exact algorithms have been 
proposed for solving it. Exact methods can only solve 
relatively small problems. Concerning the approximate 
algorithms, a number of heuristics and metaheuristics have 
been effectively used in the case of large problems. 
Nowadays, approximate methods are considered as a very 
interesting subject for many researchers who still trying to 
find the best algorithm that gives a very good approximate 
solution in appropriate running time [14]. 
III. 
SOLVING METHODS OF PTSP 
The PTSP was introduced by Jaillet [15], who studied 
some of its properties and proposed different heuristics and 
also an exact branch & bound algorithm to solve this 
problem [30]. It represents an optimization problem for 
which, there is no known algorithm that ensures the 
obtaining of an exact solution in polynomial time. The 
algorithms used for solving this problem can be classified 
into two categories: exact algorithms and heuristics. The 
exact algorithms permit finding an optimal solution, but they 
   a priori tour 
The resulting tour 
when the points 1 
and 5 are absent 
(3) 
     
   
    
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-421-3
AMBIENT 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

are 
characterized 
by 
a 
complexity 
that 
increases 
exponentially with the problem size (the number of cities). 
However, the approximation algorithms or heuristics permit 
the obtaining of good solutions, but can not guarantee their 
optimality. Thus, these methods approach the optimal 
solution in reasonable time. Among the most commonly used 
techniques for PTSP resolution, we can mention the local 
search algorithms 2-Opt and Tabu and the branch & bound 
technique [9]. 
A. 2-Opt Algorithm 
The 2-Opt algorithm was proposed by Lin-Kernighan 
[31] in 1973, with a purpose of ensuring the obtained starting 
solution improvement [32]. Indeed, a possible transformation 
consists in removing 2 edges of the tour and recomposing 
another trajectory by reconnecting remaining segments in 
another way, through the use of new links and by reversing 
their course direction if possible (suppression of 2 edges then 
testing all the ways to reintegrate them). The 2-Opt algorithm 
provides an elementary transformation consisting in selecting 
two nonadjacent present edges in the Hamiltonian cycle and 
carrying out their exchange by two other edges in a manner 
to obtain a new cycle. One starts with a random tour and 
systematically tries to find a better tour by replacing two arcs 
of the tour by two other arcs [31]. Figure 3 illustrates this 
operation.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. 2-Opt procedure 
B. Tabu Algorithm 
Tabu Search (TS) is a local search method combined 
with a set of techniques to avoid being trapped in a local 
minimum or cycle repetition. TS was mainly introduced by 
Glover [33] in 1986. This method has proved high efficiency 
for the resolution of difficult optimization problems. Indeed, 
from an initial solution in a set of local solutions, subsets of 
solutions that belong to this set neighborhood are generated. 
Through the evaluation function, we retain the solution 
which improves its value, selected among the set of 
neighboring solutions. The algorithm may accept sometimes 
solutions that do not always improve the current solution 
[26]. We implement a Tabu list containing the last visited 
solutions, which does not give the possibility for a solution, 
which is already found, to be accepted and stored in the Tabu 
list. Then, the choice of the next solution is carried out on a 
set of neighboring solutions outside of the elements of this 
list. When the list length is reached, each new selected 
solution replaces the oldest in the list. The list construction is 
based on the First In First Out (FIFO) principle. As a 
stopping criterion, one can for example fix a maximum 
number of iterations, or fix a limited time after which the 
search should stop.  
TS is a local search method, and the structure of its basic 
algorithm is similar to that of simulated annealing, with the 
advantage of having a simplified parameter setting: the 
parameter setting consists initially in finding an indicative 
value of iterations during which the movements are 
prohibited. It will be necessary to choose a memorization 
strategy. However, the Tabu method requires a memory 
management, more and more intense, by putting complex 
memorizing strategies [33]. The effectiveness of the Tabu 
method provides its use in several classical COPs such as the 
TSP, the scheduling problem, the problem of vehicles, etc.  
IV. 
KAT-MOBILITY PROTOCOL 
Nakayama et al. [34] proposed the KAT-mobility 
protocol based on optimization methods of routing and 
aggregation [9]. It is a model of mobility of sinks that can 
effectively gather detected data employed in a WSN, even if 
some nodes are destroyed [35]. Indeed, the implementation 
of this mobility concept provides better energy management 
and increases the network lifetime. The system is composed 
of two modules: the clustering algorithm and the 
approximate solution for the TSP [34]. 
A. Clustering Algorithm 
The KAT-mobility protocol is based on clustering and 
especially on the K-means approach [36] defined by 
McQueen [37] in 1967 and illustrated in Figure 4. The goal 
of this method is the division of the sensors set into k 
partitions, where each sensor will belong to the appropriate 
partition with the nearest average. The implementation of 
this algorithm is carried out by following these steps: the first 
step consists in choosing k that represents the number of 
groups to be created and then generating k initial centers 
randomly. The following step is to browse through all the 
nodes in order to assign them to the proper group whose 
center is the closest, on the basis of the computation of the 
distance between this center and each node. Then, we 
calculate the new centers associated with the new partition 
by seeking the average value of all the sensors in the 
respective group (centroid). Thereafter, we repeat the second 
step to perform the reassignment and the third step to update 
the average of each group. These last two steps will be then 
repeated until convergence to a stable partition: this 
convergence will be reached when there is no change. This 
algorithm convergence can be slow, so it is advised to add a 
stopping criterion, which is the case of KAT-mobility 
protocol. This process can be regarded as an optimization 
problem, as it aims to minimize the sum of the distances 
between group centers and the points located inside each 
group (the sum of the approximate errors). In fact, the group 
cost is estimated by the approximation error between the 
sensors and the center. This algorithm divides the set of 
nodes virtually into k clusters (C1, C2 … Ck) geographically 
close. We denote by n the nodes number in the network, 
usually n >> k. Let mj (j = 1, 2 ... k) be a group center and xi 
   Before exchange 
   After exchange 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-421-3
AMBIENT 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

(7) 
(i = 1, 2 ... n) be a sensor, which is represented by a 2-
dimensional vector (i.e., sensor position) [9]. d (xi, mj), 
which is indicated by the Euclidian distance between the 
group center and the sensor, represents the approximation 
error. The goal is to assign each sensor to a cluster Cj by 
reducing the total error of the clusters in order to reduce 
batteries consumption and communications energy [38]. The 
final objective is to assure the configuration of Cj such that 
the sum of approximate errors is minimized. 
 
Figure 4. Operating principle of K-means algorithm 
 
After the grouping of nodes, the K-means method 
reaches the mobile sink to make a course through the centers 
of groups, determined as anchor points, according to the 
trajectory of an optimized route [9]. This route is set as an 
approximate solution of the TSP. 
B. Route Optimization 
The second procedure of KAT-mobility protocol consists 
in optimizing the routing path of the collector (sink). Finding 
the best path for the mobile node is identical to the TSP. 
Then, a collector represents the traveling salesman and 
cluster centroids (centers) define cities. The route 
optimization of the mobile collector to visit once and only 
once every cluster centroid is equivalent to searching for the 
shortest trip of the traveling salesman in order to visit each 
city once [11]. Here, it is supposed that an administrator 
distributes nodes to supervise the targeted zone, and they are 
scattered at random locations and do not move afterwards. 
Indeed, this method reaches the mobile sink to make a course 
through the centers of groups according to the trajectory of 
an optimized path. The sink collects then the data coming 
from nodes on the level of the visited groups [9]. Figure 5 
illustrates this principle [34]. 
The goal is to find the trajectory π which minimizes the 
tour lengths, where the initial position of the mobile sink is 
indicated by m0. The quantity mentioned in (7) shows the 
tour length of a mobile collector that will be realized by 
visiting the centers in the specified order according to the 
permutation, while returning finally to the starting position. 



(0) 
)
(
1
0
1)
(
( )
,
,









m
d m
m
d m
k
k
j
j
j
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. KAT-mobility protocol 
The TSP belongs to the category of NP-hard problems 
and it represents an optimization problem, for which there 
does not exist a known algorithm that ensures the obtaining 
of an exact solution in polynomial time. Then, the conclusion 
of the optimal trajectory can not be executed in an easy 
manner. To solve this problem, a particular family of 
algorithms called the heuristics, providing the obtaining of 
almost optimal solutions, is proposed [9]. For the KAT-
mobility protocol, the local search algorithm 2-Opt, based on 
the modification of a current solution to TSP by heuristics, is 
implemented. Fortunately, for a WSN, sensors can 
communicate together, and the mobile sink does not need to 
visit all the sensors. Therefore, it is only needed to optimize 
the routes among group centers. The KAT-mobility approach 
assumes that the collector has a priori knowledge of the 
positions of its member sensors [11]. It is possible that it 
loses communications with its blocked or failed members. In 
this case, it can stay at the center of its cluster to discover 
broken sensors and its trajectory can then be recalculated as 
soon as it reaches the access point [11]. Accordingly, a new 
algorithm was proposed in [9], with the aim of providing a 
better and practical solution by improving the route 
optimization of the sink in the presence of faults and 
breakdowns. In order to ameliorate this algorithm 
performance and the conventional KAT-mobility algorithm, 
our purpose in this paper is to propose a priori strategy that 
ensures transmission reliability, achieves better energy 
efficiency and guarantees the obtaining of a solution in real 
time once the problem is disturbed by the failures of some 
sensors. 
V. 
NKAT-MOBILITY PROTOCOL 
We propose through this paper to perform a transmission 
of information in real time and in an automated manner via a 
WSN. Our proposal consists in presenting the New K-means 
and Traveling Salesman Problem based mobility (NKAT-
mobility) protocol, based on K-means algorithm and the 
routing path optimization by using the Tabu method. The 
Step 3 
Initial choice of k: k=2 
Groups number = 
Centers number 
                                  
A 
M 
* 
* 
* 
 
* 
   : Base Station   
   : Mobile sink 
    
   : Sensor  
  
   : Mobile sink  
route 
    
: Cluster 
centroids 
A 
M 
M 
M 
M 
* 
Step 4 
Reassignment 
Step 5 
Recalculation 
Step 5 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-421-3
AMBIENT 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

(8) 
aim of this paper is to present this a priori strategy which 
ensures the reliability of data transmission in the presence of 
faults, so we model the wireless network by a graph G (V, 
E), where V is the set of group centers and E represents the 
set of edges reflecting the possible communications between 
these points. We denote by k the number of vertices in the 
graph, which is considering here as the problem size. In 
wireless sensor networks, one or several sensors may not 
function correctly, so the number of functional vertices 
varies between 0 and k. We are working in a situation where 
the vertices do not exist in a deterministic manner in this 
graph, but they are present in a probabilistic way. In other 
words, a probability of presence pj will be associated with 
each vertex mj (j = 1, 2 ... k). Moreover, on any instance of 
the problem, we avoid the total flaw of the system by 
changing the graph structure and transforming it into a 
subgraph, according to a modification strategy that will be 
specified in advance. 
For the KAT-mobility protocol, the local search 
algorithm 2-Opt, based on the modification of a current 
solution to TSP by heuristics, is implemented. To ameliorate 
this work in the deterministic case, which is a particular case 
of this probabilistic problem, i.e., when pj (j = 1, 2 ... k) = 1, 
we propose the improvement of the route optimization by 
implementing the Tabu algorithm instead of the used method 
2-Opt. This algorithm depends on an initial solution, the 
neighborhood and a Tabu list. It is possible that the mobile 
sink lose communications with its failed or broken member 
nodes. In this case, it can stay at the center of its group to 
discover failed nodes and its trajectory can be recalculated as 
soon as it reaches the access point [11]. Updating this route 
is preceded by a modification of the centroids locations in 
the WSN. In other words, a new clustering procedure 
through the subset of operational sensors is performed. 
Consequently, we propose that only some centers among all 
the vertices will really necessitate a visit according to their 
probabilities of appearing (remaining functional) and we 
assume that when all a cluster members are failed, its center 
will be regarded as absent. We specify then a modification 
strategy µ, which removes absent centers from the initial a 
priori trajectory. This is a problem of finding a priori 
trajectory that minimizes the functional of covered distances. 
Our aim consists in obtaining a tour among the initial 
vertices such that G is transformed into the subgraph G'= G 
[V'], where V' ⊆ V is the set of present group centers and the 
new path through its vertices will be in the same order as that 
created by the a priori tour. Given the set of cluster centers, 
the probability law ℙ, the set of all the subsets of V, i.e., each 
instance V' ⊆ V has a probability of presence ℙ (V'). For a 
given trajectory R through the vertices defined on V, the 
modification strategy μ used for generating a realizable 
solution through V', consists in gumming or eliminating 
those who are absent from the a priori trajectory. Let L(R,μ) be 
the random variable defined on 2V, which for a trajectory R 
and for all V' ⊆ V, associates the length L(R,μ) (V') through 
V', induced of the trajectory R by the modification method. 
Therefore, the route optimization of the mobile sink to visit 
once and just once every node is equivalent to find the 
trajectory that minimizes the functional of L(R,μ) [21]. To 
solve our cited problem, this a priori strategy is modeled 
with the aim to maintain network functionality and to avoid 
the total system flaw despite of the existence of faults in a 
subset of its elementary components by minimizing the 
objective function of this problem. So, we propose the 
implementation of the Tabu algorithm for optimizing the 
routing path of the sink, as a second procedure of NKAT-
mobility protocol, in the deterministic case as well as in the 
probabilistic case (in presence of breakdowns, i.e., when pj (j 
= 1, 2 ... k) ≠ 1). The functional of covered distances 
depending on R and μ, can be expressed by: 






 

)'
(
)'
(
)
(
min
, )
(
'
( , )
V
L
V
L
R
V
V
R
R


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. NKAT-mobility protocol 
 
NKAT-mobility protocol allows us to have a real time 
solution, which is valid in all situations. This a priori strategy 
is used to achieve better performance than other existing 
methods and the new route obtained through the set of 
functional centroids is illustrated in Figure 6. 
VI. 
SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
In this section, simulation results are presented and 
analyzed. In fact, simulation is a very important step that 
enables us to analyze a WSN performance [39]. In fact, it is 
necessary to reduce the various possible conception errors by 
performing a validation step. To achieve our simulations and 
to study our approach (NKAT-mobility) performance, we 
have used the software Java. We have simulated the KAT-
mobility protocol, the existed strategy proposed by 
Bellalouna et al. [9] and the NKAT-mobility protocol. In 
fact, we have implemented the K-means algorithm that 
represents the first module of each protocol and thereafter 
the second module of each one, which differs from one 
method to the other.  
The WSN that we have simulated comprises 200 sensor 
nodes, which are dispersed inside the simulation area. They 
are deployed according to a random distribution in order to 
test our proposed strategy performance under conditions that 
  
                                  
* 
A 
M 
M 
 
M 
* 
* 
* 
     : Base Station   
      
      : Mobile sink 
    
     : Sensor node 
 
     : Failed node 
 
     : Mobile sink 
route 
    
 : Cluster 
centroids 
A 
M 
* 
ℙ 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-421-3
AMBIENT 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

are more similar to those real. We consider the metric tour 
cost (expressed in meter) for estimating the tour lengths. 
 
Figure 7. Variation of the trajectory cost according to the number of nodes 
in deterministic case 
Through Figure 7 that represents the trajectory cost 
depending on the number of nodes, varying from 19 to 200, 
we can see that the tour length obtained by NKAT-mobility 
protocol for any used distribution is lower than that obtained 
by KAT-mobility protocol. Then, we can conclude that the 
new method based on K-means clustering and the 
approximate solution for TSP by using the local search 
method Tabu achieves better performance than the 
conventional method based on K-means clustering and the 
approximate solution for TSP by employing the simple local 
search algorithm 2-Opt, in deterministic case. In other words, 
NKAT-mobility protocol ensures the minimization of the 
trajectory length for any employed distribution, when the 
probability of presence pj, associated with each vertex mj (j = 
1, 2 ... k), is equal to 1 (all the nodes are operational).  
The nodes number may vary from one day to the other 
because of the possible failures and attacks, so the NKAT-
mobility protocol was proposed to deal with this problem 
(probabilistic case). To confirm our a priori strategy 
performance, we have executed the simulations of the three 
mentioned algorithms: KAT-mobility, NKAT-mobility and 
the existed algorithm proposed by Bellalouna et al. [9]. 
Figure 8. Variation of the execution time according to the probability of 
presence in probabilistic case 
It is shown from the simulation results of Figure 8, 
representing the time execution, which is expressed in 
nanoseconds, depending on the presence probability of 
cluster centroids, that the NKAT-mobility protocol provides 
less execution time than the KAT-mobility protocol. Our 
proposed probabilistic model is much more realistic, once 
the problem is disturbed by the failures of some nodes (i.e., 
the probability of remaining functional is less than 1). It is 
clear from the simulation results that the reduction in terms 
of time, compared with the conventional method, is very 
important. However, we can notice a small gap between our 
protocol and the existed protocol. Therefore, it was 
interesting to compare these two methods by evaluating the 
functional of covered distances. 
 
Figure 9. Performance comparison with failed nodes (30% absent) 
Figure 10. Performance comparison with failed nodes (50% absent) 
 
Figure 11. Performance comparison with failed nodes (10% absent) 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-421-3
AMBIENT 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 12. Variation of the functional according to the probability of 
presence in probabilistic case 
Through Figures 9, 10 and 11, we can see that the 
functional of covered distances obtained by our method 
(NKAT-mobility) is lower than that of the existed strategy 
proposed by Bellalouna et al. [9], for any used distribution 
and for any tested values of pj. In fact, these figures 
representing the functional variation, with values of n 
ranging from 20 to 200 and with different values of the 
presence probability (the percentages of centroids absence 
are 10%, 30%, 50%), shows that NKAT-mobility achieves 
better performance than the existed protocol and guarantees 
the functional minimization. This idea is also confirmed in 
Figure 12 that represents the functional variation when pj 
varies and when n is fixed at 200. It is clear from our 
simulations that the improvement provided by our new 
method is effective and that our algorithm is more realistic 
than the fault tolerant KAT-mobility protocol, valid in all 
situations and better than the existed protocol in terms of 
solution quality (optimized routing path).  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, a new strategy of data collection in a WSN 
has been proposed. The novelty of this scheme is that the 
combinatorial optimization provides applicable approaches 
in the context of wireless sensor networks. In other words, 
the WSN can be modeled as a probabilistic combinatorial 
optimization 
problem, 
particularly 
in 
presence 
of 
breakdowns. Then, we have presented the fault tolerant 
NKAT- mobility protocol that assures finding a real time 
solution to each new problem instance, once it is disturbed 
by the absence of some nodes. This a priori strategy aims to 
provide better practical solution compared with two 
conventional methods based on K-means clustering and the 
approximate solution for TSP, in probabilistic case. 
Simulation results demonstrated that the performance 
differences between our probabilistic model and the two 
methods are significant. We can conclude that NKAT-
mobility ensures the improvement of the collector route 
optimization. To accomplish this work, we aim to use a new 
strategy by implementing various algorithms employed for 
probabilistic combinatorial optimization problems resolution, 
such as approximate methods and this will be so interesting 
when the risk of breakdowns becomes considerable and the 
number of cluster centroids will be reduced. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Clement, “Some contributions in wireless sensors 
networks: Localization and Routing,” Ph.D thesis, Avignon 
University, France, 2008. 
[2] I. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. 
Cayirci, “Wireless sensor networks: a survey,” Computer 
Networks, vol. 38, issue 4, 2002, pp. 393-422, doi: 
10.1016/S1389-1286(01)00302-4. 
[3] H. Bousetta, “Multiphysics modeling and global simulation of 
autonomous systems on chip,” Ph.D thesis, National 
Polytechnic Institute of Grenoble, France, 2010. 
[4] K. Bouchakour, “Hierarchical routing in wireless sensor 
networks: KhLCH protocol (K-hop Layered Clustering 
Hierarchy),” Ph.D thesis, National High School of Computer 
Sciences, Algeria, 2012. 
[5] M. Hempstead, M. J. Lyons, D. Brooks, and G. Wei, “Survey 
of hardware systems for wireless sensor networks,” Low 
Power Electronics, vol. 4, issue 1, 2008, pp. 11-20, doi: 
10.1166/jolpe.2008.156. 2008. 
[6] M. Bellalouna, “Probabilistic combinatorial optimization 
problems,” Ph.D thesis, National School of Bridges and 
Roads, Paris, 1993. 
[7] M. Bellalouna and A. Ghabri, “A priori methods for fault 
tolerance in wireless sensor networks,” World Congress on 
Computer and Information Technologies (WCCIT), IEEE, 
Sousse, 2013, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/WCCIT.2013.6618654.  
[8] C. Karlof and D. Wagner, “Secure routing in wireless sensor 
networks: attacks and countermeasures,” Ad Hoc Networks, 
vol. 
1, 
2003, 
pp. 
293-315, 
doi: 
10.1016/S1570-
8705(03)00008-8.  
[9] M. Bellalouna, A. Ghabri, and W. Khaznaji, “The K-means 
and TSP Based Mobility Protocol Modeling as a Probabilistic 
Combinatorial Optimization Problem,” in proceedings of the 
Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks 
Communications (ICSNC), IARIA, Nice, France, October 
2014, pp. 48-53.  
[10] D. J. Bertsimas, “Probabilistic combinatorial optimization 
problems,” Ph.D thesis, MIT, Cambridge, Mass, 1988. 
[11] H. Nakayama, N. Ansari, A. Jamalipour, and N. Kato, “Fault-
resilient sensing in wireless sensor networks,” Computer 
communications, vol. 30, issue 11, September 2007, pp. 2375-
2384, doi: 10.1016/j.comcom.2007.04.023. 2007. 
[12] P. 
Jaillet, 
“Analysis 
of 
Probabilistic 
Combinatorial 
Optimization Problems in Euclidean Spaces,” Mathematics of 
Operations Research, vol. 18, issue 1, February 1993, pp. 51-
70, doi: 10.1287/moor.18.1.51.  
[13] D. Bertsimas, P. Jaillet, and A. Odoni, “A priori 
Optimization,” Operations Research, vol. 38, issue 6, 
December 1990, pp. 1019-1033, doi: 10.1287/opre.38.6.1019.  
[14] A. Henchiri, M. Bellalouna, and W. Khaznaji, “Probabilistic 
traveling salesman problem: a survey,” in proceedings of the 
Federated Conference on Computer Science and Information 
Systems (FedCSIS), Warsaw, September 2014, pp. 55-60,  
doi: 10.15439/2014F381.  
[15] P. Jaillet, “Probabilistic Traveling Salesman Problems,” Ph.D 
thesis, MIT, Cambridge, Mass, USA, 1985. 
[16] P. Jaillet, “Analysis of the probabilistic traveling salesman 
problem in the plane,” Ricerca Operativa, vol. 36, January 
1986, pp. 57-68. 
[17] C. Murat and V. Paschos, “The probabilistic longest path 
problem,” Networks, vol. 33, issue 3, 1999, pp. 207-219, doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1097-0037(199905)33:3<207::AID-
NET7>3.0.CO;2-7. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-421-3
AMBIENT 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

[18] C. Murat and V. Paschos, “The probabilistic minimum vertex 
covering problem,” International Transactions in Operational 
Research, vol. 9, issue 1, January 2002, pp. 19-32, doi: 
10.1111/1475-3995.00338. 
[19] Z. Bouyahia, M. Bellalouna, P. Jaillet, and K. Ghedira, “A 
Priori Parallel Machines Scheduling,” Computers & Industrial 
Engineering, vol. 58, issue 3, April 2010, pp. 488-500, doi: 
10.1016/j.cie.2009.11.009. 
[20] M. Bellalouna and L. Horchani, “The Two-Dimensional 
Probabilistic 
Bin-Packing Problem: 
An 
average 
case 
analysis,” International Journal of mathematics and computer 
in simulation, vol. 2, issue 1, March 2008, pp. 42-46. 
[21] P. Jaillet, “A priori solution of a Travelling Salesman Problem 
in which a random subset of the customers are visited,” 
Operations research, vol. 36, issue 6, Maryland, US, 1988, pp. 
929-936, doi: 10.1287/opre.36.6.929. 
[22] M. Bellalouna, C. Murat, and V. Paschos, “Probabilistic 
combinatorial optimization problems on graphs: A new 
domain in operational research,” European Journal of 
Operational Research, vol. 87, issue 3, December 1995, pp. 
693-706, doi: 10.1016/0377-2217(95)00240-5.  
[23] L. Forlizzi, J. Hromkovic, G. Proietti, and S. Seibert, “On the 
stability of approximation for hamiltonian path problem,” in 
proceedings of the Conference on Current Trends in Theory 
and Practice of Computer Science, Berlin, 2005, pp. 147-156, 
doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-30577-4_18. 
[24] D. J. Bertsimas and L. H. Howell, “Further results on the 
probabilistic traveling salesman problem,” European Journal 
of Operational Research, vol. 65, issue 1, February 1993, pp. 
68-95, doi: 10.1016/0377-2217(93)90145-D. 
[25] D. J. Bertsimas, “A Vehicule Routing Problem with 
Stochastic Demand,” Operational Research, vol. 40, issue 3, 
June 1992, pp. 574-585, doi: 10.1287/opre.40.3.574. 
[26] M. Gendreau, G. Laporte, and R. Séguin, “A Tabu Search 
Heuristic for the Vehicle Routing Problem with Stochastic 
Demands and Customers,” Operations Research, vol. 44, 
issue 3, May 1996, pp. 469-477, doi: 10.1287/opre.44.3.469. 
[27] S. Rosenow, “Comparison of an Exact Branch-and-Bound 
and an Approximative Evolutionary Algorithm for the 
Probabilistic 
Traveling 
Salesman 
Problem, 
Operations 
Research, August 1998, pp. 168-174, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
58409-1_16.  
[28] D. S. Johnson and L. A. McGeoch, “The Traveling Salesman 
Problem: A Case Study in Local Optimization,” John Wiley 
& Sons, New York, NY, USA, 1997, pp. 215-310.  
[29] M. Bellalouna, V. Paschos, and W. Khaznaji, “Well solved 
cases of probabilistic traveling salesman problem,” 42nd days 
of statistics, INRIA, Marseille, France, June 2010, pp. 1-7. 
[30] P. Jaillet, “On some probabilistic combinatorial optimization 
problems defined on graphs,” Flow Control of Congested 
Network, vol. 38, 1987, pp. 255-267, doi: 978-3-642-86726-
2_16.   
[31] L. Bianchi, J. Knowles, and N. Bowler, “Local search for the 
probabilistic traveling salesman problem: Correction to the 2-
p-opt and 1- shift algorithms,” European Journal of 
Operational Research, vol. 162, issue 1, February 2005, pp. 
206-219, doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2003.10.016. 
[32] L. Bianchi and A. M. Campbell, “Extension of the 2-p-opt 
and 1-shift algorithms to the heterogeneous probabilistic 
traveling 
salesman 
problem,” 
European 
Journal 
of 
Operational Research, vol. 176, issue 1, January 2007, pp. 
131-144, doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2005.05.027.  
[33] F. Glover, “Future paths for integer programming and links to 
artificial intelligence,” Computer & Operations Research, vol. 
13, issue 5, 1986, pp. 533-549, doi: 10.1016/0305-
0548(86)90048-1. 
[34] H. Nakayama, N. Ansari, A. Jamalipour, Y. Nemoto, and N. 
Kato, “On data gathering and security in wireless sensor 
networks,” in proceedings of the IEEE Sarnoff symposium, 
IEEE, Nassau Inn, Princeton, NJ, 2007, pp. 1-7, doi: 
10.1109/SARNOF.2007.4567337.  
[35] J. P. Jafrin and P. A. C. Angelin, “A comparative study of 
data gathering algorithms for a mobile sink in wireless sensor 
network,” International journal of advanced research in 
computer engineering and technology, vol. 1, issue 9, 
November 2012, pp. 250-255.  
[36] Z. Guellil and L. Zaoui, “Proposition of a solution to the 
initialization problem K-means Case,” in proceedings of the 
second 
International 
Conference 
on 
Informatics 
and 
Applications (CIIA), Saida, Algeria, 2009, pp. 1-9.  
[37] P. Mathur, S. Saxena, and M. Bhardwaj, “Node clustering 
using K Means Clustering in Wireless Sensor Networking,” in 
proceedings of the second National Conference in Intelligent 
Computing Communication (EICC), Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Uttar Pradesh, India, 2013, pp. 1-6.  
[38] T. Fukabori, H. Nakayama, H. Nishiyama, N. Ansari, and N. 
Kato, “An efficient data aggregation scheme using degree of 
dependence on clusters in WSNs,” in proceedings of the IEEE 
International Conference on Communications, May 2010, pp. 
23-27, doi: 10.1109/ICC.2010.5502285.  
[39] A. Makhoul, “Sensor Networks: localization, coverage and 
data fusion,” Ph.D thesis, University of Franche-Comte, 
France, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-421-3
AMBIENT 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

