High Speed Wireless Access Based on Visible Light Communication Utilizing 
Maximum Ratio Combination of Multi-Detectors 
 
Jiehui Li, Xingxing Huang, Nan Chi 
Department of Communication Science and Engineering 
Fudan University 
Shanghai, China 
e-mail: jiehuili13@fudan.edu.cn, xinghuang90@gmail.com, nanchi@fudan.edu.cn 
 
Abstract-In this paper, we propose and experimentally 
demonstrate a novel space-reception diversity model based on 
Maximal Ratio Combining (MRC) algorithm in Single Input 
Multiple Output (SIMO) Visible Light Communication (VLC) 
system. Different from the previous schemes, the data was 
received by two detectors located in different space positions at 
the same time, and then, combined using MRC algorithm. As a 
result, the Bit Error Ratio (BER) of receivers can be reduced to 
one to two orders of magnitude. The performance of VLC 
system is significantly improved. 
Keywords-LED; multi-detector; maximun ratio combining; 
visible light communication; spatial positions. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Visible Light Communication (VLC) based on Light 
Emitting Diodes (LEDs) offers an entirely new paradigm in 
wireless technologies in terms of communication speed, 
flexibility, usability and security [1]-[3]. The VLC is being 
touted as one of the next generation wireless communication 
systems, because it can simultaneously support illumination 
and communication [4]. With the further advancement of the 
project in future, VLC can be a replacement to almost all 
indoor and short range communication purpose.  
Multipath propagation is a key feature of wireless 
communication. It has been conceived of as a bottleneck that 
hampers the creation of efficient wireless communication 
systems [7]. In VLC system, the multipath interference effect 
is mainly caused by the distance difference between the light 
and the receiver and the light reflected the walls. In a 
multipath environment, the spatial diversity can average out a 
substantial part of defecting effects of sporadic fades between 
different detectors. In the simplest form of it, there is just a 
single transmitter (Tx), in which case the problem reduces to 
combining the signal from multiple receivers (Rxs) in the 
most efficient way. The optimum solution to it is well 
established. We called the algorithm Maximal Ratio 
Combining” (MRC). MRC weighted after the merger, 
significantly lower Bit Error Rate (BER) for receiving signals, 
which can effectively enhance the received signal [8]. Since it 
is optimum in Single Input Multiple Output (SIMO) 
transmission systems, it can be considered as a benchmark in 
comparison with more recently proposed Multiple Input 
Multiple Output (MIMO) systems.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section Ⅱ introduces 
the related work information, Section Ⅲ  introduces the 
proposed system model and its mathematical presentation. 
The simulation and experiment results are presented and 
discussed in Section Ⅳ, before we conclude this paper in 
SectionⅤ. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
The performance variation at the receiver is one of 
important issues for VLC. Due to the sensitivity of the 
detector the performance is not same, even though the same 
transmitter and receiver are being used. Many researchers 
proposed some methods for improving receiver performance 
in VLC system, but no one has considered the performance 
can be improve according to automatically weight two 
different receivers. Lee et al. [5] have proposed a receiver 
structure to improve the VLC system where separate 
receivers with specific spectral response are used for the 
detection of different colors of channels. Muhammad et al. [6] 
proposed a receiver considering the performance variation on 
the different color of channels according to the VLC band 
plan, and proved it functionality mathematically as well as by 
simulation, but they did not consider the performance 
variations of the receivers located in different space positions. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The schematic of VLC 1×2 SIMO system. 
In this paper, we proposed a 1×2 SIMO transmission 
model considering two receivers located in different space 
positions. Figure 1 shows the sketches of VLC 1×2 SIMO 
system. This dual function of LED, for lighting and 
communication. MRC was used to combine the data with 
diversity from two detectors located in different space 
Computer
LED
Visible light
Visible light
Mobile Phone
LED
Rx1a
Rx1b
Rx2a
Rx2b
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

positions in the computer and mobile phone. Then, the data 
was outputted after combined. With the scheme, the 
transmission distortion will be improved efficiently in visible 
light communication system. As a matter of fact, our 
simulation and experiment results also proved it. Our 
proposition can be extended to more detectors to enhance the 
performance in the future. 
III. 
 SIMULATION AND RESULTS 
LEDs are used to transmit desired optical signal in VLC 
system. The desired optical signals then travel through air 
before reaching optical detector. The receiver collects some 
undesirable optical signals which cause severe degradation to 
the overall system performance. In a VLC system, the 
receiver performance variation is occurred due to the angle 
and space position. We proposed a visible light SIMO 
communication system, the combining algorithm of MRC is 
used to improve the performance of the receiver. 
A. Sprinciple of MRC 
As well as most of the receive diversity algorithm, MRC 
combiner linearly combines the individually received branch 
signals so as to maximize the instantaneous output Signal-to-
Noise Ratio (SNR) [9]; that is to say, the output result is the 
weighted sum of different fading channels. MRC algorithm 
is applicable to any modulation way, arbitrary diversity route 
and branch decline. 
A SNR can express the quality of a communication 
system. We assume that the transmitter transmits the signal 
using On-Off Keying (OOK) modulation technique. Among 
all modulation techniques for visible light communication 
link, OOK is the simplest one and very easy to implement. In 
a single receiver, the average SNR is defined as the ratio of 
the received signal to the aggregated noise, and the SNR is 
proportional to the detector area when the shot noise is the 
dominant noise source [10]. The signal component of the 
SNR is measured by Uddin et al. [6]: 
ܵ ൌߟଶߦଶሺ݊ோ௫ሻܲ௥௦௜௚௡௔௟
ଶ
 
The signal received power  ܲ௥௦௜௚௡௔௟ is: 
ܲ௥௦௜௚௡௔௟ ൌ න ൫∑݄௜ሺݐሻ⨂ܲ௜ሺݐሻ൯݀ݐ
்
଴
 
where ߟ represents the photo sensitivity of the photo-detector 
(in A/W), ܲ௜ሺݐሻ is the instantaneous input power, the symbol 
“ ⨂ ” denotes convolution, ݄ሺݐሻ  resembles the impulse 
response, ߦሺ݊ோ௫ሻ  is the performance variation balancing 
factor. The time average transmitted optical power is given 
by Uddin et al. [6]: 
ܲ௧ ൌ lim
்→ஶ
1
2ܶ න ܲ௜ሺݐሻ݀ݐ
்
ି்
 
where ܲ௜ሺݐሻ ൒ 0 since the instantaneous input power must be 
nonnegative. 
We assume OOK with rectangular transmitted pulses of 
duration equal to the bit period. Gaussian noise having a total 
variance N0 that is the sum of contributions from shot noise, 
thermal noise and Inter-Symbol Interference (ISI) by an 
optical path difference: 
ܰ଴ ൌߪ௦௛௢௧
ଶ
൅ߪ௧௛௘௥௠௔௟
ଶ
൅ߟଶܲ௥ூௌூ
ଶ
 
Therefore, the SNR is given by: 
ܴܵܰ ൌߟଶߦଶሺ݊ோ௫ሻܪଶሺ0ሻܲ௧
ଶ
ߪ௦௛௢௧
ଶ
൅ߪ௧௛௘௥௠௔௟
ଶ
൅ߟଶܲ௥ூௌூ
ଶ  
And BER is given by: 
ܤܧܴ ൌ 1
2ߨ න
݁ି௬మ/ଶ݀ݕ
ஶ
√ௌேோ
 
where ܪሺ0ሻ ൌ ׬
݄ሺݐሻ݀ݐ
ஶ
ିஶ
 is the channel DC gain.  
The received power by inter-symbol interference ܲ௥ூௌூ 
is given by: 
ܲ௥ூௌூ ൌ න ൫∑݄௜ሺݐሻ⨂ܲ௜ሺݐሻ൯݀ݐ
ஶ
்
 
Short noise variance is given by: 
ߪ௦௛௢௧
ଶ
ൌ 2ݍߟ൫ܲ௥௦௜௚௔௟ ൅ ܲ௥ூௌூ൯ܤ௘௡൅2ݍܫ௕௚ܫଶܤ௘௡ 
where q is the electronic charge, ܤ௘௡ is equivalent noise 
bandwidth, ܫ௕௚ is background current and ܫଶ  is noise 
bandwidth factor. 
The thermal noise variance is given by Uddin et al. [6]: 
ߪ௧௛௘௥௠௔௟
ଶ
ൌ 8ߨ݇ܶ௞
ܩߜܣܫଶܤ௘௡
ଶ ൅ 16ߨଶ݇ܶ௞ܧ
݃௠
ߜଶܣଶܫଷܤ௘௡
ଷ  
where ݇ is Boltzmann’s constant, ܶ௞is absolute temperature, 
G is the open-loop voltage gain, ߜ is the fixed capacitance of 
photo-detector per unit area, E is the Field-Effect Transistor 
(FET) channel noise factor, ݃௠ is the FET transconductance.  
B. Simulation of VLC system 
The schematic of visible light SIMO system is shown in 
Figure 2. For high speed telecommunications, Quadrature 
Amplitude Modulation (QAM) technique that is used in the 
communication system would be helpful in which the desired 
waveform is modulated onto the instantaneous power of the 
carrier. On the other hand, QAM demodulation algorithm is 
the requirement proportional to the received data in receivers. 
In our channel model, the information carrier is a light wave. 
Moreover, detector dimensions are in the order of thousands 
of wavelengths, leading to efficient spatial diversity, which 
prevents multipath interference. Therefore, multipath 
interference can be greatly reduced in optical wireless 
transmitting. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Figure 2.  The simulation model of visible light SIMO system. 
C. The results 
When studying the performance with QAM modulation, 
the abscissa of the curves is the QAM order and delta 
frequency of the two detectors. The simulation results are 
depicted in Figure 3 and Figure 4. These curves are essential 
to understand the diversity gain that is attainable by 
concatenation of the SIMO. A threshold line for BER is set 
as 3.8×10-3.  
Figure 3 shows the receive BER variation for different 
detectors and proposed MRC combining according to the 
different QAM orders. It can be intuitively explained by 
noting that MRC weighted can significantly improve the 
performance of the separate detectors even though the BER of 
the MRC algorithm and separate channels looks almost  the 
same when 128 QAM or higher. The BER curve has a lowest 
point with the QAM order increasing, due to the high 
frequency fading of low-order signal is faster [11]. The 4-
QAM order (16QAM) shift is worth noting between the SIMO 
schemes. When the QAM order is 4 or below, the BERs of the 
detector change little, but above 4-QAM order, the BERs 
increase exponentially. This further illustrates that the MRC 
algorithm is suitable for low-order QAM modulation rather 
than high-order.  
 
Figure 3.  Simulation BER versus QAM order. 
The simulation results show that it is hard to discern any 
differences in performance between the optimum and sub-
optimum 
16QAM 
demodulations. 
Considering 
the 
transmitting speed, we determine the optimal modulation 
format for 16QAM. From Figure 4, the receiver BER 
increases with the increase of transmission frequency 
difference. It illustrates that the higher the delta frequency, the 
greater the noise in the receiver, the easier to produce error. 
The BER of MRC weighted combining significantly lower 
than the separate detector. When the delta frequency bellow 
7Hz, the receiver has a better performance, and the BER of 
MRC weighted combining is below the Forward Error 
Correction (FEC) limit of 3.8×10-3.  
  
Figure 4.  Simulation BER versus delta frequency. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP  
In a VLC system, every receiver expects the same 
performance, even though the two receivers have different 
SNR. Therefore, our scheme focuses on reducing the 
performance variation at the receiver side. In order to verify 
the simulation results, we tried to send an image with our 
proposed VLC system. At the receiving end, we placed two 
receivers at in different spatial positions to receive signal at 
the same time. Due to the limited experiment conditions, two 
receives are used. Then the received data was analyzed with 
MRC algorithm. The experiment system is shown as Figure 
5. To increase the separation distance between a light 
transmitter and a receiver, lenses are often used. A light 
receiver may use a lens to collect the weak light from the 
transmitter and focus it onto the optical detector for 
processing. However, the lens will always collect extra light 
from the environment that is not wanted. Hence, all of the 
received data from detectors in different spatial positions are 
combined by MRC algorithm, then the output data requires 
further signal processing to restore the desired image. As a 
result, the performance of the VLC system will be 
significantly improved.  
  
Data in
QAM
mapper
FFT
Data out
Up
sample
Transfer*H 
Matrix
IFFT
LED
∑
∑
∑
Noise 1
Noise 2
Noise n
PD
PD
PD
Down 
sample
Down 
sample
Down 
sample
QAM 
demodulation
 
×
×
×
W1
W2
Wn
∑
i branch 
SNR
Merge 
output
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 5.  The experiment system: (a) the schematic of VLC system; (b) the transmitter (Tx); (c) the receives (Rx). 
We measured the BER performances versus bias 
voltages of red LED. In this demonstration, the distance 
between transmitter and receivers is 0.6m, and the electrical 
input power is fixed at 12dbm, which is relatively small to 
avoid reaching the saturation area of LED. The modulation 
format is 64QAM-OFDM, considering the actual data 
transfer rate. The BER versus bias voltage results are 
depicted in Figure 6, and the constellations are shown for the 
bias voltage of 2.2V. We can find the BER of MRC algorithm 
can improve one to two orders of magnitude compared with 
any separate detector. Therefore, it is very effective that space 
diversity reception with MRC algorithm adopts multiple 
receivers in order to improve the performance of the VLC 
system. 
 
Figure 6.  Measure BER versus bias voltage. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Diversity combining, which skillfully combines multiple 
replicas of received signals has long been as one of the most 
efficient techniques to overcome the destructive effects of 
multipath fading in wireless communication systems [5]. In 
this paper, we have proposed a novel 1×2 SIMO transmission 
model in VLC system based on two detectors located in 
different space positions. With the scheme, the transmission 
distortion of images can be improved efficiently. The BER of 
receivers can be reduced to one to two orders of magnitude. 
The BERs of signal combining algorithm of MRC are always 
below the FEC limit of 3.8×10-3. Therefore, space-reception 
diversity based on MRC algorithm could be an effective 
technique to achieve high data rate and high fidelity 
transmitting images in visible light communication system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partially supported by NHTRDP (973 
Program) of China (Grant No. 2010CB328300), NHTRDP 
(863 Program) of China (No. 2013AA013603), NNSF of 
China (No. 61177071), and Key Program of Shanghai Science 
and Technology Association (No. 12dz1143000). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Punith P. Salian, Sachidananda Prabhu, Preetham Amin, 
Sumanth K. Naik, and M. K. Parashuram, “Visible Light 
Communication,” 
Texas 
Instruments 
India 
Educators’ 
Conference. India, 2013, pp. 379-383. 
[2] Yuanquan Wang, Yiguang Wang, Nan Chi, Jianjun Yu, and 
Huiliang Shang, “Demonstration of 575-Mb/s downlink and 
225-Mb/s uplink bi-directional SCM-WDM visible light 
communication using RGB LED and phosphor-based LED,” 
Opt. Express, vol. 21, 2013, pp. 1203-1208. 
[3] Yiguang Wang, Minglun Zhang,  Yuanquan Wang,  Wuliang 
Fang,  Li Tao,  and Nan Chi. “Experimental demonstration of 
visible light communication based on sub-carrier multiplexing 
of multiple-input-single-output OFDM,” OECC 2012, 2012, 
pp. 745-746. 
[4] Toshihiko Komine, “Fundamental Analysis for Visible-Light 
Communication 
System 
using 
LED 
Lights,” 
IEEE 
Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 50, 2004, pp. 100-
107. 
[5] It Ee Lee, Moh Lim Sim, and Fabian Wai-Lee Kung, 
“Performance 
Enhancement 
of 
Outdoor 
Visible-Light 
Communication 
System 
Using 
Selective 
Combining 
Receiver,”. IET Optoelectron, vol. 3, 2009, pp. 30-39. 
[6] Muhammad Shahin Uddin, Jae Sang Cha, Jin Young Kim, and 
Yeong Min Jang, “Mitigation Technique for Receiver 
Performance Variation of Multi-Color Channels in Visible 
Light Communication,” Sensor, 2011, pp. 6231-6144. 
[7] Risto Nordman, “Soft decision decoding of the orthogonal 
complex MIMO codes for three and four transmit antennas,” 
Physical Communication, vol. 5, 2012, pp. 33-46. 
[8] Fawaz S. Al-Qahtani, Salam A. Zummo, Arun K. Gurung, and 
Zahir M. Hussain, “Spectral efficiency of maximum ratio 
combining (MRC) over slow fading with estimation errors,” 
Digital Signal Processing, vol. 20, 2010, pp. 85-96. 
[9] Andrea Goldsmith, Wireless Communications, Cambridge 
University, 2005, ISBN: 0521837162.  
[10] Joscph M. Kahn, and John R. Barry, “Wireless Infrared 
Communications,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 85, 1997, pp. 265-298.  
[11] Changxin Fan, and Lina Cao, “Principles of Communications the 
Seventh Edition,” Beijing: National Defence Industrial Press, 2012, pp. 
191-198.
 
 
RX1
RX2
(c)
TX
(b)
(a)
∑
Wn
W1
i branch 
 SNR
Merge output
SNR
×
×
Visible light 
transmission
LED
Modulation
O to E
LED
Rx Module
Signal
processing 
Coding modulation
Pre-equalization 
Tx module
data
data
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

