Positionally Exclusive Broadcasting 
 
 
Tomáš Žižka, Athanasios Podaras 
Department of Informatics 
Faculty of Economics, Technical University of Liberec 
Voroněžská 13, Liberec, Czech Republic 
tomas.zizka@tul.cz, athanasios.podaras@tul.cz 
 
 
Abstract— Early information distribution in crisis events 
constitutes an important life-saving and social security 
characteristic. Modern information technologies can provide 
the possibility of developing systems which can timely send 
warning messages to citizens within a specific area in order to 
protect them from a crisis event that occurs in a close region. 
The current paper attempts to design a new system model 
aimed to be utilized for warning citizens outside a building 
about criminal activity in the inner part, within a target area, 
and prevent them from entering inside.  Basic parts of the 
proposed early-warning system are the RADIO-HELP system 
enriched by an algorithmic message encryption/decryption 
process. Combination of these methodologies forms the 
proposed contribution. People inside the building shall receive 
by the Police Operational Center encrypted message so that no 
panic situation will occur and no escape effort will be made by 
criminals; on the other hand citizens outside the building shall 
receive clear decrypted message. The message type (encrypted 
or decrypted) is dependent on the geographic definition of the 
target area. 
Keywords-broadcasting; decryption; emergency; encryption; 
information; RADIO-HELP. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The transmission of relevant information during  
non-standard - special and unexpected - situations to 
demanded places has been always considered to be an 
important task. However, in today's "modern world", where 
the development of information technology is rapid, multiple 
advanced technical resources that can assist in the early and 
timely distribution of critical and important information to 
desired locations exist. But, as it turned out in the recent past, 
the transmission of necessary and sometimes vital 
information in crisis situations (floods in the Czech Republic 
in 2013, leakage of hazardous sludge from the aluminum 
processing plant in western Hungary in October 2010, etc.) 
was not always effective or failed completely [1][2]. 
At first, it is necessary to define what can be considered 
as 
non-standard 
situation. 
This 
term 
can 
include 
emergencies, crises and other situations that may affect the 
normal status of life of a certain group of people [3]. 
Emergency can be defined as an event or situation that is 
in a certain environment caused by natural disasters, 
accidents, criminal activity, threats to critical infrastructure, 
disease, threats to internal security and economy [4]. 
Examples of emergencies are fires, floods, storms, traffic 
accidents, plane crash and threats against public safety as a 
result of criminal and terrorist events and so on. 
As a consequence, the question is how could we 
effectively use available technology to ensure that in case of 
an emergency or crisis situation, important information will 
be delivered to concerned recipients on time, in an 
understandable form and moreover only to locations where 
the concrete message will be useful. 
The aim of this paper is to outline possible methods of 
distributing information in emergency situations that, 
additionally, require data encryption, so that they are 
readable only in a certain location/position. Safety support 
during criminal activity or terrorist attacks is one of the areas 
where information coding based on the position of the 
receiver could be extremely useful. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: The starting 
point of the proposed solution is a model situation that is 
described in the Section II-A. Section II-B mentions the 
basic system requirements. Section III-A gives information 
about RADIO-HELP system [5][6], which constitutes the 
basic building block for the design of a system for 
distributing positionally encrypted information.  Section  
III-B provides basic attributes of the encrypted positional 
broadcasting. Details about model of the message 
transmitting procedure are given in Section IV. The paper 
closes with a summary in Section V. 
 
II. 
MODEL SITUATION AND BASIC REQUIREMENTS 
A. Model Situation 
A wanted criminal is spotted at a certain shopping center. 
The Czech Police coordinates the measures needed to be 
taken in order to secure safety within the shopping center. 
Moreover, a critical police task is to warn the citizens, who 
are approaching the given shopping center and advise them 
to avoid the area. Therefore, it is necessary to define the 
message target area with regard to the shopping center, so 
that only people located outside the defined region will 
obtain the broadcasted police warning. As the flow of 
information within the center is coordinated by the police, 
the possibility of confusing the shoppers inside the center 
with a transmitted message aimed for another group must be 
eliminated, because this could cause a panic. It is also 
important that messages distributed through this information 
channel will be kept secret from criminals. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

A graphical representation of a model situation is shown 
in Fig. 1. The area where it should be received decrypted 
message (clear warning message) is marked in green. Area 
of shopping center and gray colored circle are areas for 
which the message is encrypted. The location of an armed 
criminal is marked in Fig. 1 with red color.  
 
 
        Figure 1. Graphical representation of a model situation 
 
B. System Requirements 
The idea of a transmitting encrypted information based 
on the position, does not aim to develop a completely new 
system, but to use existing technology components and 
solutions that will, however, be integrated to new functional 
units. 
The basic requirements are the following: 
 
Information must be available to everyone (citizens, 
visitors, etc.)  who is inside the target area, 
 
The ability to encrypt information, based on 
geographic definition of the target area, 
 
Independence of the functionality of mobile 
networks and the Internet, 
 
The information provider must be a reputable 
source, 
 
Security and robustness of the system against abuse, 
 
The possibility of ongoing testing and verification of 
functionality. 
 
III. 
TECHNICAL ATTRIBUTES OF THE ENCRYPTED 
POSITIONAL BROADCASTING 
The basis of the proposed system for encrypted positional 
broadcasting is the use of system called RADIO-HELP 
[5][6], which is designed and developed at the Department of 
Informatics of the Technical University of Liberec in Czech 
Republic. 
The aim of the present research team is to create a 
modern and innovative early warning system that will inform 
citizens that a crisis event due to criminal activity takes place 
within a specific area. 
More precisely, the currently described methodology will 
be based on the combination of two tested scientific tools. 
The first tool is the RADIO – HELP system, an innovative 
message broadcasting instrument that utilizes both digital 
and analogue technology.  
The second tool that will be utilized as an additive feature 
to the above mentioned technology, with the ambition to 
result in the formulation of a modern and innovative 
application, is the position based encryption/decryption 
algorithm. The location based encryption algorithmic 
procedure is also delineated and utilized by multiple 
researchers who have already developed and tested its 
functionality on mobile users. 
Scott and Denning [7] proposed a data encryption 
suggested a data encryption algorithm by using the GPS 
called Geo-Encryption, the functionality of which is based 
on the traditional encryption system and communication 
protocol. For the sender the encryption was encrypted 
according to the PVT (Position, Velocity, Time) of the 
receiver. 
Futhermore, Liao et al. (2008) [8] introduced and 
proposed the Location – Dependent Data Encryption 
Algorithm (LDEA). The position based encryption concept 
is also inspired from a similar approach called Location 
Based Services (LBS), the importance of which is underlined 
and thoroughly analyzed by Mohopatra and Suma (2005).  
 Location Based Services are classified in four categories 
[9]: 
• 
Emergency service 
• 
Information service 
• 
Tracking service 
• 
Entertainment Service 
 
Taking into consideration the emergency and information 
service categories and also the target operation of the 
functionality defined by the present work, it can be realized 
that a prospective encryption algorithm dependent on the 
position of the mobile user will be derived from existing 
similar algorithmic approaches in order to extend the 
RADIO-HELP functionality and ameliorate the prevention 
of criminal actions within a target area. 
  
A. Description of RADIO-HELP System 
Detailed principle of RADIO-HELP system is described 
in [10] under the working title RADIO-H (RADIO-HELP). It 
is 
based 
on 
simultaneous 
application 
of 
analogue 
broadcasting technology with superposition of digital content 
(HD RADIO or DRM) or full-digital broadcasts with the 
possibility of defining the positional coordinates via GPS [5] 
[6]. HD Radio technology company iBiquity Digital 
Corporation was selected in 2002 in the U.S. as a key 
technology for the digitization of radio broadcasting. 
Currently, this technology carries a large percentage of U.S. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

radio stations. More information about HD Radio 
Broadcasting is described in [11]. 
HD Radio technology uses the principle of superposition 
of the digital signal to analogue signal. The transmitted 
relation of Radio-Help uses positional codes for identifying 
areas of compulsory income, i.e., where the broadcast is 
directed. The receiver in the area is maintained in a standby 
mode and captured broadcast on fixed rate compares its 
position according to GPS coordinates with areas included in 
the broadcast. If there is compliance, it activates forced 
broadcast reception session. After the broadcasting code 
ends, the receiver goes into standby mode again. Subscribers 
of RADIO-HELP that are outside the defined zone will not 
be disturbed by warning broadcast sessions. 
This principle implies that it is possible to transmit 
separate sessions to more areas simultaneously. Long wave 
radio 
transmitters, 
which 
with 
new 
higher quality 
broadcasting channels gradually lose their utility, could be 
used for the broadcast. In such a case, it would suffice to 
cover the whole Czech Republic just by one central long 
wave radio sender [12]. 
Due to the development of IT where circuits for 
terrestrial broadcasting and positioning GPS are now 
equipped with most new mobile phones, it should not be 
technically demanding to use it for purposes of positionally 
based broadcasting. 
B. Basic Attributes of the Encrypted Positional 
Broadcasting 
The concept of the proposed model relies on the  early 
warning broadcasted messages to citizens within and outside 
a defined area, where criminals and suspects are spotted by 
the police, and police actions against the latter is about to 
take place. The core characteristic of the transmitted 
messages is that they must be based on position. As a 
consequence, the data sent inside the defined area where 
criminals are found in the certain moment, will differ from 
the data content which will refer to the people who are at that 
time outside this area. In other words, the broadcasted 
warning 
message 
has 
to 
be 
sent 
as 
encrypted  
(i.e., ciphertext) when it is addressed to the citizens inside 
the target area and as plaintext or decrypted in the case that it 
is addressed to the people found outside the same area. 
It can be, thus, realized that the algorithmic approach 
which is related to the encryption/decryption procedure of 
the early warning messages is comprised of the following 
steps: a) encryption of the broadcasted message and b) 
decryption of the message when i.e. the mobile user is found 
outside the region.  
Multiple message encryption/decryption algorithmic 
approaches exist, such as the symmetric, asymmetric, hybrid 
and GeoEncryption [7]. The contribution described in the 
present paper, should be based on GeoEncryption algorithm, 
since it is an approach that takes into consideration the 
location of receiver, which is core characteristic of the 
desired system. However, the final algorithmic encryption 
strategy, which will be added to RADIO-HELP system in 
order to formulate the target contribution, will be decided in 
future part of the research.  
The aforementioned area can be a shopping center, a 
park, a hospital, a public organization or even a square.  
When police receives information about the presence of a 
criminal in a shopping center the immediate action that 
should be taken according to our proposed model, in order to 
protect the lives of citizens and succeed in eliminating the 
danger to which they could be exposed, is comprised of the 
below described procedure. 
 
IV. 
MODEL OF THE MESSAGE TRANSMITTING 
PROCEDURE 
The final critical step of the system’s conceptual 
construction was the flow specification of the broadcasting 
process of the so called early warning messages. As soon as 
the criminal’s presence (i.e., in Shopping Center) is realized 
by the Police, there will be an immediate broadcast of a 
warning message to the citizens who are at that moment 
inside the area (center) and at the same time for those 
citizens who are outside the area so that they will not attempt 
to visit the defined region. In the second case, the message is 
characterized as the early warning protection message. The 
model’s flow with regard to the early warning message 
transmission is depicted in Fig. 2. The transmission 
procedure is initiated by Message encryption. The warning 
text message is formulated and then encrypted.  
In the next step, it is necessary to define the target region 
of the warning message as well as the area for which the 
message is encrypted with a special algorithm based on GPS 
coordinates related to this area. 
The third step of the process is the transition of the 
encrypted message from the Police Operation Center to a 
special transmitter. If the transmitter does not reject the 
incoming message due to a technical problem, the same 
message will be sent at once to citizens’ mobiles, radios, car 
radios and other possible devices in a form of text. For the 
user group placed inside the target area the broadcasted 
message, due to encryption, will be displayed as advertising 
text so that it will not be understood by criminals as warning 
message from the Police. Moreover, this form of text will 
help the police take action without the cause of panic to 
citizens. Panic situation will be avoided since this group of 
end users will obtain the same encrypted message in the 
form of advertisement.  
However, the message, as it was above stated, will be 
also addressed to a second group of people outside the 
defined area. In this case it will be decrypted and displayed 
in its original form as a clear warning text. As a result the 
second group will be successfully and timely informed of the 
forthcoming danger and will avoid the specific area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
 
Figure 2. Activity Diagram of the Early Warning Message Transmission Model 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Positionally encrypted broadcasting system should be a 
future additional element to the existing concept of RADIO-
HELP system, which will ameliorate its functionality. The 
core idea that authors will further develop is protected by a 
patent application - PV 2010-260 in Czech Republic 
(Encryption and decryption of broadcasting based on the 
position of listener) [13].  
Throughout the creation of the model among the core 
issues that were discussed as possible obstacles of the 
execution of the process in practice and during real crisis 
situation, were the following: a) the limit or border between 
the region inside and outside the target area and its 
definition, b) the type of the message sent to people inside 
the area (encrypted) and outside the area (decrypted), since 
the message will be received by criminals as well and will 
try 
to 
escape, 
c) 
algorithmic 
encryption/decryption 
methodologies and finally, d) the technology utilized 
regarding the data transmission (medium of transition – 
transmitter, receiving devices, etc.).  
The above stated topics are considered to be 
indispensable parts of the new functionality. This way, the 
combination of RADIO-HELP system and a location based 
encryption algorithm will formulate an innovative and useful 
scientific contribution in the area of location based 
emergency and information services. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the project No. 
CZ.1.07/2.2.00/28.0327 Innovation and support of doctoral 
study program (INDOP), financed from EU and Czech 
Republic funds. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Fire Rescue Service of the Czech Republic, “Flood situation in the 
Czech 
Republic,” 
[retrieved: 
June, 
2013], 
Available 
from: 
http://www.hzscr.cz/clanek/flood-situation-in-the-czech-republic.aspx
?q=Y2hudW09MQ%3d%3d. 
[2] BBC, “Hungary battles to stem torrent of toxic sludge”, [retrieved: 
June, 2013], Available from: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-
europe-11475361. 
[3] W. T. Coombs and S. J. Holanday, “The Handbook of Crisis 
Communications,” Chichester: Willey-Blackwell, p. 21, 2010, ISBN 
978-1-4051-9441-9. 
[4] Ministry of the Interior of the Czech Republic, “The terms”, 
[retrieved: June, 2012], Available from: http://www.mvcr.cz/
clanek/mimoradna-udalost-851851.aspx. 
[5] J. Skrbek, “New Possibilities of Information Services for Special 
Situations“, In 17 – th Interdisciplinary Information Management 
Talks, Proceedings (IDIMT-2009), Trauler Verlag, Linz, Sep. 2009, 
pp. 123-130, ISBN 978-3-85499-624-8. 
[6] J. Skrbek, “Radio-Help as a Smart Early Warning and Notification 
System“, In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the 
International Society for the Systems Sciences, 14 p, University of 
Hull Business School, UK, July 2011, [retrieved: June, 2013], 
Available from: http://journals.isss.org/index.php/proceedings55th/
issue/view/11, ISSN 1999-6918. 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

[7] L. Scott and D. E. Denning, “Using GPS to enhance data security: 
Geo-Encryption,” GPS World (14), April 2003, pp. 40-49. 
[8] H. C. Liao and Y. H. Chao, “A New Data Encryption Algorithm 
Based on the Location of Mobile Users,” Information Technology 
Journal 7 (1), 2008, pp. 63-69, ISSN 1812-5638. 
[9] D. Mohapatra, and S. B. Suma, “Survey of location based wireless 
services,” Proceedings of the International Conference on Personal 
Wireless Communicatons, USA, Jan. 2005, pp. 358-362. ISBN 0-
7803-8964-6. 
[10] J. Skrbek, “Advanced Ways and Means of Civilian Notification in 
Crisis Situations“, In A. KOCOUREK (ed.). Proceedings of the 10th 
International conference: Liberec Economic Forum  1st edd., Liberec: 
Technical University of Liberec, 2011,  pp. 419-426. ISBN 978-80-
7372-755-0. 
[11] iBiquity Digital, “What is HD Radio Broadcasting?”, [retrieved: June, 
2013], Available from: http://www. ibiquity.com/hd_radio. 
[12] D. Kubát, J. Kvíz, J. Skrbek, and T. Žižka, “Distributing Emergency 
Traffic Information,” In 20 – th Interdisciplinary Information 
Management Talks, Proceedings (IDIMT-2012),  Johanes Kepler 
Universitäs, Linz, Sep. 2012, pp. 33-39, ISBN 978-3-99033-022-7. 
M. Brunclík and J. Skrbek, “Encryption and decryption of 
broadcasting based on the position of listener,” 2011, [retrieved: June, 
2013], Available from: http://spisy.upv.cz/Applications/2010/PPVC
Z2010_0260A3.pdf. 
 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

