GluMo: A Noninvasive Blood Glucose Monitor
Ben Tan, Peter Ferguson, Teddy Nguyen, Hanna Albright, Navid Shaghaghi, and Zhiwen Zhang,
Ethical, Pragmatic, and Intelligent Computing (EPIC) Laboratory
Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, California, USA
{jtan1, pferguson, tpnguyen1, halbright, nshaghaghi, zzhang}@scu.edu
Abstract—Diabetics are used to pricking their ﬁngertips in order
to check their glucose level. In an effort to sunset that practice,
Santa Clara University’s Ethical, Pragmatic, and Intelligent
Computing (EPIC) Laboratory has envisioned, designed, and
prototyped a portable noninvasive glucose monitoring medical
instrument which we have dubbed GluMo. In place of a drop of
blood GluMo uses Infrared (IR) light emitters and receivers as
part of a small form factor Internet of Things (IoT) medical in-
strument which calculates the amount of the IR wave’s interaction
with glucose molecules within the blood stream. The information
is then transmitted to a database for tracking, history building,
and data visualization for the patient (and potentially the patient’s
doctor if authorized). Since current single droplet blood glucose
meters are attainable as cheap as 10 USD, in order to keep
GluMo’s cost under 100 USD without diminishing the accuracy
of the reading outside of an acceptable bounds, Near Infrared
(NIR/IR-A DIN) emitters at the 1300 nanometer (nm) wavelength
and corresponding receivers were chosen for the prototype. The
choice of 1300nm NIR/IR-A comes from the fact that 60% of
human blood is water (H2O) and 1300nm NIR/IR-A has the
largest positive difference between its absorbance in glucose and
its absorbance in water among the other wavelengths of IR in
the NIR/IR-A range.
Keywords–Blood Glucose Monitor; Infrared (IR); Internet of
Things (IoT); Medical Instrumentation; Non-invasive.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Diabetes is a chronic disease caused by an inherited
and/or acquired deﬁciency in the production of insulin by the
pancreas, or by the ineffectiveness of the insulin produced.
Such a deﬁciency results in increased concentrations of glucose
in the blood, which in turn damage many of the body’s
systems such as the vision and digestive systems, as well as
organs such as the heart, blood vessels, nerves, kidneys, and
even skin [1]. Diabetes is thus the seventh leading cause of
death in the United States as it is a factor in causing serious
health complications including heart disease, blindness, kidney
failure, and lower-extremity amputations [2]. According to the
International Diabetes Federation, in 2017, over 425 million
adults suffered from diabetes. This number is estimated to
increase to over 629 million within a generation (2045) [3].
With regular glucose monitoring, patients can maintain
normal glucose levels and thus can prevent or delay the afore-
mentioned diabetes-related complications. The current method
for monitoring blood glucose levels requires a drop of blood to
be obtained by pricking a ﬁnger tip with a retractable needle.
However, this method is invasive, painful, and sometimes
messy for the users. It can also cause infections over time
with regular use [4] due to the usage of un-sterilized needles,
repeated usage of needles which were designed for single
usage, or the sharing of needles/prickers between patients.
The replacement of this painful, messy, and unsafe method
of blood glucose monitoring is thus under much research
and development as is explored in the Related Work Section
below. Sections II and III will cover the consumer needs
and existing efforts respectively. Section IV will delineate
GluMo’s design and implementation and Section V will report
on GluMo’s preliminary results. Finally, Section VI previews
the many redesigns, improvements, and additions currently
under research and development at Santa Clara University’s
Ethical, Pragmatic, and Intelligent Computing (EPIC) research
lab which aims to create GluMo’s Minimal Viable Product
(MVP).
II.
CONSUMER NEEDS
With a signiﬁcant and rapid increase in the prevalence of
type II diabetes in the world’s population, the ability to contin-
uously detect the amount of glucose in the blood is particularly
relevant. Diabetics must be able to quickly and accurately test
their blood glucose level in order to appropriately regulate
their blood sugar level in response. Current single drop blood
glucose meters allow the patient to self-monitor their blood
glucose levels regularly throughout the day in an accurate
way. However, because they must directly analyze blood to
determine its concentration of glucose, patients are forced
to prick their ﬁngers for each reading, making monitoring
blood sugar an inherently noncontinuous, invasive, painful,
and potentially unhygienic process. In addition, the single-
use test-strips required by these meters represent an ongoing
expense for the patients, which is especially costly for those
requiring multiple tests throughout the day. The quality of the
test-strips does also effect the accuracy of the blood glucose
level readings especially if damaged or expired.
Therefore, although currently available meters allow pa-
tients to accurately meter their blood glucose concentration,
they do not make the experience pleasant nor completely safe.
Pricking the skin for the extraction of blood does pose a poten-
tial health hazard. The ﬁnger pricker’s needle may accumulate
microbes and/or viruses and thus inject the patient with them
inadvertently. Also, patients report that to save money they
often reuse their prickers’ needles even up to several days
or a week. The pricking needle is also not considered safe
for children and can be very harmful if used improperly. The
needle, just for instance, is capable of damaging the eye if
accidentally or maliciously used in that area.
Therefore, what diabetic patients need, is a continuous,
painless, hygienic, and safe alternative which also does not
incur an indeﬁnite cost of test-strips and needles.
III.
RELATED WORK
As reported by researchers McNicoles and Cot´e [5] back in
the year 2000 ”over 100 small companies and universities were
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

working to develop noninvasive or minimally invasive glucose
sensing technologies”. Yet, a 2019 search of online retailers
such as Amazon, Ebay, and Alibaba results in a scant number
of extremely expensive devices such as the Glucose Wizard
[6] at a price tag of nearly 1150 USD or OMELON B-2 [7]
at a price tag of nearly 400 USD and an overarching number
of reviews which report the device’s inaccuracy in measuring
blood sugar levels yet doing well as a blood pressure meter.
Glucose detection using IR spectroscopy is not a new
discovery [8]. In fact, among the aforementioned 100 ventures
of the two past decades, McNicoles and Cot´e [5] report
that the optical methods for measuring glucose levels had
the biggest share. More speciﬁcally, they indicate that the
NIR/IR-A DIN (DIN standing for the Deutsches Institut f¨ur
Normung or the German Institute for Standardization) region
of the infrared optical spectrum has been the primary region
of focus in academia and industry as it has the least IR
radiation absorbance in water in comparison to the other IR
spectrum regions such as the short-wavelength IR (SWIR/IR-
B DIN) and mid-wavelength IR (MWIR/IR-C DIN) regions.
However, much of the early work in the NIR/IR-A have
been of purely proof-of-concept nature and thus have used
large and relatively expensive bench-top machines [9] such as
the Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) [10] instruments and
grating spectrometer [11] instruments.
Many researchers have also suggested that the thickness of
the human skin can cause the scattering of the IR signal. For
instance in 1982, researchers suggested measuring the glucose
level of the aqueous humor of the eye as a measure of the
blood glucose concentration in the blood [12]. They indicated
that this would lead to the development of noninvasive blood
glucose meters for public usage but as of 2019 no such publicly
available devices have been found in the market by the authors.
In a different approach, GlucoTrack is a noninvasive non-
IR solution through combining ultrasonic, electromagnetic, and
thermal technologies for the measurement of glucose in the
blood through the ear lobe [13]. However, because the device
is so close to the patient’s ear, and the fact that numerous
studies such as [14], [15], and [16] exist which link ultrasonics
to human ear damage and thus hearing degradation, the device
has the potential of damaging the eardrum due to its continued
bombardment with ultrasonic waves. More time and usage data
are necessary to ascertain the true health effects of the device
on longtime users.
IV.
DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
GluMo is a multi-phased research project. Phase 1, which
will be expand on in this section, was the proof of concept
and prototyping phase. Phase 2 is the MVP phase in which the
size of the instrument is reduced to pocket-sized and potential
IR frequency changes outside of NIR/IR-A are explored for
further increasing accuracy. Much work on this phase has also
been completed or is near completion. However, a thorough
cost-beneﬁt analysis will contrast the accuracy gain of the
system against the higher cost of the non-NIR/IR-A LEDs
which will need to be used instead. And phase 3 consists
of a robust human subject ﬁeld testing of GluMo beyond the
laboratory setting which included carefully crafted test tubes
containing precise glucose solutions. The inherent uncertainty
and messyness of the real world will thus help ﬁne-tune
GluMo’s design in preparation for the next phase. Lastly,
phase 4 is the further reduction of the size to a system on a
chip for the incorporation of the bio-medical instrument within
common wearables such as smart watches.
A. Electronics
The electronics of GluMo consists of 2 closed circuits. One
for an IR emitter at the 1300nm wavelength, and another for
an IR receiver - a photodiode designed to be able to detect IR
signals around 1300nm. The choice of 1300nm NIR/IR-A is
due to two separate requirements of the system: low cost, and
accuracy. Since current single droplet blood glucose monitors
are purchasable from online retailers as cheap as 10 USD, in
order to satisfy the market imposed requirement of keeping
GluMo’s prototype’s cost under 100 USD, the emitter chosen
for the prototype needed to be a Near Infrared (NIR/IR-A DIN)
LED as LEDs in this range are attainable off the shelf at under
20 USD.
However, another requirement for the GluMo prototype
is to maintain a glucose measurement accuracy within an
acceptable bounds. Due to the fact that 60% of human blood
is water (H2O) and that among the other wavelengths of IR
in the NIR/IR-A range the 1300nm NIR/IR-A has the largest
positive difference between its absorbance in glucose and in
water [17], the 1300nm NIR/IR-A satisﬁes the requirement
for maintaining a glucose measurement accuracy within the
acceptable bounds.
B. Software
Arduino C code is used to control the instrument, to
analyze the data from the IR receiver, and to transmit the
results to a computer for analysis. Using built-in Arduino func-
tions, 1000 voltage-readings from the photodiode are averaged
and after observing 10 of these values, the most frequently
occurring value is recorded. Furthermore, a delay of 1 second
between readings is established and the voltage values from
the IR receiver are converted to percentage of transmittance
and then inverted into absorbance. These absorbance values are
then converted to blood glucose values given an experimentally
derived equation for a standard curve of glucose concentration
vs. absorbance as follows:
Glucose = Absorbance − 0.2671
0.4665
(1)
However, due to the indeterminate nature of reality, the afore-
mentioned 1 second spaced readings are not constant and
ﬂuctuate slightly around the actual value. This can be remedied
by increasing the number of readings to 10,000 values instead
of 1000 and averaging the results. It therefore follows that
obtaining even more readings and averaging their value should
result in a more accurate value. However, the patience of a user
must be here considered. How long would a diabetic patient be
willing to wait with his or her ﬁnger inside of the instrument
in order to get an accurate reading? Therefore, a band-pass
software ﬁlter was created to exclude outlying values in order
to increase the accuracy of the average value even on fewer
reading samples. The ﬁnal decision on the number of readings
necessary as well as the exact values to set the band-pass ﬁlter
to, are yet to be determined as further human subject testing is
necessary to ﬁne tune these values. Though we do foresee this
ﬁne-tuning to be also individual based and perhaps even part
of an automated initial calibration step when a patient utilizes
the device for the ﬁrst time.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

C. 3D printed Casing
The circuitry was placed in a 3D-Printed box, made from
PLA, designed to minimize interference from outside light in
order to focus the infrared light through the patient’s ﬁnger’s
tissue and onto the photo-diode receiver. The box consists
of a lid and a main body, as seen in Figure 1, with two
openings: one for a USB cable that powers the system and
transmits the results to a connected computer, and another for
the patient’s ﬁnger. The main body and the top have screw
holes at each corner so that the box can be sealed securely
from any interfering light.
Figure 1. 3D-Printed GluMo Housing
V.
RESULTS
To calibrate, test, and validate GluMo a series of test tubes
with varying levels of glucose concentration were built and
utilized repeatedly to test accuracy in face of both variance
and strain of continued usage. In order to best resemble the
human skin, the test tubes were built from powder-less and
lubricant-free condoms. The error in measurements were under
10% With a high average level of accuracy at 99.2%. However,
since this will be a medical device which millions will rely
upon for regulating their blood glucose levels, we are aiming
for 100% accuracy.
Human subject testing was also conducted on team mem-
bers and veriﬁed against traditional single blood droplet glu-
cose meters with the same levels of error and accuracy when
multiple results are averaged. As an example, the table in
Figure 2 shows 5 consecutive measurements for a single
subject. The average blood glucose concentration measurement
taken by the noninvasive meter was 113.65mg/dL. This value
represents a 0.6% error compared to the value given by
the commercial meter, suggesting that the meter is highly
accurate. However, as the calculated p-values comparing each
measurement to this average value indicate, the precision of
each individual measurements was not as ideal. The p-values
indicate the certainty with which each measurement can be
assumed to be equal to the average value, with a maximum
value of one. There is 90% conﬁdence in the measurement
for each of the ﬁve trials, with two trials indicating that their
respective values are deﬁnitively different from the average
measurement with p-values of almost zero.
The high accuracy of the average glucose measurement
despite this lack of precision was caused by a fairly even
distribution of individual measurements above and below the
average value. Many more human subject test are necessary
Figure 2. Blood glucose concentration measurements and p-values from
glucose meter testing.
in order to validate the accuracy levels. However, due to the
COVID19 Pandemic at the time of this writing the human
subject testing was very limited and insufﬁcient to validate that
the high level of accuracy will be maintained across a wide
verity of patient skin types. A more extensive human subject
testing will be conducted once the second phase prototype is
completed as delineated further below.
VI.
WORK IN PROGRESS
The ﬁrst prototype of GluMo has been produced as a proof
of concept. The second pocket-sized GluMo prototype is under
development as an MVP for a marketable alternative to today’s
blood droplet glucose meters.
A. Spectroscopy
In order to ﬁnd the optimal IR wavelength to absorb
glucose in water, the full range of IR is being explored. As seen
in Figure 3, at around 1650nm, the absorbance of IR in water
is zero [18]. Hence, this region provides a unique opportunity
for testing the accuracy of measuring glucose in blood. Thus,
the entire absorbance recorded by the system should only be
the absorbance of IR in glucose without needing to subtract the
absorbance of water. However, this will cause the instrument to
be more expensive than 100 initially until economies of scale
lower the product’s cost of production.
Figure 3. Water and Glucose Solution Absorbance spectra 1500nm –
2500nm. [18]
However, a complete IR spectroscopy of glucose vs water
will be conducted in order verify this ﬁnding or to better select
the IR range which will have the highest absorbance in glucose,
yet lowest absorbance in water.
B. Pocket sized MVP with 3D-Printed casing
The current GluMo prototype, even though light weight
and robust, is still too big for every day usage. Granted that
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

competitor devices such as the Glucose Wizard or OMLEN
B-2 are still bigger than GluMo in size, GluMo’s circuitry can
still me shrunken down substantially with low cost off-the-
shelf available components alone. The packaging of the MVP
in a custom 3D-Printed casing also allows for a lot of ﬂexibility
in the design of both the internal and overall looks and feel
of the instrument. The intricate design details of the Pocket
sized GluMo MVP and its results, will be the subject of the
authors’ next paper; but it is noteworthy that the completion
of the MVP enables consumer testing of the instrument.
C. Rechargeable Battery and apparatus for USB charging
The GluMo MVP will be a portable pocket-sized device.
Hence, it will need to operate even when not plugged in to
a power source. Therefore, the MVP will include a small,
internal, and rechargeable battery and a charging board. The
USB port which serves as a data port in the Phase 1 prototype
will then be re-purposed for charging the battery. There will
also be a small OLED to display the battery status and the
current blood glucose level.
D. Wireless communication
The GluMo prototype in phase 1 is designed to utilize
serial communication using a USB cable. However, a point to
point communication system consisting of nrf24 transceivers
was tested as a proof of concept. GluMo’s pocket-size MVP
in phase 2 will have WiFi capabilities in order to allow the
instrument’s direct connection to the home or facility WiFi
router for its independent access to an online database. This
will allow the centralization of the patient’s glucose reading
history for easier access by the patient as well as the patient’s
care taker and/or doctor.
E. Web application
Our current prototype’s data visualization is merely nu-
meric based, with minimal explanatory details, and geared
towards researchers and experts in the domain. In order to
enable the mass usage of the instrument by users, a web
based Graphical User Interface (GUI) is being developed.
The interface will include numeric results of the readings as
well as interactive graphs to help patients, their care takers,
and physicians to better track their glucose levels across time
periods. Furthermore, user’s will be able to view their glucose
readings over a speciﬁed period of time, such as the past
day, week, or month. The application will also feature an
alert capability which can automatically send messages to the
patient’s authorized care taker(s) or health provider(s) in case
of a sustained abnormal glucose reading level, provided such
alerts are set up.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE STEPS
An alternative to the classical single droplet blood glucose
monitors which are prevalent today is a painless, hygienic,
noninvasive glucose monitoring system utilizing infrared light
waves; and it does not have to cost 1150 USD. There is at least
3 decades worth of evidence that researchers in companies and
universities have been working on noninvasive blood glucose
meters with most of them utilizing optics of some sort. The
physics and chemistry of the absorbance of IR in glucose is
thus not a new discovery, yet no reliable, portable, low cost,
noninvasive blood glucose meter has made its way to the
market. GluMo is an attempt at that and as the preliminary
prototype results indicate it is a promising attempt. Once
GluMo’s pocket-sized MVP is completed and the limitations
imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic are alleviated, a period of
rigorous human subject ﬁeld testing will ﬁnally present GluMo
as the light at the end of the more than 3 decade long effort to
enhance the lives of those struggling with diabetes by lessening
their pain by a few needle pricks a day.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Many thanks to Santa Clara University’s maker lab for
providing 3D-Printing services for the project as well as the
Frugal Innovation Hub and the Department of Bio Engineering
for their continued support of the project.
REFERENCES
[1]
Healthier Talk, “6 ways high blood sugar silently damages your body,”
2017. [Online]. Available: https://healthiertalk.com/6-ways-high-blood-
sugar-silently-damages
[2]
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, “Diabetes.” [Online].
Available: https://www.cdc.gov/media/presskits/aahd/diabetes.pdf
[3]
International
Diabetes
Foundation,
“Diabetes
statistics,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.idf.org/our-activities/education/idf-
school-of-diabetes.html
[4]
S. Clarke and J. Foster, “A history of blood glucose meters and their role
in self-monitoring of diabetes mellitus,” British journal of biomedical
science, vol. 69, no. 2, 2012, pp. 83–93.
[5]
R. J. McNichols and G. L. Cot´e, “Optical glucose sensing in biological
ﬂuids: an overview,” Journal of biomedical optics, vol. 5, no. 1, 2000,
pp. 5–17.
[6]
Glucose
Wizard,
“Glucose
wizard.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.glucosewizard.com/index.html
[7]
OMELON
B-2,
“Omelon
b-2.”
[Online].
Available:
https://diabetestalk.net/blood-sugar/omelon-b2-non-invasive-glucometer
[8]
G. L. Cot´e, “Noninvasive optical glucose sensing—an overview,” Jour-
nal of Clinical Engineering, vol. 22, no. 4, 1997, p. 253.
[9]
——, “Noninvasive and minimally-invasive optical monitoring tech-
nologies,” The Journal of nutrition, vol. 131, no. 5, 2001, pp. 1596S–
1604S.
[10]
NIST, “Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy,” 2016. [Online].
Available:
https://www.nist.gov/laboratories/tools-instruments/fourier-
transform-infrared-spectroscopy
[11]
B. E. Sauer, “The grating spectrometer,” 2007, imperial College of
London Laboratory Notes.
[12]
B. Rabinovitch, W. March, and R. L. Adams, “Noninvasive glucose
monitoring of the aqueous humor of the eye: Part i. measurement of
very small optical rotations,” Diabetes Care, vol. 5, no. 3, 1982, pp.
254–258.
[13]
Integrity
Applications,
“Glucotrack.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.glucotrack.com/about-glucotrack/
[14]
B. Smagowska and M. Pawlaczyk-Łuszczy´nska, “Effects of ultrasonic
noise on the human body—a bibliographic review,” International Journal
of Occupational Safety and Ergonomics, vol. 19, no. 2, 2013, pp. 195–
202.
[15]
W. Acton, “The effects of industrial airborne ultrasound on humans,”
Ultrasonics, vol. 12, no. 3, 1974, pp. 124–128.
[16]
H. O. Parrack, “Effect of air-borne ultrasound on humans,” International
Audiology, vol. 5, no. 3, 1966, pp. 294–308.
[17]
H. Yoshinari, H. Ishizawa, M. Fukuda, S. Tokutake, S. Koyama, and
Y. Miyauchi, “Non-invasive self monitoring of blood glucose system
using near-infrared spectroscopy,” in 2012 Proceedings of SICE Annual
Conference (SICE).
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1852–1854.
[18]
R. Hotmartua, P. W. Pangestu, H. Zakaria, and Y. S. Irawan, “Non-
invasive blood glucose detection using near infrared sensor,” in 2015
International Conference on Electrical Engineering and Informatics
(ICEEI).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 687–692.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

