A Multi-Sensor Approach for Activity Recognition in 
Older Patients 
 
Carlos Fernando Crispim Junior1, Francois Bremond1,2 
1Institut de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique 
2EA CoBTeK Université de Nice Sophia Antipolis 
Sophia Antipolis, France 
{carlos-fernando.crispim_junior,francois.bremond}@inria.fr 
Veronique Joumier2,3 
3Centre Mémoire de Ressources et de Recherche de Nice 
Nice, France 
veronique.joumier@inria.fr
Abstract — Existing surveillance systems for older people activity 
analysis are focused on video and sensors analysis (e.g., 
accelerometers, pressure, infrared) applied for frailty assessment, 
fall detection, and the automatic identification of self-maintenance 
activities (e.g., dressing, self-feeding) at home. This paper 
proposes a multi-sensor surveillance system (accelerometers and 
video-camera) for the automatic detection of instrumental 
activities of daily living (IADL, e.g., preparing coffee, making a 
phone call) in a lab-based clinical protocol.  IADLs refer to more 
complex activities than self-maintenance which decline in 
performance has been highlighted as an indicator of early 
symptoms of dementia. Ambient video analysis is used to describe 
older people activity in the scene, and an accelerometer wearable 
device is used to complement visual information in body posture 
identification (e.g., standing, sitting). A generic constraint-based 
ontology language is used to model IADL events using sensors 
reading and semantic information of the scene (e.g., presence in 
goal-oriented zones of the environment, temporal relationship of 
events, estimated postures). The proposed surveillance system is 
tested with 9 participants (healthy: 4, MCI: 5) in an observation 
room equipped with home appliances at the Memory Center of 
Nice Hospital. Experiments are recorded using a 2D video camera 
(8 fps) and an accelerometer device (MotionPod®). The multi-
sensor approach presents an average sensitivity of 93.51% and an 
average precision of 63.61%, while the vision-based approach has 
a sensitivity of 77.23%, and a precision of 57.65%. The results 
show an improvement of the multi-sensor approach over the 
vision-based at IADL detection. Future work will focus on system 
use to evaluate the differences between the activity profile of 
healthy participants and early to mild stage Alzheimer’s patients. 
Keywords – Event Streams Fusion; Instrumental Activities of 
Daily Living; Dementia; Elderly 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The growth of older people population in past years has 
highlighted the importance of the development of tools that 
could extend their independent living, and to improve the 
diagnosis and treatment of age-related diseases. Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT) have proposed wearable 
sensors [1-2], smart homes, and video surveillance systems [3-
7] to address older people surveillance, detect emerging 
patterns of frailty and falling down events, and to support the 
early diagnosis of aging related diseases (e.g., Alzheimer, 
Parkinson, Mild Cognitive Impairment - MCI). People 
surveillance is generally based in smart home approaches, 
which analyzes older people daily living activities using a set 
of heterogeneous sensors placed at home appliances (e.g., 
infrared presence sensors, contact sensors, temperature sensors, 
microphones, and video cameras). Their goal is generally to 
identify falling down events or emerging patterns of frailty by 
the detection and analysis of a set of self-maintenance activities 
known as Activities of Daily Living (ADL[8], e.g., hygiene, 
toilet use, eating, resting, and dressing) [10-12]. Although a 
multi-sensor approach enriches the quantity of data about the 
person daily routine, the multiple sources of readings also 
increase the complexity of data analysis process, as it is 
necessary to choose the relevant sensor to detect the activity of 
interest (disregarding the existent data storage issues). 
Video-monitoring systems are an alternative to the fully 
sensor equipped smart-homes, as they can replace or be used in 
parallel to reduce the number of sensors necessary to describe 
the overall activity of a person. Existing applications vary from 
fall detection to ADL detection at constrained environments [3-
7]. An ontology-based approach was shown for modeling the 
context of human status (e.g., body posture) and the 
environment context (semantic information about the scene). 
The models use information provided by a set of cameras for 
person detection, and accelerometer devices attached to objects 
of daily living for environment events triggering (e.g., TV 
remote control or doors use). A rule-based reasoning engine is 
used for processing and combining both models types at activity 
detection level. The ontology tries to solve the semantic gap 
among the human activities (and scene context) and the sensors 
raw signals [28]. A Fuzzy logic scheme [27] was also proposed 
to cope with multiple sensor fusion at activity analysis in a 
smart home. Audio, infrared sensors and a wearable device 
(acquiring physiological signals, like, ECG, and body posture) 
are combined to infer ADLs events. 
Although daily activity surveillance can support the analysis 
of medium- to long-term patterns of activity, in-lab clinical 
protocols supported by ICT have been recently proposed to 
analyze a person performance in specific activities (like ADL), 
that could highlight emerging symptoms of a certain diseases. 
For example, wearable devices have been used to assess older 
people motor functions performance in a gait analysis test.  
Patients wear a chest or fist sensor which automatically extracts 
parameters about their gait performance (e.g., stride length and 
cadence, vital signals). These parameters are used to identify 
disturbances in gait patterns that could be associated to 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

emerging symptoms of Dementia (e.g., Alzheimer, MCI, and 
Parkinson) [16-18, 22]. 
This paper proposes a multi-sensor surveillance system 
using heterogeneous sensors data (video and accelerometer 
recordings) to identify activities during a medical clinical 
protocol. An ontology approach is used to model the semantic 
information about activities and the clinical protocol tasks. 
Accelerometer data is combined with visual information to 
identify the body posture of the person in situations where video 
camera data is not sufficient due to occlusion or scene 
characteristics that affect people detection on the scene. 
The set of activities analyzed differ from previous studies as 
Instrumental Activities of Daily living (IADL) are used instead 
of ADL. IADL set of activities have been recently discussed as 
a 
better 
estimator 
for 
the 
evaluation 
of 
emerging 
neuropsychiatric symptoms, as they are associated with tasks 
that require independence, organization, judgment 
and 
sequencing abilities (e.g., using the phone, shopping groceries, 
organizing medications, and managing personal finances) [8]. 
The system prototype is tested in an ongoing medical 
clinical protocol under development by the Memory Center of 
Nice Hospital, which intends to quantitatively and objectively 
assess older people executive functions and functional abilities. 
The long-term goal of this approach and the clinical protocol is 
to differentiate early stage Alzheimer’s patients from healthy 
participants. 
The main contributions of the present work are the use of 
accelerometer-based and visual-based information for posture 
recognition. The sensors data are combined using an ontology 
language similarly to [28], but the set of sensors used is 
different. The IADLs recognition instead of ADLs as previous 
works discussed is stated as a contribution for the clinical 
domain. Next sections will present the proposed multi-sensor 
approach, the clinical protocol where the proposed system is 
tested, and the preliminary results. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Clinical Protocol 
Participants aged more than 65 years are recruited by the 
Memory Center (MC) of the Nice Hospital. Inclusion criteria of 
the AD group are: diagnosis of AD according to NINCDS-
ADRDA criteria and a Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) [19, 
23] score above 15. AD participants which have significant 
motor disturbances (per the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating 
Scale) are excluded. Controls participants were healthy in the 
sense of behavioral and cognitive disturbances. 
In the designed clinical protocol the participants have to 
undertake a set of physical activities and IADLs in a Hospital 
observation room furnished with home appliances. The clinical 
protocol activities are divided in three scenarios are as follows: 
(1) Scenario 01 - Directed activities (10 minutes): it 
intends to assess kinematic parameters about the 
participant gait profile (e.g., static and dynamic 
balance test, walking test); 
(2) Scenario 02 - Semi-directed activities (15 minutes): it 
aims to evaluate the degree of independence of the 
participant by taking and organizing a list of daily 
living activities (IADLs) within 15 minutes. 
Participant is alone in the room with the list of 
activities to perform, and he/she is advised to leave 
the room only when he/she has felt that  the required 
tasks are completed; 
(3) Undirected (“free”) activities (5 minutes): it aims to 
assess how the participant spontaneously initiates 
activities and organize his/her time.  
The proposed monitoring system is tested with the video 
recordings of the Semi-directed scenario (Scenario 02). Table 1 
shows the set of IADLs that the participant is instructed to 
perform. Results using a previous version of the clinical and a 
video-based approach for activity detection be seen in [19]. 
TABLE 1. CLINICAL PROTOCOL – SCENARIO 02 
Watch TV, 
Make tea/coffee, 
Write the shopping list of the lunch ingredients, 
Answer the Phone, 
Read the newspaper/magazine, 
Water the plant 
Organize the prescribed drugs inside the drug box according to the 
daily/weekly intake schedule, 
Write a check to pay the electricity bill, 
Call a taxi, 
Get out of the room. 
B. Data recording 
Experimental data is recorded using a 2D video camera 
(AXIS®, Model P1346, 8 frames per second), a 3D camera 
(Kinect® sensor), a motion sensor (MotionPod®), and ambient 
audio microphone (Tonsion, Model TM6, Software Audacity, 
WAV file format, 16bit PCM/16kHz). The proposed approach 
is tested with 9 participants (healthy: 4, MCI: 5).  
MotionPod® is a proprietary device that provides estimation 
about a person posture based on the readings coming from 
accelerometers and gyroscopes sensors. MotionPod® is 
attached to Patient chest using  a chest strap accessory. As 
Video and MotionPod® recordings are acquired using different 
computers, these computers had their internal clock reference 
automatically synchronized using a network service (Network 
Time Protocol) to avoid time issues. 
C. Multi-sensor surveillance system 
The proposed multi-sensor system is divided in two main 
components: the vision and the event detection components. 
The video record is processed by the Vision Component which 
is responsible to detect mobile objects and classify them 
according to a set of objects of interest (e.g., person). Once a 
person is detected on the video frame under analysis, the event 
module component analyzes his/her activity in relation to the 
activity models previously defined by an expert using an 
ontology language. Posture events coming from MotionPod® 
data are taken in account only at the event component level. Fig. 
1 illustrates a diagram of the system architecture and sensors 
contribution for each module. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 1. System architecture 
1) Vision Component 
The vision component has been developed using a modular 
vision platform locally developed that allows the test of 
different algorithms for each step of the computer vision chain 
(e.g., video acquisition, image segmentation, physical objects 
detection, physical objects tracking, actor identification, and 
actor events detection). The vision component extracts the 
objects to track from the current frame using an extension of the 
Gaussian Mixture Model algorithm for background subtraction 
[26]. People tracking is performed by a multi-feature tracking 
algorithm presented in [20], using the following features: 2D 
size, 3D displacement, color histogram, and dominant color.  
Fig. 2 shows an example of the vision component output. 
Rectangle envelope highlights the detection of a person in the 
scene. Blue dots represent previous positions of the detected 
person in the scene. 
 
Figure 2. Multi-sensor activity recognition system screen. Rectangle envelope 
highlights the detection of a person in the scene. Blue dots represent previous 
positions of the detected person in the scene. 
2) Event Detection Component  
Event detection component uses a generic constraint-based 
ontology language to model and recognize activity events. 
Event models are described using a priori knowledge about the 
experimental scene (scene model), the clinical protocol 
activities (event models), attributes of the physical object 
tracked by the vision component (e.g., spatial, temporal, 
kinematic and appearance properties), and posture estimations 
coming from MotionPod® sensor. 
The a priori knowledge about the experimental scene 
consists of the decomposition of a 3D projection of the scene 
floor plan in a set of spatial zones which represent contextual 
information about the clinical scenario (e.g., zoneTV, 
zoneArmChair, 
zoneOfficeDesk). 
The 
constraint-based 
ontology is declarative and intuitive language as it is based in 
natural terminology, allowing domain experts to easily define 
and modify the event models. 
Event models are hierarchically categorized according to 
their complexity (primitive or complex) and the information 
they model (the current state or time-based event). Primitive 
states refer to a specific value in the property(ies) of a tracked 
physical object (e.g., the participant). Primitive events refer to a 
change(s) in the value(s) of an object property(ies) (e.g., change 
of posture). Composite/Complex events are defined as a set of 
primitive events and/or states. More details about the generic 
ontology language used are seen in [25]. 
Table 2 shows an example of the complex event called 
“Person standing and using OfficeDesk”. The ontology event 
description is divided among four components: the Physical 
objects involved in the event model (an object classified as a 
Person – p1, a contextual zone – z1, and a contextual object – 
eq. 1); the Components (or sub-events) that must be detected for 
the 
Event 
Model 
identification 
(e.g., 
Person_using_OfficeDesk); the constraints which  components 
and physical objects attributes must hold (e.g., minimal duration 
of the event “Person using OfficeDesk”); and an Alarm category 
used as reference to a specific treatment that could be performed 
in case of the event is detected. 
TABLE 2. EVENT MODEL OF PERSON_STADING_AND_USING_OFFICEDESK 
CompositeEvent(Person_standing_ and_using_OfficeDesk, 
    PhysicalObjects(  
                     (p1 : Person), (z1 : Zone),  (eq1 : Equipment)) 
    Components(       
                     (c1 : CompositeEvent Person_using_OfficeDesk(p1, z1, eq1)) 
                     (c2:  PrimitiveState     Person_standing_MP ( p1) ) 
     ) 
    Constraints((duration(c1) > 2) 
    Alarm ((Level : NOTURGENT))     
) 
Table 3 describes the primitive state called “Person using 
OfficeDesk”. “Person using Office Desk” event is modeled 
based on the participant presence inside the contextual zone 
“OfficeDesk”, and in the distance between participant 3D 
bounding box projection on the scene floor and the 
parallelepiped modeling the real desk. 
TABLE 3. EVENT MODEL OF PERSON_USING_OFFICEDESK  
CompositeEvent(Person_using_OfficeDesk, 
       PhysicalObjects( (p1 : Person), (z1 : Zone), (eq1 : Equipment)) 
       Components( 
                       (c1: PrimitiveState Person_Inside_Zone_OfficeDesk(p1, z1)) 
                       (c2: PrimitiveState Person_closeTo_OfficeDesk(p1, eq1)) 
  ) 
  Alarm ((Level : URGENT)) 
) 
3) Multi-sensor event fusion 
Sensor fusion can be performed at different levels, e.g., data 
level (raw data combination), feature level (fusion of 
observation data from different sensors), or at decision level 
(fusion of events detected by different sensors) [24]. The multi-
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

sensor fusion herein presented is performed at decision level. 
One advantage of sensor fusion at this level is the possibility of 
changing the sensor type without the need of change of event 
models, e.g., postures could be defined as an attribute or a sub-
event, the source of which could be replaced as soon as it keeps 
its label. Herein the posture status coming from MotionPod® 
and the Visual component are defined as attributes of the 
ontology model called “Person”, and the specific changes in 
these attribute values are modeled as primitive events. 
Raw MotionPod® is post-processed using MotionPod® 
manufacturer software which provides the set of participant 
postures during the experiment (e.g., standing, sitting, lying 
down, changing from a posture to another). The vision 
component estimates standing and sitting postures based on a 
sitting threshold applied over the person 3D height. The sitting 
threshold is manually defined per video (and patient) based on 
the visualization of the participant average sitting height. A 
time synchronization step is performed based on sensors (video 
and accelerometer) readings timestamps.  
The choice of which sensor posture estimation is used per 
activity model was based in the analysis of the system activity 
recognition performance in the defined contextual zones.  For 
example, goal-oriented events that are performed farther from 
the camera viewpoint, where the Person remains immobile 
used accelerometer posture estimation, and Event models that 
requires quick response in posture estimation (Sitting to 
Standing transfer tests) were modeled in respect to the vision 
module posture estimation, as the accelerometer standard data 
acquisition rate is around 1 data acquisition/sec. 
4) Events Models and IADLs 
Event models are described taking in account a person 
presence in a contextual zone, his/her proximity to a contextual 
objects, and his/her current body posture (e.g., standing, 
bending). These constraints pose a limitation to some IADLs 
models as their target actions that cannot be directly detected 
(e.g., writing a check to pay electricity bill, reading a magazine, 
organizing a set of cards) and they have the same contextual 
information. 
In these cases, a few IADLs of the Clinical protocol are 
merged in a single activity. For example, answering and calling 
someone is a voice-based behavior in which the person 
interacts with an object (the phone), and, as there is none 
pressure sensor in the phone nor audio recognition in this 
approach, these two models are simplified to “using phone” 
activity. Table 4 lists the activity models of the clinical 
protocol (Scenario 02) and their simplified version. 
TABLE 4. COMPARISON BETWEEN EVENT MODELS AND PROTOCOL IADLS 
EVENT MODEL 
MODELED EVENT 
Person using OfficeDesk 
 Make a shopping list of the 
ingredients for lunch  
 Write a check to pay the 
electricity bill. 
Person watching TV 
 Watch TV 
Person preparing Coffee 
 Make Tea/Coffee. 
Person using Pharmacy 
 
Organize 
the 
prescribed drugs inside the 
drug box according weekly 
to the hour/day schedule 
Person using Phone; 
 Call a taxi,  
 Answer the Phone 
Person watering Plant; 
Watering the plant 
Person using Reading Zone 
Person 
reading 
the 
newspaper/magazine 
D. Evaluation 
Evaluation results are presented for event models based 
only on visual constraints and the Multi-sensor approach to 
evaluate the improvements in event detection performance. 
Vision-based models consist of the same activity models but 
only taking in account posture estimation obtained from visual 
information.  
Activity recognition performance is assessed using the 
performance indices precision and sensitivity (Equations 1 and 
2, respectively), where TP refers to True Positive events; FP to 
False Positive events, TN to True Negative events, and FN to 
False Negative events. The evaluation is performed for the 15 
min. of each video sequence, and not in the form of previously 
extracted video chunks containing only IADL events. 
 
(1) 
 
 
(2) 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Table 5 shows the events detection performance rate for the 
vision system approach about 9 participants (15 min. each). GT 
states for ground-truth, and it specifies the total number of 
events inside the video sequences of all participants. The term 
“Person” was omitted from the event model name to improve 
the table readability. Table 6 shows the event detection rate for 
the multi-sensor approach. 
TABLE 5. ACTIVITY DETECTION RATE OF THE VISION SYSTEM 
Activity 
GT 
Precision 
(%) 
Sensitivity 
(%) 
Standing and preparing Coffee 
13 
37.5 
37.50 
Sitting and using OfficeDesk 
8 
5.80 
100.00 
Standing and using OfficeDesk 
12 
43.37 
100.00 
Standing and using Pharmacy 
8 
75.92 
100.00 
Standing and using Phone 
19 
83.33 
25.92 
Standing and watering Plant 
10 
100.00 
100.00 
Average performance 
70 
57.65 
77.23 
TABLE 6. ACTIVITY DETECTION RATE OF THE FUSION SYSTEM 
Activity 
GT 
Precision 
(%) 
Sensitivit
y (%) 
Standing and preparing Coffee 
13 
51.85 
100 
Sitting and using OfficeDesk 
8 
27.22 
100 
Standing and using OfficeDesk 
12 
43.37 
100 
Standing and using Pharmacy 
8 
75.92 
100 
Standing and using Phone 
19 
83.33 
100 
Standing and watering Plant 
10 
100.00 
61.11 
Average performance 
70 
63.61 
93.51 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

The vision system has an average precision of 57.65% and 
a sensitivity of 77.23%. The multi-sensor system performance 
is higher at the two indices, 63.61% at precision and 93.51% at 
sensitivity, highlighting that the use of accelerometer data in 
posture 
estimation 
has 
increased 
the 
overall 
system 
performance by improving the precision of the first three 
events of Table 6. 
Factors like occlusion, illumination changes, and color 
clothing similar to background have reduced person body 
detection at visual component, increasing the difficult at 
determining posture. Accelerometer data acquisition resolution 
is sometimes not sufficient to cope with person speed, e.g., in 
changing postures activities. But, the use of both sensors, each 
one applied in the situation (event model) where it provides 
better 
estimation, 
have 
improved 
the 
overall 
system 
performance without incorporating noisy in the event 
estimation framework. 
Part of the FP events that caused lower values of precision 
could be explained by unexpected behaviors of the participants 
that are not predicted in the event models. For example, events 
based on the spatial zone “OfficeDesk” are affected by this 
zone proximity to the “Watching TV” zone. FP events of 
“Using pharmacy” events are explained by a few patients 
placing a chair into this zone to watch the TV (located in the 
opposite side of the room). These inconsistences will be future 
addressed by refining the event and scene models and by the 
adoption of new features (e.g., adding an orientation attribute to 
the “Person” model and place constraints avoiding the cited FP 
event). 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The preliminary results of the proposed system shows that 
the adoption of a multi-sensor approach (a video data 
complemented by a wearable accelerometer) has improved the 
event detection performance of the activity recognition system 
in comparison to the same system based only on video data. 
Future work will focus at analyzing an unsupervised way of 
choosing among the posture attributes based on reliability 
measurement. A reliability measurement could support the 
automatic choice of one sensor over the others or the 
calculation of the likelihood of events based on multiple 
sensors reading. A broader validation is also planned to 
evaluate the reproducibility of results shown in a larger 
quantity of patients. The proposed multi-sensor approach also 
added new posture types (e.g., bending, lying down) that will 
be considered in the next evaluation. The long-term goal of the 
proposed approach is to support clinicians in the identification 
of emerging symptoms that could early diagnose Alzheimer 
patients at mild to moderate stages in a quantitative and 
objective way. 
V. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Maki, H. Ogawa, S. Matsuoka, Y. Yonezawa, and W. M. Caldwell, “A 
daily living activity remote monitoring system for solitary older people” 
Proc. Annual International Conference of the Engineering in Medicine 
and Biology Society (EMBC 11), Massachusetts 2011, pp. 5608–5611. 
[2] Y. Yang and X. Zhao, “Development of a fall detection algorithm based 
on a tri-axial accelerometer,” Proc. International Conference on 
Biomedical Engineering and Informatics (BMEI 11), vol. 3, 2011, pp. 
1371–1374. 
[3] H. Foroughi, B. S. Aski, and H. Pourreza, “Intelligent video surveillance 
for monitoring fall detection of older people in home environments,” 
Proc. International Conference on Computer and Information Technology 
(ICCIT 2008), Issue Date:  24-27 Dec. 2008, pp. 219-224. 
[4] A. H. Nasution, P. Zhang, and S. Emmanuel, “Video surveillance for 
older people monitoring and safety,” Proc. IEEE Region 10 Conference 
(TENCON 2009), 2009, pp. 1–6. 
[5] A. H. Nasution and S. Emmanuel, “Intelligent video surveillance for 
monitoring older people in home environments,” Proc. IEEE 9th 
Workshop Multimedia Signal Processing, 2007, pp. 203–206. 
[6] M.-L. Wang, C.-C. Huang, and H.-Y. Lin, An intelligent surveillance 
system based on an omnidirectional vision sensor,” Proc. IEEE 
Conference on Cybernetics and Intelligent Systems, i. 7-9 June 2006, pp. 
1–6. 
[7] S. Fleck, and W. Strasser, “Smart camera based monitoring system and 
its application to assisted living,” Proc. of the IEEE, vol. 96: 10, 2008, pp. 
1698–1714. 
[8] L. Monaci and R. G. Morris, “Neuropsychological screening performance 
and the association with activities of daily living and instrumental 
activities of daily living in dementia: baseline and 19- to 24-month 
follow-up”, International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, vol. 27:2, 2012, 
pp. 197-204. 
[9] O. Ojetola, E. I. Gaura, and J. Brusey, “Fall detection with wearable 
sensors--safe (Smart Fall Detection)”, Proc. International Conference in 
Intelligent Environments (IE 2011), 25-28 July 2011, pp. 318–321. 
[10] A. Fleury, M. Vacher, and N. Noury, “SVM-based multimodal 
classification of activities of daily living in health smart homes: sensors, 
algorithms, and first experimental results”, IEEE Transactions in 
Information Technology in Biomedicine, March 2010, vol. 14 (2), pp. 
274–283. 
[11] A. Fleury, N. Noury, and M. Vacher, “Introducing knowledge in the 
process of supervised classification of activities of Daily Living in Health 
Smart Homes,” Proc. e-Health Networking Applications and Services 
(Healthcom 2010), IEEE Press, 1-3 July 2010, pp. 322–329. 
[12] S. Zhang, S. McClean, B. Scotney, X. Hong, C. Nugent, and M. 
Mulvenna, “Decision support for alzheimer's patients in smart homes,” 
Proc. Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS '08), 17-19 June 2008, 
pp. 236–241. 
[13] O. Brdiczka, M. Langet, J. Maisonnasse, and J. Crowley, “Detecting 
human behaviors models from multimodal observation in a smart home”, 
IEEE Trans. on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 6(4):1, 2009, 
pp. 588-597. 
[14] I.   mez-Conde, D.N. Olivieri, X.A. Vila, and L.  odr guez-Liñares, 
“Smart telecare video monitoring for anomalous event detection,” Proc. 
Iberian Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI 
10), 2010, pp. 1–6. 
[15] N. Zouba, F. Bremond, and M. Thonnat, “An activity monitoring system 
for real older people at home: validation study,” Proc. IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance (AVSS 
10), IEEE Press., 2010, pp. 278 – 285. 
[16] S. Gillain, E. Warzee; F. Lekeu, V. Wojtasik, D. Maquet, J.-L. Croisier, 
E. Salmon, and J. Petermans, “The value of instrumental gait analysis in 
older people healthy, MCI or Alzheimer’s disease subjects and a 
comparison with other clinical tests used in single and dual-task 
conditions,” Annals of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine, vol.52, 
2009, pp. 453–474. 
[17] J. Cancela, M. Pastorino, M. T. Arredondo, M. Pansera, L. Pastor-Sanz, 
F. Villagra, M.A. Pastor and A. P. Gonzalez, “Gait assessment in 
Parkinson’s 
disease 
patients 
through 
a 
network 
of 
wearable 
accelerometers 
in 
unsupervised 
environments,” 
Proc. 
Annual 
International Conference on of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Society (EMBC 11), Massachusetts, 2011, pp. 2233-2236. 
[18] H. H. Manap, N. M. Tahir, A. I. M. Yassin, and R. Abdullah, “Anomaly 
gait classification of parkinson disease based on ann,” Annals of Physical 
and Rehabilitation Medicine, vol.52, 2009, pp. 579–587. 
[19] R. Romdhane, E. Mulin, A. Derreumeaux, N. Zouba, J. Piano, L. Lee, I. 
Leroi, P. Mallea, R. David, M. Thonnat, F. Bremond, and Ph. Robert, 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

“Automatic video monitoring system for assessment of alzheimers 
disease symptoms,” Journal of Nutrition, Health and Aging, September 
2011. 
[20] D. P. Chau, F. Bremond, and M. Thonnat, “A multi-feature tracking 
algorithm enabling adaptation to context variations,” Proc.  International 
Conference on Imaging for Crime Detection and Prevention, 2011. 
[21] M. Nambu, K. Nakajima,  M. Noshiro,  and Toshiyo Tamura, “An 
algorithm for the automatic detection of health conditions,” Proc.  
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, IEEE Press., July-Aug. 
2005, v.24:4, pp. 38–42. 
[22] B. Auvinet, P. Touzard, D. Chaleil, C. Touzard, A. Delafond, C. Foucher, 
and F. Multon, “Dual tasking and gait in people with mild cognitive 
impairment according to amnesic and non-amnesic subgroups, 
preliminary results,” Annals of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine, 
vol. 54, S1, pp. e87–e94, 2011. 
[23] M.F. Folstein, L.M. Robins, and J.E. Helzer, “The mini-mental state 
examination,” Arch Gen. Psychiatry, 1983, 40(7): p. 812.  
[24] N. Zouba, F. Bremond, and M. Thonnat, “Multisensor fusion for 
monitoring elderly activities at home”, Proc. IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance (AVSS 
09), Genoa, Italy, September 2-4, 2009, pp.98-103. 
[25] S. Zaidenberg, B. Boulay, F. Bremond, and M. Thonnat, “A generic 
framework for video understanding applied to group behavior 
recognition,” (AVSS 2012), in press. 
[26] A.T. Nghiem, F. Bremond and M. Thonnat, "Controlling background 
subtraction algorithms for robust object detection", Proc. 3rd International 
Conference on Imaging for Crime Detection and Prevention, ICDP 09, 
Kingston University, London, UK, December, 2009, pp. 1-6. 
[27] H. Medjahed, et al, A pervasive multi-sensor data fusion for smart home 
healthcare monitoring. Proc. IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy 
Systems (FUZZ 11), 27-30 June 2011, pp. 1466-1473. 
[28] Y. Cao, L. Tao, and G. Xu, “An event-driven context model in elderly 
health monitoring”, Proc. Symposia and Workshops on Ubiquitous, 
Autonomic 
and 
Trusted 
Computing, 
2009, 
pp. 
120-124, 
doi:10.1109/UIC-ATC.2009.47.
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-235-6
AMBIENT 2012 : The Second International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

