Smart World: Convergence of Communication Networks and Enabling
Technologies for Ubiquitous Services
Shaftab Ahmed
Department of Software Engineering
Bahria University, Islamabad, Pakistan
Email: Shaftab_2010@yahoo.com
Abstract – The development of intelligent hardware and
advancements in data communications networks have led to the
development of smart technologies with Internet connectivity.
Such devices are called Internet of Things (IoT) and are used to
integrate
intelligent
solutions.
The
Service
Oriented
Architecture
(SOA)
has
added
virtuality,
scalability,
manageability, seamless cross platform communication and
integration for ubiquitous availability. Mobile communication
technologies have matured to 4G and 5G levels for global
connectivity and use of satellite communications also called
Wireless World Wide Web (WWWW). Progress towards 6G
and 7G
networks
will
address the
difficulties
of
earlier
standards, making space roaming a reality. Convergence of data
communication paradigms is imminent due to advances in
network technologies and evolving reliance on software defined
networks. While the use of cloud computing and virtual storage
is rapidly being accepted by computer users, the security of
information particularly personal data and healthcare has to be
improved. In this paper we review the enabling technologies of
Next
Generation
Networks
(NGN)
for
smart
world
and
migration to IPv6 suit. In addition we discuss broadband access
technologies merged with communications and network systems
being used by enterprises, shopping complexes, healthcare
systems, emergency response systems and traffic control.
Keywords - SDN; wwww; SOA; IoT; BMS; WSN.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Data communications and networking have become a life
line of modern society. The world is experiencing a vital
change due to the availability of smart solutions for all kinds
of activities. The computation and data storage are not limited
to desktop or central servers; instead the resources may be in
virtual
domain
accessible
through
intelligent
service
providers. The services may also include the Quality of
Service (QOS) and bandwidth on demand options available
for prospective users.
The de-centralization of data storage and computation is the
outcome of intelligent terminal equipment development and
the use of computer networks. Internet revolutionized the
Information Communication Technologies (ICT) activities by
providing a gateway to users of all domains to share,
communicate or use the data services offered by Internet
service providers (ISPs). Service Oriented Architecture (SOA)
has revolutionized the ICT activities leading to virtual storage,
computation and a variety of service frameworks [1]. Cloud is
the term used to describe virtual service paradigms, which use
virtualized infrastructures to offer Software as a Service
(SaaS) and Platform as a Service (PaaS) over Infrastructure as
a Service (IaaS) allowing users to share physical resources in
multitenant applications [2]. Network as a Service (NaaS)
enables the use of heterogeneous hardware and software
communication between devices and computers for exchange
of information [3]. Software Defined Network (SDN) divides
a computer network into Control Plane and Data Plane for
better management and controllability through software.
Today we experience a convergence of technologies where
smart phones, wireless sensors, laptops, tablets etc. are able to
easily use the storage / computation services in virtual domain
easily. The users of these Information Technology (IT)
resources may not be professional computer scientists or
engineers. The Internet of Things (IoT) architecture supports
embedded sensors like Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)
tags
/
reader,
near
field
sensors
(NFS),
near
field
communication (NFC) and actuators [4]. The enormous
amount of data from these devices has to be rationalized,
processed, stored and presented in an easy to interpret form.
Various solutions are available for this purpose however,
custom tailored versions are preferred.
The mobile communication standards have evolved from
1G to 4G and now progressing towards 5G to 7G. The first
generation (1G) was developed using analog systems available
on Public Switched Telephone Networks (PSTN) and had a
data rate of 2.4Kb/Sec. The second generation (2G) used
digital data communication networks and technologies. The
third generation (3G) is the outcome of success of 2G and is
designed for user-user communication. It also laid down
specifications of a framework for future growth of mobile
communication technologies. The framework supports three
tiers, i.e. Access technologies, Transport technologies and
User applications [5]. The fourth generation (4G) was
developed to integrate the cellular network technologies with
Wi-Fi and fixed network technologies. The fifth generation
(5G) increased flexibility in global communication systems to
include satellite communications, hence, the evolution of
wireless worldwide web (wwww) technologies [6]. The sixth
generation (6G) is developed to overcome the problems of 5G,
i.e.
technology
and
standard
variations
in
global
communications systems [7]. The seventh generation (7G)
will support space roaming through global integration of
mobile communications with no data capacity and mobility
restriction across countries and continents seamlessly [8].
Broadband access technologies, integrated with mobile
communication
platforms,
will
enhance
the
scope
of
distributed processing applications available for effortless
usage through mobile applications [9]. Mobile application
development is the fastest growing field in IT. Mostly Java
programming language is used for application development
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

and Java Virtual Machine (JVM) supports cross platform
portability. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in
Section II we present relevant research work for IoT
infrastructure development. In Section III, we discuss software
and data network communication technologies in the context
of smart world architectures. In Section IV, we present the
challenges posed by IoT culture and the need to develop
elaborate security mechanisms with forensic data management
leading to enhanced and trustful usage of IoT devices. In
addition we discuss future directions in security enhancements
for IoT expansion in the context of distributed computing and
data
management
involving
Internet
of
things
through
hierarchical security policies.
II.
RELATED WORK
Ubiquitous connectivity using Wi-Fi, Wi-Max and other
similar technologies have supported the development of smart
solutions for home / office automation, healthcare, guidance /
surveillance systems, etc. Wireless sensors and actuators have
led to the development of intelligent devices enabled to
communicate over the web called IoT. The IT developers
provide plug and play environments to integrate hardware and
software for IoT. Hence, data acquisition, storage and sharing
are effortless [10]. From a larger perspective, applications may
collect measure and use the information for expert systems or
Decision
Support
Systems
(DSS).
Convergence
of
technologies and the interests of IT developers, business
communities and virtualization of multitenant, multiplatform
architectures have extended the scope of service providers and
IoT solution providers [11].
Social networking has become a means of evolving close
knit communities. The registration, discovery and session
management features allow interaction and usage of common
resources through virtual networks abstracted through layered
architecture. Ubiquitous services are available through hand
held smart devices, which use wireless and fixed networks and
communication
systems
in
virtual
domain.
Distributed
information systems are available to the users through
converged IT solutions.
Healthcare support by intelligent data acquisition and
management system has helped patients and doctors to avail
all time connectivity, consultation and emergency response
[29]. Home care systems have evolved where data periodically
collected through sensors is measured, aggregated and sent to
the servers / nursing stations where it is processed and saved
in the personal history of the patients. Intelligent agents
analyze the clinical data to monitor patients’ progress and
raise suitable alerts whenever required, under appropriate
protocols and policies [36]. Alerts may be related to medicine
intake, laboratory tests, exercise schedule, nutrition and
procedures for treatment prescribed by the physician. In some
cases, the alerts may be raised for imminent medical
emergency, like heart attack or stroke, while the patient is
unaware of the symptoms [37].
The growth of IoT and its integration in smart systems has
increased vulnerability of digital systems. In prevailing
security mechanisms, authentication, authorization and access
control is extended to distributed data networks and eventually
the cloud architectures. These systems have been developed as
a result of research carried out in the last few decades to
provide reasonably effective solutions in ICT industry. Data
management in heterogeneous distributed systems accessible
through smart systems with embedded IoT demand inclusion
of new features for forensic studies.
Inclusion of intelligent devices capable to communicate
with digital systems autonomously may cause serious security
problems. Hence, new features like registration, verification
and forensic data management are required for IoT in highly
virtualized distributed systems in smart networks at home,
neighborhood, city systems and the world at large. A home
device
authentication
method
based
on
Public
Key
Infrastructure (PKI) has been discussed in [12]. Light weight
PKI has been proposed for mobile and hand held devices used
in smart systems [13]. A model forensics aware system design
for IoT in future systems has been presented by [14]. The
concept of Certification Authority (CA) to maintain forensic
information record about manufacturer code, unit number,
seller / buyer / current owner identity along with password
history, session key management trail with reasonable depth
can be useful to make IoT security practical. Security
information may be managed through hierarchical levels for
quicker services and fault tolerance. The IoT may be linked to
mobile,
wireless
and
wired
network
networks
with
a
possibility to extract trail of events for forensic study.
III.
CONVERGENCE OF TECHNOLOGIES
Availability of broadband connectivity and multimedia
support at affordable prices has merged data communications
and computer networks. Developments of Wireless Sensor
Networks (WSN) smart phones, hand held devices and
intelligent host system developments have transformed the
world into a digital society. IT applications range from home
automation,
healthcare,
and
education
to
industrial
automation, environmental applications, e-government and
smart city solutions. Increasing use of digital contents in data
transmission
over
IP
based
networks
has
converged
technologies
in
enterprises,
homes
and
industry
[10].
Virtuality is the popular way to integrate software, hardware
and support systems into service oriented architecture (SOA).
Out of these developments, a rapidly growing market of smart
solutions has emerged [16].
Virtualization of computer hardware, software and services
has led to integration of IT and Communication Technology
(CT) for smart solutions. Wireless Internet aware intelligent
technologies are rapidly becoming acceptable in human
communities for various purposes. The evolving scenarios
will allow integration of solutions by using interoperable IoT
devices and Software Defined Networking (SDN). Figure 1
shows Next Generation Network (NGN) architecture based
on
layered
model
to
integrate
Original
Equipment
Manufacturers (OEMs), network
technology developers,
Telecommunication service providers, Radio / television and
Internet Service Providers (ISP).
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Figure 1.
Convergence of network technolgies and the layered
architecture over Software Defined Network (SDN)
Telecommunication companies and Radio/ Television are
increasing use of Internet service model for all time and
anywhere availability. Similarly the Packet switching, circuits
switched to broad cast networks are offered through a
common service layer, which uses protocol conversions,
policy, Service Level Agreement (SLA). Converged networks
require elaborate security, privacy and accountability policies
for borderless communication [15].
Convergence of wireless, optical fiber and land based
digital
communication
technologies
with
computer
technologies
for
computation;
data
management
and
presentation etc. have ignited innovative growth of smart
devices and applications in everyday life. The smart cities,
smart enterprises / buildings, disaster management, medical /
eHealthcare, smart grids and road traffic are the realms of the
smart world [16][17]. We discuss the enabling technologies,
network communication protocols and the security issues
stemming out as a result of private and personal engagement
through social networking [18][19].
A.
Technical perspective
Smart data communication technologies have promoted
easy integration of hardware and
customized
software
solutions for distributed systems. The middleware support
vendor neutral, platform independent hardware / software
interface required to meet standards of interoperability,
portability, transparency, mobility etc. We discuss example of
smart city supporting eHealthcare, building management,
road traffic and smart grids as under:
i.
Smart City Management Systems (SCMS)
The smart solutions for everyday life as well as
professional and industrial systems have given birth to
the concept of “smart city”. It is implemented through
layered architecture where physical spaces, buildings,
enterprises, transport utilities etc., are abstracted into
city systems layer through ICT infrastructure [20].
These systems provide access to latest information
concerning the city through Internet to be used for
analysis and decision support systems. SOA has
helped
in
making
city
systems
ubiquitous
and
pervasive [21][22]. Convergence of networks plays a
key role in seamless access to resources irrespective
of software, hardware, and service platform. Network
services play a key role by hiding platform and
network layers in allowing access to resources.
ii.
Building Management Systems (BMS)
Most of the enterprise buildings today have computer
networks, which support services like database /
document management, ecommerce, paging, video
coverage
along
with
Internet
access.
Intelligent
building management systems are supported by IoT
devices
for
autonomous
data
collection
and
submission to server; they may share data with other
IoT devices in the neighborhood [23][24]. Electric
power management of illumination lights, room air-
conditioning and other activities can be handled by
smart devices in coordination with server under a
policy [25]. Ubiquitous cloud services may be used to
provide
anywhere,
anytime
availability
of
information. Smart city projects can be extended to
integrate features offered by building management
systems for various purposes like security and remote
monitoring / management. A cyber-home connected
to a service provider over the Cloud architecture is
shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2.
IOT: Smart Buildings and home architecture [Internet clipart
resources]
Information sharing requires security features to be
implemented in a building management system to
avoid
malicious
activities.
The
IoT
device
authentication at home or office can be implemented
by
a
hierarchical
PKI
based
stack
where
the
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Certification Authority (CA) at various levels plays a
key role [25-28].
iii. Medical and Healthcare Systems (MHS)
Home care and e-Healthcare models are being rapidly
developed to provide better quality of life, protection
and health monitoring services. The aged or disabled
people, patients getting prolonged medical treatment
or requiring post-surgical monitoring are the clients
for smart homes and smart cities. User friendly
Decision Support Systems (DSS) over the cloud
architecture allow the doctors to interactively make
medical therapy schedule while getting patient’s
inputs on line if required [29]. Doctor’s prescription
for clinical tests, reports and patient monitoring may
be managed online [30]. The IT and clinical tools are
used for data searching and presentation to patients,
doctors,
pharmacists
and
researchers.
Proactive
monitoring of lab reports and the record of exercise /
physiotherapy schedules is done by intelligent agents
embedded in these systems. Figure 3 shows a typical
e-Heathcare system using IoT devices.
Figure 3.
An e-Healthcare system using IoT devices
iv.
Intelligent transport systems (ITS)
The
industrial
developments
and
availability
of
opportunities for technical financial and social growth
has led to concentration of human population in big
cities. Transport management in such cities is quite
complex on account of varying traffic conditions, road
accidents,
etc.
Conventional
traffic
control
is
supported by intelligent transport systems by using
statistical record and live information for traffic
forecast
and
raising
alerts.
The
information
is
presented for traffic management and driving support
through telecommunication system. The drivers can
get traffic information on line while in transit or at
home through intelligent devices and alerts. The
emergency support systems along with multimedia
services may be of great value for the commuters in
many situations. Besides access to network services
they may be able to communicate with other vehicles
on the road. The fiber cables laid alongside long haul
highways provide high speed data access through
access points for wireless communication. Intelligent
transport system consists of navigation, electronic toll
collection, driving safety etc. [31][32]
B.
Enabling technologies for convergence
Network hardware and software systems use technologies,
which
support
interoperability
and
easy
configurability
through software. Object oriented programming tools are
extensively used for this purpose. JAVA supports better
portability across hardware and software platforms by using
Java Virtual Machine (JVM) at an intermediate layer. It has
won wide acceptability particularly for hand held smart
devices using embedded operating systems like IOS, Tiny
Linux, Android etc. Enabling technologies for convergence
of IT activities are discussed as under:
i.
Smart devices and IoT culture
Internet has been widely accepted norm of the modern
world making it a global village engulfed into a
virtual reality.
The IoT culture and use of smart
devices over available network solutions will add new
dimensions to the social systems covering all areas of
social, cultural and technical activities [33]. Wireless
sensor networks often use low power, maintenance
free devices at the front end and Wi-Fi, Wi-Max or
land based communication systems for data network.
IoT devices use wireless sensors for autonomous data
collection, decision making and reporting events to
servers under a policy.
ii.
Social Networking
The participation of humans of all ages, professions
and interests has given rise to formation of cyber
communities
spanning
over
computer
networks.
Community is a group of users sharing common
interest
for
example
content
creators,
users,
developers and service providers, etc. form a group
[34]. Hence, a community in the ICT domain may be
seen as interlinked web pages in the Internet cloud.
These communities are usually able to interact with
each other hence, making bigger picture of social
networking. Social networks like LinkedIn, Facebook,
Twitter, WhatsApp, etc. have assumed importance for
sharing information in professional and social groups
or
communities.
Whereas
it
is
an
interesting
phenomenon, it is often complicated and dangerous
[35].
iii. Cloud Services Architectures (CSA)
An
integrated
e-Healthcare
solution
over
cloud
services architecture may be developed by utilizing
web engineering technologies, coupled with software
utilities of Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS)
along with a suitable RDBMS (Relational Database
Management
System)
over
high
speed
data
communication infrastructure. The characteristics of
ubiquitous healthcare system over a cloud should
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

provide
inexpensive,
flexible,
and
reliable
fault
tolerant services [36][37].
iv.
Software Defined Network (SDN)
Smart solutions offered through ubiquitous network
connectivity and the evolving new paradigms the
Internet of Things, smart cities and e-government
demand fundamental changes in the network design
techniques
[38].
Application
developers
require
intelligent management of networks for cloud services
architectures hence, SDN is being used for flexibility,
scalability and network management.
C.
Secure communication protocols
It is estimated that 20 billion IoT devices will be attached
to the Internet through ISPs in the next decade [24].
Extensive use of IoT devices will increase vulnerability due
to a wider platform open to hackers and their malicious
activities. The large number of devices requires low level
identification / verification to conceive reasonable security
architecture. Hence, a quick transition to Internet Protocol
version 6 (IPv6) will be required to meet the enormous
increase in devices, data and the handshake for secure
communications [39]. The devices will be connected in a
hierarchy of levels to reduce the overhead of protocol data
and communication.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The software design and network architectures have to
provide solutions for secure data sharing in multitenant
domains. Service oriented computing offered in the cloud
architectures
use
virtualized
infrastructures
to
offer
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) allowing users to share
physical resources in multitenant applications.
Computer forensics can be summarized as the process of
identifying, collecting, preserving, analyzing and presenting
the computer-related evidence in a manner that is legally
acceptable by the court of law. Integrity of information
through verifiable procedures allows forensic data to be used
for evidence. Forensics Aware IoT (FAIoT) [40][41] suggests
three layers i.e. Cloud forensics, Network forensics and
Device forensics for this purpose. The model is highly
distributed hence, a trusted repository may be used for data
collection, analysis and evidence extraction. An evidence
collection module will monitor all registered IoT devices and
store in the repository. To handle such large repository
Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) has been proposed.
Internet based central registration of IoT for forensics
through hierarchy of certification authorities (CA) can be
used for security and verifiability. The typical PKI algorithm
with some modifications to reduce overheads can be used for
this purpose. The certificate may maintain security vectors
for manufacturer, buyer, owner history, password history,
GIS location etc. distributed at various levels. Secure session
logs after TLS handshake at the Internet level can be
maintained for forensic studies
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Yoshida, R. Take, H. Kishimoto and Y. Hibi, “ Service Oriented
Platform” Fujitsu Sci.Tech. J. Vol 46, no. 4, pp 410-419, October 2010.
[2]
R. Guha and D. Al-Dabass, “Impact of Web 2.0 and Cloud Computing
Platform on Software Engineering” International symposium on
electronic
system
design”
978-0-7695-4294-2/10,
IEEE,
DOI
10.1109/ISED.2010.48.
[3]
W. Gerhardt, C. Cordero, C. Reberger and T. Dolan, “Mobile Network
as a Service A New Solution Architecture for Mobile Network
Operators” Cisco Internet Business Solutions Group (IBSG), March
2013.
[4]
H. Farhady, H. Lee and A. Nakao “Software-Defined Networking: A
survey” 1389-1286/_ 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved, pp79-95,
2015
[5]
J. Kremer, “White Paper Near Field Commmunications” JKCS
Consulting Services.
[6]
M. Farooq, M. I. Ahmed and U. Mohammad, “Future Generations of
Mobile
Communication
Networks”
Academy
of
Contemporary
Research Journal V II (I), 24-30, ISSN: 2305-865X, Resource Mentors
(Pvt) ltd, 2013.
[7]
J. Sen, “ Convergence & Next Generation networks” Whitle paper,
Tata Consultancy Services Ltd., Global ICT standardization forum for
india (GISFI), Jul 2009
[8]
J. Alleman and P. Rappoport, “The unsustainability of access
competition ITU”, The Future of Communications in Next Generation
Networks, 15-16 January 2007.
[9]
X. Li，A. Gani, R. Salleh and O. Zakaria, “The Future ofMobile
Wireless
Communication
Networks”
978-0-7695—3522-7,IEEE
Computer Society, DOI 10．1109／ICCSN．2009．105.
[10] R.
C.
Huacarpuma
et al,“ Distributed
Data
Service for
Data
Management in Internet of Things Middleware” Sensors 2017, 17, 977;
doi:10.3390/s1705097 .
[11] J. Lopeza, R. Riosa, F. Baob and G. Wang, “Evolving Privacy: From
Sensors to the Internet of Things, Journal of Future Generation
Computer Systems May 29, 2017.
[12] D. Lee, J. Han and Y. Lee, "Home Device Authentication Method
Based
on
PKI",
,
vol.
02,
no.
,
pp.
7-11,
2007,
doi:10.1109/FGCN.2007.143
[13] H. Jin and H. Chen, “Lightweight Session key Management scheme in
Sensor Networks” FGCN '07 Proceedings of the Future Generation
Communication and Networking - Volume 02 pp 3-6, ISBN:0-7695-
3048-6, doi>10.1109/FGCN.2007.159.
[14] Shalini, V. N. Singh, M. Yadav and P. Rastogi, “Forensic Approach for
Data Acquisition of Smart Phones to Meet the Challenges of Law
Enforcement Perspective” J Indian Acad Forensic Med. April-June
2015, Vol. 37, No. 2 ISSN 0971-0973A.
[15] M. T. Abdullah, R. Mahmod , A. A. Ghani, M. Z. Abdullah, and
A.Bakar, “Advances in Computer Forensics” IJCSNS International
Journal of Computer Science and Network Security”, VOL.8 No.2,
February 2008.
[16] M.
Al-Hader
and
A.
Rodzi,”
The
smart
City
Infrastructure
Development & Monitoring” Theoratical and Empirical Researches”
number 2(11) / May 2009.
[17] Z. Alazawi, O. Alani, M. Abdljabar, S. Altowaijri and R. Mehmood, “
A
Smart
Disaster
Management
System
for
Future
Cities”,
WiMobCity’14,
August
11,
2014,
Philadelphia,USA.
doi.org/10.1145/2633661.2633670.
[18] C. Cerrudo, “An Emerging US (and World) Threat: Cities Wide Open
to Cyber Attacks” a white paper, IOActive, Inc., 2015.
[19] “Cyber Physical Systems – Situation Analysis” NIST: National
Institute ofstandards and Technology, March 2012.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

[20] L. Anthopoulos, “From Digital to Ubiquitous Cities: Defining a
Common Architecture for Urban Development” IEEE Computer
Society, ISBN: 978-0-7695-4149-5 doi>10.1109/IE.2010.61.
[21] T.
Na
and
T.
mA.
Pardo,
“Conceptualizing
Smart City with
Dimensions of Technology, People, and Institutions” Proceedings of
the 12th Annual International Conference on Digital Government
Research, Dg.o’11, ACM 978-1-4503-0762-8/11/06.
[22] J. Lee, S. Baik, and C. Lee, “Building an Integrated Service
Management Platform for Ubiquitous Ecological Cities”, Computer,
vol. 44, no. , pp 56-63, June 2011, doi:10.1109/MC.2011.131.
[23] M. Batty et al, “smart Cities of the future” Eur. Phys. J. Special Topics
214, 481–518 (2012), doi: 10.1140/epjst/e2012-01703-3.
[24] J. Yu, M. Kim, H. Bang and S. Kim, “IoT as a applications: cloud-
based building management systems for the internet of things”
Multimedia Tools and Applications • July 2015 doi 10.1007/S11042-
015-2785-0.
[25] L. Ngo, "Service-oriented architecture for home networks”, TKK T-
110.5190 Seminar on Internetworking 2007-3-4/5 Helsinki University
of Technology, Finland.
[26] G. Meyer and A. Stander, “Cloud Computing:The Digital Forensics
Challenge”
Proceedings
of
Informing
Science &
IT Education
Conference 2015, pp 285-299.
[27] L. Vrizlynn and L. Thing, “ Cyber Security for A Smart Nation”
ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=7238277.
[28] D. Lillis, B. A. Becker, T. O’Sullivan and M. Scanlon, “ Current
Challenges
and
Future
Research
Areas
for
Digital
Forensic
Investigation” The 11th ADFSL Conference on Digital Forensics,
Security
and
Law
(CDFSL
2016),
Florida,
USA,
May
2016,
arXiv:1604.03850v1 [cs.CR].
[29] M. Hassanalieragh et al, “Health Monitoring and Management Using
Internet-of-Things
(IoT)
Sensing
with
Cloud-basedProcessing:
Opportunities and Challenges” IEEE International Conference on
Services
Computing,
978-1-4673-7281-7/15,
DOI
10.1109/SCC.2015.47, 2015.
[30] S.
S.
Ponedal
and
M.Tucker,”UnderstandingDecision
Support
Systems” journal of managed care pharmacy jmcp 2002 vol. 8, no. 2.
[31] S. L. Suen, S. Henderson,”Aapplication of Intelligent Transportation
Systems to Enhance Vehicle Safety for elderly and Less able travellers”
16th International Technical Conference on the Enhanced Safety of
Vehicles , The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine, DOTHS808759 Volume: 1 pp. 386-94.
[32] J. Walker, “Intelligent Transportation Systems Report for Mobile,
GSMA Connected Living Programme,GSM Association, 2015.
[33] P.C.Jain
and
K.P.Vijaygopalan,
“
RFID
and
Wireless
Sensor
Networks” Proceedings of ASCNT – 2010, CDAC, Noida, India, pp. 1
– 11.
[34] A. Elmagarmid, A. Samuel and M. Ouzzani, “Community Cyber
Infrastructure
Enabled
Discovery
in
Science
and
Engineering”
Computing in Science and Engineering 10(5):46 - 53 • October 2008.
[35] K. Malagi, A. Angadi and K. Gull, “Survey on Security Issues and
Concerns to Social Networks” International Journal of Science and
Research (IJSR), India Online ISSN: 2319-7064.
[36] C. Orwat, A. Graefe and T. Faulwasser, “Towards pervasive computing
in health care – A literature review” BMC Medical Informatics and
Decision Making 2008, 8:26 doi:10.1186/1472-6947-8-26.
[37] E. Sazonov, K. Janoyan and R.
Jhac, “Wireless Intelligent Sensor
Network
for
Autonomous
Structural
Health
Monitoring,
doi=10.1.1.99.4283
[38] “SDN and the Future of Service Provider Networks” Fujitsu Network
Communications Inc., 2013.
[39] Jara1, L. Ladid and A. Skarmeta, “The Internet of Everything through
IPv6: An Analysis of Challenges, Solutions and Opportunities” Journal
of Wireless Mobile Networks, Ubiquitous Computing, and Dependable
Applications, volume: 4, number: 3, pp. 97-118.
[40] D.
Loomis and B. Wohnsiedler, “ The ‘Internet of Things’ (IoT)–
Opportunities and Risks” American Society of Safety Engineers ,
ASSE-15-744, Professional Development Conference and Exposition,
7-10 June, 2015.
[41] S. Zawoad and R. Hasan, “FAIoT : Towards Building a Forensics
Aware Eco System for the Internet of Things” 12th IEEE International
Conference
on
Services
Computing
(SCC),
DOI:
10.1109/SCC.2015.46.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

