Review of Activity Measuring Techniques For Assisted Living Systems
 
1Caroline Byrne,  
Department of Computing & Networking  
Institute of Technology Carlow, Co. Carlow, Ireland,  
email: caroline.byrne@itcarlow.ie  
2Rem Collier, Michael O’Grady, 
School of Computer Science 
 University College Dublin (UCD) Belfield, Dublin 4, 
Ireland 
email: rem.collier, michael.j.ogrady@ucd.ie 
 
 
 
 
3Gregory M. P. O’Hare, 
 School of Computer Science & Earth Institute 
University College Dublin (UCD) Belfield, Dublin 4, 
Ireland 
 email: gregory.ohare@ucd.ie 
4Alena Brennan,  
Department of Computing & Networking  
Institute of Technology Carlow, Co. Carlow, Ireland, 
 email: alena.brennan@itcarlow.ie  
Abstract—An individual’s Activities of Daily Living (ADL) are 
difficult to accurately measure in Ambient Assisted Living 
(AAL) systems. Such ADLs are invariably, in part, verified 
using technologies requiring key user interactions. The User 
Interface (UI) applied to these living systems is critical in order 
that the elderly achieve their daily living milestones of health 
supervision, social engagement, physical movement or daily 
prompts. In order to bootstrap effective machine learning 
necessitates accurate daily user interaction. This paper reviews 
AAL system interface’s and seeks to establish if ADL 
measurement accuracy could improve if UI’s were prioritised 
within system development.   
Keywords-Ambient Assisted Living: Measurement Techniques: 
Activities of Daily Living. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Population aging is an issue in the European Union with 
those aged 65 years or over increasing from 17.1% to 30.0% 
in 2060 (84.6 million in 2008 to 151.5 million people in 
2060) [1].  As we age our health becomes more complicated 
and our ability to sense accurately, disseminate information 
at speed and conduct various tasks simultaneously decreases 
dramatically. Consequently elder’s living independent lives, 
find that over time their ADL performance diminishes they 
become burdened with daily chores and AAL UI’s unburden 
them from the ADL’s limiting their daily lives. Multiple 
UI’s assist the elderly such as, the MONAmI project 
encouraging social participation [2], the i2Home project UI 
[3] and the Universal Remote Console (URC). ADL 
interfaces for the kitchen have also been addressed in the 
SWEET-HOME project utilising voice command for 
automating a home, with a speech activated assistive kitchen 
and the Smart Kitchen [3] offering nutritional advice on 
food in real time. The research spotlight on AAL and ADL 
systems has concentrated on UI’s enabling elder’s to live 
independently. ADL monitoring is difficult to measure 
accurately and research conducted in purpose-built labs is 
not 
representative 
of 
the 
systems 
available 
for 
commercialisation or those being currently used in homes 
on a daily basis. UI design is critical within the area of AAL 
as its success dictates a system’s usability. Good User 
Interface (UI) design regularly quote Neilsen’s 10 usability 
heuristics [4] in conjunction with Shneiderman’s 8 golden 
rules [5], whilst other design principles [6] are utilised less 
frequently. Research studies within the area of UI’s for the 
elderly include a universal interface design [7] using touch-
based and multimodal user interfaces. Viewing the elderly 
as a combined age group has been encouraged yet their user 
interaction could be observed for usability as two separate 
groups of (65-80yrs) and (80+yrs) [8]. Several research 
studies acknowledge that UI usability between younger and 
elderly adults is very different [9] but not between the two 
elder age groups [10]. This paper reviews AAL system UI’s, 
their subsequent usability for users and seeks to raise the 
question, that if greater emphasis was placed upon UI 
design could ADL measurement subsequently improve. 
 
Section II deals with Buxton’s framework and how 
humans interact with Ambient Assisted Systems, thereafter 
Section III reviews UI design guidelines and they’re 
subsequent inculcation in the various systems throughout 
Europe. The original framework of Buxton is extended in 
Section 
IV 
to 
incorporate 
subtle 
human-computer 
interactions. Section V in turn proffers UI usability 
recommendations 
while 
Section 
VI 
examines 
the 
conclusions drawn from this review of UI methodologies 
applied to AAL systems and the methods available for 
measuring human-computer interactions in order to 
facilitate ease of use and uptake.   
II. 
HOW HUMANS INTERACT WITH COMPUTERS 
A basic framework categorising the subject areas of 
computing [11] (see Fig.1), constituted a foreground and 
background, indicative of conscious and un-conscious tasks. 
This framework established how humans interacted with 
computers and that the success and failure of AAL systems 
relied upon the technological ability of the user. All 
interactions, whether implicit or explicit, were in the 
foreground 
when 
required 
[12], 
otherwise 
in 
the 
background. AAL interaction ought to be ubiquitous, 
operating in the background as the user interacts in the 
foreground. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-508-1
AMBIENT 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
 
Figure 1.  The Basic Model 
The UI’s should incorporate features such as, ease of use for 
medical professionals, carer’s or elder’s and be productive 
in their ability to enable effective human-computer 
interaction. Systems utilising UI’s that support effective 
user interaction result in greater uptake [13]. Conversely 
varying UI’s on different devices affect user uptake and 
impede the older user’s ability to successfully navigate the 
technology [14]. Commonality in UI design for the elder 
user should be central to best practice guidelines and it’s 
prioritisation within AAL system development is paramount 
in order to improve usability and ADL measurement 
possibilities.  
III. 
UI DESIGN REVIEW 
A. UI Research Design Approaches 
Usability is fundamental to good UI design [15] and the 
pivotal role it plays has received significant coverage in 
conjunction 
with 
the 
challenge 
of 
interweaving 
technological advancement into our modern lives. The UI 
needs to facilitate the user in executing their desired tasks 
and this occurs if the interaction is intuitive and seamless. 
Designing for interfaces must include those factors which 
influence 
how 
humans 
interact 
with, 
and 
process 
information, while executing other tasks [16]. Ambient 
Intelligence (AmI) [17] over time has permeated many 
computer science areas of together with engineering, 
biosciences and education. The involvement of Human-
centered Computing (HCC) [18] approaches to interface 
design has resulted in more effective methodologies being 
implemented. Many typical AAL system users have no 
medical or technological training, yet are often required to 
input and assimilate data spanning both these fields. 
Systems acclaimed to be most effective have utilised icons 
to represent ADL’s. 
B. A Review of ADL Measurement Techniques in Assisted 
Living Systems  
Previous reviews of AAL systems [19] have expressed 
concerns regarding UI development costs and data 
protection issues which have produced inefficient designs 
leading to insufficient uptake. Design frameworks that 
support adaptable UI’s for user’s with complex medical and 
social needs is a goal for AAL researchers [20]. System 
effectiveness has been reviewed and several productive 
systems developed, UniversAAL [21] being Europe’s 
leading research platform. Projects such as, Soprano [22], 
Persona [23], Amigo [24], Oasis [25] and MPower all strive 
to work toward the goal of a baseline open source platform 
for researchers. Europe’s prominent AAL systems are 
reviewed to ascertain the emphasis ascribed to UI design 
and it’s role within the system’s architecture. AAL systems 
proclaiming self-organisation include Persona an AmI 
system with a UI framework, platform modules and it aims 
to offer independent living options for elder’s. Self-learning 
ambient systems such as Soprano rely on the user for 
inputting manual commands conveyed through sensors and 
actuators, UI’s for medicinal reminders [26] physical 
exercise programs and social interactivity. Soprano’s 
Ambient Middleware (SAM) is the technical core which 
receives user commands. Systems promoting independent 
rural living include Remote [27] for those with conditions, 
such as hypertension, asthma, Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s 
disease. Tele-healthcare services [28] record daily biometric 
readings in conjunction with physical movements and at-
risk scenarios UI’s enabling the complex health needs of the 
users and their technological abilities are offered on several 
devices and the project was considered a success in that 
sensor monitoring decreased cardiac mortality rates. 
 
Open source platforms such as MonAMI assist elder’s 
with ADL’s, improving security and health monitoring 
living options [29] via user friendly UI’s for wearable 
devices. User-friendly interfaces are accessible through 
internet browsers encouraging social interaction with 
family/friends thus supporting independent living options. 
Emerge [30] assists elder users with monitoring and 
accident prevention through sensors providing ambient 
supervision and reasoning in emergency situations. ADL 
evaluation [31] is logged and deviations from expected 
routine behaviours enable swift detection of situations 
requiring intervention. The Human Capability Model 
(HCM) is the resultant medical file of the elder created in 
association with their medical experts.  The I-Living Project 
developed an assisted living environment for embedded 
devices (sensors, actuators & displays) which could operate 
individually or cooperatively in the Assisted Living Hub 
(ALH) [32]. The Secure Active Aging: Participation and 
Health for the Old (SAAPHO) Project facilitates elder 
involvement as it prioritises usability features by utilising 
interface tools to increase user interaction and uptake. 
Another project, which focused on the importance of 
interface usability for ADL monitoring, was the Home 
Sweet Home project in Ireland which evaluated the impact 
of tele-monitoring on an elder’s life. The physiological and 
mental health, living environment factors and ADL 
reminders was evaluated for its effect, if any on the 
participants 
lives. 
A 
simple 
user-friendly 
interface 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-508-1
AMBIENT 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

supervises each user’s health and well-being through the 
information collated from various sources including, 
environment sensors, video conferencing and other enabling 
services.  
IV. 
UI DESIGN FRAMEWORKS 
In 
2008 
the 
basic 
Human-Computer 
interaction 
framework was expanded to include an axis of relevant 
criteria, (see Fig. 2) [33] accommodating more subtle, 
implied interactions that occur as humans and machines 
exchange information. Traditional computing can manifest 
as implicit or explicit and interactive exchanges are along a 
continuum that either demand a user’s attention with a 
command or responds to a command initiated by the user. 
Reactive interactions are typically user initiated while 
proactive are system initiated. AAL systems demand 
implicit and explicit communications as a consequence of 
user demands for unobtrusive systems.  Achieving a 
information exchange is the key to success and it cannot 
appear within the user’s attentional foreground. AAL 
systems need to be in the foreground if required by the user 
and fade into the background when the need for them has 
been responded to.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Implicit interaction framework with a range of interactive 
system behavious. 
The original framework and the extended version 
contends that human-computer interactions can be plotted 
along a continuum of activities counter-balanced against the 
degree of invasiveness for the user. Critical to the evaluation 
of UI design is the emphasis in AAL systems of the scales 
of balance for the user. The goal is system adaptivity 
whereby it assists when requested or when a scenario 
requires 
direct 
intervention. 
This 
evaluation 
theory 
encourages independence not isolation, inclusion not  
exclusion and facilitates communications from either 
direction. AAL systems that acknowledge UI design 
guidelines and prioritise these have the ability to be truly 
effective in assisting the user with their ADL’s. If 
standardisation within assisted living development became a 
goal then the possibility of improving and harmonising 
ADL measurement would ensue as a result. 
V. 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
This paper postulates that pre-existing UI design 
guidelines for the elderly should be adhered to when 
creating and implementing AAL systems in unison with 
Nielsens and Shneiderman’s usability guidelines. The four 
primary areas of focus in designing for the elder user 
include vision, hearing, mobility & cognition, with specific 
suggestions for each area of concern. AAL UI design should 
incorporate dynamic interfaces capable of autonomically 
adapting to the specific needs associated with the user’s age 
and medical condition progression. Representation from 
both distinct elder groups is required when testing systems 
to ensure increasingly complicated daily living needs are 
accommodated. AAL designers acknowledge the UI 
usability differences between these two elder groups yet 
continue to combine them into a single homogeneous group 
when designing and testing systems. A reasonably healthy 
65yr old with IT skills has radically divergent AAL system 
requirements to an 85yr old with limited mobility, attention 
span and IT skills.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Ambient systems provide users with daily living 
assistance. They generally present in a myriad of forms, 
providing condition specific forms of support, are more or 
less ambient and demand greater or lesser user interaction. 
UI’s affect uptake which impacts directly upon usability.  
Those achieving commercial success have tended to employ 
highly stylized and easily recognisable icons to represent 
ADL’s. Given ambient systems require subtle user 
interactions from an audience which will become 
progressively more infirm then perhaps the only solution is 
that of multi-modal UI’s [34] which are dynamic and fulfill 
the users needs at any given point in their health continuum. 
Adaptivity of the system interface tracking the longitudinal 
progression of age, circumstance and condition is 
paramount for system adoption and persistence. This 
benefits users as the interfaces remain familiar and 
gracefully and seamlessly evolve to reflect the capabilities 
of the senior citizen as their condition/age progresses. 
Research has shown [35] that an AAL system providing 
UI’s for elder’s that exhibits reasonable functionality, is 
both physically and cognitively usable and consequently has 
the ability to extend the independent lives of those using 
them and impact positively on those assisting the elder. This 
paper advances the view that AAL usability will be 
improved, firstly as a result of UI prioritisation within 
system development facilitating ADL measurement and 
secondly through the development of adaptive interfaces 
sensitive to the evolving needs of the individual.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] K. Giannnakouris, “Aging characterises the demographic 
perspectives of the euopean societies, “ Eurostat: 2008: 
Statistics in Focus, 72. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-508-1
AMBIENT 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

[2] J. L., Falcó, E. Vaquerizo, L. Lain, J. I. Artigas and A. Ibarz, 
“AmI and deployment considerations in AAL services 
provision for elderly independent living: The MonAMI 
project, “ Sensors,  2013(7), pp. 8950-8976. 
[3] J. Frey, R. Neßelrath and C. Stahl, “An open standardized 
platform for dual reality applications, “Proc. International 
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI) Workshop on 
Location Awareness for Mixed and Dual Reality LAMDa11, 
Palo Alto, CA, USA, Feb 2011, Vol. 1316, pp. 10-14. 
[4] J. H. Chen, P. P. Chi, H. H. Chu, C. C. Chen and P. Huang, A 
smart kitchen for nutrition-aware cooking. IEEE Pervasive 
Computing, 2010, (4), 58-65. 
[5] J. Nielsen, “10 usability heuristics for user interface design,“ 
1995, Fremont: Nielsen Norman Group.[Consult. 20 maio 
2014]. Disponível na Internet. 
[6] B. Shneiderman, “Designing the user interface: strategies for 
effective human-computer interaction,“ 1992, Vol. 3, 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
[7] R. Pak and A. McLaughlin, ”Designing displays for older 
adults,” 2010, CRC Press. 
[8] D. E. Crews and S. Zavotka, ”Aging, disability, and frailty: 
implications for universal design,”Journal of physiological 
anthropology, 2006, 25(1), 113-118. 
[9] P. Laslett, “The third age and the disappearance of old age,“ 
In Preparation for Aging, 1995, pp. 9-16, Springer US. 
[10] M. Obrist, R. Bernhaupt, E. Beck and M. Tscheligi, 
“Focusing on elderly: an iTV usability evaluation study with 
eye-tracking,“ In Interactive TV: a Shared Experience, 2007, 
pp. 66-75, Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
[11] A. Lorenz and R. Oppermann, “Mobile health monitoring for 
the elderly: Designing for diversity,“Pervasive and Mobile 
Computing, 2009, 5(5), 478-495. 
[12] W. Buxton, “Integrating the Periphery and Context: A New 
Model of Telematics,” Proc. of Graphics Interface, 1995, 239-
246. 
[13] P. Dourish S. Bly, “Portholes: Supporting awareness in a 
distributed work group,” Proc. of the SIGCHI conference on 
Human factors in computing systems, June 1992, pp. 541-547, 
ACM. 
[14] T. Gross, “Ambient interfaces: design challenges and 
recommendations,” Human computer interaction: theory and 
practice, 2003, 68-72. 
[15] D. E. Crews and S. Zavotka, “Aging, disability, and frailty: 
implications for universal design,” Journal of physiological 
anthropology, 2006, 25(1), 113-118. 
[16] F. Portet, M. Vacher, C. Golanski, C. Roux and B. Meillon, 
“Design and evaluation of a smart home voice interface for 
the elderly: acceptability and objection aspects,” Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing,  2013, 17(1), 127-144. 
[17] A. Dillon, “User interface design,” Encyclopedia of Cognitive 
Science, 2003. 
[18] M. Stefaner, S. Ferré, S. Perugini, J. Koren and Y. Zhang, 
“User interface design. Dynamic Taxonomies and Faceted 
Search,” 2009, 75-112. 
[19] W. O. Galitz, “The essential guide to user interface design: an 
introduction to GUI design principles and techniques,” 2007,  
John Wiley & Sons. 
[20] M. Memon, S. R. Wagner, C. F. Pedersen, F. H. Beevi and F. 
O. Hansen, “Ambient assisted living healthcare frameworks, 
platforms, standards, and quality attributes,“ Sensors, 2014, 
14(3), 4312-4341. 
[21] N. Carbonell, “Ambient multimodality: towards advancing 
computer accessibility and assisted living,” Universal Access 
in the Information Society, 2006, 5(1), 96-104. 
[22] S. Hanke, et al, “UniversAAL–an open and consolidated AAL 
platform,” In Ambient assisted living, 2011, pp. 127-140, 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
[23] A. Sixsmith, et al, “SOPRANO–an ambient assisted living 
system for supporting older people at home,” In Ambient 
Assistive Health and Wellness Management in the Heart of 
the City, 2009, pp. 233-236, Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
[24] M. Amoretti, et al, “Sensor data fusion for activity monitoring 
in the PERSONA ambient assisted living project,”  Journal of 
Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 2013, 4(1), 
67-84. 
[25] AMIGO Project. Ambient intelligence for the networked 
home environment. STReP in the 6th Framework Programme 
of the European Union, 2004. http://www.amigo-project.org 
[Retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[26] E. Bekiaris and S. Bonfiglio, "The OASIS concept," In 
Universal 
Access 
in 
Human-Computer 
Interaction. 
Addressing Diversity, 2009, pp. 202-209. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg. 
[27] A. Bekiaris and Mourouzis, A., The REMOTE AAL Project: 
Remote Health and Social Care for Independent Living of 
Isolated Elderly with Chronic Conditions. Universal Access in 
Human-Computer Interaction. Context Diversity. Lecture 
Note in Computer Science vol. 6767,  2011,  pp. 131-140. 
[28] R. Kornowski, et al, “Intensive home-care surveillance 
prevents hospitalisation and improves morbidity rates among 
elderly patients with severe congestive heart failure,“ Am. 
Heart J, 1995, vol. 129,  pp. 762-766. 
[29] D. Šimšík, A. Galajdová, D. Siman and M. Andrášová, “First 
experience of implementation of social services based on ICT 
in Slovakia, “(CR-ROM). European Journal of Physical and 
Rehabilitation Medicine, 2011, vol. 47-suppl. 1(2),  pp. 33-34. 
[30] EMERGE: Emergency Monitoring and Prevention, Specific 
Targeted Research Project (STREP) of the EC, Project No. 
045056, http://www.emergeproject.eu, [Retrieved: October, 
2015]. 
[31] S. Prueckner, C. Madler, D. Beyer, M. Berger, T. Kleinberger 
and M. Becker, “Emergency Monitoring and Prevention – EU 
Project EMERGE,”  In: Ambient Assisted Living Proc. 1st 
German AAl-Congress, 2008. 
[32] Wang, Q., et al, “I-Living: An Open System Architecture for 
Assisted Living,”  In SMC, October 2006, pp. 4268-4275. 
[33] W. Ju and L. Leifer, “The Design of Implicit Interactions: 
Making interactive systems less obnoxious,” Des. Issues 
2008, 24, 72-84. 
[34] Byrne, C.A., Collier, R.W., O’Grady, M.J., & O’Hare, 
G.M.P., User Interface Design for Ambient Assisted Living 
Systems, In Proceedings of Human Computer Interaction 
International 2016 Conference Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, (Volume: 9749, pp 35-45), 17th-22nd July, 2016, 
Toronto, Canada, Springer Publishers. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-508-1
AMBIENT 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

[35] R. Blasco, A. Marco, R. Casas, D. Cirujiano and  R. Picking, 
“A Smart kitchen for ambient assisted living,” 2014,  Sensors, 
14(1), 1629-1653. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-508-1
AMBIENT 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

