A Rhetoric of Smart Carpet in the Age of Disruption 
Leveraging IoT, Blockchain, and Platform for Value Co-Creation 
Amirhossein Roshanzamir, Vishanth Weerakkody,  Vignesh Yoganathan 
Bradford University School of Management 
 Bradford, UK 
Email:{A.H.Roshanzamir, V.Weerakkody, V.Yoganathan}@bradford.ac.uk 
Abstract – The luxury goods industry has experienced evolving 
consumer preferences, emerged from innovation and growth in 
the sharing economy and driven by digital technologies. On one 
side, the sharing economy has disrupted traditional luxury 
brands by providing or sharing access to goods and services 
through online platforms. On another side, the entire value 
chain of luxury goods, from procuring raw materials, design 
and production, delivery, product co-creation, up to customer 
service, in-store experience, and even consumption are 
transformed by digital technologies. The purpose of this study 
is to explore the role of digital technologies including the 
Internet of Things (IoT), blockchain and platform models, to 
disrupt the luxury industry. This paper suggests a novel and 
practical framework to transform handmade carpet to smart 
carpet and co-create value with potential customers in order to 
build trust and influence their buying behavior. The framework 
illustrates, for the first time, how the unmatched power of a 
brand story can be leveraged and authenticated by digital 
technologies and through active contribution of customers. 
Keywords–Smart Carpet; Luxury goods; The Sharing 
economy, Disruption;  Digital technologies; Start-up; Brand 
Story; Co-creation; IoT; Blockchain; Platform models. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Luxury products and services rely a great deal on brand 
intangibles and evoke a sense of myth and fascination. This 
is one of the reasons why the luxury sector grows faster than 
any other fields and thrives even during the challenging 
economic times. Considering all segments, the luxury market 
grew by 5% to an estimated €1.2 trillion globally in 2017, 
where sales of luxury cars continued to dominate the market 
by reaching €489 billion [1]. The value of worldwide 
personal luxury goods market —the "core of the core" is 
estimated to be €262 billion in 2017 with a heterogeneous 
group of 330 million individuals diversified by gender, 
cultural background, nationality, generation, attitude, and 
shopping behavior [1]. This huge market generated 
increasing interest in the luxury sector among both academics 
and practitioners [2][3] especially in the recent year with the 
advent of new trends and technologies.    
On one side, the concept of sharing economy, which 
argues that the role of ownership is steadily being replaced 
by access, is gaining popularity and spreading among 
consumers, which ultimately redefines the luxury sector. The 
shift from " owning a luxury to just having access to it " is 
disrupting the luxury market and pushing brands beyond their 
traditional business models. The benefits of sharing platforms 
are lauded because of their possibilities to increase inter-
personal interaction and provide more sustainable and 
environmentally friendly options in the market [4][5]. On 
another side, the widespread adoption of electronic 
commerce and online platforms transformed the value 
proposition of luxury brands from the product-centric of 
value creation to one that focuses on the personalized and 
overall experience of the process in which brands, 
consumers, and the respective networks co-create a superior 
value proposition through the entire supply chain. This is 
very challenging and threatening for traditional luxury brands 
since they are not equipped to provide the same sensory 
atmospheric conditions as the offline purchase [6]. Even, 
most luxury marketers questionably considered the Internet 
as a mass-market, which push them to substantial discounting 
and this ultimately discourages them to embrace digital and 
online business [7]. The sharing economy and digital 
technologies have huge implications for luxury brands and 
how they can be marketed and managed. The proliferation of 
online platform business models, blockchain, and the Internet 
of Things (IoT) have heralded a digital transformation to 
serve as a catalyst of growth and enable individuals to share 
goods and services and even contribute in design, production, 
and consumption of them. The platforms build up 
commercially ecosystems of suppliers and consumers in 
which enormous amounts of value can be created and 
exchanged [8].  Blockchain and IoT can embed tractability 
and visibility by recording every event and transaction within 
a supply chain on a distributed ledger [9] in order to integrate 
transparency, fair trade, and sustainability.    
This paper, therefore, aims to explore the impact of digital 
technologies on transforming the luxury sector through value 
co-creation. By examining the smart carpet as a case study, 
this research argues that co-creating a brand story can be 
nurtured by digital technologies which ultimately builds trust 
and influences the purchaser’s intentions and willingness to 
pay a premium for the product. The rest of this paper is 
organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the sharing economy 
and digital disruption in the luxury sector. Section 3 is 
focused on co-creation concept and evolving preferences of 
customers. In Section 4, the smart carpet is examined as a 
case study and a practical framework is suggested to illustrate 
how the power of brand story can be leveraged by IoT, 
blockchain and platform model in order to build trust and 
influence consumers’ buying behavior. Section 5 analyzes 
the framework to examine how successful it can be in the 
global marketplace. The final section summarizes the 
contributions and suggests further domain for research. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

II.
THE SHARING ECONOMY AND DIGITAL
DISRUPTION IN LUXURY SECTOR
Rogers [10] suggests that the world of marketing is 
shifting from mass market to customer networks in which the 
core behavior of customers is focused on access, connect, 
engage, customize and collaborate. Kotler [11] describes how 
marketing has evolved from product-driven marketing (1.0) 
to customer-centric marketing (2.0) to human-centric 
marketing (3.0) and now value-driven marketing (4.0). The 
term “value” has received lots of attention especially from 
scholars and practitioners in marketing discipline and in its 
simplest definition means price. If we take more professional 
approach value refers to the buyer's existing benefits over 
what he or she paid for. These benefits or values can be of 
three types ; functional value – the value of a product's 
features and functions, the economic value – what the product 
benefits are worth in terms of time and money and finally 
emotional value – the psychological benefits that they get 
from buying, using, and owning products [12]. The latter is 
very important within the luxury sector as luxury customers 
are placing more emphasis on the emotional value, such as 
closeness and involvement with brands when making their 
purchase decisions [13][14].  
The consumer preferences of emotional value and 
involvement within the luxury sector are now influenced by 
the sharing economy and digital technologies. The concept of 
sharing economy argues that the role of ownership is steadily 
being replaced by access and companies and consumers are 
less likely to exchange goods and service in markets [15] 
within the new era. As such, a growing number of consumers 
are engaging in access-based consumption, where consumers 
gain access to the products they seek, but no transfer of 
ownership takes place [16]. In this scenario, suppliers lease, 
rent or charge subscription or membership fee, and 
consumers just pay for the temporary experience or short-
term use of goods and services [15][17]. With the 
advancement of information technology and widespread use 
of social media [18][19] the sharing economy enables people 
to collaboratively make use of under-utilized inventory 
through fee-based sharing activities on online platforms [20]. 
Today’s prominent online peer-to-peer platforms including 
Uber (owns no taxi), Airbnb (owns no property) and Alibaba 
(owns no stock) which are driven by social relations as well 
as prices, facilitate the use of underutilized labor and assets 
and disrupt their relevant industry. Disruption is associated in 
part with “Disruptive Innovation Theory” coined by Clayton 
Christensen [21] and refers to the fact that companies are 
disrupted because of their success, that they are so invested 
in a wonderfully profitable way to extract the most money 
from product, and doing it so well, they allow new entrants 
to offer an inferior product or service which is cheaper and 
more accessible. As such incumbents never seek to explore 
ways to do things differently and become vulnerable to a new 
technology at a lower price point which moves up market, 
eventually displacing established competitors [21].Williams 
[22] also argues that in some cases, threats to a company’s
business model come less from direct competitors than from
high-impact innovation in a seemingly unrelated market. The
DOMAIN 
STRATEGIC THEMES 
Customers 
Harness Customer Networks 
Competition 
Build Platforms, not just products 
Data 
Turn data into assets 
Innovation 
Innovate by rapid experimentation 
Value 
Adapt value proposition 
     Rogers [23] argues the value of a platform grows as more 
people use it and this due to the customer's expectation of 
bilateral value exchange. In fact, the platform can constantly 
improve its own features and increase participant benefits by 
creating a feedback loop. The data is an important asset which 
must be collected through online portals. Today, luxury 
brands can utilize social media and mobile apps for exploring 
customer's requirements, building communities of potential 
customers and using analytics and data mining to know them 
new technologies often enter at the bottom of the 
market which is ignored by established companies and 
then new ventures grow and beat the old systems from that 
point [22]. The tremendous success of the world's 
largest taxi firm (Uber), the world’s largest provider 
of 
accommodation (Airbnb) and the world's largest 
retailer (Alibaba) testifies that they did not come from 
competitors in the same industry or even from companies 
with a similar business model. Rather all of them 
emerged from the sharing economy platforms as start-ups 
and forged by digital technologies and ultimately disrupted 
their respective industry. In line with these success stories, 
it is assumed that owning lots of things is going to be 
outdated in a fast-paced luxury sector and most of the 
resources are borrowed or outsourced in a transition from 
ownership to the sharing economy. In “The Digital 
Transformation Playbook” Rogers argues that disruption 
happens when an existing industry faces a challenger that 
offers greater value to the customers in a way that 
existing firms cannot compete with directly [23]. The five 
domains of digital transformation" described by Rogers 
[23] 
builds 
a solid 
foundation 
to 
explain 
how 
digitalization is reshaping customers, competition, 
data, 
innovation, 
and 
value domains. Table 
I 
sets 
out 
strategic themes and key concepts as businesses move 
from the analog era to the digital age. The first and most 
important domain is the customers. Digital technologies 
have transformed the whole customer expectation and 
experience. In fact, luxury goods and services are now 
sought, sampled, and purchased in very different ways 
than before and consumers expect competent e-commerce, 
engaging 
and 
exciting 
interactions 
on social media, 
and 
multiple 
channels 
for 
interaction. [24]. The 
customers are now empowered with digital tools and 
require extremely 
personalized 
experience 
even 
by 
asking 
to shape the products and services. These 
requirements create a new ground of competition for 
the luxury brand and drive them toward building up an 
interactive platform to communicate with their customers.
TABLE I. THE FIVE DOMAINS OF DIGITAL TRANSFORMATIONS [23]
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

better and ultimately to offer personalized and customized 
services. Digitalization, as discussed by Rogers [23], 
provides a solid platform for a company to constantly 
experiment, test each of new ideas, measure customer 
response, and iterate on what it learns. Innovation is also 
leveraged through crowdsourcing and receiving feedbacks 
via social media and platforms. These are all invaluable for 
designing new products and services and improving the 
existing one as Parker [8] argues innovation is no longer the 
province of in-house experts and research and development 
labs. Lastly, digital technologies enable luxury brands to 
enhance, extend or reshape the customer value proposition 
with digital contents and engagement, i.e., to offer better, 
faster and customized products and services which resonates 
with their personal lifestyle [24].  
While 
some 
luxury 
brands 
seek 
solutions 
to 
digitally automate their existing operations, we observe a 
few luxury start-ups are shaking up the industry [25] by 
aggregating many luxury e-commerce sites into a 
personalized feed and universal shopping cart [25][26] 
and extracting the most value from platform business 
model. The platform as discussed by Parker [8] offers 
reach, speed, convenience, and efficiency to customize 
the customer's requirements on luxury brand online 
shops. The possibility to capture data about customers' 
preferences 
and 
then 
develop and deliver 
the
customized products in the quickest manner can be 
considered other benefits which are implemented by  start-
ups who focus on access rather than ownership. These new 
ventures aim to replace ownership with access where users
can register on a platform and rent luxury items such as 
accessories and jewelry on a weekly or monthly basis. These
start-ups work on everything from lab-grown diamonds
to 
luxury subscription services to blockchain for 
authenticating luxury products. Some also launch new
brands and/or help incumbents by offering them luxury-
specific technology tools [27]. A good example is Rent the 
Runway [28] founded in 
2009, 
an 
online 
platform 
which rents clothes and accessories for women with 
different plans. Eleven James [29] founded in 2013 is 
another online platform which provides access to a 
diverse collection of luxury watches for both men and 
women through subscription service.  Dou Bao Bao and Y-
Closet are two Chinese start-ups which provide access to 
a high-end designer handbag and a high-end clothing 
respectively by following rental business model [30]. 
Dou Bao Bao launched its platform on WeChat, and also 
released an official app and is now planning to expand the 
service to other Asian countries including Malaysia,
Thailand, Vietnam, and Korea as the model far exceeded the
company's expectations [30][31]. Y-Closet follows the 
rental business model and charges a monthly subscription 
fee of RMB 499 (USD$73) in which consumers have the 
option to select three cloths per month and swap them out 
as many times as they wish where delivery is included 
in the fee [30][31]. The next trend could be for the 
consumers to exchange each-others’ items through the 
platforms. There are blockchain start-ups such as CEDEX 
[32] and BitCar [33] who focus on a single type of asset —
diamonds and luxury cars, respectively. Switzerland-based
Tend [34] is planning to offer a multitude of assets for
investment purpose such as vineyards, watches and other 
luxury items. All three start-ups are still at very early-
stage and planning to raise several millions of dollars 
through initial coin offerings in 2018. We can, however, 
see that they are all examples 
for 
rising 
of 
the
sharing economy and platform business 
which 
are 
disrupting 
the 
value proposition 
of 
traditional 
luxury brands and creating emerging opportunities.
 Acquiera et. al [35] conceptualize the sharing 
economy to rest on three foundational cores including  
Access 
economy, 
Platform 
economy, 
and  
Community-based economy. 
The 
sharing 
economy 
facilitates collaborative production and consumption and 
drives the concept of value co-creation [36]. 
III.
VALUE CO-CREATION IN LUXURY
BRANDS 
Value co-creation, which refers to the practices a 
company uses to collaborate with its stakeholders during the 
design, development, and deployment of its products and 
services [37], is an emerging concept and was coined by 
Prahalad and Ramaswamy. It replaces the hierarchical 
approach to management and the linear approach to 
innovation by affording all stakeholders the possibility to 
influence and bring forth meaningful and relevant solutions 
in a collaborative environment from product design to 
product consumption [38]-[40]. Value co-creation has been 
triggered and driven by digital technologies in recent years 
[41]-[43]. These technologies can facilitate and transform the 
vast user-generated data and input into socially and 
economically valuable products and services [44]. In the era 
of big data, every change in customer behavior, location, or 
even physiological data can be recorded and analyzed [45]. 
In fact, big data allows firms to uncover unforeseen patterns 
about customers, businesses, and markets [15] while offering 
the firms opportunities to track customer behavior and 
measure outcomes of competitive strategies[16][17]. Modern 
luxury products usually commit to a brand story that includes 
a visionary myth and mission [46] and technology can expand 
this narrative to customers. Today, luxury brands should 
integrate their products with digital technology to add value 
and address "omnichannel interactions" including "integrated 
delivery service," comparable "promotions and rewards," and 
a "consistent brand image across all channels [47]. Although 
it is widely shown that user co-creation is beneficial in 
mainstream fashion [17], we must recall that the luxury sector 
has always distanced itself from consumers [48] in order to 
preserve the exclusivity and high status. Also, it is argued that 
luxury is art and should spring from designers' creative 
genius without that much input from the end user, therefore, 
user-designed luxury products are perceived to be lower in 
quality and fail to signal high status [49]. That is why to some 
extent consumers expect the artists to dictate what luxury 
should be and how it should be experienced [49][50]. As a 
result the luxury sector has implemented “a top-down, we-
know-best-and-we-won’t-listen-to-you attitude” [51]. In 
non-luxury categories, it is argued that “user design” i.e., 
drawing on users’ ideas and designs for new products, will 
enable firms to achieve a number of positive benefits [52][53] 
including reducing new product development costs, 
improving time to market, and deriving innovative products 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

which are better at meeting consumer needs and wants 
[17][20][53]. The Internet helps luxury brands increase 
consumer awareness and promote their images online 
by describing their brands' story and heritage[51]. However,
Heine and Berghaus [54] argue that the majority of luxury 
brands still use mainly digital platforms to disseminate 
information to consumers in the classical sense of marketing 
rather than using social media to engage with their 
consumers. This strategy used to restrict the consumers' 
input to preserve since they walk the line between 
access and exclusivity, 
exposure 
and 
mystery, 
and 
restraint 
and expansion [46]. But now, the Internet is 
being utilized as a vehicle for luxury brands to enable 
consumers to share their personal experiences through 
narratives, co-creation and story-giving [54]. The direct 
interaction with consumers allows luxury brands turn 
storytelling into story-giving. As such these brands will not 
relinquish control of information creation while engaging 
with their consumers in the co-creation of their brand 
image. Tiffany & Co. [55] introduced the concept of the 
story giving as a powerful co-creation tool in their 2011 
“What Makes Love True” (WMLT) which was a social 
media campaign with access to the e-commerce section of 
the company main website and studies shows that story-
giving provide them with new opportunities to co-create 
stories about the brand while maintaining performance 
and paucity [55]. Schreier et al. [56] find that consumers 
evaluate a product more positively and indicate stronger 
purchase intentions if it is labeled as created by users instead 
of by the firm's internal designers. All these have created 
serious challenges as how to accommodate with the rise 
of co-creation trend which pushes luxury brands to shift 
their business model from a product-centric view of 
value creation to one that focuses on personalized and 
collaborative brand experiences.  
IV.
FRAMEWORK DEVELOPMENT AND
CASE STUDY 
Most successful start-ups like Uber and Airbnb have tried 
to improve people’s life by solving something, empowering 
people, delivering value, fitting into their lives and giving 
people time back. However, many of them have challenges 
in building up their corporate brand at the initial stage as they 
had no resources, such as money and internal structure, nor 
did they have customers or even a consistent idea how the 
end-product should look like [57][58]. In fact, for a start-up, 
“visibility creates Opportunities”, the faster it gets visible the 
closer the possibility of a business success is [59].  Moreover, 
the digital era has provided start-ups with tremendous 
opportunities to communicate and engage with their potential 
customers and stakeholders but substantial risks at the same 
time. Young ventures have specific branding needs due to 
their lack of resources [60], lack of internal structures and 
processes [60], and fundamental need to build a reputation 
[61] in order to find customers and investors. Venkatesh [62]
identifies some of the challenges for start-up brand building
including financial, legal and reputational risks, gaining
traction and scaling-up. As such start-up branding cannot be
addressed in a holistic approach since a new venture follows
a growth curve where it goes through experimenting 
and testing its business model. Roshanzamir [57] suggests 
the EIC conceptual model in Figure 1 to break down brand 
building of a start-up  into three stages and integrate it with 
start-up growth stages [57].  
Figure 1. The EIC model for start-up branding in the digital era [57] 
The EIC framework argues that the founders of start-ups 
must first have a strong sense of purpose, cause or belief to
solve a market need or take advantage of an existing market 
opportunity 
and 
cultivate 
innovation 
and 
co-
creation mindset. Second, they need to innovate things that 
make them special and differentiate them from their 
competition. Third, they must seek to jointly create and 
develop value as the tangible manifestation of the first 
two 
stages 
[57]. 
The authors propose a practical 
extension on the EIC model to illustrate how the power of 
a brand story can be leveraged by IoT, blockchain and 
platform models, in order to influence consumer buying 
behaviour. The concept of smart handmade carpet is, then, 
introduced and used as a case study here.  
A.
Emotion
For centuries, Persia has been famed as the  major center
of oriental carpet weaving and established the standards of 
architecture 
design 
miniature 
painting, 
and 
textile 
production. Carpet-weaving is considered to be one of the 
essential manifestations of Persian culture and art, and dates 
back to 500 B.C., during the Achaemenid according to 
evidence such as the 2500-year-old Pazyryk carpet. Though 
carpet weaving is now mechanized in many areas, the 
traditional handwoven carpet still has wide appeal throughout 
the world as a valuable masterpiece with a much higher price 
compared to machine made counterparts. The price of a 
handmade carpet is also determined by a number of factors 
including origin, size, design, age, purchase value, the 
materials as well as a brief history behind. Some traders 
document all these and issue a certificate of authenticity 
which can even be attested by international inspection 
companies. However, the authors argue that IoT, the 
blockchain and platform business can offer a game-changing 
solution and disrupt handmade carpet business by bringing 
transparency and trust to the supply chain,  dealing with 
counterfeiting and increasing customer engagement. These 
technologies bring numerous possibilities to improve 
operations and contribute to a marketing campaign and build 
strong brands by generating an immutable digital certificate. 
At the early stage of weaving a carpet, we can observe 
that the passion, skills, and talents of the designer and 
weavers are a bold contributor to producing a masterpiece. 
Innovation and Co-creation mindsets are other important 
ingredients for generating a brand story that must be 
cultivated from early days. In fact, a luxury strategy places a 
high priority on localized production to support the brand 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

story and increase intrinsic value and the country of origin 
symbolizes expertise and cache [51]. That is why two pieces 
of carpet can be made of the same material within the same 
size, and even have a similar design, yet, Persian origin can 
reel the price by 5 to 10  times. By integrating IoT with 
blockchain, the smart carpet verifies the origin through smart 
tag embedded in the carpet from the time weaving started.  
Chamrosh Technology [63] is a new start-up which is 
aimed to establish a platform in order to connect the luxury 
carpet weavers with the potential avid carpet fans and 
enthusiasms by leveraging digital technologies. The value 
proposition is to give the possibility of 
directly 
communicating with the weavers by reviewing the data and 
the full story of a carpet through digital tools i.e., video and 
pictures from the time weaving start. The platform utilizes 
IoT and blockchain to track the lifecycle of a carpet and 
validate the provenance such as origin and existing owner and 
other details in an immutable ledger which builds up the 
ingredient of a story. Griffin et. al. [64] indicates stories are 
often more important than hard facts because a brand or 
company’s stories shape its reality. Walsh [65] argues 
storytelling is so critical to the brand building since stories 
are easy to remember and share, engage our feelings, shape 
our beliefs and enable us to see ourselves in a different light, 
and more importantly influence our behavior in accordance 
with these new perceptions, insights, and identities. The name 
of this start-up is smartly selected by the founders to generate 
a compelling story which gains buy-in from potential 
customers and guide, motivate and inspire stakeholders. 
Chamrosh is a bird in Persian mythology said to live on the 
summit of Mount Alborz and is sent by an angel to snatch 
invaders and drop them from mountaintops to protect 
the Persian Land [63]. The name generate a compelling
story which  is easy to remember, share and engage 
potential customers’ feelings. Moreover, it is believed 
that integrating IoT, blockchain, and platform business 
model, indicated in Figure 2, would establish a structure to 
co-create value with potential customers in order to build 
trust and influence their buying behavior. 
Figure 2. The practical extension of the EIC model 
The framework breaks down the story of a carpet from 
the time procuring of knots and then weaving starts in a 
simple connection of cause and effect. The narrative of 
a carpet including the place and exact location of weaving, 
the name of weaver and designer together with video, 
audio and pictures are recorded, collected and shared 
with the potential customers as they are experiencing 
it as if it were their story. The customers feel what the 
weaver 
feels; 
they 
see what 
the 
weaver 
sees 
and experiences.
Therefore, they memorize and retain chunks of information
contained in the story since they watch the images 
and videos, hear the sounds, and feel the emotions 
which 
are 
recorded 
in 
a 
digital 
ledger 
that 
is
distributed, decentralized, verifiable and irreversible. 
Figure 3. The rhetoric of carpet is recorded in the blockchain. 
Figure 3 shows how the attractive rhetoric of a carpet can 
be leveraged in an immutable ledger on a vast network 
of computers and that put substantial monetary and
emotional value at the heart of the weaving process. 
B.
Innovation
Innovation is considered to be a critical factor for long-
term business success and organizations which have 
innovated successfully have typically been rewarded with 
growth, profits, and access to new markets throughout 
history, [66]. Though innovation can be the result of new 
technology; however, in some cases innovation is based on 
smart redeployment or combination of existing technologies. 
For example, iPhone as the most successful and amiable 
smartphone was not certainly the first one on the market 
either. Chamrosh is the first platform that fosters innovation 
in order to track a wealth of history behind the handmade 
carpet. It further builds a new experience and generates an 
authentic story for carpet buyers and art collectors by 
integrating digital technologies in the production, marketing 
and sales of handmade carpet in the world. The blockchain 
globally stores and collaboratively write a list of all 
transactions that have ever taken place within a given system 
[67] [68] and offers the possibility to keep the whole story of
a carpet in a decentralized system. Therefore, when the owner
of a smart carpet decides to sell his or her carpet, he or she
could easily use the platform to create a digital certificate of
authenticity and the next customer will be able to verify that
carpet has not been stolen and that it was kept and maintained
well. The uniqueness and novelty of this model are aimed to
replace the legal norms and ownership rights of smart carpet
without the need for a third-party authority to enforce
exclusion rights. This is perfectly in line with recent
arguments that the hybrid institution of property is a
distributed ledger that can hold information about an
intellectual property of right holders instead of a centralized
government database [69] [70].  As the ownership records
and other environmental data of the carpet are registered in
real time system, all the pre and post owners of a single
carpet, as well as the location of use, play a part in generating
the story behind the carpet which can be verified. The process
is described in Fig. 4 where the new ownership details will be
added into the blockchain system together with some
additional details including the temperature, humidity, and
location of use. Here we see a paradigm shift in story-giving
where the customer of a smart carpet can actively contribute
in composing the story of it before selling the carpet to the
next customer.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Figure 4. The smart carpet business model can address the trust issue by creating an authentic brand story [63]  
C.
Co-creation
Maxwell et. al [68] propose that blockchain technologies
can become a new framework not only for the production 
(distribution and financing) of stories but also their 
generation. According to them the structural breaking down 
of stories into constituent parts and formulae is well 
established – from Aristotle’s analysis of tragedy in Poetics 
to Georges Polti identifying 36 plots to Campbell’s 
monomyth and Booker’s seven themes. In the blockchain, 
each update or transaction like owner change is a new "block" 
added to the chain an encrypted manner without affecting the 
previous one. The implementation of property rights for 
physical objects through IoT and blockchain applications can 
eliminate some functions of third-party authorities for the 
enforcement of property rights [70]. Of course, it is still very 
early to conclude that some of the blockchain applications 
will be able to replace legal norms and property rights, yet, 
we can observe how some aspects of property relations in 
society are being replaced with the blockchain [71].   
Co-creation practically happened in the third stage when 
a 
platform 
empowers 
different 
players 
including 
weavers, dealers, and buyers get together in order to 
produce a mutually valued output through a smart 
carpet which integrates digital technologies. Chamrosh 
utilizes the sense of trust and transparency embedded with 
the blockchain and IoT to generate a progressive story of a 
carpet from the time weaving 
starts. 
The 
smart 
tag 
or Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) chip will 
collect 
environmental parameters including temperature, 
moisture, number of time people walk across a carpet 
and more importantly the physical location through the 
radio signals without building a mechanical or optical  
contact. All these will be recorded in the form of a new 
block of the story across a peer-to-peer network as the 
carpet moves among multiple parties and owners.
The corporate story plays an important role in creating 
a position for the company against competitor [72] and 
could influence the impressions that audiences form of the 
organization and therefore build the corporate brand [73]. It 
has been argued that sharing consumers’ positive stories 
about a brand can be a highly effective online 
marketing strategy [74]. In the smart carpet, we have a story 
anchored by the customer’s lifestyle, driven by digital 
technologies and eager to provide extra verification on a 
carpet origin and lifecycle. Moreover, the novel integration 
of IoT, blockchain and platform, suggested here, addresses 
the question as to what 
extent 
corporate 
stories 
represent the reality of the organization raised by Spear 
and Roper [73] because the data about a smart carpet 
stored on the blockchain reflect the real events happen
during ownership. Though they are not inherently 
accurate and mistakes can happen during recording 
time just as with a centralized database, however, 
integrating IoT and blockchain technologies can generate an 
authentic brand story that builds trust. In fact, IoT is 
the critical tool 
to 
disrupt 
the 
existing 
business 
paradigms of trading second-hand carpet with a new 
way of thinking, organizing, collaborating, and creating 
through 
decentralized 
applications. 
In 
these 
circumstances, a rhetoric of smart carpet in the age of 
disruption 
can 
engage 
the 
customer’s feeling and 
influence their attitude and decision with the new 
perception and identify provided via digital technology. For 
example, those carpets which are placed at the holy sites 
of Islam and Christianity are traded at premium prices 
because the potential buyers assumed them to be 
blessed and cherished by the location of use. The smart 
carpet offers an innovative solution to trade these used 
carpets by ensuring the integrity of location and positively 
influence the purchase intentions and willingness of 
customers to pay a premium.   
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Moreover, the platform, accessible upon registration 
allows dealers and buyers to view and evaluate hundreds of 
carpets offered by different weavers and also former owners. 
The model also creates a pleasant experience and more choice 
for customers through aggregation of digital information by 
going beyond traditional factors such as age, design, and 
quality, promising them authenticity, trust, and transparency 
in an immutable ledger. Freemium model, which is built on 
an expectation of converting a portion of visitors to real 
buyers paying customers, increases the number of visitors to 
share views, comments, and feedback about each and every 
carpet. This will ultimately act as a strong marketing tool to 
promote the new start-up. Visitors can view and even verify 
the carpets but can neither buy nor sell within the platform. 
Only paid customers can utilize this advantage.  
IBM Research has recently developed an Artificial 
Intelligent-powered counterfeit detector that verifies an 
item's authenticity using a smart phone's camera and then 
comparing the item to a database contained within a 
blockchain ledger [75]. The technology is accessible via a 
mobile app and can be used in Chamrosh to verify the 
authenticity of the carpet within a limited edition of carpets 
registered in the system.  
V.
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
This section is dedicated to discussion and conducting 
performance analysis on smart carpet framework through the 
models offered by the most distinguished international 
leaders in the study of brands, branding, and marketing of the 
luxury goods.  
First, Keller [76] argues that marketers have the 
opportunity to drive sales and build brands in ways never 
before possible by combining a diverse collection of new 
digital options added to the traditional media and 
communication options. He, therefore, suggests seven 
integrated marketing communications (IMC) choice criteria 
namely: 
coverage, 
cost, 
contribution, 
commonality, 
complementarity, cross-effects, and conformability [76]. 
These choices unlock the power of integrated marketing and 
can examine how effectively and efficiently they have been 
assembled. In order to evaluate the IMC choice criteria for 
smart carpet, we need to conduct a quantitative research 
which is beyond the objective of the existing paper. 
Nonetheless, we can review each criterion and examine how 
it resonates with the framework suggested by considering the 
luxury nature of smart carpet. 
•
Coverage for luxury brands needs to balance 
exclusivity with connection and honor and establish a 
soft barrier that makes a customer feel really special 
[46].
•
Cost is the most important criteria to ensure an 
effective efficient communications campaign. It is 
assumed that innovation engraved in the product and 
platform business together with leveraging the power 
of social network would justify the cost.
•
Contribution is certainly the most robust criteria and 
the essence of the smart carpet concept where the new 
avid carpet customer fan is encouraged to compose 
and be a part of a brand story through co- creation. 
This criteria also resonate 
with 
a 
concept 
of 
"Ueber-myth" 
a compelling story that gives the 
product meaning and reverberates emotionally with 
customer suggested by Schaefer and Kuehlwein [46]. 
•
Commonality must ensure that information conveyed 
by different communication options shares meaning or 
elicits 
similar 
effects 
across 
communication 
options which is focused on co-creating value with 
potential customers and influence their attitude.
•
Complementarity here is focused on covering the 
customer decision journey and desired positioning of 
smart carpet which can be met by integration of IoT 
and blockchain.
•
Cross-effects offer creative synergy among the 
potential customers and leverage brand knowledge at a 
different stage of ownership. Since the new owner can 
review the ownership record and reality of former 
customers in the blockchain.
•
Conformability is a bit tricky here since the whole 
concept of luxury is built on the product story weaves a 
tale 
of heritage and 
craftsmanship 
[46]. The 
enthusiasm 
of 
potential 
customers 
and 
their 
communication record can provide a glimpse into the 
heart and soul of the smart carpet. 
Second, Joachimsthaler and Pfeiffer [77] claim companies 
need to understand consumers in the context of daily life 
experiences in order to leverage enormous opportunities for 
success. They propose Episodic Reconstruction Method 
(ERM) which attempts to broadly capture a wide range of 
situations and contexts of interests. Joachimsthaler [78] 
further insists that brand strategy must focus on the total 
transformative experience of consumers as people living, 
working and playing and then on linking emotional benefits 
to tangible proof and reasons in the superiority of the product. 
The value of our smart carpet model can be easily determined 
by the ERM framework. It allows the avid carpet funs to 
connect and engage with the smart carpet via latest 
technology and become part of the story. Rather than seeking 
to only improve the quality of carpet that is merely different 
from competitors’ products, the smart carpet is focused on a 
brand story that creates desirability. The monetary value of 
the smart carpet increases through direct contribution of the 
new owner,  the way he or she fits the carpet into his or her 
daily life, for example, the place it is located or the number 
of times the owner walk across it. 
Third, the circles of luxury management practices 
developed by Nueno and Quelch [79] would offer more 
focused analysis. They [79] classify four distinct circles in 
managing luxury brands which can ensure the success in the 
global 
marketplace 
as 
design 
and 
communications 
management; product line management; customer service 
management; and channel management.  Building on their 
model, we can see that Chamrosh business model perfectly 
fulfills these circles by harnessing digital technology to foster 
innovation and generate a favorable market acceptance. First, 
the nature of Persian carpet that only increases in value over 
time, is evolved from handmade carpet to smart carpet by 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

harnessing technology and recording narratives in a digital 
ledger that is distributed and verifiable (communication 
management). Second, this evolution adds substantial 
monetary value every time the carpet is being bought and sold 
(product line management). Third, in Chamrosh platform 
each and every customer becomes expert in customer service, 
and relationship building by contributing in the rhetoric of 
carpet through generating a new block. In fact, the customer 
who buys a carpet today may purchase another item of much 
higher value from the platform or other customers tomorrow 
or even sell his or her carpet. Because more consumers are 
tempted to mix and match the narrative of carpets within the 
platform, 
the 
competition 
surges 
and 
cross-selling 
opportunities increase as they are seized (customer service 
management). Fourth, Chamrosh owns and is expected to 
manage the distribution channel by connecting weavers to 
customers and later customer to customer. As a developer of 
technology, the platform gets involved every time a carpet is 
bought and sold. It further charges a nominal fee to facilitate 
the transaction and generate a new block within the database 
(channel management). The other competitive advantage 
inherited within smart carpet platform is that it dedicates to 
the latest technology which is appealing to the young 
generation who are the potential customer of this technology 
in the coming years. As Nueno [80] argues, the future of 
many companies will depend to a great extent on teenagers’ 
behavior and attitudes toward consumption which is shifting 
away from developed economies toward emerging markets, 
where the new wealth being generated is giving rise to an 
aspirational middle class. This young generation who are 
sometimes referred to as "Digital Millennials" or “ Digital 
Natives” has many characteristics such as racial diversity, 
their status as the most educated generation to date, their low 
marriage and fertility rates but the most important one is that 
they are born with technology and considered heavy web 
users[81][82]. They currently form over a quarter of the 
American population, and about a quarter of the European 
Union’s with an estimated purchasing power of $2.45 trillion 
worldwide [82]. Therefore, the challenge for smart carpet 
remains as for how to target this huge market.   
Lastly, with the advent of Artificial Intelligence, we see 
some other applications of a smart carpet have such as 
physical therapy where the walking pattern of the owner is 
detected and analyzed and then with a help of therapist these 
patterns can predict mobility problems and correct them, have 
emerged, [83]. Also, the smart carpet can identify the 
presence of an intruder, acting as a kind of alarm system 
which detects environmental threats, like fires [83].  
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
The sharing economy and digital technologies are 
disrupting the luxury sector by offering a new catalyst for 
growth and enabling individuals to share goods and services 
and even contribute in the design, production, and 
consumption of them. Blockchain and IoT can embed 
tractability and visibility by recording every event and 
transaction within a supply chain on a distributed ledger and 
then a platform provides an ecosystem of suppliers and 
consumers where enormous amounts of value can be created 
and exchanged.   
This paper makes a few novel contributions to the domain 
of IoT, blockchain, and platform and their application in 
brand building, digital transformation in marketing of luxury 
products. It is the first study to suggest a framework for 
integrating IoT and blockchain and platform and apply the 
same in the marketing and branding field. Reviewing carpet 
weaving as one of the traditional businesses throughout the 
world and then utilizing the framework to transform this field 
from handmade carpet to smart carpet can be considered as 
the second significant contribution. Another key contribution 
is an emphasis on co-creating of a smart carpet brand by 
offering a paradigm shift in story-giving where the customer 
contributes to composing the story while handing over the 
ownership. Last but not least is that the framework addresses 
trust towards the smart carpet by creating an authentic brand 
story. 
Future research is suggested to focus on conducting an 
empirical analysis especially on value elements and the value 
proposition of a smart carpet for different stakeholders in 
order to validate the effectiveness and credibility of the 
framework. The authors also believe that developing 
Minimum Viable Product (MVP) will help to conduct 
practical experience in order to humanized the new 
technologies, evaluate the pros and cons and bring them into 
daily life.  
REFERENCES 
[1]
C. D’Arpizio, F. Levato, M. Kamel and J. Montgolfier, “Luxury 
Goods Worldwide Market Study,” Fall–Winter 2017, December 22, 
2017, https://www.bain.com/insights/luxury-goods-worldwide-
market-study-fall-winter-2017/ 2018.09.20 
[2]
U. Okonkwo, “The luxury brand strategy challenge,” Journal of 
Brand Management, Vol.16, No.5-6, pp. 287-289, 2009. 
[3]
K-P Hung, A.H. Chen, N. Peng, C. Hackley, R.A. Tiwsakul and  C-L 
Chou, “Antecedents of luxury brand purchase intention,” Journal of 
Product & Brand Management, Vol.20, No.6, pp. 457–467, 2011. 
[4]
J. Hamari, M. Sjöklint and A. Ukkonen, “The sharing economy: Why
people participate in collaborative consumption,” Journal of the 
Association for Information Science and Technology, Vol. 67, No.9,
pp. 2047–2059, 2016. 
[5]
K. Hellwig, F. Morhart, F. Girardin and M. Hauser, “Exploring
different types of sharing: A proposed segmentation of the market for
sharing  businesses,” Psychology and Marketing, Vol.32, No.9, pp. 
891–906, 2015. 
[6]
P. Arienti, “Global Powers of Luxury Goods 2018 Shaping the future 
of the luxury industry,” EMEA Fashion & Luxury Leader. 2018; 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/at/Documents/consu
mer-business/deloitte-global-powers-of-luxury-goods-2018.pdf/
2018.09.20 
[7]
U. Okonkwo, “Luxury Online Styles, Systems, Strategies,”  Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2010. 
[8]
G. G. Parker, M. W. Van Alstyne and S. P. Choudary, “ Platform 
Revolution: How Networked Markets Are Transforming the
Economy - and How to Make Them Work for You,” W. W. Norton & 
Company, 2016. 
[9]
Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, and H. Wang, “Blockchain challenges 
and opportunities: A survey,” International Journal of Web and Grid 
Services, 2017, pp. 1–23
[10] D. L. Rogers, “The Network Is Your Customer: Five Strategies to
Thrive in a Digital Age,”  Yale University Press. Kindle Edition, 
2011. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

[11] P. Kotler, H. Kartajaya, and I. Setiawan, "Marketing 4.0: Moving 
from Traditional to Digital,“ Wiley. Kindle Edition, 2017. 
[12] M. Sawhney, “Fundamentals of Customer Value,” Kellogg School of 
Management,  pp. 107–110 ; 
https://mthink.com/legacy/www.crmproject.com/content/pdf/CRM4_
wp_sawhney.pdf / 2018.09.20 
[13] C. D'Arprizio, C. Jilla, and M.A. Kamel, “The new rules of luxury,“
Bain & Company, Financial Times, 18 May, available at:
https://www.bain.com/insights/the-new-rules-of-luxury/ 2018.09.20
[14] H.J. Choo, H. Moon, H. Kim and N. Yoon, "Luxury customer value," 
Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management: An International 
Journal, Vol.16, Iss.1, pp. 81-101, 2012. 
[15] R. Clarke, “ Big data, big risks,“ Journal Information Systems, Vol.26
Iss.1, pp. 77–90, 2016. 
[16] S. Tirunillai, and G.J. Tellis, “Mining marketing meaning from online 
chatter: strategic brand analysis of big data using latent Dirichlet 
allocation,” Journal of Marketing Research, Vol.51, Iss.4, pp. 463–
479, 2014. 
[17] C. Fuchs, E. Prandelli, M. Schreier and D.W. Dahl, “All That Is Users 
Might Not Be Gold: How Labeling Products as User Designed 
Backfires in the Context of Luxury Fashion Brands,” Journal of 
Marketing: September, Vol.77, No.5, pp. 75-91, 2013. 
[18] W.D. Hoyer, C. Rajesh, M. Dorotic, M. Krafft, and S.S. Singh, 
“Consumer Co-creation in New Product Development,” Journal of 
Service Research, Vol.13, No. 3, pp. 283-296, 2010. 
[19] S. Ogawa, and F.T. Piller,” Reducing the Risks of New Product 
Development,” Sloan Management Review, Vol.47 (Winter): p65-72, 
2016. 
[20] E. Von Hippel, “Democratizing Innovation: The Evolving 
Phenomenon of User Innovation,” Journal für Betriebswirtschaft. 
Springer-Verlag, Cambridge. 2005
[21] C. M. Christensen, “The innovator's dilemma: When new 
technologies cause great firms to fail, “ Harvard Business School 
Press. 2016
[22] L. Williams, “Disrupt: Think the Unthinkable to Spark
Transformation in Your Business” Pearson FT Press; 2nd edition, 
2015. 
[23] D. L. Rogers, “The Digital Transformation Playbook: Rethink Your
Business for the Digital Age,” Columbia Business School Publishing,
Columbia University Press. Kindle Edition, 2016.
[24] www.bcg.com/industries/consumer-products/luxury.aspx/
2018.09.20 
[25] https://www.cbinsights.com/research/future-luxury-
trends/#subscription/  2018.09.20 
[26] https://apiumhub.com/tech-blog-barcelona/luxury-startups/ 
2018.09.20 
[27] P. Waelbroeck, "An Economic Analysis of Blockchains" CESifo 
Group Munich. pp. 1-28, 2018. 
[28] www.renttherunway.com/ 2018.09.20
[29] https://elevenjames.com/about/ 2018.09.20 
[30] https://jingdaily.com/luxury-rentals-china-sharing-economy/ 
2018.09.20 
[31] https://jingdaily.com/luxury-goods-rental-startups-explained/
2018.09.20 
[32] https://cedex.com/  2018.09.20 
[33] https://bitcar.io/  2018.09.20 
[34] https://www.tendswiss.com/  2018.09.20 
[35] A. Acquiera,T. Daudigeosb and J. Pinksec, “Promises and paradoxes 
of the sharing economy: An organizing framework” Technological
Forecasting & Social Change Vol.125, pp. 1–10, 2017. 
[36] T. Zhang, M. Farboudi Jahromi and M. Kizildag, “ Value co-creation 
in a sharing economy: The end of price wars?” International Journal 
of Hospitality Management No.71, 2018.
[37] C.K. Prahalad and V. Ramaswamy, "Co‐creating unique value with
customers," Strategy & Leadership, Vol.32, Iss.3, pp. 4-9, 2004. 
[38] C.K. Prahalad, “The co-creation of value,” Journal of  Marketing ; 
Vol.68, Iss.1, pp. 1-17, 2004. 
[39] A. Payne, K. Storbacka., P. Frow, and S.  Knox, “Co-creating brands:
diagnosing and designing the relationship experience,” Journal of 
Business Research, Vol.62, No.3, pp. 379–389, 2009. 
[40] S. Lenka, V. Parida, D.R. Sjodin and J. Wincent, ” Digitalization and 
Advanced Service Innovation: How Digitalization Capabilities 
Enable Companies to Co-Create Value with Customers, “
Management of Innovation and Technology, No.3, pp. 2-5, 2016. 
[41] S. Lenka, V. Parida and J. Wincent, “Digitalization Capabilities as 
Enablers of Value Co-Creation in Servitizing Firms,” Psychology & 
Marketing, No.34, pp. 92-100, 2017.
[42] M. Holmlund, T. Strandvik and I. Lahteenmaki, “Digitalization 
Challenging Institutional Logics: Top Executive Sensemaking of 
Service Business Change,“ Journal of Service Theory and Practice, 
No.27, pp. 213-230, 2017. 
[43] T. Brandsen, B. Verschuere and T. Steen, “Co-Production and Co-
Creation” New York: Routledge, 2018. 
[44] A.A. Efros, “Portraiture in the age of big data,” Communications of 
the ACM, Vol.57 Iss.9, pp. 92-92, 2014. 
[45] L. Yang, S. Madnick, R. Wang, F. Wang and Z. Hongyun, “A Cubic
Framework for the Chief data Officer: succeeding in a world of big 
data,”  MIS Quarterly Executive, Vo.13, Iss.1, pp. 1–13. 2014
[46] W. Schaefer and J.P. Kuehlwein, “Rethinking Prestige Branding 
Secrets of the Ueber-Brands,” Kogan Page, 2015. 
[47] O. Abtan, C. Barton, F. Bonelli, H. Gurzki, A. Mei-Pochtler, N. 
Pianon and Miki Tsusaka, “Digital or Die The Choice for Luxury 
Brands.” Boston Consulting Group, 2016.
[48] J.N. Kapferer and V. Bastien, “The Luxury Strategy: Break the Rules 
of Marketing to Build Luxury Brands,” Kogan Page: London, UK, 
2009. 
[49] W. Ozuem and Y. Azemi, “Digital Marketing Strategies for Fashion 
and Luxury Brands,” IGI Global; 1st edition, 2017. 
[50] J.N. Kapferer, “The future of luxury: Challenges and opportunities,”
The Journal of Brand Management. Vol.21, Iss.9, pp. 716–726, 2014. 
[51] J. N. Kapferer, “Kapferer on Luxury How Luxury Brands Can Grow
Yet Remain Rare,” Kogan Page. 2015. 
[52] E. Colyer “Luxury Brands Confront Web 2.0,”
www.brandchannel.com, August 27. 2007
[53] D. W. Dahl, C. Fuchs, & M. Schreier, “Why and When Consumers 
Prefer Products of User-Driven Firms: A Social Identification 
Account” Management Science, Vol.61, No.8, pp. 1978-1988, 2015. 
[54] K. Heine and B. Berghaus, “Luxury goes digital: how to tackle the 
digital luxury brand–consumer touchpoints,” Journal of Global 
Fashion Marketing, Special Issue: Social Media Marketing and
Luxury Brands, Vol.5 No.3, pp. 223-234, 2014.
[55] http://www.tiffany.com/ 2018.09.20 
[56] M. Schreier, C. Fuchs and D. Dahl, “The innovation effect of user 
design: Exploring consumers' innovation perceptions of firms selling 
products designed by users” Journal of Marketing, No.76, pp. 18-32, 
2012. 
[57] A. Roshanzamir, “ Dilemmas of Branding for Start-ups in Digital Era, 
”  The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and 
eGovernments Rome, Italy, pp. 63-72, 2018. 
[58] M. Nair “Why Is Branding Crucial For Start-ups ?”
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/279331/  2018.09.20
[59] T. Abimbola, and C. Vallaster, “Brand, organizational identity and
reputation in SMEs: an overview, “ Qualitative Market Research: An 
International Journal, Vol.10, Iss.4, pp. 341-348, 2007. 
[60] V. Rode and C. Vallaster, “Corporate branding for start-ups: the
crucial role of entrepreneurs, “Corporate Reputation Review, Vol.8
No.2, pp. 121-135, 2005. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

[61] A. P. Petkova, and V. P. Rindova, and A.K. Gupta, "How can new
ventures build reputation? An exploratory study,” Corporate
Reputation Review, Vol.11, Iss.4, pp. 320–334, 2008. 
[62] U. Venkatesh, “Branding Impetus for Start-Ups: Relevance and 
Rhetoric, “ IGI Global, pp. 54-74, 2018. 
[63] www.chamrosh.com/ 2018.09.20
[64] A.Griffin, M.B. Johnson, E. K. Fishman, K.M. Horton, P.T. Johnson, 
"The Power of Stories in Brands, Business, and Life," Journal of the
American College of Radiology, Vol.14, Iss.4, pp. 573-574, 2017. 
[65] B.C. Walsh, "The Power of Story: Bring Your Brand to Life," 
Nonprofit World, Vol.34, Iss. 4, pp. 18 19, 2016.
[66] J. Bessant and J. Tidd,  “Innovation and Entrepreneurship” John
Wiley & Sons. 2007
[67] D. Maxwell,  “Story Blocks: Reimagining narrative through the 
blockchain” Convergence: The International Journal of Research into
New Media Technologies Vol.23, Iss.1, 2017. 
[68] D. Maxwell, C. Speed and L. Pschetz “ Story Blocks: Reimagining
narrative through the blockchain,“  The International Journal of 
Research into New Media Technologies, Vol.23, Iss.1, pp. 79-97. 
2017. 
[69] A. Ha, “ Blockai Uses the Blockchain to Help Artists Protect Their
Intellectual Property,” 2016; . Retrieved from 
https://techcrunch.com/2016/03/14/blockai-launch/  2018.09.20 
[70] P. Brody and V. Pureswaran, “Device democracy: Saving the future 
of the Internet of things”  IBM, 2014. 
[71] G. Ishmaev, "Blockchain Technology as an Institution of Property", 
Metaphilosophy, Vol. 48, No.5, pp. 666-686, 2017.
[72] S. Roper and C. Fill, “Corporate Reputation, Brand and 
Communication,” Pearson, Harlow, 2012.
[73] S. Spear and S. Roper, “Using corporate stories to build the corporate
brand: an impression management perspective,“ Journal of Product & 
Brand Management Vol. 22, Iss.7,  pp. 491–501, 2013. 
[74] R.R. Gosline, J. Lee and G.Urban, “The power of consumer stories in
digital marketing,” MIT Sloan Management Review, Vol. 58, Iss.4, 
pp. 9-13, 2017. 
[75] https://thenextweb.com/artificial-intelligence/2018/05/23/ibm-
combines-ai-and-blockchain-to-turn-your-phone-into-a-counterfeit-
detector/ 2018.09.20 
[76] K.L. Keller, “Unlocking the Power of Integrated Marketing 
Communications: How Integrated Is Your IMC Program?,”  Journal 
of Advertising, Vol. 45, Iss.3, pp 286-301, 2016. 
[77] E. Joachimsthaler and M. Pfeiffer, “ Decoding Demand Opportunity, 
“ Business Strategy Review, Vol. 21, Iss.1, 2010. 
[78] E. Joachimsthaler, “ Hidden in Plain Sight: How to Find and Execute 
Your Company's Next Big Growth Strategy,” Harvard Business 
Review Press, 2017. 
[79] J. L. Nueno and J. A. Quelch, “ The Mass Marketing of Luxury”
Business Horizons, Business Horizons, Vol.41, Iss.6, pp. 61-68, 
1998. 
[80] J. L. Nueno, “ Teens Today, Young Adults in 2020 “ IESE Insight , 
First Quarter, Iss.8, pp. 50-58, 2011. 
[81] M. Serazio, “Selling (Digital) Millennials The Social Construction 
and Technological Bias of a Consumer Generation” Television & 
New Media, Vol. 6, Iss.7, pp. 599-615, 2013. 
[82] K. Moran, “Millennials as Digital Natives: Myths and Realities”
January 3, 2016 ; https://www.nngroup.com/articles/millennials-
digital-natives/ 2018.09.20 
[83] D. Zax “A Smart Carpet to Detect Intruders”
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/429130/a-smart-carpet-to-
detect-intruders/ 2018.09.20
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

