Exergame Design Guidelines for Enhancing Elderly’s Physical and Social Activities
Rainer Planinc, Isabella Nake and Martin Kampel
Computer Vision Lab
Vienna University of Technology
{rainer.planinc, martin.kampel}@tuwien.ac.at, isabella.nake@chello.at
Abstract—Games based on full-body interaction are able to
increase physical and social activity and thus have been evaluated
regarding their appropriateness for elderly. Results show that
exergames have a positive impact on elderly people, because they
help them to remain active and thereby they also contribute to
their overall well-being and increased mobility, but most of the
existing games on the market are not suitable for them. This
work presents design guidelines for the development of exergames
which are controlled by body movements and especially con-
siders the requirements of elderly players. Furthermore, these
theoretical guidelines are applied to the game FishCatcher, being
introduced in this work. Finally, challenges in applying theoretical
guidelines to practical games are discussed using the example of
FishCatcher.
Keywords—exergame; elderly; physical activities; social activi-
ties;
I.
INTRODUCTION
Exergames are computer and video games which are not
played sitting in front of the computer or any other monitor, but
require full-body movement of the player to control the game
[1]. Various input devices for exergames exist, for example
exercise bikes, foot operated pads and motion sensors [2]. Two
different types of motion input can be distinguished. The ﬁrst
uses a controller for tracking the movements of the player,
for example the Nintendo Wii Remote [3]. The player has to
move the controller or press buttons which are placed on the
controller, or even both at the same time. The second type
of motion input does not need any controller, but the games
are controlled directly by tracking body movements such as
hand gestures. Amongst others, Sony PlayStation II EyeToy
[4] and Microsoft Kinect [5] belong to this type of motion
sensors. Games using these motion sensors have the advantages
that players do not have to pay attention to any controller in
their hand, but are able to interact with the game directly, thus
resulting in a more simple interaction [6].
Exergames are not only used among children, teenagers
and young adults, but they can also be used by grownups and
elderly to increase physical activity and motivate elderly to
be more active (e.g., [7], [8]). Hence, in the ﬁeld of Ambient
Assisted Living (AAL), exergames offer beneﬁts for elderly
and enable them to stay physically ﬁt and thus increase the
mobility of elderly. In addition, exergames are also applied
to rehabilitation to raise the motivation, since exercises with
a high number of repetitions are demanded [7]. Furthermore,
elderly people lack in staying physically active [8]. Hence, it
is important to boost their physical activity in an entertaining
way. The development of systems to improve the quality
of life and the well-being of seniors to prevent them from
age-related diseases and injuries became more signiﬁcant [9].
Digital games which are not only designed for entertainment,
but for education, training, advertising, research or health as a
primary purpose, are called “serious games” [10].
Already during the 1980s, Weisman [11] investigated the
beneﬁts of using computer games for elderly people. Those
games are exercises to improve the eye - hand coordination
as well as memory trainings and they can enhance their self-
esteem. Weisman evaluates four computer games that are
suitable for elderly people, which means they do not depend
on quick hand-eye coordination or speed and have no small
moving objects. Since no appropriate commercial games were
available, adjustments for the needs of elderly are introduced.
Evaluation of the adoptions are performed with residents of a
nursing home. 80% of those who were invited were willing to
play and demonstrated that also elderly people can have fun
playing computer games. Weisman highlights the importance
of large symbols, clear auditory clues and the adaptability to
the users’ skills in computer games for elderly people.
After the Nintendo Wii has been introduced to the mar-
ket, research on the use and beneﬁts for elderly people is
conducted. Wollersheim et al. [1] tested the physical and
psychosocial effects of Nintendo Wii Sports games among
older women. The result of this study shows particularly the
social beneﬁts the game-play has on elderly women. They
are better connected among themselves, but also to their
grandchildren. Furthermore, the study of Clark and Kraemer
[12] is based on the Nintendo Wii, evaluating the change in the
risk of falling amongst elderly people playing the Nintendo Wii
bowling simulation. After two weeks of playing the bowling
game on a regular basis, a decreased fall risk of the patient
could be shown. Additionally, Harley et al. [13] organized a
Wii Bowling League between residents of different sheltered
houses to investigate the impact of Nintendo Wii playing on
physical and social activities of elderly people. Therefore,
regular playing sessions in small groups of residents of close
sheltered houses were arranged together with two public
events. The study followed the participants over the ﬁrst year.
At the beginning of the study the players encountered problems
with pressing the right button in the proper moment. All of
them were focused on the game and while one was using the
Wii Remote, the others were watching and giving advices. One
year later, this complete concentration on the game was gone.
Spending time together was more important than the actual
game. The players were talking about everyday problems,
eating and drinking besides playing the bowling game. The
study shows that the Nintendo Wii promotes physical and
social activity. But not only the Nintendo Wii is used for
investigating the inﬂuence of video games on elderly. Beside
one Nintendo Wii game, Shubert [14] tested two other video
games for their appropriateness as physical activity for elderly
people: Dancetown Fitness System and Sony Playstation II
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

EyeToy. The results show that those two games are more suited
for elderly people since they are easy to use and consider the
seniors’ requirements. The Nintendo Wii games are typically
set up by activity directors, not by the patients themselves.
Furthermore, they require too fast movements or contain fast
moving objects and the feedback is too negative.
Studies have shown that elderly people enjoy the Nintendo
Wii bowling game [13], [15]. However, attention should be
paid to their sparse experience with computers. Because of
the uncertainty about the handling of new technologies, seniors
take up a critical stance towards them and are afraid of making
a mistake [15]. In the study of Weisman [11], 20% of the
elderly who were invited to play computer games refused to do
so because they were afraid of exposing their deﬁcits, another
10% needed encouragement. Furthermore, the participants of
the Nintendo Wii bowling events of Neufeldt [15] thought
they broke the game, when they pressed a wrong button and
an unexpected menu was opened. Beside the Nintendo Wii
bowling game, other games (e.g., Dancetown Fitness System
[14], SilverBalance [16]) exist which are accessible for the
elderly people, but several studies have shown that most
of those computer games which are already commercially
available on the market are not suited for elderly people [14],
[17]. Thus, games which are attractive to a senior audience
should be developed. Game developers have to be careful not
to think about their interests when creating the game, but the
needs and requirements of the target group of these games
[18].
Another controller for Nintendo Wii games, besides the
Wii Remote, which also initiated a lot of new studies related
to the use of video games for elderly people, is the Nintendo
Wii BalanceBoard. Gerling et al. [19] conducted a study
making use of both, the Nintendo Wii Balance Board and
the Wii Remote for game control. It is evaluated how age-
related changes, especially cognitive and physical limitations,
inﬂuence game design for elderly people. The result shows
that also elderly enjoy Wii games as leisure activity. Gerling
et al. [17] investigated the usability and accessibility of two
video games which are controlled with a Nintendo Wii Balance
Board for elderly players. The game with a reduced graphical
style and the possibility of sitting down during gaming is
more appealing for elderly people than the other one. Players
perceive better game control and are less afraid while using the
board since the simpler user interface increases the focus on
body movements and the perceived safety in bodily exertion
on the balance board. Based on a case study which uses the
Nintendo Wii Balance Board to encourage elderly players to
the use of video games, Gerling et al. [16] discusses game
design guidelines for developing safe and usable games for
elderly people. The major guidelines, which are mentioned in
this paper, are: elderly people should be able to play sitting
and standing, no extensive or sudden movements should be
required, players should be able to adjust the level of difﬁculty
individually and the game should give constructive feedback to
avoid frustration. The Nintendo Wii BalenceBoard is also used
by Navarro [9], who conducted a study concerning the usage
of interactive games to improve the physical and mental well-
being of elderly. Therefore, four Nintendo Wii balance games
are analyzed. As a result, a design framework is proposed,
which contains the following feedback loop: (1) monitoring
the current status of the patient, (2) interpretation of this
data, (3) adjustments of the trainings plan (if needed), (4)
communication back to the patient and (5) repetition of this
cycle.
With the launch of Microsoft Kinect, a new technology is
investigated regarding its use for elderly people and a new
type of gaming concept was introduced. Gerling et al. [6]
created guidelines for full-body interaction in games for elderly
people. Therefore, they conducted two studies; the ﬁrst one
investigates the performance of a given set of gestures. The
results show that traditional gesture movements should be
limited for elderly people. Based on those ﬁndings, a game was
implemented using a Microsoft Kinect for gesture recognition
and is evaluated during the second study. It is shown that this
game, which uses gestures that are suited for elderly people,
has a positive effect on the participants’ mood. Borghese et al.
[20] developed a low-cost system which can be used for at-
home rehabilitation. The goal is to use technologies such as a
Microsoft Kinect and a game engine, which contains two mini
games, adapts the game level automatically to the patient’s
status and gives audio-visual feedback, to motivate the patients
to exercise. The whole rehabilitation process can be monitored
by the hospital. The aim is to build a game which is enjoyable
and at the same time useful for therapeutic purposes.
The aim of this paper is to summarize and evaluate design
guidelines based on previous studies to be considered in
order to develop a multi-player exergame for elderly people,
enhancing their physical and social activities. Furthermore, a
prototype of the game FishCatcher is implemented according
to these guidelines and results are discussed. The rest of this
work is structured as follows: design guidelines for exergames
are summarized in Section 2, their implementation on an
elderly friendly game is shown in Section 3. A discussion
of the application of these guidelines and a conclusion is
presented in Section 4.
II.
DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR EXERGAMES
As previous studies have shown (e.g., [14], [17]), already
commercially available games on the market are not suitable
for elderly people. Evaluation of digital games led to guide-
lines helping to create an appropriate game for the senior
audience. These guidelines evolved from testing and analyzing
commercially available games, research studies as well as
discussions with elderly people [18]. This section summarizes
those guidelines and provides the basis for the implementation
of FishCatcher.
1) Mind the physical condition: An important factor to be
considered when designing a video game for elderly players
based on body movement are the age-related processes, having
an impact on the ability to move [6]. Common age-related
changes are decrements in posture, balance, gait and ﬁne
motor skills, affects on visual and hearing senses as well
as impairment of short-term memory, attention and vigilance
[19]. Additional aspects to be addressed are longer reaction
and overall movement times and the increased risk of fall.
Especially the latter has to be respected to avoid unsuitable
movements which cause injuries [6].
Due to diseases or injuries of the elderly players, limited
use of the extremities and the presence of wheelchairs have
to be accounted for. This can be realized by offering gestures
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

where the user can either use one arm or both and can be
carried out standing or sitting. The range of motion should be
evaluated according to the abilities of each individual player.
Instead of a high precision of gesture recognition, a bigger
tolerance should be claimed. To avoid overexertion and injury,
the player should have enough time to relax and recover
between physically intense periods [6].
2) Use appropriate gestures: Players should have the pos-
sibility to learn the gestures before the actual start of the
game in a tutorial [6]. They should become familiar with the
technology during training phases. As soon as those trainings
are not required anymore, players should be able to skip them
[9]. It should not be assumed that players remember different
gestures over the whole game period, especially that they can
recall the gestures in the moment they are required. This means
it should not be necessary that the player performs a gesture
to trigger another action, but there should be an in-game event
which reminds the player to perform the gesture [6].
3) Avoid small objects: Most existing games, which are
currently available on the market, are not suitable for elderly
people because they consist of small, fast moving characters
and targets which can produce strain and anxiety [11], [20].
It is easier for the elderly to have just one task at the time to
deal with and also to play with bigger characters.
4) Give visual and auditive feedback: Unlike young people
(so called ”digital natives”), elderly people did not grow up
surrounded by computers and video games. Thus, elderly
people are not as conﬁdent in their ability to use this tech-
nologies as the young [21], which causes computer anxiety.
To avoid the anxiety, the players should be encouraged by
positive feedback and successful experiences. Therefore, it
is recommended to give positive feedback on learning goals
rather than performance goals.
Players should be able to understand the relation between
their movements and the display and the game has to respond
according to their movements [9]. They should get feedback
so they can learn how to interact with the game. In the case of
failure, they blame themselves and not the game, which can
lead to a low self-esteem and frustration [17]. As soon as the
players ﬁnish their tasks or achieve a goal, they should get
a positive feedback immediately. They should never get any
negative feedback, neither for not achieving a goal nor for not
performing an activity [8]. For example, in the project UbiFit
Garden [22] the more the player exercises the more beautiful
the garden becomes; ﬂowers grow and butterﬂies appear. If the
player does not exercise, nothing happens. There are no ﬂowers
growing, but the player does not get any negative feedback.
5) Adjust the difﬁculty: The goal of the game has to be
reachable for the players, so that they keep their motivation
and continue playing [9]. Unnecessary cognitive complexity
and complex movements should be avoided. Since there is a
large range in ability between elderly people, the game should
offer the possibility to adjust the difﬁculty [6]. It is important
that more active players are challenged, so that they do not lose
their interest in the game and others are not overstrained. The
game should not be frustrating, but entertaining [9]. The best
way to realize this is to adapt the challenges dynamically. The
players should reach a “ﬂow state”, in which a good balance
between challenge and the players’ skill level exist [20]. In this
state, they are completely focused on the game which might
reduce physical pain or hide possible impairments.
For additional motivation it might be helpful to display the
users’ previous scores. To become better and beat themselves
is an extra personal goal for the players [8].
To keep the game interesting and avoid habituation, espe-
cially when playing it regularly, it should contain randomized
elements, so that the player has to react slightly different each
time [20].
6) Use a clear user interface: Elderly people have no
experiences with computer games [6]. To avoid people needing
assistance during the game, all instructions should be clear
and use common language. Furthermore, no information that
is not needed should be included, e.g., additional Graphical
User Interface (GUI) elements. All actions should be explained
using diagrams or simple on-screen demonstrations. Also, the
start-up and shutdown have to be easy, so that neither the older
adults nor the nursing stuff need to have speciﬁc technical
knowledge. The user interface should be easy to use, so that
players can focus on the actual exercise [8].
Rules and instructions should also be available as audio
[9]. For non-speech audio signals, lower frequencies should be
used, since aging might reduce the sensitivity for pure tones
and high frequencies [21]. It should be noted that massive in-
game sound, in combination with hints and explanations from
the assistance or other players, can create stress for the players
and result in less fun playing the game [15].
7) Use a suitable topic: The topic of the video game
should be adjusted to the interests of elderly people [9]. The
participants of the study of [17] made positive comments about
the theme of the game, which was related to garden and
animals. The entry into the video game world is easier, when
the required gestures are related to real-world actions. Seniors
prefer games which give them an educational or cultural beneﬁt
[18], but they refuse violence in computer games [23].
8) Encourage social interaction: Due to physical disabil-
ity or other age-related problems, elderly experience social
isolation [24]. Video games are one possibility to maintain
the relationships with families or friends. Social interaction
is an important factor regarding the motivation of elderly
people for playing video games [21]. Playing with others
who are encouraging and cheering increases the fun [11].
If elderly people start regularly common playing sessions,
their social interaction grows. While at the ﬁrst sessions the
main focus is on the game, soon the concentration is shifted
to conversations about the game and also about everyday
problems. The communication is not only part of the game
events, but may also spread into their daily life, for example
the playing sessions become a topic of conversation at lunch
[15], [13]. Thus, they become closer and get to know each
other better [1]. Playing video games does not only encourage
the social interaction among elderly people, but also improves
the relationship to their grandchildren due to the shared interest
and new topic of conversation. Elderly people are pleased to
have the feeling to be up to date with their grandchildren and
be able to play with them at a later date [13]. The design
of a game and its interface which addresses both the older
generation and their grandchildren at the same time is an
interesting challenge [21]. In the study of [18] elderly people
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

were involved in the design process of computer games. Six out
of ten participants designed a multi-player game. Therefore, it
is reasonable to design a game that can be played together
with others.
III.
IMPLEMENTATION OF GUIDELINES: FISHCATCHER
FishCatcher is an exergame which is implemented ac-
cording to design guidelines for video games for elderly. In
contrast to commercially available games, this game considers
the requirements of elderly. Elderly people can beneﬁt from
exergames in different ways. First, digital games are a leisure
activity. They can be used for relaxation and entertainment. If
the game has an accessible design and thoughtfully integrated
feedback, it can increase the self-efﬁcacy. Secondly, elderly
people can enjoy playing digital games together with others
which increases social inclusion and reduces isolation. Not
only multi-player games, but also games, which can be played
alone, are used as social activity with friends or family.
Third, since exergames demand body movements to control
them, they help to be physically active [21]. FishCatcher is
controlled by arm movements, which are tracked by a 3D
sensor (e.g., Microsoft Kinect) and uses the OpenNI library.
Arms are tracked using the OpenNI library NITE and tracking
is initialized by performing a wave gesture. Visualization of
the ﬁsh and the surroundings is implemented using OpenGL
and blender models.
In this game, yellow and red ﬁsh are swimming from left to
right and vice versa (see Figure 1). Elderly have to wave with
their hands in order for the sensor to recognize them. When
this happens, a worm is displayed in front of the hand, in order
to directly give feedback about the player’s hand position.
To catch the ﬁsh, the players have to touch them with their
hands. If a ﬁsh is touched, it disappears and a sound is played,
depending on whether a yellow or red ﬁsh was touched. Hitting
red ﬁsh results in a deduction of two points, whereas each
yellow ﬁsh that was caught yields one point. At no time the
score can become negative, in order to avoid negative feedback.
The score is represented by stars, where one star corresponds
to one point. When a player has collected ten points, a big star
is displayed instead of ten smaller ones. The game stores the
best ﬁve scores and displays them on the menu, so that the
players can see their improvement.
One game lasts 30 seconds, and, during this time, the
players try to catch as many yellow ﬁsh as possible, while
avoiding touching the red ﬁsh. The remaining time is shown
by a small yellow ﬁsh at the bottom of the window. When the
game starts the ﬁsh is located leftmost at the bottom. During
the 30 seconds, this ﬁsh moves to the right side. After that
time, the ﬁsh is located rightmost, which signiﬁes that the
game is over. After one game is over the users can take a
break and decide whether they want to continue playing or
not. Furthermore, the player can choose between three different
levels of difﬁculty. The easiest one contains the fewest amount
of yellow ﬁsh and also of red ones, while the most difﬁcult
level consists of the biggest number of yellow and red ﬁsh,
respectively. Another difference between those three levels is
the velocity and the size of the ﬁsh. The ﬁsh in the simplest
level are swimming slower and are bigger than the ﬁsh of the
most complex level. In the medium level, the numbers of ﬁsh,
the velocity as well as their size are in between the two others.
Fig. 1.
Yellow and red ﬁsh are swimming, the stars specify the current score
and the little ﬁsh at the bottom shows the remaining time
A. Game Modes
The game offers different variants of playing. In addition
to the previously described way, the single-player mode, two
possibilities of multi-player modes exist, which are described
in the following section.
•
Single-Player: This way of playing is already de-
scribed in the previous part. One player tries to catch
as many yellow ﬁsh as possible while avoiding to
touch the red ones. The goal is to receive as many
points as possible.
•
Multi-Player 1: This variant is similar to the previous
one. In contrast to the previous version, in this mode
two or more players are catching together the yellow
ﬁsh. The number of caught yellow ﬁsh of both players
is added together.
•
Multi-Player 2: Also for this mode at least two players
are required. One or more players catch all the yellow
ﬁsh, while the other one(s) catch the red ones. If the
score is zero at the end of the game, the players who
caught the red ﬁsh won; if it is greater than zero, the
other players won.
The game FishCatcher, as well as games which were intro-
duced in previous studies, is controlled by hand movements.
One reason for using only hand gestures is the high number
of elderly people who are unsteady on their feet or sitting in
a wheelchair. Since games which are really controlled by full-
body movements might increase the risk of falling of those
people, it is reasonable when the game can be controlled by
hand gestures only and thus be played also sitting. Further-
more, to train arms and hands is also important for daily
activities, such as grasping objects or brushing teeth. With
exergames, elderly people are not only encouraged to move
their arms, but also their coordination capabilities (especially
hand - eye coordination) are improved.
B. Exergames Design Guidelines Applied On FishCatcher
Before the start of the development of FishCatcher, studies
regarding guidelines, especially in the context of games for
elderly and exergames, were analyzed. This section illustrates
the integration of those guidelines in the game FishCatcher.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

1) Mind the physical condition: An important issue is to
consider the physical condition of elderly, since age-related
processes may have an impact on the ability to move. Fish-
Catcher is developed to address as many elderly as possible.
Therefore, it is created in such a way, that the players can stand
on their feet as well as sit on a chair or in a wheel chair while
playing the game. In addition, it can be played using both arms
as well as just one of them. Since the ﬁsh are swimming from
left to right and vice versa, different positions to catch a ﬁsh
exist. This means that no unsuitable movements are required
because each player can decide individually which position is
the most pleasant one to touch the ﬁsh.
2) Use appropriate gestures: It should not be required that
the players have to perform a gesture to trigger another action.
In FishCatcher this is avoided, since the ﬁsh only have to be
touched and no gestures are required.
3) Avoid small objects: Although the size and the velocity
of the ﬁsh are depending on the chosen level, even for the most
difﬁcult level the objects were designed to fulﬁll the criterion
of not being too small or moving too fast.
4) Give visual and auditive feedback: Since it is recom-
mended to provide not only visual but also auditive feedback,
a sound is played after a ﬁsh was caught and disappeared. The
sound is different for red and yellow ﬁsh, so that it is possible
to use audio in order to be able to differentiate between yellow
and red ﬁsh. To give positive feedback when users manage to
catch a yellow ﬁsh, they get a star, which symbolizes one point.
Although the players lose points when they touch red ﬁsh,
they do not get a real penalty since the points never become
negative. The worm which is displayed on the hand gives the
user the feedback that the hand was recognized by the sensor.
If no worm is visible, the hand was not recognized and the user
can not catch the ﬁsh until the waving gesture is performed so
that the sensor recognizes the hand again. Hence, the users are
able to understand the relation between their hand movements
and the display better.
5) Adjust the difﬁculty: To be adaptable for different play-
ers, no matter if they are active or frail, they can choose one of
three levels each time a new game is started. The more active
players should be challenged with the difﬁcult level, and the
frail ones should not be overstrained with the easy one. To give
additional motivation, the best ﬁve scores of previous games
are displayed. This shows the users if they are getting better
after repeating the game several times. To avoid exactly the
same movements for each repetition of the game, the size and
the velocity of the ﬁsh contain random values. Thus, players
have to react slightly different each time.
6) Use a clear user interface: The user interface of the
game is quite simple so that it is not overloaded with un-
necessary elements and the user is able to concentrate on the
game. While the game is loaded, an instruction for the game
is displayed. On the menu screen, a short description and a
simple animation show the players how to move their arms
in way that the sensor can recognize them. The current score
of the game is not shown as a number, but as stars. To avoid
having too many stars displayed at the same time, always ten
stars are collected as one big star.
7) Use a suitable topic: To adjust the topic to the interests
of elderly people, who prefer games regarding garden and
animals, ﬁsh were chosen as the theme of the game.
8) Encourage social interaction: FishCatcher encourages
social interaction, since it is also suitable for several people
playing at the same time. One possibility is the ﬁrst multi-
player mode where two people try together to catch as many
yellow ﬁsh as possible. Each of the persons can play with
either one or two hands. They can play both standing, both
sitting or even one standing and one sitting. The alternative
is to play the second multi-player mode, where one player
tries to catch as many yellow ﬁsh as possible, while the other
player catches the red ones. Also for this mode the players
can choose to use one or two hands and to sit down or stand
up individually. It is even possible to have three or four users
playing at the same time if each of them uses just one hand,
but thereby may arise the difﬁculty to place all the people in
front of the sensor.
IV.
DISCUSSION
This section discusses the implementation and application
of the guidelines on the game FishCatcher as well as provides
feedback and experiences gathered playing the game. At the
beginning, it should be mentioned that by simply consider-
ing eight guidelines, the developed game is not necessarily
accepted by the end-user automatically since all guidelines
offer freedom of interpretation. Furthermore, these guidelines
summarize general requirements when developing games for
elderly, but do not take personal requirements and constraints
into consideration. Hence, it is necessary to consider these
additional constraints when developing games. However, the
guidelines presented in this paper are the most important
guidelines to be considered in any case to address basic
requirements. Figure 2 shows an elderly playing the game
and providing feedback. In order to use a suitable topic for
Fig. 2.
One person is playing the game during preliminary testing of
FishCatcher
the developed game, ﬁsh were chosen as topic since they are
well known. To avoid difﬁcult and complex gestures, ﬁsh are
caught by touching them. However, this does not reﬂect the
usual way of catching ﬁsh (i.e., by ﬁshing) and thus might be
confusing for the elderly. A preliminary test has shown, that
only touching the ﬁsh to catch them might be even too simple
since one elderly tried to wipe over the ﬁsh in order to catch it.
Hence, simplicity is important but a trade-off for the mapping
to real-life applications needs to be found.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Negative feedback is avoided by the fact that the total
score can not be negative. However, touching red ﬁsh does
result in the loss of points in order to increase the level of
difﬁculty. Since this is needed in order to ensure a minimum
level of difﬁculty and avoid elderly getting bored, this might
also have an negative consequence since it can be seen as form
of penalty, which should be avoided.
Preliminary test results also indicated that the waving
gesture at the beginning to initialize the hand tracker is too
complex and might overstrain elderly. This is especially the
case if the tracker looses the track of the hand and re-
initialization is needed during the game. To re-initialize the
hand-tracking the waving gesture needs to be perforemed. If
this initialization is needed during the game, no information on
how to initalize the game is displayed. This will be improved
in the next version of FishCatcher. Moreover, the possibility of
using either one or both hands changes the level of difﬁculty,
since it is more challenging not only to catch the yellow
ﬁsh but also to avoid touching the red ﬁsh when playing
with two hands simultaneously. Playing the game with two
hands enhances the hand-eye coordination, since not only one
hand but two hands need to be coordinated at the same time.
However, depending on the personal constraints when playing
the game, this can either act in a motivating or overstraining
manner.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Playing exergames allows elderly to remain active and so-
cially integrated. This paper presented important guidelines to
be considered when developing exergames ﬁtting the speciﬁc
requirements of elderly people and thus enable them to stay
physically and socially active. Following these guidelines does
not necessarily ensure that elderly are accepting the game, but
ensures to satisfy their basic needs. The game FishCatcher
following these guidelines was developed and the application
of the guidelines to this game was discussed. Future work deals
with an evaluation of FishCatcher and gathers feedback from
the end-users in order to verify the feasability of the proposed
guidelines.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Wollersheim, M. Merkes, N. Shields, P. Liamputtong, L. Wallis,
F. Reynolds, and L. Koh, “Physical and psychosocial effects of wii
video game use among older women,” Internatinal Journal of Emerging
Technologies and Society, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 85–98, 2010.
[2]
J. Sinclair, P. Hingston, and M. Masek, “Considerations for the design
of exergames,” in Proceedings of the 5th international conference
on Computer graphics and interactive techniques in Australia and
Southeast Asia, ser. GRAPHITE ’07.
New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2007, pp. 289–295.
[3]
N. Wii. http://www.nintendo.com/wii. (last access on 2013.03.09).
[4]
S.
P.
EyeToy.
http://us.playstation.com/ps2/accessories/eyetoy-usb-
camera-ps2.html. (last access on 2013.03.09).
[5]
M. Kinect. http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/kinectforwindows/. (last ac-
cess on 2013.03.09).
[6]
K. Gerling, I. Livingston, L. Nacke, and R. Mandryk, “Full-body
motion-based game interaction for older adults,” in CHI ’12: Pro-
ceedings of the 30th international conference on Human factors in
computing systems, Austin, Texas, USA, 2012, pp. 1873–1882.
[7]
J. Garcia Marin, K. Felix Navarro, and E. Lawrence, “Serious games to
improve the physical health of the elderly: A categorization scheme,”
in CENTRIC 2011, The Fourth International Conference on Advances
in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and
Services, 2011, pp. 64–71.
[8]
E. Brox, L. F. Luque, G. J. Evertsen, and J. E. G. Hernandez, “Ex-
ergames for elderly: Social exergames to persuade seniors to increase
physical activity,” in Proc. 5th Int Pervasive Computing Technologies
for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth) Conf, 2011, pp. 546–549.
[9]
K. Felix Navarro, “A dynamic and customisable layered serious game
design framework for improving the physical and mental health of the
aged and the inﬁrm,” in eTELEMED 2011, The Third International
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2011, pp.
140–145.
[10]
J. Wiemeyer and A. Kliem, “Serious games in prevention and rehabili-
tation - a new panacea for elderly people?” European Review of Aging
and Physical Activity, vol. 9, pp. 41–50, 2012.
[11]
S. Weisman, “Computer games for the frail elderly,” The Gerontologist,
vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 361–363, 1983.
[12]
R. Clark and T. Kraemer, “Clinical use of nintendo wii(tm) bowling
simulation to decrease fall risk in an elderly resident of a nursing home:
A case report,” Journal of Geriatric Physical Therapy, vol. 32, no. 4,
pp. 174–180, 2009.
[13]
D. Harley, G. Fitzpatrick, L. Axelrod, G. White, and G. McAllister,
“Making the wii at home: game play by older people in sheltered hous-
ing,” in Proceedings of the 6th international conference on HCI in work
and learning, life and leisure: workgroup human-computer interaction
and usability engineering, ser. USAB’10. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag, 2010, pp. 156–176.
[14]
T. E. Shubert, “The use of commercial health video games to promote
physical activity in older adults,” Annals of Long-Term Care, vol. 18,
no. 5, pp. 27–32, 2010.
[15]
C. Neufeldt, “Wii play with elderly people,” in International Reports
on Socio-informatics. Enhancing Interaction Spaces by Social Media
for the Elderly: A Workshop Report, ser. 3, vol. 6, 2009, pp. 50–59.
[16]
K. Gerling, J. Schild, and M. Masuch, “Exergame design for elderly
users: The case study of silverbalance,” in International Conference on
Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology (ACE 2010), Taipei,
Taiwan, 2010, pp. 66–69.
[17]
——, “Exergaming for elderly persons: Analyzing player experience
and performance,” in Mensch & Computer 2011, Chemnitz, Germany,
2011, pp. 401–411.
[18]
B. De Schutter and V. Vanden Abeele, “Meaningful play in elderly life,”
in Proceedings of ICA, 2008.
[19]
K. Gerling, F. Schulte, and M. Masuch, “Designing and evaluating
digital games for frail elderly persons,” in International Conference on
Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology (ACE 2011), Lisbon,
Portugal, 2011, pp. 62:1–62:8.
[20]
N. A. Borghese, M. Pirovano, R. Mainetti, and P. L. Lanzi, “An
integrated low-cost system for at-home rehabilitation,” in Proc. 18th
Int Virtual Systems and Multimedia (VSMM) Conf, 2012, pp. 553–556.
[21]
W. Ijsselsteijn, H. H. Nap, Y. de Kort, and K. Poels, “Digital game
design for elderly users,” in Proceedings of the 2007 conference on
Future Play, ser. Future Play ’07.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007,
pp. 17–22.
[22]
S. Consolvo, D. W. McDonald, T. Toscos, M. Y. Chen, J. Froehlich,
B. Harrison, P. Klasnja, A. LaMarca, L. LeGrand, R. Libby, I. Smith,
and J. A. Landay, “Activity sensing in the wild: a ﬁeld trial of ubiﬁt
garden,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’08.
New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2008, pp. 1797–1806.
[23]
H. Nap, Y. d. Kort, and W. IJsselsteijn, “Senior gamers: Preferences,
motivations and needs,” Gerontechnology, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 247–262,
2009.
[24]
L. Gamberini, M. Fabregat, A. Spagnolli, L. Prontu, B. Seraglia,
M. Alcaniz, A. Zimmerman, T. Rontti, J. Grant, R. Jensen et al.,
“Eldergames: videogames for empowering, training and monitoring
elderly cognitive capabilities,” Gerontechnology, vol. 7, no. 2, p. 111,
2008.
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

