 
Enhancing Collaborative Learning and Management Tasks through Pervasive 
Computing Technologies 
 
Christophoros Karachristos  
Educational Content Methodology 
and Technology Laboratory, 
Hellenic Open University, 
Patras, Greece 
karachrist@eap.gr 
 
 
Christos Goumopoulos 
Educational Content Methodology 
and Technology Laboratory, 
Hellenic Open University & 
Information and Communication 
Systems Engineering Department, 
Aegean University, Hellas 
goumop@{tutors.eap.gr; aegean.gr} 
Achilles Kameas 
Educational Content Methodology 
and Technology Laboratory, 
Hellenic Open University, 
Patras, Greece 
kameas@eap.gr
Abstract— We are examining in this paper how ubiquitous 
technology enhanced classrooms can foster opportunities for 
enhancing teaching and learning. Our concept of Smart 
Classroom 
is 
shaped 
upon 
an 
ambient 
intelligent 
environment which supports three major objectives of the 
educational 
process: 
assisting 
course 
creation 
and 
presentation, classroom management and student assessment 
and collaboration. Distance learning poses additional 
requirements on smart classrooms since both local and 
remote 
students 
should 
have 
an 
equal 
educational 
experience. This paper describes a Smart Classroom 
prototype, which combines a number of pervasive computing 
technologies such as RFId, Microsoft Kinect, magnetic cards 
and Android applications. The main contribution of our 
work is combining such different technologies to support 
classroom attendance management, lecture presentation 
handling 
through 
physical 
interaction 
and 
student 
collaboration through android applications. Finally, this 
work includes a survey on related systems and their 
contribution on strengthening the educational procedure. 
 
Keywords- Smart Classroom; collaborative learning; 
pervasive computing; physical interaction. 
I.INTRODUCTION 
Traditional classrooms have a simple structure as the 
instructor is the only responsible person for planning, 
management and guidance of all activities in the classroom 
as well as for the presentation of the educational content. 
On the other hand, smart classrooms (SC) provide a 
complex structure that allows innovative ways of learning. 
A SC is a physical classroom in which information and 
communications technologies have been integrated. The 
technological infrastructure of a typical SC includes 
equipment for multimedia content rendering, projectors, 
large screens for video projection, computers, smart boards 
and desks, data centers, etc. This infrastructure facilitates 
students to watch a lecture without concerning on keeping 
detailed notes, since after the lecture they can have access 
to the teaching material including notes and annotations. In 
such an environment students can interact with the 
material, the instructor and the other students in new ways. 
The deployment of a SC has many advantages such as 
enabling active learning (students become active inventors 
of knowledge rather than passive recipients), enhancing 
content and presentation, harnessing the wealth of the 
Internet, bringing in experts with videoconferencing, 
allowing lecture and notes capturing and enhancing 
distance learning (instructing remote and local students). 
As an example, students can use SC resources (e.g., 
interactive desks that are connected to the smart board) and 
under the supervision of their instructor can work 
educational activities in teams as part of a course. 
Afterwards, each team can present their solutions, compare 
them, discuss under the guidance of the instructor, and as a 
consequence create joint knowledge (complementing one 
another). 
Hellenic Open University (HOU) has a mission to offer 
university level education using distance learning 
methodology and to develop the appropriate material and 
teaching 
methods. 
Currently, 
HOU 
offers 
31 
undergraduate and postgraduate Study Programmes with a 
total of approximately 30,000 students, coached by 1,700 
tutors in 1,550 groups (20 students per group on average). 
Students of the HOU usually live in disparate locations all 
over the country. Besides being students they usually have 
families and working obligations so they have pressing 
time constraints for studying. Once per month students of a 
particular group meet face-to-face with their tutor. 
In this paper, we describe a SC prototype developed in 
the HOU. The prototype enhances a typical SC with 
pervasive computing technology components in order to 
accelerate management services and to support an 
enhanced learning experience by providing services that 
enhance student-tutor interaction. A critical objective of 
the HOUs SC is to decrease the gap between a traditional 
classroom and a virtual classroom regarding the 
educational experience acquired by students. A basic 
approach to achieve this is to move the user interface from 
the static computer environment of a typical virtual class 
software system to the 3D space of the SC so that the 
instructor can interact with the remote students with 
multiple natural ways, in equal terms as with the local 
students. 
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II gives an overview of the SC prototype and the 
enabling platforms used for developing a number of 
services. Section III describes how user authentication and 
status update is performed in the context of the SC using a 
combination of pervasive computing components. The 
management of the educational content presentation 
through gesturing movements using the Kinect technology 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
is presented in Section IV. The importance of enhancing 
collaborative learning through suitable collaboration tools 
is discussed in Section V. The results of a preliminary 
evaluation of the SC prototype are discussed in Section VI. 
Related work is presented in Section VII followed by our 
conclusions in the final section. 
II. SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
The SC model that was developed incorporates 
computational intelligence in such a way to be invisible to 
the audience and its final goal is the improvement of 
learning experience both for the local students and the 
remote students. It constitutes a mixture of a classroom 
with traditional characteristics but as well as a web-based 
learning system which provides both synchronous and 
asynchronous communications services. The classroom 
that is used has a total coverage of 66 m2. It includes 
bearings for the students, a Student Board and a Course 
Board connected with a projector. The SC incorporates 
audiovisual content recording and processing system 
(server, sound processing and video processing software), 
digital content distribution / streaming, a sensor package to 
measure environmental parameters (sound, temperature, 
light, etc.), a location tracking system based on the 
commercial 
Ubisense 
system, 
Radio 
Frequency 
Identification-based 
(RFId) 
applications, 
biometric 
devices, a voice recognition and text rendering system and 
an eyetracking system for building affect sensitive 
intelligent  tutoring  systems. A basic setup of the SC is 
shown in Fig. 1. 
When possible, open source technologies are used for 
the enhancement of the learning process considering that 
the system must be inexpensive so that it can be easily 
adopted by the educational institutions. On the other hand, 
commercially available software is necessary to cover the 
needs that the open source software cannot. A 
characteristic example is the Saba Centra Teleconference 
software, which the HOU employs for synchronous 
communication in the context of virtual classrooms. 
The features of the SC that were developed apply to 
different stages of a lecture. The first stage refers to the 
authentication of the user either the local one or the remote 
one. For the authentication task there are various available 
technologies that can be used such as the RFId technology 
in combination with single board computers and magnetic 
cards technology which are used by students attending a 
face-to-face meeting with the instructor in the SC. Remote 
students authentication is accomplished through JSP pages. 
Regarding the educational process stage, the aim is to be 
enhanced with various technological means. Thus, the 
students will have in their disposal tablets with android 
operating as an enabling platform. Alternatively, students 
can bring their personal laptops. There are a lot of reasons 
why tablets are used in the educational process. Some of 
them are concerning their low cost, their storage capacity 
and their ease of use. Finally, a primary factor is that these 
devices have peer-to-peer connection capabilities but also 
broad network capabilities through various communication 
protocols such as Wi-Fi, Bluetooth or NFC. Thereby, in 
the context of the SC the learners are given the chance to 
have access to the educational content as well as to operate 
cooperatively in groups.  In the educational process stage, 
another parameter that is taken into account is the 
enhancement of the students’ participation in the process. 
Students are no longer passive viewers but they are able to 
be active, to ask questions and to handle the educational 
content. Via the Android applications they can intervene to 
the discussion and handle the content, which is projected to 
the Course Board remotely. Hence, the student from her 
place can be connected to a central computer and can use 
the input/output capabilities of her tablet to interact with 
material of an educational task collaboratively with other 
students. Finally, in this prototype the instructor can move 
around in the SC and interact with educational material in a 
natural manner without being static in front of a computer. 
For example, she is able to manage her lecture and 
navigate the presentation slides projected on the board via 
gesturing movements. This can be accomplished by using 
Microsoft Kinect technology which can recognize the 
tutors’ movements through infrared rays. 
 
 
Fig. 1.  Smart Classroom setup. 
In this prototype, we aim to use devices and objects 
which have embedded computational capabilities that can 
be accessible by the student in a non-intrusive manner. 
This prototype continues to develop with new applications 
and services which enhance even more the concept of 
ubiquitous computing and improve the educational process 
both for the local and remote students. Each one service 
that was developed is analyzed below. 
III. UBIQUITOUS USER AUTHENTICATION AND STATUS 
UPDATE 
One of the offered services in the SC prototype is the 
user authentication module serving both the local and 
remote students and the recording of their status (e.g., 
present, absent) for every lecture/meeting taking place. In 
this 
particular 
implementation 
a 
combination 
of 
technologies are used, such as microcontrollers (RFId), 
Web development and magnetic cards. This combination 
came out through the analysis of the users’ requirements as 
different needs have emerged by the different user 
categories of the system. Thus, the developed service 
constitutes a combination of three modules. Two modules 
are responsible for the physical authentication of the user 
and the recording of her status. In this case, both RFId 
sensors and magnetic card technology are used (Fig. 2, 3).  
The RFId represents a major change in how 
applications handle object identification and tracking. RFId 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
uses radio waves and allows the automatic identification of 
the data which are transferred into smart RFId “tags”. The 
RFId tags can be automatically monitored by stationary or 
mobile devices without the need of being serially scanned. 
 
 
Fig. 2.  Phidget SBC – RFId Technology. 
 
Fig. 3. Magnetic Card Technology. 
Using this way of gathering information the university 
can dramatically reduce the time and the cost of 
management tasks such as the management of the status of 
its human resources. For instance, the instructor is not 
anymore required to inform the status of the students who 
attended a face-to-face meeting (this is a mandatory task 
according to HOUs management procedures) as this is 
achieved in an automatic manner. 
The user needs to pass the RFId tag through the RFId 
reader which is placed in the classroom’s entrance. 
Alternatively, the user can carry a magnetic card. A 
magnetic card is provided to every student of the HOU 
integrating in its magnetic tracks information that uniquely 
identifies each one of them. This card is also used in a 
number of other activities such as using library services or 
joining university’s social network. If the user is a member 
of the group that has assigned a meeting at that time in the 
classroom she will be granted entrance in the classroom. 
Simultaneously, the user’s attendance status will be 
updated. If the user is not a member of that group he/she 
will be informed with an appropriate message on the 
screen.  
Additionally, in the context of the authentication 
process a web interface was developed. This interface 
gives the user the capability to be connected and 
authenticated remotely. The remote student provides her 
personal details (e.g., email and id number) via a web 
interface and is authenticated by the system. When the user 
is connected she can watch information regarding the 
lecture that is taking place (e.g., location, opening time, 
number of participants) as well as information concerning 
her status both to this particular lecture and those 
preceding. The authentication does not mean the automatic 
participation in the meeting in which she has been 
connected. This procedure is accomplished through the 
Centra platform, a teleconference service (implementing 
virtual classes) which provides both the instructors and 
students the capability of attaining meetings and seminars 
regardless the place of their physical presence.  
Status update refers to the recording of the users’ status 
with respect to the authentication time and mode. The 
potential user states are the following: present, late, in 
distance present, in distance late, absent. User’s status 
recording allows continuous statistical analysis with 
respect to the HOU’s students’ attendance profile with an 
ultimate aim to provide improvements and/or adjustments 
of the offered services towards them.  
A. RFId-based Authentication  
For the development of this module PhidgetSBC2 
Single Board Computers are used serving the execution of 
independent and autonomous applications without the need 
of a host computer on which they must be connected. A 
PhidgetSBC2 node is running a light version of a Debian 
GNU/ Linux operating system. Development services like 
the creation of a new application running on the board or 
its network management features are managed through a 
Web interface. Its advanced features can be accessed 
through an embedded SSH server. The identification 
process is performed through PhidgetSBC2 wireless 
connection with the Central Server on which the system 
database is running. 
Those boards are placed in the entrance hall of every 
classroom. The PhidgetRFId Reader reads the RFId tags 
which are attached to the reader instantly and returns the 
unique authentication number that identifies each tag. This 
requires that each participant in the meeting has her own 
tag which is provided to her during the registration process. 
The tag’s unique authentication number is recorded in the 
specific field in the corresponding database table. The 
software, which runs on PhidgetSBC2 board, is responsible 
for identifying the tag, establishing a connection to the 
database if the user is authenticated successfully and 
updating the status of the tag holder with the proper 
indication. Finally, it is responsible for the system’s output 
to the user giving a short beep after successful 
identification from the user or a longer beep with a 
different pitch after unsuccessful identification.  
B. Web-based Authentication  
For the development of the user interface for the 
remote students’ authentication the JSP technology 
(JavaServer Pages) is used. This technology helps software 
developers to create dynamically generated web pages 
based on HTML, XML, or other document types. The core 
of the developed application uses also the Java 
programming language. Specifically two JavaBeans 
components have been created (Fig. 4). The first is 
responsible for the storage of data variables entered by the 
student (username, email) through the interface and the 
second is responsible for establishing a connection with the 
database and performing SQL queries. After the successful 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
user validation the same procedure as in the RFId module 
is applied and the status update of the user is performed. 
Then, the student who successfully entered the credentials 
can retrieve information about the lecture attending and 
other relevant information. Finally, the application enables 
the student either to disconnect or to connect remotely to 
the lecture which is carried through the teleconference 
system. 
 
 
Fig. 4. Web Authentication Architecture 
C. Magnetic Card-Based Authentication  
In this module, the JSP technology is used in 
conjunction with the magnetic cards technology. The Web 
interface developed in the previous module is modified so 
that instead of username and email it receives a string 
which is a unique identifier for each student. Specifically 
this identifier consists of three parts. The first part is a 66 
characters length secret key that uniquely identifies each 
user. The second part is the user’s password. Finally, the 
third part is the user's name in ASCII encoding. Each part 
has a starting character and an ending character. In the first 
part the starting character is "%", in the second part is the 
character "#" and in the third part is the "+" character. In 
all three parts the terminating character is ";". The string is 
stored in the three tracks of the magnetic card. So when the 
magnetic card is passed through the card reader, 
authentication is performed by a series of SQL queries to 
the database including the students’ status update. 
Simultaneously, on a screen, which is positioned at the 
entrance of the SC, the user can also retrieve information 
about the lecture to attend. After a few seconds the display 
returns to the original home screen for next student 
authentication. The software architectural design follows 
the pattern of the previous module making use of Java 
beans in the same way. Here the major difference is the 
credentials that must be managed by the application. 
Another difference with the previous module is the number 
of users that it handles. This module must give the ability 
to a number of users to enter their credentials in a short 
period of time. So it is designed in a way that every single 
user can be validated and disconnected after a while so the 
next user can be authenticated.   
IV. GESTURE-BASED PHYSICAL INTERACTION 
A second service that was developed in the context of 
the SC prototype is the management of the educational 
content presentation through gesturing movements using 
the Kinect technology. Microsoft Kinect [10] is a motion 
sensing device that enables physical interaction with the 
computer.  Gesturing movements replace the standard 
human-computer interaction which is achieved with the 
mouse and the keyboard. The innovative technology 
behind Kinect is a combination of hardware and software 
contained within the Kinect sensor accessory that can be 
added to any computer device running Windows, Linux or 
Mac OS. Kinect cameras use three hardware innovations 
working together. The first one is a Color VGA video 
camera, which is called RGB camera, referring to the color 
components it detects. The second one is a depth sensor. 
It’s a combination of an infrared projector and a 
monochrome complimentary metal-oxide semiconductor 
(CMOS) sensor working together to "see" the room in 3-D 
regardless of the lighting conditions. Finally, there is a 
multi-array microphone which is an array of four 
microphones that can isolate the voices of the users from 
the noise in the room. This allows the users to be a few feet 
away from the microphone and still use voice controls. 
This camera was positioned to the area where the instructor 
moves between the smartboard and the bearings of the 
students and within the distance of 5 feet from him (Fig. 
1). The reason for this distance is the optimal performance 
of the camera, which ranges from 4 feet to 6 feet. 
The tutor by using gesturing movements can change 
slides which are projected to the Course Board. 
Specifically pointing the Kinect camera at her direction 
and standing at least five feet away she can extend her 
right arm to activate the "right" or "forward" gesture. If she 
extends her left arm she activates the "left" or "back" 
gesture. These gestures will send a right or left arrow key 
signal to the foreground application, respectively. The up 
and down movement can be added if necessary. These two 
movements can be used to create a gesturing handled 
document reader with which the user will be able to move 
smoothly to the next page (not instantaneously as in the 
slides presentation). Additionally, one can mark on the 
document or ‘printscreen’ the document.  
It should be noted that this application is independent 
of any 
slideshow software 
architecture (such as 
PowerPoint or Adobe Reader) which means that basic 
movements like Next_Slide(), Previous_Slide() can be 
easily applied to any of them. The way this is achieved is 
that the application uses Window.Topmost property of 
Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF) windows, which 
is a graphical subsystem for rendering user, interfaces in 
Windows-based applications by Microsoft. This property 
defines how in a group of windows, the window that has 
set the Topmost property to true is currently activated as 
the topmost window. Likewise for the group of windows 
that has set Topmost property to false are currently 
deactivated. The only thing the instructor has to do is to 
run the slides presentation software with the lecture’s 
slides loaded to it. Since the slides presentation software 
has the this.Topmost value set to true this means that the 
window is not overlapped by any other window and the 
instructor can use the gesturing movements Next_Slide(), 
Previous_Slide() and change slides back and forth in a 
natural interaction manner using a pervasive computing 
infrastructure. 
The HOU teleconferencing platform for virtual 
classrooms provides tutors and students with the ability to 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
participate in meetings and seminars regardless of their 
physical location by organizing and monitoring "electronic 
events". A typical teleconference session (event) consists 
of a central leader - presenter who is usually the tutor, and 
the other participants/guests who are usually the students. 
HOU uses the Saba Centra system which enables learners 
to connect remotely and watch lectures in real time. One of 
its main functions, inter alia, is the lectures slides 
presentations. This enables remote students to see on their 
screen the lecture’s slides and listen to the sound from the 
classroom in real time. The developed Kinect-based 
application has been adapted to the needs of the Centra 
system (Fig. 5) providing the teacher with the ability to 
handle slides of lectures by using gesturing movements.  
 
 
Fig. 5. The HOU’s teleconference system. 
The modification needed to be done in the existing 
software consisted of the operation of the movements that 
the tutor could accomplish. The loaded slides at Centra are 
converted to images independent of each other. To move to 
the previous/next image the user has to move with the 
up/down arrow keys and therefore two new gesturing 
movements which send a down or up arrow key signal to 
the foreground application were developed. 
V. ENHANCING COLLABORATIVE LEARNING 
The need for an active involvement of the students in 
the educational process led us to the design of an 
application which gives the student the capability to 
perform and share their thinking and understanding using 
annotation techniques. The aim of this application is 
particular classroom resources, such as the Course Board, 
to become available to the students in order to unfold their 
thoughts or to annotate comments to the content that is 
under discussion. In the context of  a traditional lecture this 
seems difficult due to the fact that the student in order to be 
able to have access to the Smart Board must move from 
her seat and stand in front of the computer in which the 
operation software of the smart board is installed. Then she 
can handle smart board operations and eventually put 
forward her views. With this particular application the 
student is given the chance to interact with and handle this 
specific resource remotely, without moving from her place. 
The rationale is that the student, given the permission 
of the instructor, is able to connect remotely with the smart 
board and handle its content either through the provided 
tablet or through her own Android device (Fig. 6). This 
specific application makes use of an android application 
which gives the ability to the android device to operate like 
a wireless mouse and keyboard for a specific computer. 
Thus, when the student is given the permission by the 
instructor to interact, she is connected remotely and gains 
access to the resource making use of the mouse and keypad 
in distance from her place. The application gives the 
instructor the ability to determine who is connected 
remotely each time as well to terminate the connection.   
 
Fig. 6. Collaborative Tools 
The architecture of this particular application is based 
on the client-server model in which the role of the client is 
played by the android devices and the role of server is 
played by the computer on which are connected and in our 
case is the same to that which runs the smart board 
software. On the server side special software is installed as 
a windows remote service which gives the capability to set 
the correct IP as well the TCP port in which the service 
will start.  Once the windows remote service is started, 
every android device which belongs to the same network 
can search for its tracking. When the android device tracks 
the remote service it can be connected through the connect 
command with the server and have access to the handle of 
the mouse and the keyboard and therefore to the content of 
the lecture which is projected on the smart board.  On the 
server side the tutor can monitor the interactions in the log 
section, to see which device is connected each time and 
terminate the connection when this is necessary.  
VI. EVALUATION 
The proposed authentication model was evaluated in a 
pilot setting including five trial meetings allocated to three 
groups of 20 students. Both the students and the tutors 
were provided with magnetic cards and RFId tags for their 
authentication as well as codes for their remote connection. 
From the data collected, 53% of the students on average 
participated physically to the meetings, 31% participated 
remotely and 16% were not attending. Regarding the 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
technology preference, there was a clear preference to the 
magnetic cards (87%) versus to RFId (13%), which is 
easily explained, as the former is a technology familiar to 
most of the students due to other services provided to them 
through it. Another reason for this preference was the 
additional feedback that the magnetic card based module 
provides to the students as it informs them not only about 
their successful authentication but also for 
their 
participations to the preceding sessions. Regarding the use 
of RFId technology we noted an increase on its usage 
meeting after meeting due to the fact that students were 
more familiarized to the new technology. The 100% of the 
tutors agreed that the automated way of recording the 
status of the students no matter the technology employed 
was time saving in relation to the traditional status 
recording.   
On the other hand, it was noticed that alongside with 
the ubiquitous mode of authentication the traditional way 
of recording should be maintained as there were cases in 
which the students had forgotten to bring either their RFId 
tag or their magnetic card. In technological level, after the 
use of the system it was found out that the specific system 
was operating robustly within the failure margins given by 
the RFId/magnetic tag/card manufacturer (2%).  
The gesture based physical interaction service was also 
evaluated. At the end of each session both tutors and 
students who participated in the meeting were asked to 
answer a questionnaire stating their view on the use of the 
particular application during the educational process. 
Regarding tutors who are the ones that are directly 
involved with the new service as well as being the main 
operators of the system, at first they found the application 
very difficult to handle as they were not familiar with this 
way of interaction with the system. Alongside they found it 
difficult to memorize the various combinations of 
gesturing movements that the application requires for 
handling slides. They reported that their concentration was 
focused on combining the movements with their hands to 
cause an action (e.g., next slide) which made them lose 
their sequence of thoughts. However, after the first two 
sessions the tutors got familiar with the handling of the 
application which led them to the conclusion that the use of 
gesturing movements increased their performance giving 
them the ability to interact in a more physical manner with 
the material and the students. The Kinect technology gives 
them the capability to navigate through the slides of the 
lecture along with their verbal communication without 
being forced to stop the lecture, approach the computer, 
change the slide from the keyboard and then continue their 
discussion. It should also be pointed out that one of the 
objectives of the SC prototype is the recording of the 
training material and the online streaming as a service to 
students. This application therefore helps achieving a better 
quality of the produced material since the video recording 
of lectures contains material which is more natural.  
On the other hand, students, mainly those who are 
remotely connected to the SC accepted very well the use of 
this technology as their access to the classroom is achieved 
through the Centra teleconference system so using such an 
application gives them the illusion of even more physical 
presence in the classroom. Regarding the technical part 
there is one point in which the application should be 
improved in the future. That is the gesturing movement 
combinations which should be simplified so that the 
system can be used with greater ease. 
Finally, students who participated in the meetings were 
provided with network capability to their laptops. The 
remote desktop application, which was mentioned in 
section V, was distributed to students via the network. 
Alongside all students were informed about the use of the 
application in the teaching process. In conclusion the use 
of the application strengthened the participation of students 
in the educational process something which is particularly 
difficult in traditional classrooms. Students were asked to 
rate the use of the application at a five point likert scale 
questionnaire. The result revealed the positive attitude 
shown by the students in the adoption of the application as 
a tool that enhances the involvement in the learning 
process. 
VII. RELATED WORK 
In this section, we present research efforts that attempt 
to convert simple classrooms to smart ones by using 
pervasive computing technologies. 
In 2003, researchers at Tsinghua University of China 
proposed a smart classroom standard for enhancing the 
traditional 
classroom 
with 
pervasive 
computing 
technologies and supporting remotely connected students 
[5][6]. The classroom is equipped with two wall-size 
projector screens, one in the front wall called Mediaboard 
and another called Studentboard. In the first board, which 
is touch sensitive, the teacher can present his slides and 
notes, while in the Student screen, images of the remote 
students and information about them are displayed. The 
smart classroom supports user authentication services via 
face and voice recognition also. A multiagent software 
platform coordinates multiple processes which are hosted 
in any computer of the classroom.  
The George Maison University presented in 2005 
Network EducationWare (NEW) an open source and 
distance learning education system [4]. Students via the 
NEW have the ability to hear instructor’s voice and view 
lecture’s presentation material, on their screen. They are 
also given the opportunity to intervene in the process and 
make questions either asynchronously or synchronously 
via instant messaging (chat) during the lecture. Finally, the 
system supports recording and playing back recorded 
lectures whenever the student wants in a later time. An 
important advantage over other commercially available 
systems in this domain, such as Saba Centra and Microsoft 
LiveMeeting, is the low cost of purchase and maintenance 
for educational institutions. 
The CyLab laboratory of the Carnegie Mellon 
University in Japan proposed its own version regarding the 
Smart Classroom topic [9]. The main aim of this project is 
to link two or more classrooms through the internet. For 
this purpose a set of technologies are used such as the 
BlackBoard system, which provides online learning 
opportunities and recording lectures, the Lecture On 
Demand system (LOD), which enables students to have 
access to all previous lectures and material, and finally the 
VTE system (Virtual Training Environment), which is a 
library of educational tools and learning objects such as 
demonstrations, lectures slides, videos, hands-on labs. 
In 2009, the University of Tsinghua in collaboration 
with the University of Kyoto in Japan developed the Open 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
Smart Classroom [7] model based on Smart Classroom 
project [5]. The developing model proposes the interaction 
among several Classrooms which are geographically 
dispersed. Two Smart Classrooms have been used, one at 
Tsinghua University and another one at the University of 
Kyoto. All processes that (are used), run on a software 
infrastructure called Open Smart Platform, which is based 
on the software platform of Smart Classroom that was 
developed at the university Tsinghua and consists of 
Agents, Containers and Directory Services. To optimize 
performance in the interconnection of the two classrooms 
the platform adopted services such as instant messaging, 
live data streaming and transferring large amounts of data 
(bulk data transfer).  
The LOCAL project (Location and Context Aware 
Learning) is based on the principles of pervasive 
computing [1]. This project utilizes location and contextual 
information of learners aiming to promote the learning 
process. The model uses description learner’s standard 
called PAPI to describe the user profiles [2]. The services 
that have been developed and are being supported are: 
sending messages to specific trainee who has been 
authenticated by the system; sending messages to a 
specific group of learners; and massive messaging. The 
messages addressed to students represent learning objects 
and are correlated to the goals set by the students 
themselves.  
In 2010 the University of Cairo developed its own 
Smart Classroom standard which is named iClass [8]. This 
project uses a classroom equipped with various types of 
sensors such as light, temperature and humidity sensors 
and a weather station. All of those sensors are being 
interconnected via Lonworks, a building automation 
protocol, commercially available which provides HTML 
interfaces to users and which interfaces with the IP 
network infrastructure. RFId technology is also used, for 
user authentication. Specifically when the teacher enters 
the room a Smart Agent recognizes him and automatically 
opens the smart board. Then students can be authenticated 
by the Smart Agent too. Finally, using voice recognition in 
the classroom the instructor is allowed to interact with the 
devices of the classroom through voice commands.  
Researchers at the Taipei University have developed a 
Smart Classroom standard [3] in which the teaching table 
agent has several modules for classroom management. One 
module takes care of the power supply and lighting system 
and another module is responsible for managing entrance 
issues since the classroom has digital locks and smart user 
authentication system. A third module manages the smart 
blackboard system and is responsible for controlling the 
projector. This model beyond the management capabilities 
focuses on providing a smart timetable system which 
enables the instructor to interact with it. The application 
has several levels of interaction which are defined 
according to the distance of the user from the screen and 
the gesturing movements he uses. 
VIII.CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we introduced services deployed in a SC 
for enhancing collaborative learning and management 
tasks through pervasive computing technologies. The 
specification and the development of such services require 
an understanding of the needs and characteristics of all the 
involved educational stakeholders. The proposed system is 
a first prototype which makes use of tracking technologies 
such as RFId and natural interaction modalities with the 
system to support a collaborative learning methodology. 
The objective is the proposed model to be enriched with 
new technologies and services that will enable the students 
to participate in the educational process through 
contemporary 
and 
interactive 
distance 
learning 
environments. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The research described in this paper has been co-
funded by the European Union (European Social Fund –
ESF) and Greek national funds through the Operational 
Program "Education and Lifelong Learning" of the 
National Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) (Funding 
Program: “HOU”). 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Barbosa, R. Hahn, S. Rabello, and D. Barbosa, “LOCAL: 
A Model Geared Towards Ubiquitous Learning,” ACM 
SIGCSE Bull.,2008 vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 432-436. 
[2] PAPI - Draft Standard for Learning Technology. Public and 
private information (PAPI) for learners (PAPI learner). Last 
Accessed 
[retrieved: 
May, 
2014]. 
Available 
at 
ltsc.ieee.org/wg1/files/ltsa_06.doc. 
[3] Y. Yu, S. D. You, and D. Tsai, "Smart Timetable Plate for 
Classroom," 2010, icalt 10th IEEE International Conference 
on Advanced Learning Technologies, pp.552-554. 
[4] C. Snow, J. M. Pullen, and P. McAndrews, "Network 
EducationWare: an open-source web-based system for 
synchronous 
distance 
education," 
Education, 
IEEE 
Transactions on, 2005, vol. 48, pp. 705-712. 
[5] Y. C. Shi, et al.: ‘The smart classroom: merging 
technologies for seamless tele-education’, IEEE Pervasive 
Computing, IEEE CS Press, 2003, 2, (2), pp. 47-55. 
[6] X. Li, L. Feng, L. Zhou and Y. Shi, "Learning in an 
Ambient Intelligent world: Enabling Technologies and 
Practices." IEEE Trans. Knowl. & Data Eng., June 2009, 
vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 910-924. 
[7] Y. Suo, N. Miyata, H. Morikawa, T. Ishida, and S. 
Yuanchun, "Open Smart Classroom: Extensible and 
Scalable Learning System in Smart Space Using Web 
Service Technology," IEEE Transactions on Knowledge 
and Data Engineering,2009, pp. 814-828. 
[8] R. Ramadan, H. Hagras, M. Nawito, A. Faham, and B. 
Eldesouky, (2010). The Intelligent Classroom: Towards an 
Educational Ambient Intelligence Testbed. 2010 Sixth 
International Conference on Intelligent Environments, 2007 
pp. 344-349. Cairo. 
[9] D. Pishva, "Smart Classrooms Bring Top-Quality Education 
around 
the 
Globe," 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Applications and the Internet Workshops (SAINTW07), 
pp.40. 
[10] Kinect- 
Xbox.com, 
http://support.xbox.com/en-
US/browse/xbox-on-other-devices/kinect-for-windows 
[retrieved: May, 2014] 
 
 
 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

