Head-Mounted Display in Work Assistance 
- An Origami Case Study - 
Tadashi Miyosawa, Takayuki Gujo 
Department of Business Administration and Information 
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa,  
Nagano, Japan 
miyosawa@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp, jh110044@ed.tus.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Head-mounted 
display 
(HMD) 
has 
gained 
significant attention in recent years. The goal of this study was 
to verify whether using HMD in work assistance actually 
improves work efficiency via an evaluation test. We focused on 
the field of work assistance and reflected on whether people 
who use HMD become interested in using the technology to 
help them to work efficiently when they fold origami in their 
spare time, compared with other methods such as an origami 
book and cellphone applications. The results of our evaluation 
test show that HMD technology is effective in the field of work 
assistance. 
Keywords-head-mounted display; HMD; work assistance; 
origami. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, head-mounted displays (HMDs) have 
been sold by a variety of makers and are used in many 
industries. 
For many years, HMDs have garnered attention as the 
device that realizes the visual aspect of virtual reality (VR), 
and there has been continued research and development into 
wearable computers. HMDs are display devices that use a 
head mount that can be either in the form of goggles or 
glasses. The HMD displays visuals in front of the eyes and 
is characterized by having a superior sense of immersion 
compared with typical displays. HMDs can be separated 
into four categories, but most of the products on the market 
today can be split into two main categories: one that shows 
an image in one eye, and one that shows an image in both. 
The other two categories are displays where you can see 
behind the images and see the surrounding landscape (see-
through) and displays where you cannot (nonsee-through). 
HMDs for both eyes are the largest portion of consumer 
products. Products such as the SONY HMZ-T3 [11] (Fig. 1) 
represent nonsee-through displays for both eyes. This type 
of product is suited for the use of some types of audiovisual 
(AV) content such as when viewing movies or playing 
games because the user can be immersed into the images 
without seeing the surrounding background. In addition, 
see-through displays for both eyes such as the Wrap [13] 
series by Vuzix and Moverio [12] (Fig. 2) by Epson are also 
suited for use with AV content. In contrast, single-eye 
HMDs are unsuitable for the total immersion experience 
because they do not totally block the user’s vision. Instead, 
they are suitable for use during work and thus these HMDs 
are designed for businesses. 
 
Figure 1. 
HMZ-T3 [11]. 
 
 
Figure 2. 
Moverio [12]. 
There is also an unprecedented need for improvements 
in factory floor productivity. For example, it takes time to 
fix mechanical problems that occur in isolated locations. 
This then turns into a big problem for the production 
process. The engineers must be transferred to that location 
temporarily to address the work that cannot be done by the 
local staff. Technical succession is becoming difficult as the 
number of expert engineers declines. 
What are the advantages of using HMDs to support daily 
operations? One is that an employee can work with their 
hands free. That means an employee can access a user 
manual or any other materials they need without breaking 
from their main duties. Therefore, in this paper, we will 
examine the effectiveness of using HMDs during work. We 
will consider whether superimposing movies or images onto 
a real-world view improves work accuracy and efficacy. 
We note that fundamental research into HMDs and 
human anatomy has been explored previously [1] [2] [3] [4]. 
The aim of this experiment is to validate the work 
optimization of HMD and propose new usage methods for 
future HMDs by having students of the Tokyo University of 
Science, Suwa use and assess the technology. 
In present-day origami, it is standard to fold the paper 
while looking at images in an origami book or on a 
cellphone application. In this experiment, we considered 
whether students could shorten the time to comprehend 
greater amounts of messages, seeking comments like “the 
directions are easy to understand” and “this is a smoother 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

process than folding origami while looking at images” by 
having them fold origami while viewing movies on the 
HMD, whether they were able to enjoy origami thanks to 
this new method, and whether they would want to use this 
method again. 
Section I discussed the background that led to this study, 
and the aim of this paper. Section II introduce the related  
works. Section III introduces the environment that was 
prepared for creating the contents used in the HMD, and the 
developed content for experiment. Section IV introduces the 
three methods in the experiment that were used for the 
materials in Section III. Section V discusses the results and 
observations of each experiment discussed in Section IV. 
Section VI proposes improvements for the methods in this 
paper based on the experimental results. Section VII 
discusses conclusions made based on the experimental 
results. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Currently, research is being conducted on applications 
for work support and other various applications [6] [7] 
[8][15], including the ones that we will introduce below. 
1) Logistics solutions: In a four-company collaboration 
between Seiko Epson Corporation [12], Toyo Kanetsu 
Solutions K.K., Kokusai Kogyo Co., Ltd, and King Jim Co., 
Ltd, testing of logistics solutions using Epson’s Moverio 
was conducted at Toyo Kanetsu Solutions K.K.’s plant in 
Chiba, Japan. 
As shown in Fig. 3, these brand-new logistics solutions 
can aid workers in safely and efficiently completing their 
picking and sorting work while the navigation screen of the 
picking course is superimposed onto their real-world 
perception by having workers wear the Moverio in logistics 
facilities, such as a warehouse or logistics center with using 
Augmented Reality(AR). 
 
 
Figure 3. Logistics solutions using AR navigation. 
2) Sorting 
support 
for 
physical 
merchandise 
distribution: Yamazaki et al. [5] focused on order picking 
for warehouse storage and proposed an order-picking 
system that assists workers through mixed reality (MR) 
technology. They identified problems that order-picking 
systems have faced in the past, and worked to improve work 
efficiency and reduce errors by solving those problems 
using MR technology. The system can intuitively present 
information to support the current task by superimposing 
computer-generated images onto the worker’s field of vision 
through an HMD. This research confirmed the behavior of 
the 
developed 
system 
and 
carried 
out 
evaluative 
experiments that compared the impact of see-through video 
HMD and optical HMD on work efficiency. 
 
3) A Highly-portable Markerless User Interface Using 
Optical See-through HMD and AR Technology : Irie et al. 
[15] proposed a system "AirTarget", which can point virtual 
and real object directly with user's finger is proposed for 
optic see-through HMD devices. The camera attached to the 
HMD device detects the position of user's fingertip, 
calibrates the gap between the sight of the camera and eye, 
and displays the cursor overlapped to the finger on the 
virtual plain. Finger detection is done in markerless image 
processing, so that it does not require specific input devices 
or external computer. This system enables to send control 
commands by simple gesture, working as a self-contained 
interface. The user is able to point a virtual object with their 
finger, and able to cut out an object of the real sight which 
can be used as a query of the image searching. And the 
simple gesture operation was achieved highlyaccuracy and 
recognition rate. 
 
III. 
CREATING THE HMD CONTENTS 
In this section, environment that was prepared for 
creating the content, and the developed content for 
experiment are explained. 
A. How to Use an HMD 
The controller has an Android system. The images and 
movies installed on the micro memory card are played by 
the Android system installed in the HMD controller (Fig. 4). 
The user views the images and movies through the headset. 
The screen size changes according to the viewpoint. If 
the viewpoint is distant, the screen will also appear as if it is 
far away. 
 
 
 
 
Trackpad 
Head Set 
Power Switch 
microSD Card Slot 
BACK Key 
MENU Key 
HOME Key 
Enter Key 
Direction Key 
 
Figure 4. HMD controller and headset. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

B. Development/Testing Environment of HMD Images and 
Movies for this Study 
As shown in Table I, As for HMD, MOVERIO was 
selected for this experiment considering the availability in 
Japan. A Smart Phone was used to capture the images and 
movies. And PC was used to edit the images and movies. 
 
TABLE I.  DEVELOPMENT/TESTING ENVIRONMENT OF HMD IMAGES 
AND MOVIES 
HMD 
Camera 
PC 
Product 
Name 
MOVERIO（EPSON） 
Product  
Name 
iPhone5 
Product 
Name 
Fujitsu 
FMV-E8290 
Movie 
MP4(MPEG4+AAC) 
MPEG2TS 
(H.264+AAC) 
SD-Video 
Image 
 
8 Million Pxcels 
(1280×960 dot) 
CPU 
Intel(R)Core™2Duo 
CPU 
P8700(2.53GHz) 
Image 
JPEG,PNG,BMP,GIF 
 
 
Memory 
2GB 
Memory 
 
１GB 
microSD(Max 2GB) 
microSDHC(Max32GB) 
 
 
OS 
Windows7 
Professional 
 
 
The GNU Image Manipulation Program (GIMP) was 
used to edit the images. A large number of images were 
prepared in this software using methods such as layering and 
by cutting the images into shapes. 
C. Content Used in the Experiment 
1) Origami book: “Present, Decorate, and Enjoy 
Practical Origami” by Mitsunobu Sonobe was used in this 
experiment. 
2) HMD images: For this experiment, six types of 
origami with the same estimated completion time were 
chosen from Sonobe’s book. We took one picture per step 
for each of the six types of origami. The pictures were then 
transferred to the computer and then saved to the micro 
memory card. Figure 5 shows one example of an HMD 
image set of the origami contents used in this experiment on 
the HMD. This example is of a folding style for a 
dachshund. 
 
 
Figure 5. HMD image set. 
 
3) HMD movies: We recorded movies showing the 
folding of the same six types of origami. Pace was 
considered while folding the origami so that all six types 
were completed in the same amount of time.  
 
   
   
 
Egg Stand        Swallow          Rabbit 
 
  
  
 
      Vase           Box          Dachshund 
 
Figure 6. HMD movies. 
The movies were then saved to the micro memory card. 
Figure 6 shows the six types (movies) of the origami 
contents used in this experiment on the HMD. 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENT 
In this section, detailed process of our experiment is 
explained as follows. 
A. Experiment 
1) Purpose of this experiment: The purpose of the 
experiment is to improve the efficiency of folding origami 
compared with the traditional method of using an origami 
book through an experiment where participants fold origami 
using an HMD. Another purpose of this experiment is to 
listen to the thoughts and opinions of the participants 
through the user surveys, and verify improvement plans for 
future materials. 
2) Participants: Eighteen students from the Tokyo 
University of Science, Suwa. 
3) Details of the experiment: We implemented three 
experiments: “origami book,” “HMD images,” and “HMD 
movies.” Each of the participants performed each 
experiment in turns using HMD. 
In each experiment, the participant created one of the six 
origami according to the instructions they received. They 
measured the time it took to complete each origami and 
answered a user survey after completing all experiments. 
4) Materials: Origami book; movies and images created 
for this experiment; HMD; three sheets of origami paper per 
person; user survey sheet; timer; and writing tools. 
5) Experiment: An origami book and HMDs were used 
in the experiment. Because most participants were using an 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

HMD for the first time, we arranged for an explanation and 
some operational practice before the actual experiment 
began. For practice, the participants used movies and 
images that would not be used during the actual experiment. 
Additionally, to avoid bias in the data because of working 
order, the order for each participant was based on an order 
sheet created specifically for that practice. Each participant 
answered a user survey after completing the experiments 
with the origami book, HMD movies, and HMD images. 
6) The sequence: First, prepare the origami book and 
turn on the HMD. Prepare the HMD so that it can be used 
immediately. Give the origami paper to participants so that 
they can begin folding the origami immediately. Each 
participant was called on individually and began their 
practice (see Fig. 7) based on the practice order listed below.  
 
 
Figure 7. Test scene. 
 
<For HMD images>  
• 
Explanation of experiment 
• 
Distribution of origami 
• 
Prepare HMD images for practice 
• 
Practice 
• 
Prepare HMD images for actual experiment 
• 
Fold origami 
• 
Finish the origami and collect HMD 
< For HMD movies>  
• 
Explanation of experiment 
• 
Distribution of origami 
• 
Prepare HMD movies for practice 
• 
Practice 
• 
Prepare HMD movies for actual experiment 
• 
Fold origami 
• 
Finish the origami and collect HMD 
<For the origami book>  
• 
Explanation of experiment 
• 
Distribution of origami and book 
• 
Fold origami while viewing instructions in book 
• 
Collect book 
After a participant completed all three origami, we 
distributed a user survey and writing materials, and the 
participant was encouraged to express their opinions on the 
experiment freely. The experiment was considered complete 
when the participant had completed the survey and returned 
both the survey and writing materials. 
There were 18 participants in total. We ensured that all 
18 participants were equal and that there was no chance of 
Bias by having three different folding methods for six 
different types of origami. 
 
V. 
RESULTS AND OBSERVATIONS 
Based on the experiment described in Section IV, 
Following result was observed. 
A. Survey Results 
1)  Comparison of survey results: The average of each 
survey category as shown in Fig. 8 is explained below. 
0.0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
3.0 
3.5 
4.0 
4.5 
5.0 
Book
HMD Image
HMD Movie
Interesting                  Easy to Fold               Easy to go next step        Enjoyable            Would like to use again  
Figure 8. Average of each survey category. 
a) The order of the results in the category, “Found it 
interesting” were HMD movies > HMD images > origami 
book. These results suggest that the participants developed 
an interest in HMD technology after the experiment. 
b) The order of the results in the category, “Environment 
in which origami can easily be folded” were HMD movies > 
origami book > HMD images (there was a slim margin 
between HMD movies and origami book). These results 
suggest that folding origami using the HMD was not a 
hindrance for the participants. 
c) The order of the results in the category, “Easy to 
understand next step” were HMD movie > origami book > 
HMD images. This shows that movies were easier to 
understand than images in the HMD environment and that 
images were inferior to the origami book. 
a) The order of the results in the category, “Enjoyed 
folding the origami” were HMD movies > HMD images > 
origami book. These results suggest that the participants 
enjoyed folding origami better with HMD technology. 
e) The order of the results in the category, “Would use 
again” were HMD movies > HMD images > origami book. 
These results suggest that participants would like to 
continue using HMD technology. 
f) When we look at the average of the sum of all mean 
values, the average of both the origami book and HMD 
images are about the same, but the average for HMD movies 
is much higher than both categories, as shown in Fig. 9. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
0.0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
3.0 
3.5 
4.0 
4.5 
5.0 
Book
HMD Image
HMD Movie
 
Figure 9. The average of each mean value by category. 
 
2) Analysis of survey results: A one-way analysis of 
variance was conducted on each category using valuation 
points to verify whether there is a significant difference in 
the evaluation points in each category in the survey as 
shown in Fig. 8. 
a) There is a significant difference between the origami 
book and HMD images in the category, “Found it 
interesting.” There is also a significant difference in the 
traditional origami book and HMD movies as well as 
between HMD images and movies. 
b) There is a significant difference between the origami 
book and HMD images in the category, “Environment in 
which origami can easily be folded.” There is also a 
significant difference between HMD images and movies. 
c) There is a significant difference between the origami 
book and HMD movies in the category, “Easy to understand 
next step.” There is also a significant difference between 
HMD images and HMD movies. 
d) There is a significant difference between the origami 
book and HMD movies in the category “Enjoyed folding the 
origami.” There is also a significant difference between 
HMD images and movies. 
c) There is a significant difference between the origami 
book and HMD movies in the category, “Would use again.” 
There is also a significant difference between HMD images 
and movies. 
B. Measurement of Completion Time 
As shown in Fig. 10, five of the six types of origami 
were faster to fold using HMD movies. Comparing Fig. 10 
and Table II, it can be concluded that the more steps there 
are to complete the origami, the longer it takes when using 
the origami book compared with HMD movies and the 
smoother the process when using HMD movies. However, it 
is faster to use the traditional origami book rather than the 
HMD for origami with fewer steps to complete. These 
results show that the appropriateness of HMD or the 
original origami book depends on the number of steps 
needed. These results show that HMD is appropriate for 
difficult work and inappropriate for simple work. 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Rabbit
Egg stand Dachshund
Swallow
Box
Vase
Minutes
Book
HMD Image
HMD Movie
 
Figure 10.  Measurement of completion time. 
 
TABLE II.  NUMBER OF STEPS 
Rabbit
25 Steps
Egg Stand
22 Steps
Dachshund
25 Steps
Swallow
28 Steps
Box
18 Steps
Vase
21Steps
 
 
Figure 11 is the average value of completion time for the 
method used to complete the origami. This figure shows that 
the completion time was shorter when using the origami 
book compared with HMD images, and that the completion 
time was shortest when using HMD movies. The average 
work time was fastest with HMD movies. 
0.00 
2.00 
4.00 
6.00 
8.00 
10.00 
12.00 
14.00 
16.00 
18.00 
20.00 
Book
HMD Image
HMD Movie
minutes
 
Figure 11 Average completion time by method. 
C. Free Descriptions 
Participants’ positive and negative opinions about this 
experiment are shown in Table III. 
 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

TABLE III.  
OPINIONS 
Good Point
Bad Point
Book
All Process can be seen at the same
time.(6 people)
Hard
to
see
complicated
process.(7 people)
HMD Image
Can keep his own pace.
Can compare
his
output. (10
people)
Hard to find the folding line.
(7 people)
HMD Movie
Because This is see thorough HMD.
It was very easy to do same things
withmovie. (14 people)
Once
you
get
trouble,
Operation is bit difficult.
(6
people)
 
 
The positive responses for HMD movies indicate that 
close to half of the participants held the opinion that HMD 
was “Easy to work with because I could copy the folding 
methods in the movie because the HMD was see-through.” 
Everyone was used to the paper medium of the traditional 
origami book. As a result, participants felt that it was easy to 
understand how to fold the origami, easy to complete, and it 
was also easy to view the entire process. 
Other relatively common opinions were that using HMD 
is “excitingly new” and that they “became interested in the 
technology.” Another opinion that stood out was that the 
biggest difference from the traditional origami book was 
that “I was able to fold the origami while viewing the 
folding method in the see-through glasses, and it was better 
compared with using the traditional book.” Negative 
opinions were “It’s difficult to see and understand where to 
fold” and as a result, “It was a little confusing and the 
equipment was bothersome.” 
The aim was to verify whether the use of HMD 
improves efficiency over the traditional origami book, and 
to verify if we can increase interest in HMD. As a result, we 
can consider that the participants were able to increase their 
efficiency and work and becoming interested in HMD. It 
can be considered that there were no obstacles while they 
were working. 
 
VI. 
IMPROVEMENT PLAN 
The improvement plan for creating future materials for 
work (this time for folding origami) with HMD was 
examined. 
Many participants held the opinion that “it was difficult 
to locate the folding crease” with HMD images. Many 
participants held the opinion that “using the equipment was 
bothersome” regarding HMD movies.  
An improvement plan for HMD images/movies was 
created based on these two points. 
A. Improvement Plan for HMD Images 
The instructions for the HMD images used in this 
experiment were displayed together with the images. We 
thought that doing work using a different method to the 
traditional origami book was connected to the improvement 
of work efficiency; however, it was difficult for participants 
to locate the folding crease, increasing the completion time.  
B. Improvement Plan for HMD Movies 
An HMD movie was created for this portion of the 
experiment. Many participants felt that it was tiresome to 
have to redo their work if they had trouble for some reason. 
The participants were able to complete the origami in a 
shorter amount of time compared with traditional methods. 
However, it was necessary to coordinate everyone because 
some people work quickly and some people work slowly. 
To address this, we propose a subdivision of the movie 
into steps by creating an HMD movie that has a pause after 
each step. If the movies are subdivided by steps, then the 
participants will be better able to understand the actual 
situation and they can easily review a step when needed, thus 
further increasing work efficiency. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The aim of this study was to verify whether using HMD 
in the area of work assistance actually improves work 
efficiency using an evaluation test. Another aim is to review 
the improvement plan for future materials based on the 
experimental results, and to review conclusively the efficacy 
of HMD in the area of work assistance. 
We focused on the field of HMD work assistance and 
reflected on whether people who use HMD become 
interested in using the technology to help them to work 
efficiently when they fold origami in their spare time, 
compared with other methods such as an origami book and 
cellphone applications. 
In this experiment, 18 participants folded origami while 
using an origami book, HMD images, and HMD movies, 
and answered an accompanying user survey 
after 
completion of the experiment. 
We observed the following three results: 
1) To explore work efficiency improvement, participants 
folded origami using an origami book and HMD movie. 
Using the HMD movie was overall faster than using the 
traditional origami book. However, using HMD images is 
an inferior method to using an origami book. We also 
discovered that using HMD movies is an inferior method 
when there are few steps involved in completing the origami. 
This may be because a user cannot see the whole picture 
when using HMD images and it takes time to operate the 
equipment. These results show that HMD movies increase 
work efficiency more than do HMD images. However, 
using HMD takes longer for simple tasks. The average 
completion time from these procedures show that the order 
of fastest completion time, in descending order, is HMD 
images > origami book > HMD movies. This order shows 
that HMD movies are more effective than an origami book 
or HMD images. 
2) The interest in using HMD technology was examined 
using a paper user survey. When we examined the average 
values taken from the survey answers, HMD movies 
received a higher value than the origami book in three 
categories: “I became interested in the technology,” 
“Enjoyed folding origami,” and “I would like to use HMD 
again.” The average data for each category tells us that 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

participants preferred, in ascending order, HMD images < 
origami book < HMD movies. This result shows that using 
HMD is beneficial to improving participant interest in the 
technology. 
3) In the “free description” section of the survey, six 
people held the positive opinion that “the origami is easy to 
understand because I could view the whole thing at once,” 
regarding using the origami book. Seven people held the 
negative opinion that it was difficult to understand 
complicated origami instructions when using an origami 
book. Ten people held the positive opinion that folding 
origami while looking at HMD images “is comparable to 
when I fold origami on my own, at my own pace.” Seven 
people held the negative opinion that “it was difficult to 
locate the folding crease” when using HMD images. 
Fourteen people held the positive opinion that “it was easy 
to copy the folding methods because the HMD movie is see 
through.” Six people held the negative opinion that “It was a 
little confusing and difficult to use the equipment” regarding 
HMD movies. 
From these three results, we can conclude that using 
HMD technology is effective in the field of work assistance. 
In this study, we have not applied AR technology to 
Origami yet. However, in the next experiment, we are going 
to compare Origami with AR technology and Movie in 
HMD environment. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Kawai, T. Iwasaki, T. Inoue and,  K. Noro,"Effect of Head 
Mount Display on Visual Function" Transactions of the 
Virtual Reality Society of Japan 4(1), 1999, pp. 275-280.  
[2] H. Kono, "Visibility and Distance Error on VR Landscape 
Simulation" Transactions of the Virtual Reality Society of 
Japan 1(2), 1996, pp. 9-14.  
[3] H. Iwase and A. Murata, "Effects of Long Time Task Using 
Head Mounted Display on Postural Control System" The 
Transactions of the Institute of Electronics, Information and 
Communication Engineers. A J85-A(9), 2002, pp.1005-1013.  
[4] K. Watanabe, T. Takeuchi, T. Inoue and, K. Okada, "Face-to-
Face Collaboration System that Identifies Individual User" 
The IEICE transactions on information and systems (Japanese 
edition) J91-D(12), 2008, pp. 2755-2764. 
[5] K. Yamazaki, F. Shibata, A. Kimura and, H. Tamura,  
"Application of Mixed Reality Technology to Order Picking 
for Warehouse Storage" Proceedings of the Virtual Reality 
Society of Japan, Annual Conference 18, 2013, pp. 196-199.   
[6] Y. Yoshimura "Interactive work support system with movable 
head-up display" (Nara Institute of Science and Technology) 
Master's Thesis.  
[7] S. Tamiya, M. Kataoka, R. Tenmoku, F. Shibata, A. Kimura 
and, H. Tamura, "A Network Wiring Support System Using 
Mixed Reality" Dissertations of Information Processing 
Society of Japan Kansai Branch, 2007, pp. 13-14. 
[8] K. Nitta, “Developing Nuclear Power Plant Maintenance 
Support Systems Using Augmented Reality”, 2002, Kyoto 
University Master’s Thesis. 
[9] M. Sonobe, "Present, Decorate, Enjoy Practical Origami" 
Seibido Shuppan, July 2012. 
[10] Nikkei Monozukuri Magazine, October 2012, pp. 158-159.  
[11] SONY 
HMZ-T2 
Home 
page(http://www.sony.jp/hmd/products/HMZ-
T2/image.html)  [retrieved: June 2014]. 
[12] Epson Moverio Home Page  
(http://www.epson.jp/products/moverio/bt100/feature.html)  
(http://www.epson.jp/osirase/2013/130911.htm) 
[retrieved: June 2014]. 
[13] Telescope 
Magazine 
(http://www.tel.co.jp/museum/magazine/human/120810
_topics_06/04.html)   [retrieved: June 2014]. 
[14] engaget 
Japanese 
Edition 
(http://japanese.engadget.com/2012/08/02/vr-oculous-rift-70-
cloud/) [retrieved: June 2014]. 
[15] H. Irie et al., “AirTarget: A Highly-portable Markerless User 
Interface Using Optical See-through HMD”, Transaction of  
Information Processing Society of Japan, 55(4), Apr 2014, 
pp.1415-1427. 
 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

