The Experience Cylinder, an immersive interactive platform 
The Sea Stallion's voyage: a case study 
 
 
Troels Andreasen, John P. Gallagher,  
Roskilde University 
CBIT, Building 43.2 
Universitetsvej 1 
Roskilde Denmark 
{troels,jpg}@ruc.dk 
 
Nikolaj Møbius, Nicolas Padfield 
Roskilde University / illutron 
HUMTEK, Building 08.1 
Universitetsvej 1 
Roskilde Denmark 
{nimo,nicolasp}@ruc.dk 
 
Abstract—This paper describes the development of an 
experimental interactive installation, a so-called “experience 
cylinder”, 
intended 
as 
a 
travelogue 
and 
developed 
specifically to provide a narrative about the Viking ship Sea 
Stallion’s voyage from Roskilde to Dublin and back. The 
installation provides a framework for individual experience 
of the Sea Stallion's voyage, where a user among the 
audience interacts with the installation. Interaction is mainly 
by position and gesture tracking and feedback is by selection 
and projection of objects, such as photos, videos, 
background images, synthesized sound and recited stories. 
All combine to provide an individual path of choice through 
a coherent story told by means of a cylindrical screen, 
enclosing a space providing 3D positional sound following 
the interacting user and exploiting data such as wind, wave 
and weather logs through 3D sound effects. While being 
intended to tell a story about a certain voyage the resulting 
installation has been developed as an open interactive 
platform suitable for story-telling/travelogue. First and 
foremost the platform provides an approach to easy and 
intuitive navigation within heterogeneous media material 
comprising a large number of media objects.  
Keywords - interactive installation, bodily navigation, 
cylindrical screen 
I. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION 
The “experience cylinder” described in this paper is an 
interactive installation developed in connection with a 
pilot project carried out in a newly established Experience 
Lab at Roskilde University [1]. In collaboration with the 
Danish Viking Ship Museum the aim was to establish a 
“story-telling” platform that presents the documentation of 
the reconstructed Viking ship Sea Stallion’s (Havhingsten) 
voyage from Denmark to Ireland and back in 2007-2008 
and provides an individual experience of the voyage to the 
interacting user.  
The physical surroundings comprise a continuous 
image on a large cylindrical screen (six meters in 
diameter) provided by several connected projectors, 
ambient positional sound provided by several speakers and 
precision position as well as gesture tracking using 3D 
cameras. The story of the voyage can be told in this 
environment individually to users walking around, 
approaching what captures their interest. The design of the 
cylinder allows users to obtain more details through 
images (photos, video, animations) and sound (video 
soundtracks, recitation of logbook and stories, wind and 
wave data reflected by artificial sound effects) that emerge 
as a response to movement and can be further invoked by 
gestures.  
In its present incarnation, the focus is on presenting 
historical knowledge and an engaging narrative in a 
museum context. Our and the museum’s ambition is to use 
recent technology for the interactive presentation of 
historical material in a way that does not resemble the PC-
like ‘kiosks’ with touch screens often found in museums. 
The aim is to give the user of the cylinder a sense of 
presence and of personal exploration in the story of the 
Sea Stallion’s voyage, as opposed to a passive experience 
as recipient of a predetermined narrative. 
The installation comprises, however, an open platform 
facilitating 
navigation 
through 
any 
amount 
of 
heterogeneous media, such as video, audio, text, 
photography, nautical charts and weather data. We are 
experimenting with new embodied input models where 
audience movement and gestures are interpreted as 
expressions of interest and used to determine focus and 
navigation.  
We are in the midst of an iterative process; first, two 
mockups were programmed on a standard computer using 
a normal screen and mouse for input. Then the full scale 
installation was built and the software tested. Some 
changes were made and the installation presented and 
tested at a workshop. The next stage includes more 
extensive and formalized user testing, more data to be 
displayed, and in time different data sets.  
II. THE EXPERIENCE CYLINDER 
The experience cylinder, a section of which is shown 
in Fig. 1, consists of a 6 meter diameter projection screen. 
Participants enter this 360 degree other-worldly immersive 
experience by sliding past a section of curtain, the curtain 
serving both as the projection screen and as the visible 
boundary to the technologically enhanced reality within 
the 
cylinder, 
where 
normal 
physical 
laws 
are 
supplemented with sensors allowing control of the 
surroundings just by moving about. 
 
25
AMBIENT 2011 : The First International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-170-0

 
 
Figure 1. The experience cylinder. 
Media are displayed all around the inside wall of the 
cylinder, reminiscent of pictures hanging on the wall at a 
gallery. The initial state is one of rest, all media about the 
same size, no video or sound playing, only a calm sea as 
background visual and ambient sound. When the participant 
signifies interest by moving towards a cluster of media, those 
media are fluidly expanded, more details and more media 
objects appear and video or sound clips can be activated. The 
participant can thus by merely moving around navigate a 
very large media collection and zoom in upon any particular 
single element, without use of any traditional computer UI 
elements and metaphors such as windows, cursors or mice.  
A. 
System design 
A required property of the design was from the beginning 
the ability to navigate through the trip following the route 
with a possibility to walk or jump to certain sections of 
interest to immerse into more detail. So a simple first 
solution was to draw a map of the route on the floor 
according to the geo-coordinates of the track, a particular 
point representing geographical as well as temporal location 
in the narrative as illustrated in Fig. 2, and to support 
navigation by walking this map. 
While such a design would have fulfilled the main 
purpose of presenting the Sea Stallion’s voyage, we moved 
away from this as we felt it would not function optimally as 
an engaging installation, being very predictable and lacking 
the ability to inspire participants “by surprise” – and thereby 
stimulating participants to experiment with the interaction in 
a playful manner.  
Having discussed and compared several solutions for 
navigation input, including a variation of simplifying 
projections of the track image, we finally agreed on an 
alternative that also implicated a model interactive 
framework as a whole – a circular projection as a metaphor 
for the route track enclosing the interior disk as a navigation 
space, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The obvious addition to this 
was a cylindrical projection screen leading to the basic 
design of the experience cylinder. 
Thus in this setting the circular extent represents the track 
as well as a timeline for the voyage. Media are organized on 
the screen corresponding to temporal placement in the 
duration of the voyage. The ship’s departure from Roskilde 
is at “0 degrees”, the middle of the voyage, landfall in 
Dublin, is at “180 degrees” and arrival at home port of 
Roskilde again is at “360 degrees”. This arrangement seemed 
intuitively graspable by most participants – seeing the floor 
of the circular space as a large clock face laid flat, where 
further clockwise corresponds to ‘later’. 
The experience starts in the middle of the circular area. 
The entire journey is visualized divided into an appropriate 
number of pieces shown on a corresponding number of equal 
sized circular segments on the canvas as indicated in Fig. 3. 
By turning around in the middle, one can assess the entire 
trip. Immersion into more detail of a whatever part of the trip 
that captures ones interest can be done simply by moving in 
the direction of this part. 
26
AMBIENT 2011 : The First International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-170-0

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Geo-coordinates of the track. 
 
Figure 3. A circular projection enclosing a navigation space. 
This causes the map to be “re-projected" so that the 
segment in focus grows and other segments shrink. This 
magnification is progressive - the distance from the center 
determines the degree of magnification. Fig. 4 shows an 
example of a projection based on the indicated position on 
the disk – the user has moved towards the “Den Helder – 
Glyngøre” segment to study this in more detail. When the 
distance to the center exceeds the appropriate limit (here the 
half-radius) then segment division will be frozen allowing 
the viewer to walk around inside the corresponding pie to 
study details of part of the trip in focus without being 
disturbed by further re-projections. By moving back towards 
the center and continuing in another direction, a new part of 
the trip can be investigated. Or by going in circles around the 
center, the whole journey can be traversed in more or less 
detail depending on the viewer’s distance to the center. 
Thus the interaction results in feedback in the form of a 
modified screen division and an adapted presentation of 
media objects. Each point on the circle represents a position 
on the trip (a time slot). Each pie represents a piece of the 
trip and the period for which this was completed. The 
selection of media objects adapts such that more objects and 
more details are presented on large pies and less details are 
shown on small. 
Media objects are as mentioned presented by projection 
on the cylindrical screen and by means of the 3D positional 
sound. Objects that appear and float as projections on the 
segments of the screen include segment titles, photos, videos, 
stories (shown as titled icons) such as fragments from the log 
or tales on themes such as seasickness. Video and story 
objects involve sound and occupy time spans and therefore 
activation and deactivation options for each of these are 
needed in the interaction. These media objects can be 
activated by arm pointing gestures (or by approaching close 
enough) and deactivated by moving away or activating other 
objects.  
Obviously the zooming functionality explained above in 
itself will enable set-ups with a significant amount of media 
objects (the Sea Stallion voyage has about 25000 photos). 
However, to improve support of huge amounts we are 
experimenting with ways to include 3D rendering of 2D 
media with objects positioned at different depths in a 3D 
space projected on the screen. Thereby a new means and 
purpose of interaction arise: a user can look behind an object 
covering another by moving to the side. This 3D-rendering is 
illustrated in Fig. 5. The challenge here is to intuitively 
combine the basic zooming feedback with 3D perspective 
behavior. 
 
Figure 4. Interacting by walking – moving towards a section of interest. 
27
AMBIENT 2011 : The First International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-170-0

 
 
In addition to the primary objects mentioned above the 
installation also incorporates a seascape animation by means 
of a visual as well as auditory background to provide the 
visitors with a feeling of being on a ship at sea. The 
background visual rendering exploits the 360 degree sea 
level “horizon” animating waves as well as rolling of the 
ship. The visual horizon is accompanied by a synthesized 
background sound imitating wind and rolling waves. 
This seascape animation can also be used to exploit data 
from the voyage. A significant amount of detailed data about 
waves and weather conditions logged on geo-positions is 
used to reflect the weather conditions and intensity of the 
waves at the time and position of the media currently being 
focused on. 
III. IMPLEMENTATION 
A. 
Tracking 
Tracking the participants is accomplished with a 
Microsoft Kinect® 3D webcam and computer vision 
algorithms. The Kinect sensor functions by projecting a 
special pattern with an IR (infrared) laser, which enables the 
IR camera to calculate the distance to all objects in the field 
of view by measuring distortion of the known pattern. The 
Kinect delivers distance data in the form of a greyscale value 
for each pixel. Until recently, tracking individuals would 
have required IR floodlighting the whole area and applying 
background subtraction, frame differencing and finally blob 
detection to images captured by an IR security camera. The 
Kinect now makes it far easier to recognise a person, simply 
using blob detection.  
The system is programmed to lock onto the participant in 
the center of the circle and follow this individual until she 
leaves the field of view. This means any number of people 
can be in the installation at one time, without confusing the 
system, the interaction or each other. The only challenge 
with the Kinect is engineering a large enough field of view, 
as it (being a consumer device) does not support 
interchangeable lenses. The easiest is to have a high ceiling, 
or, failing that, to stitch together multiple images in software. 
B. 
Software architecture 
The installation is programmed in OpenFrameworks 
[10], an open source C++ toolkit for creative coding. 
OpenFrameworks provides easy access to multiple libraries 
we require (OpenGl, Quicktime and freeType among others) 
and can run on Mac, Windows and Linux. 
The sound is created and controlled in MaxMSP [8]. The 
positioning of sounds etc. is controlled by MAX, which 
receives commands from OpenFrameworks via UDP, 
enabling the work to be distributed to several computers. 
The visualization is written to a virtual buffer in 
OpenFrameworks, offering the possibility of distributing 
work across several computers and in the future supporting 
projector overlap with alpha blend for a more seamless 
display, higher light intensity and easier adjustment.  
. 
Figure 5. 3D display of media objects. 
The seascape background rendering is based on Virtual 
Choreographer [5] for the interaction (message capture and 
interpretation) and on OpenGL for the geometrical 
rendering. The output frame can be captured in a Frame 
Buffer Object and distributed over different viewports to 
cope with the distribution of the graphical rendering over 3 
GPUs. 
C. 
Physical construction 
For the physical construction of the installation we 
utilised rapid prototyping principles to quickly get to a 
testable stage. We were interested in using as many standard 
off-the-shelf elements as possible both to keep costs down 
and to increase flexibility, but did have to custom produce 
certain elements. 
The construction is illustrated in Fig. 6 and 7. The 6 
projectors (an Acer widescreen 4000 ANSI lumen model 
selected for its good price/resolution/light output ratio) are 
driven by one Mac Pro computer with 8 cores and 2 graphics 
cards, via 2 Matrox Triple Head 2 Go, which split the 
computer’s 2 DVI outputs to 6 VGA outputs (VGA being 
selected as it is easier to run long cables). 
A 7 channel surround sound system consisting of Prodipe 
monitor speakers mounted at head height, supplemented by 4 
subwoofers, is driven by an 8 channel M-audio Firewire 
sound card connected to the Mac Pro.  
The projection screen is standard cheap unbleached 
cotton cloth. 
We had to custom weld a modular circular lighting rig of 
50mm standard tubing to carry the circular projection screen 
and the projectors. After trying out different commercially 
available projector mounts, we found it easiest and cheapest 
to produce our own, CNC milling them out of 12mm 
plywood. The whole rig is suspended on 3 chain hoists 
enabling it to be raised and lowered for easier adjustment. 
28
AMBIENT 2011 : The First International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-170-0

 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Construction of the experience cylinder. 
D. 
Media and narrative 
 
The material made available by the Viking Ship Museum 
for the project involves mainly the two parts of the 
journey:Wicklow to Torquay and Den Helder to Glyngøre. 
The material includes photos, video, position, weather and 
wave data recorded at locations along the route. In addition 
we have had access to selections of texts, including log 
books and descriptions related to a theme and stories written 
by crew members. 
All photos and video footage taken by photographer 
Werner  Karrasch from the Viking Ship Museum. These are 
unique and impressive recordings that are ideally suited to 
"dramatize" the tour. Much of the footage is taken from a 
dinghy that followed the Sea Stallion at a distance and 
managed to give a very vivid impression of movements on 
the high seas.  
The installation does not include any direct display of 
text apart from simple words and titles for parts of the trip. 
However, the installation includes functionality for playback 
of audio clips, and texts such as logs and stories related to 
certain themes, which are recited and included as clips. 
Weather and wave data are presented by combining 
synthesized wave, wind and rain sound and artificial sea 
level animation as background images. Currently sound 
modeling as well as background animation is developed, but 
this is not coupled to the data. Some work has yet to be done 
on data preparation and modelling. 
IV. CONCLUSION, PERSPECTIVES AND FURTHER WORK 
A. 
Evaluation and Related Work 
The main result and contribution of the project is to 
create a physically interactive environment - the experience 
cylinder - in which precise tracking of body movements 
results in immediate responses in the visual and audio 
display of media items on the cylinder's screen and speakers. 
The cylinder has been applied to an experiment in which the 
items displayed relate to the voyage of the reconstructed 11th 
century Viking ship Sea Stallion from Denmark to Ireland 
and back.  Initial evaluation in two workshops with about 25 
participants each gave valuable user feedback and 
suggestions for further work. Firstly, experience shows that 
the cylinder gives the user a sense of control and engagement 
in that the display reacts smoothly and coherently to personal 
movements. Secondly, the cylinder can “tell a story" even 
though the user can in principle move freely in the space, the 
physical arrangement of the media items providing a certain 
narrative timeline structure. The cylinder has a domain-
independent architecture, in that the media content relating to 
the Sea Stallion is independent of the tracking and display 
control, and thus the cylinder could be adapted for other 
applications. 
The ideas behind the experience cylinder evolve from 
earlier 
concepts 
such 
as 
“physically 
interactive 
environments” [9], [11], “immersive virtual environments” 
[13], and “tangible interfaces" [12], originate in Kruger’s 
seminal ideas dating back to the 1980s on computer-
controlled interactive spaces [7].  Our system uses low-cost 
and easily available technology, as do other recent systems 
such as the CryVe system [6].  However, the system 
described here differs from other typical virtual and mixed-
reality systems in that it aims to allow a user to navigate 
using physical movements though a mass of heterogenous 
but interrelated media, rather than place the user in some 
specific virtual spaces. 
Numerous examples appear in the literature of the 
development of interactive environments for the general 
purpose of communication, in areas such as advertising, 
entertainment, story-telling and dissemination of cultural 
assets; see for example [2], [4], [11].  One of the main 
motivations for such developments seems to be that 
physically interactive environments are perceived to offer the 
user a greater sense of presence and immersion, allowing the 
user to engage more actively with the content of the 
communication than is the case with traditional media.  This 
is particularly so when interaction involves substantial 
physical body movements and gestures;  Falk and Dierking 
[3] argue that the human sense of self is closely bound to 
physical interaction and that this is vital when considering 
individuals’ learning experience in the museum context. Our 
experiment shares the same general motivations, and exploits 
newly available affordable 3D camera technology for precise 
body tracking, allowing refined physical interaction such that 
small movements provide immediate and precise visual and 
audio feedback.  We conjecture that the new concept of 
“tangible” computing is not necessarily related to tangible 
objects alone, but that new technology enables spatial 
interfaces which allow us to leverage humans’ well 
developed spatial reasoning abilities in UI and invent new 
metaphors for engagement. 
The concept of narrative is vital to the experience 
cylinder.  In the case of the Sea Stallion's voyage, the 
physical structure of the circular screen in itself imposes a 
narrative structure corresponding to the route from Roskilde 
to Dublin and back, even though the user can "follow" the 
29
AMBIENT 2011 : The First International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-170-0

 
 
 
Figure 7. Diagram showing layout and main hardware and software components. 
narrative in any desired order by moving around in the space. 
By contrast, the temporal order, size and arrangement in 
which media items appear on the screen can be controlled by 
the designer, allowing local storylines to be imposed within 
the overall structure.  These aspects are the subject of 
continuing experiment and evaluation in the experience 
cylinder.  The concept of "narrative spaces" is further 
explored by Sparacino [14], who offers promising narrative 
models, merging ideas from artificial intelligence such as 
probabilistic interaction models with physically interactive 
environments. 
 
B. 
Future Work 
Preliminary experiments and demonstrations confirmed 
that the cylinder has considerable potential to deliver an 
immersive, engaging experience that can be personalized and 
that the platform can combine knowledge transfer and story-
telling with the feeling of being present on the journey.  At 
the same time, the experience cylinder showed clearly the 
need for much further research in both technical and 
communicative dimensions.  Firstly, the platform itself can 
be improved by technical refinements and extensions, 
including the addition of more 3D sensors covering the area 
with greater precision;  this will also contribute to extensions 
allowing gesture tracking and tracking several users 
simultaneously.  The quality of the projection and rendering 
can be improved with, for example, back projection, while 
alpha blending allows transparency effects and a more 
seamless display. Secondly, the narrative elements and 
structure will undergo further investigation, experiment and 
evaluation. Questions that arise include how to provide better 
visual and audio orientation points that maintain the narrative 
structure, and how context such as the user’s previous route 
or prior knowledge could influence the interaction. Thirdly, 
the Sea Stallion voyage generated a huge amount of data, 
which motivates the integration of techniques for intelligent 
searching, for example based on an ontology relating to the 
voyage and its historical background. The intention is that 
the user can explore a chosen theme within the huge amount 
of available media, such as for example life on board the 
ship, shipbuilding methods or Viking history. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The project was partially funded by RUCInnovation, 
Roskilde University. We would like to thank the Viking Ship 
Museum, Roskilde, for supplying the media relating to the 
Sea Stallion’s voyage and for their support and enthusiasm. 
Dixi Strand, Sisse Siggaard Jensen, Christian Jacquemin and 
Henning Christiansen also contributed greatly to the project.  
 
 
30
AMBIENT 2011 : The First International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-170-0

 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Andreasen, T., H.Christiansen, J.Gallagher, C. 
Jacquemin, N.Møbius, N.Padfield, S.Siggaard, 
D.L.Strand, and P.R. Sørensen "Havhingstens Tur til 
Irland: en interaktiv oplevelsesplatform." CBIT, 
Roskilde University, 2011. 
[2] Danks, M., M. Goodchild, K. Rodriguez-Echavarria, 
D.B. Arnold, and R. Griffiths. "Interactive storytelling 
and gaming environments for museums: The interactive 
storytelling exhibition project." Technologies for E-
Learning and Digital Entertainment, Second 
International Conference, Edutainment 2007. Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, 2007. 104-115. 
[3] Falk, J.H. and Dierking, L.D. Learning from museums: 
Visitor experiences and the making of meaning. Alta 
Mira, 2000. 
[4] Grigorovici, D. "Persuasive effects of presence in 
immersive virtual environments." Being There: 
Concepts, effects and measurement of user presence in 
synthetic environments. Ios Press, 2003. 
[5] Jacquemin, C. "Architecture and experiments in 
networked 3d audio/graphic rendering with virtual 
choreographer." Proceedings, Sound and Music 
Computing (SMC'04), 2004. 
[6] Juarez, A., W. Schonenberg, and C. Bartneck. 
Implementing a low-cost CAVE system using the 
CryEngine2.   Entertainment Computing 1, 157–164, 
2011. 
[7] Krueger, M.W. "Environmental technology: Making the 
real world virtual." Comm. ACM, 1993: 36-37. 
[8] MAX/MSP. 2011. 
http://cycling74.com/products/maxmspjitter/. 
[9] Montemayor, J., A. Druin, A. Farber, S Simms, W. 
Churaman, and A. D'Amour. "Physical programming: 
designing tools for children to create physical interactive 
environments." CHI. 2002. 
[10] OpenFrameworks. 2011. 
http://www.openframeworks.cc. 
[11] Pinhanez, C.S., J. W. Davis, S. S. Intille, M.P. Johnson, 
A. D. Wilson, A. F. Bobick, and B. Blumberg 
"Physically interactive story environments." IBM 
Systems Journal 39, no. 3&4 (2000): 438 - . 
[12] Sales Dias, J.M. "Natural and tangible human-computer 
interfaces for augmented environments." Proceedings of 
the 26th annual ACM international conference on 
Design of communication, SIGDOC '08. ACM, 2008. 
181-182. 
[13] Slater, M. and S. Wilbur. "A framework for immersive 
virtual environments (FIVE): Speculations on the role of 
presence in virtual environments." Presence 6, no. 6 
(1997): 603-616. 
[14] Sparacino, F. "Natural interaction in intelligent spaces: 
Designing for architecture and entertainment." 
Multimedia Tools and Applications 38, no. 3 (2008): 
307-335. 
 
 
31
AMBIENT 2011 : The First International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-170-0

