Explicit and Implicit Human Computer Interactions in 
Ambient Intelligence Environments 
From Concepts Towards Concrete Implementations in the  
Active and Assisted Living Field of Practice 
 
Miroslav Sili 
Center for Health & Bioresources 
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH 
Giefinggasse 4, 1210 Vienna, Austria 
email: Miroslav.Sili@ait.ac.at 
Emanuel Sandner & Lukas Roedl 
Center for Health & Bioresources 
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH 
Giefinggasse 4, 1210 Vienna, Austria 
email: Emanuel.Sandner@ait.ac.at, Lukas.Roedl@ait.ac.at
 
 
Abstract—This work presents the design and development 
process of Ambient Intelligence Environments from the 
conception phase, over the implementation phase towards the 
end user perspective. The focus is on different interaction 
techniques in Ambient Intelligence Environments and their 
added value for the end user of such a system. 
Keywords-AmI; explicit HCI; eHCI; implicit HCI; iHCI; 
architecture; Active and Assisted Living; AAL.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Ambient Intelligence (AmI) interactions focus on 
interactions that are supported by, and embedded in, digital 
equipped environmental settings. As indicated in [1], AmI is 
a concept that refers to a digital environment that pro-
actively, but sensibly, supports people in their daily lives. 
In order to reach this goal, it is from utmost importance 
to consider the contextual information. This is also 
underlined by Schmidt [2] as follows: "Context and context-
awareness are central issues to ambient intelligence. The 
availability of context and the use of context in interactive 
applications offer new possibilities to tailor applications and 
systems on-the-fly to the current situation." The "on-the-fly" 
adjustment according the current situation is also a central 
element in adaptive systems [3]. Moreover, AmI systems 
utilize adaptive systems and the adaptivity factor but with a 
stronger 
focus 
on 
interactions 
in 
digital 
equipped 
environmental settings. This, in turn, allows the realization 
of implicit Human Computer Interactions (iHCI) in 
ubiquitous and disappearing computing [4]–[6] settings. This 
is a key element of AmI systems, namely the shift from 
explicit Human Computer Interaction (eHCI) elements, 
where users focus on interactions embodied within one 
single device (e.g., smartphone, tablet device, TV setting, 
etc.) towards iHCI elements where users can interact with the 
whole environment. Further on in his work, Schmidt 
summarizes this juxtaposition of eHCI vs. iHCI as follows: 
 
A. Explicit Human Computer Interaction (eHCI) 
• 
The user requests the system to carry out a certain 
action. 
• 
The action is carried out by the computer, in modern 
interfaces providing feedback on this process. 
• 
The system responds with an appropriate reply, 
which in some cases may be empty. 
B. Implict Human Computer Interaction (iHCI) 
• 
iHCI is the interaction of a human with the 
environment and with artifacts which is aimed to 
accomplish a goal. Within this process, the system 
acquires implicit input from the user and may 
present implicit output to the user. 
• 
Implicit inputs are actions and behavior of humans, 
which are done to achieve a goal and are not 
primarily regarded as interaction with a computer, 
but captured, recognized and interpret by a computer 
system as input. 
• 
Implicit output of a computer that is not directly 
related to an explicit input and which is seamlessly 
integrated with the environment and the task of the 
user. 
This work focuses on these two interaction types and 
presents in the first section a literature-based overview about 
the architectural setting that is needed to realize the eHCI 
and iHCI approaches within an AmI setting. Section 2 
presents a concrete AmI system, which utilizes the 
mentioned AmI architecture. This development represents 
the technical point of view regarding AmI systems and the 
backend, respectively. Section 3 presents two AmI settings 
from the end user perspective and from the frontend, 
respectively. This section highlights the eHCI and the iHCI 
factors where users interact not only with a device but rather 
with their environment. Section 4 summarizes the work and 
provides an outlook to future work in this field. 
II. 
BASIC AMI ARCHITECTURE 
One remarkable work that summarizes AmI concepts and 
application was presented by Augusto, et al. [1]. In this 
work, Augusto presents a general architecture of an AmI 
system and the corresponding information flow within the 
system. Figure 1 illustrates components of the general AmI 
architecture. The top component represents environmental 
interaction elements. This layer is responsible for the 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

mentioned iHCI aspect but at the same time this layer can 
also provide eHCI artifacts, for instance, as concrete UIs 
rendered on a smartphone or on a tablet device. The 
underlying layer is conducted of Sensors and Actuators. 
These components are responsible for information transfer 
from the digital world (in terms of bits and bytes) into the 
physical world (in terms of physical values, e.g., 
spatiotemporal sensing and smart-home control), and vice-
versa. The next component, the middleware layer, is 
responsible for the aggregation and the harmonization of 
sensor data and for the delegation of interventions towards 
different actuators installed in the environmental setting. 
This is the core component of an AmI system since it 
orchestrates the whole information flow. The next 
component represents the reasoner of the AmI system. In this 
architecture, Augusto refers to Artificial Intelligence 
reasoning. Negnevitsky highlights the key characteristic of 
AI in his work "Artificial intelligence: a guide to intelligent 
systems" 
with 
the 
following 
statement: 
"Artificial 
intelligence is a science that has defined its goal as making 
machines do things that would require intelligence if done by 
human" [7]. At this point, it is doubtful if every AmI Setting 
and thus if a general AmI architecture really requires this 
high level of reasoning. Nevertheless, despite of the 
reasoning level, it is understood, that every AmI system 
requires a reasoner that retrieves the aggregated and 
harmonized data form the middleware layer and that 
delegates interventions towards the middleware layer. 
 
 
Figure 1. General AmI system architecture and the flow of information [1]. 
 
In this work, Augusto uses the phrase “high level 
decision making process” to explain the remaining 
components and their interplay. The reasoning is based on 
the “Decision Makers” component that, for instance, can 
conclude a set of decision rules, and based on machine 
learning results produced by the “Discovery and Learning” 
component. This component requires a “Knowledge 
Repository” that collects relevant system events and that 
serves as data provider for the underlying machine learning 
module. 
 
In the previous section, we have seen that AmI systems 
relay on physical devices (sensors and actuators) in order to 
form the Ambient Intelligence environment. Next to the 
general AmI System architecture, Augusto also presents a 
generic layout of a Smart Home environment which is 
equipped with sensors and devices (actuators). 
 
Figure 2. A generic layout of a “Smart Home” enriched with sensors and 
devices as presented in [1] 
 
Figure 2 illustrates such a Smart Home environment and 
highlights, that in general, disproportional efforts are needed 
in order to build an iHCI setting. However, since we are 
living in a technological driven society it is expected that 
future technologies and developments will reduce current 
dominant cost- and complexity factors in building AmI 
environments. Current products, for instance Apple’s 
HomeKit [8], support this assumption. 
III. 
THE HOMER AMI SYSTEM 
Situated in the Active and Assisted Living (AAL) field of 
practice we have been experiencing the need to build AmI 
settings in various research projects and developed 
prototypes [9]–[11]. This resulted in the development of the 
HOMER [12] AmI system, which can be used across several 
research projects. The HOMER system utilizes all mentioned 
components of the general AmI architecture except the AI 
reasoning on this high sophisticated level. The reasoning in 
HOMER is bases on a set of finite state machines. Thus, 
HOMER provides in the first step rule-based reasoning, but 
it also provides interfaces for external components that build 
the knowledge repository and the machine learning 
components. However, Figure 3 illustrates the rule-based 
reasoning which utilizes finite state machines. States can 
trigger various interventions and the transitions have a large 
set of configurable conditions which need to be fulfilled in 
order to change the system state from one state into another. 
This example illustrates only one finite state machine within 
the system. It needs to be mentioned that the HOMER AmI 
setting supports a large set of finite state machines which are 
concurrently considered in the decision-making process.  
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 3. Example of decision making procedure based on finite state 
machines [12]. 
 
Despite the reasoning and the decision-making process, 
HOMER 
incorporates 
various 
sensors 
and 
devices 
responsible for the communication with the physical 
environment. Table I illustrates an excerpt of used devices 
and their purpose within the HOMER AmI environment. 
 
TABLE I.  
COMMUNICATION WITH PHYSICAL DEVICES IN THE 
HOMER AMI ENVIRONMENT 
Purpose 
Technology/Protocols 
Motion detection 
PIR Sensors (KNX, enOcean, Homematic, 
xComfort) 
Indoor localization 
RSSI-based localization (iBeacon), PIR 
based 
Smart Home control 
Actuators (KNX, enOcean, Homematic, 
RfxTrx, Tradfri) 
Ambient lighting 
Smart Lights (Philips Hue, Tradfri) 
Energy consumption 
Energy consumption sensors (Homematic, 
xComfort) 
Water valve control 
Sprinkler actuators (OpenSprinkler) 
Environmental Sensing 
Air 
quality, 
Temperature, 
Humidity, 
Barometric, 
Rain 
or 
Wind 
sensors 
(RfxTrx, Oregon Scientific) 
Activity Sensing 
Binary sensors, smart floor, window 
sensors 
Medical Device 
communication 
Weighing 
scale, 
blood 
pressure 
measurement 
devices 
(Near 
Field 
Communication - NFC, Bluetooth) 
Event tracking 
Device usage- based event tracking 
Object identification 
sensing & control, e.g., door opener, key 
reminder (NFC) 
TV as Interaction device 
IR, HDMI-CEC & SmartTV-based 
 
The table is not meant to be holistic, but rather to 
highlight that the development of AmI environments can be 
a quite complex procedure. In HOMER, a separate hardware 
abstraction layer enables the various modules to interact with 
each other and the rest of the system. HOMER itself utilizes 
the ISO/IEEE 11073-10471 standard for communication. 
 
IV. 
THE END USER PERSPECTIVE 
Previous sections focused on the AmI concept, AmI 
architecture and the concrete manifestation based on the 
presented HOMER AmI system. This section focusses on the 
end user perspective and highlights eHCI and iHCI aspects 
within AmI settings.  
As already highlighted in the previous section, AmI 
systems require Smart Home settings. In Figure 2 a generic 
layout of a “Smart Home” was presented. This illustration is 
similar to the HOMER setting, since HOMER also supports 
a representation of the current status within the Smart Home 
environment. Figure 4 illustrates this representation on a 
wall-mounted display. The figure highlights the floor plan of 
a demonstration setting conducted of two living rooms 
(lower part) and the hall way (upper part). The depicted dots 
within the floor plan illustrate installed sensors and actuators. 
Any activity originated form these devices are instantly 
updated in the GUI. Next to the visual representation, 
HOMER supports also speech synthesis as an interaction 
medium in order to inform the user regarding critical 
situations using the acoustical interaction modality. This is 
highlighted by the speaker which is located on the top of the 
wall-mounted display. 
 
 
Figure 4. Smart Home status representation on a wall-mounted display 
including a speaker for the HOMER system speech synthesis. 
 
In addition to the wall-mounted representation, the 
HOMER GUI can be rendered on any mobile device within 
this setting but also on TV-devices. This represents the 
classical eHCI approach where the user requests the system 
to carry out a certain action and where the system responds 
with an appropriate reply. As pointed out earlier, AmI 
environments additionally support the iHCI approach, where 
users interact with the environment rather than with devices. 
In the HOMER setting, an iHCI is, for instance, the door or 
the window opening action. This action is recognized by the 
system and might cause an intervention by the system if a 
critical condition is met. Such a critical condition is, for 
instance, the state where the user has forgotten to close/lock 
the door after entering the apartment. The system provides in 
such a case an intervention via the mentioned speech 
synthesis feature or via a push notification which will be 
displayed on user’s smartphone. 
As mentioned before, in our AAL field of practice, we 
have been utilizing HOMER in various projects and 
developments. The following example illustrates eHCI and 
iHCI aspects of AmI environments based on the research 
project RelaxedCare [9],[13],[14]. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

 
The project was performed between May 2013 and April 
2016 and was targeting the development of an interactive 
system for informal caregiver and their assisted persons. The 
goal of the project was to provide a solution which can 
reduce the necessity of regularly checking the status of a 
person in need of care, living at home. Although the project 
has finished years ago, its concept still represents the state-
of-the-art approach regarding AmI, eHCI and iHCI. Figure 5 
illustrates the basic idea of the RelaxedCare system. It 
depicts the AmI setting installed at the assisted person and 
the communication channels towards the informal caregiver. 
The overall goal of the project was to provide iHCI artifacts 
that derive a wellbeing state of the person in need of care. 
The assisted person primarily interacts with their living 
environment and less with explicit devices. On the other 
hand, the informal caregiver utilizes technologies such as the 
smartphone or an ambient light device to perceive the overall 
wellbeing state of their assisted person and to start the dialog 
with the remote person. This setting represents a mixed 
setting that utilizes eHCI artifacts (smartphone, RelaxedCare 
cube) and iHCI artifacts (the interactive picture frame, the 
ambient light device and the RelaxedCare cube). 
 
 
Figure 5. The RelaxedCare idea depicting the AmI environment in the top 
half of the image and the communication channels at the bottom half of the 
image. 
 
This iHCI vs. eHCI juxtaposition becomes even clearer if 
we take the final prototype into account that is depicted in 
Figure 6. The figure illustrates the mentioned ambient light 
device that can be installed on both sides, on the informal 
caregiver side and on the assisted person’s side. The ambient 
lighting represents the overall wellbeing state of the assisted 
person. This wellbeing state is derived from activity level, 
social interaction and daily life routine data, which in turn 
are provided by the AmI setting. 
 
 
Figure 6. The RelaxedCare cube prototype that provides the overall 
wellbeing state of the assisted person via ambient lighting. 
 
Thus, iHCI artifacts are used twofold: (1) to convey the 
wellbeing information and (2) to collect data for deriving the 
wellbeing state. Additionally, the solution provides eHCI 
artifacts by utilizing NFC-based tangible buttons which, 
when placed on the top of the RelaxedCare cube, cause a 
concrete communication action towards the remote user or a 
user-triggered change of the well-being status. Finally, the 
solution provides several predefined actions such as “please 
call me”, “I feel good/bad” or the emotion in term of “I’m 
thinking of you”. This information is transferred to the 
remote person to their smartphone and to their ambient 
lightning device. Here, and once again, the remote user 
utilizes both iHCI and eHCI factors for the information 
gathering and for the communication establishment. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
This work presented the design process from the 
conceptualization of AmI systems based on a general 
architecture, over to the manifestation of an AmI system 
based on the HOMER platform, towards the utilization of an 
AmI system demonstrated by the RelaxedCare project. 
Moreover, this work highlighted one of the key aspects of 
AmI systems, which is, next to the context awareness, also 
the provision of explicit HCI artifacts and implicit HCI 
artifacts. In addition to these positive aspects, the work also 
underlined that the design and the development of AmI 
systems can be a time-consuming, costly and complex 
process. Nevertheless, current technological developments, 
as highlighted earlier in Section 2, indicate that these 
negative factors can be alleviated in the near feature.  
Thus, with respect to future work, our focus will be the 
incorporation of such off-the-shelf technologies and the 
stronger focus on the decision-making process including its 
subparts, namely the enhancement of the knowledge base 
representation and the enhancement of machine learning 
algorithms. 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. C. Augusto and P. McCullagh, “Ambient intelligence: 
Concepts and applications,” Computer Science and 
Information Systems, vol. 4, pp. 1–27, 2007. 
[2] 
A. Schmidt, “Interactive context-aware systems interacting 
with ambient intelligence,” Ambient intelligence, vol. 159, 
pp. 159–178, 2005. 
[3] 
C. Mayer et al., “A comparative study of systems for the 
design of flexible user interfaces,” Journal of Ambient 
Intelligence and Smart Environments, vol. 8, pp. 125–148, 
2016. 
[4] 
N. Streitz and P. Nixon, “The disappearing computer,” 
Communications-ACM, vol. 48, pp. 32–35, 2005. 
[5] 
M. Weiser, “The computer for the 21st century.,” Mobile 
Computing and Communications Review, vol. 3, pp. 3–11, 
1999. 
[6] 
M. Weiser and J. S. Brown, “The coming age of calm 
technology,” Beyond calculation, Springer, pp. 75–85, 
1997. 
[7] 
M. Negnevitsky, “Artificial intelligence: a guide to 
intelligent systems” , Pearson Education, 2005. 
[8] 
A. Inc., iOS - Home Accessories - Apple (UK). [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.apple.com/uk/ios/home/accessories 2018.10.24 
[9] 
M. Morandell, S. Dittenberger, A. Koscher, E. Sandner, and 
M. Sili, “The simpler the better: How the user-inspired 
innovation process (UIIP) improved the development of 
RelaxedCare–the entirely new way of communicating and 
caring,” 
International 
Conference 
of 
Design, 
User 
Experience, and Usability, Springer, pp. 382–391, 2016. 
[10] 
C. Siegel, B. Prazak-Aram, J. Kropf, M. Kundi, and T. 
Dorner, “Evaluation of a modular scalable system for silver-
ager located in assisted living homes in Austria–study 
protocol of the ModuLAAr ambient assisted living project,” 
BMC public health, vol. 14, p. 736, 2014. 
[11] 
F. Palumbo, D. La Rosa, and E. Ferro, “Stigmergy-based 
Long-Term Monitoring of Indoor Users Mobility in 
Ambient Assisted Living Environments: the DOREMI 
Project Approach.,” AI* AAL@ AI* IA, pp. 18–32, 2016. 
[12] 
T. Fuxreiter et al., “A modular platform for event 
recognition in smart homes,” e-Health Networking 
Applications and Services (Healthcom), 12th IEEE 
International Conference on, IEEE, pp. 1–6, 2010. 
[13] 
M. Morandell, “Relaxedcare: How Informal Caregivers 
Stay Informed and Connected in a Really Easy Way,” 
Alzheimer’s & Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer’s 
Association, vol. 12, p. P157, 2016. 
[14] 
T.R.P. Consortium, RelaxedCare | connecting people in 
care 
situations. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.relaxedcare.eu/de 2018.10.24 
 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

