BOxy: A Cost-Effective Blood Oximeter
Beau Hsia, Derrick Wang, Navid Shaghaghi, and Zhiwen Zhang
Ethical, Pragmatic, and Intelligent Computing (EPIC) Laboratory
Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, California, USA
{bhsia, dwang1, nshaghaghi, zzhang}@scu.edu
Abstract—In third-world countries, there are efforts that push
for the increased availability of pulse oximeters for monitoring
critical health conditions. Currently, it costs African hospitals 500
USD to replace their current oximeters, and 250 USD to repair
small malfunctions, due to the outrageously high shipping costs
for both the machine and its spare parts. There is a great need
for oximeters that are cost effective, easy to maintain and repair,
portable, and convenient. With the proliferation of the Internet
of Things (IoT) these requirements can easily be met. However,
the beneﬁts of IoT have not yet reached critical mass in rural,
isolated, or impoverished parts of the world. Therefore, even
though the recent years have seen a plethora of wireless clip-on
ﬁngertip pulse oximeters on the market, the cost and reliability on
a Bluetooth connection with a cellphone are still considerable and
sometimes prohibitive factors. At the time of this writing, simple
yet reliable SPO2 sensors exist for around 2 USD yet the cheapest
pulse oximeter with Bluetooth capability is around 30 USD and
WiFi enabled devices are not available in the general consumer
market. BOxy, is Santa Clara University’s Ethical, Pragmatic, and
Intelligent Computing (EPIC) Laboratory’s effort to produce the
most cost-effective Blutooth and WiFi enabled pulse oximeter
using readily available and supported off-the-shelf components
so that communities and health workers in rural, isolated, and
impoverished regions of the world can easily purchase or build
and certainly repair their own pulse oximeters rather than rely
on costly or uncertain products or shipping costs.
Keywords–Blood Oxygen Meter (SpO2); Oximeter; Internet of
Things (IoT); Infrared.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Pulse oximetry noninvasively measures a patient’s blood-
oxygen level (SpO2) by analysing absorbed or reﬂected light
from red oxygenated hemoglobin or from blue de-oxygenated
hemoglobin in one’s pulmonary circulation [1]. From this
optical information, the device calculates the person’s blood
oxygen level using highly speciﬁc algorithms [2] to account
for undesirable absorbance values as it passes through venous
blood, or adipose, endothelial and epithelial tissue [1]. Pulse
oximeters are commonly used in clinical settings, where health
professionals monitor the level of oxygen in a patient’s blood,
which is of paramount importance especially when the patient
is undergoing artiﬁcial ventilation due to compromised lung
capabilities or is under general anesthesia [3]. [4] sites that
there are at least eight clinical applications of this technology,
including detection of hypoxemia, assessing pulmonary gas
exchange, and measuring blood pressure, among other uses.
Pulse oximeters are also extensively useful in pediatrics [5] for
monitoring pneumonia and other conditions, which has been
proven to reduce child mortality rates [6]. Pulse oximetry has
also been described as “one of the most important advances in
respiratory monitoring” [7]. The availability of this technology
provides a viable alternative to arterial blood samples, which
are invasive [7]. Outside the medical clinic, pulse oximeters
are also used for measuring sleep apnea in adult sleep studies
[8] and for detecting pneumonia in resident homes [9].
In third-world countries, there are efforts that push for the
increased availability of pulse oximeters for monitoring critical
health conditions [10]. Currently, it costs African hospitals
500 USD to replace their current oximeters, and 250 USD
to repair small malfunctions, due to the outrageously high
shipping costs for both the machine and its spare parts [11].
There is a great need for oximeters that are low-cost, easy to
maintain and repair, portable, and convenient.
In Sections II and III some limitations and existing ef-
forts for producing reliable cost-effective pulse oximeters are
explored. Sections IV and V delineate the implementation of
BOxy and some initial results respectively. And Section VI
provides a road map of future additions and changes to BOxy
which will transform the system from a prototype to a product.
II.
LIMITATIONS
There are currently some limitations to pulse oximters
applications, as they have not been proven to be effective
for anemia, methemoglobinemia, vasoconstriction, motion arti-
fact, hypotension, and carboxyhemoglobinemia [12]. However,
there have been efforts to manage the discrepancies that arise
due to motion artifacts, including those proposed by Masimo
technologies, which allows for continuous monitoring in the
face of poor tissue perfusion and patient movement [13].
Current oximeter standards hold that oximeters inaccuracies
are inherent, and can only be reduced by a certain degree [14].
III.
RELATED WORK
There have been many recent efforts to improve current
designs of the pulse oximeters that try to reduce its cost,
increase its accuracy, increase its portability, etc. Attempts
to create a smartphone based oximeter using a smartphone’s
ﬂashlight and camera to capture the reﬂectance and refraction
of the light ray as it traverses through a ﬁnger have not been
entirely successful because of various technological barriers,
such as the smartphone camera’s inability to accurately de-
tect infrared radiation [15]. Furthermore, such direct-detection
methods using a smartphone can not extend to continuous
monitoring even if their accuracy levels increase dramatically.
Researchers have also tried to create a micro-oximeter
that could be placed on someone’s ﬁngernail, made from
ﬂexible biomaterial [16]. Although this design could prove to
be convenient for continuous measurement, no price range was
speciﬁed. It seems reasonable to speculate that such a device
would be priced highly due to the inherently high cost of
ﬂexible and compact biomaterials and biosensors being used.
Hewlet Packard corporation developed a smaller more
portable family of pulse oximeters for clinical use in 1997
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

which were at the time revolutionary [17]. However, with the
proliferation of cell phone technology in the past decades,
much cheaper and more portable oximeters have been pro-
duced since. For instance, [18] is a low-cost oximeter that
is linked to a smartphone display via a headphone jack con-
nection. While this product is certainly a great step forwards
in terms of usability and economics, a Bluetooth connection
proves necessary because many current high-end smartphones
lack a headphone jack altogether in favor of more sleek
designs and features such as being waterproof. Furthermore,
a bluetooth connection extends the range of operatability by
eliminating entangled wires.
Finally, versions of continuously monitoring oximeters do
exist, but some require peculiar placements, such as on one’s
eyeglasses [19], forehead [20], neck [21], or ear canal [22].
IV.
DEVICE DEVELOPMENT
As the need for a cost-effective Bluetooth enabled oximeter
is apparent, a prototype of such an Internet of Things (IoT)
device using off-the-shelf components was undertaken by
Santa Clara University’s Ethical, Pragmatic, and Intelligent
Computing Laboratory.
A. Hardware
The prototype comprises of a single-board microcontroller
(Arduino UNO REV3), a sensor chip (MAX30102 Pulse
Oximeter Sensor Module [23]), and a Bluetooth module (HC-
05 Bluetooth Serial Module [24]). In the ﬁrst iteration, these
components were connected via extensive jumper wiring, and
with a breadboard simplifying the entire construction, ensuring
stable connections and accurate feedback.
Figure 1. Blood oximeter prototype.
Figure 1 shows all the necessary components and their
relevant connections and Figure 2 shows a simpliﬁed schematic
of the system showing all the necessary connections. During
operation, the system is completely independent and powered
internally using a 9V battery. This could be replaced with
a rechargeable battery source for environmental or economic
reasons.
The sensor module is present on the exposed portion of
the device surface, and uses an LED light to obtain blood
Figure 2. Blood oximeter Schematic.
Oxygen level readings through the skin noninvasively. The
LED emits electromagnetic frequencies in the range of red
and infrared light, which is the optimal range for hemoglobin
SpO2 analysis. Due to the constraints of human vision to light
wavelength of approximately 720nm, the light emitted by the
sensor appears red and looks like a laser, but is completely
safe for human vision due to the sensor’s low power output.
1) Design: In accordance to frugal and minimalist design
principles, the hardware has been simpliﬁed as much as
possible. Not only will having fewer parts lower the costs
associated with building and manufacturing the device, it will
also increase the ease at which users could repair or replace
the parts due to normal wear and tear per prolonged use.
The software for the device has also been designed with
usability and simplicity in mind. The device software has been
completely abstracted away from the user, and implements an
advanced signal processing algorithm to generate data quickly
and efﬁciently in the Arduino micro-controller, which has
limited computational power.
Finally, a minimalist smartphone application has been im-
plemented in a way to maximize ease of use while conserving
resources, in terms of energy, storage, and computational
power. Since the computational data ﬁltering and analysis
algorithm are housed solely on the microcontroller, the user’s
smartphone needs only to display the information obtained
via Bluetooth, freeing up computational resources to other
applications, perhaps running in tandem. The user interface is
completely intuitive and provides all the necessary instructions
for all the tasks from connecting to the device, to optimally
placing one’s ﬁnger on the sensor, to obtaining the blood
oxygen content reading from the device.
2) Materials: The prototype features the following items,
listed along with their prices:
•
Arduino UNO REV3: 5.49, Banggood
•
HC-05 Bluetooth Serial Module: 3.99, Banggood
•
MAX30102 Pulse Oximeter Sensor Module: 2.10, Ali
Express
•
8 Breadboard wires: 0.12 (1.5 cents each), Newegg
The total cost of the materials is 11.70 which at the time of this
writing, is about a third of the cost for the cheapest Bluetooth
enabled ﬁngertip pulse oximeter available for purchase in the
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

United States. As will be discussed further in the Future Steps
section below, the cost of this pulse oximeter can be reduced
even further.
B. Software
The program for the device includes calculations provided
for the MAX 30102 chip in the ”SparkFun MAX3010x Sensor
Library”. Bluetooth functionality and data communication was
incorporated into this code, and the size of the variable arrays
was reduced to decrease the static random access memory us-
age to alleviate memory shortcomings on the microcontroller.
To enable Bluetooth communication between the Arduino and
phone, an app was designed using the MIT App Inventor
website.
V.
RESULTS
During the prototype testing phase, the oximeter was able
to successfully show readings of blood oxygen level and heart
rate. However, sometimes the user had to wait a moment
before the oximeter would calibrate and display correct values.
When the oximeter is unable to obtain data or if it detects an
unrealistic SpO2 or heart rate measurement, such as if the
user’s ﬁnger is not on the sensor, it displays question marks
and instructs the user to re-position their ﬁnger.
Figure 3. Blood oximeter results side by side
As depicted in Figure 3, the accuracy of the readings
were tested against a commercially available ﬁngertip Pulse
Oximeter. Due to the extenuating circumstances brought about
by the COVID-19 outbreak at the time of this writing, the
device was not mass-tested, but the available data obtained
from limited tests indicated a great degree of accuracy.
Accurate readings were however punctuated with intervals
of higher variability in the blood oxygen and heart-rate read-
ings displayed. There are several factors that could contribute
to the periods of reading volatility; the most important of
which being the difﬁculty of stabilizing a ﬁnger on the
sensor for an extended period of time without some sort
of support mechanism such as an alligator clip (common in
medical instrumentation) or straps that immobilize the sensor
across the skin (common in athletic and ﬁtness monitoring
equipment). Slight movements of the ﬁnger caused the chip to
measure inaccurate values, which resulted in the intervals of
inconsistent readings observed on the smartphone application
display until the ﬁnger comfortably rests on the sensor for long
enough. Building a case to surround the components and thus
allow the faster resting or immobilization of the ﬁnger tip on
the sensor will alleviate this issue.
VI.
FUTURE STEPS
A. Shrinking Circuitry Size
The Arduino Uno microcontroller used for the current
working prototype, is considerably large and thus reduces the
portability of the device. To reduce the size of the system, there
are several possible alternatives that can be used. One option is
the placement of the Arduino Uno board with smaller boards
such as the Arduino Nano or Pro Mini. These two boards are
primarily the same, with the only major difference being a
substantial decrease in size. In addition, the Arduino Nano is
available at a cheaper price (3.29 from Banggood). A second
alternative is the combination of two of the components by
utilizing an Arduino microcontroller with built-in Bluetooth
capability. This would also effectively make the device smaller
due to the elimination of the extra Bluetooth module used in
the current prototype design. In addition, these microcontroller
modules are available at prices cheaper than estimated costs
for the separate microcontroller and Bluetooth modules.
B. Addition of WiFi capability
Another way to increase the portability of the oximeter
is to enable it to work completely separate from the phone.
The addition of a WiFi module would enable the device to
connect directly to a web service and store its readings. These
readings could then be pushed to a web or mobile GUI for the
user’s viewing or aggregated and graphed for trend building
and analytics as part of the medical record of an athlete or
patient for instance. In case of no WiFi connectivity, the device
could take advantage of the microcontroler’s internal memory
to store its readings and to push them to the server once WiFi
signal becomes available again.
At the time of this writing, arduino compatible devel-
opment boards with both Blutooth and WiFi radio modules
onboard in the form of Dual Core CPU with Low Power
Consumption MCU ESP-32S are available for 2.08 USD which
provides more functionality in a smaller form factor and at
cheaper cost. The use of such a board would effectively reduce
the prototype cost to less than 9 USD while increasing its
functionality to include WiFi capability as aforementioned.
C. Custom PCB
In making the device more stable and practical for use,
the use of a custom Printed Circuit Board (PCB) will be
required. This will not only eliminate the need for wires
and the breadboard, but also provide stability in electrical
connections between the components. PCBs can also enable
a decrease in size of the device and make installation more
effective and convenient.
Furthermore, the design and fabrication of a custom PCB
with all electronic components onboard would reduce the
cost drastically during mass production as it would be a
single purpose board and not need the general purpose design
and components of the commercially available microcontroler
development boards aforeused and aforementioned.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

D. 3D Printed Casing
The addition of a casing would provide more structural
support for the device and contribute to the visual aesthetic. A
3D printed casing would also protect the internal components
from collecting dust or otherwise natural weathering by the
external environment. A 3D printed casing was not produced
for the proof of concept prototype but is under design for
the smaller sized prototype which uses an ESP32 development
board.
E. UI Design
Improving the app design and the user interface will beneﬁt
the userfriendliness of the device. Furthermore, providing a
graph showing the trend based on multiple data points over
time will be more useful and beneﬁcial to a person that requires
or prefers periodic monitoring of their heart rate and blood-
oxygen levels. And lastly, it will be more practical to include
instructions for the most effective usage of the device in order
to provide a guide as well as troubleshooting steps to the users.
F. User Testing
To make sure that the device measures heart rate and
SPO2 levels properly across a variation of scenarios, sufﬁcient
user testing is necessary. In testing BOxy’s prototype, due to
limitations outlined by COVID-19 restrictions, this was not
possible. In the development of future designs and additions
delineated above, extensive user testing will be carried out
more robustly in order to verify the reliability and viability of
the device.
VII.
CONCLUSION
BOxy is a cost effective, portable, convenient, and easy
to repair pulse oximeter built from readily obtainable com-
ponents. These features enable the development, deployment,
and maintenance of reliable SPO2 sensing in low income,
remote, or technologically isolated communities. There is still
great room for improvement, as delineated in the future steps
section above, but the initial results have proven the possibility
of building such an oximeter. With the progress shown thus
far and the remaining improvements delineated above, BOxy
has the capability of playing a role in preserving the lives of
patients worldwide as the need for an oximeter with BOxy’s
attributes to be available to monitor the pulmonary health
of pediatric and geriatric patients in remote rural areas and
impoverished nations is very pressing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Many thanks are due to Santa Clara University’s depart-
ment of Bioengineering as well as the Frugal Innovation Hub
for their continued support of the project.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Yelderman and W. New, “Evaluation of pulse oximetry,” Anesthe-
siology: The Journal of the American Society of Anesthesiologists,
vol. 59, no. 4, 1983, pp. 349–351.
[2]
T. Rusch, R. Sankar, and J. Scharf, “Signal processing methods for
pulse oximetry,” Computers in biology and medicine, vol. 26, no. 2,
1996, pp. 143–159.
[3]
K. K. Tremper and S. J. Barker, “Pulse oximetry,” pp. 98–108, 1989.
[4]
A. Jubran, “Pulse oximetry,” Intensive care medicine, vol. 30, no. 11,
2004, pp. 2017–2020.
[5]
J. W. Salyer, “Neonatal and pediatric pulse oximetry,” Respiratory care,
vol. 48, no. 4, 2003, pp. 386–398.
[6]
T. Duke, R. Subhi, D. Peel, and B. Frey, “Pulse oximetry: technology
to reduce child mortality in developing countries,” Annals of tropical
paediatrics, vol. 29, no. 3, 2009, pp. 165–175.
[7]
A. Jubran, “Pulse oximetry,” Critical care, vol. 3, no. 2, 1999, p. R11.
[8]
N. Netzer, A. H. Eliasson, C. Netzer, and D. A. Kristo, “Overnight pulse
oximetry for sleep-disordered breathing in adults: a review,” Chest, vol.
120, no. 2, 2001, pp. 625–633.
[9]
K. S. Kaye, M. Stalam, W. E. Shershen, and D. Kaye, “Utility of
pulse oximetry in diagnosing pneumonia in nursing home residents,”
The American journal of the medical sciences, vol. 324, no. 5, 2002,
pp. 237–242.
[10]
C. King et al., “Opportunities and barriers in paediatric pulse oximetry
for pneumonia in low-resource clinical settings: a qualitative evaluation
from malawi and bangladesh,” BMJ open, vol. 8, no. 1, 2018, p.
e019177.
[11]
M. W. Weber and E. K. Mulholland, “Pulse oximetry in devloping
countries,” The Lancet, vol. 351, no. 9115, 1998, p. 1589.
[12]
J. E. Sinex, “Pulse oximetry: principles and limitations,” The American
journal of emergency medicine, vol. 17, no. 1, 1999, pp. 59–66.
[13]
J. M. Goldman, M. T. Petterson, R. J. Kopotic, and S. J. Barker,
“Masimo signal extraction pulse oximetry,” Journal of clinical moni-
toring and computing, vol. 16, no. 7, 2000, pp. 475–483.
[14]
M. Nitzan, A. Romem, and R. Koppel, “Pulse oximetry: fundamentals
and technology update,” Medical Devices (Auckland, NZ), vol. 7, 2014,
p. 231.
[15]
S. Tomlinson, S. Behrmann, J. Cranford, M. Louie, and A. Hashikawa,
“Accuracy of smartphone-based pulse oximetry compared with hospital-
grade pulse oximetry in healthy children,” Telemedicine and e-Health,
vol. 24, no. 7, 2018, pp. 527–535.
[16]
J. Kim et al., “Miniaturized battery-free wireless systems for wearable
pulse oximetry,” Advanced functional materials, vol. 27, no. 1, 2017,
p. 1604373.
[17]
S. K¨astle, F. Noller, S. Falk, A. Bukta, E. Mayer, and D. Miller, “A
new family of sensors for pulse oximetry,” HEWLETT PACKARD
JOURNAL, vol. 48, 1997, pp. 39–47.
[18]
C. L. Petersen, H. Gan, M. J. MacInnis, G. A. Dumont, and J. M.
Ansermino, “Ultra-low-cost clinical pulse oximetry,” in 2013 35th
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society (EMBC).
IEEE, 2013, pp. 2874–2877.
[19]
F. Braun et al., “Evaluation of a novel ear pulse oximeter: Towards
automated oxygen titration in eyeglass frames,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 11,
2020, p. 3301.
[20]
G. Comtois, Y. Mendelson, and P. Ramuka, “A comparative evaluation
of adaptive noise cancellation algorithms for minimizing motion arti-
facts in a forehead-mounted wearable pulse oximeter,” in 2007 29th
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 1528–1531.
[21]
M. Peng, S. A. Imtiaz, and E. Rodriguez-Villegas, “Pulse oximetry
in the neck-a proof of concept,” in 2017 39th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society
(EMBC).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 877–880.
[22]
J. P. Buschmann and J. Huang, “Pulse oximetry in the external auditory
canal–a new method of mobile vital monitoring,” IEEE Sensors Journal,
vol. 12, no. 3, 2011, pp. 671–676.
[23]
“Arduino heart rate monitor using max30102 and pulse oximetry,” 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://makersportal.com/blog/2019/6/24/arduino-
heart-rate-monitor-using-max30102-and-pulse-oximetry
[24]
“Hc-05
datasheet
—
bluetooth
transceiver
module,”
2019.
[Online]. Available: https://maker.pro/custom/tutorial/hc-05-bluetooth-
transceiver-module-datasheet-highlights
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-814-3
AMBIENT 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

