The Persuasive Potential of Lighting: Exploring User Lighting Setting Preferences 
for a Warm Room Atmosphere and Energy Consumption Feedback 
 
Shengnan Lu, Jaap Ham, Marianne van den Akker and Cees Midden 
Human-Technology Interaction 
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
e-mail: {s.lu, j.r.c.ham, c.j.h.midden}@tue.nl 
 
 
 
Abstract—Ambient lighting can be used for influencing users’ 
experience of the environment and their subsequent (energy 
consumption) behavior. Our research explored which lighting 
settings users prefer for lighting that is designed to give a room 
a ‘warm’ atmosphere and for lighting that is used as energy 
consumption feedback. In the experiment, three lighting 
characteristics (brightness, color temperature, and color hue 
and saturation) could be adjusted through an interactive 
interface according to participants’ preferences. Results 
showed that for creating a ‘warm’ atmosphere, lighting with a  
low luminance, a low color temperature, and a highly 
saturated,  warm color (i.e., orange/red) was preferred. For 
providing negative feedback about energy consumption, 
lighting with a high luminance, and a highly saturated, red 
color was preferred. Thereby, current results suggested that 
ambient lighting’s persuasive potential might be most optimal 
when lighting settings are used that are appropriate to a 
situation. 
Keywords-Ambient Lighting, Persuasive Technology, Energy 
Conservation, Lighting Characteristics. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Earlier research showed that ambient lighting can be used 
for influencing (energy conservation) behavior [1]. Thereby, 
lighting is used as ambient persuasive technology (e.g., [2] - 
[6]). More specifically, earlier research effectively used 
colors of ambient lighting as feedback to indicate a user’s 
energy consumption level, e.g., more red for higher energy 
consumption and more green for lower energy consumption 
[7] - [9]. Research [8] showed that colors of ambient lighting 
feedback 
can 
carry 
meaning 
that 
has 
pre-existing 
associations with energy consumption and these associations 
help users to easily process the feedback messages, and 
thereby enhance the effectiveness of ambient persuasive 
technology. 
In addition to using colors of ambient lighting to 
communicate feedback, other characteristics of lighting (e.g., 
brightness level, color temperature etc.) can also influence 
users’ experience of the ambient lighting, their environment, 
and importantly, their subsequent behavior [6]. For instance, 
people prefer ‘warm’ lighting (i.e., lighting with a low color 
temperature) in winter [10], and household energy 
consumption for heating systems could be reduced by 5% to 
8% by using this ‘warm’ light in winter while maintain the 
same thermal comfort level [11].  
To expand our knowledge on how lighting settings are 
able to influence energy consumption behavior, the current 
research investigated which lighting settings users prefer for 
lighting designed to give a room a ‘warm’ atmosphere and 
for lighting that is used as energy consumption feedback. 
That is, participants were seated in a room of which they 
could set the lighting characteristics (brightness, color 
temperature, and color), and participants were asked to set 
lighting characteristics to their preferences for two types of 
scenarios. In the first series of scenarios, participants were to 
set the room lighting characteristics such that room lighting 
gave the room a warm (or fresh) atmosphere. In the second 
series of scenarios, participants were asked to indicate which 
room lighting characteristics they would prefer the room 
lighting to have when that lighting was to be used to give 
them (positive or negative) feedback about their energy 
consumption (e.g., caused by heating the room). 
II. 
METHOD 
Fifteen participants (11 males and 4 females) aged 
between 17 and 35 participated in the experiment, all without 
a known visual handicap (e.g., color-blindness). Participants 
received 5 Euros for their participation in the experiment that 
lasted approximately 30 minutes. The experiment was 
computer-based and conducted in the Lighting Lab in the 
IPO building at the Eindhoven University of Technology 
campus. 
Participants were welcomed and seated in a room in 
which they could set the lighting characteristics. The settings 
interface allowed them to change three characteristics of the 
room lighting: Brightness, Color temperature, and Color 
(both hue and saturation). Participants could select one of 
these characteristics at a time, and change its settings using 
the ‘right’ and ‘left’ arrows on a computer keyboard. 
After participants had gotten familiar with the interactive 
lighting system, they were asked to set the room lighting to 
their preferences for a series of room atmosphere scenarios. 
That is, participants were presented with a scenario (e.g., 
“you are feeling a bit chilly and you want to create a warm 
atmosphere with the light”), and then could set the lighting 
characteristics to their preferences for that scenario. In half 
of the scenarios, participants were asked to create a ‘warm’ 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-508-1
AMBIENT 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

atmosphere, and in the other half of the scenarios, 
participants were asked to create a ‘fresh’ atmosphere. 
In the next task, participants were presented with a 
different series of scenarios, and asked to indicate which 
lighting settings they would prefer for receiving energy 
consumption feedback through changes in room lighting. For 
this, participants were first given a short introduction: “We 
are currently performing research on how lighting can be 
used as feedback to stimulate energy different behavior in 
home environments. For example, lighting can provide the 
feedback to inform you to turn down the temperature, use 
less water, shut down devices that are not in use, etc.” Next, 
participants were asked to set the lighting characteristics for 
a series of scenarios related to saving energy and resources 
(e.g., “You’ve set the bathroom temperature to 28 Celsius 
degrees, although it will not be used until tomorrow 
morning. How can lighting inform you that the temperature 
is set too high?” as an example of negative lighting 
feedback). For one scenario at a time, participants were 
asked to set lighting characteristics to their preferences, 
using the room lighting interface. In half of the scenarios, 
participants were asked to set the lighting such that it 
indicated negative feedback, and in the other half of the 
scenarios, participants were asked to set the lighting such 
that it indicated positive feedback. Finally, participants were 
thanked for participation, paid and debriefed. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Results showed that for giving a room a ‘warm’ 
atmosphere, participants preferred lighting with 1) a lower 
luminance, 2) a lower color temperature, 3) higher saturated, 
and 4) warmer colors (i.e., orange/red), compared to the 
lighting settings participants preferred for giving a room a 
‘fresh’ atmosphere (all p’s< .05). 
Furthermore, results showed that for receiving negative 
energy consumption feedback, participants preferred lighting 
with 1) a higher luminance, and 2) a higher saturated 3) color 
with a lower hue (i.e., red light), compared to lighting 
settings participants preferred for receiving positive energy 
consumption feedback (all p’s< .05). 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The current research explored which lighting settings 
users prefer for lighting designed to give a room a ‘warm’ 
atmosphere and for lighting that is used as energy 
consumption feedback. The results of this study describe the 
lighting settings users prefer for these two purposes, and 
thereby add to our knowledge of people’s associations of 
lighting characteristics with room atmosphere and heating 
(energy consumption) feedback, and thereby of the 
persuasive potential of lighting. The current results suggest 
that this persuasive potential might be most optimal when 
lighting settings are used that are appropriate to a situation. 
This 
research 
studied 
basic 
lighting 
characteristics 
(brightness; color temperature; and color, both hue and 
saturation), and future research might assess other 
characteristics of room lighting (e.g., patterns, movement, 
etc.). Based on the current results, future research can 
investigate the effectiveness of changing these characteristics 
of lighting for actually changing people’s perception of 
(‘warm’) 
room 
atmosphere, 
temperature 
perception, 
effectiveness 
of 
energy 
consumption 
feedback, 
and 
ultimately, the effectiveness of ambient lighting changes for 
influencing energy consumption behaviors. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank Martin Boschman for technical 
assistance during the experiment. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Ham and C. Midden, “Ambient persuasive technology 
needs little cognitive effort: the differential effects of 
cognitive load on lighting feedback versus factual feedback,” 
in Persuasive Technology. Springer, pp. 132–142, 2010. 
[2] E. Arroyo, L. Bonanni, and T. Selker, “Waterbot : Exploring 
Feedback and Persuasive Techniques at the Sink,” in 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in 
computing systems, pp. 631–639, 2005. 
[3] J. Ham, C. Midden, and F. Beute, “Can ambient persuasive 
technology 
persuade 
unconsciously? 
Using 
subliminal 
feedback to influence energy consumption ratings of 
household appliances.” in Proceedings of the 4th International 
Conference on Persuasive Technology - Persuasive ’09, 2009. 
[4] B. J. Fogg, Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to 
Change What We Think and Do, San Francisco, 2003. 
[5] G. T. Wilson, D. Lilley, and T. Bhamra, “Design Feedback 
Interventions 
For 
Household 
Energy 
Consumption 
Reduction,” in 16th Conference of the European Roundtable 
on Sustainable Consumption and Production (ERSCP) & 7th 
Conference 
of 
the 
Environmental 
Management 
for 
Sustainable Universities (EMSU) (ERSCP-EMSU 2013), 
2013. 
[6] S. Lu, J. Ham, and C. Midden. “Persuasive technology based 
on bodily comfort experiences: The effect of color 
temperature of room lighting on user motivation to change 
room temperature.” International Conference on Persuasive 
Technology. Springer International Publishing, pp. 83-94, 
2015. 
[7] S. Maan, B. Merkus, J. Ham, and C. Midden, “Making it not 
too obvious: the effect of ambient light feedback on space 
heating energy consumption,” Energy Efficiency, vol. 4, no. 
2, pp. 175–183, 2011. 
[8] S. Lu, J. Ham, and C. Midden. “The influence of color 
association strength and consistency on ease of processing of 
ambient lighting feedback.” Journal of Environmental 
Psychology, 47, pp. 204-212, 2016. 
[9] S. Lu, J. Ham, and C. J. Midden, “Red Radiators Versus Red 
Tulips: The Influence of Context on the Interpretation and 
Effectiveness 
of 
Color-Based 
Ambient 
Persuasive 
Technology.” 
International 
Conference 
on 
Persuasive 
Technology. Springer International Publishing, pp. 303-314, 
2016. 
[10] EH. Nakamura, N. Kakitsuba, and M. Oki, “Influence of air 
temperature on preference for color temperature,” Journal of 
Architecture Planning and Environmental Engineering, no. 
535, pp. 1–8, 2000. 
[11] Y. Ishikawa, “Energy-saving effect of heating/cooling system 
by illuminant color,” Journal of the Illuminating Engineering 
Institute of Japan, vol. 77, no. 11, pp. 690–692, 1993.
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-508-1
AMBIENT 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

