Ambient Sensor System for In-home Health Monitoring
Toshifumi Tsukiyama
School of Information Environment
Tokyo Denki University
Inzai, Chiba, Japan
Email: t-tsuki@mail.dendai.ac.jp
Abstract—In this paper, we deal with a sensor-based monitoring
system, which evaluates the health status of the elderly based
on daily living activities and provides the forecast of an emer-
gency situation to a local nursing center without explicit user
interaction. Here, the main focus is on reasonably priced and
noncontact sensors which assure direct recognition of quotidian
activities. For meeting these criteria, water ﬂow sensors that are
attached to faucets in the kitchen, washroom, and to the toilet
are a promising solution. An advantage of this solution is that
the system can be readily installed in any type of housing. In
addition, this system does not require personal data to be saved
or transmitted outside. We will present initial results from some
experiments.
Keywords–Ambient monitering system; Health care; Water ﬂow
sensor; Active RFID tag; Vibration sensor; Recognition of quotidian
activity.
I.
INTRODUCTION
We are confronted with an increasing population of solitary
elderly many of whom live in their own housing and for
whom dangerous situations that may require medical attention
are insidious. However, the number of caregivers available
for frequent home visits is limited. Thus, new care services,
such as the use of monitoring systems, are needed to cut
costs in health care while still providing security and adequate
medical treatment for people who live alone and are restricted
physically.
There are a number of compact wearable sensors used for
the detection of emergencies, such as sensors for the obser-
vations of vital signs [1]. This kind of emergency sensor has
one disadvantage: it has to be worn permanently and operated
actively, making it highly limited in regards to functionality
and comfort. Recently, research for this aspect of health care
has focused on capturing the activities of daily living by using
ambient monitoring systems. Such monitoring systems can be
divided into two categories: to identify short-term emergencies
and long-term variations in health status. In this paper, we
focus on long-term variations in the health status, in other
words, a sensor-based monitoring system which evaluates the
health status of an elderly person based on his/her daily living
activities and provides the forecast of an emergency situation
to a local nursing center without explicit user interaction.
One method for the early detection of emergency situation
is monitoring systems using position sensors. The best-known
representatives of position sensors are infrared-ray position
sensors, which are installed in the living room, a bedroom,
corridors and so on [2]-[4]. Positional information for the
person is acquired from the detection place of body heat as
he/she moves through the house. A model of the normal day-
to-day behavior patterns is created based on the individual’s at-
home actions, such as their movement patterns, living room use
frequency, and living room use time, which are derived from
the positional data [5][6]. Problems with the individual’s phys-
ical condition can be detected when there is a major deviation
between the model behavior and actual behavior patterns. The
development of the day-to-day behavior models with machine
learning methods requires a solid database with a substantially
large number of cases in order to achieve reasonable results.
Therefore, the installation of such technologies takes a great
deal of time.
These position sensors provide only indirect information
on daily living activities. From the viewpoint of reliability,
it is desirable to directly specify normal daily activities and
then to detect variations which may be signs of a dangerous
situation. TV cameras can observe daily activities and detect
dangerous situations, but from the viewpoint of privacy, their
introduction into private homes is limited. A smart meter,
which is used for the billing of electricity, can also be used for
activity recognition [7]. Daily variations in power consumption
are recorded in the smart meter and household appliance use
can be ascertained from the variations, allowing the inference
of daily living activities. However, it is very difﬁcult to analyze
the variations in the current.
In this paper, we propose a monitoring system for the
early detection of an emergency situation by using water
ﬂow sensors which are attached to faucets in the kitchen and
washroom sinks, and in the toilet in the bathroom. These
sensors assure direct recognition of quotidian activities, such
as urination, kitchen work, and activities related to keeping
neatness. For example, the activity of washing one’s hands
can be derived from the signal of a water ﬂow sensor at the
washroom sink. An advantage of this method is that rule-based
methods [8][9] can be used for analysis and interpretation of
the sensor data. In addition, these sensors are available at
reasonable price. The system can be installed easily in any
type of housing, and no interaction by the user is required. No
personal data, such as photographs or video recording have to
be saved in the system or transmitted outside.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II we de-
scribe the brief outline of the proposed method and monitoring
system with water ﬂow sensors. Section III describes the
technical aspect of the water ﬂow sensors. Section IV contains
the implementation of the monitoring system and experimental
results. Concluding remarks and future works are given in
Section V.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

II.
OVERVIEW OF THE PROPOSED MONITORING SYSTEM
Many quotidian activities that are involved in maintaining
a healthy life are accompanied by the usage of tap water,
and there is a strong connection between such activities and
the time and duration of tap water use. For example, a large
volume of tap water is used for cooking and washing-up before
and after a meal. Therefore, based on the duration of tap water
use at each faucet at particular times, day-to-day activities are
directly recognizable. There are some conventions about the
usage of tap water in daily living. The proposed monitoring
system uses such conventions to understand the daily living
activities and to deduce signs of ill health in the elderly.
The water ﬂow sensors of the monitoring system are ﬁxed
on faucets in the kitchen and washroom sinks, and on the toilet
in the bathroom in the user’s house, and the monitoring system
records the duration of tap water use at one-hour intervals. The
knowledge and conventions used in the monitoring system are
as follows. According to medical knowledge, humans urinate
an average of ﬁve or six times a day. If there is much less
or much more frequent use of the toilet, then some diseases
are suspected [10]. It is possible to infer this by checking the
frequency of water usage in the bathroom. If the user is a
healthy person, he/she washes his/her face and rinses his/her
mouth when he/she gets up in the morning and before going
to bed at night. He/she also performs activities, such as hand
washing during the day. Such activities can be inferred based
on the data from the water ﬂow sensor at the sink. In addition,
at meal times, people use a large volume of water in the kitchen
for cooking and washing dishes. Some peaks of water usage
appear in the distribution of the use duration in the kitchen.
Based on these conventions and this knowledge, the health
status of the user can be inferred.
The model for the normal water usage is created based on
such conventions. When there are major deviations between
the model and actual usage patterns, problems with the user’s
physical condition are detected. The reasoning can be based on
a decision tree which is organized using the conventions and
knowledge of water usage. At midnight, the reasoning program
checks the time and duration of water use at every faucet. If
there is a major deviation between the model and the activities
of the day it reports the forecast of an emergency situation to
a local nursing center. Then, a caregiver will visit the user to
verify his/her condition.
III.
EQUIPMENT FOR THE MONITORING SYSTEM
This section describes the technical implementation of the
proposed monitoring system. We considered the following
factors for the system design. The two most important factors
are the selection of suitable sensors and software technical
realization. The sensors must be reasonably priced and must
assure direct recognition of quotidian activities. The sensors
must also be easy to install in any type of housing without
high-cost remodeling. A wireless connection is also an im-
portant factor. In addition, the monitoring system must not be
operated or conﬁgured by the user. No personal data should
be saved in the system or transmitted outside.
Fig.1 illustrates the functional block diagram of the mon-
itoring system. The monitoring system consists of two main
elements: water ﬂow sensors attached to a water pipe near a
faucet and a notebook computer that is placed in the house of
the user. The sensors are linked with the computer wirelessly.
The computer collects data from the sensors, processes it, and
sends the report to the nursing center via the Internet at the
ﬁxed time.
The water ﬂow sensor consists of a vibration sensor and
an active Radio Frequency IDentiﬁcation (RFID) tag. Fig.2
illustrates the prototype of the water ﬂow sensor. Mechanical
vibration in the range of 1000 to 1500Hz occurs at the water
pipe near the faucet while tap water is running. The vibration
sensor is designed to be attached to the water pipe near a
faucet to pick up the mechanical vibrations. A ready-made
vibration microphone used for tuning musical instruments can
be applied to the vibration sensor, which is available for about
10 euros in the market. Fig.3 shows an example of the vibration
microphone clipped to a water pipe near a faucet.
The active RFID tag has a unique ID code, which provides
information about its location in the house. When the micro-
phone detects mechanical vibrations from the faucet, the active
RFID tag is switched on. Consequently, the tag sends a radio
frequency signal (315MHz) with its ID code. The signal is
transmitted at one-second intervals while the water continues
to ﬂow through the faucet. The tags can send signals to a range
of up to about 10m, which is sufﬁcient for collecting the ID
codes in a normal house. The proposed monitoring system
measures the time of running water from each faucet to obtain
the use frequency and duration of tap water use in everyday
life.
Fig.4 illustrates an RFID reader with a notebook computer.
The RFID reader receives the RF signal from the tags, obtains
the ID code and reports it to the computer through an RS-
232c serial port. The number of ID codes received indicates
the amount of time that there is running tap water and is
proportional to the amount of water use because ID codes
are transmitted steadily at one-second intervals. The computer
accumulates the received ID codes at one hour-intervals and
then the distribution of the duration of tap water use can
be obtained for each faucet. The computer is responsible for
recording the ID codes and evaluating the health status based
on the distributions of the duration of tap water use. It also
makes the report of the day at the ﬁxed time, which includes
warning messages if there is a forecast of an emergency
situation.
Water Pipe
Vibration Sensor
Active RFID
Tag
ID Code
RFID
Reader
Notebook
Computer
Vibration Sensor
Water Pipe
Active RFID
Tag
Figure 1.
Functional block diagram of the monitoring system, which consists
of vibration sensors, active RDIDs and a notebook compute with a RFID
reader.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Figure 2.
Prototype of the water ﬂow sensor which consists of a vibration
microphone, an audio amp., an active RFID tag with an antenna, and a battery.
Figure 3.
The water ﬂow sensor is installed at the sink. The vibration
microphone is clipped to a water pipe near the faucet.
IV.
IMPLEMENTATION AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The monitoring system was installed in a real housing
environment and the experiment was conducted to see whether
there is a strong connection between quotidian activities and
the time and frequency of tap water use. The house had a
living area of 108 square meters (roughly 15m by 8m) and
the resident was a 65-year-old man in good health. The water
ﬂow sensors were set at the kitchen sink, the washroom sink
and the toilet’s ﬂush tank. The maximum distance between
the RFID reader and the water ﬂow sensors was 7m. First,
the sensitivity and reliability of the water ﬂow sensors was
checked. The sensors could detect gently running water such
as would be poured into a glass.
Fig.5 illustrates an example of the distribution of the
duration of water use at the toilet. The water ﬂow sensor was
set on the water pipe connected to the toilet’s ﬂush tank in
the bathroom. The horizontal axis of the graph denotes time,
which starts at 2 a.m., at one-hour intervals. The ﬂow sensor
transmits its ID code at one-second intervals while water is
ﬂowing into the ﬂush tank. It continues for about 60 seconds
to ﬁll up the tank. The vertical axis shows the duration of
water use for the received ID code. From the graph you can
see that the resident urinated seven times on this day, at an
average interval of 2.5 hours.
Fig.6 shows the graph of the duration of tap water use
in the kitchen. The water ﬂow sensor was set on the water
pipe connected to the sink’s faucet. The time period when
the frequency of water use becomes high was observed twice.
The ﬁrst was during the lunch hour and the second one was at
mealtime in the evening. The graph shows that the resident
prepared meals twice on this day. The total time of water
Figure 4.
RFID reader and a notebook computer for data acquisition and
processing.
ﬂow is relatively short because the house is equipped with
a dishwasher. The peak of the distribution in the middle of the
night appears to be caused by drinking tea or something.
Fig.7 shows the graph of the duration of tap water use at
the washroom sink. The water ﬂow sensor was set on the water
pipe connected to the sink’s faucet. This sensor is intended to
detect quotidian activities, such as face washing and brushing
of teeth. In other words, this is a sensor to detect activities for
keeping neatness. The distribution of the duration had a peak
in the morning. This means that the resident used tap water
for brushing his teeth and washing his face. He also rinsed
his mouth around midnight and performed activities, such as
washing his hands during the day.
The model of the normal water usage was created based on
the following medical knowledge and conventions. According
to medical knowledge, humans urinate an average of six to
eight times a day. If there is much less or much more frequent
use of the toilet, then, some diseases are suspected. If you
awake two or more times at midnight to urinate it is also the
sign of a poor state of health. At meal times, people use a
large volume of water in the kitchen for cooking and washing
dishes. The time period when the use frequency of tap water
is high appears in the distribution graph, and it is very likely
to be observed in the morning, at around lunch time, or in the
evening. You wash your face and rinses your mouth when you
get up in the morning and before going to bed at night. You
also perform activities, such as hand washing during the day.
A large volume of water is not used at the washroom sink but
the use frequency of tap water is apt to become high.
At every midnight (2 a.m.), the reasoning program checked
the use frequency of tap water at the faucets. The program
counted the duration of water usage at each interval as one
quotidian activity if it was above a ﬁxed threshold time. When
there were major deviations between the time and number of
activities and the model it was considered that some problems
occurred in the user’s physical condition. The reasoning for
detecting the problems was done on a decision tree which was
organized based on the model, and the report of the day was
sent out by e-mail. In this experiment, the mail was sent to
the author’s ofﬁce at midnight. Fig.8 shows an example of
the e-mail message, which includes three items: ”Urination”,
”Kitchen Work”, and ”Activities for Neatness”. Each item
consists of a judgment and the list of the time of the major
water usage, which is used for the judgment. If there is a
deviation between the normal model and the actual activity
pattern the judgment of each item is denoted as ”Something
Wrong”. If not, the message is ”Normal”.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Toilet
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
2
5
8
11
14
17
20
23
Time
Duration (s)
Figure 5.
Distribution of the duration of water ﬂow at the toilet’s ﬂush tank.
Kitchen sink
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2
5
8
11
14
17
20
23
Time
Duration (s)
Figure 6.
Distribution of the duration of tap water use at the kitchen sink.
Washroom sink
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2
5
8
11
14
17
20
23
Time
Duration (s)
Figure 7.
Distribution of the duration of tap water use at the washroom sink.
Figure 8.
Example of the e-mail massage which is sent to a caregiver at
regular intervals.
V.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this paper, we dealt with a sensor-based monitoring
system which evaluates the health status of the elderly based on
daily living activities. Here, the main focus was on reasonably
priced and contactless sensors which assure direct quotidian
activity recognition. To meet these demands we proposed the
water ﬂow sensors attached to faucets in the kitchen and
washroom and to the toilet. The advantage of this solution is
that the monitoring system can be built affordably into any kind
of housing. We made a prototype of the monitoring system
from electric parts which are all available in the market. The
prototype of the monitoring system was checked in a real
house and the experiments showed that the expected results
from the water ﬂow sensors were obtained. The initial results
will be followed by more practical trials where the system
will be installed in various home environments and criteria for
generating automatic alert messages will be derived. This is
currently in preparation.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Pantelopoulos, and N. G. Bourbakis, ”A Survey on Wearable Sensor-
Based Systems for Health Monitoring and Prognosis,” IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics - Part C: Application and Reviews,
Vol. 40, No. 1, pp.1-12, 2010.
[2]
X. H. B. Le, M. D. Mascolo, A. Gouin, and N. Noury ”Health Smart
Home for elders -A tool for automatic recognition of activities of daily
living,” 30th Annual International IEEE EMBS Conference, pp. 3316-
3319, IEEE Press, Vancouver 2008.
[3]
M. Skubic, R. D. Guevara, and M. Rantz ”Testing Classiﬁers for
Embedded Health Assessment,” M. Donnelly, et al. Eds. ICOST 2012,
LNCS vol. 7251, pp. 198-205, 2012.
[4]
S. Ohta, H. Nakamoto, Y. Shinagawa, and T. Tanikawa, ”A Health
monitoring system for elderly people living alone” J Telemed Telecare
8, pp. 151-156, 2002.
[5]
S. Aoiki, M. Onishi, A. Kojima, and K. Fukunaga ”Learning and
Recognizing Behavioral Patterns Using Position and Posture of Human”
The 2004 IEEE Conference on Cybernetics and Intelligent Systems, pp.
1299-1302, IEEE Press, Singapore 2004.
[6]
P. Chahuara, A. Fleury, F. Portet, and M. Vacher ”Using Markov Logic
Network for On-Line Activity Recognition from Non-Visual Home
Automation Sensors” F. Paterno, et al. Eds. AmI 2012, LNCS vol. 7683,
pp. 177-192, 2012.
[7]
S. Chiriac, and B. Rosales ”An Ambient Assisted Living Monitoring
System for Activity Recognition -Results from the First Evaluation
Stages” R. Wichert, and B. Eberhardt Eds. AAL-Kongress 2012, pp.
15-27, Berlin, Springer 2012.
[8]
C. Marzahl, P. Penndorf, I. Bruder, and M. Staemmler ”Unobtrusive Fall
Detection Using 3D Images of a Gaming Console -Concept and First
Results” R. Wichert, and B. Eberhardt Eds. AAL-Kongress 2012, pp.
135-146, Berlin, Springer 2012.
[9]
C. A. Siebra, M. D. C. Silva, F. Q. B. Silva, A. L. M. Santos, and
R. Miranda, ”A Knowledge Representation for Cardiovascular Problem
Applied to Mobile Monitoring of Elderly People,” The Fifth International
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, pp. 314-319,
2013.
[10]
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/003140.htm
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-356-8
AMBIENT 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

