Improving Interdisciplinary Communication – Use Case Focused User Interaction 
Diagram 2.0 
Daniela E. Ströckl, Daniela Krainer, Elena Oberrauner 
Active & Assisted Living – Research Unit of Carinthia University of Applied Sciences 
Klagenfurt, Austria 
e-mail: {d.stroeckl, d.krainer, e.oberrauner}@fh-kaernten.at
Abstract— In this paper, we present the results of further 
research according to a communication improvement method 
within projects with interdisciplinary disposition. This method 
was used in the Active and Assisted Living (AAL) pilot-region 
project Smart VitAALity, to encourage elderly people to 
interact with state of the art technologies and formulate their 
needs. In addition to various research partners (computer 
science, economics and health management), business partners 
and Non-Profit Organizations (NPOs), end-users are also 
involved, and all these project partners speak a different 
language, according to their profession. The Use Case focused 
User Interaction Diagram 2.0 should provide a non-technical 
translation for every stakeholder independent of their prior 
knowledge to enhance the development process and capture 
various aspects, ideas, and suggestions for improvements and, 
furthermore, it should represent the interaction needs of 
elderly people. Therefore, the diagram was evaluated by 
elderly people to improve the feedback method. 
Keywords - Interaction Design; Human-system Interface; 
Interaction Diagram; Communication method; AAL. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
During applied research projects, it is common that 
communication takes place between different stakeholders 
with diverse background knowledge. These stakeholders 
often use the same terms with different meanings; to avoid 
misunderstandings, the Use Case Focused User Interaction 
Diagram [1] (UC-UI-Diagram 1.0) was developed according 
to the development process of systems with a human-system 
interface. This tool improves the communication base in 
interdisciplinary projects and gives every stakeholder a 
quick overview of the ongoing interface development per 
use case. 
Referring to the first version of the chart notation, the 
Use Case Focused User Interaction Diagram 2.0 (UC-UI-
Diagram 2.0) was developed with the approach to minimize 
the notation elements in order to improve the learning curve 
for understanding the diagrams. Therefore, the number of 
notation elements was decimated from eight to three and the 
elements were adjusted according to the UML 2.5 [2] 
standard element design. One of the reasons for the element 
design change was that the used element design of the UC-
UI-Diagram 1.0 required different color expressions and the 
contrast and discriminability was not useable for a possible 
involvement of older adults with visual impairments. To 
also use the UC-UI-Diagram for this stakeholder group 
during the development process, the idea of the pre-
evaluated element design of the UML 2.5 interaction 
diagrams (sequence diagram and communication diagram 
[2]) was used. This makes it possible to create the diagrams 
with common diagram drawing tools like Microsoft Visio, 
because the element designs are pre-installed and, 
furthermore, computer scientists are familiar with them and 
can also use the diagrams during the implementation into 
the system.   
In the project Smart VitAALity, an Active and Assisted 
Living (AAL) pilot region project in Austria (Carinthia), the 
UC-UI-Diagram 2.0 method was initially used to improve 
the communication between technical and non-technical 
stakeholders. The involved stakeholder group is an 
interdisciplinary consortium of researchers in health 
management, economics, computer science and engineering, 
as well as Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) 
with the emphasis of technical development and NPOs as 
caregivers. The entire project team was involved in the 
development process of the use cases. To extend the 
perspective of each use case, the UC-UI-Diagram 2.0 is 
additionally used. This information is provided on a shared 
platform to every stakeholder and, based on this, everyone 
can make proposals for improvements. To let the user group 
participate in the development process, it is necessary to 
evaluate the used tool with their prior-knowledge and 
usability. Therefore, during the Smart VitAALity project, 
the UC-UI Diagram 2.0 was evaluated and the results are 
presented in this paper. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II, we discuss the materials and method. Section III presents 
our results. Section IV addresses improvement and 
discussion. We conclude this paper in Section V. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
This section explains the background for the UC-UI 
Diagram 2.0. Furthermore, it presents the evaluation 
strategy according to the human-centered design approach 
[3]. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

A. UML 2.5 Communication and Sequence Diagram 
The concept of time-related interaction between entities, 
as well as the illustration of relations between entities, can 
be realized with communication diagrams in combination 
with sequence terms. Because of its structure, this diagram 
extension is 
hard to understand for non-technical 
stakeholders. To get a quick overview of the different 
interactions, the UML standard uses a nesting strategy. 
  1.2b.1: function2(param1, param2) 
(1) 
As shown in (1), the notation for communication diagram 
interactions 
with 
sequence 
terms 
is 
realized. 
The 
designation 1.2b.1 means: the first interaction in the content 
led to a second interaction which was a parallel interaction 
denoted with b (the other parallel interactions will get an “a” 
or a “c”). The interaction after the parallel one (2b) will be 
the executed interaction in this example with function2, 
which contains two parameters. This can be hard to 
understand if the usage of such UML standards is not a 
daily business. To ease the understanding of the interaction 
diagram, two measures were undertaken: 
1. 
Simplify 
interaction 
sequences: 
no 
parallel 
interactions illustrated with characters or complicated 
numbering to show dependencies between interactions 
2. 
Context change: the interaction diagram is specific 
for one named use case – to make it easier to understand 
The UC-UI Diagram 2.0 should use the idea of use case 
based interaction of the prior 1.0 version of the diagram and 
combine it with the idea of the time and relation related 
interaction concept of UML 2.5. Furthermore, the diagram 
should be developed in a way that even non-technical 
experts should be able to understand and give feedback to 
improve the navigation strategy.  
B. UC-UI Diagram 2.0 Evaluation Strategy 
For the evaluation of the developed UC-UI Diagram 2.0, 
an assessment was made with the aim to analyze the 
diagrams to determine acceptability, understanding and 
potential areas for improvement. The evaluation process can 
be divided into the following five phases. 
The participants of the chosen user group were selected 
based on their age - between 50 and 75 years. In the first 
phase (step 1) of the evaluation, the participants completed 
the TA-EG survey [4] (“Technology Affinity for Electronic 
Devices”) which is a tool to assess the technical affinity and 
serves to determine the attitude towards electronic devices 
of the participants. The TE-AG consists of 19 items 
structured in four subscales “Enthusiasm”, “Competency”, 
“Positive impacts”, “Negative impacts” when dealing with 
electronic devices like mobile phone, computer, TV, etc.  
The second phase (step 2) was about the comprehension 
of the diagram. For this purpose, the developed diagram 
with a corresponding legend, was shown to the test persons 
for the first time. Since it is a UC-UI Diagram, the use case 
“show weather forecast” was chosen, because the 
participants may be familiar with this scenario from daily 
routines. The task of this phase was to understand the 
diagram with the enclosed legend after the documents were 
explained in detail. 
The next step (step 3) in the evaluation process was 
about the graphical representation of the interaction 
elements in the diagram, such as buttons or text elements. 
Therefore, the participants were asked to design a mock-up 
based on the current use case. The emphasis in this 
assignment was to see if the participants get a picture in 
their minds according to the diagram elements and if they 
distinguish different element types (e.g., text, buttons, etc.). 
After the completion of this task, the created mock-up 
design was compared to an existing design representing the 
same use case, and the results were discussed. 
In the fourth phase (step 4), an incomplete interaction 
diagram was presented, representing the use case 
“emergency call”. In this scenario, one element was omitted 
deliberately: A “Cancel” button that prevents the user to 
cancel a particular part of the scenario. The goal was to look 
more closely at the navigation paths within the diagram to 
find the mistake. 
Finally, in the fifth phase (step 5), the test persons were 
asked if they had already worked with a UC-UI Diagram 
and if such a diagram could be a straightforward way to 
display navigation paths. Furthermore, the participants were 
asked about the difficulties while working with the diagrams 
during the evaluation process. In the end, suggestions for 
potential improvements were discussed. 
The used language for all documents was German. The 
session had one hour duration. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Within this section, the results of the diagram 
conceptualization and the evaluation are presented. 
A. UC-UI Diagram 2.0 
To 
get 
a 
step 
further 
into 
the 
understanding 
improvement, the diagram notation was reversed from the 
1.0 version and, according to the feedback of project 
partners, the learning curve of the elements was too high. 
Hence, the main ideas of the sequential and communication 
diagram [2] are combined in the 2.0 version. 
Diagram Notation 
Based on the feedback regarding the chart notation of the 
UC-UI Diagram 1.0, the used elements needed to be 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

reduced. From eight elements, the reduction leads to three 
elements – because it is not necessary for non-technical 
stakeholders to distinguish between elements like external 
influencer, decisions or merges by diagram design. For any 
additional information, the elements will get a unique 
understandable label. 
As shown in Figure 1, there are three elements to 
distinguish. The use case container includes all possible 
interactions of a specific use case. The agent container 
represents agents like views, people, interaction elements 
like buttons or checkboxes as well as descriptions. The user 
can interact in different ways with the agents; the agent 
container represents a human being itself. Every agent has a 
specific non-technical labeling. The agents can be nested 
into each other.  
 
Figure 1.  UC-UI Diagram 2.0 diagram notation (English translation). 
Description of the three used elements: use case container, agent container, 
and sequential activity. 
In the case of a software project like Smart VitAALity, a 
tablet application is implemented. Every application shows 
different views to a user and every view contains different 
elements, like text or buttons. In this example, the first agent 
will be the view, and in the view agent container, the agent 
container for the button is nested. 
This interaction diagram type focuses on human-system 
interaction and, therefore, the sequential activities are 
optimized. Users are able to do one interaction after another 
– real parallelization is no human possible interaction so no 
special notation is needed [5]. This type of diagram (UC-UI 
diagram 2.0) focuses on human-system interactions; all 
interactions a user can do with the system and the main 
function is displayed. In the following, one sample scenario 
is given: 
Scenario: the user enters some content into a text-field. 
Instead of representing every key down interaction, only the 
save-interaction is shown. Moreover, further distinctions 
and system-to-system interactions in the front- and backend 
like “content send to backend”  “backend receives 
content”  “content stored in the database” have been 
excluded from the diagram. 
Therefore, sequential activities are numbered one after 
another with simple counting one, two, and three. After the 
counting, the interaction receives a function name and a 
possible parameter. This parameter can be a decision 
parameter as for a checkbox (option 1 and 2) or in some 
cases, it can be empty. 
In comparison to the UC-UI Diagram 1.0, the second 
version renounces to any color usage as well as different 
line style. Furthermore, the diagram has the highest possible 
contrast according to the black/white diagram notation; 
according to the conformance stage of the Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines – WCAG 2.1 [6] this is needed for 
a barrier-free usage. This makes it easier for people with 
vision impairments (color blindness or ametropia) to 
understand the diagrams – and according to AAL projects, it 
is one aspect for the inclusion of elderly people to minimize 
the barriers and to enhance the participation during the 
implementation phase.  
 
In the Smart VitAALity project, 71 use cases are defined. 
All use cases are written with the use case template of 
Alistair Cockburn [7]. For every single use case, the 
different possible procedures (standard procedure and 
multiple alternative procedures) are explained. This helps on 
the 
one 
hand 
the 
developers 
to 
have 
an 
exact 
implementation guideline and furthermore it increases the 
reading flow and understanding for non-technicians. 
The strategy used in the project was to combine the use 
case template of Cockburn with a method that gives a quick 
overview of all possible interactions. Therefore, the UC-UI 
Diagram 2.0 was used. 
 
Figure 2.  Example of the use case “UC 303 Show weather details” of the 
Smart VitAALity project. Shown are the different views of a tablet 
application to realize a weather forecast.   
As shown in Figure 2, the first agent container on the left 
“:View-Homepage” includes the possibility to do more 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

interactions like clicking on Button-Information or Button-
SOS, but the UC-UI Diagram 2.0 is in context of a pre-
defined use case “UC 303 Weather – Show weather details”. 
This helps to minimize and regulate the shown interactions 
and to get a clean and neatly arranged interaction overview. 
Nonetheless, it should represent the whole context of each 
view to give the user the big picture and an idea whether the 
navigation in the context would be understandable. 
B. Evaluation Results 
For evaluation purposes, five people (3 female, 2 male) 
were tested according to the five-step evaluation strategy 
chosen. The youngest participant was 51 years old and the 
oldest 73 years. All these people are living in the urban-rural 
area of Klagenfurt and Villach in Carinthia – Austria.  
According to their pre-knowledge of using technical devices 
like smartphones, computers or tablet computers, 4/5 people 
have a smartphone and tablet computer and 5/5 people have 
contact with at least one technical device. 
Step 1: TA-EG 
At the beginning of the evaluation process, the 
participants 
were 
asked 
to 
complete 
the 
TA-EG 
questionnaire with a five-level Likert response format 
(strongly disagree – strongly agree). For each participant, 
the mean values of all items of the individual subscales 
“Enthusiasm” for electronic devices (5 items), perceived 
“Competency” (4 items), perceived “Positive impacts” (5 
items) and perceived “Negative impacts” (5 items), were 
calculated to get an overview of the technology affinity. 
Table I shows the mean value and the standard deviation of 
the technology affinity for electronic devices of all five 
participants, where value 5 is the maximum and means 
“strong agreement” and value 1 “strong disagreement”. 
TABLE I: RESULTS OF TECHNOLOGY AFFINITY QUESTIONNAIRE FOR 
ELECTRONIC DEVICES (N=5); MEAN VALUE 1…STRONGLY DISAGREE – 
5…STRONGLY AGREE 
Subscale of TA-EG 
Mean 
Value 
Standard 
Deviation 
Enthusiasm for electronic devices 
3.4 
0.9 
Perceived Competency 
3.2 
0.7 
Perceived negative impacts 
2.3 
0.5 
Perceived positive impacts 
4.4 
0.3 
On average, the participants have a “neutral” response 
(“neither-nor” agreement) on “Enthusiasm” for electronic 
devices, with a high variance and range from slightly 
disagree to strongly agree on “Enthusiasm”. The results for 
the perceived “Competency” are similar and show on 
average a “neither-nor” agreement on “Competency”, with a 
range from slightly disagree to slightly agree. 
For the subscales perceived “Negative impacts” and 
“Positive impacts”, on average the participants show a slight 
disagreement on perceived “Negative impacts” when using 
electronic devices and a moderate / strong agreement on 
perceived “Positive impacts” when using electronic devices. 
Overall, and besides varying agreement to “Enthusiasm” 
and “Competency”, the attitude towards usage of electronic 
devices is positive. 
Step 2: Use Case “Weather Forecast” + Diagram Key 
After some general instructions, the UC-UI Diagram 2.0 
example was shown to the participants and discussed 
according to the use case on the one hand and the different 
elements on the other. Furthermore, the diagram key was 
given to the participants to have a look at it. The following 
results, presented in Table II, are evaluated: 
TABLE II. QUESTIONS, RESULTS, AND REMARKS ACCORDING TO THE 
WEATHER FORECAST USE CASE. 
Question 
Result & Remarks 
Is the diagram key 
helpful to 
understand the 
UC-UI Diagram 
2.0? 
4/5 said it was not necessary or 
would confuse them 
1/5 understood it, but an example 
and a short spoken introduction 
were preferred. 
Is the “Weather 
forecast” –UI 
Diagram 
understandable? 
5/5 mentioned that it was clear for 
them 
Do you know what 
a View is? 
3/5 answered right 
2/5 people told after further 
questioning that they did not 
recognize that every view was a 
different page. 
Step 3:  Mock-Ups Use Case “Weather Forecast” 
The next step was to draw the different views shown in 
the UC-UI Diagram on sheets of paper. 4/5 participants did 
not really want to draw anything at first because they 
thought they were not talented enough in the drawing. Two 
out of this group disliked the exercise a lot, they just drew 
anything but talked more about the results. After their 
drawing exercise, the real mock-ups for the UC-UI Diagram 
were shown and the differences between their interpretation 
and the real mock-up discussed. The results of this step are 
shown in Table III. 
TABLE III. EXERCISE ISSUES, RESULTS, AND REMARKS ACCORDING TO THE 
MOCK UP DRAWING OF THE WEATHER FORECAST USE CASE 
Exercise 
issues 
Results & Remarks 
Allocation 
of 
elements 
4/5 started drawing on the upper left corner 
and drew very few elements. After telling 
them that they had enough space and more 
than one paper, they started drawing bigger 
elements. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

Symbols 
or text 
elements 
4/5 drew predominantly symbols instead of 
text for the buttons;  
1/5 was the total opposite. After re-asking 
them why, they started mixing more because 
they had the feeling that it was not right 
what they are doing. 
Label & 
drawing 
5/5 drew all elements in boxes like they 
were drawn in the UC-UI Diagram. Asking 
why: they didn’t care while they were 
drawing if it was a text or button and they 
could not do it better. 
Labeling 
5/5 could not differentiate between texts. It 
was not clear if the text was a label or a text-
input or some information. All participants 
had problems in drawing the “: View 
Weather” because of this issue. 
Wording 
5/5 did not know what an “Avatar” was and 
4/5 did not know at first what a “PopUp” 
was. After explaining it, it became clear but 
they could not work with these words. 
Showing 
the mock-
up  
5/5 connected the mock-up to the diagram;  
3/5 told that it looked nice and that they had 
something similar in mind but they were not 
able to draw like that. 
Step 4: Use Case “Emergency Call” 
The second use case shown was “Emergency call”, and it 
was prepared with a mistake – a navigation trap; the 
participants needed to identify that they were caught in a 
loop in one view and could not navigate to another view 
anymore. Furthermore, they should explain what they saw 
in a Think Aloud manor. The following results in Table IV 
were detected: 
TABLE IV. EXERCISE ISSUES, RESULTS, AND REMARKS ACCORDING TO THE 
EMERGENCY CALL USE CASE 
Exercise 
issues 
Results & Remarks 
Explaining 
the use case 
5/5 could explain what they saw on the 
diagram 
Evaluate the 
navigation 
process 
3/5 started to evaluate the given 
navigation strategy and they focused on 
how to improve the “Emergency call” as 
such.  
Mistake 
detection 
3/5 could find the mistake by 
themselves; two needed some hints to get 
it.  
3/5 told that they first thought it was no 
mistake because on tablet computers they 
always had the “Home”-button option to 
cancel, (not shown in the diagram).  
Drawing 
mistake 
improvement 
4/5 mentioned the mistake with speech, 
1/5 participant drew a button as it should 
be. 
 
Step 5: Reflection 
After all the tasks were done, the last part of the 
evaluation was to get some reflection based on pre-defined 
questions. These questions, together with results and 
remarks, are shown in Table V. 
TABLE V. QUESTIONS, RESULTS, AND REMARKS ACCORDING TO THE 
REFLECTION OF THE UC-UI DIAGRAM 2.0 EVALUATION 
Questions 
Results & Remarks 
Are you used to 
such diagram 
representations? 
4/5 never used such diagrams or other 
similar ones before. 1 participant had 
experience in process management 
(former occupation). 
Is it a good 
method to 
represent 
navigation 
purposes and 
could it 
improve/replace 
written 
manuals? 
4/5 thought it was a clearly structured 
way to describe navigation processes;  
2/5 would have preferred this 
description according to written 
manuals 
3/5 would have suggested it as a 
supplement to written manuals 
 
Could there be 
difficulties by 
using the UC-
UI Diagram 
2.0? 
5/5 wanted a clear wording according 
to interaction and non-interaction 
elements like the text element. The 
word text alone was not clear enough. 
1/5 said that maybe non-technical 
affine people could have problems in 
general with technical diagrams. 
Have you had 
any difficulties 
using the 
diagram? 
5/5 mentioned the wording of the 
element; it was not clear enough 
1/5 said that the elements were too 
close to each other 
Do you think 
you are able to 
give feedback 
according to the 
navigation 
strategy 
(mistakes or 
improvement)? 
5/5 said that they thought, after an 
explanation of the diagram, that they 
were able to give feedback or improve 
the use case navigation strategy. 
3/5 already did it in the second use 
case; 
 
Do you have 
now ideas for 
improvement? 
2/5 mentioned that there was no need 
for the relations to be labeled with 
“click”  
1/5 mentioned that all Anglicisms 
should be avoided  
2/5 mentioned that non-interaction 
elements should be removed  
1/5 mentioned - fewer rectangles 
would be better, elements could be 
combined  
The results shown in Table V influence further research 
and improvement of the diagram. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

IV. 
IMPROVEMENT & DISCUSSION 
The intention to include the end-users from the very first 
steps during a development process should reduce 
misguided implementation. Therefore, new soft- and/or 
hardware tools enable users to participate in an appropriate 
way. That means that non-experts need to get a big picture 
of the development processes even before design issues are 
developed. To get feedback about the navigation and/or 
interaction concept, it is necessary to work with a tool that 
end-users easily understand so that they can concentrate on 
the main topic – to evaluate interaction proposals.  
To develop such a tool and to prove that it is working for 
a certain user group, an evaluation was undertaken. 
Referring to the results of that evaluation, three major issues 
could be identified, which should be improved in future 
before working with the diagrams intensively.  
Language 
The element labeling still has the proper wording for the 
user group. The improvement should clarify if an element is 
an interaction element or not. Regarding the participants, 
maybe all non-interaction elements should be removed. If 
such elements are in the diagram, they should be labelled 
clearly, so that there are no misunderstandings possible. 
Easy language should be (German: Leichte Sprache [8]) 
used and all the English terms should be avoided. This 
could increase the acceptability and usability of the 
participants. 
Diagram key 
The diagram key may be important for research 
purposes, but for users it is not relevant at all. They are 
confused because of the given explanations. It is easier for 
the user group to give a simple example, maybe with a 
mock-up, and/or explain it before they use it in feedback 
sessions.  
Relation-labelling 
The participants did not notice the labeling referring to 
the click-action and two of them mentioned that it was not 
relevant and could be removed. This should be evaluated 
again; maybe if there was more than just click interaction it 
could also be relevant for the user group. 
As for now, the UC-UI Diagram 2.0 version is used in 
AAL projects like Smart VitAALity. In the current 
development stage, it is possible to give elderly user groups 
who are non-technical a tool that helps them give feedback 
to the prior-defined navigation strategy. Still, there is room 
for improvement according to the prior mentioned topics 
with language leading the way. The next step for improving 
the diagram will be a survey (maybe online) according to 
the wording topic; the study will be supported by a linguist.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper shows the evaluation results of a simple 
diagram language (UC-UI Diagram 2.0), that should assist 
the participation of elderly users during development 
processes in AAL projects. According the results, this type 
of diagram will also be used in other projects and it will be 
improved iteratively, maybe with a bigger group of 
participants, to make it even more applicable.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We want to thank all those who have contributed to our 
UC-UI diagram 2.0 evaluation within the project Smart 
VitAALity. The pilot region Smart VitAALity (grant no. 
858380) is co-financed by funds of the benefit programme 
from the Austrian Federal Ministry for Transport, 
Innovation and Technology (bmvit). 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Krainer, D. E. Ströckl, and J. Oberzaucher, “Use Case 
Focused User-Interaction Diagram – A Communication Tool 
within AAL Projects” in: PETRA ’17: Proceedings of the 
10th International Conference on Pervasive Technologies 
Related to Assistive Environments, 21-23 Jun 2017, Island of 
Rhodes, Greece, S. 193.196, 2017 
[2] Object Management Group (OMG); OMG Unified Modeling 
Language – Version 2.5; http://www.omg.org/spec/UML/2.5, 
2015 [retrieved: September, 2018] 
[3] Germany.ISO. 9241-210: 2010. “Ergonomics of human 
system interaction-Part 210: Human-centred design for 
interactive 
systems.” 
International 
Standardization 
Organization (ISO). Switzerland, 2010  
[4] K. Karrer, C. Glaser, C. Clemens, and C. Bruder, „Capture 
technology attraction– the survey TA-EG”. Original Title: 
“Technologieaffinität erfassen – der Fragebogen TA-EG” In 
A. Lichtenstein, C. Stößel und C. Clemens (Hrsg.), Der 
Mensch im Mittelpunkt technischer Systeme. 8. Werkstatt 
Mensch-Maschine-Systeme (ZMMS Spektrum, Reihe 22, Nr. 
29, S. 196-201). Düsseldorf: VDI Verlag GmbH, 2009 
[5] T. Schubert, “The central attentional limitation and executive 
control.” Front. Biosci. 13, 3569-3580. 10.2741/2950, 2008 
[6] World Wide Wep Consortium (W3C). “Web Contenct 
Accessibility 
Guidelines 
(WCAG) 
2.1”; 
https://www.w3c.org/TR/WCAG21/, 
2017 
[retrieved: 
September, 2018] 
[7] A. Cockburn, „Effectively creating Use Cases.“ Original 
Title: “Use Cases effektiv erstellen.” MITP Verlach, 2003 
ISBN 3-8266-1344-9, 2003 
 
 
[8] U. Bredel and C. Maaß, „Simple Language: theoretical 
essentials. Orientation for the practice“ Original: „Leichte 
Sprache: Theoretische Grundlagen. Orientierung für die 
Praxis.“ Duden. ISBN: 978-3-411-75616-2, 2016 
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-679-8
AMBIENT 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

