Persuasion Mobility in Ambient Intelligence
Lukas Ruge
Institute of Telematics
Graduate School for Computing in Medicine and
Life Sciences, University of Lübeck
University Of Lübeck
Ratzeburger Allee 160
23562 Germany
ruge@itm.uni-luebeck.de
Andreas Schrader
Institute of Telematics
Ambient Computing Working Group
University Of Lübeck
Ratzeburger Allee 160
23562 Germany
schrader@itm.uni-luebeck.de
Abstract—Persuasion can be archived with much greater
impact using ambient intelligence. Ambient systems may be used
to positively influence users’ behavior, especially with regard
to healthcare. Unfortunately, current state-of-the-art persuasive
ambient systems use either mobile devices or are statically bound
to dedicated infrastructure. In this paper, we introduce the con-
cept of persuasion mobility. This supports continuous persuasion
even when users move between different environments. Besides a
discussion of the potential benefits of this approach, we analyze
current and developing technological building blocks towards a
persuasion mobility architecture.
Keywords—ambient intelligence; persuasion; mobility.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Persuasive technology, a term coined in 2003 by B.J.
Fogg [1], has been described as “software or information
systems designed to reinforce, change or shape attitudes or
behaviors or both without using coercion or deception” [2].
Since its inception, a great deal of progress has been made in
understanding and developing persuasive technology aided by
new technological developments.
With programmable mobile phones, persuasive applications
have been created that promise to interact with users whenever
and wherever they are. This technology offered to increase the
persuasive effect by the promise of persuading in the right
moment at the right place, often called kairos (named for
Kairos, the Greek god of “the favorable moment”) [1]. Now,
with an ever increasing number of sensors on the phone as well
as the almost uninterrupted connectivity to the Internet, smart
phones provide us with even more ways to achieve persuasion,
not just based on place and time, but even on sensed context.
Proposed by Mark Weiser [3], the vision of Ubiquitous
Computing is fast becoming a reality. The vision of Ambient
Intelligence extends on the idea of ubiquitous computing,
proposing a more user centered approach to generate appli-
cations in these intelligent spaces to suit the user’s needs [4].
With the advent of Ambient Intelligence, technology may
again become more persuasive as it adapts to the new paradigm
to include not just the resources of mobile personal comput-
ing devices but dynamically include the environment as an
active component too. Aarts et al. [4] have defined ambient
persuasion as the use of context-aware, networked devices that
enable context-sensitive system behavior to deliver persuasive
content.
In this paper, we analyze the key advantages of persuasion
strategies combining the power of (personal) mobile devices
and (public) ambient devices. Proposing to combine the power
of these paradigms, we expand the concept of ambient persua-
sion by adding the idea of persuasion mobility. Persuasion
mobility is defined by the mobility of the act rather than the
mobility of the hardware.
Combining and adapting previously developed technology
and standards, we show how such mobility may be achieved
in ambient persuasion.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
Sections II and III describe the two main types of persuasive
systems: The mobile device and the ambient infrastructure
solutions, focusing on how the advantages of each computing
environment are harvested. Section IV extends the properties
of ambient persuasion by defining persuasion mobility. Section
V provides an overview of technologies and standards that
may be used to enable prototyping of mobility in ambient
persuasion. In Section VI we conclude with a discussion of
future work and draw conclusions.
II.
PERSUASION WITH MOBILE DEVICES
Persuasive solutions using mobile devices have been gen-
erated targeting a wide range of different problems. In the area
of health, the dangers of sedentary work, smoking, bad sleep
habits, environmental hazards or psychological problems are
among the problems targeted.
BeWell [5] is an application using sensors and mobile
phones to enable users to measure their activity level and
compare it with the level of friends.
txt2stop [6] is a smoking cessation support system that
provides motivational SMS-messages and information to users
intending to stop smoking. Messages are send to users for a
month providing information as well as distraction.
UbiFit [7, p. 78] is an application geared to promote an
active lifestyle. The system uses the internal sensors to infer
data on the user’s lifestyle and present them on the screen in
a garden metaphor.
SoundOfTheCity [8], an environmental monitoring platform
using the phones’ microphone to measure the noise exposure
for users, employs a notification strategy, prompting users to
leave a loud area, when a dose threshold is reached.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

These systems show the persuasive power of mobile tech-
nology, consisting of a) the constant connection to service
providers, either using SMS, the Internet or other wireless
technologies; b) access to sensors that can gather data to infer
high level contextual data to assess a users behavior; c) the
possibility to use the phone to allow for private access to
sensible information; and d) the ability to reach and thereby
prompt or nudge the user at the right time.
However, mobile systems do not yet fulfill the promises of
kairos entirely. The device itself does not truly offer permanent
peripheral awareness as it resides mostly in the users’ pocket.
Handling the phone is not appropriate in all situations and the
device itself is limited in the types of actuation it can provide.
III.
PERSUASION IN AMBIENT ENVIRONMENTS
Spaces can be persuasive by their properties themselves
based on the architecture and design of a space or building
[9]. However, the persuasiveness of a space can be increased
using ubiquitous computing technology.
In such environments, computer aided persuasion is
achieved by amending the physical objects with capabilities
that allow them to act in the service of persuasive systems.
Medical mirror [10] is a mirror that augments the reflection
of the user with current health data gathered with sensors in
the home environment, allowing the user to self monitor his
or her health.
APStairs [11] is a project in which the authors have rigged
a flight of stairs with sensors to detect the Bluetooth signature
of those climbing up as well as an ambient display encouraging
users to rather take the stairs then the elevator.
Breakaway [12] uses ambient actuators on a desk in offices
to alert occupants when they work too long in a seated position.
The project uses the actuator as a reflection of the user
allowing for an assessment of one’s actions at a glance.
Using physical objects at the location of the user pro-
vides advantages over the use of mobile devices. Actuators
can enrich everyday objects like mirrors, which the user is
accustomed to and knows how to utilize, or artifacts placed
naturally into the environments to transmit information pe-
ripherally, utilizing a broader range of modalities and stimuli
then available to the mobile device.
The medical mirrors and APStairs system show how con-
textual data from sensors placed in the environments can
increase the persuasive effect. However, these projects work
with a specifically designed hardware-platform and software-
architecture, having complete control over the sensors and ac-
tuators that only exist in one place and only serve this purpose.
In ambient intelligence scenarios, such static constructs will no
longer be viable.
IV.
PERSUASION MOBILITY
Ambient Intelligence contains, at its core, the idea of a
smart environment that changes to accommodate users’ needs
and wishes when a person enters it. Technology enables
environments to gather those needs, either by sensing or by
retrieving them from the user’s personal profiles and resources.
Among a persons’ needs may be the execution of systems that
take persuasive actions in the environment.
Aarts et al. [4] argue that each ambient persuasive system is
context-aware through the use of sensors, and is able to deliver
persuasive content to the user. Concerning such delivery,
Oinas-Kukkonen and Harjumaa [13] remark that successful
persuasion is predicated on the information, that the system
has deemed relevant, being presented to the attention of the
persuadee (the one being persuaded) and being comprehended.
Kaptein [14] extends these requirements by proposing adaptive
persuasive systems as systems selecting appropriate strategies
for the individual user based on estimated success, instead of
using a pre-set persuasive strategy that is effective on average.
These systems have three core requirements a) Identification
of the persuadee; b) the technological ability to change repre-
sentations of appeals and c) the ability to measure the success
of the persuasive attempt.
However, when the person is leaving an adaptive, persua-
sive smart environment, the persuasive actions should leave
with the user and their execution should continue in the next
environment the user enters. This includes slow migration
situations, where some of the current smart objects get out of
reach and new ones appear. In such cases, while these sensors
and actuators are properties of the space, the persuasion would
be mobile.
Such dynamically instantiated mobile persuasion combines
the advantages of persuasion using mobile devices (being
where the person is) with the advantages of ubiquitous per-
suasive entities by allowing to combine the power of both
personal and environmental sensors and actuators depending
on properties like availability, security, privacy or modality.
Only through such combination can kairos be truly claimed.
In such a scenario, the environment as traditionally defined
by the physical space is replaced by the user environment.
The user environment may be defined as the physical and
virtual environment of the user, consisting, at any given time,
of sensors that can sense the users actions and the users
surroundings, and actuators that are able to evoke change
perceivable to the user.
In the following, we will understand persuasion mobility
as the act of persuasive software that is dynamically executing
its appropriate strategies in the user environment utilizing
available sensors and actors.
Persuasion mobility increases the potential persuasiveness
of Ambient Intelligence by providing consistency of per-
suasion even if changes in the user environment occur. It
allows for persuasive action to be taken independent of the
availability of specific technology rather only based on the
determination that a persuasive act is required. Combining
this feature with the aforementioned properties of adaptability
provides a powerful basis for ambient persuasion.
V.
TOWARDS MOBILITY IN AMBIENT PERSUASION
We present a set of technologies and protocols from
different fields that, in combination, may provide support
to develop persuasive systems that leverage the power of
persuasion mobility. In our proposed architecture, the control
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

of the persuasive actions would lie solely on the personal
mobile device, but the actuation is orchestrated in space.
A. Context Abstraction
We have developed Ambient Dynamix [15], an ambient
intelligence framework for Android-phones that allows to
connect dynamically to the ever evolving set of actuators and
sensors in the user environment. Ambient Dynamix supports
context generation, abstracting from the hardware to high-level
contextual data that is provided to applications subscribing to
it, independently of the source of data.
Ambient Dynamix approaches the challenge of the wide
area of possible actors and sensors by providing a framework
for plug-ins that enable communication with these physical
or virtual entities. These plug-ins can be written by domain
experts and provided during runtime to the users phone.
Using Ambient Dynamix, applications obtain independence
of specific sensors by only subscribing to the high level
context that may be generated from different sources as the
user environment evolves. Similarly, actions in space can
be induced via abstract commands executed dynamically on
available actuators. With these capabilities, Ambient Dynamix
provides the necessary hardware abstraction to allow a persua-
sive system to execute its persuasive actions independent of
specific devices. Instantiating the actions manually for every
possible environment would be inconceivable considering the
heterogeneity of smart environment technology.
B. Identification
Moving persuasive actions with the user is only possible, if
the controlling entity of the smart environment can identify the
user. Kaptein [14] identified this as a condition for adaptive
persuasive systems, allowing the system to adapt its means
and strategies according to the person. In mobile persuasion,
identification is a prerequisite to gain an understanding of
the user environment. Proposals for such identification have
been made, ranging from RFID or Bluetooth-keys to face
recognition or fingerprinting [14, p. 103].
We propose that such identification can be inherently
achieved by moving the controlling intelligence into the per-
sonal mobile device of the user. Since such a mobile device
is inherently personal and usually co-located with the user the
persuasive systems run on it can personalize their actions for
the specific user in the environment.
C. Device Discovery
Using the mobile device as the central control system
for ambient persuasive systems with Ambient Dynamix as
the context-abstraction layer it becomes necessary for the
mobile device to discover available hardware ad-hoc. The
mobile device connects to the ambient devices using different
(mostly wireless) standards, such as RFC3927 [16], SLP [17],
UPnP [18] and others which allow for discovery and the
establishment of services.
Smart phones implement a host of wireless services that
can be used to communicate to sensors and actors.
D. Device Capabilities
Current standards for device discovery, like the aforemen-
tioned UPnP, offer mechanisms for self descriptions, however,
the currently used device profiles lack in information concern-
ing stimulus modality and other actuation features relevant to
persuasion. UPnP-profiles have been adapted for the use in
different smart environments, indicating that the standard can
be used in such a way [19]. When proposing to perform an
action with an ambient actuator, Ambient Dynamix has to be
made aware of the capabilities of the devices it connects to.
Only with such knowledge can it choose the right actuator
given an abstract action description. Conceptual structure for
ambient actuators as well as the logic of binding actuators to
an action have been proposed in the literature [20].
E. Unobtrusive Transfer of Device
When the user environment is evolving, it may become
necessary to transfer an ongoing action from one actuator to
another since the user has moved out of the scope and can no
longer perceive the action. Mobile persuasion requires such
transfer of device to happen unobtrusively, without the user
intervening. Similarly, the sensors used to produce a relevant
context may change.
By orchestrating the persuasive environment from the
personal mobile device, this central controlling instance can
discover new available local sensors and actuators on the go.
Potentially, given a description of the action to be taken, the
controlling instance could choose an appropriate actuator as
soon as it is found, transparent to the application. This may
include the transfer between stimulus modalities, switching, for
example, from auditive to visual action if more appropriate.
El-Khatib at al. [21] describe such an architecture for
service mobility, using background services on a mobile device
to discover available Bluetooth-devices and execute actions
on them, handing off services to new devices if needed. In
multimedia presentation, the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
[22] can be used to provide support for session mobility,
switching between devices mid-session [23].
F. Coordination of Actuation
According to [24] combining several modalities can en-
hance the understanding of the message. Since comprehension
is one of the key factors in persuasion according to [13],
such combination would increase the persuasive effect. Multi-
modal execution has been discussed in [25]. It requires the
coordination of distributed actors in space, which is currently
neither supported by Ambient Dynamix nor by the actors.
The heterogeneity of environments means that synchro-
nization between actuators cannot be ensured on the device
level. Such coordination must then be, as far as this is possible
in distributed systems, be supported by the controller on the
mobile device.
G. Measurement of Success
Kraft et al. [26] argue that the “structure of digital health
interventions should reflect the psychological chronology of
the change process”. Such can be said for all persuasive
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

technology as the interactions of the system with the persuadee
must track the progress made towards the set goal.
Potentially, an additional middle-layer on the controlling
device could offer support to ambient persuasive systems by
allowing them to define trigger-context specification (in which
the persuasive system would be alerted to act) and goal-context
specifications (which could be used to estimate the success of
the action taken after the trigger-event).
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The future discussion on mobility in ambient persuasion
must also include the social sciences, tasked with the ques-
tion how, with the regard to the way a medium shapes a
message, different circumstances and environments impact the
persuasiveness of any action. Additionally, only psychological
research can validate the approach of mobile persuasion.
By providing architectural and systematic support for mo-
bility in ambient persuasion at the device and the middle-ware
level, we hope to enable prototyping of systems that can dy-
namically call upon mobile ambient persuasive means. In this
work, by analyzing the advantages of persuasive systems using
mobile devices and persuasive systems using the environment,
we have defined the parameters of such means and propose a
set of technologies which may enable them.
In the long term we hope to tackle the more general
question of cross-application persuasion support for persuasive
systems on mobile devices. With advances in the development
in ambient persuasive systems, system-properties and system
requirements due to the persuasive intent of the designer will
arise. Providing an additional layer of mobile middle-ware
purely aimed at the support of those demands, may enhance
rapid prototyping and enable designers to focus more on the
persuasive strategy and less on specific implementations.
Ideally, persuasive strategies can be handed as mobile
services to the persuasion middle-ware that executes them
according to the user’s needs and available actuators .
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was partially supported by the Graduate School
for Computing in Medicine and Life Sciences funded by
Germany’s Excellence Initiative [DFG GSC 235/1]
References
[1]
B. J. Fogg, Persuasive technology: using computers to change what we
think and do. Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
[2]
H. Oinas-Kukkonen and M. Harjumaa, “Towards deeper understanding
of persuasion in software and information systems,” in Proceedings of
the First International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human
Interaction, ser. ACHI ’08. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer
Society, 2008, pp. 200–205.
[3]
M. Weiser, “The computer for the 21st century,” SIGMOBILE Mob.
Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 3–11, 1999.
[4]
E. Aarts, P. Markopoulos, and B. Ruyter, “The persuasiveness of
ambient intelligence,” in Security, Privacy, and Trust in Modern Data
Management, ser. Data-Centric Systems and Applications, M. Petkovi´c
and W. Jonker, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 367–381.
[5]
N. Lane et al. “Bewell: A smartphone application to monitor, model and
promote wellbeing,” in 5th International ICST Conference on Pervasive
Computing Technologies for Healthcare, 2012.
[6]
A. Rodgers et al. “Do u smoke after txt? results of a randomised trial
of smoking cessation using mobile phone text messaging,” Tobacco
Control, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 255–261, 2005.
[7]
S. Consolvo, “Designing and evaluating a persuasive technology to
encourage lifestyle behavior change,” Ph.D. dissertation, University Of
Washington, 2008.
[8]
L. Ruge, B. Altakrouri, and A. Schrader, “SoundOfTheCity - Con-
tinuous Noise Monitoring for a Healthy City,” in 5th International
Workshop on Smart Environments and Ambient Intelligence (SENAmI
2013), San Diego, California, USA, 2013.
[9]
D. Lockton, D. Harrison, and N. Stanton, “Design with intent: Persua-
sive technology in a wider context,” in Persuasive Technology, ser.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, H. Oinas-Kukkonen, P. Hasle,
M. Harjumaa, K. Segerståhl, and P. Øhrstrøm, Eds.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2008, vol. 5033, pp. 274–278.
[10]
A. del Valle and A. Opalach, “The persuasive mirror: computerized
persuasion for healthy living,” in Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, 2005.
[11]
R. Sakai, S. Peteghem, L. Sande, P. Banach, and M. Kaptein, “Per-
sonalized persuasion in ambient intelligence: The apstairs system,”
in Ambient Intelligence, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
D. Keyson, M. Maher, N. Streitz, A. Cheok, J. Augusto, R. Wichert,
G. Englebienne, H. Aghajan, and B. A. Kröse, Eds., vol. 7040. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 205–209.
[12]
N. Jafarinaimi, J. Forlizzi, A. Hurst, and J. Zimmerman, “Breakaway:
an ambient display designed to change human behavior,” in CHI ’05
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI
EA’05.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pp. 1945–1948.
[13]
H. Oinas-Kukkonen and M. Harjumaa, “Persuasive systems design: Key
issues, process model, and system features,” Communications of the
Association for Information Systems, vol. 24, no. 1, p. 28, 2009.
[14]
M. C. Kaptein, “Personalized Persuasion in Ambient Intelligence,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Eindhoven University of Technology, 2012.
[15]
D. Carlson and A. Schrader, “Dynamix: An open plug-and-play context
framework for android.” in IOT, 2012, pp. 151–158.
[16]
S. Cheshire, B. Aboba, and E. Guttman, “Dynamic Configuration of
IPv4 Link-Local Addresses,” IETF RFC3927, 2005.
[17]
E. Guttman, C. Perkins, J. Veizades, and M. Day, “Service Location
Protocol, Version 2,” IETF RFC2608, 1999.
[18]
UPnP Forum, “UPnP device architecture 1.0,” 2003.
[19]
A. A. N. Shirehjini, “A generic upnp architecture for ambient intelli-
gence meeting rooms and a control point allowing for integrated 2d and
3d interaction,” in Proceedings of the 2005 joint conference on Smart
objects and ambient intelligence: innovative context-aware services:
usages and technologies, ser. sOc-EUSAI ’05. New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2005, pp. 207–212.
[20]
S. Prammanee and K. Moessner, “Mobile multimodality: A theoretical
approach to facilitate virtual device environments,” Mobile Networks
and Applications, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 569–582, 2008.
[21]
K. El-Khatib et al. “Personal and service mobility in ubiquitous comput-
ing environments,” Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing,
vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 595–607, 2004.
[22]
J. Rosenberg et al. “SIP: Session Initiation Protocol,” IETF RFC3261,
2002.
[23]
R. Shacham, H. Schulzrinne, S. Thakolsri, and W. Kellerer, “Session
Initiation Protocol (SIP) Session Mobility,” IETF RFC5631, 2009.
[24]
R. López-Cózar and Z. Callejas, “Multimodal dialogue for ambient
intelligence and smart environments,” in Handbook of Ambient In-
telligence and Smart Environments, H. Nakashima, H. Aghajan, and
J. Augusto, Eds. Springer US, 2010, pp. 559–579.
[25]
M. Guerini, O. Stock, and M. Zancanaro, “A taxonomy of strategies
for multimodal persuasive message generation,” Applied Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 99–136, 2007.
[26]
P. Kraft, F. Drozd, and E. Olsen, “Digital therapy: Addressing willpower
as part of the cognitive-affective processing system in the service
of habit change,” in Persuasive Technology, ser. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, H. Oinas-Kukkonen, P. Hasle, M. Harjumaa,
K. Segerståhl, and P. Øhrstrøm, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008,
vol. 5033, pp. 177–188.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-309-4
AMBIENT 2013 : The Third International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

