Effect of Heart Rate Feedback Virtual Reality on Cardiac Activity 
A preliminary study with heart rate feedback “fire flame” scene 
Shusaku Nomura, Rei Sekigawa, and Naoki Iiyama 
Department of Engineering 
Nagaoka University of Technology 
Nagaoka, Japan 
e-mail: nomura@kjs.nagaokaut.ac.jp 
Abstract— In this study, the psycho-physiological effect of a 
heart rate (HR) feedback virtual reality (VR) scene on a 
human was investigated. The VR scene was a living room with 
a fire place, where a fire flame flickered in synchronisation 
with the viewer’s own HR in a real-time manner. Fifteen male 
university students underwent this interactive installation for 
60 s, repeatedly. In comparison with the control condition in 
which the fire flickered at a constant rhythm, the HR 
significantly decreased and exhibited a positive correlation 
with the subjective score of “comfortable.” Thus, the change in 
the cardiac sympathetic nervous activity may be attributed to 
the psycho-physiological effect.  
Keywords-biofeedback; virtual reality; heat rate; ambient 
feedback. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
VR is used not only for the purpose of entertainment, but 
also for clinical purposes, such as treatment of phobias [1] 
and pain management [2]. Majority of these studies 
presented patients with a relaxing virtual world, and reported 
the alleviation of anxiety, a positive mood, and an 
improvement in physiological states of the patients. 
Therefore, immergence into the VR world has a significant 
influence on the viewer’s psycho-physiological functioning.  
Recently, attempts have been made to integrate VR with 
biofeedback training. “Virtual Meditative Walk” enables 
users to perform meditation training by walking in a virtual 
forest where the weather conditions change according to the 
user’s galvanic skin response; thus, the users can train to 
control their sympathetic nervous activity by themselves [3].  
The aforementioned studies demonstrate the possibility 
of expanding the use of bio-signal interactive VR, which 
positively induces the state of the human mind and body. 
However, to the best of our knowledge, no study has directly 
investigated the psycho-physiological effects on humans 
experiencing an interactive VR system using bio-signals. 
The present preliminary experimental study aims to 
investigate the effect of an interactive heart rate (HR) virtual 
reality (VR) scene on the human mind and body. 
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. The 
configuration of our developed bio-signal feedback VR 
system and the experiment conducted to test the system 
efficacy is described in Section 2. The experimental results 
and their discussion are presented in Sections 3 and 4, 
respectively. 
II.
METHOD
As a preliminary challenge to explore the psycho-
physiological effect of the bio-signal feedback VR system, 
we focused on the HR signal because of its accessibility. 
A.
Configuration of heart rate feedback virtual reality 
scene 
The HR feedback VR system comprises a VR head 
mounted display (HMD) (Oculus Rift DK 2, Facebook 
Technologies, LLC.), bio-signal amplifier (BIOPAC MP150, 
BIOPAC Systems, Inc.), game engine (Unity 5.2), and 
personal computer (controller). The electrocardiogram 
(ECG) signal was acquired by the bio-signal amplifier at a 
sampling rate of 200 Hz. The beat-to-beat interval (known as 
“RR interval”) of the ECG signal was determined and 
conveyed to a control PC to generate the HR feedback VR 
“fire flame” using the game engine. Then, the VR image was 
exposed to a viewer via the HMD. 
The VR scene was a living room with a fire place where 
a fire flame flickered. In the HR feedback regulation, the size 
and brightness of the fire flame was varied to synchronise 
with the viewer’s own ECG signal; eventually, the size and 
brightness of the flame synchronised with the viewer’s own 
heartbeat. The degree of change in the size and brightness 
was normalised based on the ECG signal of the viewer.  
B.
Experiment 
The psycho-physiological effect of the HR feedback VR 
scene was investigated in 15 healthy university male students 
using a within-subject experimental design. None of the 
subjects had any visual disorders, such as near- or far-
sightedness. To directly compare the effect of the bio-signal 
feedback, we prepared three different “fire flames,” which 
were changed to synchronise with the subject’s HR (SYN 
condition), in a manner of a sine wave at a constant rhythm 
(CST condition), and at random in terms of size and 
brightness at a constant rhythm (RND condition). The 
constant rhythm in CST and RND was set to the average HR 
of all the subjects (75 bpm), which was measured in 
advance. The degree of change in the size and brightness of 
the flame in CST and RND was set to the same range as that 
in SYN. 
In the experiment, we used a pairwise comparison and 
made a subject compare two conditions sequentially, which 
was repeated twice. For example, a subject experienced the 
VR scene in SYN and RND alternatively. Each condition 
was experienced for 60 s with a 5 s interval (255 s in total) 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-739-9
AMBIENT 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

-1.50
-1.00
-0.50
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
Q1.
Spacious
Q2.
Comfortable
Q3.
Natural
RND
SYN
CST
Averaged evaluation value (α)
**
*
**
**
Figure 1. Subjective socres for virtual reality (VR) scene in each 
condition.  
67.0
68.0
69.0
70.0
71.0
SYN
CST
RND
HR [bpm]
*
Figure 2. Mean heart rate during VR exposure. 
between the two conditions. Scenes presented to the subjects 
during this procedure were repeated for three possible 
combinations of input signals, i.e., SYN-RND, SYN-CST, 
and RND-CST; therefore, each subject experienced nine 
trials in total. The sequence of the presentation of the nine 
conditions was randomised and counter-balanced to 
compensate the possible order effect. 
Subjective scores, namely, “spacious” (neutral item), 
“comfortable,” and “natural,” were assessed using the 11-
point Likert scale of +5 (strongly agree) to –5 (strongly 
disagree). The HR and the high frequency component (0.15–
0.40 Hz) of the HR variability (HF) were calculated from the 
ECG 
data. 
No 
information 
regarding 
the 
system 
configuration was provided to the subjects. Instead, they 
were instructed to just watch the presented VR scene and 
respond to the questionnaire. 
Nakaya’s variation of the Sheffé’s ANOVA for paired 
comparisons [4] was employed for the statistical analysis of 
the subjective scores. The studentised range statistic (q) was 
further used for multiple comparisons [5]. Pair-wised 
student’s t-test was employed to evaluate the HR and HF, 
and the level of statistical significance was set to 0.05. 
III.
RESULTS
According to a verbal interview conducted after the 
experiment, no subject complained about any malaise, 
including VR sickness, during the experiment, or abandoned 
the repetitive exposures in the experiment. Additionally, no 
subject was aware of the regulation manner of the fire flame. 
Moreover, no subject could differentiate between the SYN 
and RND VR scenes. 
In the SYN condition, subjective scores of “comfortable” 
and “natural” were significantly higher than those in the CST 
condition (all for p < 0.01) and were marginally higher than 
those in the RND condition, as depicted in Figure 1.  
The HR value in the SYN condition was smaller than that 
in the CST and RND conditions, and a significant difference 
was observed in the HR between the SYN and RND 
conditions (p < 0.05), as depicted in Figure 2. Furthermore, 
there was a moderately positive correlation between HR in 
the SYN condition and the score of “comfortable” (r = 0.48). 
No difference was observed in HF in any of the conditions, 
and no correlation was observed between HF in any 
condition and any of the psychological scores. 
IV.
DISCUSSION
The HR feedback VR fire flame that was implemented in 
this study demonstrated the effect on cardiac activity in 
terms of decline of HR. Moreover, the subjects viewed the 
bio-signal interactive VR as “comfortable” and “natural,” 
and the HR was found to be associated with “comfortable,” 
even though the subjects were not distinctly aware of the 
difference among the conditions. 
It is well known that the sound of the heartbeat has an 
alleviative effect, as people say “listening your own heart 
beat makes you relax.” The heartbeat feedback fire flame 
scene may induce a similar effect on the human mind. 
Moreover, because the HR reduced in the SYN condition, 
such a psychological benefit may be mediated by the 
suppression of the cardiac sympathetic nervous system.  
Further research with a wider population range may lead 
to the development of a new concept of “ambient bio-
feedback system,” in which the ambient stimuli (such as 
lightning, sound, and smell) are regulated by synchronizing 
with the human bio-signal, thereby fostering a positive 
psycho-physiological effect. 
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Hartanto, I. L. Kampmann, N. Morina, P. G. M. 
Emmelkamp, 
M.A. 
Neerincx, 
and 
W-P. 
Brinkman, 
“Controlling Social Stress in Virtual Reality Environments,” 
PLoS ONE, vol. 9, e92804, pp.1-17, 2014. 
[2]
J. L. M. Vázquez, B.K. Wiederhold, I. Miller, D. M. Lara, and 
M. D. Wiederhold, “Virtual Reality Assisted Anesthesia 
(VRAA) During Upper Gastrointestinal Endoscopy,” Surgical 
Research Updates, vol. 5, pp.1-11, 2017. 
[3]
M. Nazemi and D. Gromala, “VR Therapy: Management of 
Chronic Pain Using Virtual Mindfulness Training,” Proc. CHI 
2014, ACM, pp.1-2, 2014. 
[4]
S. Nakaya, “A Modification of Scheffe's Method for Paired 
Comparisons,” in 11th Meeting of Sensory Test, pp.1-12, 
1970. 
[5]
H. Takagi, “Practical Statistical Tests Machine Learning---III-
--Signi,” Systems, Control and Information, vol. 58, pp. 514-
520, 2014. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-739-9
AMBIENT 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies

