Wireless P2P: Problem or Opportunity?
Rossana Motta and Joseph Pasquale
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, USA
Email: rmotta, pasquale@cs.ucsd.edu
Abstract—P2P is currently considered a problem by many
wired and wireless providers, especially because of the large
amount of trafﬁc it generates. However, given new technology
developments such as Wi-Fi Direct, we see an opportunity
for P2P in mobile settings that, rather than treating mobiles
as second-class citizens, seeks to take advantage of their
capabilities over stationary devices. In this paper, we outline a
new approach for fully decentralized mobile P2P that allows
mobiles to run a variety of services and at the same time
alleviates data overload in mobile networks. We consider
mobiles integral and a richer class of nodes, and assume that
they are capable of forming P2P networks without necessarily
relying on the aid of stationary hosts or servers. We present a
new architecture based on JXTA middleware, which is meant
to not only optimize mobile resources, but also aims to take full
advantage of the features that mobiles offer, such as mobility,
ubiquity, location-awareness and sensors.
Keywords-Wireless; Peer-To-Peer; Mobiles; Broadbands.
I. INTRODUCTION
Mobile broadband networks currently serve not only users
of mobile devices but also subscribers that, for reasons
such as lack of coverage of wired networks, convenience of
mobility, or price, choose mobile broadband as their primary
connection. Thus, the scenarios where P2P is currently used
are wide-ranging, with mobile devices connected either to
a mobile network or to a wi-ﬁ access point, and with
stationary hosts connected either to a wired network or to a
mobile network. While wired networks may also have some
problems with trafﬁc overloads due to P2P, these problems
are especially exacerbated in mobile networks.
The introduction of the Wi-Fi Direct protocol [1] rep-
resents an opportunity to support P2P in a way that can
effectively relieve the overload on some mobile networks.
Both Internet Service Providers (ISPs) and consumers could
beneﬁt from this. Wi-Fi Direct will allow a mobile to connect
directly with another mobile in its range that is also running
the protocol, with no hubs or routers are involved. Data rates
are expected to be over 250 Mbps with a coverage range of
about 100 meters [1].
In this paper, we present some of the main issues that
motivate the need for an alternative strategy for mobile P2P.
We then present a new middleware framework based on
JXTA to support mobile P2P systems that, amongst other
capabilities, takes advantage of technologies such as Wi-Fi
Direct.
II. P2P, MOBILE NETWORKS, AND EMERGING
TECHNOLOGIES
A. P2P and ﬁle demand
As reported by Gigacom in 2009, the ISPs of wired net-
works have long considered P2P as a “voracious, bandwidth-
eating monster” and have adopted aggressive trafﬁc shaping
policies and bandwidth caps in order to stop P2P trafﬁc from
overrunning their networks [2] [3]. Operators of cellular
networks are paying closer attention to P2P trafﬁc, which
has become a problem in mobile networks too [2]. Many
mobile providers have adopted trafﬁc shaping policies to
throttle P2P trafﬁc at least during certain parts of the day
(e.g., [16] [4]) or even blocking it completely [5].
According to a study conducted by Allot Communications
and published in 2010 [6], P2P is the single largest factor
leading to congestion. In mobile broadbands it accounts for
34% of bandwidth utilization in the 5% of users generating
the largest amount of overall trafﬁc. However, the study also
reveals a rapid growth in HTTP trafﬁc during 2009. Allot re-
ports that in the second half of 2009 “HTTP downloads grew
by 73%, and have become a feasible alternative for massive
ﬁle sharing” [6]. In fact, a number of HTTP services are
becoming extremely popular to share ﬁles, for example one-
click hosters (e.g., RapidShare, MediaFire, MegaUpload,
etc.) and other ﬁle hosting services, such as DropBox and
LiveMesh. These services typically offer free or paid plans
for users to upload and download ﬁles via HTTP. RapidShare
reports to be currently hosting over 10 petabytes of data.
These facts suggest that the trafﬁc problems in many
current networks are not solely caused by P2P technologies,
but rather by the rapidly growing demand for ﬁle sharing
and other services. Should P2P technologies disappear, the
current problems will likely remain, but shifted towards
other existing or yet to emerge technologies. Additionally,
an increasing number of paid services currently offer virtual
private networks that can be used to tunnel and encrypt any
type of trafﬁc, including P2P, which is thus disguised and
can circumvent ISP restricting policies.
32
AP2PS 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advances in P2P Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-102-1

B. Mobile Broadbands
Mobile broadbands, which allow wireless access to var-
ious Internet services through 3G, GPRS or other cellular
networks, are becoming very popular worldwide. According
to the statistics collected by Allot Communications, mobile
broadband usage has increased of 72% in the second half
of 2009 [6]. Mobile broadbands are being more and more
widely used as a replacement for wired connections to
exchange data. Verizon reports a wireless data revenue rise
of 41% from 2007 to 2008 [7].
It is predicted that the number of mobile devices may pass
the number of PCs and laptops by 2013 [31], which directly
translates in a further increase in the number of users of
mobile networks. Currently the 3G network counts about 1
billion subscribers, which are expected to reach 2.8 billion
by 2014 [31]. A few providers have been trying to relieve
their cellular networks by spreading wi-ﬁ hotspots in some
areas with particularly high trafﬁc so that customers can use
them in place of the 3G network for data transfers. This
approach is clearly expensive and requires adding hardware
and infrastructure.
However, 3G is mainly designed for voice trafﬁc, which is
much less bandwidth intensive than data trafﬁc. Although the
network has a data overlay capability, the latter is designed
for bursts of data rather than continuous streams. For this
reason, a continuous stream of data, which is often seen in
P2P transfers, represents a problem for a mobile network.
If many users are transferring large amounts of data, this
will clog the network and leave other subscribers unable to
access their own services [8].
Additionally, 3G networks have intrinsic limitations in the
number of connections that a sector can accept, regardless
of the amount of data transferred. Thus, whenever many
nearby users try to access the network simultaneously, as
often happens during social or emergency events, some
users may be denied a connection because that sector of
the network has already reached the maximum number of
connections. Little can be done to prevent this problem, and
even setting up the cellular network to reset connections
more often provides limited results. It is estimated that 40%
of the connections transfer less than 100 bytes, however
many mobile applications automatically attempt to establish
very frequent connections [31] and this greatly contributes
to quickly clogging the mobile network.
One of the possible problems with restricting P2P usage
in mobile networks is that the experience of their subscribers
may signiﬁcantly degrade, as users are unable to reach
acceptable speeds in P2P communications. The possible
dissatisfaction in their service may have a negative impact
on mobile broadband ISPs, as customers may feel like the
broadband subscription is not worth paying for. In fact,
subscribers are often expecting their mobile networks to
perform in much the same way as ﬁxed networks and to
be able to do the same things they would do on a normal
wired network [2]. On the other hand, as other non-P2P
services that generate high amounts of data gain popularity,
restricting P2P becomes less and less effective to relieve
overload problems.
C. Emerging Technologies
The upcoming release of the Wi-Fi Direct protocol [9]
holds promise for promoting the feasibility and convenience
of fully distributed wireless technologies. The Wi-Fi Direct
protocol uses physical P2P communication in that it allows
wi-ﬁ devices in range to talk to each other without the need
of intermediate wireless access points or routers. While few
devices already support the protocol [10], the Wi-Fi alliance
has announced that the wi-ﬁ cards of many existing wireless
devices can be made compatible with Wi-Fi Direct through
upcoming software upgrades [1].
Since Wi-Fi Direct does not require any special hardware
or infrastructure and can be installed on virtually any device
with a wireless card, it is not unreasonable to expect that the
concentration of devices running the protocol will become
high in populated areas. This implies that in general each
device could easily ﬁnd a number of other devices in its
range, which provides an opportunity to build chains of local
connections. Additionally, even if two devices are not in
each other’s range, a connection could be established using
multiple hops through other intermediate devices.
While P2P systems in theory can always be built on top
of centralized network technologies, and the advent of 4G
1 will make data transmission over mobile networks more
efﬁcient, relying on fully distributed technologies can be
beneﬁcial for several reasons. Certain areas, for instance,
may always lack coverage. The cellular network may be
overloaded, or too expensive for some users, or mobile
providers may decide to block P2P. Also, in certain countries
where heavy censorships are in use to limit the freedom
of communication, fully decentralized technologies may be
a viable alternative to exchange information circumventing
censorships.
III. DRIVING APPLICATIONS
A wide range of services will beneﬁt from mobile P2P and
could be run in a Wi-Fi Direct supported P2P system. The
heterogeneity of mobile devices and the desirable compati-
bility of the P2P system with stationary hosts could create
a pool of different features, with peers complementing each
other. Consider the following possible areas of application:
- Voice communication. The success of voice-over-IP
(Voip) P2P applications such as Skype shows that P2P
networks are good enough to provide time-sensitive services
14G network technology for mobile networks is just now starting to be
tested, with the two main competitors being WiMax and LTE [11]; it is
not clear when it or the other technologies will actually be more generally
deployed.
33
AP2PS 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advances in P2P Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-102-1

such as real-time audio and video communications. Voice
communication does not necessarily need a dedicated in-
frastructure, nor a lot of computational power or bandwidth,
as shown by Skype measurements [17].
- Text messaging. Being a time-insensitive service, text
messaging can easily be implemented using mobile P2P,
through multiple hops if necessary. Each peer would buffer
a message only until it can be forwarded to another peer
closer to the destination. By using epidemic routing [34], a
time insensitive message can travel long distances under the
assumption that at least some of the peers move in space.
- Dissemination of trafﬁc information. It is becoming more
and more common for smartphones and other mobile devices
to have GPS capabilities. This allows for dissemination
of information about local trafﬁc in a P2P fashion. For
instance, the GPS function of a mobile could automatically
compute the mobile’s speed and infer the degree of trafﬁc
congestion. Such data could be transparently transmitted in
a P2P fashion, to help other drivers choosing less congested
routes [26].
- Dissemination of emergency data. During emergencies,
many nearby people typically try to send or retrieve in-
formation through their phones and it may happen that
the number of attempted connections exceeds the number
of connections that a speciﬁc cellular network sector can
accept. The information could be shared in real-time and
received by anyone that has a mobile connected to the P2P
network. The devices do not need to be connected to an
access point, nor to have access to the cellular network.
This works well also because many emergencies are local,
and the data can be spread in a precise area.
- Photo/video sharing during an event. Events such as
sports or meetings of any kind encourage people that share a
common interest to gather together. Their proximity allows a
local mobile P2P network to be formed, and thus peers can
share photos or videos (or any other type of information
relevant to the event). It is well known that such events
represent a tough challenge for mobile networks because of
the high number of connections within a small area. Video
transfers, which can be especially bulky, currently represent
a big portion of the mobile trafﬁc and are quickly growing
[12].
- Last–mile connectivity. For people living in areas that are
not covered by cellular networks or by Internet connections,
such as farms in rural areas, a self-supporting mobile P2P
network can be an alternative, assuming there are enough
nodes that act as bridges between the uncovered area and
an area where an Internet connection is available.
- Local service networks for hospitals and other orga-
nizations. Some corporations, especially in poor countries,
cannot afford expensive LANs due to the costs of setting up
and managing an infrastructure. In addition, the personnel
may be often in movement and their having access to
standard wi-ﬁ connections may be sporadic. A corporate,
protected mobile P2P network can allow personnel to be
securely connected to each other at any time and with
relatively low costs.
- Local social networking. Social networks are becoming
very popular, and the integration of location information,
while still immature, will provide powerful capabilities. In
addition to promoting these capabilities, the proximity of
mobiles allows the dynamic creation of location-aware social
networks.
- Multi–player gaming. Even without an Internet connec-
tion, a mobile peer could ﬁnd players for a multi-player
game in the local P2P network. This allows peers to play
games requiring more than one player. that otherwise could
not be played alone.
IV. CURRENT STATE OF P2P SUPPORT FOR MOBILES
Currently, P2P exists in mobile networks in three different
forms.
- P2P protocols designed for stationary hosts but used
in mobile broadbands. Many subscribers use their mobile
broadbands through USB cards connected to laptops and
PCs. These users often run P2P applications designed for
wired networks, often expecting comparable performance
with the same application running on a computer connected
to a wired network [2]. This can be highly inefﬁcient
because traditional P2P protocols are not optimized for
mobile networks, which clearly have different parameters
and capabilities. Additionally, this approach does not take
advantage in any way of the added features and capabilities
that mobile devices can have compared to stationary hosts,
such as mobility, ubiquity, and sensing.
- P2P protocols where mobile devices are considered
weaker nodes and thus have to rely on stationary hosts. In
several P2P systems (e.g., [18] and projects based on JXME,
JXTA in Java Micro Edition), it is assumed that mobiles need
stationary hosts that relieve them from the computational
load derived from being part of the P2P network. Mobiles
typically have their queries to and from other peers mediated
by a stationary node, which acts like a proxy. While in
the past mobiles had indeed very reduced computational
and storage capabilities, this is changing. At present, many
mobile devices have better computational capabilities than
PCs had ten years ago and are suitable for properly designed
P2P technologies. Additionally, the proxy approach greatly
reduces the applicability of mobile P2P systems, which
cannot take advantage of the proximity of other mobile
devices unless they can connect to a stationary host running
the P2P protocol.
- Ad-hoc and application-speciﬁc P2P systems. A large
number of different P2P systems for ad-hoc networks have
been proposed, either relying on existing protocols, such as
Bittorrent ([33], [13]) or adopting new ones (e.g. [26], [30]).
The fragmentation in P2P protocols for ad-hoc networks,
along with the incompatibility of the different protocols,
34
AP2PS 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advances in P2P Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-102-1

does not maximize the opportunities for cooperation of the
devices. In fact, a device cannot easily ﬁnd other nodes
running the same P2P protocol and, since mobile P2P
heavily relies on the high number and proximity of peers
for efﬁciency, this represents a signiﬁcant disadvantage. Ad-
ditionally, since there is no widely established middleware
framework, each new P2P application needs to be developed
from scratch.
A mobile P2P middleware framework may represent a
signiﬁcant improvement towards an efﬁcient mobile P2P
system. A middleware framework can support basic building
blocks for protocols, and thus allow for the intercommuni-
cation of services and applications with different purposes
built on the same compatible protocols. This implies that
mobiles running different applications, but using the same
protocol, could still cooperate on various tasks that are vital
to the P2P network (e.g., query routing and peer/resource
discovery). Additionally, new applications do not need to be
developed from scratch, but instead can rely on the existing
building blocks, and only the application-level development
is necessary for a new service. Tailoring a P2P system on
a mobile environment also means that it can be designed
to take full advantage of the capabilities that mobiles have,
such as mobility, ubiquity and sensing. At the same time, it
can be optimized to take into account the different features
that mobile networks exhibit.
V. MOBILE-OPTIMIZED MOBILITY-OPTIMIZED JXTA
Mobiles have several advantages over stationary hosts,
mostly deriving from their capability for mobility. Since mo-
bile devices are used in a variety of contexts, they can also
carry information to and from each context. Additionally,
mobiles can be tailored to the needs of their owner and of
the surrounding environment. While a number of mobile P2P
applications have been proposed, there are very few existing
middleware frameworks, and they typically do not take the
physical location into account.
JXTA, an open-source middleware system developed by
Sun Microsystems in 2002 [14], is a good basis for versatile
mobile P2P middleware that can be adapted to emerging
technologies such as Wi-Fi Direct. The additions and exten-
sions that we are developing take advantage of the added
functionalities of mobiles, and at the same time, seek to
improve the performance of JXTA-based networks in highly
dynamic environments.
Traditionally, JXTA is organized in three basic layers. The
core layer includes mandatory JXTA functionalities that are
strictly necessary for the JXTA network to function properly.
The service level includes fundamental higher-layer services,
designed for ﬂexibility and extensibility. The application
layer includes a variety of applications that can be developed
on top of the other two layers.
Figure 1 shows the structure of our mobile-optimized,
mobility-optimized JXTA. The orange blocks represent parts
Figure 1.
The three layers in our mobile-optimized JXTA. The colored
blocks represent components that we either modify from the traditional
JXTA (in the core and service layers) or introduce (in the application layer).
of our system that differ from traditional JXTA. At the
core layer, our focus is on JXTA’s grouping abstraction.
In JXTA, groups of peers provide a minimum set of given
services and/or share speciﬁc interests. The group structure
improves the performance and limits the load on each node
by restricting the scope and the number of peers to query.
We extend the peer group structure so that, in a true P2P
communication scenario, that grouping criteria can be based
on the physical location of nodes. This grouping extension
promotes good performance by minimizing the number of
hops that messages travel. Note that scoping is not restricted
since a peer may be a member of both “local” and “remote”
groups, and thus can also act as an intermediary for nearby
nodes that only have a direct (as in Wi-Fi Direct) connection.
Other core layer features, such as peers publishing XML-
represented advertisements for resources (peers, groups,
pipes and communications services), assigning IDs, and the
various levels of support for authentication and privacy,
remain the same as in the traditional JXTA.
In JXTA, peers can run rendezvous and relay services.
Rendezvous peers improve the efﬁciency of the network,
as they maintain global advertisement indexes and play an
important role in resource discovery. Relay peers are used
to communicate with unreachable peers (i.e., those behind
ﬁrewalls or NATs). The typical JXTA approach towards
supporting minimal-edge peers (traditionally identiﬁed with
mobile resource-limited devices) has been to establish proxy
35
AP2PS 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advances in P2P Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-102-1

peers that mediate all the communication with the minimal-
edge peers to allow them to access JXTA functionalities.
Proxy peers are no longer absolutely necessary in our
mobile-optimized system. In fact, current devices are pow-
erful enough to be part of a P2P network without the need
for stationary hosts to act as a proxies.
Consequently, at the service layer, we focus on the
following extensions. In traditional JXTA, the membership
service is used to securely establish identities and trust
within a peer group, while the access service is used
to validate requests of resources, made by one peer to
another. In a highly dynamic environment where mobiles
are continuously moving and thus causing changes to the
structure of groups, it is virtually impossible to enforce
strong rules for membership while maintaining efﬁciency
and ﬂexibility. Since having more peers in the network
can lead to better performance, resilience and availability
of services, it is convenient to have a loose policy for
membership. Thus, we allow location/proximity to be a
major criteria for access control in our system, as peers that
happen to be geographically close represent an opportunity
for efﬁcient connections. Blacklists are used for peers that
misbehave. Additionally, existing JXTA cryptographic tools
can be customized to ensure an adequate level of privacy
and authenticity, implemented at the peer level, rather than
at the group level. Each peer is thus able to independently
decide whether it wants secure connections, possibly only
with trusted peers.
Traditional JXTA does not provide any speciﬁcations to
ensure fairness or provide incentives. However, whether
services are provided for free or for payment, incentives rep-
resent a fundamental component to encourage P2P resource
sharing. Relying on the generosity of each node can lead to
widespread free-riding behavior, especially in a mobile con-
text, where nodes typically have to take their battery usage
into account. Incentives can be economic rewards, or they
may be established through a more general fairness policy in
the exchange of services. For instance, a peer can be granted
access to a service only if it also provides that same service,
or in a more ﬂexible scheme, it can be granted access to
some given number of different services if it also provides a
given number of similar ones. Due to the variety of services
that JXTA can support, and given the dynamicity of P2P
interactions, our approach is that each peer be rewarded
for any service provided to the P2P community in general,
and not to speciﬁc peers only. A similar concept has been
used by Efstathiou et al. in the design of their P2P Wireless
Network Confederation (P2PWNC) [27], and differs from
the incentive strategy adopted by many popular P2P systems
(e.g., Bittorrent and Edonkey). We take advantage of code
mobility feature of JXTA [22], [25] which allows services
to be added dynamically, not only by loading a pre-installed
module but also by downloading from a remote source, such
as another peer, the code needed to run a service. This
provides further ﬂexibility for a fairness scheme.
The discovery protocol is used in JXTA to ﬁnd advertise-
ments published by other peers within a group. To provide
better availability of content, it is convenient that the discov-
ery protocol also include the capability of retrieving content
from peers outside the “local” group. Peers connected to
the Internet through a wi-ﬁ connection could, for example,
retrieve content located far away and inject it in the local
P2P network. A similar approach is described in [33].
We make use of JXTA support for a fully decentralized
search infrastructure, which is based on resource indexing
through distributed hash tables (DHT). Despite that this
requires more computational resources than other search
methods such as ﬂooding, it is much more efﬁcient as to
network usage, which is particularly important in mobile
broadbands.
VI. RELATED WORK
Mobile P2P applications have typically not considered the
geographical location as a prime concern. We are not aware
of any P2P system that is speciﬁcally designed to optimize
Wi-Fi Direct connections.
A number of potential mobile P2P applications have been
proposed, for either new (e.g., [26], [30]) or existing (e.g.
[33], [13]) protocols. As for middleware solutions, we refer
to [28] and [32] for an extensive list. Many of the existing
middleware frameworks present similarities, especially in
the communication and resource discovery schemes, while
the different scopes of each middleware determine some of
the intrinsic differences among them, such as optimizations
and sets of offered primitives. The great majority of the
the middleware frameworks in [28] and [32] are currently
discontinued.
Regarding JXTA-related mobile P2P, several works by
Bisignano et al. present a JXTA-based middleware for
MANETs (Mobile Ad hoc NETworks) [22], [19], [21], [23],
[20]. In these works, a software layer is added on top of
JXTA, with the main purpose of creating optimizations for
advertisements and connections in MANETs. Results shown
through simulations appear to be encouraging.
In [35], a set of improvements is presented to speciﬁcally
optimize ﬁle sharing by using JXTA-Overlay. The latter is a
project that builds an overlay on top of JXTA to offer a set of
commonly needed functionalities and basic primitives [15].
In particular [35] proposes a distinction among different
types of advertisements, to be handled differently, and,
according to JXTA-Overlay speciﬁcations, the use of broker
peers to govern the JXTA P2P network. ContextTorrent [29]
is a semantic context management framework for distributed
searches among local and remote context-aware applications.
It is implemented in JXME, which has been ported to An-
droid. Finally, JXBT [24] implements a JXME infrastructure
using Bluetooth. It enhances basic Bluetooth and overcomes
36
AP2PS 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advances in P2P Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-102-1

some of its limitations, such as the reduced number of
interconnectable devices and limited transmission range.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have highlighted how P2P is currently
a widespread reality in both wired and wireless networks,
and the reasons why a new form of P2P, one that exploits
upcoming technologies for fully distributed connections,
such as Wi-Fi Direct, can be beneﬁcial for both consumers
and service providers. We also presented some of the ap-
plications that become possible with new forms of P2P. We
described the main building blocks of a new JXTA-based
P2P middleware architecture, optimized not only for mobiles
but also for mobility and location awareness. We are in
the process of implementing the system in Android and we
plan on testing it using Wi-Fi Direct as soon as it becomes
available.
REFERENCES
[1] http://www.wi-ﬁ.org/ﬁles/20091019 Wi-Fi Direct FAQ.pdf.
[2] http://gigaom.com/2009/07/21/will-p2p-soon-be-the-scourge-
of-mobile-networks.
[3] http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2010/04/just-like-
comcast-rcn-accused-of-throttling-p2p.ars.
[4] http://virginmobile.custhelp.com/app/answers/detail/a id/290/˜/peer-
to-peer-%2F-p2p-shaping.
[5] http://www.ovum.com/go/content/c,57072.
[6] http://www.allot.com/Allot MobileTrends Report Shows
Signiﬁcant Growth.html.
[7] http://gigaom.com/2009/07/12/what-will-carriers-do-when-
the-data-gravy-train-derails.
[8] http://gigaom.com/2008/11/06/att-buys-wayport-to-keep-
iphone-users-happy.
[9] http://www.wi-ﬁ.org/news articles.php?f=
media news&news id=909.
[10] http://www.sci-tech-today.com/story.xhtml?story id=
10200AGALOB0.
[11] http://technologizer.com/2009/05/20/lte-vs-wimax-the-4g-
wireless-war.
[12] http://www.ﬁercewireless.com/special-reports/mobile-video-
trafﬁc-alleviating-capacity-crunch.
[13] http://amorg.aut.bme.hu/projects/symtorrent.
[14] https://jxta.dev.java.net/.
[15] https://jxta-overlay.dev.java.net.
[16] Trafﬁc inspection for visibility, control and new business
opportunities. Technical report, Ericcson, 2008.
[17] S. A. Baset and H. G. Schulzrinne. An analysis of the skype
peer-to-peer internet telephony protocol. INFOCOM 2006.
[18] A. Berl, I. Dedinski, E. Georgiew, and H. D. Meer. Mobile
p2p: Turning heterogeneity to an advantage.
[19] M. Bisignano. Jmobipeer: a middleware for mobile peer-to-
peer computing in manets. In Distributed Computing Systems
Workshops, 2005.
[20] M. Bisignano.
A jxta compliant framework for mobile
handheld devices in ad hoc networks. In ISCC 2005.
[21] M. Bisignano.
Expeerience: a jxta middleware for mobile
ad hoc networks. In Third International Conference on P2P
Computing, 2003.
[22] M. Bisignano. Design and development of a jxta middleware
for mobile ad-hoc networks, 2004.
[23] M. Bisignano. An infrastructure-less peer-to-peer framework
for mobile hand- held devices.
European Transactions on
Telecommunications, 2004.
[24] C.Blundo and E. Cristofaro. A bluetooth-based jxme infras-
tructure. In Proceedings of the 9th International Symposium
on Distributed Objects, Middleware and Applications, 2007.
[25] R. Y. Chen and B. Yeager. Java mobile agents on project jxta
peer-to-peer platform. Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, 9, 2003.
[26] S. Dornbush and A. Joshi. Streetsmart trafﬁc: Discovering
and disseminating automobile congestion using vanet’s. In
Vehicular Technology Conference, 2007.
[27] E. C. Efstathiou and G. C. Polyzos. A self-managed scheme
for free citywide wi-ﬁ. In WoWMoM 2005.
[28] S. Hadim. Trends in middleware for mobile ad hoc networks.
2006.
[29] D. H. Hu. A semantic context management framework on
mobile device. Second International Conference on Embed-
ded Software and Systems, 2009.
[30] N. B. Niraula, K. Kanchanasut, and A. Laouiti. Peer-to-peer
live video streaming over mobile ad hoc networks. In IWCMC
’09, pages 1045–1050, 2009.
[31] R. Padovani and QUALCOMM. A day in the life of a smart-
phone, http://www.calit2.net/newsroom/article.php?id=1683,
2010.
[32] G. Paroux.
A survey of middleware for mobile ad hoc
networks. Technical report, Telecom Paris, 2007.
[33] M. K. Sbai. Bithoc: Bittorrent for wireless ad hoc networks,
2008.
[34] A. Vahdat and D. Becker.
Epidemic routing for partially-
connected ad hoc networks. Duke Tech Report, 2000.
[35] F. Xhafa.
Extending jxta protocols for p2p ﬁle sharing
systems. In International Conference on Complex Intelligent
and Software Intensive Systems, 2008.
All links were last checked on 7/7/2010.
37
AP2PS 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advances in P2P Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-102-1

