Development of Complex Technologies for Biomass Processing 
 
Konstantin Latinin 
 International Science and Technology Center 
Moscow, Russia 
e-mail: latynin@istc.ru 
Vladimir Sinelshchikov, Victor Zaichenko 
Joint Institute for High Temperatures of Russian 
Academy of Sciences  
Moscow, Russia 
e-mail: zaitch@oivtran.ru
 
Abstract—There are presented two technologies of biomass 
processing. One technology is concerned with manufacture of 
hydrogen and pure carbon materials. It based on the process of 
heterogeneous pyrolysis of gaseous hydrocarbons during 
filtration through porous medium. As a porous material it is 
suggested to apply a charcoal formed as a result of thermal 
processing of biomass (wood, peat and agricultural waste). The 
advantages of this technology are the waste-less character of 
biomass processing and wide range of the end products. 
Another technology is a technology of conversion of biomass 
into synthesis gas. The experimental data on quantity and 
composition of the gaseous products formed in the process of 
thermal treatment of wood and peat are presented. It is shown 
that as a result of peat and wood pyrolysis and the subsequent 
cracking of emanating products at temperature 1000 0С it is 
possible to produce about 1.4 m3 of gas with calorific value 11.7 
MJ/m3 from one kg of original raw material. 
Keywords- biomass, pyrolysis, pyrocarbon, syngas, hydrogen 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Today utilization of biomass for power engineering in 
most cases is more expensive, than use of traditional fossil 
fuels. As a result a biomass can be competitive in the market 
of power resources only under the condition of state 
budgetary support. Under the global financial and economic 
crisis a budgetary support becomes problematic.  
In present conditions, any scientific and technical activity 
in the field of energy supply should be based on two basic 
principles: 
– full-scale mutually beneficial international cooperation; 
– attractiveness of developing technologies  to investors 
both from the economic and ecological points of view. 
The first principle will provide for integration of 
experimental possibilities and 
intellectual 
efforts 
of 
specialists from different countries. Such integration will be 
the guarantor of the common successes. Practical realization 
of the second principle can be successful only at complex 
processing of a biomass with production of a wide range of 
the commodity output which are in popular demand in the 
market, namely: gaseous and liquid fuels, including 
hydrogen, and also carbon materials with predetermined 
properties – active carbon, coke, pyrocarbon. 
The role of Russia in the development of the international 
cooperation should be considerable as there is concentrated 
about 42 % of peat and about 23 % of wood world reserves 
in Russia. Use of peat and wood waste does not demand 
preliminary expenses for biomass growing, soil recultivation 
and other nonproduction expenses. The level of scientific 
and technical workings in Russia gives opportunity to hope 
for development of economically justified technologies of 
biomass utilization for power engineering. Application of 
biomass complex processing technologies which are 
developing today in Russia will allow to satisfy the 
requirements of Russian and partially international markets 
in ecologically clean fuels. Now Russia one of the main 
supplier of the fossil fuels on the foreign market and in the 
future it can make the essential contribution to formation of 
biofuel market and can become one of the major biofuel 
exporter.  
Technologies of complex thermal biomass processing 
developed in Joint Institute for High Temperatures of 
Russian Academy of Sciences (JIHT) are stated below. Both 
technologies are based on pyrolysis of such raw materials as 
wood and peat and agricultural waste. Distinction between 
these technologies consists in the end products which can be 
obtained. One technology is the technology of complex 
processing of biomass with production of technical hydrogen 
and pure carbon materials [1, 2] and another is the wasteless 
technology of biomass processing with production of high-
calorific gas fuel [3]. 
The main features of technologies under consideration, 
characteristics of end products and results of experimental 
investigations substantiating these technologies are presented 
and discussed. 
II. 
PRODUCTION OF CARBON COMPOSITE AND 
TECHNICAL HYDROGEN  
At the first stage of the technology for production of pure 
carbon materials and technical hydrogen a raw material 
(peat, wood or agricultural waste) are heated approximately 
to a temperature of 600 0C in a gas medium free of oxygen. 
As a result there is produced a charcoal which is a brittle 
porous material with the carbon content exceeding 90%. At 
the second stage a gaseous hydrocarbon is blown through the 
charcoal bed heated up to the temperature about 1000 0С. For 
these purpose natural gas, oil gas and waste burning gases of 
petrochemical manufactures can be used. Passing through the 
porous carbon structure formed at the first stage, gaseous 
hydrocarbons decompose into hydrogen and carbon which 
stuffs the porous carbon matrix and transforms it to a solid 
composite with carbon content up to 98 %. Carbon materials 
with such properties are in popular demand in the market. 
7
BIONATURE 2011 :  The Second International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-138-0

Figue 2. Change of open (1) and closed (2) pore volume fraction of 
wood char sample in process of methane pyrolysis. 
Produced hydrogen may be used as a pure gas fuel for 
energy purpose. The both stages of the technology can be 
carried out in one device.  
All methods of hydrogen production for power 
engineering existing now are not repaying and some 
financial support is need for its realization. The scheme 
stated 
above, 
when 
hydrogen 
production 
fulfilled 
simultaneously with the production of pure carbon materials, 
is paying back, as the price of produced carbon materials 
covers all expenses for manufacture of hydrogen and its 
subsequent power use.  
The photo of pyrocarbon samples received with the help 
of the developed technology is presented in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1.  Samples of the carbon composite and their composition. 
The results of porosity measurements give the 
opportunity to imagine a character of structure modification 
of a sample in process of the heterogeneous pyrolysis of gas 
hydrocarbons and its final internal structure. Figure 2 shows 
the time evolution of the volume fraction of open and closed 
pores of a charcoal sample [4]. One can see that the volume 
fraction of open pores decreases and the volume fraction of 
closed pores increases in process of the methane pyrolysis. 
After 100 minutes the volume fraction of closed pores is 
practically constant. This fact indicates that after 100 minutes 
pyrolysis is in progress practically only on outer surface of 
the sample while internal pores become closed for methane 
diffusion though their volume fraction is about 50%. 
The hydrogen content in gaseous products at the exit of 
reaction volume depends on the operation conditions and 
may reach  80 – 90 volume percents. The rest is not 
decomposed gaseous hydrocarbons. 
III. 
PRODUCTION OF SYNGAS 
The second technology of bioconversion is the 
technology of wasteless production of synthesis gas. Present 
day technologies of solid hydrocarbon raw materials 
conversion into gas can be divided on two basic groups: 
gasification and pyrolysis. During gasification the thermal 
decomposition of initial raw materials occurs in the oxidizing 
gas environment and the product gas contains combustion 
products of raw materials. At air gasification the product gas 
is also substantially diluted by nitrogen. As a result the 
combustion heat of gas mixtures produced at gasification 
usually does not exceed 6 MJ/m3 usually. Use of such low-
calorific gas in the modern power units is ineffectively. 
Essential improvement of characteristics of power gas 
produced with the help of existing processes of biomass 
gasification cannot be received. 
During pyrolysis the heating of initial raw materials 
occurs without oxidizer access. Pyrolysis products are char, 
noncondensable gases СО2, СО, Н2, СН4, СnHm, N2 and 
volatiles. In cooling the volatiles form liquid fraction which 
consists of tar and pyroligneous liquor. While pyrolysis 
makes it possible to produce gas mixtures with a calorific 
value up to 20 MJ/m3, the main demerits of the given method 
is the presence of the considerable carbon dioxide fraction 
(up to 30 % volume) in pyrolysis gases and rather low gas 
yield, which reaches 0.3-0.4 m3 per kg of initial raw 
materials at best. As a result the efficiency of energy 
conversion, determined as the ratio of the product gas 
thermal value to thermal value of initial raw materials, does 
not exceed 0.3. Thus, the main objective of technological 
advancement is an increase of conversion degree of initial 
raw materials into gas together with conservation of enough 
high specific combustion heat of product gas mixtures.  
The technology of biomass (peat, wood and agricultural 
waste) thermal processing with production of high calorific 
power gas developed in the JIHT is based on high-
temperature processing of the pyrolysis gases and volatiles. 
The method is similar to the one suggested in [5] for 
processing of wood sawdust and used in [3] for processing 
of wood waste and peat. It consists in filtration of volatiles 
and gases, forming by pyrolysis of initial raw materials, 
through the porous carbon bed kept at a fixed temperature Tf
(further this regime is referred to as «pyrolysis with 
cracking»). As the carbon material (filter) the char obtained 
as a result of initial raw material carbonization was used. 
Due to the developed surface of the carbon filter there is a 
fast heating of volatiles and gases to the temperature Tf. As a 
result of homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical 
reactions in the high-temperature zone an intensive 
decomposition of pyrolysis gases and volatiles takes place. 
The conversion degree depends both on the temperature Tf.
and the interaction time of volatile products with heated 
Composition % (weight) 
Carbon        > 97 
Hydrogen        0.3 
Volatile          1.1 
Moisture         0.5 
Ash          <  0.7 
Sulfur         < 0.02 
Combustion heat  
7800 kcal/kg 
8
BIONATURE 2011 :  The Second International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-138-0

Figue 4. High (solid line) and low (dash line) calorific values of 
output pyrolysis gas vs. temperature of raw material (peat pellets) in 
different regimes of thermal processing: «pyrolysis with cracking»  
at Тf = 1000 0С – 1, 850 0С – 2;  «pyrolysis» – 3. 
Figue 3. Shange in relative mass of raw material (1) and volume gas 
yield per one kg of raw material (2-5) in heating of peat pellets: regime 
«pyrolysis with cracking»  at Тf = 1000 0С – 2, 950 0С – 3, 850 0С – 4; 
regime «pyrolysis» – 5. 
carbon surface. As follows from the data presented in Figure 3 
the increase in the char filter temperature Tf leads to 
essential increase in the yield of gaseous products (Tc. –
current temperature of processed raw material, heating rate 
– 10 0С /min).  
Simultaneously with the growth of gas yield the 
reduction of quantity of the liquid fraction in the end 
products is observed. For the temperature Тf = 1000 0С there 
is no liquid fraction that is evidence of full tar and 
pyroligneous liquor conversion into gas. Thus during the 
filtration through the char filter decomposition of the 
volatiles, forming in process of thermal destruction of raw 
material and condensing as a tar, takes place. In addition 
interaction of pyrolytic water with char leads to generation 
of hydrogen and carbon monoxide. 
Change of operating parameters results in change of 
product gas composition. From results of chromatographic 
analysis it is follows that carbon dioxide and methane 
content in the product gas decreases with the rise of the char 
filter temperature Тf . Composition, specific combustion heat 
and volume of gas mixture produced from peat and wood are 
presented in Table I and II. For temperature Тf = 1000 0С the 
content of carbon dioxide and methane does not exceed one 
percent. An increase of the char filter temperature leads to 
raise the rate of disoxidation of CO2 and the rate of 
heterogeneous pyrolysis of methane and other paraffin 
hydrocarbons. As a result at Тf = 1000 0С the product gas 
mixture consists of CO and H2 in practically equal parts. 
From comparison of the Tables I and II data one can see 
that the specific combustion heat of gas mixtures produced 
at different operating conditions are rather close to each 
other. One of the main advantages of the «pyrolysis with 
cracking» regime is a considerable increase of the volume 
gas yield and, as a consequence, a rise in the degree of 
conversion of biomass into gas. 
TABLE I. COMPOSITION, SPECIFIC COMBUSTION HEAT AND VOLUME  OF 
PRODUCT GAS PRODUCED FROM ONE KG  PEAT PELLETS 
Volume fractions of 
combustible 
components  
Combustion 
heat, 
MJ/m3
Тf , 0C
Volume, 
m3/kg 
 
H2
CO 
CnHm
QH
QL
850 
950 
1000 
 
Pyrolysis 
0.76 
1.1 
1.39 
 
0.29  
 
0.40 
0.43 
0.49 
 
0.23 
 
0.27 
0.40 
0.41 
 
0.19 
 
0.08 
0.02 
0.01 
 
0.13 
 
11.7 
11.3 
11.7 
 
10.4 
 
10.6 
 10.4 
 10.6 
 
9.6 
TABLE II. COMPOSITION. SPECIFIC COMBUSTION HEAT AND VOLUME  OF 
PRODUCT GAS PRODUCED FROM ONE KG WOOD PELLETS 
Volume fractions of 
combustible 
components  
Combustion 
heat. 
MJ/m3
Тf . 0С
Volume. 
m3/kg 
 
H2
CO 
CnHm
QH
QL
850 
950 
1000 
 
Pyrolysis 
0.83 
1.24 
1.39 
 
0.26  
 
0.39 
0.47 
0.46 
 
0.28 
 
0.28 
0.41 
0.46 
 
0.26 
 
0.10 
0.01 
0.00 
 
0.16 
 
12.5 
11.5 
11.7 
 
13.2 
 
11.5 
10.6 
 10.9 
 
12.1 
Change of the gas calorific value at reactor output in 
process of raw material heating (rate – 10 0С /min) is 
presented in  Figure 4. As one can see from Figure 4, in the 
«pyrolysis» regime the calorific value of output gas at 
temperature of processed raw material above 550 0С is 
higher than the calorific value of output gas in the 
«pyrolysis with cracking» regime. However the calorific 
value of output gas in the «pyrolysis» regime is strongly 
changes in process of raw material heating.  
As appears from comparison of the dependences 
presented in Figure 4, in the «pyrolysis with cracking» 
regime an increase of the temperature Тf
depresses a 
temperature influence on the calorific value of output gas. 
9
BIONATURE 2011 :  The Second International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-138-0

As mentioned above at Тf = 1000 0С the output gas is a 
mixture of CO and H2. Relation between volume fractions 
of this components in temperature range Tc = 250 – 500 0С
(that is in the range of main gas release) does not change 
practically. As consequence the calorific value of output gas 
does not depend on the temperature of processed raw 
material. This circumstance is rather important from the 
point of view of the subsequent usage of product gas 
mixtures, for example, as a fuel for power plant on the base 
of internal combustion engine.  
The ratio of thermal value of gas obtained by thermal 
processing of one kg of the raw material to calorific value of 
one kg of the utilized raw material is about 0.7 – 0.8. 
Significant advantage of suggested technology is the absence 
of liquid fraction in the end products. Such gas mixture can 
be used as a gas fuel for power unit on the base of gas piston 
engine. Burning of the gaseous fuel produced from biomass 
raw materials by developed technology can be carried out 
without reconstruction of the existing gas-fired power 
equipment while the direct use of wood waste or peat (for 
example, peat or wood pellets) requires considerable 
structural modifications of the existing power installations 
meant for electricity generation. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION  
1. The technology of manufacture of carbon materials 
and hydrogen based on the process of heterogeneous 
pyrolysis of gaseous hydrocarbons during filtration through 
porous structure formed as a result of thermal decomposition 
of biomass are presented. The carbon material produced by 
the developed technology may be used as a high calorific 
solid fuel and as a raw material for various industries, for 
example, metallurgy. The gaseous mixture at the exit of 
reaction volume contains hydrogen which concentration may 
be easy varied by change in operating parameters and may 
reach 90 volume percents. Natural gas of low-pressure gas 
fields, oil gas and waste hydrocarbon gases of petrochemical 
manufacture can be used as gaseous raw material for this 
technology. 
2. It is shown that the mixed technology of thermal 
processing of different kinds of biomass, involving the stage 
of pyrolysis and the subsequent cracking of volatile products 
by their filtration through charcoal, it is possible to increase 
the efficiency of energy conversion of biomass into gas by 
several times. At the charcoal temperature 1000 0С and given 
residence time it is possible to produce about 1.4 m3 of gas 
with specific combustion heat about 11.7 MJ/m3 per one kg 
of original raw material. The produced gas mixture consists 
generally of carbon oxide and hydrogen. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by Russian Foundation for 
Basic Research grant No. 10 – 08 – 005551. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V.M. Zaichenko, E.E. Shpil’rain, and V.Ya. Shterenberg, 
“Integrated Processing of Natural Gas to Obtain Hydrogen for 
Power Engineering and Carbon Materials for General Use in 
Industry”, Thermal Engineering, No. 3, 2006, pp. 217-223. 
[2] V.M. 
Zaichenko, 
V.V. 
Kosov,.V.F. 
Kosov, 
V.A. 
Sinelshchikov, and G.F. Sokol, “Experimental Feasibility 
Study of Technology for Integrated Processing of Wood 
Waste and Natural Gas”, Thermal Engineering, No. 7, 2008, 
pp. 587-593.
[3] V.V. Kosov, V.F. Kosov, I.L. Maikov, V.A. Sinelshchikov, 
and V.M. Zaichenko, “High-calorific Gas Mixtures Produced 
by Pyrolysis of Wood and Peat”, Proc. of 17th European 
Biomass Conference and Exhibition, Hamburg, Germany, 
2009, pp. 1085-1088. 
[4] V.F. Kosov, V.A. Sinelshchikov, and V.M. Zaichenko, “New 
Teechnology for Integrated Processing of  Biomass and 
Natural Gas with Production of Hydrogen and Pure Carbon 
Materials”, Proc. of 16th European Biomass Conference and 
Exhibition, Valencia, Spain, 2008,  pp. 1171 – 1175. 
[5] Snehalatha K Chembukulam, Arunkumar S. Dandge, 
Narasimhan L. Kovilur, Rao K. Seshagiri, and R. 
Vaidyeswaran, “Smokeless Fuel from Carbonized Sawdust”, 
Ind. Eng. Chem. Prod. Res. Dev., vol. 20, 1981, pp. 714-719. 
 
10
BIONATURE 2011 :  The Second International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-138-0

