Complex Approach to Oil Spill Utilization 
 
 
E.M. Sulman, M.G. Sulman, E.A. Prutenskaya, E.V. Selivanova, M.Yu. Rakitin 
Tver Technical University 
Tver, Russia 
e-mail: sulman@online.tver.ru 
 
 
Abstract— In the course of oil extracting on oilfield, and 
also at oil transportation inevitably there are oil spills leading 
to ecological balance disruption and bringing a doubtless loss 
to natural ecosystems. Bioremediation is the safest way of 
neutralization of the soils polluted with oil spill products. The 
highest degree of polluted soil clearing is observed while using 
of oil-slime pretreatment and its further additional cleaning by 
a 
consortium 
of 
not 
pathogenic 
petrooxidizing 
microorganisms. Complex method of neutralization of spills 
and wastes polluted by oil hydrocarbons allows converting 
more than 85 % of oil hydrocarbons from the initial 
concentration in samples within two weeks. Developed 
scientific 
and 
technical 
production 
has 
advantage 
in 
comparison with analogs and includes the use of ultrasonic 
pretreatment. The basic advantage of ultrasonic processing is 
its 
sufficient 
quickness, 
profitability 
and 
ecological 
harmlessness, and possibility to destroy С-С bonds in paraffin 
molecules. 
Keywords-oil spill, ultrasound, pretreatment, biological 
degradation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As a result of development of new and operation of 
already functioning oil deposits the environment undergoes 
considerable changes. Owing to emergency oil products 
spill on oilfields a considerable amount of oil hydrocarbons 
and also the chemical reagents used at extraction pollutes 
the environment. 
Oil and oil-slime polluting the environment as a result of 
emergencies at spilling, extraction, transportation, storage 
and treatment, are the reason of numerous environmental 
problems [1, 2]. Unfavorable impact of oil on environment 
and nonrenewaling of hydrocarbonic raw materials make a 
problem of waste treatment a rather actual. 
Applied technologies of soil bioremediation are possible 
to be divided in two groups: methods in situ and methods ex 
situ. Bioremediation in situ is based on clearing of spill from 
pollutants without removal of the polluted soil from pollution 
area. The most perspective is bioremediation ex situ, which 
is based on removal of a layer of the polluted soil and its 
clearing from pollutant outside of a pollution place. 
Technologies of this type have a number of advantages: they 
demand less time and provide complete control of clearing 
process. 
Use of bioreactors is one of the types applied at 
bioremediation ex situ technologies. The polluted soil is 
placed in the bioreactor, necessary nutritious elements and 
microorganisms are loaded. Optimum conditions of 
microorganisms cultivation are provided. After completion 
of the clearing process the soil is dried and returned in 
environment. 
Other approach of bioremediation ex situ consists in 
placement of the removed from a place of pollution soil in 
certain territory, it is provided with aeration, nutrients and 
water for stimulation of microorganism growth and a 
metabolism. In comparison with clearing by means of the 
bioreactors, this technology demands a lot of place and 
longer time. 
The most effective way of oil hydrocarbonic fraction 
biodegradation by microorganisms is the method of the 
continuous cultivation, allowing maintaining a number of 
process parameters at the set level, and simultaneously 
carrying out selection of the most active microorganisms-
destructors. 
The maximal degree of clearing, more than 60-90 %, is 
observed at use of oil-slime pretreatment and the further 
additional cleaning by a consortium of not pathogenic 
petrooxidizing microorganisms [4]. The most perspective 
method is preprocessing by ultrasound which plays a role of 
demulsifying agent and a dispergator. As a result of 
ultrasonic influence in a water solution there is a formation at 
first the emulsion of direct type which is in a condition of 
inversion of phases. 
Then, starting from critical value of acoustic wave sound 
pressure, there is a cavitation in a liquid. С-С bonds in 
paraffin molecules get broken and owing to what there are 
changes of physical and chemical structure (reduction of 
molecular weight, temperatures of crystallization, etc.). After 
ultrasonic pretreatment the steady microemulsion is formed 
and concentration of an accessible source of carbon and 
mineral components increases. 
Preprocessed oil-slime destruction is 10-30 %. 
Thus the aim of this study is development of 
neutralization method of spills and a waste polluted by oil 
hydrocarbons. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
Oil of the Caspian deposit has been used as a model in 
this study. Some of the major characteristics of oil are the 
density and viscosity. The density of oil is 860 kg/m3. Oil 
43
BIONATURE 2011 :  The Second International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-138-0

with relative density 0.86 is called average. Dynamic 
viscosity of oil ranges from 1.4 to 4.5 mP.s and depends on 
chemical and fractional structure, in our case viscosity of oil 
makes 3.39 mP.s. 
Observable oil contains about 10 % of paraffin. Hence, it 
concerns to highwaxy substances. From ecological positions 
components 
sulfur 
presented 
in 
oil 
(elementary, 
hydrosulphuric, sulphidic, sour sulfur) are important 
compounds of it. Used oil contains 0.2 % of sulfur, therefore 
is low-sulphur. Mechanical impurity was also defined in the 
oil. Its general maintenance in the investigated sample 
doesn't exceed 0.01 %. 
In experiments the modeling samples of the polluted soils 
consisting of soil and oil were used. The sample contained 
15 % of oil. Combination of oil with soil spent within three 
days. Ultrasonic pretreatment of the modeling sample were 
carried out after that.  
As each solvent possesses the characteristic properties, 
the correct choice of environment is very important for 
definition 
of 
optimum 
conditions 
of 
carrying 
out 
sonochemical processes. Selection of a leach, as a rule, is 
carried out purely empirically; scientific bases of the directed 
selection are developed in small degree because of a lack of 
the information about oil-slime structure and character of its 
interactions with solvents of the various nature. 
After analysis of different methods of solvents activity 
effectiveness research dissolving ability of hydrocarbons 
for maintenance of the maximum accuracy of received 
results and an exception of a making error of the 
experiment caused by possible discrepancy of conditions of 
carrying out of experiences were defined 
Thus 
for 
laboratory 
researches 
hexane, 
toluene, 
chloroform, benzene were used. 
Ultrasonic generator IKASONIC U 50 was applied to 
raw materials treatment, working at frequency of 30 kHz. 
The device was completed with a nozzle of updating US 50-
3 Sonotool with a diameter of 3 mm and maintenance of 
intensity to 460 Wt/cm2. 
The quantity of oil products in the modeling sample were 
defined by the gravimetric method. During experiments 
intensity of ultrasonic processing (from 230 Wt/cm2 to 414 
Wt/cm2) and extraction time from 1 till 25 minutes were 
varied. As a control, continuous extraction of hydrocarbons 
of oil from samples under normal conditions in conical flasks 
on a rocking chair of type AVU-1. 
Extraction degree (W, %) of oil hydrocarbons from oil-
slime were defined under the equation: 
 
B
A
W
*100
=
, 
 
where                                                                    
A – amount of the producing hydrocarbons from 
oil-slime solvent quantity (g); 
B – content (wt.) of oil in oil-slime (g). 
 
Oil qualitative analysis was carried out via GC using 
chromatograph Kristallux-4000 equipped with FID, and 
capillary column Zebron ZB-FFAP 50, and GCMS-QP2010. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Determination of leach:oil-slime optimum ratio the first 
investigation stage. During the experiments it has been 
established that the fullest extraction of hydrocarbons of oil 
from samples occurred at leach:oil-slime ratio – 4:1 (Figure 
1). Experiments were carried out at all rates (from 230 
Wt/cm2 to 414 Wt/cm2) and in all investigated solvents. 
 
 
Figure 1. – Oil-slime hydrocarbons extraction degree at 
various oil-slime:solvent ratios 
(Solvent is chloroform, intensity of 414 Wt/cm2) 
 
Optimum time of ultrasonic treatment has been also 
chosen, the range varied from 5 till 10 minutes depending on 
solvent (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2. – Time of oil-slime ultrasonic treatment influence 
on degree of oil hydrocarbons extraction in solvent 
 
On the basis of the obtained results it is possible to find 
an optimum range of ultrasonic extraction intensity (414 
Wt/cm2 – 460 Wt/cm2) at which there is the most effective 
extraction of oil hydrocarbons (Figure 3). 
At fractional oil-slime extraction without ultrasonic 
treatment the maximum degree of oil hydrocarbons 
extraction has been reached in 1,5-2 hours and was 46, 48, 
56, 66 % for chloroform, hexane, benzene and toluene, 
correspondingly. Thus it it is possible to conclude that 
ultrasonic treatment intensifies process of oil hydrocarbons 
extraction from model samples. 
44
BIONATURE 2011 :  The Second International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-138-0

 
Figure 3. – Time of oil-slime ultrasonic treatment influence 
on degree of oil  hydrocarbons extraction in solvent 
 
It was shown that at ultrasonic influence the mineral oil 
temperature in the reactor increases on 7-10oС, in 
comparison with control. It likely occurs because of the 
acoustic energy dissipation (Figure 4). 
During the sonochemical process particles in oil-slime 
make oscillative motions. Oscillative motion energy 
increases, in particular, at heating. As a result, the bonding 
between sand particles and hydrocarbon molecules is 
destructed, which leads to oil-slime structure weakening, but 
it is not enough for full extraction. 
 
 
Figure 4. – Influence of ultrasonic treatment intensity on 
extraction temperature 
 
However, even at higher temperature changes, limiting 
gradients of pressure can be reduced maximum in two-three 
times [5] (not in degrees, as it is necessary in many cases) 
since during the increase of the amount of free particles the 
probability of its collision and dynamic balance between 
process of hydrocarbons structure destruction and its 
restoration also increases. Thus, temperature rise owing to 
acoustic energy dissipation isn't the basic mechanism of oil-
slime treatment from hydrocarbons though it plays a 
subsidiary role. 
Following stage of the investigation was biodestruction 
of 
samples, 
polluted 
by 
oil 
hydrocarbons 
during 
sonochemical 
process. 
Collection 
cultures 
and 
the 
microorganisms secured in «Biotechnologies and chemistry» 
department of Tver Technical University were used in the 
study. The phenotypic characteristic of new isolate was 
studied. It is shown that it concern barmy cultures of 
Candida genus (DK1, DK2, DK3, B3) and bacterial 
microorganisms of Bacillus genus. Oxidizehydrocarbon 
ability of studied microorganisms has been found (Figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 5. – Degree of oil hydrocarbons destruction by pure 
cultures 
 
 
Optimum conditions of oil-slime biodestruction 
(temperature; рН; organic solvent, mineral salts and oil 
hydrocarbons concentrations) were chosen. It was shown 
that yeasts are the most effective destructor. 
 
Further the consortium from allocated isolate was 
developed (Figure 6). 
 
 
1 – strains DK2, DK 3, Bacillus subtilis in the ratio 
1:1:1, 
2- strains DK2 и DK3 in the ratio 2:1, 
3- strains DK2 и DK3  in the ratio 3:1, 
4- strains DK2 и DK3 in the ratio 1:3, 
5- strains DK2, DK3, Б3 in the ratio 1:1:1, 
6- strains DK2 и DK3 in the ratio 1:1 
Figure 6. – Oil hydrocarbons destruction in 
associations of microorganisms 
 
Chosen consortium (1) is capable to decompose not only 
volatile fractions of oil, such as hexadecane, but also diesel 
fuel and heavier fractions of oil, for example black oil, i.e. 
destruct a wide spectrum of hydrocarbons. And the 
consortium doesn't lose the oxidizing activity at the 
45
BIONATURE 2011 :  The Second International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-138-0

hexadecane, diesel fuel, oil and black oil maintenance at 5% 
(wt.). 
CONCLUSIONS 
Oil spill is a difficult engineering and microbiological 
problem which demands the complex approach for its 
solution. The developed method of oil spill recycling 
combines mechanical, physicochemical and biological 
methods. 
Mechanical method means removal of oil spill from 
the polluted area and transferring it to the reactor for 
ultrasound extraction. Physicochemical method (ultrasound 
extraction) of oil spill pretreatment allows decreasing 
concentration of oil hydrocarbons up to atoxic level for 
microorganisms.  Biological method allows destruction the 
remaining oil hydrocarbons up to maximum permissible 
concentration. 
On the basis of experimental data optimum 
conditions of oil-slime ultrasonic pretreatment have been 
established: duration of process of 5-10 min, ultrasonic 
influence intensity of 368 Wt/cm2 – 460 Wt/cm2. From all 
studied solvents chloroform possessed the greatest extract 
ability for used samples. Thus the maximum degree of oil 
extraction from oil-slime was 75,9 %, at influence with 
intensity of 414 Wt/cm2 and time of 10 minutes. 
In process of biodestruction of the samples polluted 
by oil hydrocarbons after ultrasonic extraction, destruction 
degree has made more than 80 %. 
Thus, the complex method of spills and a waste 
polluted by oil hydrocarbons neutralization, has allowed 
removing from it more than 85 % of oil hydrocarbons from 
the initial maintenance in samples within two weeks. 
Developed scientific and technical production has 
advantage in comparison with analogs and includes use of 
ultrasonic treatment. The basic advantage of ultrasonic 
treatment consists of its sufficient quickness, profitability 
and ecological harmlessness. Besides, it allows destroying С-
С bonds in paraffin molecules. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Kumar, V. Leon, A. Materano, O.A.Ilzins, Enhancement 
of oil Degradation by Cop-Culture of Hydrocarbon degrading 
and Biosurfactant Produciong Bacteria, Polisch Journal of 
Microbiology.-2006.-A(2).-P.139-146. 
[2] G.G. Yagafarova, S.V. Leontjeva, A.H. Safarov, I.R. 
Yagafarov, M.V. Golovtsov, Complex technology of oil-slime 
purification, Oil-treatment-2008: international scientific-
practical conference. – Ufa, 2008. – P. 330-331 (in Russian). 
[3] T.V. Mikhailova, S.V. Leonova, Problems of oil-slime 
treatment, Industrial ecology.-2009.-1. –P.10 (in Russian). 
[4] Isolation of autichthonous non-white rot fungi with potential 
for enzymatic upgrading of Venezuelan extra-heavy crude 
oil./ 
Naranjo, 
Urbina 
H., 
Leon 
V// 
Biocatal 
Biotransformation.-2007.-F(25).-P.341-349 
[5] R. Baldev, V. Randjendran, P. Palanichami, Ultrasound 
application, Moscow: Technosphere.-2006.-576 pp. (in 
Russian). 
 
 
 
46
BIONATURE 2011 :  The Second International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-138-0

