Monitoring of Residential Air Quality by Formaldehyde Biochemical Gas Sensor for 
Indoor Public Health 
High sensitive (sub-ppb) bio-sniffer for  residential VOC assessment 
 
Toshifumi Yamashita, Kumiko Miyajima, Takahiro 
Arakawa, Hiroyuki Kudo, Kohji Mitsubayashi 
Institute of Biomaterials and Bioengineering, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan 
ty.bdi@tmd.ac.jp, ku.bdi@tmd.ac.jp, ta.bdi@tmmd.ac.jp, 
hk.bdi@tmd.ac.jp, m.bdi@tmd.ac.jp  
 
Tomoko Gessei 
Tokyo Metropolitan Industrial Technology Research 
Institute, Tokyo, Japan 
ge.bdi@tmd.ac.jp  
  
 
 
Abstract— An optical fiber biochemical gas sensor (bio-sniffer) 
for assessment of indoor formaldehyde was fabricated and 
tested. The bio-sniffer measures formaldehyde vapor as 
fluorescence of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
(NADH), which is the product of formaldehyde dehydrogenase 
(FALDH) reaction. Usually, an enzyme loses its specific activity 
in the gas phase. This makes biochemical gas monitoring 
difficult. We used a micro flow-cell with a FALDH 
immobilized membrane to prevent the FALDH from 
deactivation. An ultraviolet light emitting diode (UV-LED) 
with peak emission of 335nm was employed as an excitation 
light source. Emission of the UV-LED was introduced to the 
optode through an optical fiber and fluorescence of NADH was 
picked up coaxially at the optode. In order to improve the 
sensitivity, a photomultiplier tube was utilized as a 
photodetector. Consequently, continuous FA monitoring with 
biochemical method was successfully conducted with high 
sensitivity and high selectivity. A real-sample test was also 
carried out with the bio-sniffer. According to the results, it is 
expected to be useful in fast and convenient monitoring of 
indoor FA. 
Keywords- residential formaldehyde; bio-sniffer; volatile 
organic compound; public health. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Formaldehyde (FA) is a reactive and flammable aldehyde 
which is well known as one of the harmful volatile organic 
compounds (VOCs). Although FA is also produced in 
natural processes [1], it is mainly emitted to the living 
environment by human activities. One of the main emission 
sources of indoor FA is urea-formaldehyde resins in pressed 
wood products, such as particleboard and fiberboard used in 
cabinetry and furniture. A combination of respiratory disease, 
allergic dermatitis and other ailments so called sick building 
syndrome (SBS), is associated with chronic exposure to FA 
[2-3]. Therefore, indoor FA levels are occasionally utilized 
to assess indoor air qualities. The guideline for indoor FA is 
determined to 80 ppb from its acute toxicity by world health 
organization (WHO). Although the WHO standard is held in 
many countries, there are still serious health problems caused 
by chronic exposure to FA even less than 80 ppb.  
The relationship between the indoor FA levels and 
related health damages are usually investigated using 
chromatographic methods [4]. However, these methods are 
too time-consuming to monitor the daily fluctuation of 
indoor FA levels. Hence, solid-state gas sensors with gas-
sensitive oxides are expected in monitoring of indoor VOCs 
for their stability, reduced cost and fast response [5-10]. 
Considering the monitoring of indoor FA, it is also important 
to enhance the selectivity to other chemicals since the 
measurement is conducted under the presence of many 
chemicals. Improving the selectivity of real-time gas 
monitoring in mind, we previously reported a biochemical 
gas sensor (bio-sniffer) that utilizes enzyme to recognize the 
target substance [11].  
In this work, we have constructed a fiber-optic 
biochemical gas sensor for continuous monitoring of indoor 
formaldehyde with high sensitivity and tested by monitoring 
fluctuation of FA levels using real-sample. We report the 
design, structure, characteristics and latest result of indoor 
FA monitoring. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
A. Design and Fabrication 
The bio-sniffer measures FA as fluorescence of 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH), which is the 
product of formaldehyde dehydrogenase (FALDH) reaction 
given as following equation. 
FA + NAD+ + H2O                   formic acid + NADH + H+ 
The bio-sniffer consists of an UV-LED-based excitation 
system, a photomultiplier tube (PMT) and an optical fiber 
probe with a flow-cell. The UV-LED based excitation 
system was constructed by attaching an UV-LED (UVTOP® 
BL335, Sensor Electronic Technology, Inc., USA) on a 
custom-fabricated UV-LED power supply (KLV CO., LTD., 
Japan) with an adjustable SMA connector.  
FALDH 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
 
Figure 1.  Principle of the fiber-optic bio-sniffer for FA vapor. 
The excitation system and the PMT (C9692, Hamamatsu 
Photonics, Co., Ltd, Japan) were connected to an optical 
fiber probe (F1000-900, core diameter: 1.0 mm, Ocean 
Optics Inc., USA) using an optical fiber assembly (BIF600-
UV/VIS, Ocean Optics Inc., USA). The excitation light and 
the fluorescent light were filtered using a band-pass filter 
(BPF: 490-510 nm) and a long-pass filter (LPF: >400 nm) 
purchased 
from 
Asahi 
Spectra 
Co. 
LTD. 
(Japan), 
respectively. A flow cell, on which an enzyme immobilized 
membrane, was attached at the end of the optical fiber probe. 
The enzyme membrane was prepared as follows: FALDH 
(FALDH, EC 1.2.1.1, 1 units/mg, solid, from Pseudomonas 
sp., Funakoshi Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) with an activity of 1 
unit mg-1 of protein was first immobilized onto a hydrophilic 
PTFE (H-PTFE) membrane filter (Porosity: 80 %, Pore size: 
0.2 μm, JGWP14225, Millipore Co., USA) by curing a 
mixture 
of 
2-methacryloyloxyethyl 
phosphorylcholine 
(MPC) copolymerized with 2-ethylhexyl methacrylate 
(EHMA) solution (1μl cm-2) and FALDH (50 units cm-2) on 
the H-PTFE membrane filter (4 °C, 180 min). 
Figure 1 represents the working principle of the bio-
sniffer. Since the enzyme is immobilized at the hydrous 
sensing membrane, the FA vapor at the neighborhood of the 
probe is easily dissolved into the flow-cell. As explained in 
eq (1), FALDH produces formic acid and NADH under the 
presence of FA and NAD+. Fluorescence of the NADH is 
coaxially introduced into the optical fiber probe and 
measured with the PMT. Phosphate buffer which contained 
NAD+ is continuously circulated in the flow-cell to prevent 
enzyme from deactivation, to remove the products of enzyme 
reaction and to rinse the excessive substrate. The NADH 
produced at the sensing region is immediately removed from 
the sensing region. Therefore, the output of the fiber-optic 
bio-sniffer is determined by the trade-off of the FA level and 
the removal rate of NADH (i.e. flow-rate of the phosphate 
buffer). This indicates that the sensing region of the bio-
sniffer is always refreshed by the circulation of the 
phosphate buffer which contained NAD+. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Experimental set-up for characterization of the bio-sniffer. 
B. Characterization of the FA bio-sniffer 
Characterization of the bio-sniffer was carried out using a 
standard gas generator (Permeater, Type: PD-1B, Gastec 
Corp., Kanagawa, Japan) [12]. Figure 2 shows the 
experimental set-up for characterization of the fiber-optic 
bio-sniffer. The UV-LED was operated with a constant 
forward current of 20 mA for excitation of NADH. The 
excitation light was coupled into the optical fiber and guided 
to the probe. During the measurement, phosphate buffer (pH 
8.0, 80 mM) with NAD+ (20 mM) was circulated into the 
flow-cell (flow rate: 1.5 ml/min). Various concentrations of 
standard FA vapor were supplied with the standard gas 
generator. The flow-rate of the sample gas was fixed at 200 
ml/min. Fluorescent signal was measured with the PMT and 
the signal was recorded using a laptop PC.  
In order to confirm the usefulness of our system for real 
indoor airs, fluctuation of the FA levels induced by a real-
indoor air was also investigated using the bio-sniffer in real-
time. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Spectral response to FA vapor 
First of all, spectral response to formaldehyde vapor was 
investigated. Fluorescent spectrum of NADH was measured 
by replacing the PMT with a fiber-optic spectrometer. A cut 
on wavelength of 400nm was employed instead of the BPF 
(490nm). Figure 3 shows the spectral responses of the bio-
sniffer. The line labeled 0 ppm represents the initial response 
and 5.0 ppm is the spectral response to 5.0 ppm FA vapor. In 
both cases, phosphate buffer which contained NAD+ was 
circulated.  Fluorescence increased as the concentration of 
the gaseous FA increased. The peak wavelength of the 
spectrum was 491nm, which is consistent with our previous 
reports [11]. The result indicates that NADH was 
successfully produced by enzyme reaction of FALDH (eq.1).  
 
 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
Figure 3.  Spectral response of the bio-sniffer. 
B. Characteristics of the bio-sniffer for  FA vapor 
After the spectral investigation, characterization of the 
bio-sniffer was carried out using the PMT as a photodetector 
and the BPF (490 nm). At first, the dynamic response to the 
FA exposure was investigated. Figure 4 shows the change of 
fluorescent response to FA. Exposure to Standard FA was 
conducted from 2 to 10 min. Only the carrier gas, which 
impurities were removed with activated carbon filter, was 
flown into the sensing region before and after the 
measurement.  
At the beginning of FA exposure, the fluorescent signal 
increased immediately and became stable in approximately 
90 seconds. And the signal decreased down to the initial 
value after the switching into carrier gas. The increase of the 
signal can be associated with the production of NADH as 
mentioned above, and the decrease of the signal is the 
resulted by the circulation of phosphate buffer. Considering 
the working mechanism, the fluorescent signal can be 
increased by reducing the flow-rate of the buffer circulation. 
The lower detection limit was 2.5 ppb, with the simple single 
LED excitation system. This can be improved by increasing 
the intensity of the excitation light by using multiplied LED 
system. The selectivity of the bio-sniffer was also 
investigated. Acetaldehyde, acetone, benzene, methanol and 
ethanol (5.0 ppm) was also tested using the bio-sniffer with 
FALDH. The maximum fluorescence was 1.3% of FA in 
case of acetaldehyde and no significant crosstalk was found 
in case of other chemicals.  
In order to confirm the possibility of indoor FA 
monitoring, we also conducted a real-sample test. First the 
pure carrier gas was applied and confirmed the initial level. 
After that, air in the laboratory was applied to the sensing 
region. As a result, the fluorescence increased immediately 
and the FA level was estimated to 20 ppb at that time while it 
varies by the temperature or position in the room.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Typical change of the fluorescece during FA exposure. Standard 
FA vapor (10.0 ppb) was applied to the sensing region from 2 min to 10 
min. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A bio-sniffer for FA vapor was fabricated and confirmed 
to be useful for indoor FA monitoring. Since the bio-sniffer 
uses an enzyme for molecular recognition, high selectivity 
was achieved. The optical measurement system also reduces 
the 
effect 
of 
interferences 
in 
comparison 
with 
electrochemical methods. High sensitive detection system 
with the PMT provided high sensitivity to FA vapor. Using 
the optimized multi-LED system, it is expected to be able to 
monitor sub-ppb level FA in real-time.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partly supported by Japan Society for the 
promotion of Science (JSPS) Grant-in-Aid for Scientific 
Research System, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
(JST) and MEXT (Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, 
Science and Technology) Special Funds for Education and 
Research “Advanced Reasearch Program in Neo-Biology”.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Guicherit and F.L. Schulting, “The occunence of organic 
chemicals in the atmosphere of the Netherland,” Sci Total 
Environ. 43, 1985, pp. 193–219. 
[2] J. Gamble, “Effects of formaldehyde on the respiratory 
system.” In: Gibson JE, ed. Formaldehyde toxicity. 
Hemisphere & McGraw Hill, Washington DC, 1983, pp. 175-
197. 
[3] H. Maibach, “Formaldehyde: Effects on animal and human 
skin.” In: Gibson JE, ed. Formaldehyde toxicity. Hemisphere 
& McGraw Hill, Washington DC, 1983, pp. 166-174. 
[4] J. Levin, K. Andersson, R. Linndahl, and C. Nilsson, 
“Determination 
of 
sub-parts-per-million 
levels 
of 
formaldehyde in air using active and passive sampling on 2,4 
 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

dinitrophenylhydrazine-coated 
glass 
fibre 
and 
high-
performance liquid chromatography,” Anal. Chem. 57, 1985, 
pp. 1032–1035. 
[5] J.A. Dirksen, K. Duval, and T.A. Ring. "NiO thin-film 
formaldehyde gas sensor," Sens. Actuator-B 80, 2001, pp. 
106–115. 
[6] T. Seiyama, A. Kato, K. Fujiishi, and M. Nagatani, "A new 
detector for gaseous components using semiconductive thin 
films," Anal. Chem. 34, 1962, pp. 502–1506. 
[7] M. Tonoike, "Current status and future view of development 
for odorantsensors," Bull. Electrotechn. Lab. 52, 1988, pp. 
63–79. 
[8] Y. Hiranaka, T. Abe, and H. Murata, "Gas-dependent 
response in the temperature transient of SnO2 gas sensors," 
Sens. Actuators-B 9, 1992, pp. 177-182. 
[9] T. Maekawa, J. Tamaki, N. Miura, and N. Yamazoe, 
"Development of SnO2-based ethanol gas sensor," Sens. 
Actuators-B 9, 1992, pp. 63–69. 
[10] P. Lv, Z.A. Tang, J. Yu, F.T. Zhang, G.F. Wei, Z.X. Huang, 
and Y. Hu. "Study on a micro-gas sensor with SnO2-NiO 
sensitive film for indoor formaldehyde detection," Sens. 
Actuators-B 132, 2008, pp. 54-80. 
[11] H. Kudo, M. Sawai, Y. Suzuki, X. Wang, T. Gessei, D. 
Takahashi, T. Arakawa, and K. Mitsubayashi, “Fiber optic 
bio-sniffer (biochemical gas sensor) for high selective 
monitoring of ethanol vapor using 335 nm UV-LED,” Sens. 
Actuator B-Chem, 147, 2010, pp. 676-680. 
[12] Mitsubayashi K., Nishio G., Sawai M., Saito T., Kudo H., 
Saito H., Otsuka K., Noguer T., and Marty J-L., A bio-sniffer 
stick with FALDH (formaldehyde dehydrogenase) for 
convenient analysis of gaseous formaldehyde. Sens. Actuators 
B 130, 2008, pp. 32-37. 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

