Torrefied Pellets As Fuel For Two-stage Technology Of Biomass Conversion Into 
Synthesis Gas 
 
 
Victor Zaichenko, Valentin Kosov, Julia Kuzmina, Vladimir Lavrenov 
Joint Institute for High Temperatures of the Russian Academy of Sciences (JIHT RAS), 
Moscow, Russia 
E-mails: zaitch@oivtran.ru, kosov@ihed.ras.ru, juli_kuzmina@mail.ru, v.a.lavrenov@gmail.com  
 
 
Abstract— One of the most important properties of the 
torrefied pellets, along with high calorific value, is their 
hydrophobicity. Inability to absorb moisture and self-destruct 
under its influence determine possibility of using of pellets in 
the pyrolysis reactor. For the technology of two-stage thermal 
processing of biomass, developed at the Joint Institute for High 
Temperatures, the amount of synthesis gas which can be 
obtained from one kilogram of torrefied pellets is also 
important. A construction of the pilot torrefaction reactor 
powered by flue gas is shown. The results of experimental 
investigations of hydrophobicity of torrefied pellets produced 
by the reactor and quantity of synthesis gas which can be 
obtained by two-stage thermal processing of the pellets are 
presented. It is shown that torrefaction allows simplifying the 
process of conversion of pellets into synthesis gas without 
significant reduction in the volume of the gas. 
 
Keywords - biomass conversion; torrefaction; pyrolysis; 
syngas. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The most effective way to convert biomass is its 
conversion into combustible gas. However, the existing 
conversion technologies of solid hydrocarbon raw materials 
in gaseous fuel have several disadvantages. 
Air gasification is the easiest method to convert biomass 
into the gas. However, the resulting gas contains up to 60% 
nitrogen and 40% carbon dioxide. The calorific value of the 
gas is generally around 4 - 5 MJ/m3, which is too low for 
efficient use. Overall efficiency of gasification gas power 
plant is limited to 20% [1].  
Oxygen and steam gasification allow increasing the 
calorific value of the gas which contains no nitrogen and 
small amount of carbon dioxide. The maximum gas yield 
reaches 1.3 nm3 per kg of raw material and its calorific value 
is about 11 MJ/m3 [2]. Steam gasification is the widespread 
process because of its simplicity. The main disadvantage of 
the process is concerned with necessity of steam generation, 
which reduces overall effectiveness of power plant. Use of 
oxygen for the purpose of gasification demands an air 
separation unit in technological chain that leads to rise in 
price of end product. It should also be noted that purification 
of the gas from tar and ash is an urgent problem for all 
methods of gasification. 
For several years, in the Joint Institute for High 
Temperatures of Russian Academy of Sciences, the two-
stage technology of biomass processing has been developing 
[3, 4]. The technology is based on pyrolysis of biomass as 
the first stage. The second stage is high-temperature 
conversion of liquid fraction of the pyrolysis on the surface 
of porous charcoal matrix. Synthesis gas consisted from 
carbon monoxide and hydrogen is the main products of the 
technology. 
Our experiments have shown a significant increase of the 
volume of gas in the outlet of the reactor due to 
decomposition 
of 
condensable 
and 
non-condensable 
pyrolysis products. In comparison to pyrolysis, the volume 
of gas increased nearly 10 times at cracking temperature 
1000 ° C. At this temperature, the gas consists almost 
entirely of hydrogen and carbon monoxide in approximately 
equal parts in the zone of maximum gas release. 
To implement this technology at the Joint Institute for 
High Temperatures, an experimental model of power station 
of electric power up to 5 kW was created. The power station 
consists 
of 
a 
thermochemical 
reactor, 
control 
and 
measurement system, and a gas-diesel engine with an electric 
generator. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Experimental power station of electric power up to 5 kW. 
During the test of the power station, a problem with the 
high hygroscopicity of wood pellets was detected. Pellets 
that are in the low-temperature zone of the reactor absorbed 
water vapor rising from the high-temperature zone. As a 
result of swelling of the pellets, the gas-tight stopper formed 
that blocked operation of the reactor. Preliminary drying of 
pellets allowed to improve the situation only insignificantly, 
but did not remove the main problem. To solve the problem, 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

it was suggested to use torrefied pellets as fuel for the 
thermochemical reactor. 
The second section describes construction of the 
torrefaction reactor that was created in Joint Institute for 
High Temperatures of the Russian Academy of Sciences and 
characteristics of produced torrefied pellets. The third section 
describes the technology of two-stage thermal processing of 
biomass that use torrefied pellets as a raw material for 
synthesis gas production. 
II. 
TORREFACTION REACTOR 
It is known that torrefaction allows reducing substantially 
the ability of biomass to absorb the atmospheric moisture. 
During the torrefaction process biomass heated up to the 
temperature 250 – 270ºC, the moisture and quantity of the 
volatile matter leaves, in result calorific value of biomass 
increased from 19 to 22 MJ/kg and biomass gets waterproof 
properties. 
To achieve these goals, the torrefaction reactor using as a 
heat source exhaust gases of power station engine was 
created. The reactor is shown at the Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Torrefaction reactor 
Raw material is loaded into the reactor through the feed 
tube 1 and fills the volume of the top of the reactor tank 3. 
Hot gases flow through the pipe 7 in average tank 6, passing 
through the perforated cone, heat pellets and leave through 
the pipe 2. The flow rate of the hot flue gases was 242.5 nm3 
per hour. The temperature of the hot flue gases was regulated 
by temperature control system (is not shown at the Figure 2) 
consisted of a gas-water heat exchanger and a mixer. 
With the rod 5 with closing sphere, the hot pellets are 
discharged into the lower tank 10, where they are cooled by 
cold gases. Cooled Pellets unloaded from the reactor when 
the cone-unloader is open. 
The main feature of the proposed scheme is the use 
exhaust gas of the internal combustion engine as gas coolant. 
Thus, two problems are solved. Firstly, due to the high heat 
transfer coefficient an efficient heating processed raw 
material provides in comparison with schemes in which the 
heat input through the reactor wall. Secondly, the proposed 
scheme, in essence, is a co-generation unit which allows 
generating electricity and utilizing the heat produced by in 
order to improve the properties of the solid biomass fuel. 
This approach significantly improves the economics of the 
whole process of processing of pellets into synthesis gas. 
For the purpose of using the obtained torrefied pellets as 
a fuel or raw material for further processing, it is important 
to know their properties of hygroscopicity and calorific 
value. Figure 3 shows the change of hygroscopicity of 
torrefied wood pellets obtained in the reactor at three 
temperatures of torrefaction 230°C, 250°C and 270°C, in 
comparison with original raw material. The total torrefaction 
time for all cases was 60 min. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Hygroscopicity of wood pellets obtained in the torrefaction 
reactor in comparison with laboratory sample. 
The figure also presents the values hygroscopicity of 
torrefied pellets obtained in the laboratory at the same 
temperatures. From the data above, it follows that 
hygroscopicity of the torrefied pellets is significantly lower 
than hygroscopicity of the original pellets. In this case, 
hygroscopicity of pellets obtained in the reactor even lower 
than that of laboratory samples. Long-term experiments 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

(about 72 hours) showed that the torrefied pellets are not 
destroyed under the influence of moisture and retain their 
structure. 
The results of measurements of the relative increment of 
the calorific value of wood pellets in comparison to the 
original material are shown in the Figure 4. Calorific values 
of samples torrefied in the laboratory are shown as well. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Relative increment of the calorific value of wood pellets 
obtained in the torrefaction reactor in comparison with laboratory sample. 
From the data presented, it follows that pellets obtained 
in the torrefaction reactor have similar properties of calorific 
value as the laboratory samples. Small variations in the 
relative increment of the calorific value of pellets obtained in 
the torrefaction reactor can be explained by differences in the 
properties of the original material and the non-uniformity of 
the thermal field inside the reactor. 
In general, it can be concluded that the proposed 
construction of the reactor allows obtaining torrefied pellets 
of high quality suitable for use as fuel and as raw material for 
further processing. 
III. 
TWO-STAGE THERMAL PROCESSING OF TORREFIED 
WOOD PELLETS 
The technology of biomass thermal processing with 
synthesis gas production developed in the JIHT RAS is 
based on high-temperature processing of the pyrolysis gases 
and volatiles. The method is similar to the one suggested in 
[5] and used in [3, 4] for processing of wood waste and peat. 
Products of biomass pyrolysis are char, non-condensable 
pyrolysis gases (CO2, CO, H2,) and liquid fraction. Carbon, 
hydrogen and oxygen content of condensable and non-
condensable volatiles allows them to be converted into 
synthesis gas consists of hydrogen and carbon monoxide in 
practically equal parts.  
During torrefaction some part of volatiles leave the 
biomass reducing the total amount of biomass synthesis gas 
that can be obtained from it and lowering the total 
effectiveness of the technology. It was important to 
determine the amount of synthesis gas that could be obtained 
from the torrefaction volatiles and compare it to the amount 
of gas is produced from torrefied pellets. 
The experimental set-up (Figure 5) was similar to one 
described in [3] and consisted of a high-temperature two-
chamber fixed-bed reactor and a system of extraction and 
analysis of gas and vapor forming as a result of heating an 
initial raw material.  
The reactor was a stainless steel tube with an inside 
diameter of about 37 mm, which was placed within two-
section furnace with independent heaters for each section. 
The chambers were 300 mm length each. Raw material was 
placed into the bottom chamber. Char obtained by pyrolysis 
of the same raw material was placed in the top chamber. The 
depth of char bed was equal to 50 mm. Before experiments 
the top chamber was heated up to temperature 1000°C that 
was held further at the constant level. After that the 
temperature of the bottom chamber was raised at the rate 
10°C/min. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Scheme of the experimental reactor 
Pyrolysis gases formed during pyrolysis of initial raw 
material passed through the porous carbon bed with the fixed 
temperature. As a result of homogeneous and heterogeneous 
chemical reactions in the high-temperature zone, a 
decomposition of torrefaction gases took place. Conversion 
degree depended both on the temperature in the top chamber 
and on the residence time in a high-temperature zone. Non-
condensable gas came into the volume meter (eudiometer). 
The samples of the gas were chromatographed. 
There were two series of experiments. In the first series 
of experiments the amount of synthesis gas that can be 
produced by thermal decomposition of volatiles formed 
during torrefaction was determined. In the second series of 
experiments, the amount of synthesis gas that can be 
produced by thermal decomposition of volatiles formed 
during pyrolysis of the preliminary torrefied pellets was 
determined. There were also carried out experiments on the 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

production of synthesis gas from the initial non-torrefied 
pellet. 
The data on gas volume (per kg of initial raw materials) 
obtained in the process of wood pellets torrefaction at 
constant temperature of the top chamber are shown in 
Figure 6. It can be seen that high-temperature conversion of 
torrefaction volatiles allows obtaining from 0.2 м3 to 0.3 м3 
of synthesis gas consisted from hydrogen and carbon 
monoxide in practically equal parts. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Gas yield per one kg of raw material during torrefaction of 
wood pellets. 
Based on the material balance, it can be assumed that the 
decrease in the volume of gas produced from torrefied pellets 
will be less than gas volume produced from the initial non-
torrefied pellets on a comparable value. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Gas yield per one kg of torrefied wood pellets during its thermal 
processing. 
Experimental results on the two-stage thermal treatment 
of torrefied wood pellets into synthesis gas showed the 
validity of this assumption. Figure 7 shows the dynamics of 
the yield of synthesis gas during the thermal treatment of 
torrefied pellets. In this case the synthesis gas also consisted 
from hydrogen and carbon monoxide in practically equal 
parts. Reducing the amount of the resulting synthesis gas 
compared to initial raw pellets was from 0.1 м3 to 0.3 м3.  
Thus, the inclusion in the technological scheme the 
torrefaction reactor for pretreatment of wood pellets allowed 
to solve the problem of the destruction the pellet during the 
pyrolysis process and did not significantly reduce the 
resulting volume of synthesis gas. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Preliminary heat treatment of pellets from biomass can 
solve the problem of the destruction of moisture. Even the 
low-temperature torrefaction at 230°C allows reducing the 
hygroscopicity of wood pellets more than twice.  
The proposed construction of the torrefaction reactor 
which is used as the heat source of gas-diesel exhaust gases 
provides production the torrefied pellets with desired 
properties. Hygroscopicity of wood pellets obtained from the 
reactor was lower than that of the sample obtained in the 
laboratory. 
Increased calorific value of the torrefied wood pellets 
allows using them not only as raw material for a two-stage 
processing into synthesis gas, but also as a source of heat for 
ensuring thermal regime of the process. 
Optimal mode of torrefaction of wood pellets is a low-
temperature heat treatment at the temperature of 230°C that 
allows the process implementation without significant 
reduction in the volume of product gas. 
Future work will include an elemental analysis of the 
biomass torrefied at different torrefaction temperature to 
determine the H/C and O/C ratio. Also it will be determined 
the energy balance for the technology. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Lisý, P. Kohout, Z. Skála, M. Balás, and J. Moskalík: 
Biomass Gasification and Cogeneration, 16th European 
Biomass Conference, (2008), pp. 843-849.  
[2] L. Pengmei, Y. Zhenhong, M. Longlong, W. Chuangzhi, 
C. Yong, and Z. Jingxu: Hydrogen-rich gas production from 
biomass air and oxygen/steam gasification in a downdraft 
gasifier, Renewable energy, Vol. 32, no. 13, (2007), pp. 2173-
2185. 
[3] V.V. Kosov, V.F. Kosov, I.L. Maikov, V.A. Sinelshchikov, 
and V.M. Zaichenko. High calorific gas mixture produced by 
pyrolysis of wood and peat., The Proceedings of 17th 
European Biomass Conference and Exhibition, 29 June - 3 
July 2009, Hamburg, Germany, pp. 1085 – 1088  
[4] V.F. Kosov, V.A. Sinelshchikov, and V.M. Zaichenko. New 
Teechnology for Integrated Processing of Biomass and 
Natural Gas with Production of Hydrogen and Pure Carbon 
Materials, The Proceedings of 16th European Biomass 
Conference and Exhibition, Valencia, Spain, 2008, pp. 1171 – 
1175. 
[5] S.K. Chembukulam, 
A.S. Dandge, 
N.L. Kovilur, 
R.K. Seshagiri, and R. Vaidyeswaran, “Smokeless Fuel from 
Carbonized Sawdust”, Ind. Eng. Chem. Prod. Res. Dev., vol. 
20, 1981, pp. 714-719. 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

