A Naturalistic Indicator of the Forest Quality and its Relationship with the Land 
Use Anthropentropy Factor 
Theory, Tools, and Results for an Italian Case Study
Silvia Assini  
Dept. of Earth and Environment Sciences 
University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy 
e-mail: silviapaola.assini@unipv.it 
Maria Grazia Albanesi 
Dept. of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering 
 University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy 
e-mail: mariagrazia.albanesi@unipv.it 
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes a new indicator related to an 
important aspect of the forest landscape: the quality, expressed 
by the forest floristic composition, according to the 
phytosociological approach. Furthermore, the relationship 
with an existing land use indicator, the Anthropentropy 
Factor, is investigated. Another novelty of this research is its 
multidisciplinary 
approach: 
we 
combine 
the 
classical 
algorithms of computer vision systems to process the images 
from GIS (Geographic Information System) databases with the 
necessary expertise provided by the biological knowledge. The 
goal is to build a deep knowledge about some aspects of 
biodiversity preservation, by studying the impact of anthropic 
activities, both inside (urbanization) and outside (forests) the 
areas occupied by human settlements. We define two metrics to 
classify the levels of land use and forest quality status. The 
knowledge coming from the computation of the two indicators 
and the corresponding metrics can be used for policy actions, 
to 
guide 
local 
government 
decisions 
for 
biodiversity 
conservation in the landscape planning. The two indicators and 
the methodological approach are validated by presenting 
experimental results on a case study of a North-West area of 
Italy.  
Keywords- biodiversity; land use; environmental indicator; 
forest status; Anthropentropy Factor. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Land use estimation is a key aspect for biodiversity 
preservation; in fact, the European Environment Agency 
considers land use and biodiversity in the same policy target 
and objective for the next decades [1]. The reason is the 
well-known significant loss of the territory, both for vegetal 
and animal species, due to the impact of anthropic activities 
on the environment. There are plenty of examples of human 
activities which lead to soil sealing and loss of wild nature: 
urban and rural expansion, new roads and communication 
lines, settlements for industries, tourism and services, and 
intensive farming.  
If we consider the problem by a quantitative, absolute, 
point of view, the situation may not seem so dramatic: 
according to the most recent Corine Land Cover data [2] 
referring to the period 2000-2006, the artificial areas cover 
only the 4% of the land in Europe, as compared to a 34% of 
forests, a global value of 51% for activities to support the 
economic growth and food (agriculture, crops, pasture and 
semi-natural vegetation) and a 11% of bare soils, water and 
wet lands. However, if we consider the net change in land 
cover, expressed as a percentage of the initial year (2000), 
we observe a worrying value of +2.5% for the artificial areas, 
while other typologies of land cover have important 
decreases or slight increases (less than 0.5%). 
Processes which cause land-use change are different in 
different parts of Europe [3]: the Boreal and Alpine regions 
are dominated by forest management; abandonment and 
intensification are mainly encountered in the Mediterranean; 
urbanization and drainage are more characteristic of the 
Continental and Atlantic regions. In Italy and, particularly, in 
the studied area, urbanization and agricultural intensification 
are the main drivers of biodiversity loss in the planar belt, 
while land abandonment and the consequent forest re-
colonization cause biodiversity loss in the hilly-montane belt 
[4]-[6]. 
For all these reasons, a high challenging goal of the 
scientific community is to provide efficient ways to define, 
measure and correlate indicators which refer to some aspects 
of land use and biodiversity estimation, in order to help in 
defining policies to preserve environment and, in the same 
time, to assure a sustainable growth of our economies and 
societies. This ambitious goal is the main aspect of the 
research described in this paper, which is organized as 
follows. Section II describes the addressed problem and main 
novelties of our approach. Section III describes the state of 
the art, for what concerns the problem of defining efficient 
indicators for land use and forest status. Section IV addresses 
the problem of computing the new proposed Forest Status 
Quality Indicator (FSQ), and its relationship to a land use 
indicator, which has been recently proposed in literature, i.e., 
the Anthropentropy Factor, (AF). Section V describes the 
results of the computations of the new indicator on a real 
case on the Italian territory. Conclusion and considerations 
about future work close the article. 
II. 
OUR MULTIDISCIPINARY APPROACH 
One of the main novelties of the proposed study is its 
multidisciplinary approach, which bridges across two 
important fields of our modern scientific research: computer 
science and botany. Both of them have knowledge, tools and 
paradigms which are able to assess the impact of human 
activities for a sustainable future. In particular, we have 
chosen to address the problem of estimating land use and, 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

among the different categories of land use, to pay attention to 
two main aspects: 
 
The estimation of the areas which are not influenced 
by anthropic activities and, potentially, could be 
occupied entirely by wild nature; 
 
Inside these areas, which parts are occupied by 
forests, and their quality status. 
We have chosen these two aspects because (a) the first is 
essential to estimate, for a given territory, which parts are yet 
available for wild habitats, and (b) the second takes into 
consideration the important presence of the forests which 
provide benefits for the human well-being (the so-called 
ecosystem services), such as flood prevention, erosion 
control, CO2 absorption, climate regulation, refugium 
function for wild plants and animals, recreation, science and 
education. However, a simple counts of square kilometers is 
a too rough method to give hints on the real status of the 
environment for biodiversity preservation. In fact, others 
elements have to be taken into consideration, in order to 
describe the two aspects by indicators which have a real 
meaning, from an ecological point of view. In particular, we 
fixed these goals: 
 
The proposed indicators have to take into account 
not only the areas, but also their shapes, as 
fragmentation of habitats is a great problem for 
biodiversity preservation. 
 
The presence of a forest, inside a territory, has to be 
described not only by its relative area, but also by 
several aspects related to its quality, as the number 
of alien or protected species and the stratification.  
Our multidisciplinary approach combines algorithms of 
computer-assisted image processing and remote sensing data 
analysis with the knowledge about forest typologies based on 
their floristic composition according to the phytosociological 
approach [7-10]. Besides the indicators, we propose two 
metrics to define ranges of increasing worrying status for 
biodiversity preservation. Such metrics may support policies 
for management and restoration of forests and landscape.  
III. 
THE STATE OF THE ART 
A. Forest quality indicators  
Quality means different things to different people. The 
assessment of forest quality differs according to the different 
components that can be evaluated (ecological, social and/or 
economic components associated to forests). In many 
assessment systems, environment has been relegated to a 
relatively unimportant element, if compared with other issues 
such as economic importance, although there are now also 
some specialized indicator sets relating to the environment, 
such as WWF (World Wide Fund For Nature) Living Planet 
Index [11]. Other examples include: the IUCN (International 
Union for the Conservation of Nature) well-being index [12], 
that divides indicators into two classes, the first relating to 
human well-being (socio-economic) and the second to the 
environment (ecological, environmental services etc.) and 
the Montreal Process criteria and indicators [13], for 
temperate and boreal species outside Europe, which uses 
seven criteria (and 67 indicators) including the conservation 
of biological diversity.  
B. Land use indicators 
All data provided by international projects [14] proves 
that our high-energy consumption lifestyles are exerting an 
increasing, destroying pressure on wildlife habitats. We have 
to consider not only the soil sealing phenomenon, i.e., 
thousands of hectares/year are covered by concrete, but also 
the fragmentation of territory and of habitats, a serious threat 
for most of endangered species in Europe. Therefore, 
conventional land use indicators based on the simple 
computation of area percentage are not able to express the 
gravity of the problem. For this reason, we have considered 
recent contributions in literature [15-16], which describe a 
new indicator, called Antropentropy Factor (AF). Here, we 
recall the basic definition and concepts which are essential to 
understand the relationship between this indicator and the 
Forest Status Quality Indicator here proposed (for details on 
the properties of the AF indicator and its application to 
Italian territory, see [15]). 
Anthropentropy is a neologism, from the Greek term 
Anthropos (Άνθρωπος) = man, and entropy; in fact, the AF 
indicator wants to express the “disorder” introduced in 
natural ecosystems, by the presence and disturbance of 
human beings. The AF expresses in an absolute, continuous 
scale (from 0 to 1) the degree of anthropic human activities 
and the consequent land use. We think that this indicator is 
the closest one to a naturalistic evaluation of land use, 
because it does not only computed the percentage of land 
occupied by human activities and urban expansion, but also 
it takes into consideration the shape of the areas subtracted to 
nature, and their relative positions, thus incorporating an 
important aspect of fragmentation and its impact on 
biodiversity. This is possible because the computation is 
performed 
by 
using 
classical 
image 
processing 
morphological operator of dilation [17] on satellite GIS 
images of the territory on satellite maps of the territory. 
In order to compute the AF indicator, we define the 
following entities: (a) the delimited part of a geographic 
territory under consideration, and its area S, in squared 
kilometers; (b) the Death Zone, as the union of all the 
anthropic regions of the territory, and its area DA, in square 
kilometers), and (c) the Neutral region as the part of the 
territory, if any, containing inland waters, (e.g., lakes or 
lagoons) and lands located more than 3,000 m above sea 
level, and its area NA (in square kilometers). The 
Anthropentropy Factor (AF) is defined [15] as the ratio: 
 
AF = DA / (S – NA)  
(1) 
The AF expresses the land use as a fractional number, 
between 0 (completely uninhabited territory, DA = 0) and 1 
(the Death Zone completely occupies the territory, but for the 
Neutral Zone (if any, because in the Neutral Zone human 
settlements are not possible.) In Table I, the corresponding 
metric on the AF indicator is described. For a reasoned 
treatment of the metric and its relationship with a possible 
policy making for a sustainable development, see [15-16].  
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

TABLE I.  
THE METRIC ON THE AF INDICATOR FOR LAND USE. 
Class of 
land use 
and map 
color 
Evaluation of Land Use  
Intervals of AF 
Meaning 
1 
light green 
0 <= AF <= 0.2 
 
Very low level of anthropentropy, 
ideal situation for nature and human 
beings 
2 
green 
0.2 < AF <= 0.4 
 
A 
first 
worrying 
level 
of 
anthropentropy, but the situation is 
still good 
3 
yellow 
0.4 < AF <= 0.6 
 
A serious level of anthropentropy, 
with a beginning negative impact of 
anthopization on the environment. 
4 
red, light 
violet 
0.6 < AF <= 0.8 
 
A 
very 
serious 
level 
of 
anthropentropy, 
with 
a 
great 
negative impact of anthopization on 
the environment. 
5 
violet, 
black 
0.8 < AF <= 1 
 
The 
worst 
situation, 
with 
an 
irreversible 
environmental 
degradation. 
 
In Figure 1, the map of the area of our case study (the 
territory of Pavia province) is shown: for each municipality, 
its territory is depicted in a color related to the class of land 
use, as specified in Table I (from green, yellow, red and 
black). Even if the AF indicator is able to take into 
considerations quantitative extensions, shapes and relative 
positions of the anthrophized areas of a territory, it expresses 
only the land use pressure on the environment (according to 
the DPSIR (Driving Forces, Pressures, States, Impacts, 
Responses) model [18] of the European Environment 
Agency); it does not give any hints on the state of the green 
areas outside the urbanized areas, which is the goal of the 
second and new indicator here described. 
IV. 
THE FOREST STATUS QUALITY INDICATOR  
For our purposes, we define the forest quality status as 
the value of its ecological components, with particularly 
reference to the biodiversity conservation. We have chosen 
the following components: the number of forest layers (more 
layers correspond to higher biodiversity), the presence of 
protected species according to the regional law (more 
protected species mean higher and better biodiversity) [L.R. 
10/2008] and the presence of alien species (lesser alien 
species mean higher and better biodiversity). We considered 
only natural forests (plantations were not taken into 
consideration). Furthermore, we considered only forests 
occurring on areas greater than 10.000 square meters. In 
forest patches smaller than 1 ha, floristic richness is 
generally very low [19]. For a given territory of area S, we 
define a set of sub-regions occupied by natural forest Fi (i = 
1, 2, n). Each of Fi may have one or more occurrences, 
denoted by the index k, in the territory (k = 1, 2, max(i)). 
Each k-th occurrence is characterizes by: (a) an area Ak
i, 
expressed in square meters, for i= 1,2,,…n and k = 1, 2,… 
max(i) and (b) a type of Ti, derived from the GIS Database 
“Map of the Forest Types of Lombardy” [20], which 
classifies forests on the basis of their physiognomy 
(dominant woody species) and the ecological characteristics 
of the site where they occur (geological substrate, type of 
soil, etc.) [21]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  
The visual map for the AF land use indicator for the 
municipalities of the target area of our case study (Pavia Province, 
Lombardia, North Western Italy).  
In our target territory, we have 66 different forest types, 
but only 32 of them have occurrences whose areas are 
greater than 10.000 square meters. Therefore, in our case 
study, n= 32. 
For each forest Ti, we found the correspondence with one 
or 
more 
phytosociological 
tables 
[22]. 
When 
this 
correspondence was not reported by the above mentioned 
authors, we used other bibliographic references or 
phytosociological relevés collected in the area where the 
forest type occurs. In Table II, a list of the types Ti and the 
relative 
reference 
syntaxa, 
for 
the 
territory 
under 
investigation, is provided. The Type Lab field in the Table is 
a label which refers to the database [20] used as input data 
source. 
For each forest type Ti, which is described by one or 
more phytosociological tables, we defined a set of the three 
indicator components (si, ai, pi) above described:  
 
Stratification (number of layers) of a forest type i 
(si): this component analyzes the quality of the forest 
structure. The tree and the herb layers are always 
present in a forest. The shrub layers (high-shrub 
and/or low-shrub layers) were considered valuable if 
their total cover were > of 10% of the sampled forest 
area (indicated in the phytosociological tables) or at 
least one species presented an abundance value equal 
to 2.  
 
 Percentage frequency of alien species (ai) in the 
corresponding phytosociological table/s. When more 
phytosociological tables described a forest type Ti, a 
mean value between the percentages of each table 
was calculated. 
 
Percentage frequency of protected species (pi) in the 
corresponding phytosociological table/s. When more 
phytosociological tables described a forest type Ti, a 
mean value between the percentages of each table 
was calculated. 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

TABLE II.  
FOREST TYPES FOR THE PROVINCE OF PAVIA (ITALY) 
Type 
Laba 
Description of forest types Ti 
and relative reference syntaxa  
 
1 
T1: Oak-Hornbeam wood of the lowlands  
Syntaxa: Polygonato multiflori-Quercetum roboris subass. 
carpinetosum and anemonetosum Sartori 1984; Quercus robur, 
Carpinus betulus and Physospermum cornubiense community; 
Quercus robur, Carpinus betulus and Holcus mollis community 
12 
T2: Oak wood of inland sand dunes (“dossi”) 
Syntaxa: Quercus robur community 
13 
T3: Oak wood of stony river beds  
Syntaxa: Quercus robur and Brachypodium rupestre community 
14-
15 
T4, T5: Oak-Elm wood (also including the Black Alder variant) 
Syntaxa: Polygonato multiflori-Quercetum roboris subass. 
ulmetosum Sartori 1984 
20, 
23 
T6, T7: Quercus pubescens wood of the carbonatic substrates 
(also including the Chestnut variant) 
Syntaxa: Quercus pubescens, Euphorbia cyparissias and 
Epipactis helleborine community 
26, 
27 
T8, T9: Quercus petraea wood of the carbonatic substrates and 
mesic soils (also including the Chestnut variant) Syntaxa: 
Physospermo cornubiensis-Quercetum petraeae Oberd. et Hofm. 
1967 
28 
T10: Quercus cerris wood 
Syntaxa: Quercus cerris, Cruciata glabra and Anemone trifolia 
community 
45, 
48, 
49, 
50, 
57 
T11, T12, T13, T14, and T15: Chestnut wood on drift; Chestnut 
wood of the carbonatic substrates (mesic soils, meso-xeric soils, 
xeric soils); Chestnut wood of the siliceous substrates and mesic 
soils  
Syntaxa: 
Physospermo 
cornubiensis-Quercetum 
petraeae 
Oberd.et Hofm. 1967; Castanea sativa and Corylus avellana 
community 
63, 
64, 
65 
T16, T17, and T18 Ostrya carpinifolia and Fraxinus ornus wood 
(of layer, of cliff, typical) 
Syntaxa: Knautio drymeiae-Ostryetum Mondino et al. 1993 
84 
T19: Birch wood 
Syntaxa: Betula pendula community 
88 
T20: Primitive Beech wood 
Syntaxa: Trochiscantho-Fagetum Gentile 1974; Fagus sylvatica 
and Acer opulifolium community 
89, 
96, 
97, 
105 
T21, T22, T23, and T24: Beech wood of the carbonatic substrates 
(high-montane, montane, montane of xeric soils, submontane) 
Syntaxa: Trochiscantho-Fagetum Gentile 1974; Fagus sylvatica 
and Acer opulifolium community 
99 
T25: Beech wood of the siliceous substrates 
Syntaxa: Trochiscantho-Fagetum Gentile 1974; Fagus sylvatica 
and Acer opulifolium community 
172 T26: Black Alder wood of gulley 
Syntaxa: Alnus glutinosa, Populus alba and Ulmus minor 
community 
173 T27: Typical Black Alder wood 
Syntaxa: Osmundo regalis-Alnetum glutinosae Vanden Berghen 
1971; Carici elongatae-Alnetum glutinosae W. Koch 1926 et R. 
Tx. 1931; Carici acutiformis-Alnetum glutinosae Scamoni 1935 
177 T28: Willow wood of bank 
Syntaxa: Salix alba community; Salicetum albae Issler 1926 
180 T29: Salix cinerea wood 
Syntaxa: Salicetum cinereae Zolyomi 1931 
183 T30: White Poplar formation 
Syntaxa: Populus alba community  
188 T31: Pure Robinia pseudoacacia wood 
Syntaxa: Robinia pseudoacacia community 
189 T32: Mixed Robinia pseudoacacia wood 
Syntaxa:Robinia pseudoacacia, Quercus robur and Ulmus minor 
community 
a. According to ERSAF database [20] 
 
The three components can assume only discrete values, 
from 0 to 3. While the definition of quality of stratification is 
independent on the altitude of the forest, the definition of 
values related to the percentages of alien and protected 
species is different, according to the altitude. Thus, 
naturalness is higher in the montane belt than in planar belt. 
We differentiate between forest types belonging to the class 
“high hilly and montane” (altitude > = 500 m) and forest 
types belonging to the class “planar and low hilly” (altitude < 
500 m). The three components (si, ai, pi) are defined 
according to an empirical if – then- else algorithm, reported 
in Figure 2. 
 
If the number of layers = 2 , then si = 1 
 Else if number of layers = 3 , then si = 2 
 Else if number of layers = 4 , then si = 3 
 
For altitude <500 m: 
If the percentage of alien species is > 40 then ai = 0 
Else if alien species range is (15- 40] then ai = 1 
Else if alien species range is (5- 15] then ai = 2 
Else if alien species range is [0- 5] then ai = 3 
If percentage of protected species range is (0.5-3] then pi = 1 
  
Else if protected species range is (3- 6.5] then pi = 2 
  
Else if protected species range is > 6.5 then pi = 3 
 
For altitude > = 500 m: 
If the percentage of alien species is > 10 then ai = 0 
Else if alien species range is (5-10] then ai = 1 
Else if alien species range is (2-5] then ai = 2 
Else if alien species range is [0- 2] then ai = 3 
If percentage of protected species range is (0.5-5] then pi = 1 
Else if protected species range is (5- 10] then pi = 2 
Else if protected species range is > 10 then pi = 3 
Figure 2.  The computation algorithm of the three indicator components. 
For each of the forest type i of Table II, we computed the 
relative value set of (si, ai, pi), according to the algorithm of 
Figure 2 and  the phytosociological tables and/or relevés: the 
complete value set is reported in Table III. 
TABLE III.  
THE VALUE SET OF COMPONENTS FOR STRATIFICATION, 
ALIEN AND PROTECTED SPECIES, FOR EACH FOREST TYPE. 
Type Lab 
Components (si, ai, pi) 
 
1 
3,2,3 
12 
2,2,1 
13 
3,3,3 
14-15 
3,2,2 
20, 23 
3,3,1 
26, 27 
2,3,3 
28 
3,3,2 
45, 48, 49, 50, 57 
2,3,3 
63, 64, 65 
3,3,2 
84 
1,3,0 
88 
3,3,3 
89, 96, 97, 105 
3,3,3 
99 
3,3,3 
172 
3,3,1 
173 
2,3,2 
177 
1,1,0 
180 
2,2,0 
183 
3,1,0 
188 
2,1,0 
189 
3,2,0 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

After determining the values of the set of components for 
stratification, alien and protected species, it is now possible 
to define the Forest Status Quality Indicator (FSQ) of a given 
territory as: 
  
FSQ = iksi + ai + pi)*Ak
i/S  
(2) 
for i= 1, 2,.., n, k = 1,2,… max(i) where i is one of the n 
the significant forest type (at least one occurrence of the 
forest has Ak
i >= 10.000 square meters) which is present in 
the territory under investigation, Ak
i is the area of the k-th 
occurrence of forest type i, and S is the area of the territory. 
The number of occurrences may vary, from a minimum of 1 
to a maximum, which depends of the forest type (max(i)).  
The FSQ definition is the weighted values of the 
components, where the weights are the ratios between the 
areas of the forests and the area of the territory under 
investigation. The wider is the area occupied by a forest, the 
higher is its contribution to the global quality of the territory. 
Besides, its contribution is related to the values of the 
components (stratification, alien, and protected species) as 
described in the if-then-else algorithm. The summation in (2) 
is for all the forest types of the territory under investigation, 
and for all the occurrences of the forests. 
The FSQ value can range from 0 (no forests are present 
in the territory with at least one occurrence of A1
i> 10.000) 
to a maximum of 9, which is derived by considering the 
“perfect”, quite unrealistic, situation of a forest of very high 
TABLE IV.  
THE METRIC ON THE FSQ INDICATOR FOR FOREST 
QUALITY. 
Class of forest 
quality 
Evaluation of Forest quality and policy  
Intervals of FSQ 
Suggested policy 
1 
Unsatisfactory 
0 <= FSQ <= 0.9 
 
Very low level forest quality. 
A 
high-impact 
policy 
of 
restoration 
and/or 
requalitication of forest is 
mandatory.  
2 
Satisfactory but 
improvable 
0.9 < FSQ <= 1.8 
 
Sufficient forest quality but 
improvable. A policy for 
forest 
biodiversity 
preservation is preferable. 
3 
Good 
1.8 < FSQ <= 3.6 
 
Good forest quality, the first 
level of satisfactory situation. 
A policy for the conservation 
of 
existing 
forests 
is 
suggested. 
4 
Optimum 
3.6 < FSQ <= 4.5 
 
The optimun situation, with a 
high quality of forests. A 
policy for the conservation of 
existing forests is suggested. 
Anyway, if shrublands and 
grasslands 
are 
scarse 
or 
absent, a policy for their 
biodiversity preservation has 
to be considered. 
5 
Overbalanced 
FSQ > 4.5 
 
The overbalanced situation, 
forests have overcome other 
ecosystems. A policy for 
shrubland 
and 
grassland 
biodiversity preservation is 
highly suggested. 
 
quality (set of components (si, ai, pi) =(3,3,3)), and where 
the areas of all the occurrences are equal to the area of the 
entire territory  Ak
i = S). 
By using an approach similar to the AF metric, we have 
defined a set of ranges for the FSQ indicator, starting from 
an unsatisfactory forest quality, a satisfactory but improvable 
situation, a good, an optimum situation and overbalanced 
situation. In Table IV, the metric for the FSQ indicator and 
the suggested policy actions are shown.  
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  
A. Data Sets and computer-based processing 
The case study is the province of Pavia (Figure 1), which 
is located around its chief town, Pavia (latitude, longitude: 
45°11'7"44 N, 09°9'45"00 E), in the North-Western part of 
Italy. The province consists of 190 Municipalities, with the 
altitude (meters above sea level) in the range [53-951]. In 
order to compute the value of FSQ in (2), it is necessary to 
have a description of the territory in terms of administrative 
boundaries and area, the geo referential coordinates of the 
occurrences of the forest, and their relative types and areas. 
We have used two GIS databases in order to derive the 
useful data: (a) the database of the Italian administrative 
boundaries provided by Istat [23], where we can compute the 
exact boundaries of the municipalities of the case study and 
their relative areas (the term S in (1) and (2)), and (b) the 
ERSAF (Ente Regionale Servizi Agricoltura e Foreste, i.e., 
Regional Agency for Agriculture and Forest Services) 
database [20]. By superimposing the two data sets we can 
obtain a visual map of the territory, where, for each 
municipality, we can compute, with a standard primitives of 
GIS software, the areas of each k-th occurrence of each 
forest type i (the value Ak
i. in (2)).  
 
 
Figure 3.  The visual map of the input data [20]: different colors refers to 
the forest types of Table II (a detail of the province of Pavia, Italy). 
In Figure 3, the visual map for a limited zone of the 
studied area is shown in the standard Google Earth interface. 
Different colors refer to different types of forests. 
B. Results on the case study and discussion 
The values of AF and FSQ computed, according to (1) 
and (2), for each municipality are shown in Figure 4. The 
correlation between the two sets of values is very low 
(correlation coefficient: -0,197651). The dispersion plot 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

(FSQ v. AF) of Figure 5 also shows that the two indicators 
are quite independent and this is a positive result, because it 
expresses the fact that the two indicators are related to 
independent and different pressures on the environment: land 
use and forest quality. Figure 5 also shows that all the 
Municipalities with serious levels of AF (> 0.4) have very 
low levels of forest quality (FSQ < 0.9). This underlines a 
worrying trend to neglect the ecological compensations to 
mitigate the impact for increasing urbanization. On the other 
side, some Municipalities of high altitude show very low 
levels of AF (< 0.2), but overbalanced levels of FSQ (> 4.5), 
underling a worrying trend to neglect the forest re-
colonization caused by land abandonment. All the results 
indicate how environment and biodiversity loss are scarcely 
considered in the land use policies of the study area. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
In this paper, an innovative indicator for forest quality 
has been proposed and its relationship with the land use 
anthropentropy factor has been investigated. The forest 
quality indicator is coherent with literature indications [13] 
which suggest the use of existing database, indigenous 
knowledge and possibly some field research as methods for 
data collection in order to evaluate the biodiversity 
conservation. Furthermore, they also suggest basic biological 
knowledge (in our case, phytosociology) as necessary 
expertise. 
Current and future developments of this work include: a 
wider study area (Lombardy Region) and a shape parameter 
related to forest occurrences. An interesting analysis is to 
investigate how to combine FSQ and AF in a “super-
indicator”. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors greatly appreciate for his collaboration 
Antonio di Gennaro, for importing and pre-processing of 
data from GIS databases. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] European Environment Agency, “Towards a green economy 
in Europe - EU environmental policy targets and objectives 
2010–2050,” 
EEA 
Report 
n. 
8/2013, 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/towards-a-green-
economy-in-europe [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
[2] Analysis of changes in European land cover from 2000 to 
2006, http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/land-
cover-2006-and-changes-1 [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
[3] F. Gerard et al., “Land cover change in Europe between 1950 
and 2000 determined employing aerial photography”, 
Progress in Physical Geography, vol. 34 (2), 2010, pp. 183-
205. 
[4] A. Falcucci, L. Maiorno, and L. Boitani, “Changes in land-
use/land-cover patterns in Italy and their implications for 
biodiversity conservation”, Landscape Ecology, vol. 22, 2007, 
pp. 617-631. 
[5] S. Assini, F. Filipponi, and F. Zucca, “Land cover changes in 
abandoned agricultural land in the Northern Apennine (Italy) 
between 1954 and 2008: spatio-temporal dynamics”, Plant 
Biosystems, in press, doi: 10.1080/11263504.2014.983202. 
[6] S. Assini, F. Filipponi, M. Brusoni, and F. Zucca, “Vegetation 
of abandoned areas in the northern Apennines (Italy): 
phytosociological aspects and biodiversity analysis”, Acta 
Botanica Gallica: Botany Letters, vol. 161 (4), 2014, pp. 379-
393, doi: 10.1080/12538078.2014.948065. 
[7] J. Braun-Blanquet, Plant Sociology. New York: Mac Grew 
Hill Book Company, 1931. 
[8] E. Biondi, “Phytosociology today: Methodological and 
conceptual 
evolution”, 
Plant 
Biosystems, 
vol. 
145 
(Suppement),  2011, pp. 19-29. 
[9] C. Blasi, E. Biondi, and J. Izco, “100 years of plant sociology: 
A celebration”, Plant Biosystems, vol. 145 (Supplement), 
2011, pp. 1-3. 
[10] R. Pott, “Phytosociology: A modern geobotanical method”, 
Plant Biosystems, vol. 145 (suppl. 1), 2011, pp. 9-18. 
[11] J. Loh, Living Planet Index 2003. WWF and the UNEP-
World Conservation Monitoring Centre,Gland, Switzerland 
and Cambridge, UK, 2003. 
[12] R. Prescott-Allen, The Well-Being of Nations: A Country-by-
Country Index of Quality of Life and the Environment. Island 
Press, Covelo, California and Washington DC, 2001. 
[13] N. Dudley, R. Schlaepter, W. Jackson, J.P. Jeanrenaud, and S. 
Stolton, Forest Quality, Assessing Forests at a landscape 
Scale. Eartscan, London, Sterling VA, 2006. 
[14] European 
Environment 
Agency, 
Urban 
Sprawl, 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/highlights/urban-sprawl-eating-
into-wildlife [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
[15] M. G. Albanesi and R. Albanesi, “A new approach based on 
computer vision and collaborative social networking for 
environmental preservation: theory, tools and results of Italian 
ACI project,” Proc. of The Eight International Multi-
Conference on Computing in the Global Information 
Technology ICCGI2013, Nice (France), IARIA ed, 21-26 July 
2013, pp. 16-21, ISBN 978-1-61208-283-7. 
[16] M. G. Albanesi and R. Albanesi: “A Decision-making 
Support System for Land Use Estimation Based on a New 
Anthropentropy 
Predictive 
Model 
for 
Environmental 
Preservation 
– 
Theory, 
Model 
and 
Web–based 
Implementation”, International Journal On Advances in 
Intelligent Systems, IARIA ed, v 7 n 1&2 2014, pp. 85-102. 
[17] R. C. Gonzales and R. E. Woods, Digital image processing, 
Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008, Chapter 9, “Morphological 
image processing”. 
[18] E. Smeets and R. Weterings, “Environmental indicators: 
typology and overview,” European Environment Agency 
Technical 
Report 
n. 
25/1999 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/TEC25 
[retrieved: 
March, 2015] 
[19] P. Digiovinazzo, G.F. Ficetola, L. Bottoni, C. Andreis, and E. 
Padoa-Schioppa, “Ecological thresholds in herb communities 
for the management of suburban fragmented forests”, Forest 
Ecology and Management, vol. 259, 2010, pp. 343-349. 
[20] Ente Regionale Servizi Agricoltura e Foreste (Regional 
Organization for Services in Agricolture and Forests) 
http://www.cartografia.regione.lombardia.it/ArcGIS10/rest/se
rvices/ERSAF/carta_reali_forestali/MapServer. 
[retrieved: 
March, 2015]. 
[21] R. Del Favero, Forest types of Lombardy (transl. I tipi 
forestali nella Regione Lombardia), CIERRE Ed., 2002. 
[22] C. Andreis and F. Sartori, eds, “Forest Vegetation of 
Lombardy, 
phytosociological 
classification” 
(transl. 
Vegetazione forestale della Lombardia. Inquadramento 
fitosociologico), Archivio Geobotanico, vol. 12-13, 2011, pp. 
1-215. 
[23] Istat 
shapefile 
for 
administrative 
boundaries: 
http://www.istat.it/it/archivio/24580 [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
 
 
Figure 4.  The two indicators Anthropentropy Factor (AF) and Forest Status Quality (FSQ), for all the municipalities of the province of Pavia. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  The relationship between the two indicators for land use and forest quality: dispersion plot of FSQ vs. AF, for all the municipalities of the 
province of Pavia. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

