Arctic Sea Ice Reduction and Tropospheric Chemical Processes 
S. V. Nghiem1, P. B. Shepson2, W. Simpson3, D. K. Perovich4, M. Sturm5, T. Douglas5, I. G. Rigor6, P. Clemente-
Colón7, J. P. Burrows8,9, A. Richter8, A. Steffen10, R. Staebler10, D. Obrist11, C. Moore11, J. Bottenheim10, retired, U. 
Platt12, D. Pöhler12, S. General12, J. Zielcke12, J. D. Fuentes13, D. K. Hall14, L. Kaleschke15, J. Woods16, C. Hager16, 
J. Smith16, C. R. Sweet16, K. Pratt2, K. Custard2, P. Peterson3, S. Walsh3, E. Gleason3, E. Saiet3, M. Webster6, R. 
Lieb-Lappen17, C. Linder6, and G. Neumann1 
1Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, U.S.A. 
2Departments of Chemistry and Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, Purdue University, Lafayette, Indiana, U.S.A. 
3Department of Chemistry, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, Alaska, U.S.A. 
4U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, Hanover, New Hampshire, U.S.A. 
5U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, Fairbanks, Alaska, U.S.A. 
6Polar Science Center, Applied Physics Laboratory, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, U.S.A. 
7National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Ice Center, Washington, District of Colombia, U.S.A. 
8Institute of Environmental Physics, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany 
9Biogeochemistry Programme, NERC Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Wallingtonford, Oxfordshire, U.K. 
10Science and Technology Branch, Environment Canada, Toronto, ON, Canada 
11Division of Atmospheric Sciences, Desert Research Institute, Reno, Nevada, U.S.A. 
12Institute for Environmental Physics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany 
13Department of Meteorology, Penn State, University Park, Pennsylvania, U.S.A. 
14NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, U.S.A. 
15Institute of Oceanography, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany 
16U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland, U.S.A. 
17Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire, U.S.A. 
Contact e-mail: Son.V.Nghiem@jpl.nasa.gov 
 
 
Abstract—Arctic sea ice extent reached another historical 
record low in summer 2012.  More importantly, perennial sea 
ice extent in 2012 set the new record low in the long period that 
extends back to the last half of the 20th century as observed by 
a combination of long-term measurements acquired by ocean 
buoys and decadal data acquired by satellite scatterometers.  
To investigate impacts of sea ice reduction on atmospheric 
chemical processes, we conducted the BRomine, Ozone, and 
Mercury EXperiment (BROMEX) in March-April 2012 around 
Barrow, Alaska.  We present an overview of BROMEX and 
highlight results to document sea ice change and chemical 
processes. We found a large number of bromine explosion events 
occurred in the BROMEX area where seasonal sea ice dominated. 
Keywords-Arctic sea ice; bromine; ozone; mercury; BROMEX. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE 
In the context of Arctic change in the last half century, 
perennial sea ice, the class of thicker and older ice important 
to the stability of Arctic sea ice, has been declining most 
precipitously in the last decade.  Nghiem et al. [1] reported 
the extent of perennial ice in the month of March (1950s to 
the 2000s), estimated by the buoy-based Drift-Age Model 
(DM) together with nearly a decade of QuikSCAT (QS) 
satellite observations within the domain of the DM 
(excluding peripheral seas such as Greenland Sea and the 
Canadian Arctic Archipelago).  From the published data [1], 
perennial ice extent declined at rate of 0.5 million km2 per 
decade in the 1970s-1990s while there was no discernable 
trend in the 1950s-1960s.  Abruptly, the rate of decrease has 
tripled to 1.5 million km2 per decade in the 2000s. Such 
rapid reduction has resulted in a regime shift of Arctic sea 
ice to being dominated by seasonal sea ice that grows and 
melts annually. The springtime distribution of these ice 
classes is critical in terms of preconditioning prior to the 
summer melt, and moreover it plays a major role in 
tropospheric chemical processes controlling bromine, ozone, 
and mercury photochemistry in the Arctic atmospheric 
boundary layer. To investigate impacts of sea ice reduction 
on atmospheric halogen and other chemical processes, we 
conducted the BRomine, Ozone, and Mercury EXperiment 
(BROMEX) in March-April 2012 around Barrow, Alaska, 
which was successfully carried out.  In the sections below, we 
state the science issues (II), describe BROMEX (III), present 
the observations (IV), and provide the summary (V). 
II. 
SCIENCE ISSUES 
Observations of the state of Arctic sea ice using multiple 
satellites show drastic loss of perennial ice extent [1].  More 
importantly, an initial study has led to the first report of BrO 
in a clear vortex pattern, and a discovery of an apparent 
topographic control on the transport and distribution 
processes of bromine monoxide (BrO) [2].  The full field of 
the three-dimensional rising-air-parcel (RAP) model [2] 
forced by the NCEP/NCAR reanalysis [3] consistently 
reproduces the spatial pattern of BrO observed by the Global 
Ozone Monitoring 2 (GOME-2) satellite [4].  
4
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

The bromine explosion process is briefly summarized 
here. At the polar-sunrise time, gaseous bromine (Br2) is 
photo-dissociated into Br atoms, which catalytically destroy 
ozone (O3) and oxidize gaseous element mercury (GEM) 
with the Br atoms being regenerated in excess in this 
autocatalytic process. Hypobromous acid (HOBr) formed in 
a termination step deposits to saline surfaces, generating Br2 
that evolves to the gas phase, providing twice as many Br 
atoms back to the gas phase, and hence the term “bromine 
explosion” is used to describe this behavior [5]. 
Despite recent advances in understanding Arctic 
tropospheric halogen chemistry in the context of a changing 
state of Arctic sea ice, key science questions still remain to be 
answered in order to understand the impact of the recent drastic 
reduction of Arctic sea ice, such as how the bromine is 
initiated, recycled, transported, and terminated. Sea ice 
reduction has profoundly changed the Arctic environment and 
halogen chemical processes involved in the bromine explosion, 
ozone depletion, and mercury deposition events.  This is a 
cascade of photochemical reactions that abruptly increase 
gaseous bromine such as bromine monoxide (BrO) in the 
atmospheric boundary layer, leading to the depletion of 
tropospheric ozone (O3), and the oxidation of gaseous 
elementary mercury (GEM) to a reactive form that deposits 
onto land, ice, and ocean surfaces in the Arctic. 
III. 
THE BROMEX FIELD CAMPAIGN 
BROMEX was conducted in March and April 2012 
around Barrow, Alaska (Figure 1).  The field area extended 
from inland terrestrial sites to a large region of the sea ice 
offshore, where energetic dynamics created large leads, 
fortuitously providing a variety of sea ice and atmospheric 
conditions 
for 
this 
investigation. 
BROMEX 
included 
participation and contributions from more than thirty scientists, 
researchers, and support staff from multiple international 
institutions. 
We coordinated and collected satellite data, including a 
number of near-real-time products, from multiple satellite 
instruments.  These include the Moderate Resolution 
Imaging 
Spectroradiometer 
(MODIS), 
the 
Advanced 
Microwave Scanning Radiometer on the Earth Observing 
System (AMSR-E), the Special Sensor Microwave Imager/ 
Sounder (SSMIS), GOME-2, the Scanning Imaging 
Absorption Spectrometer for Atmospheric Cartography 
(SCIAMACHY), the Ozone Monitoring Instrument (OMI), 
the RADARSAT-2 Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), the 
Envisat Advanced SAR, the TerraSAR-X add-on for Digital 
Elevation Measurements (TanDEM-X) SAR, the Soil 
Moisture and Ocean Salinity (SMOS) radiometer, the 
CryoSat-2 altimeter, and the Oceansat-2 scatterometer.  
Multiple products derived from satellite data by the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), NASA Goddard Space Flight 
Center (GSFC), U.S. National Ice Center (NIC), University 
of Bremen, and University of Hamburg were used to plan for 
and to support the BROMEX campaign. 
Three different aircraft were used for instrument 
deployments and data collections. We deployed atmospheric 
chemical and meteorological buoys in the Chukchi Sea and the 
Beaufort Sea.  We set up instruments to measure multiple 
chemical species of mercury at sites on sea ice and on land.  In 
addition to existing weather stations, we installed a 
meteorological tower and a snow measurement tower at a site 
on the tundra.  At these sites, continuous atmospheric chemical 
and meteorological measurements were made for many weeks. 
! 
Beaufort Sea 
Chukchi Sea 
Barrow 
Elson 
Lagoon 
 
Figure 1.  Image from a composition of bands 3, 6, and 7 acquired by the MODIS Terra satellite on 24 March 2012.  Sea ice in the Chukchi Sea and the 
Beaufort Sea appears as red. Dark areas in the ocean are leads, formed by wind forcing that ruptured the sea ice cover.  Grayish streaks are vapor plumes 
emanating from the leads. Landscape features are seen through the translucently overlain MODIS image with red-orange shades indicating snow cover. 
5
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

We made measurements and collected samples of sea ice, 
snow, seawater, and air for physical, meteorological, chemical, 
biological, and acoustic studies. We obtained an enormous 
amount of satellite and field data. In the sections below, we 
present the BROMEX measurement components and discuss 
highlights of the results to document sea ice change and 
observed atmospheric and snow chemical processes. 
IV. 
SATELLITE, ARICRAFT, AND FIELD OBSERVATIONS 
A. Satellite Observations 
Arctic sea ice extent reached another historical record 
low in summer 2012.  More importantly, perennial sea ice 
extent in 2012 set the new record low in the extensive period 
from the last half of the 20th century up to date, as observed 
by a combination of long-term measurements acquired by 
ocean buoys and decadal data acquired by satellite 
scatterometers. The NASA SeaWinds scatterometer mission 
with the QuikSCAT (QS) satellite acquired the most stable 
and accurate Ku-band backscatter data [6] over a decade 
(1999-2009).  The Oceansat-2 (OS2) scatterometer [7] 
launched by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) 
in September 2009 continues the scatterometer data 
collection to the present. The satellite data were used to 
identify, map, and monitor perennial sea ice versus seasonal 
sea ice that grows and melts annually [1]. To monitor winter 
perennial and seasonal sea ice, the DM [8] provides over a 
half-century estimate of Arctic sea ice age distribution to 
determine the long-term trend since 1955.  From monthly 
gridded fields of ice motion based on buoy data, this model 
estimates sea ice age, and thereby identifies perennial and 
seasonal sea ice.  In the DM spatial domain, model estimates 
and satellite scatterometers consistently determined the three-
fold decrease rate of perennial sea ice extent in the 2000s.   
Updated data from OS2 indicated that springtime perennial 
sea ice extent reached a new low record in 2012. Except for a 
narrow band of perennial sea ice in the north of the Alaskan 
coast, seasonal sea ice dominated the sea ice cover in the 
Chukchi Sea and the Beaufort Sea.  The thinner and weaker 
seasonal ice, compared to perennial ice, facilitates the 
formation of large leads when strong winds force sea ice 
away from shore and creates long open water areas that 
quickly refreeze and support the growth of new (nilas) ice 
and frost flowers on the new sea ice surface.  This new ice is 
highly saline and provides a potential source for lower 
atmospheric halogen chemical reactions.  Figure 1, a MODIS 
image acquired on 24 Mach 2012 during BROMEX, shows a 
large lead in the Chukchi Sea to the west of Barrow.  On the 
same day, both GOME-2 and OMI satellites detected 
extensive areas where a bromine explosion occurred above 
the ocean and across the terrestrial tundra land in the North 
Slope of Alaska. 
B. Aircraft Observations 
During BROMEX in March 2012, the Purdue Airborne 
Laboratory for Atmospheric Research (ALAR; see details at 
[9]) was used as a key platform to measure ozone (O3, in-
situ), BrO (produced entirely from Br atoms reacted with O3, 
with Multi Axis – Differential Optical Absorption 
Spectroscopy or MAX-DOAS), and aerosol number and size 
distributions (in-situ).  Eleven flights were conducted over 
continuous first-year sea ice in the Beaufort Sea, over new 
ice and leads with frost flower coverage in the Chukchi Sea, 
and over the snow-covered tundra between Barrow, 
Deadhorse, and the Brooks Range.  All systems performed 
well during this campaign. 
From initial analyses of the ALAR data, a number of 
interesting findings were apparent during the flights. For 
example, on 24 March 2012, we flew over the tundra, at a 
constant altitude, and observed the BrO distribution in the 
boundary layer.   There was a relatively enhanced column of 
BrO over the tundra on this day.  On other days, elevated 
aerosol layers were observed aloft, possibly suggesting long-
range transport.  Interestingly, on two flights, we observed 
deeper ozone depletions over the tundra, compared to the sea 
ice. Overall, the simultaneous O3, BrO, and aerosol 
measurements will yield many insights into halogen cycling. 
Through a coordination with the NASA IceBridge 
program, the NASA P3 aircraft was flown across the 
BROMEX field domain from the Beaufort Sea, across Elson 
Lagoon and the North Slope tundra, to the Chukchi Sea.  
Sensors on the IceBridge P3 aircraft measured multiple 
parameters including: sea ice thickness, snow thickness, 
surface height, and surface temperature.  These parameters 
are useful for interpretation of sea ice and snow physical 
properties and for investigating their roles in halogen 
photochemical processes. 
C. Field Observations 
Field activities for BROMEX were focused on two types 
of locations: (1) buoy sites in the Arctic Ocean, and (2) 
snowmobile-accessible locations on land and shore-fast sea 
ice near Barrow, Alaska. A major goal of the near-shore sea 
ice work was to access a location where the landfast ice and 
pack ice meet so that when a major flaw lead opened we 
would have access to the open water. A safety plan was 
carefully developed and implemented for BROMEX since 
this area could be dynamic and frequented by polar bears. 
A key component of BROMEX was the deployment of 
two chemistry buoys, fabricated by the University of Alaska 
Fairbanks (UAF): IceLander 1 (IL1) in the Beaufort Sea and 
IceLander 2 (IL2) in the Chukchi Sea.  This deployment 
process had three steps: (1) defining the criteria for a 
suitable floe, (2) analyzing remote sensing imagery to select 
candidate floes, and (3) flying out to the candidate floes for 
an in-situ evaluation. The criteria were: first-year ice, center 
area of hundreds of meters without major ridges, snow 
covered, accessible by helicopter, and likely to survive into 
the melt season. With the high quality satellite imagery, the 
U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering 
Laboratory (CRREL) and UAF easily found the candidate 
floes and selected the best floe to deploy the IceLanders. 
Surveys of snow depths were performed, and results showed 
that average snow depths were comparable at the two sites. 
IL1 was stationary until its retrieval in March 2012. IL2 
drifted across sea ice under a variety of conditions from 
pack ice, to lead opening and closing, and unconsolidated 
sea ice in March to June 2012 when it was knocked over by 
6
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

a polar bear.  An identical DOAS system was also installed 
at a building in Barrow (BRWDOAS), which has been 
operating continuously to the present.  An analysis has been 
completed for Level-2 (slant column density of gases versus 
elevation angle) data and also Level-3 (vertical profiles of 
BrO) data for BRWDOAS, IL1, and IL2. O3 data were 
processed and finalized for IL1, IL2, and BRWDOAS. IL2 
O3 in Figure 2 revealed that ozone depletion events occurred 
frequently forcing O3 level to near complete depletion in 
many instances in the Chukchi Sea region off the west coast 
of Barrow where it was dominated by seasonal sea ice. A 
preliminary analysis has been carried out for Lagrangian 
matching of data between IL1, IL2, and Barrow to look for 
changes in BrO and ozone related to sea ice.  First 
examinations indicate that ozone and BrO changes between 
sites are small. An examination of the longer-term seasonal 
behavior of IL2 and BRWDOAS revealed a relationship 
between the BrO seasonal end date and snow properties.  
Additionally, snow microphysics is currently researched to 
obtain a solid interpretation of these observations. 
To assess how changing sea ice conditions may affect 
the regional cycling of atmospheric mercury, Environment 
Canada’s Out On the Ice (OOTI) system was deployed and 
operated at a site approximately 1 km from shore on the 
frozen Arctic Ocean during March-April 2012.  This system 
measured speciated atmospheric mercury concentrations, 
including gaseous elemental mercury (GEM), reactive 
gaseous mercury (RGM), and fine particulate bound 
mercury (FPM). Environment Canada and the Desert 
Research Institute also collected data for surface-
atmosphere fluxes of GEM and O3, and meteorological 
variables, and measured speciated atmospheric mercury and 
O3 concentrations at a second site 5 km inland in the Arctic 
tundra, co-located with in-situ halogen measurements by 
Purdue University. At each site, surface snow samples and a 
sample from a newly designed cold-plate sampler were 
collected 
daily 
for 
total 
mercury 
and 
major 
ion 
concentrations.  Striking changes in GEM, RGM, and FPM 
concentrations occurred during the transition from a large 
open lead to newly frozen sea ice, furthering our 
understanding of the complexity of Arctic mercury 
depletion. The concentration of GEM was different at the 
inland tundra site and at the OOTI site over the sea ice 
reflecting the impact of sea ice on the mercury cycling. 
At the inland tundra site, chemical ionization mass 
spectrometry was utilized to measure the concentrations of 
various bromine species, including Br2, HOBr, and BrO, at a 
high temporal resolution.  Together with co-located 
measurements of ozone and mercury, these ambient halogen 
measurements are being utilized to gain greater insights into 
the role of bromine in ozone and mercury depletion events.  
In addition, these BrO measurements on the tundra are 
being compared with other BrO measurements completed at 
other locations.  Overall, a good agreement has been 
observed between the DOAS and chemical ionization mass 
spectrometry measurements of BrO.  For the first time, 
collocated simultaneous mercury speciation and in situ 
halogen measurements were made to understand the link 
between these atmospheric components. 
Accurate estimates of wind and temperature are required 
for understanding the myriad of processes involved in the 
transport and distribution of the chemicals.  In-situ 
observations were provided by nearby National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) weather stations, and 
to accurately document conditions at each field site, portable 
weather stations (PWS) were installed at each site. The 
Applied 
Physics 
Laboratory 
of 
the 
University 
of 
Washington (APL/UW) provided the PWS at the tundra 
site, and deployed buoys from the International Arctic Buoy 
Programme (IABP) offshore from the field camp to assure 
that there were adequate measurements for the analyzed 
weather fields produced by the National Weather Service 
(NWS), Alaska Weather Research Forecasts (WRF), and the 
National Centers for Environment Prediction (NCEP) 
reanalysis fields.  Moreover, ten thermochrons provided by 
GSFC were deployed in different sea ice, snow, and built 
environments for comparison with MODIS satellite data 
collocated in time and in space with the surface 
measurements. Initial results revealed complexities that call 
for a rigorous protocol to be developed for accurate and 
consistent temperature measurements. 
Understanding the role of snow in the chemical 
processes is crucial. During BROMEX, intensive fieldwork 
was carried out to document snow conditions around 
Barrow and under the flight line of the IceBridge P3 aircraft. 
The mean snow depth measured by the P3 aircraft was 
validated with thousands of snow depth measurements 
collected on sea ice and tundra. Overall, about 10,000 snow 
measurement samples were obtained across the BROMEX 
domain. The initial interpretation of the results suggests the 
P3 measurements appear to overestimate areas of low snow 
cover, and underestimate areas of high snow cover. To 
investigate the change in snow distribution over the tundra 
area after a strong wind event, the volume of snow that 
moved during this event was estimated. By examining the 
spatial lagged autocorrelation (i.e. how far did the snow 
dunes move), the distance that the snow transported during 
this event could be derived. Furthermore, photographic and 
videographic records were obtained to document snow and 
ice conditions, and BROMEX field activities. 
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
0
10
20
30
40
50
Ozone Mixing Ratio from Icelander 2 (Chukchi Sea)
Date 2012 (UTC)
O3  Mixing Ratio (ppb)
70 
90 
110 
130 
150 
170 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
Day of year in 2012 (UTC) 
O3 mixing ratio (ppb) 
 
Figure 2. Ozone mixing ratio from IceLander 2 in the Chukchi Sea. Many 
ozone depletion events were observed in March to May 2012.  
7
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

In an effort to trace the source and transport of bromide 
ions from the ice and snow reservoirs, two sea ice cores, 38 
snow samples, and 20 blowing snow samples were collected 
at several locations in the vicinity of Barrow by Dartmouth 
College.  The sea ice cores were each approximately 1.5 m 
long.  Surface snow was collected at both sea ice core 
locations, at several locations in Elson Lagoon, at a tundra 
site, and along a 2-km East-West transect near the shoreline 
of the Chukchi Sea where samples were also collected for 
mercury analysis.  Where possible, snow pits were dug to 
sample snow from different depths.  Moreover, blowing 
snow samples were collected at four different heights (0.5 
m, 1.5 m, 2.5 m, and 5.5 m) above the snow surface over a 
seven-day period.  As a part of the ground-truthing efforts 
for the IceBridge aircraft measurement, surface temperature, 
surface height, snow depth, and ice thickness measurements 
were collected.  In addition, in-situ measurements were taken to 
measure snow density and snow water equivalent. 
The U.S. Naval Academy (USNA) also participated in 
BROMEX.  CRREL and USNA personnel worked with 
members of the Barrow community to establish the opening of 
a 3 km of trail to the OOTI site and other locations in the 
Chukchi Sea. USNA successfully deployed IceGoat1 Buoy 
during BROMEX.  This buoy reported near-real-time 
observations of air and sea temperatures, atmospheric pressure, 
position and images from two mounted webcams.  Acoustic 
instrumentation systems were set up for under- and through-ice 
ambient noise and propagation loss measurements to 
characterize acoustic signatures of lead ruptures and closures.  
Sea ice, frost flowers, snow, brine icicle, and water samples 
were collected for chemical and biological analyses. Bulk snow 
and water samples were analyzed for 137Cs and 134Cs to look for 
the fingerprint of the 2011 Fukushima-Daiichi Nuclear Power 
Plant incident.  Twenty bacterial cultures were made: 19 
psychrophilic clones (obligate cold growth) isolated from ice 
core and seawater interface samples, and one psychrotolerant 
clone (in 4°C - 25°C) from a brine icicle sample.  Also 
obtained was a small eukaryote to be studied for biofuels 
potential or for general characterization and potential toxicity. 
V. 
SUMMARY 
The BROMEX field campaign was successfully carried 
out across the sea, land, and air region around Barrow, 
Alaska. More than twenty institutions from U.S., Canada, 
U.K., and Germany participated in BROMEX.  This is a 
major interdisciplinary science research to investigate 
impacts of Arctic sea ice reduction on atmospheric 
photochemical processes of bromine explosion, ozone and 
mercury depletion, and mercury deposition.  Large datasets 
were obtained from the surface (sea ice and tundra snow), 
from aircraft (ALAR and NASA IceBridge P3), and from 
space (multiple international satellites).  Valuable scientific 
findings have emerged from our initial analyses of 
BROMEX data, from which better measurement protocols 
and new research directions can be identified.  While 
BROMEX helps improve our understanding of halogen 
processes in a changing Arctic, it has also initiated new 
science questions to be investigated in the future.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The research carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 
California Institute of Technology, and at NASA Goddard 
Space Flight Center was supported by the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Cryospheric 
Sciences Program.  Rigor is funded by NASA and the 
contributors to the International Arctic Buoy Programme 
(IABP), including the International Arctic Research Center, 
NASA, Naval Oceanographic Office (NAVO), NIC, NOAA, 
National Science Foundation (NSF), Office of Naval 
Research (ONR), and U.S. Coast Guard. The views, 
opinions, and findings contained in this report are those of 
the authors and should not be construed as an official 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or any 
other U.S. government position, policy, or decision. We 
thank the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) for 
Oceansat-2 satellite scatterometer data, Kelly Chance and 
Raid Suleiman of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for 
Astrophysics for OMI observations in support of BROMEX, 
Jeff Schmaltz of NASA GSFC for setting up the BROMEX 
subsets from the LANCE MODIS Rapid Response system, 
the NIC team for BROMEX special support products, 
UMIAQ for field logistic assistance, the Barrow whaling 
community for mutual beneficial interactions, and Nok 
Acker of the Barrow Arctic Science Consortium for 
community outreach presentations and several radio 
broadcasts in Barrow.  The tremendous success of the OOTI 
project was a result of the expertise of John Deary. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. V. Nghiem, I. G. Rigor, D. K. Perovich, P. Clemente-Colón, J. W. 
Weatherly, and G. Neumann, “Rapid reduction of Arctic perennial 
sea 
ice,” 
Geophys. 
Res. 
Lett., 
vol. 
34, 
L19504, 
doi:10.1029/2007GL031138, Oct. 2007. 
[2] 
S. V. Nghiem, I. G. Rigor, A. Richter, J. P. Burrows, P. B. Shepson, 
J. Bottenheim, D. G. Barber, A. Steffen, J. Latonas, F. Wang, G. 
Stern, P. Clemente-Colón, S. Martin, D. K. Hall, L. Kaleschke, P. 
Tackett, G. Neumann, and M. G. Asplin, “Field and satellite 
observations of the formation and distribution of Arctic atmospheric 
bromine above a rejuvenated sea ice cover,” J. Geophys. Res., vol. 
117, D00S05, doi:10.1029/2011JD016268, Mar. 2012. 
[3] 
E. Kalnay et al., “The NCEP/NCAR 40-year reanalysis project,” Bull. 
Am. Meteorol. Soc., vol. 77, pp. 437–471, doi:10.1175/1520-
0477(1996) 077<0437:TNYRP>2.0.CO;2, 1996. 
[4] 
R. de Beek, M. Weber, V. V. Rozanov, A. R. Ozanov, A. Richter, and 
J. P. Burrows, “Trace gas column retrieval and error assessment study 
for GOME-2, in Trace Constituents in the Troposphere and Lower 
Stratosphere,” Adv. in Space Res., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 727-733, 2004. 
[5] 
P. Wennberg, “Atmospheric chemistry – Bromine explosion,” Nature, 
vol. 397, pp. 299-301, 1999. 
[6] 
W.-Y. Tsai, S. V. Nghiem, J. N. Huddleston, M. W.  Spencer, B. W. 
Stiles, and R. D. West, “Polarimetric scatterometry: A promising 
technique for improving ocean surface wind measurements from 
space,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 38, pp. 1903-1921, 
Jul. 2000. 
[7] 
SCAT-DP Team, Oceansat-2 Scatterometer algorithms for sigma-0, 
processing and products format, Vers. 1.1, 32 pp., Space Applications 
Centre, Ahmedabad, Gurajat, India, 2010. 
[8] 
I. G. Rigor and J. M. Wallace, “Variations in the age of Arctic sea-ice 
and summer sea-ice extent,” Geophys. Res. Lett., vol. 31, L09401, 
doi:10.1029/2004GL019492, 2004. 
[9] 
http://www.chem.purdue.edu/shepson/alar.html (accessed Jan. 2013).
 
8
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

