A New Improvement of the Naturalistic Indicator of Forest Quality 
An Italian Case Study
Silvia Assini  
Dept. of Earth and Environment Sciences 
University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy 
Email: silviapaola.assini@unipv.it 
Maria Grazia Albanesi 
Dept. of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering 
 University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy 
Email: mariagrazia.albanesi@unipv.it 
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes a new improvement of the 
previous 
defined 
Forest Quality 
Indicator 
(FSQ) 
for 
biodiversity assessment and conservation purposes. The two 
novelties of the work in progress include the following aspects: 
the embedding of a shape feature of the forest patches, and the 
consideration of the plantation for ecological restoration in the 
computation of the indicator. The results are shown on a case 
study of a municipality of the West Po Plain (North Italy). The 
improved indicator seems to be very promising in describing 
the realistic situation of the forest quality in the territory. This 
suggests that it can be used efficiently to guide policy makers 
and planners to choose the best forest types/patches for 
restoration and connectivity. 
Keywords - biodiversity; environmental indicator; forest 
status quality; patch shape; plantations. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This work in progress represents a new improvement of 
the Naturalistic Indicator of the Forest Quality (Forest 
Quality Indicator, FSQ) described in [1]. Such indicator was 
performed considering the stratification, the percentage of 
alien species and the percentage of protected species (often 
corresponding to true forest species, such as Anemone 
nemorosa, 
Campanula 
trachelium, 
Carex 
elongata, 
Convallaria majalis, Listera ovata, Neottia nidus-avis, and 
Primula vulgaris) characterizing the different forest patches 
of the analyzed area (the Province of Pavia, Lombardy 
Region, North Italy). Furthermore, the proposed indicator 
took into account also the size of the forest patches, and 
only patches greater than 10.000 square meters were 
considered. In fact, patches smaller than 1 ha generally 
show low species richness [2] and a scarce floristic quality 
due to the edge effect which can increase the abundance of 
weedy and alien species [3]-[5]. The richness and floristic 
quality (due to true forest species) of the forest patches can 
be influenced not only by their size, but also by their shape. 
However, a correlation between the shape and the species 
richness of forest patches can be found when the patch size 
is sufficiently high. In fact, Dzwonko and Loster [6][7] 
found a negative correlation between the shape index of 
Patton [8] and the number of shrubs and forest species. In 
that case they worked with a restricted dataset of only 27 
forests varying from 0.03 to 1.6 ha. With such small patch 
sizes it is possible that the entire patch was subject to the 
edge effects [9]. Honnay et al. [9] analyzed 234 forest 
patches varying in size between 0.5 and 5216 ha and found 
a correlation between the Patton shape index and the 
number of species in edges and clearings, the number of 
woody species and lianas and, as a consequence, with the 
total number of forest plant species. For these reasons, in the 
new improvement of the FSQ indicator, also the shape of 
forest patches was taken into account. Patches with linear 
shapes were not considered, applying an ad hoc erosion 
operator on the image data provided by Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS) of the project (as explained in 
Section II.)  Such linear patches, together with those smaller 
than 10.000 square meters, that can be considered as 
punctual patches, do not represent core areas hosting 
complexes forest ecosystems (as the wide patches of 
compact shape where the edge effect is reduced) important 
for woody and  herbaceous true forest species. However, 
they can represent critical elements to connect core areas 
and support the structure of a local/regional ecological 
network, and the evaluation of their quality should be better 
considered from the connectivity perspective. Here, in the 
new improvement of the FSQ indicator, only forest patches 
with similar geometric characteristics (wide size and 
compact shape) were considered, with the aim to evaluate 
more homogenous elements and have a more realistic 
picture of the forest quality useful for conservation 
purposes. 
Besides embedding the geometric characteristics in the 
computation of the FSQ indicator, a second aspect has been 
considered in this work in progress: the evaluation of the 
importance of forest plantations. In fact, in the previous 
elaboration of the FSQ indicator, only natural forests were 
considered, while plantations were excluded from the 
evaluation. However, the Lombardy Region, in 2002 started 
and financed an important project aimed to create 10 new 
plain forests, each of them with a size of about 40 ha and 
planted with native trees and shrubs [10][11]. Actually, such 
forests have not still developed a typical structure of mature 
wood and a typical nemoral herb layer, which will require at 
least 20-30 years. Anyway, because of their importance for 
the restoration of the Lombardy plain and conservation 
purposes, such new forests were considered in the present 
work in progress. The objective of the research is to analyze 
and quantify the impact of considering also the forest 
plantations (for restoration purposes) on the values of the 
FSQ. The case of the Municipality of Travacò Siccomario 
(Province of Pavia) was preliminary considered, to test this  
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-489-3
BIONATURE 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
 
Figure 1.  
The territory under investigation (Municipality of Travacò 
Siccomario): the blocked colored areas superimposed on the geographic 
map  show the presence of the natural forests (light greeen and light blue) 
and the plantation (pink). 
elaboration because it hosts one of the ten new plain forests 
projected and realized with the support of Lombardy 
Region. 
The aim of this paper is describing the data set and the 
methods used to extend the previous contribution in 
literature in the new work in progress. Moreover, to help 
readability, a brief summary on FSQ indicator is provided 
(for a detailed description, see [12].) The experimental 
results refer to the case study of the Municipality of Travacò 
Siccomario and they suggest an interesting starting point for 
future work. 
II. 
DATA SET AND METHODS 
As in the previous contribution [1][12], we have used a 
GIS database, free available from the Region Lombardy 
[13], in order to derive the useful description about the 
distribution of the forest in the territory. In Figure 1, the 
visual map for a portion of the Municipality of the case 
study under investigation is shown. Different colors refer to 
different types of forests. Particularly, the compact pink area 
refers to the forest plantation. The other colors refer to 
natural forests. These data are the input for both the two 
basic operations: the computation of the FSQ indicator (see 
Section II.A) and the processing by the Erosion operator 
(see Section II.B).  
 
A. The Forest Status Quality Indicator 
The FSQ expresses the forest quality status as the value 
of its ecological components, with particularly reference to 
the biodiversity conservation. In its first application [1][12] 
it was computed for each municipality of the provinces of 
Pavia and Lodi, considering only natural forests occurring 
on areas greater than 10.000 square meters [1]. A set of sub-
regions occupied by natural forest Fi (i = 1, 2, n) was 
defined. Each of Fi may have one or more occurrences, 
denoted by the index k, in the territory (k = 1, 2, max(i)). 
The number of occurrences may vary from a minimum of 1 
to a maximum, which depends on the forest type (max(i)). 
Each k-th occurrence is characterized by: (a) an area Ak
i, 
expressed in square meters, for i = 1, 2,…n and k = 1, 2, … 
max(i), and (b) a type of Ti, derived from the GIS ERSAF 
Database “Map of the Forest Types of Lombardy” [13]. For 
each forest Ti, we found the correspondence with one or 
more phytosociological tables [14]. For each forest type Ti, 
we defined a set of the following indicator components (si, 
ai, pi): the stratification (number of layers) of a forest type i 
(si), the percentage frequency of alien species (ai) in the 
corresponding phytosociological table/s, and the percentage 
frequency of protected species (pi) (according to the 
Lombardy regional law, L.R. 10/2008) in the corresponding 
phytosociological table/s. The three components can assume 
only discrete values, from 0 to 3, according to an if – then – 
else algorithm described in [1][12]. After determining the 
values of the set of components for stratification, alien and 
protected species, for each forest Ti, it is possible to 
compute the FSQ Indicator of a municipality of area S as  
 
FSQ = iksi + ai + pi)*Ak
i/S  
(1) 
The FSQ definition is the weighted values of the 
components, where the weights are the ratios between the 
areas of the forests and the area of the territory under 
investigation. By using the primitives of the open source 
QGIS software [15], the values of  Ak
i  in the territory under 
investigation have been computed, in order to estimate the 
value of the FSQ indicator, according to (1). 
 
B. The Erosion Operator 
The first aspect of the work in progress here described is 
the introduction of the factor “shape” of the forest patches in 
the computation of the FSQ. By analyzing (1), in the original 
[1][12] FSQ definition, only the areas of forest patches are 
considered and weighted by the naturalistic components (si, 
ai, pi). The only limitation introduced on the geographic data 
is still a quantitative one (the 10.000 square meters as the 
minimum accepted size of the forest patch to be evaluated). 
However, we decided to take into consideration a 
characteristic that refers to the shape of a patch, i.e., to 
reduce the edge effect, which, in turn, reduces the floristic 
quality. This can be done by applying the standard 
mathematical morphology operator of Erosion [16], with a 
structural element of a circle of radius of 50 meters. In fact, 
Erosion is a typical image processing operator that allows to 
“erode” a connected area, starting from its perimeter and 
proceeding inside, of an extent that corresponds to a given 
shape of the structural element. In our case, the structural 
element is a circle of a given radius, in order to reduce the 
areas of the forests to their real inner shape, by excluding the 
areas near the boundary. If we use a circle as structural 
element, the shape of the forest will be remodeled in a 
symmetric way, all along the boundaries. The diameter of the 
structural element determines the minimum distance that a 
forest patch must have from its center to all the points of its 
boundaries, in order to be considered in the FSQ 
computation. As a result of the Erosion, the forest patches 
with a linear shape (a thin stripe less than 100 meters of 
amplitude) disappear from the map, as it can be seen in the 
Travacò Siccomario, Pavia, Italy, satellite map 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-489-3
BIONATURE 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

experimental results reported in Section III. All the other 
patches are reduced by the erosion, to minimize the “edge” 
effect. With the introduction of the Erosion operator, we 
applied to each area Ak
i the Erosion operator E[], thus 
leading to a new expression of FSQ, denoted by FSQe: 
 
FSQe = iksi + ai + pi)*E[Ak
i]/S  
(2) 
The new operator FSQe takes into consideration both the 
quantitative (areas) and the qualitative (shapes) aspects of the 
forest patches. 
 
C. The Study Area 
The study area includes the Municipality of Travacò 
Siccomario (geographical coordinates: 45° 8' 60,00'' N 
9° 9' 38,52'' E). It is located in the Lombardy plain at an 
average altitude above sea level of 66 meters, and is mainly 
characterized by agricultural fields and urban areas. Natural 
forest areas are localized along watercourses and channels, 
often as linear elements dominated by mixed woody species 
as Salix alba, Populus alba, Quercus robur, Ulmus minor 
and, very frequently, the invasive Robinia pseudacacia. 
Wide forest patches are limited and dominated by the woody 
species above mentioned. As we consider only forest types 
that have at least one occurrence in the territory of area 
greater than 1 ha, only three types of natural forests survive 
these requirements: the Salix alba communities, the Populus 
alba communities, and Robinia pseudoacacia communities. 
Moreover, in this study we want to include also 
plantations in the FSQ computation. In 2003-2004, one of 
the great plain forests of the Lombardy Region was realized 
in this municipality. Particularly meso-xerophilous and 
meso-igrophilous forest patches were realized on a surface of 
about 41 ha, planting native trees (such Populus nigra, 
Ulmus minor, Acer campestre, Malus sylvestris, Carpinus 
betulus, Quercus robur, Salix alba,  Alnus glutinosa, 
Populus alba, Prunus padus) and native shrubs (such 
Crataegus monogyna, Corylus avellana, Prunus spinosa, 
Sambucus nigra, Cornus sanguinea, Frangula alnus, 
Viburnum opulus, Salix cinerea). Considering the woody 
floristic composition, the new forest can be considered as the 
forest type Oak-Elm wood (also including the Black Alder 
variant) [17]. The value set of components for stratification, 
alien and protected species is 3,2,2 for this plantation. In 
Table I all the forest types, of area greater than 1 ha, for the 
case study of Travacò Siccomario are shown. 
 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In the experiments of data analysis, for the case study 
here reported, we applied the erosion operator to compute the 
FSQe, according to (2) and compare the effect of the Erosion 
on each forest types of Table I. The computed value FSQe 
for the Municipality of Travacò Siccomario is 0.2004, vs. a 
value of FSQ of 0.2276, including all the forest types of 
Table I (both natural forest and plantation). The relative loss 
of the indicator is of 11.9%.  
TABLE I.  
FOREST TYPES FOR THE CASE STUDY. 
Naturalistic 
components 
 (si, ai, pi).   
Description of forest types Ti 
and relative reference syntaxa  
 
(1,1,0) 
T1: Willow wood of bank 
(3,1,0) 
T2: White Poplar formation 
(2,1,0) 
T3: Pure Robinia pseudoacacia wood 
(3,2,2) 
T4: Plantation (Oak-Elm wood, also including the 
Black Alder variant) 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  
The territory under investigation after the Erosion operator 
applied to all the forest patches. 
Clearly, the erosion has reduced the areas of the forest 
patch, and consequently the indicator is lower. However, the 
loss of the areas is not equal for all the four forest types. In 
fact, the loss is determined by the shapes of the patches, 
which are quite different in the territory under examination. 
The loss percentages are the following: 3.6% for the 
plantation, 35.2% for the Salix alba communities, 51.3% for 
the Populus alba communities, and 61.2% for the Robinia 
pseudoacacia communities. It is interesting to note that the 
plantation is the forest type with the lowest loss; this 
indicates that the project has considered a good shape, which 
is very close to an ideal core area. Moreover, the Robinia 
pseudoacacia communities have the highest loss, and it is a 
positive aspect, because of the very low floristic quality, due 
to the dominance of alien species in linear and fragmented 
patches. In Figure 2, the map of the territory after the erosion 
is shown. The reduction of the colored areas of the forests 
types is evident, by comparing Figure 2 to Figure 1.  In 
Figure 3, the areas before and after the erosion are plot, for 
each forest type of Table I.   
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
The new improvement of the FSQ here presented and the 
obtained experimental results put in evidence that our 
methodological approach is realistic in evaluating the forest 
quality and may give useful information for the choice of 
which forest patches should be enhanced for conservation 
purposes (in our case study, Salix alba and Populus alba 
communities) or not (Robinia pseudoacacia communities). 
The promising results suggest to extend the FSQe 
computation for all the municipalities considered in [12]. 
Travacò Siccomario, Pavia, Italy, satellite map 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-489-3
BIONATURE 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
Figure 3.  The areas (in sqare meters, on Y-axis) for each the forest types (on the X-axis), before and after the Erosion. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Assini and M. G. Albanesi, “A Naturalistic Indicator of 
the Forest Quality and its Relationship with the Land Use 
Anthropentropy 
Factor,” 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Sixth 
International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity 
and Renewable Energies (BIONATURE 2015), Rome 
(Italy), 24-29 May 2015, Copyright (©) IARIA, 2015, pp. 
27-33, ISBN 978-1-61208-410-7. 
[2] P. Digiovinazzo, G. F. Ficetola, L. Bottoni, C. Andreis, and 
E. Padoa-Schioppa, "Ecological thresholds in herb 
communities for the management of suburban fragmented 
forests,” Forest Ecology and Management, vol. 259, 2010, 
pp. 343-349. 
[3] D. A. Saunders, R. J. Hobbs, and C. R. Margules, 
"Biological consequences of ecosystem fragmentation: a 
review,” Conservation Biology, vol. 5, 1991, pp. 18-32. 
[4] O. Honnay, K. Verheyen, and M. Hermy, “Permeability of 
ancient forest edges for weedy plant species invasion,” 
Forest Ecology and Management, vol.161, 2002, pp.109-
122. 
[5] W. F. Laurance et al., “Ecosystem decay of Amazon forest 
fragments: a 22-year investigation,” Conservation Biology, 
vol. 16, 2002, pp. 605-618. 
[6] Z. Dzwonko and S. Loster, “Species richness of small 
woodlands 
on 
the 
western 
Carpathians 
foothills,” 
Vegetatio, vol. 76, 1988, pp. 15-27. 
[7] Z. Dzwonko and S. Loster, “Species richness and seed 
dispersal to secondary woods in southern Poland,” Journal 
of Biogeography, vol. 19, 1992, pp. 195-204. 
[8] D. R. Patton, “A diversity index for quantifying habitat 
edge,” Wildlife Society Bulletin, vol. 3, 1975, pp. 171-173. 
[9]  O. Honnay, M. Hermy, and P. Coppin, “Effects of area, 
age and diversity of forest patches in Belgium on plant 
species richness, and implication for conservation and 
restoration,” Biological Conservation, vol. 87, 1999, pp. 
73-84. 
[10] F. Sartori and S. Assini, “First evaluation of the regional 
afforestation actions of the lombardy plain”, Transl. “Prime 
valutazioni sulle opere regionali di riforestazione della 
pinaura lombarda”, «NATURA BRESCIANA» Ann. Mus. 
Civ. Sc. Nat., Brescia, 36, 2009, pp. 191-196. 
[11] S. Assini and F. Sartori, “Vegetation and restoration – 
Monitoring of the actions: the great plain forests of the 
Lombardy Region. Analyses and perspectives”, Transl. 
“Vegetazione e riqualificazione – Monitoraggio degli 
interventi: le grandi foreste di pianura della Regione 
Lombardia. Analisi e prospettive”, Quaderni di Tutela del 
Territorio, Regione Piemonte, 3, pp. 57-65, 2009. 
[12] S. Assini and M.G. Albanesi, “A New Biodiversity 
Composite Indicator Based on Anthropentropy and Forest 
Quality Assessment. Framework, Theory, and Case Studies 
of Italian Territory”, IARIA International Journal On 
Advances in Life Science, 7 (3-4), 2015, pp. 177-194. 
[13] Regional Organization for Services in Agricolture and 
Forests, Transl. Ente Regionale Servizi Agricoltura e 
Foreste, “Map of Forest Types of Lombardia”, Transl. 
“Carta 
dei 
tipi 
reali 
forestali 
della 
Lombardia,” 
http://www.geoportale.regione.lombardia.it/galleria-mappe, 
page 3 [retrieved: May, 2016]. 
[14] C. Andreis and F. Sartori, eds, “Forest vegetation of 
Lombardia. 
Phytosociological 
classification,” 
Transl. 
“Vegetazione forestale della Lombardia. Inquadramento 
fitosociologico,” Archivio Geobotanico, vol. 12-13, 2011, 
pp. 1-215. 
[15] QuantumGIS 
software, 
http://www.qgis.org/en/site/ 
[retrieved: May, 2016]. 
[16] R. C. Gonzales and R. E. Woods, Digital image processing, 
Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008, Chapter 9, “Morphological 
image processing”. 
[17] R. del Favero, ed., “The forest types of Lombardy”, Transl. 
“I tipi forestale della Lombardia”, CIERRE Edizioni, pp. 
506, 2002. 
Area 
(mq) 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-489-3
BIONATURE 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

