Developing Environmental Responsibility Through Place-based Education 
Kevin O’Connor 
Department of Education 
Mount Royal University 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
e-mail: koconnor@mtroyal.ca 
Robert Sharp 
Yukon Department of Education 
Yukon Territorial Government 
Whitehorse, Yukon, Canada 
e-mail: bobsharp5@hotmail.com
 
 
Abstract— In response to the release of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fifth Assessment Synthesis 
Report, Dr. John P. Holdren, Director of the U.S. White House 
Office of Science & Technology Policy stated “The IPCC’s new 
Synthesis Report is yet another wake-up call to the global 
community that we must act together swiftly and aggressively 
in order to stem climate change and avoid its worst impacts". 
Realizing this call to action will require the active participation 
of 
governments, 
industries 
and 
global 
populations. 
Unfortunately governments and industries often let short-term 
economic considerations govern their behaviors contrary to the 
efforts required to address long-term environmental and social 
issues associated with climate change. Communities, NGOs, 
families and schools often lead the way in the development of 
informed populations whose citizens are supported in their 
personal responsibility for social actions towards climate 
change.  Schools that follow place-based educational principles 
actively involve students in a range of community concerns 
with goals of informing and encouraging action in a wide 
variety 
of 
environmental 
and 
social 
issues. 
Research 
identifying long-term development of responsible citizenship is 
linked to place-based education.  This paper describes long-
term analysis of a program utilizing place-based science 
education and how these practices have effected the students’ 
perceptions of their social and environmental responsibilities 
as citizens. It then explores how these approaches have led to 
responsible citizenship in northern Canada. 
Keywords- Place-based Education; Social Responsibility; 
Environmental 
Stewardship; 
Critical 
Pedagogy; 
Active 
Citizenship. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, 
Biodiversity and Renewable Energies provides opportunities 
to address a wide range of topics relating humans and their 
interactions with the natural world. Most recently, the United 
Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC 
released the first of four chapters of its Fifth Assessment 
Report AR5 in November [1]. The report calls for a strong, 
concerted global effort to combat climate change.  This is 
seen as necessary to protect the health of our economies, 
communities, children and future [2]. Such a concerted 
global effort will require that populations are informed, 
critical and actively involved in a wide range of climate 
related issues. In North America, various governmental, 
industrial and economic forces have strenuously opposed 
such action out of concern that these efforts may negatively 
impact their own economic wellbeing. Canadian Prime 
Minister, Stephen Harper characterizes this ideology as he 
recently stated, “No matter what they say, no country is 
going to take actions that are going to deliberately destroy 
jobs and growth in their country. We (Canada) are just a little 
more frank about that”  [3]. Some governments and industry 
groups 
have 
undertaken 
aggressive, 
pervasive, 
and 
persuasive advertising programs in an attempt to assuage 
environmental concerns. A pro-development campaign 
within Canada has not gone unnoticed: “Responsible 
resource development, Canadians now accept, is something 
we cannot afford. The mantra of economic growth at any 
cost has made us willing participants in the rape that Harper 
and his corporate masters have enabled” [4]. Many resource 
development groups, along with political representatives, 
often distort and manipulate conditions so as make critical 
analysis undesirable and label those dissenters as ‘radical’ 
and ‘unpatriotic’.  A common narrative that has emerged in 
Canada is that citizens who express concerns about 
environmental conditions are often labeled ‘extremists’ [5]. 
Currently, numerous social media platforms consistently 
include rhetoric attempting to persuade Canadian citizens 
that pipelines, fracking and the Alberta tar sands bitumen 
development benefit the whole Canadian population through 
‘job creation’ and ‘national prosperity’, with little to no 
reference to the cost to environments, health and to the social 
fabric of communities. 
In the face of such public campaigns, it has become 
increasingly important to have an informed and critical 
citizenship prepared to embrace responsible environmental 
and social behaviors. Barr’s research on environmental and 
social responsibility shows that public relations campaigns 
and advertisements are not sufficient to develop this type of 
citizenship [6]. This type of critical citizenship finds its 
origins rooted in active involvement at the level of 
community.  Active citizens dynamically embrace the social 
responsibilities associated with environmental citizenship 
and see, as part of their civic roles, the necessity of becoming 
informed, maintaining critical perspectives and becoming 
actively involved in social, political and environmental 
issues [7].   The genesis’ of such citizenship rests in family, 
community and schooling that promotes responsible 
environmental behaviors. Hines et al. in their study on the 
analysis and synthesis of research on environmental behavior 
determined the following variables were found to be 
associated 
with 
responsible 
environmental 
behaviors: 
knowledge of issues; knowledge of action strategies; locus of 
control, attitudes; verbal commitments, and; an individuals 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

sense of responsibility [8].  A follow-up meta-analysis 
conducted by Bamberg and Möser twenty years later had 
similar findings. They found results that support “the 
conception of pro-environmental behavior as a mixture of 
self-interest and pro-social motives. … There is also progress 
in the understanding of factors/processes contributing to the 
development as well as activation of pro- environmental 
moral norms” [9, p. 22]. 
We posit that the conditions that give rise to responsible 
environmental and social behaviors are a major focus of 
place-based educational initiatives [10][11][12].  This paper 
explores the ways in which place-based initiatives may be 
incorporated in school instructional strategies.  These place-
based educational initiatives focus on the development of 
citizenship focusing on a critical knowledge of social, 
environmental and political issues and associated action 
strategies, locus of control, attitudes, verbal commitments 
and an individuals sense of responsibility within a 
community. 
This paper is structured as follows: in Section II, we 
define citizenship and posit that critical thinking is a central 
foundation. In Section III, we introduce the field of place-
based education. We proceed to describe two related 
longitudinal research projects (Section IV), and their 
methodologies (Section V), that examine the extent to which 
an experiential education initiative has fostered responsible 
citizenship through place-based activities. In Section VI, we 
discuss our findings, and finally, Section VII gives a 
summary of the main findings and highlights compelling 
evidence indicating that educational processes involving 
place-based activities that encourage data collection, 
refection and action are important antecedents to responsible 
citizenship. 
II. 
CRITICAL PEDAGOGY AND CITIZENSHIP 
Here, we use Glaser’s definition of citizenship: “Good 
citizenship calls for the ability to think critically about issues 
concerning which there may be a difference of opinion and 
apply democratic values to the issues. Critical thinking has 
three components: an attitude of carefully considering 
problems, knowledge of logical inquiry methods, and skill in 
applying those methods”. [13] 
 In the examination of the educational processes and 
social actions that lead to good citizenship, we posit that 
critical thinking is the central foundation [7][14][15].   
Learning to think critically is conceptualized as the 
acquisition of the competence to participate critically 
in the communities and social practices of which a 
person is a member. If education is to further the 
critical competence of students, it must provide them 
with the opportunity at the level of the classroom and 
the school to observe, imitate and practice critical 
agency and to reflect upon it. Learning contexts must 
be chosen which students can make sense of and in 
which they can develop a feeling of responsibility for 
the quality of the practice in question. [16, p. 359] 
A crucial condition to critical pedagogy is it needs a 
context to be relevant and therefore be sustainable [15][17].  
Community issues in which frame place-based learning 
provide the context for critical thinking, situational 
conditions, and for attributes such as locus of control.  Place-
based educational activities focus on environmental and 
social values, situational characteristics and psychological 
variables; as community action is open to a range of varying 
and competing interests [6]. 
III. 
PLACE-BASED EDUCATION 
Place-based education (PBE) provides the learning 
context.  PBE is an approach to teaching that is grounded in 
the context of community, both natural and social. It 
connects place with self and community. The field has 
emerged from the strong roots laid by thirty years of 
environmental education in North America [18][19]. PBE 
provides a purpose to the knowledge and reasoning taught in 
schools. It provides a contextual framework for much of the 
curriculum (i.e., gives meaning to the studies) and engages 
the student in the conditions of her/his own reality. Tyler 
examines an educator’s ability to influence the environment 
to promote learning: “It is desirable that the problems be set 
up in the kind of environment in which such problems 
usually arise in life. This is more likely to result in his 
viewing this as a real problem worth of his effort to solve” 
[20, p. 69]. 
A survey of the literature on PBE reveals characteristic 
patterns to this still-evolving approach that make it 
distinctive: 
• 
It emerges from the particular attributes of a place. 
The content is specific to the geography, ecology, 
sociology, politics, and other dynamics of that 
place. This fundamental characteristic establishes 
the foundation of the concept.  
• 
It is inherently multidisciplinary.  
• 
It is inherently experiential. In many programs this 
includes a participatory action or service-learning 
component; in fact, some advocates insist that 
action must be a component if ecological and 
cultural sustainability are to result.  
• 
It is reflective of an educational philosophy that is 
broader than ‘learn to earn’. Economics of place 
can be an area of study as a curriculum explores 
local industry and sustainability; however, all 
curricula and programs are designed for broader 
objectives.  
• 
It connects place with self and community. Because 
of the ecological lens through which place-based 
curricula are envisioned, these connections are 
pervasive. 
These 
curricula 
include 
multigenerational and multicultural dimensions as 
they interface with community resources.  [11] 
IV. 
RESEARCH  
We describe two related longitudinal research projects 
[21] that examine the extent to which an experiential 
education initiative has fostered responsible citizenship 
through place-based activities.  The research project follows 
students from ten to twenty years following their 
participation in an integrated secondary science program 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

focusing on place-based activities in which science data 
collection and peer-driven social, political and environmental 
actions are promoted. The Experiential Science Grade 11 
(ES11) program was created as a pilot in 1994 and is now in 
existence as a territorial education model. The ES11 program 
is a Yukon Territory public-school program of studies open 
to all Grade 11 students.  Students from a wide range of 
schools choose to take part in the program.  Students spend 
35-45 days of a 93-day semester conducting field studies 
related to community issues and strategically connected to 
integrated curriculum science-related studies. During a ten-
year study period, 357 students have participated in the 
program and three different educators have taught the ES11 
program. About two hundred place-based activities covering 
a wide variety of issues have been the focus of student 
learning over the decade of research. 
The ES11 program integrates Biology 11 (a survey 
course including studies related to population ecology), 
Geography 
12 
(studies 
of 
Atmospheric 
dynamics, 
geomorphology and resource utilization), Chemistry 11 
(introduction to quantitative chemistry), Art 11 (focused on 
scientific illustration and landscape), Field Methods 11 
(applied studies in environmental monitoring protocols) and 
Physical Education 11 (focused on physical well-being and 
outdoor education).  Students are engaged in two full-day 
labs a week (Chemistry and Biology), housed in the local 
post-secondary institution Yukon College.  Field studies 
expose students to a wide variety of ‘experts’ associated with 
a range of resource management issues. Rigorous field 
methods, reliable well-kept data and valid scientific 
methodology are the foundation of the program. The 
GLOBE program (Global Learning and Observations to 
Benefit the Environment) is an instrumental educational 
platform utilized to assist in engaging ES11 students in the 
field of experiential science. GLOBE is a worldwide hands-
on, school-based education program that was crafted to 
develop an awareness of one’s "Place" in the natural world. 
Through the use of environmental science related activities 
and an integration of traditional ecological knowledge, 
students develop an enlightened recognition of the proper 
relationship of self, community and global world. Students 
collect field data and analyze various aspects of 
environmental study issues before developing strategies to 
address and take action related to community concerns. 
During an ES11 semester, students take part in a wide 
variety of place-based activities, often in the company of 
scientists who have been working in a related field.  They 
take part in an intensive month-long trip that involves field 
studies and community activities conducted in a range of 
settings.  Most of the activities involve environmental 
monitoring and most are longitudinal in nature as they span 
over a period of years.  The community issues students 
address during their time in the ES11 program are typically 
characterized as PBE initiatives.  The ability to infuse an 
outdoor activity with related environmental field studies 
benefits the whole educational enterprise. The linking of 
environmental field studies with an outdoor pursuit gives 
both the study and the activity additional educational value 
and meaning. In addition, field studies reinforce both labs 
and lectures in specific subjects, addressing a traditional 
education problem: integrating theory and practice [22]. 
Courses such as geography, survey biology, quantitative 
chemistry, ecology and environmental studies are often 
integrated and lend themselves to field studies that link to a 
range of outdoor activities.  The field studies approach often 
takes on the mantel of PBE since many of the field studies 
are centered on responding to community concerns, studying 
and collecting data and proposing possible responses to the 
community-defined problem. Addressing ‘real’ topics and 
finding ways to apply the prescribed learning outcomes to 
these studies have proven to engage students in ways that 
secure knowledge and strengthen positive community 
attitudes. In this respect, including field studies with outdoor 
pursuits has been proven to be a successful educational 
approach [19][23][24]. 
V. 
METHODOLOGY  
This longitudinal mixed-methods research [25] examines 
the extent to which various educational strategies foster long-
term commitments to responsible citizenship.  The research 
followed two distinct yet related paths.  The first was a 
tracking of the post-secondary educational activities of the 
students who took part in the ES11 program. We were able 
to compile information related to students’ choices of post-
secondary institutions, program of studies, course results and 
employment. The preliminary results of an initial survey, 
combined with interviews and anecdotal discussions with 
many of the former students pointed to the value of early 
student involvement in place-based activities leading to 
social and environmental action and responsibility.  We 
conducted “a spiral of cycles” [26] in our research, thus the 
preliminary results allowed us to refine not only the 
questions, but also the research techniques for following 
surveys and interviews. This gave rise to the second stream 
of research designed to collect more detailed information 
about the choices and actions of this cohort of students and 
how their ES11 experience may have influenced their 
subsequent values and actions.  To this end, an intensive 
survey addressing many topics including questions related to 
their values and actions associated to active citizenship were 
distributed to students of this cohort.  At present both of 
these research projects are ongoing.  This paper reports on 
our preliminary findings. 
Many features of this research are possible because of the 
size and nature of the community.  The city of Whitehorse, 
in the Yukon Territory, Canada, is a relatively small isolated 
northern city.  Many students opt to carry on their post-
secondary education in different ‘southern’ universities and 
technology institutions. The Yukon Government offers 
students, who complete their secondary school (Grade 7-12) 
in the Yukon Territory, a Yukon Student Grant.  This grant 
provides each student $5500 each year over five years 
towards post-secondary education.  Students are required to 
maintain and report their academic standing to qualify for the 
ongoing grants.  Our research has been able to use these 
features to track and keep in touch with former ES11 
students. Based on the relatively small size of the Whitehorse 
community 
(approx. 
population 
20,000), 
personal, 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

community and educational relationships that develop during 
the program’s field studies and place-based activities give 
rise to frequent encounters with former students and /or their 
family in various environments.  These conditions result in 
opportunities to engage with students and collect valuable 
data.  Research information related to the students’ post-
secondary education gained during the formal and in-formal 
student interactions are recorded in a database of student 
post-secondary records. Records of students receiving the 
Yukon Student Grant are also used to contribute to this 
database.  To date, 150 of the 357 students have been added 
to the post-secondary database.  Of these, 37 out of 45 have 
submitted completed surveys.  The detailed survey takes 
more than an hour to complete. Some students have chosen 
to complete the survey through a personal face-to-face 
interview process. 
VI. 
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS 
A. Post-Secondary Educational Pathways 
The initial stage of research followed 150 former 
students. In a number of cases, the students followed more 
than one path.  Since the Yukon Student Grant program is 
provided within the registered five years, information 
following the five years has been obtained through 
interviews of students within the cohort.   
The previous tables tell only part of a ‘story’ related to 
the activities undertaken by this student cohort. In depth 
review of results show that 90% of the ES11 students 
tracked, to date, went to university.  Of these, the greatest 
number followed a science program. More than half of these 
pursued fields related to environmental studies.   
B. Citizenship Survey Results 
The second ongoing research project, that includes the 
intensive 
survey, 
paints 
a 
more 
comprehensive 
understanding of the impact the program had on long-term 
student engagement and citizenship. To date, 37 of 45 
surveys have been returned.  The detailed survey includes a 
bank of open-ended questions that address seven broad 
topics: education and training following high school; 
employment history; service to community or society; 
friendships 
persisting 
from 
high 
school; 
personal 
background; travel and recreational interests; impacts of high 
school on subsequent choices, and; a concluding open ended 
section that invites further comments.  The first four banks of 
questions provide quantitative information while the last 
three banks of questions provides qualitative information.   
Overall, the intensive survey provides a blend of quantitative 
and qualitative information that yields insights into the 
individuals’ citizenship and the extent to which the ES11 
program may have influenced subsequent life choices.  Each 
of these topics is summarized below. 
 
1) Interim Quantitative Findings 
a) Post-Secondary Education 
• 
All 37 respondents took part in post-secondary 
education and training.   
• 
All completed more than one program of studies and 
completed more than one degree. 
• 
25% attended their first course at the local post-
secondary institution-Yukon College and then went 
to southern Canadian post-secondary institutions. 
• 
20% 
have 
attended 
university 
and 
training 
institutions in other countries (UK, US, NZ and 
Australia). 
• 
45% of respondents have completed graduate 
studies-Masters, PhD or professional degrees.   
b) Employment 
• 
Employment histories indicate that 85% of the 
students worked part-time in the Yukon during their 
time at studies and then took jobs in many different 
Canadian and international locations.   
• 
All respondents had jobs when they responded, and 
20% indicated they were looking for other positions.   
• 
The most interesting result as it relates to this paper 
is 45% held employment in fields related to 
environment or environmental monitoring.  
c) Travel and Recreational Interests 
• 
All respondents have traveled to 2 or more 
continents and all indicate an interest in more travel.   
 
Figure 1.  Post-Secondary Choices 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  University Program Selections 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

They have collectively visited and/or worked in 
every continent.   
• 
All respondents have remained active in outdoor 
activities and attribute many of their secondary 
school activities as the origins of these pursuits.   
• 
40% of the respondents indicate they coach in areas 
related to their outdoor interests.   
• 
Some respondents listed a wide variety of outdoor 
activities while others describe their interests as 
outdoor activities and healthy lifestyles. 
d) Personal Background  
• 
70% of the respondents indicated they were married 
or in long-term relationships, 55% have children and 
only 25% indicated they were single.  Only one 
respondent had been divorced after six years of 
marriage.   
• 
60% considered themselves to be settled in their 
lifestyle, but of these, half indicated they were 
settled in their personal lives but not yet settled in 
their employment and also on where they live 
geographically.   
• 
25% of respondents live in the Yukon, and 60% of 
the respondents living outside the Yukon indicated 
they would like to live in the Yukon or in the 
province of British Columbia (just south of the 
Yukon).   
 
2) Interim Qualitative Findings 
To best represent the qualitative findings, we have 
chosen in this section of the analysis to provide 
representative quotes from the student responses that 
demonstrate key themes.  Their voice, expressing common 
themes over a period of years, time and again provides 
compelling evidence regarding the values and subsequent 
actions of the former students.  
a) Impacts of Experiential Science on Subsequent 
Choices 
 Three quarters, 75% of the respondents indicated that the 
ES11 program impacted their subsequent career and 
educational choices.  The following quotes represent the 
scope of these views.  
The extended trip in ES was an invaluable learning 
experience for me regarding my ability to interact and 
communicate with others. As we (students) were tangled 
in socially intense learning environments (due to 
traveling with many adolescents), we were forced to 
learn and adapt to other peoples behavior. My ability to 
communicate has continued to grow and is an integral 
part of my job. I started learning about tolerance, 
empathy, charity, and patience when I was in ES, and it 
has allowed me to grow into the medical provider that I 
am today.  (Male, 1998) 
Motivated, engaged and challenging teachers with an 
awareness of current events reinforced my interest in 
global politics encouraged my interest in development 
studies and sustainable communities…it had a lasting 
impact on my decision to pursue an education that 
included an environmental component. (Female, 1996) 
From the ES experience, I value opportunities to 
learn through practical experience and trying –and 
possibly 
failing. 
I 
value 
innovation. 
I 
value 
environmental sustainability and policy decisions that 
have been informed by science.  (Male 1997) 
Collecting salt from the side of the Alaska Hwy and 
taking it into the chemistry lab at Yukon College and 
actually figuring out how much salt was present in the 
gravel to link to caribou occurrences there, integrating 
chemistry, biology, and ecology. This experience as 
holistic learning changed how I viewed education and 
the world around me. I also learned that education could 
be fun and if I found something I enjoyed learning about, 
like how humans encounter their environment, it was up 
to me to figure it out for myself. (Female, 2003) 
My high school experience cemented my interest in 
natural sciences.  I sought out programs that could offer 
field-based studies. (Male, 1996) 
My educational experience shaped my long-term 
employment goal to be part of an organization that 
promotes global sustainability, environmental awareness 
and social conscience while building networks between 
governments and civil society.   Ultimately, it reinforced 
my interest in development studies with a focus on 
environmental issues.  (Female, 1999) 
b) Relationships 
It is important to reiterate that students who took part in 
ES came from different schools and different communities.  
Even though they were only together as a cohort for a four-
month semester and many now live in different parts of the 
word, 60% of respondents indicated they remain in contact 
with friends they formed during the time they spent in ES11.   
I have maintained friendships with some people that I 
only met through this program and would have otherwise 
not know. Although not all people I kept in contact with, 
there are a select few that our relationship has grown 
over the years and I talk to on a regular basis (despite 
our geographical differences). (Male, 1997) 
I am very close to a few of the people from my ES 
class, and continue significant relationships with them to 
this day. It is always a pleasure to see people from my ES 
class. (Male, 2001) 
c) Service to Community or Society 
95% of the respondents indicated they participate in 
service for their community and/or humanity.  The following 
two quotes give a sense of his commitment to service and 
how service is related to citizenship.   
Volunteer service is an essential aspect of being part 
of a community. It is an important consideration in how 
someone chooses to live because to be a volunteer 
encourages people to pursue activities they are 
passionate about; it also encourages people to be 
increasingly aware of issues outside their own social 
circles; and provides the opportunity to foster attributes 
like commitment and dedication. With such attributes, 
volunteers ensure sustainable programs that address 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

local issues and needs. I helped the Conservation Society 
of Sierra Leone facilitate community outreach workshops 
to encourage increased awareness of environmental and 
conservation of natural resource issues. I organize and 
conduct rapid assessment surveys of coastal sea-turtle 
habitat and local fishing practices. (Female, 1999) 
 One of the things I learned from ES is that everyone 
has a voice; it’s all about how you say what you want to 
say. One of the most important things is to learn about 
the matter yourself and not rely on what others (e.g., 
pamphlets, protestors, etc.) are trying to convince you of. 
Do your own research, learn about it and you will have a 
stronger voice for it. People are more likely to listen to a 
knowledgeable person than a passionate, one-sided rant. 
And you might learn something yourself that changes 
your view of what others are saying. Being open to other 
people’s opinions is as much a part of having a voice as 
knowing what to say. (Male, 1998) 
Only 2 of the respondents indicated their voices were not 
heard and had little opportunity to influence decisions locally 
or nationally. A number of respondents spoke to problems 
with electoral systems but they still felt the capacity to 
influence change. Every participant responded that they vote 
in civic, territorial, provincial and/or national elections. This 
contrasts with the turnout of average Canadians as reported 
in the most recent National May 2011 election; only 39% of 
Canadians aged 18-24 years and 45% aged 25-34 years voted 
[27]. 
d) Open-Ended Section 
The survey invited respondent to make comments in an 
open-ended format. The following are a representative 
sample of their comments. Most of these relate to the 
experiential and PBE process:   
After being in ES and after having gone through a 
moderate amount of post-secondary education I think 
that experiential learning is a more robust way of 
learning and teaching. Being able to see a medial 
moraine, a U-shaped valley, the impacts of clear cutting, 
etc., turned ‘learning objectives’ into concrete lessons. I 
think 
that 
in 
a 
perfect 
world 
all 
curriculums 
should/would be delivered in the same manner: intensive, 
tactile and above all meaningful. (Male, 2004) 
 Innovative experiential programs like these are an 
excellent model and should be expanded into other 
regions of Canada and other subject areas – perhaps in 
physics (engineering) and political/social studies?   
Decisions on where to move with my family and where to 
enroll my child for school will be heavily influenced by 
the availability of programs such as ES. (Female, 1995) 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The extent and nature of the responses to the detailed 
survey shows a community of practice [28] of young adults 
involved in community and a heightened understanding of 
‘place’ in active ways.  They express the significant role this 
type of educational experience has influenced subsequent life 
choices.  Most participating students felt a sense of social 
and environmental responsibility, we suggest are values and 
attitudes needed to address issues such as climate change. 
Data from the quantitative and qualitative analysis show 
complementary results.  Those participating in the ES11 
program demonstrated an uncommon level of engagement 
and civic and environmental responsibility.  These students 
refer to the challenging and significant place-based field 
studies, the co-operative work relationships that develop 
during their semester and diverse instructional processes 
used throughout the program as features that left lasting 
change. Field studies resonated with those students who 
learn best experientially and in social contexts. Students 
consistently reported the short and long term benefits 
attributed to their participation. A number of students 
indicated they struggled with conventional classes yet found 
success and engagement in the environmental field studies 
approach to courses. In terms of conventional academic 
scores, students in ES11 consistently outscored all other high 
school classes taking similar courses.  
The development of citizens who internalize community 
and global challenges related to social and environmental 
goals appears to be an essential aspect of addressing 
phenomena related to climate change. This research sheds 
light on how public schooling may contribute to such 
development. In summary, the actions and values expressed 
by ES11 participants reflect those qualities of responsible 
citizenship needed to address the challenges identified by the 
IPCC Fifth Assessment Report [1].  This research provides 
compelling quantitative and qualitative evidence indicating 
that educational processes involving place-based activities 
that encourage data collection, refection and action are 
important antecedents to responsible citizenship.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC, “Fifth 
Assessment 
Report, 
2014,” 
URL: 
http://www.ipcc.ch 
[accessed: 2014.12.09]. 
[2] David Suzuki Foundation, “IPCC report is clear: we must 
clean up our act, 2014,” URL: http://www.davidsuzuki.org 
[accessed: 2014.11.20]. 
[3] S. Chase and B. McKenna, “Canada ‘more frank’ about 
climate change, 2014” The Globe and Mail. URL: 
http://www.theglobeandmail.com [accessed: 2015.01.12]. 
[4] C. Hume, “Climate change vs. Rob Ford and Stephen Harper: 
Hume, 
2013,”. 
The 
Toronto 
Star. 
URL: 
http://www.thestar.com [accessed: 2014.12.10]. 
[5] R. Liepert, “Keystone XL pipeline will keep Canada from 
hitting 2020 greenhouse gas emissions targets, say critics, 
2014,” [Radio broadcast episode]. In M. Tremonti (Producer), 
The 
Current, 
Toronto, 
ON: 
CBC. 
URL: 
http://www.cbc.ca/thecurrent/ [accessed: 2015.01.18]. 
[6] S. 
Barr, 
“Strategies 
for 
sustainability: 
Citizens 
and 
responsible environmental behaviour,” AREA, 35(3), 2003, 
pp. 227–240. 
[7] J. Kincheloe, Critical Pedagogy. New York: Peter Lang, 
2005. 
[8] J. M. Hines, H. Hungerford, and A. Tomera, “Analysis and 
synthesis of research on responsible environmental behavior: 
A meta-analysis,” Journal of Environmental Education, 18 
(2), 1986, pp. 1-8. 
[9] S. Bamberg and G. Möser, “Twenty years after Hines, 
Hungerford, and Tomera: A new meta-analysis of psycho-
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

social determinants of pro-environmental behaviour,” Journal 
of Environmental Psychology, 27, 2006, pp.14–25. 
[10] R. Louv, Last Child in the Woods: Saving our Children from 
Nature-Deficit Disorder. Chapel Hill, NC : Algonquin Books 
of Chapel Hill, 2005. 
[11] K. O’Connor, “Puzzles rather than answers: Co-constructing a 
pedagogy of experiential, place-based and critical learning in 
Indigenous educatio,” Unpublished doctoral thesis, McGill 
University, 2009. 
[12] D. Sobel, Place-based Education: Connecting Classrooms and 
Communities. Great Barrington, Massachusetts: The Orion 
Society, 2004. 
[13] M. E. Glaser, “Critical thinking: Educating for responsible 
citizenship in a democracy,” National Forum: Phi Kappa Phi 
Journal, 65(1), 1985, pp. 24-27. 
[14] P. Freire, Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Continuum, 
1970. 
[15] D. Gruenewald, “The best of both worlds: A critical pedagogy 
of place,” Educational Researcher, 32(4), 2003, pp. 3-12. 
[16] G. Ten Dam and M. Volman, “Critical thinking as a 
citizenship competence: Teaching strategies,” Learning and 
Instruction, 14, 2004, pp. 359-379. 
[17] W. Penetito, “Place-based education: Catering for curriculum, 
culture and community,” New Zealand Annual Review of 
Education, 18, 2009, pp. 5-29. 
[18] D. W. Orr, Earth in Mind: On Education, Environment, and 
the Human Prospect. Washington, DC: Island Press, 1994. 
[19] J. Raffan, “The experience of place: Exploring land as 
teacher,” Journal of Experiential Education, 16(1), 1993, pp. 
39-45. 
[20] R. W. Tyler, Basic Principles of Curriculum and Instruction. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949. 
[21] K. O'Connor and R. Sharp, “Planting the science seed: 
Engaging students in place-based civic actions,” European 
Scientific Journal, 4, 2013, pp. 160-167. 
[22] J. Dewey, Experience and Education. London: Collier-
MacMillan, 1938. 
[23] K. O’Connor, “Learning from place: Re-shaping knowledge 
flow in Indigenous education,” TRANS-Internet-Zeitschrift 
für 
Kulturwissenschaften, 
No. 
7/8-2, 
2010, 
URL: 
http://www.inst.at/trans/17Nr/8-2/8-2_oconnor.htm 
[24] J. L. Woodhouse and C. E.  Knapp, Place-based Curriculum 
and Instruction: Outdoor and Environmental Education 
Approaches. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural 
Education and Small Schools, 2000. 
[25] J. W. Creswell and V. L. P. Clark, Eds., Designing and 
Conducting Mixed Methods Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
SAGE, 2011. 
[26] K. Lewin, “Group decision and social change,” In T. 
Newcomb and E. Hartley, (Eds.), Readings in Social 
Psychology. New York: Henry Holt, 1947. 
[27] M. Mayrand, “Declining voter turnout: Can we reverse the 
trend?, 
2012,” 
Elections 
Canada 
Online. 
URL: 
http://www.elections.ca [accessed: 2015.01.05]. 
[28] E. Wenger, Communities of Practice. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

