Improving Downscaling Techniques for Glacier Studies Using Bio-Inspired 
Algorithms 
Application to tropical glaciers in the Peruvian Andes 
 
A.Tayebi, F. Álvarez-García, J. Gómez, F. Saez de 
Adana, W. Cabos-Narváez 
Group of Environmental and Climate Computing 
Universidad de Alcalá 
Alcalá de Henares, Spain 
e-mail: hamid.tayebi@uah.es  
 
 
M. Bonshoms 
General Directorate of Meteorology 
SENAMHI 
Lima, Peru 
e-mail: mbonshoms@senamhi.gob.pe  
J. Úbeda 
Group of High Mountain Physical Geography 
Universidad Complutense de Madrid 
Madrid, Spain 
e-mail: joseubeda@ucm.es 
 
 
Abstract— This study aims at improving the performance of 
interpolation techniques applied to enhance the resolution of 
climatic information provided by regional models over 
glacierized areas, characterized by a complex topography and, 
most often, by the lack of sufficient observational coverage. Our 
proposal modifies previous methods in that it seeks to optimize 
the parameters of the vertical profile used to obtain interpolated 
temperature values on the surface at a given location attending 
to their agreement with directly interpolated values aloft over 
the same point. The optimization is achieved through the 
implementation of a Bio-Inspired Algorithm.   
Keywords- Downscaling; Bio-inspired algorithms; Climate 
Variability; Glaciers. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The sensitivity of tropical glaciers to global climate 
change has been long noticed [1]. Their particular regime of 
ablation, essentially continuous throughout the year at their 
lowest altitude, leads to a fast response of their extent to 
modifications in their mass balance, hence to climate 
variations [2]. The Peruvian and Bolivian Andes harbor over 
90% of these low-latitude ice packs, that represent a crucial 
water and energy resource for local as well as for downslope 
populations, including those in the extremely arid Pacific 
coast of South America [3][4]. The last thirty years have 
witnessed the retreat of tropical Andean glaciers at a pace 
without precedent in the past three centuries since the Little 
Ice Age maximum [5], posing severe socio-economic and 
ecological threats in the region. The urgent need for adaptation 
policies is, however, hampered by the multiple uncertainties 
that plague future projections of the evolution of the glacio-
hydrological system. First and foremost, among the different 
causes of incertitude is the scarcity of observational records in 
these topographically complex areas. Regional Climate 
Models (RCMs) constitute a firm candidate to supply for this 
lack of climatic information. Their spatial resolution remains, 
however, low when confronted to the demands of glacio-
hydrological studies, and the application of further 
downscaling techniques on the RCM data has already proven 
useful [6]. The inability of the RCM to capture the fine details 
on the surface, on account of its poor representation of the 
irregular relief and its associated steep gradients, advises 
against the direct downscaling of surface data, and the 
advantages of using upper air information for these 
mountainous regions has been recognized in a number of 
studies [7]–[10]. The present study follows this approach and 
attempts 
to 
implement 
an 
improvement 
on 
recent 
methodologies, based on the optimization of the agreement 
between directly interpolated upper-air temperatures over the 
targeted location and their estimation from the vertical lapse 
rates applied to obtain the surface values. The focus is on 
temperature over glacierized areas in the Peruvian Andes. The 
data employed in the analysis are described in detail in section 
II. Section III introduces the proposed methodology, and the 
contribution is closed with some final comments on the 
benefits expected from this technique. 
II. 
DATA 
The data to be downscaled in this study comes from a 
simulation with the atmospheric RCM REMO [11]. It is 
performed on two domains, with spatial resolution of 50 km 
and 25 km, respectively, driven at the boundaries by the ERA-
Interim reanalysis [12], during the period 1980-2012. Both 
domains encompass the Peruvian Andes. The results of our 
downscaling procedure will be checked against observational 
records in the region provided by the Peruvian National 
Meteorological and Hydrological Service (SENAMHI).  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
Our methodology is based on the technique described in 
[10], to which the reader is referred for a more detailed 
account. The vertical profile of temperature, up to the 500-hPa 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-561-6
BIONATURE 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

level, at each of the four model grid points closest to the target 
location is fitted to a piecewise-linear function with two steps. 
Five parameters characterize this fit at each point: the upper 
and lower lapse rates, the corresponding intercepts (i.e., 
temperatures at sea level), and the height of the change point. 
In [10], these parameters are interpolated bilinearly and used 
to obtain the downscaled temperature at the point of interest. 
Here, the bilinear interpolation will be substituted by a 
weighted mean whose loadings are going to be determined in 
an optimization procedure. The temperature at the 500-hPa 
level over the target point is first estimated through a bilinear 
interpolation of the values at the model grid points. A second 
estimate of this mid-tropospheric temperature can be obtained 
from the local vertical profile of temperature, computed, as 
stated above, as a weighted mean of the profiles at the 
surrounding RCM grid points. The weights are sought to 
minimize the difference between the two estimates of the 500-
hPa temperature over the target location. The procedure rests 
on the notion that the modeled upper-level temperature field 
is both smoother and closer to reality, and therefore should 
provide an adequate reference to aid in the determination of 
the local, downscaled, thermal profile. 
In the last years, evolutionary computation algorithms, as 
genetic 
algorithms, 
evolution 
strategies and 
genetic 
programming have received a lot of attention with the 
objective of solving a wide range of non-linear optimization 
problems. Evolutionary algorithms are search methods 
inspired by natural evolution which adapt the environment 
changes to find an optimal solution to a problem through 
evolving a population of candidate solutions, during a 
generation based on the fitness values of each candidate and 
applying techniques of crossover, mutation and selection. 
Each type of evolutionary algorithm has its own specificities 
and that make them different one of each other. 
The genetic algorithm that is going to be applied to 
optimize the parameters of the vertical profile used to obtain 
interpolated temperature values on the surface at a given 
location attending to their agreement with directly 
interpolated values aloft over the same point is shown next: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As can be seen, based on their fitness, parents are selected 
to reproduce offspring for a new generation. Fitter individuals 
have more chance to reproduce, whereas the old generation 
dies. The new generation has the same size as old generation. 
Offspring has a combination of the properties of two parents. 
If well designed, population will converge to an optimal 
solution. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the Vice rectorate of the 
University of Alcala (Spain) through project CCG2016/EXP-
055, and by the CIENCIAACTIVA Program (CONCYTEC, 
Peru), through project CRYOPERU. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Hastenrath, “Recession of tropical glaciers”, Science, 265, 
pp. 1790–1791, 1994. 
[2] L. G. Thompson, E. Mosley-Thompson, M. E. Davis, H. H. 
Brecher, “Tropical glaciers, recorders and indicators of climate 
change, are disappearing globally”, Annals of Glaciology, 
52(59), pp. 23–34, 2011. 
[3] S. Rangecroft et al., “Climate change and water resources in 
arid mountains: an example from the Bolivian Andes”, Ambio, 
42(7), pp. 852–863, 2013. 
[4] M. Vuille, “Climate change and water resources in the tropical 
Andes”, Inter-American Development Bank, Technical note 
No. IDB-TN-515, 2013. 
[5] A. Rabatel, et al, “Current state of glaciers in the tropical 
Andes: a multi-century perspective on glacier evolution and 
climate change”, The Cryosphere, 7(1), pp. 81–102, 2013. 
[6] M. Sharma, P. Coulibaly, Y. Dibike, “Assessing the need for 
downscaling RCM data for hydrologic impact study”, Journal 
of Hydrologic Engineering, 16(6), pp. 534-539, 2010. 
[7] Y. Durand, et al., “A meteorological estimation of relevant 
parameters for snow models”, Annals of Glaciology, 18, pp. 
65–71, 1993. 
[8] L. A. Rasmussen and H. Conway, “Estimating South Cascade 
Glacier (Washington, U.S.A.) mass balance from a distant 
radiosonde and comparison with Blue Glacier”, Journal of 
Glaciology, 47, pp. 579–588, 2001. 
[9] L. A. Rasmussen and H. Conway, “Using upper-air conditions 
to estimate South Cascade Glacier (Washington, U.S.A.) 
summer balance”, Journal of Glaciology, 49, pp. 456–462, 
2003. 
[10] A. H. Jarosch, F. S. Anslow, G. K. C. Clarke, “High-resolution 
precipitation and temperature downscaling for glacier models”, 
38 (1), pp. 391–409, 2012. 
[11] D. Jacob and R. Podzun, “Sensitivity studies with the regional 
climate model REMO”, Meteorology and Atmospheric 
Physics, 63(1), pp. 119–129, 1997. 
[12] D. Dee et al., “The ERA‐Interim reanalysis: Configuration 
and performance of the data assimilation system”, Quarterly 
Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 137(656), pp. 
553–597, 2011. 
BEGIN 
Generate initial population of individuals; // individual 
is a feasible solution to a problem 
Compute fitness of each individual; // higher fitness is 
better solution 
REPEAT // New generation 
FOR population_size / 2 DO 
Select two parents from old generation; // biased to the 
fitter ones 
Recombine parents for two offspring; 
Mutate the offspring considering a certain probability 
Compute fitness of offspring; 
Insert offspring in new generation 
END FOR 
UNTIL population has converged 
END 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-561-6
BIONATURE 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

