The Theoretical Research of Torrefaction Process in a Flow Reactor 
 
Valentin Kosov, Igor Maikov, Natalya Medvetskaya, Oleg Stonyk 
Joint Institute for High Temperatures of the Russian Academy of Sciences (JIHT RAS), 
Moscow, Russia 
E-mails: kosov@ihed.ras.ru, maikov_i@mail.ru, natalia-medvetskaya@rambler.ru, puma@oivtran.ru 
 
 
Abstract — The processes of heat and mass transfer, such as 
drying, pyrolysis and heating of biomass particles during 
torrefaction in a flow reactor are considered. It is shown that 
for small particle size (~ 1 cm) heat transfer between the 
heating flow and the particles does not depend on mass 
transfer and the characteristic time torrefaction determined 
by the pyrolysis of biomass particles. Analytical dependences 
of concentration of the waste component of pellets under the 
condition of small time of heating and evaporation in 
comparison to the time of pyrolysis are made. 
Keywords— pellets; torrefaction; pyrolysis 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The processes of heat and mass transfer in porous 
medium are determining in many devices of chemical and 
energy industries. But despite the wide industrial 
application of porous materials, their uniform description is 
extremely difficult [1]. Most often some guesses based on 
experimental data for a specific process are used. Mass 
transfer and heat transfer are usually considered separately. 
Especially difficult to describe the processes in materials in 
which heat transfer is not only correlated with the mass 
transfer, but also changes the structure of the material. This 
also applies to torrefaction of organic substances which 
decompose when heated, and its different have different 
speeds of pyrolysis. 
Torrefaction is the process of thermal processing of 
chopped or granulated biomass at temperatures up to 
300  °C. Torrefaction is not only removing of moisture, i.e. 
drying of raw materials, but also thermal degradation of 
hemicellulose, which is part of the biomass. Typically, the 
process of torrefaction is described for a single sample 
biomass whether wood chips or pellets [2,3]. Description of 
this process most often based on a macroscopic energy 
considerations [4].  
In this paper the mutual influence of heat and mass 
transfer (drying, pyrolysis, heating pellets) between pellets 
and hot gas stream during torrefaction of biomass in a flow 
reactor is considered. The existing experimental data for 
the coefficients of heat and mass transfer is involved. 
 
II. 
INFLUENCE OF PYROLISYS ON HEATING OF PELLETS 
The heat equation for a single pellet is: 
ൣሺ1 െߝሻߩ௦ܿ௣௦ ൅ߝߩ௩ܿ௣௩൧
డ்ೞ
డ௧ ൌ ∆ܶ௦ െܮߩ௜݇௜݁
ି
ಶ೔
ೃ೅ೞ  
(1) 
Indexes ݏ and ݒ refer to the solid skeleton and the pore 
space respectively, ߩ - density, ܿ௣ - specific heat at constant 
pressure, ܶ - temperature, ߝ - porosity, ∆ - Laplacian. The 
last member corresponds to the pyrolysis of the core and 
the yield to the gas phase the exhaust components (we 
denote their accessories by index i) with the specific heat of 
phase transformation L and the activation energy ܧ≫ܴܶ௦. 
If we represent the last member in (1) in the form of the 
time derivative of the weight loss, it is easy to estimate: 
ሺ1 െߝሻߩ௦ܿ௣௦ ≫ܮߩ௜݇௜
ா೔
ோ்ೞమ ݁
ି
ಶ೔
ೃ೅ೞ  
   (2) 
Specific numerical data were taken from [5]. 
Thus, to determine the temperature in the pellet it can 
be neglected the heat losses for outgoing components in 
comparison with the heat to heating of the pellet.  
A similar estimate can be made regarding the impact of 
the gaseous products of pyrolysis of pellets on the density 
and velocity of the heating gas flow. Indeed, in a unit 
volume of pellet bed per unit time weight released 
~ 6ሺ1 െߝሻ ݀݇݁
ି
ಶ೔
ೃ೅ೞ
⁄
  , 
where d is the diameter of the pellet. This value is several 
orders of magnitude less than the density of the gas stream 
which means that changing the velocity and density of the 
heating flow can be neglected. 
If there is water in the pores it is necessary to consider 
its evaporation. We assume that water evaporation takes 
place at temperature of 100°C. Then the motion of the 
evaporation surface of radius ݎ଴ deep into the particle 
radius ܴ is given by: 
 
ߝߩ௟ܮߦ
ௗ௥బ
ௗ௧ ൌ
ఒ୼்
௥బሺଵି௥బ ோ
⁄ ሻ 
 
(3) 
where ߣ - thermal conductivity of the dry core, ߩ௟ - water 
density, ܮ - its boiling heat, ߦ - its mass concentration in 
the pores which in normal conditions is not more than 
10%, Δܶ - temperature difference between the surface of 
the pellet and the evaporation temperature. 
In equation (3), it was taken into account that the rate of 
evaporation is small in comparison to the speed of vapor 
movement through the pores, as density of bound water is 
much higher than vapor density. 
Solving (2), we find that at temperature of 150 ÷ 180 °C 
for 3.3 ÷ 2.8 min. the pellets will be completely dried up 
from the pore water. As shown below, the temperature 
difference correspons to the temperature of the gas flow 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

and is set in a time much shorter than the time of pyrolysis. 
Thus, drying pellets is much faster pyrolysis processes. 
 
III. 
HEATING OF PELLETS 
Let us consider the temperature field in the pellet having 
size of about a centimeter. Its Fourier number has the 
following order [5]: 
ܨ݋ ൌ
௔௧
ோమ ≅ 0.13ݐ  ,   (4) 
 
where a - thermal diffusivity, R - radius of the pellet, t-
time in seconds. 
Solution of the problem of thermal conduction in the 
sphere for a given surface temperature TR and different 
numbers of Fourier is shown in Figure 1 [6]. It is easy to 
see that after 3 - 4 seconds the temperature field in the 
particle will actually homogeneous. For processes that are 
tens minutes last to neglect four seconds is acceptable. 
Note that this applies to the vapor diffusion in the pores. 
The estimates give reason to believe that the heat 
exchange between the heating flow and pellets is 
independent of the mass transfer and the temperature 
distribution in the pellets is uniform. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The temperature distribution in the sphere at different times. 
The numbers on the curves indicate the number of Fourier. 
Heat exchange between the gas flow and the pellets that 
have the same effective diameter d and porosity ߝ௠ is 
described by the following equations: 
 
 
(
)
f
f
s
f
a
z






 




 
 
(5) 
 
 
s
f
s







 
 
        (6) 
where ߠ௙ ൌ ൫ܶ௙ െ ܶ௦଴൯ ൫ܶ௙଴ െ ܶ௦଴൯
ൗ
 and ߠ௦ ൌ
ሺܶ௦ െ ܶ௦଴ሻ ൫ܶ௙଴ െ ܶ௦଴൯
⁄
  are dimensionless temperatures of 
flow and pellets respectively (the index 0 refers to the 
initial values), 
 ܽ ൌ ቀሺ1 െߝ௠ሻൣሺ1 െߝሻߩ௦ܿ௣௦ ൅ߝߩ௩ܿ௣௩൧ቁ ൫ߝ௠ߩ௙ܿ௣௙൯
ൗ
,  
߬ ൌߙ்ݐ ሺ1 െߝ௠ሻൣሺ1 െߝሻߩ௦ܿ௣௦ ൅ߝߩ௩ܿ௣௩൧
⁄
 is 
dimensionless time, ݖ ൌ ߬ݔݑ⁄ – dimensionless spatial 
coordinate; indexes f , s and ݒ refer to the flow, hard core 
of pellets and its porous volume respectively, u – average 
velocity of the flow, ߙ் – heat transfer coefficient between 
the flow and the pellets [7]: 
 
ߙ் ൌ 2.74ߣሺ1 െߝ௠ሻଵ.ଷ଺ߝ௠
ିଵܴ݁଴.଺ସܲݎଵ ଷ
⁄
⁄݀ଶ
    (7) 
where the Re – Reynolds number: 30 ൏ ܴ݁ ൏ 8 ∙ 10ସ; ܲݎ 
– Prandtl number. 
The initial and boundary values for the system (5), (6): 
ߠ௦଴ ൌ 0, ߠ௙଴ሺݖ ൌ 0, ߬ሻ ൌ 1, ߠ௙଴ሺݖ,߬ ൌ 0ሻ ൌ 1. 
At fixed flow temperature pellets will have a temperature: 
ߠ௦ ൌߠ௙ሺ1 െ exp ሺെ߬ሻሻ  
 
 (8) 
When substituting the characteristic parameters in (7) 
(mean flow velocity u = 0.5 m / s) after 5 second the 
pellets temperature will be different from the flow 
temperature by ~ 2%. 
But at the entry to the pellet layer the flow temperature 
is fixed, so the initial temperature difference at the 
entrance will be quickly leveled and the flow will not lost 
temperature on heating already heated pellets, i.e. heat 
wave will run by layer. The velocity, with which it will be 
distributed, can be obtained as follows. For the 
temperature difference we have solution [8]: 
 
ߠ௙ െߠ௦ ൌ expሺെߦ െߟሻܫ଴൫ඥ2ߦߟ൯        (9) 
where ܫ଴ is modified Bessel function, ߦ ൌݖܽ, ߟ ൌ ߬ െݖ. 
 
Function ܫ଴൫ඥ2ߦߟ൯  has maximum at ߦ ൌߟ, i.e. at 
ݖܽ ൌ ߬ െݖ. But ܽ is a big value, so ൎ ߬ . Considering 
what is ݖ and ߬ , we obtain the maximum propagation 
velocity of the temperature difference: 
ܷ ൌݑܽ⁄  (10) 
 
For the conditions under consideration, it is ~ 0.33 
cm/s, i.e. by meter-thick layer of heating wave will run for 
about 5 minutes. We emphasize that this is exactly a wave, 
as if there was a zero right-hand side of (5), the left-hand 
side is exactly the wave equation. But, as we have shown 
previously, in our case the initial temperature difference 
quickly vanishes. 
Thus, it can be argued that under these conditions the 
pellet heating is much faster than its pyrolysis, and thus, 
pyrolysis can be viewed at a specific temperature. 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

IV. 
CONCENTRATION OF EXHAUST COMPONENTS IN THE 
PELLETS. 
Experimental data on the change in the total mass of pellets 
summarizes the various dependencies: 
 
ଵ
௠బ
డ௠೔
డ௧ ൌ െ ቀ
௠೔
௠బቁ
௡
݇௜ሺܶ௦ሻ 
         (11) 
where ݇௜ሺܶ௦ሻ ൌܣ௜݁ݔ݌ሺെܧ௜ܴܶ௦
⁄
ሻ is the pyrolysis constant, 
ܣ௜ is the preexponential factor, ܧ௜ is the activation energy, ݉଴ 
and ݉௜  are initial and current mass of the pellet, n is the 
reaction order, which is usually equal to 1, but for example in 
[9] it is equal to 1.8. If the current mass of the exhaust 
components in the solid skeleton is mi, then its concentration 
ሺݔ௜ ൌ ݉௜ ݉
⁄
ሻ satisfies the following equation: 
డ௫೔
డ௧ ൌ െ ቀ
௠೔
௠బቁ
௡ିଵ
݇௜ሺܶ௦ሻݔ௜ሺ1 െݔ௜ሻ  
(12) 
The solution of (11), (12) at a fixed temperature is 
trivial. Figure 2 shows the mass concentration of the 
volatiles of the flow at different temperatures (initial 
concentration 0.3,Ei= 220 kJ/mol, Ai = 2·10171/c, n =1.8 
[9]). 
 
The figure illustrates the strong dependence of the 
evolution of pellets composition on the temperature of the 
flow. 
 
Figure 2.  The time dependence of the mass concentration of the exhaust 
components at different gas temperatures. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
It is shown that pellets are heated to the temperature of 
the gas flow is much faster than its pyrolysis proceeds. This 
applies to the initial pellets pore water evaporation. It can 
be assumed that the pyrolysis process most of the time 
takes place at a constant temperature equal to the 
temperature of the gas flow. The characteristic time of 
torrefaction is determined by the pyrolysis of biomass. We 
emphasize that this result relates to the small size of pellets 
(~ 1 cm). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
I. Yasuaki and A.P.S. Selvadurai. Transport Phenomena in Porous 
Media. 2012. 
[2] Y.Haseli, J.A. van Oijen, and L.P.H. de Goey, Predicting 
the pyrolysis of single biomass particles based on a time and 
space integral metod, Journal of Analytical and Applied 
Pyrolysis, 
vol. 96, 
March 
2012, 
pp. 126–138, 
doi:10.1016/j.jaap., 2012.03.014. 
[3] V. Repellin, A. Govin, M. Rolland, and R. Guyonnet, 
Modelling anhydrous weight loss of wood chips during 
torrefaction in a pilot kiln, Biomass & Bioenergy., 
vol. 34(5), January 2010, pp. 602 – 609. 
[4] J. 
S. 
Tumurulu, 
S. Sokhansanj, 
C. Wright, 
and 
R.D. Boardman, Biomass Torrefaction Process Review and 
Moving Bed Torrefaction System Model Development, 
Idaho National Laboratory, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 
2010. 
[5] W.-C.R. Chan, M. Kelbon, and B.B. Krieger, Modeling and 
experimental verification 
of physical and 
chemical 
processes during pyrolysis of a large biomass particle, 
Fuel,vol. 64, November 1985,pp. 1505 – 1513. 
[6] H.S. Carslaw, J.C. Jaeger, Conduction of heat in solids, 2nd 
ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1959. 
[7] E.V. Venecianov, R.N. Rubinshtein, Dinamika sorbcii iz 
zhidkih sred, Moskva: Nauka, 1983 (in Russian). 
[8] E.P. Serov, B.P. Korolkov, Dinamika processov v teplo- i 
massoobmennyh apparatah, Moskva: Energiya, 1967 (in 
Russian). 
[9] T. Kashiwagi, H. Nambu, Global Kinetic Constants for 
Thermal Oxidative Degradation of a Cellulosic Paper, 
Combustion and Flame, vol. 88. March 1992, pp. 345 – 368. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

