Assessment of Human Pressure on Forest Ecosystems in the Czech Republic 
 
Helena Kaňková 
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Humanities 
Prague, Czech Republic 
e-mail: Helena.Kankova@czp.cuni.cz 
 
 
 
Abstract— 
Forest ecosystems play 
an 
important 
role 
for natural environment as well as for human society. With 
population and economic growth forests are put under 
increasing pressure leading to destruction of habitats and 
irreversible biodiversity loss. Quantification and interpreting 
the degradation of forest ecosystems can help raise public and 
political awareness needed for preserving the remaining 
species. In this study, human pressure on forest ecosystems in 
the Czech Republic and its impact on biodiversity loss were 
assessed. One of the main tools used is Mean Species 
Abundance indicator assessing human-induced changes in 
biodiversity including land-cover change, land-use intensity 
and fragmentation. Results are supplemented by statistical 
outputs of the National Forest Inventory and the Databank of 
natural forests of the Czech Republic. The results show serious 
decrease of mean species abundance in all landscape including 
forests. Most of the forested areas in the Czech Republic are 
affected by long-term human influence resulting in significant 
biodiversity loss and forest degradation. 
Keywords-forest; human pressure; biodiversity; mean species 
abundance. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In European landscape, forest ecosystems present an 
irreplaceable part of natural environment for habitat they 
provide, ability of climate regulation, flood and erosion 
control, water cycle and others including many services and 
products used directly by humans [1]. With growing 
population and demand for natural sources, forests are under 
increasing pressure. In the Czech Republic, an inland 
human-dominated Central European country with an area of 
approximately 79,000 km2, forests currently cover 33 % 
of the area. Although forested areas have continuously 
expanded there since the end of 19th century, they suffer 
from 
pollution, 
fragmentation 
and 
unsustainable 
management [2]. 
In our ongoing research, the anthropogenic pressure on 
ecosystems in the Czech Republic and its impact on 
biodiversity loss are assessed. Forested area assessment is 
one of the key parts of the study as forest ecosystems 
represent most of natural preserved and protected areas in the 
Czech Republic. The aim of the work is to quantify the 
extent of anthropogenic pressures on ecosystems, assess their 
spatial patterns and compare impacts in forested area with 
other landscape.  
Methods of the study are described in Section 2 of this 
paper, including specification of spatial datasets and 
indicator used for assessing biodiversity loss.  In Section 3, 
first results are presented, followed by conclusion in 
Section 4.   
II. 
METHODS 
Main steps of this study were (1) creating datasets of 
spatial distribution of Mean Species Abundance indicator 
(MSA) in the Czech Republic as a measure of anthropogenic 
pressure, (2) comparing impacts in forested area with other 
landscape, (3) supplementing results by statistical outputs of 
the National Forest Inventory in the Czech Republic. 
A. Spatial datasets 
To calculate MSA values based on land use and land 
cover data, the Consolidated Layer of Ecosystems 
of the Czech Republic (CLES) [3] was used as the most 
detailed currently available dataset of ecosystem distribution 
on the national-wide level. CLES distinguish 41 categories 
of habitats on a fine spatial resolution, including information 
on the degree of naturalness for each habitat category. Where 
a clarification was needed, actual land cover was compared 
to original landscape using a map of potential natural 
vegetation in the Czech Republic [4]. Data and results were 
supplemented by statistical outputs of the National Forest 
Inventory in the Czech Republic [5] and the Databank 
of natural forests of the Czech Republic [6]. 
B. Mean Species Abundance 
MSA is an indicator developed for model GLOBIO3 
assessing human-induced changes in biodiversity based on 
simple cause-effect relationships between environmental 
drivers and biodiversity impacts [7]. Drivers considered 
in this study are land-cover change, land-use intensity 
and fragmentation as they are assumed to be the main cause 
for biodiversity loss [8][9]. MSA values indicate relative 
remaining mean species abundance of original species 
compared to primary vegetation scaled between zero 
and one (1 = all original species, 0 = no original species). 
Water surfaces are not evaluated in this version of MSA 
indicator [7]. 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

First step was assigning MSA impact values of land-cover 
change and land-use intensity to 41 CLES categories of 
habitats in the Czech Republic. Alkemade et al. [7] define 14 
categories of land cover types and their MSA values based 
on a broad meta-analyses of available literature. Most of the 
CLES categories were assigned by their definition (artificial 
surfaces, natural vegetation) while several CLES categories 
were evaluated as intermediate and given a proportional 
value of two MSA categories following approach used by 
Prydatko et al. [10]. Geographical distribution of MSA 
values was then processed in GIS software. Another step was 
assessing fragmentation impact based on the extent of 
individual patches of forested areas based on approach of 
Alkemade et al. [7]. Neither distance nor shape of patches is 
considered in this version of MSA indicator. 
III. 
RESULTS  
Mean species abundance in the Czech Republic reached 
31% of original biodiversity in intact ecosystems. That 
means that human pressures decreased original biodiversity 
on average by almost 70 %. The biggest impact was located 
in intensively used agricultural areas in the lowlands. 
Forested mountain ranges in the border areas, as well as 
other forested interior parts of the country, achieved the 
highest values indicating they present relatively best 
preserved ecosystems in comparison with other landscape 
(MSAAVERAGE=23,7 %). However, the MSA in forested areas 
(MSAAVERAGE=43,9 %) is still decreased by human pressure 
on average by more than half.  
Although forested areas cover about 33 % of the Czech 
Republic, most of them are fragmented into small patches 
with an area less than 100 km2 as a result of dense road 
network, urban areas and intensively used agriculture land.   
While potential natural vegetation are represented on 
most of the area by mixed or broad-leaved forests with 
dominant proportion of oak and beech, due to economic 
pressure a lot of planted forests are monocultures, with 
coniferous trees occupying almost 82 % of forested area.  
Only 1,2 % area of all forests in the Czech Republic can 
be regarded as natural forests close to its original condition 
defined by [6]. All other areas including protected forests are 
affected by long-term human influence resulting in 
significantly modified species composition, spatial and age 
structure and soil degradation.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Forests present potential natural vegetation on most of 
the Czech Republic’s area and thus provide important habitat 
for big part of original fauna and flora, as well as play 
important role for human society in provision of many 
ecosystem services. This study documents significant human 
pressure on forest ecosystems and their degradation.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Special thanks go to David Vačkář from Charles 
University in Prague and anonymous reviewers for useful 
comments. The work was supported by the grant SVV-2015-
260 237.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, “Ecosystems and Human 
Well-being: Synthesis,” Island Press, Washington, DC, 2005.  
[2] Ministry of the Environment of the Czech Republic, “Report 
on the Environment in the Czech Republic in 2013,” [online]. 
Available from:  <http://www.mzp.cz/cz/zpravy_o_stavu_ 
zivotniho_prostredi_publikace> 2015.04.10 
[3] J. Frélichová, D. Vačkář, A. Pártl, B. Loučková, Z. V. 
Harmáčková, and E. Lorencová, “Integrated assessment of 
ecosystem services in the Czech Republic,” Ecosystem 
Services 8: 2014, pp. 110-117. 
[4] R. Mikyška, M. Deyl, J. Holub, M. Husová, J. Moravec, R. 
Neuhäusl, and Z. Neuhäuslová-Novotná, “Geobotanical map 
of Czechoslovakia,” Academia, Praha, 1968. 
[5] Forest Management Institute, “National Forest Inventory in 
the 
Czech 
Republic,” 
[online]. 
Available 
from: 
<www.uhul.cz> 2015.04.10 
[6] Silva Tarouca Research Institute for Landscape and 
Ornamental Gardening, “Databank of natural forests of the 
Czech 
Republic,” 
[online]. 
Available 
from: 
<http://www.pralesy.cz/> 2015.04.10 
[7] R. Alkemade, M. van Oorschot, L. Miles, C. Nellemann, M. 
Bakkenes, and B. ten Brink, “GLOBIO3: a framework to 
investigate options for reducing global terrestrial biodiversity 
loss,” Ecosystems 12 (3): 2003, pp. 374-390. 
[8] R. J. Scholes and R. Biggs, “A biodiversity intactness index,” 
Nature 434 (7029): 2005, pp. 45-49. 
[9] P. Reidsma, T. Tekelenburg, M. Van Den Berg, and R. 
Alkemade, “Impacts of land-use change on biodiversity: An 
assessment of agricultural biodiversity in the European 
Union,” Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 114: 
2006, pp. 86-102. 
[10] V. Prydatko, G. Kolomytsev, R. Burda, and S. Chumachenko, 
“Landscape ecology: Textbook on application of pressure-
based biodiversity modelling for national and regional 
educational purposes,” NAU, Kyiv, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

