South Russia Steppe Forests: Features and Problems 
Maria Kryzhevich (Martynova) 
Southern Federal University 
SFU 
Rostov-on-Don, Russia 
e-mail: maymars@mail.ru 
 
 
Abstract – Extrazonal steppe forests are studied. In this paper 
we consider Rostov region which is a typical steppe area, 
where the majority of forests are man-made. We aim to 
analyze the present state of steppe forest landscapes and to 
discuss some related geo-environmental problems. Damage 
caused by fires, pests, diseases and unbalanced forestry is 
estimated for forest ecosystems of South Russia. 
Keywords – extrazonal landscapes; steppe forests; forest 
fires; grassland fires; man-made forests. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Steppe summergreen forests are extrazonal, this 
landscape forms ecological framework of the territory. 
According to botanical and geographical zoning, studied 
area belongs to the Eurasian steppe region, the Black Sea 
province, and the Azov-Black Sea subprovince [1, 2]. The 
main part of Russian steppe forests is man-made. These 
landscapes perform a lot of ecological functions: gas-
forming, climate, wind protection, conservation, agricultural 
and so on.  The ecological troubles of these landscapes are 
caused by non-comfortable environmental conditions and by 
high density of the population of the region. In this paper we 
give a survey of the contemporary state of steppe forest and 
describe some reasons of existing troubles.  
This article includes six sections and three figures.  
In Section II, the main purpose of the research is 
mentioned and the methods we used have been referred. 
Conditions, typical for the steppe area of Southern Russia, 
are described in Section III. In Section IV, we provide a 
zoning of forests of the area and study their current 
characteristics. In Section V, the main result of the paper is 
provided; statistical observation for fire risks according 
areas of the region is given. Conclusion is provided in 
Section VI. 
II. 
PURPOSE AND METHODS 
The purpose of this investigation is to analyze the 
current status and major geo-environmental problems of an 
important component of zonal steppe landscapes – the 
forest. Forest zones play an exclusive role in ecological 
balance of Southern Russia because these lands are sparsely 
wooded and significantly populated. The density of 
population in Rostov region is 42.2 pers. / Sq km while the 
average one for Russian Federation is 8.4 pers. per Sq km 
only. An original forestry zoning including geographic 
structure of Southern Russia forest fires has already been 
made by author [4]. In this paper, we refresh and precise this 
zoning using modern data.  
Several expeditions have been performed in 2001-2011 
in order to study state of woodlands. The data obtained by 
region 
monitoring 
during 
1960-2011 
have 
been 
summarized. Field, statistical and cartographic methods 
have been actively used. 
III. 
PRINCIPAL PARAMETERS OF STEPPE FORESTS 
Rostov region is a steppe area. It has a plane platform 
geological structure with a developed river valley systems 
and three zonal landscapes types: true (bunchgrass) steppe, 
dry steppe and desert type steppe (Figure 1).  
 
Ростов-на-Дону
 
Ростов-на-Дону
 
 
True steppe 
Dry steppe 
Desert-like steppe 
Meadow and meadow 
steppe 
 
More 10.0% 
5.0-10.0% 
1.0-5.0% 
0.5-1.0% 
Less 0.5% 
A 
B 
Figure 1. Natural landscape types of Rostov Region (A) and 
forest coverage of this region (B). 
 
 
Meadows and meadow steep are intrazonal landscapes. 
The principal factor that limits the forest vegetation growth 
is environmental humidity.  
Steppe landscapes are characterized by arid hot summers 
(+22/24°C), moderately cold winters (-5/-9°C), and some 
negative forest-grown factors: low relative humidity, large 
temperature amplitude fluctuations, agricultural drought, 
extremely high summer temperatures and strong dry eastern 
winds. Mean annual precipitation is about 530-550 mm in 
the southwest and 320-360 mm – in the southeast of this 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

territory [3]. Maximum precipitation occurrence is recorded 
in the warm season – the growing season.  
Bunchgrass steppe (with normal forest coverage about 
3.0%) is characterized by a medium humidity coefficient 
(more than 4.1), dry steppe (1.7%) has a reduced index 
(3.5–4.0) and desert type steppe has a low index (less than 
3.4). 
IV. 
INVESTIGATIONS 
The majority of boreal steppe forests are man-made. 
There are contrasting woods with different conditions. The 
main part of this framework is floodplain forest. A big part 
of Lower Don forests is inundated, sometimes naturally and 
sometimes artificially. These landscapes are poorly 
preserved. There are 425 species of plants, including 225 
species of forest flora [4]. Typically, these landscapes have 
a high biological age, a stratiness loss. Their ecological 
functions, the stability have been reduced, the vegetation 
has adversely changed. Some environmental factors 
contribute to the spread of forest and grassland fires. The 
conditions of these forests have been violated after 
Tsimlyansky reservoir on the river Don was constructed. 
Ravine forests represent another woodland type of this 
region. The area is richer in species. There are 592 species 
of plants, including 292 species of forest flora [2]. The main 
tree species are Quércus róbur (32%), Pínus sylvéstris (31% 
of the forest area), poplars (9%), Robínia pseudoacácia and 
others (Figure 2).  
Also, sandy, so-called «arennye» forests are there. 
Reforestation works yield to appearance of man-made pine 
forests. Some aspen and the birch wood lots are remained 
fragments of natural forests.  
 
Ростов-на-Дону
 
 
 
 
A 
B 
C 
D 
 
A – pine (more 30%); B – broad-
leaved forest (more 60%); C – pine 
(more 30%), small-leaved (more 
10%); D – broad-leaved (more 
60%), small-leaved (more 10%) 
Figure 2. Main tree species of Rostov forests. 
 
All forests perform a protective function. According to 
Russian classification 52.1% of them are steppe and desert 
type forests; 18.2% are anti-erosion and gully-stabilization; 
6.7% are bank-protection forests, 1.6% are «green areas»; 
2.7% are «urban forests» and so on. 
The following problems are crucial for considered 
landscapes: senescence of trees, appearance of dead wood 
areas, reduction of ecological performance, and, of course, 
forest fires. The steppe woodland has the highest fire danger 
class in Southern Russia (2.2). Forests of the first and the 
second forest class of fire danger cover 58% of regional 
forest area [5, 6]. Moreover, line field-protection forests are 
mono-breed (Pínus sylvéstris) woodlands mostly planted in 
1950-1960.  
Unfortunately, the juridical status of these forests is not 
specified and, actually, nobody is responsible for their 
protection. The disastrous grassland fires are typical for this 
area (Figure 3). 
V. 
MAIN RESULTS 
As a result of field and statistical observations, 7 levels 
of fire danger have been specified. There are areas of 2nd, 5th 
a 6th level inside the Rostov agglomeration. A medium and 
sometimes even relatively high ecological potential of the 
landscapes (12.0-16.0 or more [7, 8]) is proper for this area 
while the forest coverage is reduced there (1.5-2.5%). 
Mainly, the oak forests are represented. Large and medium 
forest fires are not typical for this region [9].  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Dynamics of wood burning indicators of Rostov 
forests during the period from1971 to 2010. 
 
Many forest fires occur near populated areas in field-
protection forests. Both the forest coverage and the number 
of forest fires increase during last 30 years (Figure 2). 
However, nowadays forest fires in near-Rostov area are 
localized. Unfortunately, the artificial grassland fire is the 
principal reason of disasters. The proportion of crown fires 
is quite high (50% in 2007, about 30 in 2008, 75% in 2010). 
This is very destructive for the steppe forests, as natural 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

forest regeneration is almost impossible. The years 2003, 
2004, 2007-2011 correspond to peak values of fires. Mostly, 
there were simple natural reasons for this. Hot, dry and 
windy weather contributed intensive spread of the fire. The 
situation is deteriorates by high density of the recreational 
facilities, farms and roads. 
We expect to continue the expedition activity in order to 
find out trends of forest development, describe areas affected 
by fire and related damages. The findings of this paper and 
ones of the following researches may be used for future 
forest recovery works in damaged areas.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Frequent natural cataclysms of recent years and 
unbalanced forestry caused additional load on steppe forests. 
They started losing natural layering. The total area of 
inundated, infected and burnt forests increased. Meanwhile, 
the natural recovering is almost impossible for such type of 
forests. This may lead to loss of this unique landscape. 
We expect to continue the expedition activity in order to 
find out trends of forest development, describe areas affected 
by fire and related damages. 
The author thanks all anonymous reviewers for 
interesting and useful remarks and comments. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Gribova, T. Isachenko, and E. Lavrenko, The vegetation 
of the European USSR. Leningrad, 1980. 
[2] Plant resources. Natural resources of the North Caucasus. 
Part 1. Forest. Rostov-on-Don, 1980. 
[3] T. Smagina and V. Kutilin, “Anthropogenic transformation 
of Rostov region natural landscapes” Ecological and 
geographical Bulletin of Southern Russia, May. 2002. no 2, 
pp. 33-41 (in Russian). 
[4] M. Martynova, “Forest zoning in the open steppe” Lesnoe 
hozyaystvo, Aug. 2004. no. 4, pp. 21-22 (in Russian). 
[5] A. Isachenko, Introduction to environmental geography. St. 
Petersburg, 2003. 
[6] M. Martynova, Features of Rostov region forest fire regime. 
Proc. Conference Structural and functional forests dynamics 
organization. Krasnoyarsk, Sep., 2004. 
[7] M. Martynova, Geoecology. Geosystems optimization. 
Rostov-on-Don, 2009. 
[8] G. Zozulin, The Lower Don forests. Rostov-on-Don, 1992.  
[9] B. Gorbachev, Vegetation and natural forage lands of the 
Rostov region. Rostov-on-Don, 1980. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

