Plant Diversity in the Area of Water Bodies near Kraków  
Focus on Invasive Plants 
 
Aleksandra Wagner 
Dept. Geoinf., Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing of Env. 
AGH University of Science and Technology 
Kraków, Poland 
e-mail: awagner@agh.edu.pl 
Dario Hruševar 
Department of Botany and the Botanical Garden 
University of Zagreb 
Zagreb, Croatia 
e-mail: dario.hrusevar@biol.pmf.hr
 
Abstract— Thirteen locations were examined referring to the 
vegetation and alien species in particular. The locations were 
the areas surrounding anthropogenic water bodies in Kraków 
and vicinity. Most of them were borrow pits left to the process 
of natural succession. In all the locations alien species, 
including neophytes were found. There were 22 neophyte 
species found in total, six of them invasive transformers. The 
most 
common 
was 
the 
Canada 
golden-rod 
(Solidago 
canadensis) found in eight locations. Erigeron annuus was 
found in 7 locations. Bidens frondosa and Conyza canadensis 
were found in 6 locations. Most neophytes were of North 
American origin. 16 archaeophytes were found. Four species 
had uncertain status. In urban areas, the presence of alien 
species does not make much problem, however in rural areas 
the monitoring is recommended.   
Keywords - alien species; invasive species; suburban areas. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Water bodies (natural or artificial) and their vicinity 
make good environment for different plant and animal 
species. They attract both native and non-native species. In 
this paper, water bodies situated in Kraków and vicinity 
were studied. The region is not very rich in natural lakes, 
but includes a lot of artificial water bodies of various origin 
[1]: borrow pits of different size, made after the exploitation 
of limestone, gravel, sand or clay, fishing ponds, former 
decantation ponds, etc. In the process of natural ecological 
succession and sometimes due to human-made reclamation 
measures, these ponds get covered with vegetation and 
become inhabited by animal species [2]. Finally, they form 
semi-natural environment and can contribute to biodiversity 
of the region. The objective of the study is to examine the 
vegetation of selected water bodies in terms of the presence 
of non-native species. Non-native species can be divided 
into 
two 
groups: 
archaeophytes 
and 
neophytes. 
Archaeophytes are plants which arrived in the area in pre-
historic or early historic times and neophytes were 
introduced in modern times and the usual border date is 
accepted as ca. 1500 – the discovery of the Americas [3]. 
Most archaeophytes in Europe arrived with the agriculture, 
as weeds growing in the fields and nowadays they make an 
integral part of the flora, although can also be invasive. 
Neophytes, however, are usually regarded more dangerous 
to biodiversity.  
 
Crossbreeds between native and non-native plants are 
regarded non-native and if one of the parental species is 
neophyte, they are regarded neophytes [3].  Apart from the 
origin, the degree of naturalization in the environment is 
important; Pyšek et al. [3] distinguish casual species - alien 
species that do not form self-sustaining populations and 
naturalized species (synonym: established species) that form 
self-sustaining populations for several life cycles, as well as 
invasive species - a subset of naturalized species forming 
self-replacing populations, having the potential to spread 
over long distances. Tokarska-Guzik et al., after Richardson 
et al. [5] also differentiated the category of transformers (a 
subset of invasive plants) for the species which change the 
character of the ecosystems.  
 
Section II gives the list of locations with a short 
description of every place and studying methods. The 
localities are also shown in the map – Figure 1. In section III 
the results are given, putting particular stress on alien 
species, presented in Table 1. The vegetation of each site 
was described in a separate sub-chapter. Chapter IV 
provides the conclusions and recommendations for further 
studies.  
II. 
STUDY AREA AND METHODS 
 
The study includes the vegetation in the areas of the 
water bodies in Kraków and vicinity in summer 2009 (in the 
case of Bagry and Zakrzówek also 2008). The studied areas 
are named below. More detail characteristics of the water 
bodies and their surrounding can be found in [2] [6] [7] [8]. 
The geographic distribution of the sites is presented in 
Figure 1. The area included: 
1. Two borrow pits bodies situated south-east from the 
centre of Kraków in the area called Płaszów. The area 
of the bigger pond, called Bagry is 30.1 ha and the 
smaller one – called Staw Płaszowski (the Płaszów 
Pond) - is 9.0 ha. The ponds were formed after the 
exploitation of sand and gravel in 1930s. In Table 1., 
they are marked as BG and SP, respectively. The 
surrounding of SP is shown in figure 2. 
2. Staw Dąbski (the Dąbie Pond, marked as D), 2.1 ha, 
situated in Kraków, east from the centre, was formed in 
1930s after the exploitation of clay. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

3. Zakrzówek (marked ZK) - a borrow pit south-west from 
the centre of Kraków of 17.0 ha surface, was made in 
1990s, after quarrying limestone.  
4. The Pond of the Kaczeńcowa Street (KA) was, by the 
Resolution no. XXXI/405/07 of the City Council of 
Kraków, established Ecologically Useful Area – the 
area is 0.82 ha [9]. The pond is situated in the quarter of 
Nowa Huta in Kraków. The pond was formed as a 
result of clay exploitation. 
5. Former decantation pond of the Steelworks in Nowa 
Huta in the region called Kujawy (marked KU) has the 
area of 2.9 ha. 
6. Przylasek Rusiecki (PR) – a group of 11 gravel borrow 
pits of the total area of 82.19 ha, situated in the Eastern 
part of Kraków, quarter Nowa Huta. 
7. Borrow pits in Wola Batorska (WB) – the gravel 
quarrying is still going on, so the area is changing. 
8. Two borrow pits (exploitation of gravel) of Zabierzów 
Bocheński (ZB), commune of Niepołomice area of 
13.03 ha and 3.43 ha, respectively. 
9. The fish pond in Zakrzowiec (ZC) - area c.a. 2.5 ha, 
used for commercial angling. 
10. Two ponds in the town of Niepołomice - Mokra street 
(0.7 ha) and Akacjowa street (0.3 ha), marked as MK 
and A, respectively. 
11. Two borrow pits in the Commune of Liszki called 
Zalew na Piaskach and Budzyń, formerly known as 
‘Kryspinów’ - area 24.5 ha and 20.3 ha, respectively, 
marked as ZP. 
In each location, plots of the area of 16 m2 were randomly 
chosen and the plants were identified to the species or – if 
not possible – to the genus. The plants were listed and 
identified as native, archaeophytes or neophytes, invasive or 
not invasive, harmful or not harmful. To identify the species 
and define their status literature data from Poland [4] [10] 
[11] and other countries of Central Europe [3] [12] [13] [14] 
were used. 
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
The original data listing each species are available from 
the authors. In this paper, the results focus on alien species. 
Native species were mentioned, if predominant. Table 1. 
presents only non-native species or species of uncertain 
status. The list includes 22 neophyte species; six of them 
regarded invasive transformers. The most common of them 
were: Solidago canadensis L., found in 8 locations, and 
another invasive (although not harmful) plant – Erigeron 
annuus (L.) Pers. - found in 7 locations. Bidens frondosa L. 
and Conyza canadensis (L.) Cronquist were found on 6 
locations. 
Most 
neophyte 
species, 
however, 
were 
represented only in one location. This particularly refers to 
casual species. These were mainly tree species, mostly 
located in the area of the Mokra Street. This was a 
residential area and some ‘exotic’ trees were planted there. 
Nevertheless, casual species were also found in less human-
influenced place, such as Zakrzówek. Archaeophytes were 
represented by 17 species. Four species have uncertain 
status: one can be archaeophyte or neophyte depending on 
subspecies, which was not determined and the origin of 
three species is still debatable. The most widespread 
archaeophyte species occurred in 3 locations, which 
suggests that their ecological niches were narrower than in 
case of neophytes. On the other hand (data available from 
the authors), non-native species rarely covered more than 
25% of the surface, while native species (like Phragmites 
australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud. or Typha spp.) could cover 
up to 95%. 
 
The number of alien species in each location ranged 
from 1 or 2 in Zalew na Piaskach to 11 in the Mokra street 
in Niepołomice. Nevertheless in the Mokra Street planted 
trees distort the real picture. Considering this, the highest 
number of non-native species would be in Zakrzowiec (10). 
The detail characteristic of the studied sites looks as 
follows: 
A. Bagry 
 
The studies in Bagry were carried out on 2/07/2008 by 
Samalzhan Tleubayeva and Aleksandra Wagner in two 
locations: (1) – north-western shore of the water body and 
(2) – northern shore of the water body. Every location 
included coastal plant like Juncus effuses L., Phragmites 
australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud and Schoenoplectus lacustris 
(L.) Palla. In place (1) there was one alien species noticed - 
Phalaris canariensis L., a neophyte coming from southern 
Europe. This was the only alien species among 7 species 
scored in that place. The 2008 survey in place (2) did not 
show any alien species, however more detail survey of  
3/08/2009 by Dario Hruševar, Aleksandra Wagner, Uroš 
Ljubobratović, and Barbara Patuła showed 7 out of 31 alien 
species, among which 3 (9.7%) were archaeophytes: 
Melilotus albus Med., Melilotus officinalis (L.) Lam and 
Pastinaca sativa L. The latter was considered native for a 
long time, but recent studies shown it was alien. Neophytes 
were represented by two (6.5%) species: Acer negundo L. 
and Robinia pseudoacacia L., both of them classified as 
invasive transformers. The encountered individuals (one of 
each species) were young and belonged to the undergrowth. 
The dominant plant was native: Calamagrostis epigeios (L.) 
Roth. 
B. Staw Płaszowski (the Płaszów Pond) 
 
In the western part the studies were carried out on 
2/07/2008 by S. Tleubayeva and A. Wagner. Eleven species 
were found, among them two neophytes, none of them 
invasive: Oenothera biennis L. and one of North American 
ash trees, probably Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marshall, rarely 
encountered in natural environment in Poland. The study of 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

20/08/2009 by D. Hruševar and A. Wagner in the eastern 
side of the pond showed 22 species, among which the 
dominant was Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud. 
There were four (18.2%) neophytes: Solidago gigantea 
Aiton, Solidago canadensis L., Bidens frondosa L., Acer 
negundo L. – all of them invasive transformers. There was 
also a feral cultivar - Humulus lupulus L. Apart from the 
plot, yet another neophyte was found: Conyza canadensis 
(L.) Cronquist, according to [11] the most common alien 
species in Poland. The site is shown in figure 2.  
C. Staw Dąbski (the Dąbie Pond) 
 
The survey of 07/08/2009 by D. Hruševar, U. 
Ljubobratović and A. Wagner showed 12 species in the plot 
in the eastern part of the pond. Significantly dominant was 
Typha angustifolia L. There was only one alien species: 
Bidens frondosa L. In other parts around the pond 32 more 
species were observed, including Nuphar lutea L. – a native 
species protected by the Polish law – the only place in the 
city of Kraków where it occurs naturally. There were also 
three invasive neophyte plants:  Acer negundo L., Solidago 
canadensis L. and Erigeron annuus (L). Pers. The first two 
are regarded transformer species and the latter is regarded 
harmless. 
D. Zakrzówek 
 
Two surveys were carried out in Zakrzówek – on 
18/06/2008 by Samalzhan Tleubayeva, Aleksandra Wagner 
and Robert Mazur – on the hill in the eastern part of the area 
and on 13/08/2009, by D. Hruševar, U. Ljubobratović and 
A. Wagner – in the place slightly further from the previous 
one. In the first place 17 species were observed, including 
one archeophyte Echium vulgare L. and one neophyte 
Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marshall,  usually occurring only as 
a cultivated plant. In the second place 23 species were 
present. Among them three alien species: Lathyrus 
tuberosus L. – an invasive, but not harmful archaeotype and 
Juglans regia L. – a cultivated tree (originating from 
Caucasus and Central Asia) and now expanding into natural 
and semi-natural habitats. Another invasive neophyte found 
there was Solidago canadensis L., classified as a 
transformer, although it was not numerous in that place. 
E. The Pond of the Kaczeńcowa Street 
 
Around the water body, 24 species were found, three of 
them neophyte invasive transformers - North American: Bidens 
frondosa L. and Solidago canadensis L. and Asian - Impatiens 
parviflora DC. The study was carried out on 19/08/2009 by D. 
Hruševar and A. Wagner 
F. Former decantation pond of Kujawy 
 
The survey, carried out on 19/08/2009 by D. Hruševar and 
A. Wagner, showed 15 species, where Calamagrostis epigejos 
(L.) Roth. was dominating. One of them was archaeophyte: 
Melilotus albus Medik and two invasive neophytes: Conyza 
canadensis (L.) Cronquist and Solidago canadensis L. Outside 
the plot, one more neophyte species - Erigeron annuus (L.) Pers. 
was observed as well as 8 native species, including Centaurium 
erythraea Rafn, protected by the Polish law.  
G. Przylasek Rusiecki 
 
The survey carried out on 25/07/2009 by D. Hruševar, 
U. Ljubobratović and A. Wagner in two places near the only 
pond available for bathing: in the eastern part of the shore, 
near the beach and in the northern part – a popular place for 
angling. In the first place 39 species were found and the 
ones occurring in the biggest quantities were Achilea 
millefolium L. and Melilotus albus Medik. The latter is 
archaeophyte and both are characteristic for pastures. In 
fact, the habitats in Przylasek Rusiecki are typically rural 
despite the fact of being situated in the administrative 
borders of the city of Kraków. Another archaeotype was 
Humulus lupulus L. Neophytes were represented by 3 
species: Erigeron annuus (L.) Pers., Bidens frondosa  L. and 
Solidago canadensis L. In the second place the most 
common species was Euphorbia virgata Waldst. et Kit. This 
plant has an uncertain status in the Polish flora. There were 
an archaeopophyte species - Melilotus albus Medik.  Apart 
from the neophyte plants known from the previous place: 
Erigeron annuus (L.) Pers. and Solidago canadensis L., four 
more species: Medicago sativa L., Conyza canadensis (L.) 
Cronquist, Oenothera biennis L. and a tree species: Populus 
× euramericana (Dode) Guinier ex Piccarolo were found.  
H. Wola Batorska 
 
The survey was carried out on 19/08/2009 by D. 
Hruševar and A. Wagner near the ponds in the eastern part 
of the complex of the water bodies. Place (1) was near the 
bigger pond and place (2) near the smaller pond. In place 1 
36 species were found, among them 7 of alien origin: 
archaeophytes: Matricaria perforata Merat., Capsella 
bursa-pastoris (L.) Medik. and Lactuca serriola L., all of 
them invasive, but usually not harmful. Panicum miliaceum 
L. was also found. The subspecies was not defined, which in 
this case, does not allow stating in the plant was 
archaeophyte or neophyte, but it is invasive. Other alien 
species included Phalaris canariensis L., Acer negundo L. 
and Bidens frondosa L. In place (2) twelve species were 
found, including one archaeophyte: Echinochloa crus-galli 
(L.) P.Beauv. and one neophyte: Conyza canadensis (L.) 
Cronquist. In the area outside the plots one more neophyte 
was found: Picea pungens Engelm. The specimen found 
was in a very poor shape. Probably it was deliberately 
planted. 
I. Zabierzów Bocheński 
 
On 10/08/2009 D. Hruševar, U. Ljubobratović and A. 
Wagner surveyed two plots in the area: (1) in the central 
part of the complex – near the beach and (2) in the southern 
part of the area.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
In place (1) 34 species were found, where Bolboschoenus 
maritimus (L.) in the part near water and Trifolium repens L. – 
further from the shore were predominant. There was only one 
neophyte: Bidens frondosa L. and one of uncertain status Cirsium 
vulgare (Savi) Ten.  In site (2) there were 39 species recorded 
and only one - Solidago canadensis L. was neophyte. There were 
also Rumex crispus L. – a plant of an uncertain status and Prunus 
cerasus L. – a cultivated species, in that site occurring as feral. In 
the water a protected by the Polish law species was found - 
Salvinia natans (L.) All. 
J.  Zakrzowiec 
 
The survey was carried out on 17.08.2009 by D. Hruševar 
and A. Wagner in two sites. Site (1) was close to the pond and 
site (2) was in the place of the pond that was dried out a few 
years before the survey. In the site (1) 37 plant species were 
found. The dominant species was Phragmites australis (Cav.) 
Trin. ex Steud, covering more than 75% of surface. There were 
only two neophytes: Erigeron annuus (L.) Pers. and Conyza 
canadiensis (L.) Cronquist and one archaeophyte: Lactuca 
serriola L. In place (2) 24 species were found. The dominant one 
was an archaeophyte Echinochloa crus-galli (L) P.Beauv. Other 
archaeophytes included Setaria pumila (Poir.) Schult. and 
Matricaria perforata Merat. There was also Cirsium vulgare 
(Savi) Ten., an invasive plant of uncertain status. Neophytes 
included Bidens frondosa L., Conyza canadiensis (L.) Cronquist 
and Erigeron annnus (L.) Pers. 
K. The Mokra Street – Niepołomice 
 
The survey was carried out by D. Hruševar and A. 
Wagner on 17/08/2009. There were 31 plants found in the 
plot near the pond. Archaeophytes included: Pastinaca 
sativa L. and Setaria pumila (Poir.) Schult. Neophytes were: 
Erigeron annuus (L.) Pers., Conyza canadensis (L.) 
Cronquist and Veronica persica Poir. The presence of privet 
Ligustrum vulgare L. could be of anthropogenic or natural 
origin, but anthropogenic origin was more likely. The water 
body was in the residential area and many non-native 
species were planted: Picea pungens Engelm., Liriodendron 
tulipifera L., Catalpa bignonioides Walter, Pinus nigra 
Arnold, Abies concolor (Gordon) Lindl. ex Hildebr. and 
Thuja spp. 
L. The Akacjowa Street – Niepołomice 
 
Around the water body 40 plant species were recorded 
on 17/08/2009 by D. Hruševar and A. Wagner. There were 
two archaeophytes: Lactuca serriola L. and Echinochloa 
crus-galli (L.) P. Beauv., as well as three neophytes in the 
area: the bur marigold Bidens frondosa L., black locust 
Robinia pseudoacacia L. and horseradish Armoracia 
rusticana G. Gaertn., B. Mey. & Scherb. The latter is a 
cultivated plant, invasive, but not harmful.  
 
 
M. Zalew na Piaskach 
 
The place selected for the survey on 31/07/2009 (by D. 
Hruševar, U. Ljubobratović and A. Wagner) was in the area 
where the pond was shallower and overgrown by 
macrophytes such as Typha latifolia L. There were 40 
vascular species and a moss – Sphagnum. There was one 
neophyte there: Erigeron annuus (L.) Pers. 
 
The study showed the presence of alien plants, 
including neophytes in each location. Many of them are 
invasive, although only in few localities they were dominant 
or even made a significant proportion in the land cover. The 
most commonly found species (in terms of the number of 
locations) - Solidago canadensis - never covered more than 
25% and often less than 5%. This can confirm an interesting 
study done by Orczewska [15] suggesting that some native 
species (such as Urtica dioica L. and Galium aparine L.) 
can be more dangerous for the habitat than neophytes (such 
as Solidago gigantean Aiton). 
 
The study also confirms the data suggesting higher 
presence of non-native plants in human-influenced areas [4] 
[14]. The lowest number was scored in Zabierzów 
Bocheński and Zalew na Piskach, places relatively distant 
from residential areas. On the other hand the presence of 
non-native species in the areas with already strong human 
influence is not so harmful. The real danger for biodiversity 
is the presence of invasive plants in protected areas. The 
eastern part of the study area is situated near the 
Niepołomice Forest, a place with some amount of strictly 
protected areas. Fortunately in a nearby place like 
Zabierzów Bocheński the influence of invasive species is 
small (two species of Solidago), nevertheless cannot be 
neglected. 
 
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
Although alien species occurred in every location in the 
study area, they never dominated. Among the alien species 
particular attention should be paid on invasive transformer 
species: the ash-leaved maple (Acer negundo), black locust 
(Robinia pseudoacacia), Canadian golden rod (Solidago 
canadensis), giant goldenrod (Solidago gigantea), bur 
marigold (Bidens frondosa) and small-flowered touch-me-
not (Impatiens parviflora). The Canadian golden rod was 
the most common of them. 
In the residential areas many alien tree species are 
grown. Apart from two species (the ash-leaved maple and 
black locust) they are not invasive and most of them can 
only sporadically found in the wild. 
 Further monitoring of invasive plant species is 
necessary, also because of the perspective of climatic 
changes. Warming the climate will provide better conditions 
for the reproduction of southern species so that they could 
become invasive. The example can be the common walnut 
(Juglans regia), which was found in one location, but, 
according to literature [11] this species is in the initial phase 
of invasion, so it is likely to extend its range. 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

Tab. 1. NON-NATIVE (OR SUSPECTED TO BE NON-
NATIVE) PLANTS OF IN THE AREA OF WATER BODIES 
NEAR KRAKÓW 
N – neophyte, A – archaeophyte 
 
BG 
SP 
D 
ZK 
KA 
KU 
PR 
WB 
ZB 
ZC 
MK 
A 
ZP 
 
Acer negundo 
+ 
+ 
+ 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
N, invasive, transformer 
Robinia 
pseudoacacia 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, invasive, transformer 
Juglans regia 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N, cultivated, in the first 
phase of invasion 
Populus x 
euroamericana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N, not invasive 
Pinus nigra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, not invasive 
Picea pungens 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, casual 
Abies concolor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, casual 
Thuja sp. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, casual 
Liriodendron 
tulipifera 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, casual 
Catalpa 
bignonioides 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, casual 
Fraxinus 
pennsylvanica 
 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N, casual 
Solidago 
canadensis 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
N, invasive, transformer 
Solidago gigantea 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N, invasive, transformer 
Bidens frondosa 
 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
 
+ 
+ 
+ 
 
+ 
 
N, invasive, transformer 
Impatiens 
parviflora 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N, invasive, transformer 
Conyza canadensis 
 
+ 
 
 
 
+ 
+ 
+ 
 
+ 
+ 
 
 
N, invasive, weed 
Veronica persica 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, invasive, weed 
Phalaris 
canariensis 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
N  
Armoracia 
rusticana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
N, invasive, not harmful 
Medicago sativa 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N, invasive, not harmful 
Erigeron annuus 
+ 
 
+ 
 
 
+ 
+ 
 
 
+ 
+ 
 
+ 
N, invasive, not harmful 
Oenothera biennis 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
N, not invasive 
Panicum 
miliaceum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
A or N, depending on 
subspecies 
Echinochloa crus-
galli 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
A, invasive, weed 
Setaria viridis 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
A, invasive, weed 
Setaria pumila 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
+ 
 
 
A, invasive, weed 
Cichorium intybus 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A, invasive, not harmful 
Marticaria 
perforata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
 
 
A, invasive, weed 
Lactuca serriola 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
A, invasive, not harmful 
Capsella bursa-
pastoris 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
A, invasive, not harmful 
Papaver rhoeas 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A, invasive, not harmful 
Senecio vulgaris 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
Melilotus albus 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  
Melilotus 
officinalis 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  
Pastinaca sativa 
+ 
+ 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  
Humulus lupulus 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  
Echium vulgare 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  
Lathyrus tuberosus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
Odontites verna 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
Cirsium vulgare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
+ 
+ 
 
 
 
Uncertain status, 
invasive, not harmful 
Euphorbia virgata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uncertain status, not 
invasive 
Rumex crispus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
Uncertain status 
 
BG 
SP 
D 
ZK 
KA 
KU 
PR 
WB 
ZB 
ZC 
MK 
A 
ZP 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
The paper was financed by the grant of the 
AGH–UST (Badania Statutowe) 11.11.150.949/15. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Król-Korczak [Management of borrow pits for the 
purpose of water recreation in the Kraków 
agglomeration] “Zagospodarowanie odkrywkowych 
wyrobisk poeksploatacyjnych na cele rekreacji 
wodnej w aglomeracji krakowskiej.” Górnictwo 
Odkrywkowe  [Open cast minining] 46, 7/8, 2004, 
pp. 88 – 93. 
[2] A. Wagner, D. Hruševar and U. Ljubobratović: [An 
attempt to evaluate the water bodies in selected rural 
regions in the vicinity of Kraków (Poland)] “Próba 
waloryzacji zbiorników wodnych w wybranych 
rejonach 
wiejskich 
w 
sąsiedztwie 
Krakowa” 
Współczesne 
problemy 
gospodarki 
wodnej 
i 
kształtowania 
środowiska 
obszarów 
wiejskich 
[Current problems of water management and rural 
environment 
development] 
PAN. 
WNBiR, 
Uniwersytet Rolniczy im. H. Kołłątaja w Krakowie. 
WIŚG. KMiKŚ. Warszawa: PAN WNBiR. Zeszyty 
Problemowe Postępów Nauk Rolniczych; z. 561,  
2011, pp. 195–205. 
[3] P. Pyšek et al. “Catalogue of alien plants of the 
Czech Republic (2nd edition): checklist update, 
taxonomic diversity and invasion patterns.” Preslia 
84, 2012, pp. 155–255. 
[4] B. Tokarska-Guzik, B. Węgrzynek, A. Urbisz, A. 
Urbisz, T. Nowak and K. Bzdęga “Alien vascular 
plants in the Silesian Upland of Poland: distribution, 
patterns, impacts and threats” Biodiv. Res. Conserv. 
19, 2010, pp. 33-54. 
[5] D. M. Richardson, P. Pyšek, M. Rejmánek,  M. G. 
Barbour, 
F. 
D. 
Panetta 
and 
C. 
J. 
West 
“Naturalization and invasion of alien plants: 
concepts and definitions.” Diversity Distrib. 6, 2000, 
pp. 93-107.  
[6] A. Wagner [Possibilities of using selected small and 
medium size water ponds in the Cracow region for 
environmentally friendly recreation and ecotourism] 
“Możliwości wykorzystania wybranych małych 
zbiorników wodnych w okolicach Krakowa dla 
celów zrównoważonej ekologicznie rekreacji i 
ekoturystyki” Zeszyty Naukowe Akademii Rolniczej 
im. H. Kołłątaja w Krakowie. No. 393. Inżynieria 
Środowiska [Environental Engineering] vol. 23, 
2002, pp. 233–244.  
[7] A. Wagner and M. Orlewicz-Musiał [Recreational 
water bodies in Kraków over the history] “Zbiorniki 
rekreacyjne na terenie Krakowa na przestrzeni 
dziejów” In: [Cities come back towards water] 
Miasta wracają nad wodę  (ed. Marek Kosmala. 
Toruń : Polskie Zrzeszenie Inżynierów i Techników 
Sanitarnych [Polish Association of Engineers and 
Technicians], 2011, pp. 197–206. 
[8] A. Wagner and D. Hasanagić “Comparative analysis 
of selected water bodies in Cracow and vicinity in 
terms 
of 
their 
revitalization” 
Innowacyjne 
rozwiązania rewitalizacji terenów zdegradowanych 
[Innovative solutions of the revitalization of 
degraded areas] (ed. Jan Skowronek) Instytut 
Ekologii Terenów Uprzemysłowionych; Centrum 
Badań i Dozoru Górnictwa Podziemnego Sp. z o. o., 
2014, pp. 139–152. 
[9] [Resolution no. XXXI/405/07 of the City Council of 
Kraków of 19th December 2007 on Establishing the 
Ecologically Useful Area ‘The Pond of the 
Kaczeńcowa Street’] - Uchwała nr XXXI/405/07 
Rady Miasta Krakowa z dnia 19 grudnia 2007 r. w 
sprawie ustanowienia użytku ekologicznego „Staw 
przy Kaczeńcowej”. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.bip.krakow.pl/?dok_id=167&sub_dok_
id=167&sub=uchwala&query=id%3D17225%26am
p%3Btyp%3Du   2015.01.09. 
[10] B. Pawłowski (ed.): [Polish flora. Vascular plants of 
Poland and neighbouring countries] “Flora polska. 
Rośliny naczyniowe Polski i ziem ościennych.”. 
Vol. XI. Warszawa, Kraków: Polska Akademia 
Nauk, Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, 371 pp., 
1967.  
[11] B. Tokarska-Guzik, Z. Dajdok, M. Zając, A. Zając, 
A. Urbisz and W. Danielewicz: [The Plants of the 
alien origin in Poland, focus on invasive species] 
“Rośliny 
obcego 
pochodzenia 
w 
Polsce 
ze 
szczególnym 
uwzględnieniem 
gatunków 
inwazyjnych.” 
Warszawa: 
Generalna 
Dyrekcja 
Ochrony Środowiska, 2012. 
[12] J. Medvecká et al. “Inventory of the alien flora of 
Slovakia.” Preslia 84, 2012, pp. 257–309. 
[13] T. Nikolica,  B. Mitić, B. Milašinovic and  S. D.  
Jelaska, “Invasive alien plants in Croatia as a threat 
to 
biodiversity 
of 
South-Eastern 
Europe: 
Distributional patterns and range size.” C. R. 
Biologies 336, 2013, pp. 109–121.  
[14] A. Alegro, S. Bogdanović, I. Rešetnik, I. Boršić, P. 
Cigić, T. Nikolić, “Flora of the seminatural 
marshland Savica, part of the (sub)urban flora of the 
city of Zagreb (Croatia)” Nat. Croat., Vol. 22, No. 1, 
2013, pp. 111–134. 
[15] A. Orczewska, “Kto groźniejszy: obcy czy swój? 
Negatywne oddziaływanie nawłoci późnej Solidago 
gigantea, pokrzywy zwyczajnej Urtica dioica i 
przytuli czepnej Galium aparine na gatunki runa 
leśnego 
we 
wtórnych 
lasach 
olszowych 
posadzonych na gruntach porolnych” [Who is more 
dangerous: the alien or the native? The negative 
impact of Solidago gigantea, Urtica dioica and 
Galium aparine on the herbaceous woodland species 
in recent post-agricultural alder woods]. Studia i 
Materiały CEPL w Rogowie. R. 14. Zeszyt 33, 4, 
2012,  pp.217-225.  
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
10 km 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The study area. 
 
 
 
  
Figure 2.  The example of vegetation – the area near the Płaszów Pond. On the right-hand side – Solidago sp. Photo by A. Wagner. 
 
Zalew na 
Piaskach 
Zakrzówek 
Staw 
Płaszowski 
Bagry 
Staw Dąbski 
Przylasek 
Rusiecki 
Wola Batorska 
Zabierzów 
Bocheński 
Zakrzowiec Mokra 
Akacjowa 
Kaczeńcowa 
Kujawy 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

