Towards the Estimation of Tree Biomass Changes in the Sparse Subarctic Forests 
Using Stereo WorldView 3 Images and Historical Aerial Photographs 
Benoît St-Onge and Simon Grandin 
Department of Geography,  
University of Quebec at Montreal (UQAM) 
Montreal, Canada 
e-mail: st-onge.benoit@uqam.ca 
 
 
Abstract—Subarctic forests are open woodlands sparsely 
populated by small trees having narrow crowns. They cover, in 
Canada alone, an area of more than 2.5 million km2. Spread 
between the 50th and 70th northern parallels, these forests fall 
within the regions that are experiencing some of the greatest 
climate change that will likely induce variations in forest 
biomass. These changes could go undocumented due to the 
high costs of data acquisition in such remote areas of Canada. 
Airborne surveys (photo or lidar) are logistically difficult, and 
conventional remote sensing based on 2D satellite images (e.g., 
Landsat) lacks accuracy. Our goals are therefore to use 
new very high resolution satellite stereo images (31 cm 
pixels) to reconstruct 3D models of subarctic forests, and use 
historical stereo aerial photos acquired since the 1950s to 
create similar 3D models representing the structure of these 
forests in the past. In this study, we have reconstructed a 
digital terrain model (DTM) using stereo measurements on 
WorldView 3 images of sparsely wooded areas. We then 
performed similar stereo measurements on the top of trees and 
calculated their height by subtracting DTM elevations. These 
height measurements were in good agreement with reference 
data, and can afterward be used to estimate tree biomass. 
Similar measurements will be performed on historical aerial 
photographs, and the tree biomass changes, as a function of 
tree height and number of trees, will be estimated. 
Keywords- forest; subarctic; WorldView; height, biomass. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Subarctic forests, more specifically the open canopy 
lichen woodlands of the taiga ecoregions, cover more than 
2.5 million km2 in Canada alone, and occupy a good 
proportion of other northern nations, such as Russia. They 
are composed of sparse and rather short trees, and low 
species diversity (essentially, black spruces and dwarf 
birch). Roughly located between the 50th and 70th parallels, 
these environments will experience the greatest climate 
change. These generally include warming, but may involve 
an increase or decrease of precipitations. All these variations 
will likely induce changes in the forest height, density, 
productivity and species composition [1]. It can be 
hypothesized that, if growth is not limited by water 
availability, a significant rise in their productivity caused by 
the lengthening of the growing season and CO2 fertilization 
will increase their biomass density (Mg ha-1), and therefore 
their capacity to sequester carbon [2]. Such is the case for 
example in the province of Quebec, Canada, where 
temperature and precipitation rose [3]. Few resources are 
however dedicated to the inventory of these vast forests, due 
to the high cost of airborne and field data acquisition in such 
remote areas, and because of their low commercial interest. 
This leaves us with very few precise data on the structure of 
these forests [4]. Using two-dimensional (2D) remote 
sensing methods [5], such as regressing forest height, 
density or biomass against the reflectance of Landsat 
images, or the backscattered microwave energy of 
spaceborne 
radars 
(e.g., 
ALOS/PALSAR), 
leads 
to 
prediction models having only moderate accuracy [6]. To 
calibrate 
the 
regression 
models, 
numerous 
field 
measurements need to be done within 1-2 years of image 
acquisition, in hardly accessible areas. This calibration is 
required for any new 2D image. Moreover, upcoming 3D 
satellite missions (circa 2020), such as BIOMASS (InSAR), 
or GEDI (lidar), will be on orbits that limit acquisition to 
50o N, thus missing subarctic forests [7]. Airborne laser 
scanning (ALS) is extremely expensive to deploy in these 
regions because of remoteness, airport rarity, and the 
required very high laser point density [8]. Indeed, taiga trees 
are sparse and have very narrow crowns. Many go 
undetected by low-moderate density ALS because they fall 
in the gaps between zigzag-patterned laser scan lines [9]. 
Furthermore, we recently showed that when trees are sparse 
(discontinuous canopy), the estimation of height becomes 
ambiguous 
when 
using 
InSAR 
from 
TanDEM-X, 
precluding the use of this sensor for subarctic forests [10].  
High resolution imagery (pixel size <=0.3 m) does not 
suffer from the problems of ALS (inter-scan line gaps) or 
InSAR (complex scattering behaviour in sparse forests). 
Stereo measurements performed on aerial images allow the 
accurate estimation of tree height when ground elevation 
data is available [11]. Recently, stereo-image acquisition 
from space, has significantly improved [12]. Notably, the 
WorldView-3 and 4 imaging sensors from Digital Globe, 
launched respectively in August 2014 and November 2016, 
offer an unprecedented resolution from space (0.31 m). 
They have stereo imaging capacities and their orbit covers 
the globe up to 80o N, thus encompassing all of the subarctic 
forests. The photogrammetric quality of WorldView 3 has 
been shown to be high [13]. Since subarctic forests are 
sparse, the ground is often visible between trees, thus 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-561-6
BIONATURE 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

enabling the reconstruction of a digital terrain model (DTM) 
without the use of airborne lidar. If the apex of trees, 
typically narrow black spruces (Picea Mariana) in northern 
Canada, the height of single trees could be measured by 
stereo measurements performed on tree apices followed by 
subtraction of the ground elevation. Biomass of single trees 
can then be predicted using allometric equations. Repeating 
this operation for all visible trees over given plots then 
allows the calculation of biomass density. For areas where 
historical aerial photographs exist, the same operation can 
be performed, allowing the estimation of biomass change. 
As a first step towards these goals, we have assessed our 
capacity to estimate the height of single trees on a stereo-
pair of WorldView 3 images in a sparse Canadian forest. 
The results were compared to the values extracted from an 
airborne lidar canopy height model (CHM). We have also 
verified if the manual procedure for measuring tree height 
could be automated by applying image matching techniques 
to the WorldView images to create a 3D point cloud. 
We first explain the methods used for measuring tree 
heights on the WorldView stereopairs and how we 
compared these measurements to corresponding lidar 
heights (section II). In the following section, we present 
quantitative as well as image-based results. Finally, we 
discuss these results and provide an outlook of future 
research (section IV). 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Study region and data 
Pending the acquisition of WorldView 3 or 4 imagery in 
true subarctic forests (planned for summer of 2017), we have 
used available data (imagery and lidar) in an area of the 
Canadian boreal forest centered at 49°54' N, 71° 34' W. The 
area has a gentle topography, and is populated mostly by 
black spruces growing in closed or open canopies. Sparsely 
wooded subareas were selected for this study. 
A WorldView 3 stereo-pair acquired on June 6th 2015 in 
ortho-ready format, with rational polynomial coefficients 
(RPC), were used. View angles were respectively 12.7 and 
24.3 degrees off-nadir, and sun elevation was 61.5 degrees at 
the time of acquisition. While nominal pixel size at nadir is 
31 cm, the obliquity of the images caused this size to be 
slightly larger. 
An airborne lidar CHM was retrieved from the province 
of Quebec's (Canada) open lidar archive. This data was 
captured in summer of 2013, and transformed to a 1 m 
resolution raster CHM by the provider. The initial lidar point 
clouds had a density of at least 2 points per m2 (first or single 
returns). The 2D coregistration between the WorldView 
stereo-model and the lidar models was checked visually and 
found to be very good. The RPCs were therefore not 
adjusted. 
 
B. Measurements 
An interpreter performed stereo-measurements on the 
WorldView pair viewed in stereo using liquid crystal shutter 
glasses, and checked his pinpointing of tree tops using a 
monocular split screen strategy. The elevation of 30 tree 
apices were thus measured in 3D. For each tree, a similar 
measurement was made of ground elevation in the 
immediate vicinity of the tree. All stereo-measurements were 
performed using the Summit Evolution software application 
(DAT/EM Systems International, U.S.A.). The stereo height 
of trees (HS) was computed by simply subtracting the ground 
elevation associated to the tree from the elevation of its apex. 
The lidar tree height (HL) was extracted by reading the CHM 
value of the highest lidar pixel within each crown 
corresponding to the stereo measurements. The set of HS and 
HL values were compared by computing the bias (average of 
HS - HL), root mean square error (RMSE), and r2. The ground 
elevations at the XY position where terrain level stereo 
measurements were made (GES) were compared to the 
elevations of the lidar DTM at these positions (GEL). The set 
of GES and GEL values were compared using the method 
used for H. 
Three image matching algorithms were tested: Correlator 
3D (Simactive, Canada), MapMatrix (VisionTek, China),  
and OrthoEngine (PCI Geomatics, Canada). The number of 
available matching algorithms is limited by the fact that 
solutions applicable to (pushbroom) WorldView imagery are 
still few, compared to those using (full frame) airborne 
imagery. In our trials, the 3D models produced by Correlator 
3D were the best, so results are presented only for this 
algorithm. Subtracting the ground elevations of the lidar 
DTM from the surface elevations automatically extracted 
from the stereo WorldView images produced a stereo-lidar 
CHM (CHMSL). Alternatively, low photogrammetric points 
within local neighborhoods were classified as ground points 
and interpolated into a stereo DTM (DTMS). An entirely 
stereo-photogrammetric CHM (CHMS) was generated by 
subtracting the WorldView surface points from the DTMS. 
These models (CHMSL, CHMS) were each compared pixel-
wise to the lidar CHM (CHML) using, again, bias, RMSE and 
r2  (i.e. CHMSL - CHML ,  CHMS - CHML). 
III. 
RESULTS 
Figure 1 shows corresponding excerpts from each of the 
WorldView image forming the stereo-pair. In can be seen 
that individual trees can be well resolved, even in the case 
where trees are short and crowns are narrow. 
HS values ranged from 3.7 m to 14.7 m, with a standard 
deviation of 2.7 m. Compared to lidar, a bias of 0.19 m, a 
RMSE of 2.11 m, and a r2 of 0.63 was obtained. Figure 2 
presents a scatter plot of the H measurements. A clear outlier 
caused by a tree that was likely most entirely missed by lidar 
led to a +7.7 m difference (top-left data point in Figure 2). 
When this observation was removed, the bias and RMSE 
dropped to -0.07 m and 1.62 m respectively, and the r2 
increased to 0.77. In the case of ground level measurements, 
these values were respectively  -0.73 m, 1.06 m, and 0.98. 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-561-6
BIONATURE 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Corresponding excerpts of the WorldView 3 stereo pair. 
 
 
Figure 2. Scatterplot of the stereo (HS) vs lidar tree heights (HL). 
 
Figure 3. Lidar (top) and stereo CHM excerpts (unrelated to Figure 1). 
 
Excerpts from the lidar and stereo-lidar CHMs appear in 
Figure 3. The CHMSL is clearly lower and less resolved than 
the CHML. The bias, RMSE and r2 between the different 
types of CHM are respectively, for CHMSL - CHML, -0.51 m, 
2.98 m, and 0.29, and for CHMS - CHML, -1.2 m, 3.13 m, 
and 0.28. 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The discrepancy between the HS and HL measurements 
must be interpreted with care. At this phase of our study, 
lidar was used as reference for tree height, despite 
shortcomings. The lidar point density was rather low for 
ensuring that the top of the narrow crowns be hit in such a 
way that they would have generated a return at an elevation 
close to the tree apex. Furthermore, the rather large pixels 
size of the CHM (1 m) may have introduced more 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-561-6
BIONATURE 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

uncertainty. In this context, it appears that the manual 
measurements are quite accurate (conservative estimate of 
RMSE = 1.62 m). In general, we may expect the height 
measurement to be slightly underestimated, both in the stereo 
and lidar measurements. The presence of shrubs on the 
ground may have elevated the perceived terrain level, while 
lack of resolution of the apex of the crown may have 
diminished the top elevation. The larger ground level bias, 
at -0.73 m, accompanied with a lower RMSE (1.06 m) 
suggests that there might have remained a slight Z 
misregistration (negative bias) but that stereo measurements 
are actually very precise when the object is easily scannable 
by lidar (lower GS - GL RMSE). 
Automating the creation of tree height data through 
stereo-matching will represent a significant challenge in light 
of the results we have presented. The coefficient of 
determination (r2) did not exceed 0.29, while they reached 
0.77 for manual measurements. This is not entirely 
surprising for these types of sparse forests. Because the trees 
do not form a closed carpet-like canopy, the surface to be 
reconstructed is very complex. It is formed by a smooth base 
layer (terrain) over which sharp isolated peaks (trees) 
protrude. In many circumstances, the side of a tree is visible 
in one image, and the opposite side in the other (Figure 1). 
Also, tree leaning caused by obliquity occurred in different 
directions. The relatively high level of obliquity of the stereo 
pair that we have used probably aggravated this situation. It 
seems unlikely that current image matching algorithms will 
be able to produce usable photogrammetric points clouds for 
subarctic forests before significant improvements are made 
to their matching strategies. 
Nevertheless, we have shown that using a manual stereo 
measurement approach, the accuracy of the individual tree 
heights is at least 1.62 m. Once this is ascertained in a true 
subarctic forest using precise field measurements of tree 
height, it signifies that we could easily measure the height of 
single trees of any plot, however remote and inaccessible it 
may be. This method would probably not be applied wall-to-
wall over the vast subarctic forests of the world on the short 
term due the high cost of the imagery. However, it can be 
used as a dense sampling tool across large regions. This 
would greatly enhance our capacity to create new knowledge 
on the current state of these forests. Time series of these 
measurements, whether pastward using historical images, or 
forward by repeating similar measurements in the future, will 
allow a better understanding of the dynamics of height, 
density, and therefore biomass of sparse but vast subarctic 
forests. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was funded by the Natural Sciences and 
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). The 
authors wish to thank Effigis GeoSolutions (Montreal, 
Canada) for providing access to the WorldView 3 stereo-pair 
used in this study, and Simactive Inc. (Montreal, Canada) for 
running Correlator 3D on these images. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. S. Payette, M. J. Fortin, and I. Gamache, “The Subarctic 
Forest–Tundra: The Structure of a Biome in a Changing 
Climate”,  Bioscience, vol. 51,  pp. 2301-2316, 2001. 
[2] R. Poyatos et al, “Environmental and Vegetation Drivers of 
Seasonal CO2 Fluxes in a Sub-arctic Forest–Mire Ecotone, 
vol. 17, pp. 377–393, 2014. 
[3] L. D'Orangeville et al. "Northeastern North America as a 
potential refugium for boreal forests in a warming climate". 
Science, vol. 352, pp.1452-1455, 2016. 
[4] M. Wulder, C. Campbell, J. White, M. Flannigan and I. 
Campbell, “National circumstances in the international 
circumboreal community", For. Chron., vol. 83, pp. 539–556, 
2007. 
[5] A. Beaudoin, et al, “Mapping attributes of Canada’s forests at 
moderate resolution through kNN and MODIS imagery” Can. 
J. For. Res., vol. 44, pp. 521–532, 2014. 
[6] I. Olthof, and D. Pouliot, “Treeline vegetation composition 
and change in Canada's western Subarctic from AVHRR and 
canopy reflectance modeling” Remote Sens. Env., vol. 114, 
pp. 805–815, 2010. 
[7] D. H. T. Minh et al, “Capabilities of BIOMASS Tomography 
for Investigating Tropical Forests” IEEE Trans. Geo. Rem. 
Sens., vol. 53, pp. 965–975, 2015. 
[8] N. Thieme, O.M. Bollandsås, T. Gobakken and E. Naesset, 
“Detection of small single trees in the forest–tundra ecotone 
using height values from airborne laser scanning” , Can. J. 
Rem. Sens., vol. 37, pp. 264-274, 2011. 
[9] N. Stumberg, M. Hauglin, O.M. Bollandsås, T. Gobakken and 
E. Naesset, “Improving Classification of Airborne Laser 
Scanning Echoes in the Forest-Tundra Ecotone Using 
Geostatistical and Statistical Measures", Rem. Sens., vol. 6, 
pp. 4582–4599, 2014. 
[10] Y. Sadeghi, B. St-Onge, B. Leblon and M. Simard, “Canopy 
Height Model (CHM) Derived From a TanDEM-X InSAR 
DSM and an Airborne Lidar DTM in Boreal Forest", 
JSTARS, vol. 9, pp. 381 - 397, 2016. 
[11] B. St-Onge, J. Jumelet, M. Cobello and C. Véga, "Measuring 
individual 
tree 
height 
using 
a 
combination 
of 
stereophotogrammetry and lidar". Can. J. For. Res., vol. 34, 
pp. 2122-2130, 2004. 
[12] S. Gehrke K. Morin, M. Downey, N. Boehrer and T. Fuchs, 
“Semi-global matching, an alternative to lidar for DSM 
generation?". I. Arch. Phot. Rem. Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci., 
XXXVIII–B1, 1–6, 2008. 
[13] F. Hu, X.M. Gao, G.Y. Li and M. Li, "DEM extraction from 
WorldView-3 stereo-images and accuracy evaluation", I. 
Arch. Phot. Rem. Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci., vol. XLI-B1,  23rd 
ISPRS congress, 2016. pp. 327-332. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-561-6
BIONATURE 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

