Development Of Technology For Biomass Processing Into Heat and Power
Victor Zaichenko, Valentin Kosov, Vladimir Kosov, Vladimir Sinelschikov
Joint Institute for High Temperatures of the Russian Academy of Sciences (JIHT RAS),
Moscow, Russia
E-mails: zaitch@oivtran.ru, kosov@ihed.ras.ru, vladimir.f.kosov@mail.ru, sinelshchikov@mail.ru
Abstract — Results of experimental investigations in the field of
bioconversion are presented. The technology is connected with
pyrolytic conversion of biomass into synthesis gas which can be
used as a gas fuel for power unit on the base of gas-diesel
engine. It is shown that as a result of biomass pyrolysis and the
subsequent cracking of emanating products by their filtration
throw charcoal at the temperature 1000°С it is possible to
receive 1.4m3 of gas with heating value about 11.7 MJ/м3 per
one kg of original raw material.
Keywords - biomass conversion; pyrolysis; syngas.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Developing the technologies for conversion of different
kinds of biomass into gas fuel and pure carbon materials is
rather an actual problem both from the point of view of
natural resources conservation, and from the point of view of
creating autonomous plants to produce both electricity and
heat operating on local kinds of fuel. Very attractive natural
raw material is wood and peat. Wood and peat fall under
category of renewable hydrocarbon resources. About 70% of
the territory of the Russia is covered with forests, which
makes up about 23% of world reserves [1]. The development
of efficient methods of processing the waste of the lumbering
and wood-working industry is a very urgent problem from
the standpoint of environmental protection, because the
decay of wood waste is accompanied by emission of carbon
dioxide, phenol compounds and other harmful substances
while the thermal effect of attendant chemical reactions is
not utilization. In regard to peat reserves in Russia, which
account for about 42% of those around the world, they are
equivalent to about 70 billion tons of standard coal that
exceeds the total oil and gas resources [2]. Growth of peat
reserves only in Russia is estimated at 260 -280 million tons
per year but only few percent of that quantity is extracted
and used now [3]. From the 1960’s the use of peat began to
rapidly decrease as more natural gas was produced and
consumed. The amount of peat consumed in 1990 had
dropped by more than a factor of 8 as compared with that in
1965 and its fraction in the country’s energy balance had
decreased by a factor of 22 for the same period of time [2].
Utilization of raw or partially processed wood and peat for
needs
of
power
engineering
is
represented
rather
inconvenient and demands essential investments as it leads
to radical reconstruction of the whole technological chain of
electricity production. An alternative way to
use the
abovementioned hydrocarbon resources for power purposes
links to developing a technology for processing them into
high-calorific gas mixtures.
Gasification and pyrolysis are the most popular methods
that developed for producing gas fuel from biomass. Both of
them
have
some
advantages
and
disadvantages.
Air
gasification is the easiest method to convert biomass into
gas. However, the resulting gas contains up to 60% carbon
dioxide and nitrogen and its calorific value is generally
around 4 - 5 MJ/m3 which is too low. Overall efficiency of
gasification gas power plant is limited to 20%. The
gasification products also contain undesirable substances,
such as tars and dust which are need to be removed [4]. To
increase a calorific value of the gasification products oxygen
or water steam gasification can be used. The gas produced by
oxygen and steam gasification contains no nitrogen and
small amount of carbon dioxide. The maximum gas yield
reaches 1.3 nm3 per kg of raw material and its calorific value
is about 11 MJ/m3 [5]. Steam gasification is the widespread
process because of its simplicity. The main disadvantage of
the process is concerned with necessity of steam generation
which reduces overall effectiveness of power plant. Use of
oxygen for the purpose of gasification demands an air
separation unit in technological chain that leads to rise in
price of end product.
During pyrolysis of solid hydrocarbon raw material,
heating is carried out without air access, and, therefore
nitrogen is absent in the end products. Products of biomass
pyrolysis are non-condensable pyrolysis gas, char and liquid
fraction consisting of tar and pyroligneous liquor. Calorific
value of gas produced in the process of biomass pyrolysis is
considerably higher than calorific value of gas produced in
the air gasification process. Composition of pyrolysis
products depends both on biomass properties and on a
number of technological parameters, such as heating rate,
final temperature, characteristic time of residence in reaction
zone and so on. Insignificant degree of processing of initial
raw materials into pyrolysis gas is main disadvantage of this
technology. Significant increase the gas yield can be
achieved by high-temperature conversion of liquid fraction.
For this purpose the catalytic [6] and non-catalytic [7][8]
methods can be used. In the present paper the scheme similar
to the scheme offered in [6] for processing of wood sawdust
is considered. Experimental feasibility of the technology
based on such scheme was partially presented in [9].
Synthesis gas consisted from carbon oxide and hydrogen and
char are the end products of this technology.
Char is a brittle porous material with carbon content
about 90%. It would be possible to use it in various industrial
applications, for example metallurgy, if its stress-strain
property is not too low. The other technology which is
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-336-0
BIONATURE 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

presented in this paper allows to produce a hard carbon
composite material with carbon content up to 98% from
char. Composite is formed as a result of deposition of
pyrocarbon on the surface of char in the process of
heterogeneous pyrolysis of gaseous hydrocarbons which are
blown through reaction volume filled by char [10]. The
gaseous mixture at the exit of reactor contains hydrogen
which concentration may be easy varied by change in
operating parameters and may reach 90% (volume) and
more. As the gaseous hydrocarbons in this technology
natural gas, low-pressure gas field, oil gas and hydrocarbon
waste gases of different industrial enterprises may be used.
Comparison of behavior of different biomass types
during their processing by means of two abovementioned
technologies, experimental research of the influence of
different factors (temperature, heating rate, residence time)
on the composition and volume of the producible gaseous
mixtures,
the
quantitative
characteristics
of
the
heterogeneous pyrolysis of saturated hydrocarbons in the
process of their filtration through the porous carbonic
medium were the purposes of this paper.
The second section describes experimental reactor and
conditions of experiments. The third section describes weight
loss of different materials during pyrolysis and pyrolysis gas
volume and composition measurement. The fourth section
describes results of experiments with pyrolysis liquid and
gaseous products cracking and obtaining synthesis gas. The
fifth section describes an experimental power plant based on
the technology of two-stage thermal conversion of biomass
into synthesis gas, which is using as fuel for gas-diesel
power generator.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS
All the experiments were carried out at the setup similar
to one used in [9][10] and schematically presented in
Figure 1. It consisted of a high-temperature reactor A, a gas
supply system and a gas expense controller G at the entrance
of reactor, and a system of extraction and analysis of gas at
the exit of reactor including condenser B, eudiometer C and
chromatograph. The samples of the gas for chromatography
were taken out in the point D. The reactor was a stainless
steel tube with an inside diameter of about 37 mm, which
was placed within two-section furnace with independent
heaters for each section. Each section was 300 mm length.
The heaters allowed varying the temperature inside the
reactor from 100 to 1200oC. Such construction of the furnace
made possible to use the reactor in one and two chamber
regimes.
In the first case, the top chamber of reactor was not
heated up and was empty. During experiments the behavior
of different raw materials situated in bottom chamber at the
stage of pyrolysis, activation and also the process of
pyrocarbon deposition from gaseous hydrocarbons on the
surface of char were investigated. The gas supply system
made it possible to carry out experiments in different gas
media and monitor the volumetric gas flow through the
reactor. The pressure in reactor was equal to 105 Pa.
The two chamber regime was used for investigation of
pyrolysis of different raw materials, composition and yield of
gas produced in process of its thermal conversion. Raw
material 1 (see Figure 1) was placed into the bottom
chamber. Char 2 obtained by pyrolysis of the same raw
material was placed in the top chamber. The depth of char
bed was equal to 50 mm. Before experiments the top
chamber was heated up to temperature T2 that was held
further at the constant level. After that the temperature of the
bottom chamber was raised at the rate 10oC/min. Thus, gases
and vapour formed during pyrolysis of initial raw material
passed through the porous carbon bed with the fixed
temperature Т2 (further this mode is designated as «pyrolysis
with cracking»).
Figure 1.
Experimental installation scheme
As a result of homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical
reactions in the high-temperature zone a decomposition of
pyrolysis gases and vapour took place. Conversion degree
depended both on the temperature Т2 and on the residence
time in a high-temperature zone. The output gas mixture
passed through the condenser B. Non-condensable gas came
into the eudiometer C. Comparison of the composition and
the output of the gases formed at presence and absence of the
char in the top chamber of the reactor gave an opportunity to
compare efficiency of conversion of initial raw material into
combustible gas under different operation conditions. Wood
and peat pellets were used as initial raw material Humidity of
the
samples
was
6%
and
10%
for
wood
and
peat
respectively.
III.
PYROLYSIS OF WOOD AND PEAT PELLETS
The different raw materials pyrolysis experiments were
carried out in one chamber regime of reactor. During the
experiments raw material was heated in oxygen-free medium
from room temperature to 1000°C. The fulfilled experimental
investigations showed similar behavior of peat and wood
pellets during their thermal processing. The change in the
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-336-0
BIONATURE 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

temperature of samples and the corresponding change in their
mass are presented in Figure 2. The data shown in Figure 2
correspond to a heating rate of approximately 10°C/min. It
can be seen that the loss of mass occurs mainly in the
temperature interval from 200 to 600°C and ranges from 65
(for peat pellets) to 75% (for wood pellets) of the initial
mass. The change in the mass with a further increase in the
temperature is insignificant and is equal to around 5% of the
initial mass in the temperature interval from 600 to 1000°C.
The obtained char is a brittle porous material containing
around 80 and 90% of carbon for peat and wood pellets,
respectively.
This
difference
mainly
depends
on
the
difference of ash level of the initial raw materials. Changing
the heating rate from 2 to 35°C/min resulted in the mass of
char decreasing by no more than 10% and the specific
volume of open pores increasing by around 20%. The
specific volume of open pores for char from wood and peat
pellets is equal to 0.5 and 0.28 cm3/g, respectively.
Figure 2.
Temperature change and relative mass loss of wood and peat
pellets in the pyrolysis process
The chromatographic analysis of composition of the
gases evolved during pyrolysis of wood and peat pellets was
fulfilled in the temperature range 250 – 1000°C at the
heating rate 10°C/min. Gas yield and its composition for
wood
and
peat
pellets
are
very
similar.
Major
gas
components are H2, CO, CO2 and CnHm. Note that methane
constituted the main part in the hydrocarbon mixture CnHm.
At temperature above 500°C the carbon dioxide content
substantially decreased whereas the content of combustible
gases (methane, hydrogen and carbon monoxide) increased
that led to increase of the calorific value of the product gas
mixture. The overall gas yield was equal to 0.29 m3 per kg of
initial raw material. The lower calorific value of product gas
was equal to QL = 9,6 MJ/m3. Extraction of the gas evolved
in the temperature range 500 – 1000°C leads to the
appreciable increase of the calorific value of product gas up
to 13 MJ/m3 but the gas yield decreases to 0.18 m3 per kg of
initial raw material.
IV.
PYROLYSIS AND CRACKING
Increasing the conversion degree of raw material into a
combustible gas can be achieved as a result of high-
temperature
thermal
processing
of
gases
and
vapors
emanating in process of pyrolysis. For this purpose two
chamber regime of reactor was used. The data on gas volume
(per kg of peat pellets) obtained in the process of heating of
the bottom chamber of the reactor at different temperatures
Т2 are shown in Figure 3. In the same Figure, the similar data
received in «pyrolysis» mode are also shown. As follows
from the presented data the volume of the gas produced in
mode «pyrolysis with cracking» was much more than the
volume of the gas produced in «pyrolysis» mode. This
difference increased essentially with increasing the top
chamber temperature Т2.
Simultaneously,
reduction
of
quantity of the liquid fraction collected in the condenser B
was observed. For the temperature Т2= 1000oC there was no
liquid fraction in the condenser that was evidence of full tar
and pyroligneous liquor conversion into gas. Chemical
interaction of pyroligneous liquor with char was confirmed
by char mass loss in the top chamber of the reactor which
increased with growth of temperature Т2.
Figure 3.
Gas yield per one kg of raw material during thermal processing
of peat pellets for different regimes
The mass of char formed in the bottom chamber did not
depend on the temperature in the top chamber and was about
30% for peat pellets and 20% for wood pellets. It is followed
from Figure 3 that in mode «pyrolysis with cracking» main
volume of gas was generated in the temperature range 250 –
500oС that corresponded to the temperature range of 
condensable fraction formation during pyrolysis.
Figure 4 shows the results of chromatography of the gas
composition during heating of the bottom chamber at two
temperatures of the top chamber Т2. One can see that carbon
dioxide and methane content in output gas decreased with
the rise of temperature Т2. For temperature Т2 = 1000oC the
content of carbon dioxide and methane didn’t exceed one
percent. Thus, the temperature increase in the top chamber
leads
to
raise
the
rate
of
disoxidation
of
CO2
and
heterogeneous pyrolysis of methane. It should be noticed that
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-336-0
BIONATURE 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

for the top chamber temperature Т2 = 1000oC the gas
composition practically does not depend on the bottom
chamber temperature at its changing in the range 250 –
500oС, i.e., in the area of main gas release (see Figure 3).
Figure 4.
Composition of output gas in mode «pyrolysis with cracking»
Calorific values of the gas mixtures obtained by thermal
processing of wood and peat pellets were calculated on the
base of experimental data similar to presented in Figure 4. In
Table I and Table II data on content of combustible
components in the gas mixtures obtained by thermal
processing of peat and wood pellets for «pyrolysis with
cracking» mode and its high and low calorific values are
presented.
Similar
data
for
gas
mixture
obtained
in
«pyrolysis» mode are shown in the same Tables.
TABLE I.
COMPOSITION AND CALORIFIC VALUE OF GAS MIXTURES
OBTAINED FROM PEAT PELLETS
Т2, С
Volume fractions of
combustible
components
Calorific
value,
MJ /m3
H2
CO
CnHm
QH
QL
850
950
1000
Pyrolysis
0,40
0,43
0,49
0,23
0,27
0,40
0,41
0,19
0,08
0,02
0,01
0,13
11,7
11,3
11,7
10,4
10,6
10,4
10,6
9,6
TABLE II.
COMPOSITION AND CALORIFIC VALUES OF GAS MIXTURES
OBTAINED FROM WOOD PELLETS
Т2, С
Volume fractions of
combustible
components
Calorific
value,
MJ /m3
H2
CO
CnHm
QH
QL
850
950
1000
Pyrolysis
0,39
0,47
0,46
0,28
0,28
0,41
0,46
0,26
0,10
0,01
0,00
0,16
12,5
11,5
11,7
13,4
11,5
10,6
10,9
12,2
The data comparison shows that calorific value of gas
mixture
obtained
in
«pyrolysis
with
cracking»
mode
practically does not depend on the top chamber temperature
T2 and differs about 10% from calorific value of gas mixture
obtained in «pyrolysis» mode. For peat pellets it is more in
«pyrolysis with cracking» mode and for wood pellets it is
more in «pyrolysis» mode. The gas composition is much
more sensitive to the temperature T2. As stated above the
temperature Т2 increase leads to CO2 and CH4 content
decrease. For the temperature Т2 = 1000°C the product gas
mixture consists of CO and H2 in practically equal parts.
If calorific value of the gas mixture obtained in
«pyrolysis
with
cracking» mode
slightly
differs
from
calorific value of the gas mixture obtained in «pyrolysis»
mode,
the
gas
volumes
are essentially different (see
Figure 3). That means the «pyrolysis with cracking» mode
allows increasing the conversion degree of the initial raw
material into gas phase.
V.
PILOT POWER PLANT
On the base of experimental data mentioned above, there
was designed an experimental power plant of electric power
up to 50 kW shown at Figure 5.
Figure 5.
Pilot power plant (biomass processing unit).
The power station consists of biomass processing unit,
control and measurement system, and a gas-diesel engine
with an electric generator.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-336-0
BIONATURE 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
As a result of the pyrolysis and the subsequent cracking
of emanating volatile products over a char at the temperature
1000oС it is possible to increase the conversion degree of 
initial raw materials and to receive about 1.4 м3 of gas with
calorific value approximately 11.7 MJ/м3 from one kilogram
of wood or peat pellets.
Experimental investigations have shown that wood and
peat pellets can be used in the technology for integrated
processing of raw hydrocarbon materials for obtaining
carbon material and synthesis gas.
Future work will include energy balance determination
for the technology and series of pilot power plant tests.
REFERENCES
[1]
Russian-Danish Business Forum (2013), retrieved April,
2014, from: http://www.rdbforum.ru/investment/russia/invest
ment_climate/
[2]
E.A. Shipitin, Main lines of using peat and its products.
Proceedings of VNITP, Moscow 1992, Issue 69, pp. 52-76,
(in Russian)
[3]
Wide use of peat, wood and industrial waste for energy. News
of the Russian Ministry of Energy (10.06.10), retrieved April,
2014, from:http://minenergo.gov.ru/press/min_news/3961.html
[4]
M. Lisý, P. Kohout, Z. Skála, M. Balás, and J. Moskalík:
Biomass
Gasification
and Cogeneration, 16th
European
Biomass Conference, (2008), pp. 843-849.
[5]
L. Pengmei,
Y. Zhenhong,
M. Longlong,
W. Chuangzhi,
C. Yong, and Z. Jingxu: Hydrogen-rich gas production from
biomass air and oxygen/steam gasification in a downdraft
gasifier, Renewable energy, Vol. 32, no. 13, (2007), pp. 2173-
2185.
[6]
D. Dayton, A Review of the Literature on Catalytic Biomass
Tar
Destruction-Milestone
Completion
Report,
2002,
NREL/TP-510-32815,
National
Renewable
Energy
Laboratory, web address: www.osti.gov/bridge.
[7]
M. Boroson,
J. Howard,
J. Longwell,
and
W. Peters,
Heterogenous Cracking of Wood Pyrolysis Tars over Fresh
Wood Char Surfaces, Energy&Fuels, Vol.3, 1989, pp.735-740
[8]
S.K. Chembukulam,
A.S. Dandge,
N.L. Kovilur,
R.K. Seshagiri, and R. Vaidyeswaran, “Smokeless Fuel from
Carbonized Sawdust”, Ind. Eng. Chem. Prod. Res. Dev., vol.
20, 1981, pp. 714-719.
[9]
V.V. Kosov, V.F. Kosov, I.L. Maikov, V.A. Sinelshchikov,
and V.M. Zaichenko. High calorific gas mixture produced by
pyrolysis of wood and peat., The Proceedings of 17th
European Biomass Conference and Exhibition, 29 June - 3
July 2009, Hamburg, Germany, pp. 1085 – 1088
[10] V.F. Kosov, V.A. Sinelshchikov, and V.M. Zaichenko. New
Teechnology for Integrated Processing of Biomass and
Natural Gas with Production of Hydrogen and Pure Carbon
Materials, The Proceedings of 16th European Biomass
Conference and Exhibition, Valencia, Spain, 2008, pp. 1171 –
1175.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-336-0
BIONATURE 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

