Comparative Studies of the Combustion of Raw and Heat-treated Straw and 
Combined Coal and Straw Pellets 
 
Rafail Isemin, Aleksander Mikhalev, Valentin Konyakhin, Sergey Kuzmin, Oleg Milovanov, Dmitry Klimov 
 Ministry of Education and Science 
Tambov State Technical University 
Tambov, Russia 
e-mails: {penergy@list.ru, risemin@gmail.com, milowanov.o@yandex.ru, marcelldm@mail.ru} 
 
 
Abstract—The main combustion process should be carried out 
in the regime of a fixed, forced ventilated bed for the efficient 
combustion of biofuel with low-melting ash in boilers with 
furnaces with a small height. After a certain period of time, a 
bed must be transferred into a state of turbulent fluidization, 
and then returned to its original state. So, the objective of the 
present work is to study the process of pellets combustion in 
such a bed (let’s call it a pulsating bed). The suggested 
technology 
of 
combusting 
ensures 
prolonged 
steady 
combustion of fuel with moderate carbon monoxide emissions. 
Combined coal waste and straw pellets combust more stable 
with less carbon monoxide emissions than straw pellets. 
Preliminary torrefaction does not influence the stability of 
combustion, but allows reducing carbon monoxide emissions 
from the combustion of combined coal waste and straw pellets. 
Production of coal-straw pellets can apparently be considered 
as a new variant of the organization of coal and biomass co-
combustion; and in the case of pellets torrefaction, it allows 
producing water-resistant fuel suitable for use not only in 
electric power stations, but also in small boiler-houses. 
Keywords-fluidized bed; fixed bed; straw pellets; coal’s waste 
pellets. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Analyzing the sources of raw materials for biofuel 
production, we came to the conclusion that the most 
accessible and annually renewable resource here is straw of 
different crops. Up to 120 million tons of straw of wheat, 
rye, oats and other cereal crops is annually gathered in 
Russia. As for winter wheat straw, we gather up to 60 
million tons of it. Wheat straw is not used to feed cattle, but 
it is used in small quantities as bedding for the animals. 
Straw is often burned in the fields, as the value of its use as a 
fertilizer is questioned by many experts. According to our 
estimations, Russia can use up to 24 million tons of straw as 
fuel every year without harming either crop farming or 
agriculture. Straw as biofuel can be used for co-combustion 
with coal, including low-grade coal and coal waste (slurry). 
At the same time, we must bear in mind that straw is CO2 – 
neutral fuel, i.e., the same amount of carbon dioxide is 
released during the combustion as the plant absorbs during 
its growth. Taking into account the low bulk density of straw 
and granulometric composition of slurry (the particles are of 
size up to 0.2 mm), it makes sense to process this fuel into 
pellets, which are easy to transport and store. The feeding of 
pellets into a boiler furnace can be easily mechanized and 
automated. Such coal-straw pellets can be used in low-power 
boilers (up to 1 MW). 
However, straw differs from wood and wood wastes, 
which are now most frequently used as fuel, by a high 
content of chlorine, silicon, phosphorus, and potassium. The 
presence of these compounds in straw contributes to the 
formation of slag agglomerates in the furnace, coherent 
deposits on the boiler heating surface and corrosion under 
these deposits. Thus, about 80% of the ash, produced during 
combustion of straw, can form slag in the boiler furnace. At 
the same time, only 10% of the ash, produced from the 
combustion of wood bark, can form slag; and the ash from 
stem wood does not form slag at all [1]. 
Some problems with the formation of slag agglomerates 
arise both during the combustion of agropellets in a fixed bed 
[2][3], or during the combustion of agropellets in a fluidized 
bed of inert material [4][5][6][7].  
The process of straw combustion in a fixed bed is largely 
influenced by the mass flow rate of blasting air, and the 
dependence of straw combustion rate in a fixed bed on the 
flow rate of blasting air has an extreme character [8]. This 
severely limits the range of power control of the furnace. 
It is possible to increase the efficiency of biofuel 
combustion, including the increase of the flow rate of 
blasting air, by the organization of the combustion process in 
a fluidized bed.  
Bhattacharya et al. [9] shows that the efficiency of 
combustion in a fluidized bed of such high-ash biofuel as 
rice husks (ash content of 14% or more) can reach more than 
85%. Moreover, in contrast to the combustion of biofuel in a 
fixed bed, the efficiency of a process increases with the 
increase of the flow rate of primary air during the 
combustion in a fluidized bed.  
However, as mentioned above, during the combustion of 
biogranules with low-melting ash in a fluidized bed, we 
observe gradual agglomeration around a burning granule of 
the particles of inert material, which ultimately leads to 
defluidization and cessation of a combustion process.  
It is possible to prevent defluidization by increasing the 
gas velocity in the furnace and by transferring a bed into the 
turbulent fluidization regime. 
The use of turbulent fluidization technology can provide 
significant advantages. So, the combustion of carbon spheres 
in the turbulent fluidization regime passes at the rate of 1.5-3 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
Figure 1. Functional scheme 
times higher than in a bubbling fluidized bed [10], and it can 
be explained by significantly higher rates of mass transfer. 
However, as applied to the technology of biofuel 
combustion in low- and medium-power boilers, i.e., in 
boilers with a small height of the furnace, the technology of 
combustion in the turbulent fluidization regime may be of 
limited use due to high fuel entrainment losses. 
This implies the following proposition: the main 
combustion process should be carried out in the regime of a 
fixed, forced ventilated bed for the efficient combustion of 
biofuel with low-melting ash in boilers with furnaces with a 
small height. After a certain period of time, a bed must be 
transferred into a state of turbulent fluidization, and then 
returned to its original state. The transfer of a bed from one 
state to another can be implemented by changing the current 
frequency, energizing the drive of a blow fan. In this 
connection, the regulators of frequency can be programmed 
in a certain way, and the boiler operates automatically in 
both regimes, without operator’s intervention. 
So, the objective of the present work is to study the 
process of pellets combustion in such a bed (let us call it a 
pulsating bed). 
II. 
THE EXPERIMENTAL UNIT 
Figure 1 shows an outline of the experimental unit for 
studying the combustion of different types of solid fuel. The 
studies are conducted in the remote cylindrical furnace with 
inner diameter of 300 mm and height of 1000 mm above the 
air distribution grill. The furnace is water-cooled, and the 
cooling circuit of the furnace is inserted in the cooling circuit 
of the heat exchanger of flue gases. 
The design of the furnace provides the tangential inlet of 
flue gases into the combustion can of the exchanger. This 
provides the post-combustion of volatile matters and the 
fallout of fuel and ash particles from gas flow.  
The furnace is equipped with a hopper for solid fuel and 
with the device for fuel feeding in the furnace. Fuel inlet in 
the furnace is carried out at height of 350 mm above the air 
distribution grill. 
The furnace is rested upon the air distribution grill; 
blasting primary air from the high-pressure fan is forced 
under this grill. The frequency of the electrical current, 
energizing the drive of the blow fan, is controlled, and it 
allows us to alter both the pressure of blasting air and 
blasting air flow rate by using a special program. 
III. 
METHODS AND MATERIALSE 
In the course of the experiment, we combust pellets 
produced from straw, straw tor-pellets, combined coal slurry 
(70% by weight) and straw (30% by weight) pellets, and 
identical tor-pellets. Such a composition of pellets is 
conditioned by the fact that we want to get pellets with a 
maximum content of coal slurry. On the other hand, when 
the content of straw in the mixture is less than 30%, the 
obtained pellets are insufficiently strong. The cost of 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
Figure 2. Mean square deviation of pressure drop in a bed vs. 
increase of flow rate of blasting air. 
production of pellets from a mixture of coal slurry and straw 
is 60 euros/ton, and it is approximately equal to the cost of 
straw pellets production. 
Torrefaction of pellets is carried out at temperature of 
270°C during 30 minutes. In such a case, the weight loss of 
samples is the following: 85% for straw, 50% for coal slurry, 
and 60% for combined coal slurry and straw pellets. 
The combined straw and coal slurry pellets have the 
following composition before torrefaction: sulfur – 1.2%, 
oxygen – 17.77%, hydrogen – 3.57%, nitrogen – 1.12%, 
carbon – 42.74%. After torrefaction these pellets have the 
following composition: sulfur – 1.27%, oxygen – 10.47%, 
hydrogen – 3.26%, nitrogen – 1.14%, carbon – 44.26%. The 
net calorific value of pellets increases by 17% and runs up to 
19 MJ/kg by reducing the oxygen content and by increasing 
the carbon content. The hygroscopicity of pellets after 
torrefaction decreases from 11% to 7.1%. 
As for straw pellets, the hygroscopicity of pellets 
decreases from 22% to 12% after torrefaction, and the 
calorific value increases by 18% and runs up to 18.3 MJ/kg. 
Previously the authors of the following paper [11] 
determined the values of air flow rate, fed for the combustion 
in the same furnace as Figure 1 shows, where a bed, 
consisting of a mixture of straw pellets and solid combustion 
products, transits into a state of turbulent fluidization. The 
fractional composition of the bed is as follows: the fraction 
of particles smaller than 1 mm is 25%, the fraction of 
particles with the size from 1 mm to 2 is 27%, the fraction of 
particles with the size from 2 mm to 5 is 10% and the 
fraction of particles having a size from 5 to 6 mm is 38%. 
We study the pressure drop pulsations in a bed during the 
combustion of pellets at different flow rates of blasting air. 
The measurement of the pressure drop in a bed is performed 
by means of the differential micromanometer “Testo – 525”. 
The digital signal from the micromanometer “Testo – 525” is 
transmitted every 50 mcs to a personal computer, which 
allows storing the measured values and subjecting them to a 
statistical analysis The micromanometer “Testo – 525” has a 
measuring range from 0 to 3 kPa, the maximum duration of 
continuous measurements is 60 seconds, the measurement 
error is 0.0015 kPa. 
Figure 2 shows the alteration of the mean square 
deviation of pressure drop in a bed with increasing the flow 
rate of blasting air.  
As is well known [12][13][14][15], a sharp drop in the 
values of mean square deviation of pressure drop pulsation in 
a bed is typical to the transition of a bed into the turbulent 
fluidization regime. Hence, for our case (combustion of 
pellets in a bed of solid combustion products) a bed transits 
into a state of turbulent fluidization at air flow rate, divided 
by the cross sectional area of the empty furnace, of 2.0 – 2.5 
m/s. 
In the experiments, a bed is in a fixed state most of the 
time (flow rate of inlet blasting air in the furnace is 1.0 – 1.2 
m/s), and then, as a result of increasing the current 
frequency, energizing the drive of a blow fan, a bed is 
abruptly transferred into turbulent fluidization (flow rate of 
blasting air is 2.0 – 2.5 m/s), and then a bed is again 
transferred into a fixed state. In the course of the 
experiments, we continuously measure the content of carbon 
monoxide, nitrogen oxide, carbon dioxide in flue gases, 
using the gas-analyzer VarioPlus; and we measure the 
content of sulfur oxides during the combustion of combined 
coal waste and straw pellets. The gas-analyzer VarioPlus 
provides the following accuracy: 0.2% for oxygen 
concentration, 0.02% for CO concentration measure, 
± 5 ppm NO concentration measure. 
The analysis of changes in the concentrations of the 
above mentioned substances in flue gases during the 
experiment allows us to evaluate whether the conditions for 
efficient combustion in furnace remain, and whether the 
formation of a significant degree of ash and slag 
agglomerates, preventing the normal combustion, does not 
occur. It is known, that the concentration of oxygen and 
carbon monoxide dramatically increases in flue gases and the 
concentration of carbon dioxide decreases during the 
formation of slag agglomerates and the cessation of normal 
combustion [4].  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
a) straw pellets 
 
 
 
 
 
b) straw tor-pellets 
 
c) coal waste and straw pellets  
 
 
d) coal waste and straw tor-pellets 
Figure 3. Changes in concentration of oxygen in flue gases from combustion of different pellets. 
 
a) straw pellets 
 
 
 
 
 
b) straw tor-pellets 
 
c) coal waste and straw pellets  
 
 
d) coal waste and straw tor-pellets 
Figure 4. Changes in concentration of carbon monoxide in flue gases from combustion of different pellets. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Figure 3 shows the curves of changes in the 
concentration of oxygen in flue gases during the combustion 
of straw pellets (a) and straw tor-pellets (b), combined coal 
waste and straw pellets (c) and combined coal waste and 
straw tor-pellets (d). 
As Figure 3 shows, the combustion of all types of fuel at 
a periodic transfer of a bed from a fixed state into a turbulent 
fluidized state is stable, and the combustion process does not 
cease. The peaks of oxygen concentration are observed only 
after increasing the flow of air (after increasing the current 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
a) straw pellets 
 
 
 
 
 
b) straw tor-pellets 
 
c) coal waste and straw pellets  
 
 
d) coal waste and straw tor-pellets 
Figure 5. Changes in concentration of nitrogen oxides in flue gases from combustion of different pellets (symbols are identical with the previous figures). 
frequency, energizing the drive of a blow fan). Therefore, 
ash and slag agglomerates are not formed in the furnace or 
their formation does not prevent the normal combustion (this 
may be in case of formation of brittle porous agglomerates, 
through which air can freely flow to the fuel). 
The lowest oxygen concentration fluctuations occur in 
flue gases from the combustion of combined coal waste and 
straw tor-pellets. Such pellets have a minimum yield of 
volatile matters, and may be combusted in a bed in an 
arranged way. 
We observe the lowest concentration of carbon monoxide 
in flue gases from the combustion of combined coal waste 
and straw pellets and especially from the combustion of coal-
straw tor-pellets (Figure 4 c, d). This can be explained by a 
low content of volatile matters in these pellets. During the 
combustion of these pellets, sharp carbon monoxide 
emissions are observed only with increasing the flow rate of 
blasting air at the moment when the bed is transferred into 
the turbulent fluidization regime. 
As for straw pellets, torrefaction of pellets practically 
does not influence the emissions of carbon monoxide; it 
evidently can be explained by the slight reduction in the 
yield of volatile matters (about 13%) as a result of such 
processing.  
As a result of torrefaction the nitrogen content of pellets 
does not practically change and remains equal to 0.14 – 
0.15% for straw pellets and 1.12 – 1.14% for combined coal 
waste and straw pellets. Therefore, the emission of nitrogen 
oxides from the combustion of all the types of pellets (Figure 
5) is approximately the same (the emission of nitrogen 
oxides during the combustion of coal-straw pellets is higher). 
So, the following question is obvious: why the emission 
of nitrogen oxides is about the same during the combustion 
of coal-straw pellets, which contain about 8 times more 
nitrogen than straw pellets, as during the combustion of 
straw pellets? In our opinion, there is a partial reduction of 
nitrogen oxides to molecular nitrogen by carbon of fuel when 
the flue gases flow passes through it. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
1) 
The suggested technology of combusting fuel with 
low melting temperature of ash (combustion in a fixed bed 
with a periodic transfer of a bed into the turbulent 
fluidization regime) ensures prolonged steady combustion of 
fuel with moderate carbon monoxide emissions. 
2) 
Combined coal waste and straw pellets combust 
more stable with less carbon monoxide emissions than straw 
pellets. 
3) 
Preliminary torrefaction does not influence the 
stability of combustion, but allows reducing carbon 
monoxide emissions from the combustion of combined coal 
waste and straw pellets. 
4) 
Production of coal-straw pellets can apparently be 
considered as a new variant of the organization of coal and 
biomass co-combustion, which in the case of pellets 
torrefaction allows producing water-resistant fuel suitable for 
use not only in electric power stations, but also in small 
boiler-houses. 
5) 
The results of the study can be used for the boilers 
with any power, equipped with furnaces with a fluidized bed. 
In this case, the furnace of a real boiler can be considered as 
consisting of several furnaces with the inner diameter of 300 
mm (the furnace with such a diameter is used in this study). 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is financially supported by the Ministry of 
Education 
and 
Science 
of 
the 
Russian 
Federation 
(Agreement № 14.577.21.0116).  
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Gilbe, M. Othman, E. Lindstrom, D. Bostrom, R. Backman, R. 
Samuelsson, and J. Burvail, “Slagging characteristics during 
residential combustion of biomass pellets,” Energy and Fuel, 2008, 
vol. 22, pp. 3536-3543. 
[2] M. Rőnnbäck, M. Johansson, and F. Claesson, “Combustion test in 
residential burners of pellets from new ash rich biomass,” Proceeding 
on European Pellets Conferences, Wels, Austria 2009. 
[3] S. Kiesewalter and C. Rőhricht “Pelleting of straw and hay,”  
Proceeding on European Pellets Conferences, Wels, Austria, 2004, 
pp. 283-296. 
[4] F. Scala and R. Chirone, “Characterization and early detection of bed 
agglomeration during the fluidized bed combustion of olive husk,” 
Energy & Fuel, 2006, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 120-132. 
[5] W. Lin, K. Dam-Johansen, and F. Frandsen, “Agglomeration in bio-
fuel fired fluidized combustors,” Chemical Engineering Journal, 
2003, vol. 96, pp. 171-185. 
[6] B. Vesna, C. Z. Edgardo, and S. Juha, “Prediction of agglomeration, 
fouling, and corrosion tendency of fuels in CFB co-combustion,” 20th 
International conference on fluidized bed combustion., 2009, pp. 416-
421. 
[7] B. D. Grubor, S. N. Oka, M. S. Ili, D. V. Daki, and B. T. Arsi, 
“Biomass FBC combustion – bed agglomeration problems,” K. J. 
Heinschel (Ed.), Proceeding of the 13th International Conference on 
FBC, vol. 1, 1995, pp. 515-522. 
[8] A. Khor, C. Ryu, Y.-B. Yang, V. N. Sharifi, and J. Swithenbank, 
“Straw combustion in a fixed bed combustor,” Fuel, 2007, vol. 86, 
152-160. 
[9] S. C. Bhattacharya, N. Shah, and Z. Alikhani, “Some aspects of 
fluidized bed combustion of paddy husk,” Applied Energy, 1984, 16, 
pp. 307-316. 
[10] P. Basu and D. Subbarao, “An experimental investigation of burning 
rate and mass transfer in a turbulent fluidized bed,” Combustion and 
Flame, 1986, 66, pp. 261-269. 
[11] D. Virysov, R. Isemin, S. Kuzmin, N. Kondukov, and A. Mikhalev, 
“Determination of the fluidization regimes of bicomponent beds of 
solid particles and the characteristic velocities of a gas in these beds 
by the pulsations of the differential pressure in them,” Journal of 
Engineering Physics and Thermophysics, 2013, vol. 80,  2, pp. 308-
315. 
[12] H. T. Bi,  N. Ellis, I. A. Abba, and J. R. Grace, “A state-of-the-art 
review of gas-solid turbulent fluidization,” Chemical Engineering 
Science, 2000, 55, pp. 4789-4825. 
[13] J. Yerushalmi and N. T. Cankurt, “Further studies of the regimes of 
fluidization,” Powder Technology, 1979, 24, pp. 187-205. 
[14] G. Lee and S. D. Kim, “Pressure fluctuations in turbulent fluidized 
beds,” Journal of Chemical Engineering of Japan, 1988, 21, pp. 515-
521. 
[15] M. Rhodes, “What is Turbulent Fluidization,” Powder Technology, 
1996, 88, pp. 3-14. 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

