Thermotechnical Characteristics of Granulated Fuel Made of Chicken Litter: 
Researching and Ways of its Upgrading 
 
Vladimir F. Kosov, Julia S. Kuzmina, Vladimir A. Sinelschikov, and George A. Sytchev 
Joint Institute for High Temperatures of the Russian Academy of Sciences (JIHT RAS), 
Moscow, Russia 
E-mails: vladimir.f.kosov@mail.ru, juli_kuzmina@mail.ru, sinelschikov@mail.ru, george.sytchev@gmail.com 
 
Abstract— Experimental data on the effect of heat treatment 
(torrefaction) on thermotechnical properties of chicken litter 
pellets are presented. Initial raw material was heated in a 
nitrogen atmosphere with the rate of 10оС/min up to the 
torrefaction temperature Tt and then was held at this 
temperature during some time. Process of heat treatment lasted 
60 
minutes. 
Experiments 
were 
carried 
out 
at 
three 
temperatures Tt = 230, 250 и 270оС. To investigate the 
properties 
of 
the 
initial 
and 
torrefied 
materials 
the 
thermogravimetric 
analysis 
and 
differential 
scanning 
calorimetry were used. As a result, the data on the influence of 
torrefaction on devolatilization, ash content and combustion 
value of the granulated chicken litter were obtained. In addition 
hygroscopic properties of initial and torrefied material was 
measured. 
Listed 
thermotechnical 
characteristics 
were 
compared with similar characteristics of granular fuel made of 
wood. As a result of executed investigations it was shown that 
the torrefied granulated chicken litter can be used as a solid fuel 
for autonomous heating systems. 
Keywords - biomass; solid fuel; torrefaction; pyrolysis  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Agricultural waste, both vegetable and animal origin, are 
renewable hydrocarbon resources and relate to one of the 
most promising and environmentally friendly substitute of 
fossil fuel. Usage of agricultural waste for energy purposes 
would solve not only the problem of their utilization, but also 
significantly increases the power availability of agricultural 
industry by domestic resources. In addition, utilization of 
agricultural waste will contribute to solving a number of 
environmental 
problems 
associated 
with 
agricultural 
production. Last circumstance is primarily concerned with 
waste of livestock and poultry breeding. 
Average chicken farm produces up to 300 tons of litter 
(consisted of manure and wood sawdust) per day. Simple 
storage of chicken litter leads to pollution of ground, water 
and air. The composition of the chicken manure is as 
following: water - 50-70%, organic matter - about 25%, 
nitrogen – 0.7-1.9%, phosphoric acid - 1.5-2.0%, potassium 
oxide - 0.8-1.0%, lime - 2.4%, magnesium - 0.8%, sulfur - 
0.5%. Chicken manure contains valuable microelements 
such as copper, manganese, zinc, cobalt, boron, as well as 
active ingredients. Fresh chicken manure, usually, contains 
hazardous pathogenic bacteria, as well as in large amounts 
contains nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur. Content of 
nitrogen and phosphorus in chicken manure is 4-5 times 
more than in cattle manure [1]. The upper layer of the 
ground, on which litter is stored, contains about 4950 kg/ha 
of mineral nitrogen (including 2500 kg/ha of the nitrate), 
which is in 17 times higher in comparison with 
uncontaminated soil. 
There are two ways of chicken litter utilization: to use it 
as fertilizer and as raw stock for fuel production. 
Biogas and bio-fertilizer are two products of technology 
of the chicken litter processing, based on anaerobic 
fermentation. Such kind of technologies are widespread. If 
satisfied all specific process parameters such as optimal 
fermentation temperature, continuous mixing of raw 
materials, and well-timed loading and unloading of the raw 
material in reactor it is possible to produce up to 6 m3 biogas 
from 1 m3 of reactor. Biogas, produced a result of action of 
bacteria, consists of methane (60-70%), carbon dioxide (30-
40%), hydrogen sulfide (0-3%) and hydrogen impurities, 
nitrogen oxides and ammonia. Calorific value of biogas 
reaches 25 MJ per cubic meter that is equivalent to 
combustion of 0.6 liters of gasoline, 0.85 liters of spirit, 1.7 
kg of wood or use 1.4 kWh of electricity. 
Besides energy generation, the bioconversion process 
allows to solve another problem. Fermented chicken litter, 
when used in agriculture as fertilizer, helps increasing crop 
yield a 10-15% compared with the unfermented chicken 
litter. This is explained by the fact that during the anaerobic 
treatment, the mineralization and nitrogen fixation occur [1]. 
Chicken litter can also be used as a solid fuel. Production 
of solid fuel from chicken litter requires preliminary 
pelletization. Chicken litter pellets can be used as an 
intermediate product for further processing, or directly as a 
solid fuel. In the first case gasification of chicken litter 
pellets can be proposed for the production of gaseous fuel. 
This technology allows to convert chicken litter pellets into 
gaseous fuel with combustion value about 5000 kJ/m3 [2]. 
Composition of gaseous fuel, received by this technology is 
shown in Table I. 
TABLE I.  COMPOSITION OF GASEOUS FUEL, PRODUCED FROM CHICKEN 
LITTER PELLETS 
Gas component 
Volume content, % 
CO 
15-22 
H2 
16-22 
CH4 
1.0-2.5 
CO2 
11-15 
N2 
45-48 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-336-0
BIONATURE 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

The main drawback of this technology is the high content 
of nitrogen and carbon dioxide in the produced gas mixture 
that lead to decrease of it combustion value. 
As a solid fuel chicken litter pellets can be used for 
burning in the pellet boilers. It is also possible to use them 
for co-firing with straw, wood chips or coal. The main 
disadvantage of chicken litter pellets is its low heating value. 
So we encounter the need to raise the combustion heat of 
chicken litter pellets. One way of solving this problem is 
thermal treatment of pellets in neutral gas environment. This 
process is well known as a torrefaction and is widely used 
for processing different types of vegetable biomass into solid 
fuel [3][4]. In course of torrefaction not only the moisture 
removal from an initial raw material, i.e., its drying, occurs 
but also partial thermal decomposition of an organic 
constituent of biomass takes place. As a result a solid 
hydrophobic product is formed. In addition its specific 
combustion value surpasses a similar value for initial raw 
material [4]. 
The present paper is devoted to investigation of influence 
of the torrefaction conditions on such properties of chicken 
litter pellets as devolatilization, specific combustion value 
and hygroscopicity. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS 
Thermal processing (torrefaction) of pellets consisted in 
their heating in the inert gas environment (nitrogen) to the 
torrefaction temperature Тt = 230, 250 and 270oC at the rate 
of 10oC/min and holding at this temperature during some 
time. Total time of the process of heat treatment was equal to 
60 min. In Fig.1, one can see the temperature profile during 
torrefaction. 
When heating the mass change of pellets takes place as a 
result of devolatilization. For measurements of the 
quantitative characteristics associated with mass loss of raw 
materials during heating the thermogravimetric (TGA) 
analysis 
was 
carried 
out. 
For 
this 
purpose, 
the 
thermogravimetric analyzer SDT Q600 was used. The SDT 
Q600 was capable also to perform the differential scanning 
calorimetry (DSC) and it was used during investigations of 
the influence of torrefaction on the combustion value of 
granulated biomass fuel. 
As raw materials there were used chicken litter pellets. 
Moisture content of the pellets was equal to 4.6%, ash 
content in terms of the dry basis – 13.7%, the yield of 
volatile matter in terms of the dry basis – 73.5%. Results of 
ultimate analysis in terms of the dry ash free basis were as 
follows: carbon – 48%, hydrogen – 6.4%, nitrogen – 5.9%.  
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Heating in neutral gas environment (nitrogen) 
As mentioned above, in the process of torrefaction the 
release of volatile matter, caused by thermal decomposition 
of the organic constituents of raw material, takes place. In 
Fig. 1, the TG curves describing mass losses of samples 
during torrefaction at different torrefaction temperatures are 
presented. Ibid the TG curve describing the mass loss when 
heated up to 800°C is shown. After the sample temperature 
reaches the value of Тt the rate of mass losses decreases 
because of reduction of sample mass. As it appears from 
Fig. 1, mass losses account for 27, 34 and 37 % at 
torrefaction 
temperature 
230, 
250 
and 
270oC, 
correspondingly. From a comparison of curves, shown in 
Fig. 1, follows that these losses are noticeably less than total 
content of volatile matter in the initial sample. 
 
Figure 1.  Change of temperature (1) and ralative mass (2) of chicken litter 
pellets during pyrolysis and torrefaction at different temperatures Тt. 
Since wood sawdust is a part of chicken litter it is natural 
to compare the yield of volatile matter from them and from 
chicken litter pellets. As mentioned above, content of 
volatile matter in the chicken litter pellets is 73.5% (in terms 
of the dry basis). A similar parameter for sawdust is 82%. 
Fig. 2 presents data on the rate of mass loss as function of 
temperature (so-called DTG curves) for wood sawdust and 
chicken litter pellets.  
 
Figure 2.  Rate of mass loss of wood sawdust and chicken litter pellets 
during heating in nitrogen at the rate of 10oC/min. 
The DTG curve, corresponding to wood sawdust, has 
three representative knees (are marked by arrows) 
associated with thermal decomposition of hemicellulose (1), 
cellulose (2) and lignin (3). On the DTG curve, 
corresponding to the chicken litter pellets, the beginning of 
devolatilization is shifted to lower temperatures. The 
representative knees, associated with thermal decomposition 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-336-0
BIONATURE 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

of hemicellulose, cellulose and lignin, are persisted, 
although their amplitudes are varied considerably. 
Noticeable qualitative and quantitative differences are 
observed for the DSC curves that describe the heat flow 
required to maintain a given heating rate of wood sawdust 
and chicken litter pellets (see Fig. 3). The first endothermic 
effect for chicken litter pellets is observed in the 
temperature range 120-270oC. For sawdust the maximum of 
the 
first 
endothermic 
effect, 
associated 
with 
the 
decomposition of cellulose (see Fig. 2), falls on temperature 
of about 360oC. In the temperature range 390-480oC 
exothermic effect, caused by decomposition of lignin, 
results in change of sign of heat flow in the case of sawdust. 
At temperatures above 650oC, DSC curves for wood 
sawdust and chicken litter pellets coincide practically.  
 
Figure 3.  DSC curve of wood sawdust and chicken litter pellets in nitrogen 
at the heating rate of 10oC/min. 
B. Heating in oxidizing gas environment (air) 
DTG curves, measured in oxidizing gas environment and 
in particular in air, differ considerably from similar curves, 
measured in a neutral gas environment. This difference is 
primarily due to the fact that heterogeneous oxidation 
reactions go in air. In Fig. 4, DTG curves measured in air 
for initial and torrefied chicken litter pellets are shown.  
 
Figure 4.  Rate of mass loss of untreated and torrefied chicken litter pellets 
during heating in air at the rate of 10oC/min. 
On the DTG curve measured in nitrogen, the basic mass 
loss is observed only in the temperature range 200-450oC 
and is connected with devolatilization (see Fig. 2). On the 
DTG curve, measured in air, in the temperature range 450-
530oC there is observed the second peak of mass loss that is 
associated with the oxidation of char residue. Shift of first  
maximum towards higher temperatures for the DTG curves 
corresponding to the samples, processed at higher 
torrefaction temperatures (see Fig. 4), is explained by 
decreasing content of least thermostable organic component, 
namely hemicellulose, in their composition.  
DTG curves, shown in Fig. 4, correlate well with the 
DSC curves describing the heat generation caused by 
oxidation reactions proceeding during heating pellets in the 
air (see Fig. 5). 
 
Figure 5.  DSC curve of untreated and torrefied chicken litter pellets in air 
at the heating rate of 10oC/min. 
The first maximum in the DTG curves shown in Fig. 5 is 
associated with the oxidation of the volatile matter, the 
second – with oxidation of the char residue. As seen from 
Fig. 5, an increase of torrefaction temperature leads to an 
increase in the amplitude of both peaks. This behavior is 
explained by the fact that with increasing Тt the combustion 
value of volatile matter (the first peak) and the relative 
fraction of the char residue (the second peak) are increasing 
also. As a result the combustion value of torrefied pellets 
exceeds the combustion value of initial pellets and increases 
with increasing the torrefaction temperature. 
C. Thermotechnical characteristics of torrefied chicken 
litter pellets 
Table II presents the main characteristics of the initial 
chicken litter pellets and the pellets torrefied at different 
temperatures, which are important if we discuss the usage 
them as a solid fuel. From the presented data it follows that 
an increase of torrefaction temperature results in appreciable 
increase of specific combustion value. Unfortunately, at the 
same time the ash content, that in chicken litter pellets is 
several times greater than in peat and especially in wood 
pellets, increases also. Decrease of the volatile content in 
torrefied pellets (see Table II) leads to decrease of soot 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-336-0
BIONATURE 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

content in combustion products and decrease of smoke 
emission. 
TABLE II.  THERMOTECHNICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF 
UNTREATED AND TORRIFIED CHICKEN LITTER PELLETS 
Characteristics 
Untreated 
pellet 
Pellet torrefied at 
230˚C 
250˚C 
270˚C 
Relative combustion value 
1 
1.32 
1.41 
1.65 
Ash content (dry basis), % 
13.7 
16.6 
18.6 
20.8 
Content of volatile matter 
(dry basis), % 
73.5 
63 
58.7 
56.6 
 
Other important characteristic of any solid fuel is its 
hydrophobic properties. To determine the effect of 
torrefaction 
on 
these 
properties 
the 
corresponding 
measurements were carried out. During measurement a test 
sample was placed into a desiccator, in which 100% 
humidity at a temperature of 26oC is maintained. 
Periodically measurements of mass of test sample were 
carried out. Results of experiments are presented in Fig. 6. 
 
Figure 6.  Relative mass change of initial and torrefied (at temperature 
270oC) pellets as a result of water vapour uptake. 
The presented data show that the initial sample absorbs 
water vapor from the air considerably faster than the sample 
torrefied at temperature of 270oC. It is necessary to note that 
untreated chicken litter pellets swelled and fell apart after 
140 hours presence in a desiccator with the abovementioned 
conditions. At the same time, pellets torrefied at temperature 
of 270oC, conserved their shape and hardness. Such a 
behavior simplifies storage and transportation of torrefied 
pellets. 
From these data one can see that the torrefaction allows 
to improve essentially the hydrophobic property of 
granulated biomass fuel. The limit moisture content of 
pellets torrefied at Тt = 270oC is practically half in 
comparison with untreated pellets. It is necessary to note, 
that untreated wood pellets swelled and fell apart when in 
contact with water. The torrefied wood pellets kept the form 
in the similar conditions. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION  
Experimental investigations of influence of thermal 
treatment (torrefaction) on the properties of chicken litter 
pellets were fulfilled. Measurements were carried out by 
methods of the thermogravimetric analysis and the 
differential scanning calorimetry in neutral and oxidizing 
gas environment (nitrogen and air, respectively). As a result 
of performed experimental investigations it is shown that 
thermal processing of chicken litter pellets allows to 
improve its consumer properties, namely, to increase the 
specific combustion value and to improve hydrophobic 
properties. Thus torrefied chicken litter pellets can be 
recommended for using as a solid fuel. 
V. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
LLC company “CentrInvestProect” 
http://www.biorex.ru/index.php/type-of-trash/pomet/. 
[2] 
OJSC “BASHGIPROAGROPROM”, “Livestock and poultry farms 
recycling in the effective biological fertilizer and power-engineering”, 
Russia,Ufa,2010. 
http://www.appri.ru/sites/default/files/uploads/1297237451.pdf 
[3] 
P. C. A. Bergman and J. H. A. Kiel, “Torrefaction for biomass 
upgrading”, ECN Report, ECN-RX–05-180. 2005, pp. 1–8. 
[4] 
V.F. Kosov,  V.A. Sinelshchikov, G.A. Sytchev, and V.M. 
Zaichenko, “Influence of Torrefaction on the Fuel Characteristics of 
Different Biomass Materials”, The Fourth International Conference 
on 
Bioenvironment, 
Biodiversity 
and 
Renewable 
Energies 
(BIONATURE 2013), March 2013, Lisbon, Portugal, pp. 29-32. 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-336-0
BIONATURE 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

