Steam Gasification of Coffee Husk in Bubbling Fluidized Bed Gasifier  
Sileshi Kore, Abebayehu Assefa 
Mechanical Engineering Department 
Addis Ababa University 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia 
e-mail: {sileshikore, 
abebayehuassefa}@yahoo.com  
    Mayerhofer Matthias, Hartmut Spliethoff 
Institute of Energy System 
Technical University of Munich  
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {m.mayerhofer, splithoff}@tum.de 
 
Abstract- Currently, the worldwide demand for fossil fuel is 
increasing rapidly and, at the same time, known resources are 
diminishing. In particular, energy resources, such as oil and 
natural gas, are almost depleted in some parts of the world. In 
addition, the fact that the climate changes are more severe 
than before has increased the demand for renewable energy 
resources. Thus, energy from biomass is one of the potential 
renewable energy options. The availability of biomass, 
combined with the recent development of technologies to use it 
efficiently, with low level of emission, promise to make biomass 
an increasingly attractive fuel option. Coffee husk is an 
agricultural waste in coffee processing industries in different 
parts of Ethiopia that has the potential of exploiting energy via 
thermo-chemical conversion such as gasification.  However, the 
characteristic properties of this material with regard to 
thermo-chemical conversion technologies are missing in 
literature. This study focuses on the experimental investigating 
of coffee husk in bubbling fluidized bed gasifier. The 
performance parameters that were investigated during the 
experiment were tar content and gas composition. The study 
findings show that the tar content of coffee husk gasification is 
not disturbing the smooth operation of the gasifier and the gas 
composition observed was good as compared to wood pellet. 
Therefore, coffee husk will be promising feedstock in fluidized 
bed gasification. 
 
Keywords-coffee 
husk; 
tar-content; 
gas 
composition; 
fluidized bed; gasification.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
   As an agricultural country, Ethiopia produces considerable 
amount of biomass each year. Most of biomass has been 
utilized for domestic energy purpose, mainly by direct 
combustion (which converts solid biomass into heat). On 
the contrary, coffee husk from coffee processing industries 
is not used as a fuel in most cases due to the poor handling 
of coffee husk to be used as domestic fuel. However, 
gasification, which converts solid biomass into fuel gas 
containing CO and H2 or so-called synthesis gas, has to be 
considered as a promising alternative owing to a number of 
advantages. In the southern part of Ethiopia almost 171,000 
tons of processed coffee is supplied to the international 
market per year. During the process, more than 20,000 tons 
of residue coffee husk is disposed of. This represents a very 
good potential for biomass energy.  
    Apart from gasification for heat production, biomass 
gasification for electricity or combined heat and electricity 
production especially at small scales has drawn great 
attention as a more efficient and economical option 
compared to conventional combustion steam cycle in 
Thailand [1]. Unlike air gasification, steam gasification 
requires an external heat source if steam is used as a sole 
gasifying agent. Even though using a mixture of steam and 
air as a gasifying agent is common technology, in this 
experimental work, the air is used to facilitate the flow of 
coffee husk. In addition, it is assisted by gravity, since the 
feed is at the top of the gasifier. Also, the oxygen in the air 
will help to provide some amount of energy due to the 
exothermic nature of burning biomass. The elevated 
temperature will help in the de-volatilization process of 
biomass to produce various gases. Steam will react with 
carbon monoxide to produce hydrogen and carbon dioxide.  
    The coffee husk is processed in an atmospheric bubbling 
fluidized bed reactor. Because fluidized beds can handle a 
large variety of feedstocks, they are well suited for this 
application [2]. 
   The motivation of this study is to investigate the extent to 
which the gas quality (tar and gas) can influence the 
operation of the gasifier using coffee husk as a feedstock as 
compared to that of wood pellet from published data at the 
same operating conditions. 
    The present work is organized as follows. The 
introduction part includes some overview of the availability 
of raw materials and available technologies to use coffee 
husk as renewable energy option. The methodology part 
describes experimental facilities and works that have been 
conducted at the Institute of Energy System, Technical 
University of Munich (IES TUM). In the result and 
discussion part, we present the findings of our experiments. 
Finally, conclusions are drawn. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     Figure 1.   Wood pellets 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
 
Figure 2. Coffee husks 
 
II. 
METHODOLOGY  
 
    The study of biomass thermo-chemical conversion in 
fluidized bed reactors is among the most active research 
studies at the IES TUM. The in-house bubbling fluidized 
bed (BFB) facilities were developed and are located at the 
IES TUM as research test bench. The main biomass 
feedstock used is wood pellet (Figure 1.), which is generated 
from wood. In our work, coffee husk from coffee processing 
industries in Ethiopia is used to check whether coffee husk 
(Figure 2) is a promising biomass to be used in fluidized 
bed gasification. In addition to this, the institute is well 
equipped with regard to laboratory facility to analyze the 
thermo-chemical properties of biomass fuel, online product 
gas and FID to analyze tar material in the product gas 
(syngas).  
    The experimental study was performed in a bubbling 
fluidized bed (BFB) gasifier which is built at IES TUM. The 
reactor vessel is made of high temperature resistant steel 
(German material number 1.4841, AISI SS 310). The 
dimension of the reactor has an internal diameter of 154 mm 
and a length of 1.5 m and the schematic diagram of the 
gasifier is shown in Figure 3. The reactor can be operated up 
to 850 OC and pressurized up to 0.5 M Pa. The biomass is 
fed through a pressurized screw-conveyor into a drop shaft 
directly to the bottom of the bubbling fluidized bed gasifier. 
A small amount of air is flushed in to the biomass feeding 
system to sidestep the entrance of syngas or steam in the 
feeding system. The syngas as well as the steam flow to 
feed line should be prevented by all means as steam swells 
up the feedstock along the feed inlet pipe which leads 
quickly to obstruction of the feeding system. The bed has a 
height of approximately 700 mm and is fluidized using 
steam as fluidizing agent and gasification medium. The heat 
required for the endothermic gasification reactions is 
provided by electrical heating and transferred into the bed 
via four high temperature heat pipes which use sodium as a 
working fluid. The heat pipes have a diameter of 20 mm and 
a length of 660 mm inside the fluidized bed.  
    The heat pipes influence the flow dynamics to some 
extent and lead to the formation of a slug flow [3] 
throughout the whole height of the fluidized bed. All 
pipings are well insulated and the cyclone and the filter are 
heated up to a temperature of 330 OC to avoid tar 
condensation in order to mitigate condensed tar material, 
since condensed tar will disturb the operating condition of 
the gasifier. There are 15 thermocouples placed at equal 
distance 
along 
the 
direction 
of 
the 
reactor. 
The 
thermocouples are therefore bundled in a closed small steel 
tube that is introduced through the top flange of the reactor 
and sealed with a compression fitting.  
    The measurement procedure was as follows:  the bed was 
heated up to the required temperature and fluidized with 
steam while the biomass feeding rate was set to achieve the 
steam to biomass set point. After observing a stable gas 
composition half an hour run, three tar samples were taken 
using the solid phase adsorption (SPA) method. The method 
uses 
solid 
phase 
extraction 
tubes 
filled 
with 
aminopropaylsiane phase bounded to silica gel. A detailed 
description of the SPA sampling and analysis method can be 
found in [4] Therefore, 100 ml of product gas was drawn 
with a syringe over an amino phase column. The results of 
the analysis are given with the assumption that the steam in 
the gas is condensed in the amino phase and does not enter 
the syringe in vapor form. This value was converted into 
g/m3 at standard conditions. 
    The selected operating temperature for coffee husk 
gasification in the fluidized bed gasifier was 800 OC. An 
increase in temperature will face ash sintering problem due 
to the coffee husk ash melting point which is around 815-
820 OC. At the same time, lowering the gasification 
temperature will result in poor quality of the gasifier 
products. The selected operating parameters are indicated in 
Table I.  
    The synthesis gas (product gas) exits at the top of the 
reactor and is cleaned by passing the gas through a cyclone 
and a ceramic candle filter. Subsequently, the syngas is 
expanded in the pressure control valve to atmospheric 
pressure. At this point, the sample was taken to check the tar 
material. Finally, the gas was analyzed online for the main 
components H2, CO, CO2, and CH4. 
    Silica sand (SiO2) is used as a bed material in this 
experiment. The average particle size is 0.25 mm and 
minimum fluidization velocity is vmf = 0.034 m/s. During 
this study the bed materials wed filled to the height of 
0.39m of the reactor.     
   The feedstock characteristic of coffee husk was analyzed 
at the chemical laboratory which belongs to the IES, TUM. 
Therefore, Table II depicts the fuel characteristic of coffee 
husk. The study of thermo-chemical properties provides 
information about the quality of biomass material in terms 
of proximate and ultimate analyses, and heating values. The 
samples of coffee husks were taken from Gedeo zone, 
southern part of Ethiopia. Proximate analysis of biomass 
gives the weight fractions of volatiles, ash, and fixed 
carbon. The content of volatiles and ash has an influence on 
the thermo-chemical conversion, syngas composition and tar 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

materials. Ultimate analysis is carried out to determine the 
composition of hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and 
sulfur in a given biomass material. The heating value, also 
called calorific value or heat of combustion, defines the 
energy content of a given fuel. It is one of the most 
important parameters for design calculations and numerical 
simulations of thermal systems. The gasification products of 
a given biomass material are influenced by its thermo-
chemical properties. The coffee husk size distribution was 
not uniform but less than 5mm. In the case of the wood 
pellet the size was uniform. Therefore, this step will incur 
some additional cost compared to coffee husk.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3 Schematic Diagram of the Bubbling 
Fluidized Bed Gasifier 
 
 
TABLE I.   OPERATING CONDITION OF BUBBLING FLUIDIZED 
BED GASIFIER 
 
 
 
Properties 
 
Operating Condition 
Temperature (OC) 
800 
Pressure  
Atmospheric 
Steam/biomass 
0.83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II.  COFFEE HUSK (GEDEO ZONE, ETHIOPIA) 
CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
Parameters 
 
Values 
Water content 
8.36% 
Lower heating value 
17.2 MJ/kg 
Proximate 
analysis 
(% 
wight dry basis) 
      Ash content 
      Voletiles 
      Fixed carbon 
 
   
  6.99 wt. % db 
72.30 wt. % db 
20.71 wt. % db 
Ultimate 
analysis 
(% 
weight, dry-ash-free basis) 
     C  
     H 
     N 
     S 
     O 
 
 
48.09 wt.% db 
  5.24 wt. % db 
  1.69 wt. % db 
  5.50 wt. % db 
33.39 wt. % db 
 
 
III. 
 RESULT AND DISCUSSION  
   Three different tar samples are presented in Figure 4 to 
check whether or not the tar material affects the smooth 
operation of the gasification process. Generally, tars are 
hydrocarbon containing mixtures, which can form liquid or 
highly viscose to solid deposits by cooling of the gaseous 
phase down to ambient temperature. In addition to the main 
elements carbon (C) and hydrogen (H) other elements like 
oxygen (O), nitrogen (N) or sulfur (S) are found in tar. Tars 
are generally assumed to be largely aromatic [5]. Several 
researchers have worked on various tar classifications such 
as the division in primary, secondary and tertiary tar [6 - 8]. 
Tar materials from wood pellet can be referred to from the 
published data of Pletka et al. [2].   
    Over 800° C, tertiary tar can be found and tertiary tars are 
also called recombination or high temperature tars [9]. As 
the operating temperature of the test bench is at this 
temperature rage, most tar material in the analysis is tertiary 
tars. Figure 4 shows tar components in the product gas from 
coffee husk gasification. As the gasification process 
proceeds almost all tar contents are reduced. Thus, coffee 
husk gasification suffers little from tar challenge.  
    From the syngas evolution profiles presented, it can be 
seen that steam gasification consistently evolved major gas 
components H2, CO, CO2 and CH4 with the respective 
percentages of 40%, 21%, 20% and 6%. Being combustible 
hydrogen, carbon monoxide and methane are desired 
component of the syngas whereas carbon dioxide is not 
desired as it plays a negative role on syngas heating value. 
The syngas heating value can be calculated based on these 
combustible gas components. Therefore, the syngas 
compositions are compared with wood-pellet gasification 
which is done in the same test bench and the same operation 
condition (pressure, temperature and steam to biomass ratio) 
from the published data [2].  
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

    Figure 5 shows the species from the gasification of wood 
pellet and coffee husk. From the bar-graph one can observe 
that CO, CO2, CH4 and H2 compositions have no influential 
difference between the two feedstocks. Therefore, coffee 
husk is a good feedstock option for gasification in BFB 
gasifier.  
    Coffee husk gasification has dual advantage. The first 
advantage is economical advantage, since coffee husk 
should not be pelletized. Moreover, it is an agricultural 
residue from coffee husk processing industry (typically in 
the case of Ethiopia). The second advantage of using the 
feedstock will mitigate the environmental challenge arising 
from the dumping of the coffee husk to the environment by 
consuming this residue.   
 
 
 
Figure 4. Tar compositions from coffee husk gasification 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Species composition from wood pellet and coffee husk 
gasification 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
    In this work, experimental results are reported regarding 
the influence of tar material in the smooth operation of the 
gasifier and gas composition during fluidized bed steam 
gasification using coffee husk as a feedstock. 
    The study findings show that the tar content of coffee 
husk can be gasified in bubbling fluidized bed without 
problems and the gas composition observed was good as 
compared to wood pellet. Therefore, coffee husk will be 
encouraging feedstock to be used in fluidized bed gasifier 
for biomass energy option. 
   Important 
future 
work 
will 
include 
performing 
experiments with various operating parameters.  
 
REFERENCES  
 
[1] 
P. Chobthiangtham, S. Pipatmanomai, “Co-Gasification of Biomass 
and Plastic Waste in a Bubbling Fluidized Bed Gasifier,” 
Proceedings, World Renewable Energy Congress 2009 – Asia and 
The 3rd International Conference on Sustainable Energy and 
Environment (SEE 2009), 19-22 May 2009, Bangkok, Thailand. 
[2] 
R. Pletka, R. Brown, and J. Smeenk, “Indirectly Heated Fluidized 
Bed   Biomass Gasifier Using a Latent Heat Blast,” Bioenergy ’98 –
Expanding Bioenergy Partnership, 8th biennial conference, Center for 
Coal and the Environment Iowa State University. 
[3]  M. Mayerhofer, P. Mitsakis, X. Meng, W. de Jong , H. Spliethoff , 
Gaderer M, “Influence of Pressure, Temperature and Steam on Tar 
and Gas in Allothermal Fluidized Bed Gasification,’’ Fuel, vol. 99 
Sep. 2012, pp. 204–209. 
[4] 
C. Brage, Q. Yu, G. Chen, K. Sjöström.“Use of amino phase 
adsorbent for biomass tar sampling and separation,’’ Fuel, vol 76 
1997, pp. 137–142. 
[5] 
C. Unger, and M. Ising, “Mechanisms and significance of tar 
formation and tar removal in thermo-chemical conversion of solid 
carbon sources,”  German Society for Petroleum and Coal Science 
and Technology, Conference Report, Vol 2, 2002, pp. 131-142.  
[6] 
T. Milne, R. Evans, and N. Abatzoglou, “Biomass Gasifier Tars: 
Their Nature, Formation, and Conversion,” NREL, 1998. 
[7] 
M. Kübel,“Tar formation and tar conversion in biomass gasification- 
Application of wet chemical tar intended to CEN standard,” 
Goettingen: Cuvillier Publishing, 2007. 
[8] 
J. Neeft, H. Knoef, and P. Onaji, Behavior of tar in biomass 
gasification systems -Tar related problems and their solutions, 
Utrecht: EWAB, 1999. 
[9] 
I Aigner, U Wolfesberger, H. Hofbaue, “Tar Content and 
Composition in Producer Gas of Fluidized Bed Gasification and Low 
Temperature Pyrolysis of Straw and Wood –Influence of 
Temperature,” Wien: Proceedings of the 1st International Conference 
on Poly-generation Strategies, 2009. 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

