Influence of Torrefaction on the Fuel Characteristics of Different Biomass 
Materials 
Vladimir F. Kosov, Vladimir A. Sinelshchikov, George A. Sytchev, Victor M. Zaichenko 
Joint Institute for High Temperatures of Russian Academy of Sciences 
Moscow, Russia 
e-mail: sinelshchikov@mail.ru 
 
Abstract—Possibilities of use of low-temperature pyrolysis 
(torrefaction) 
for 
improvement 
of 
heat 
engineering 
characteristics of biomass granulated fuel are considered. The 
data on hygroscopic properties, content of volatile matter and 
specific combustion heat of the torrefied fuel, produced under 
various conditions of processing of such types of biomass as 
wood, peat and agricultural waste, are presented. It is shown 
that the high-temperature conversion of gases and vapors, 
escaping during torrefaction, into synthesis gas is an effective 
method of their environmentally friendly utilization and, at the 
same time, increases the energy efficiency of biomass 
processing to granulated fuel.  
Keywords - biomass; solid fuel; torrefaction; pyrolysis; 
synthesis gas  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
At present biomass are widely used in the power 
purposes. It is caused by development of self-sufficient 
power units, increasing attention to ecological aspects of 
warm and the electric power production, availability and 
renewable character of biomass as a fuel, tendency to energy 
safety of regions and countries. Methods of power utilization 
of biomass can be divided into two main groups, namely, 
direct use as a solid fuel and processing into gaseous or 
liquid fuel. In spite of distinctions in the properties of wood, 
agrowaste (sunflower and rice husk, straw) and peat, the 
production of granulated solid fuel (for example, pellets) 
from mentioned types of biomass obtains a wide spread 
occurrence. One of the main disadvantages of the granulated 
biomass fuel is bad hygroscopic property that complicates its 
storage and transportation and results in need to use of a 
moisture-proof package. Decrease in the hygroscopicity of 
biomass pellets can be achieved by their thermal processing. 
The thermal processing in the range of temperatures up to 
300oC, carried out in the inert gas environment (low-
temperature pyrolysis), leads to an improvement of 
consumer properties of solid fuel from biomass. In scientific 
literature this process is known as a torrefaction and can be 
used both as a prior operation before pelletisation [1, 2], and 
as processing of the solid granulated (briquetted) fuel from 
biomass [3]. In course of torrefaction not only the moisture 
removal from an initial raw material, i.e. its drying, occurs 
but also partial thermal decomposition of an organic 
constituent of biomass takes place. As a result a solid 
hydrophobic product is formed. In addition its specific 
combustion value Qt surpasses a similar value for initial raw 
material. In case of use of wood waste as initial raw material 
the value of Qt can reach 19-23 MJ/kg depending on 
conditions at which the torrefaction is carried out [1]. Note 
that the combustion value of a dry wood and wood pellets 
doesn't exceed 18 MJ/kg. The present paper is devoted to 
investigation of influence of the torrefaction conditions on 
such properties of end product as devolatilization, specific 
combustion value and hygroscopicity. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS 
As raw materials there were used such types of biomass 
as wood, straw and peat. Thermal processing of pellets from 
the mentioned biomass materials consisted in their heating in 
the inert gas environment (nitrogen) to the torrefaction 
temperature Тt = 230, 250 and 270oC at the rate of 10oC/min 
and holding at this temperature during some time.  
When heating biomass there is its thermal decomposition 
and as a result a residual char and volatile products are 
formed. The volatile products consist of noncondensable 
gases, namely CO2, CO, Н2, N2 and СnHm (among gaseous 
hydrocarbons the basic is CH4), and condensable gases and 
vapor forming the liquid fraction under the normal 
conditions. Composition of each fraction and a quantitative 
ratio between them depend both on the final temperature of 
heating and on the heating rate. The yield of volatile 
products defines the mass loss of a raw material during its 
thermal processing. For measurements of the quantitative 
characteristics concerned with mass loss of raw materials 
during heating the thermogravimetric analysis were carried 
out. For this purpose the thermogravimetric analyzer SDT 
Q600 was used. The SDT Q600 allowed also to make the 
differential calorimetric analysis and it was used during 
investigations of the influence of torrefaction on the 
combustion value of granulated biomass fuel. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Torrefaction Process 
Mass loss observed at the initial stage of heating (up to 
the temperature about 150oC) is caused by release of 
physically bound water, i.e. drying of material, and 
characterizes its initial moisture content.  In our case the 
moisture content of the samples was equal to 5.4% for wood 
pellets, 6.6% for peat pellets and 5.6% for straw pellets. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

Further mass loss is caused by a thermal decomposition of 
organic constituent of raw material. Hydrocarbon raw 
materials of a phytogenesis consist of organic and mineral 
components. In turn organic part falls into hemicellulose, 
cellulose and lignin. Hemicellulose is the least thermostable 
organic component. According to [4] thermal decomposition 
of hemicellulose accompanied with mass losses occurs in the 
temperatures range of 200-270oC (with maximum rate at 
245oC), cellulose – in the temperatures range of 280-370oC
(with maximum rate at 330-335oC). Thermal decomposition 
of lignin follows more uniformly in comparison with two 
other components, and is characterized by a temperature 
interval 200-540oC.  
Time history of the mass loss rate of wood pellets during 
torrefaction 
is 
well 
seen 
from 
the 
differential 
thermogravimetric curves (DTG) presented in Fig. 1: the first 
peak characterizes the drying rate of the sample, the second 
peak – the rate of thermal decomposition of the material. The 
maximum rate of mass loss is observed when the sample 
temperature reaches the value of Тt
whereupon the rate 
decreases because of reduction of  sample mass. As appears 
from Fig. 1 in 100 minutes after the onset of heating the rate 
of mass loss falls off practically on an order of magnitude. 
Based on this fact during investigations of the influence of 
torrefaction on the thermotechnical characteristics of 
granulated fuel from biomass the time of thermal processing 
was limited by the specified value. 
Figure 1.  Change of temperature (1, 2, 3) and rate of mass loss (4, 5, 6) of 
wood pellets during  torrefaction at Тt = 270oC – 1, 4;  250oC – 2, 5; 
230oC – 3, 6. 
DTG curves describing dynamics of mass loss during 
pyrolysis (heating up to 1000oC at the rate 10oC/min) of the 
original and torrefied wood pellets are presented in Fig. 2. In 
DTG curve, corresponding to the original sample, one can 
see three representative knees (are marked by arrows) 
associated with thermal decomposition of hemicellulose, 
cellulose and lignin. In DTG curve, corresponding to the 
sample subjected to torrefaction at Тt = 270oC, the knee 
attributed to thermal decomposition of hemicellulose 
disappears that is evidence of practically complete absence 
of it in the sample. 
Figure 2.  DTG curves of original wood pellets (1) and wood pellets 
torrefied at Тt = 270oC (2) (heating rate -10oC/min). 
In Table 1 the data on mass loss for different types of 
initial raw materials as a result of torrefaction at different 
temperatures Тt are submitted.  From these data one can see 
that the smallest mass loss at torrefaction is observed for 
wood pellets, the greatest – for pellets of straw that is mainly 
concerned with the various content of hemicellulose in these 
raw materials. Note, that the maximum mass loss, re-counted 
on a dry state, as a result of pyrolysis of initial raw materials 
(heating up to the temperature of 1000oC) accounts for 82, 
64, 72 % for pellets of wood, peat and straw, respectively. 
TABLE I.  
MASS LOSS AS A RESULT OF TORREFACTION, RE-
COUNTED ON DRY STATE (%) 
Raw material 
Torrefaction 
Temperature,  
 Тt (ºC) 
 Wood pellets  
Peat pellets 
Straw pellets 
230 
6.4 
18 
17 
250 
14 
23 
27 
270 
25 
30 
43 
Decomposition of an organic part of a raw material, 
occurring during torrefaction, leads to change of its internal 
structure that is verified by electron micrographs. As a result 
of release of the volatile products the ratio between carbon, 
hydrogen and oxygen in a raw material changes that leads to 
change of its combustion value. Thus in consequence of 
torrefaction 
an 
initial 
raw 
material 
changes 
the 
thermotechnical properties, important at its use as a solid 
fuel. 
B. 
Devolatilization 
The ratio between the content of volatile and solid 
matters in a solid fuel has essentially influence on process of 
its burning. In particular, the rate of combustion is generally 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

defined by the rate of combustion of a solid carbon residue. 
Solid carbon residue makes main contribution to the 
combustion value of solid fuel also. In Table 2 the data on 
content of volatile matter in the initial raw materials and in 
the raw materials torrefied at different temperatures are 
submitted. From the presented data it follows that an increase 
in the torrefaction temperature Тt leads to a decrease of the 
content of volatile matter and, therefore, to an increase of 
mass fraction of solid carbon residue. The greatest difference 
between initial and torrefied raw materials is observed for 
pellets of straw. It is necessary to note that decrease of the 
volatile matter content leads to decrease of soot content in 
combustion products of a solid fuel. Soot is formed as a 
result of thermal decomposition of hydrocarbon components 
contained in the volatile products and responsible for smoke 
emission. 
TABLE II.  
MASS FRACTION OF THE VOLATILE MATTER IN THE 
INITIAL AND TORREFIED RAW MATERIALS, RE-COUNTED ON DRY STATE 
(%) 
Raw material 
Torrefaction 
Temperature,  
 Тt (ºC) 
 Wood pellets  
Peat pellets 
Straw pellets 
230 
81 
60 
66 
250 
79 
57 
62 
270 
76 
53 
51 
Starting state of 
raw material 
82 
64 
72 
C. 
Hygroscopicity and Combustion Value 
Other important properties characterizing a solid fuel are 
the combustion value Q and the limit moisture content W. In 
Fig. 3 and 4 there are shown the data on influence of the 
torrefaction temperature 
Тt
on the above-mentioned 
properties. The limit moisture content W was measured as 
the ratio of the equilibrium mass of water retained by a 
material in the air with 100% humidity at the temperature of 
26oC to the mass of dry material.  
Figure 3.  Effect of torrefaction temperature Тt on limit moisture content W
for pellets of straw – 1, wood – 2 and peat – 3. 
From the data presented in Fig. 3 one can see that the 
torrefaction allows essentially to improve the hygroscopic 
property of granulated fuel of the different biomass 
materials: the limit moisture content of pellets torrefied at Тt
= 270oC halves practically in comparison with untreated 
pellets. It is necessary to note, that untreated wood pellets 
swelled and collapsed after holding during 24 hours in the air 
with 100% humidity at the temperature of 26oC. The 
torrefied wood pellets kept the form in the similar conditions. 
In Fig. 4 there are shown the data on influence of 
torrefaction on the combustion value of pellets from different 
biomass materials. From the presented data it follows that an 
increase of torrefaction temperature results in appreciable 
increase of specific combustion value. The maximum growth 
is observed for peat pellets. 
Figure 4.  Effect of torrefaction temperature Тt on the ratio of combustion 
value of torrefied pellets Qt to combustion value of original pellets Q0 (re-
counted on dry state): pellets of straw – 1, wood – 2 and peat – 3. 
IV. 
CONVERSION OF VOLATILE TORREFACTION 
PRODUCTS INTO SYNTHESIS GAS 
In torrefaction of a biomass the perceptible amounts of 
volatile products is evolved (see Table 1). Usually the mass 
fraction of condensable volatiles is several times as much as 
noncondensable one. According to [5] the condensable 
fraction of volatile products consists mainly of acetic acid 
and water with modest quantities of methanol, formic acid, 
lactic acid, furfural and hydroxyl acetone. It is natural that 
the question of their utilization is very important from the 
ecological point of view. For this purpose the technology of 
thermal conversion of pyrolysis gases and vapour, suggested 
in [6] and considered in [7] as applied to torrefaction, can be 
used. In conformity with this technology, the volatile 
products forming during heating the treated organic raw 
materials are filtered through a porous carbon medium 
maintained at a constant temperature. The coal residue 
obtained by pyrolysis (heating in the inert gas environment 
up to the temperatures of 600-1000oC) of the same raw 
material can be used as a porous carbon material. Owing to 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

its well-developed surface, a rapid heating of volatile 
products and intensive decomposition of the high-molecular 
organic components entering into their composition take 
place. In addition as a result of interaction of water vapor and 
carbon dioxide with a carbon surface a formation of 
hydrogen and carbon monoxide (the water gas reaction) and 
reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide (the 
Boudouard reaction) occur. At the temperature of the carbon 
medium about 1000oC and suitable time of interaction of 
volatile products with a carbon surface practically complete 
conversion of the last into synthesis gas, i.e. a mixture of 
hydrogen and carbon monoxide, takes place.  
In Fig. 5 there are presented the data on the volume 
content of hydrogen and carbon monoxide in gas mixture, 
which can be obtained as a result of high-temperature 
conversion of the volatile products forming during 
torrefaction of various biomass materials. Note that 
admixture of other gases, from which the basic is carbon 
dioxide, doesn't exceed 10 % (by volume). 
Figure 5.  Volume yield of hydrogen and carbon monoxide per one kg of 
initial raw material vs. torrefaction temperature Тt for pellets from: straw – 
1, wood – 2 and peat – 3. 
The combustion value of the product synthesis gas is 
about of 11 MJ/m3 that allows to consider it, as a quite 
acceptable gaseous fuel for power installations based on gas-
piston engines. Let an average efficiency of transformation 
for electrogenerating installations on the basis of gas-piston 
engine is equal to 30 %, and the volume yield of the 
synthesis gas, which can be produced by high-temperature 
processing of the volatile products formed as a result of 
torrefaction of 100 kg of pellets, ranges between 20 and 
55 m3, depending on types of raw material and torrefaction 
temperature (see Fig. 5). In this case the use of the synthesis 
gas, produced on torrefaction of 100 kg of pellets per hour, 
will permit to maintain an electrogenerating installation with 
power of 18-50 kW in operation. At the same time the 
electrical power of plant for wood pellitization with 
productivity of 100 kg per hour doesn't exceed 7,5 kW and 
with a large supply can be provided at the expense of thermal 
processing of the torrefaction volatile products  into 
synthesis gas. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
As a result of performed experimental investigations it is 
shown that thermal processing of the granulated fuel from 
different biomass materials (wood, peat, straw) allows to 
improve its consumer properties, namely, to reduce the limit 
moisture content practically in half and to increase the 
specific combustion value noticeably. The volatile products 
obtained in the course of torrefaction can be converted into 
synthesis gas that allows to solve the problem of their 
utilization and simultaneously to increase the power 
efficiency of biomass processing. The considered approach 
can be used during engineering and creation of self-
contained plants working directly in places of biomass 
production and intended for processing of different biomass 
materials (wood and agricultural waste, peat) into the 
granulated solid fuel with improved consumer properties 
and. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. C. A. Bergman, “Combined torrefaction and pelletisation – 
the TOP process”, ECN Report, ECN-C–05-073. 2005, pp. 1–
29. 
[2] P. C. A. Bergman and J. H. A. Kiel, “Torrefaction for biomass 
upgrading”, ECN Report, ECN-RX–05-180. 2005, pp. 1–8. 
[3] F. F. Felfi, C. A. Luengo, J. A. Suarez, and P.A. Beaton, 
“Wood briquette torrefaction”, Energy and Sustainable 
Development,  vol. IX, 2005, pp. 19–22. 
[4] A.N. Kislizyn, “Pyrolysis drevesiny: himizm, kinetika, 
producty, novie processy”, Lesnay promyshlennost, Moscow, 
1990 (in Russian). 
[5] M. J. Prins, K. J. Ptasinski, and J. J. G. Janssen Frans, 
“Torrefaction of wood. Part 2. Analysis of products”, J. Anal. 
Appl. Pyrolysis, vol. 77, 2006. pp. 35-40.  
[6] V. M. Batenin, V. M. Zaichenko, V.F. Kosov, and V. A. 
Sinel’shchikov, “Pyrolitic Conversion of Biomass to Gaseous 
Fuel”, Doklady Chemistry, vol. 446, part 1, 2012, pp. 196–
199. 
[7] V. V. Kosov , V.F. Kosov, V.A. Sinelshchikov, and V. M. 
Zaichenko, “Torrefaction and Synthesis Gas Production”, The 
Proceedings of 19th European Biomass Conference and 
Exhibition, June 2011, Berlin, Germany, pp. 2011– 2014. 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-261-5
BIONATURE 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

