Predictive Analytics to Determine the Potential Occurrence of Genetic Disease and 
their Correlation: Osteoporosis and Cardiovascular Disease  
Kae Sawada  
Computer Science Department 
California State University, Los Angeles  
Los Angeles, USA 
ksawada@calstatela.edu 
Zilong Ye 
Computer Science Department 
California State University, Los Angeles  
Los Angeles, USA 
zye5@calstatela.ed   
Michael W. Clark 
Biology Department 
Pasadena City College 
Pasadena, USA 
mclark7@pasadena.edu 
Nabil Alshurafa 
Medicine and of Computer Science Department 
Northwestern University  
Evanston, USA 
nabil@northwestern.edu 
Mohammad Pourhomayoun 
Computer Science Department 
California State University, Los Angeles  
Los Angeles, USA 
mpourho@calstatela.edu
 
Abstract— In this paper, a Predictive Analytics Model is 
designed, developed, and validated to determine the risk of 
manifesting osteoporosis in later life using big data processing. 
The proposed model leverages the novel genetic pleiotropic 
information in the 1,000 Genome Project of over 2,500 
individuals world-wide. Also, the mutations associated with 
osteoporosis and cardiovascular disease are specifically 
analyzed. The study proposes the automatic histogram 
clustering as an effective and intuitive visualization method for 
high dimensional dataset. The results demonstrate a significant 
correlation between a person’s regional background and the 
frequency of occurrence of the 35 Single Nucleotide 
Polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with osteoporosis and/or 
cardiovascular disease (CVD). Machine learning algorithms, 
such as Logistic Regression, Adaboost, and KNN are then 
applied to predict the occurrence of 7 osteoporosis-related-
SNPs based on the existing CVD-related-SNPs input. Finally, 
the developed model is evaluated using a separate dataset 
obtained through Affymetrix microarray mRNA expression 
signal values for the specific SNP(s) in individuals with and 
without osteoporosis. 
Keywords- osteoporosis; Predictive Model; Genome Wide 
Association Study (GWAS); Clustering. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This research is a continuation of an investigation 
previously presented in CSCI 2017 [34] by the same authors. 
The previous paper examined the dataset obtained from the 
1000 Genome Project for its mutation variants with known 
relations to osteoporosis and cardiovascular disease. This 
paper proposes an novel approach to automatic data-driven 
clustering of histogram presented data for verification and 
validation of disease related expression in different human 
populations.  As explained in later sections, high dimensional 
datasets can be effectively and intuitively visualized by the 
algorithm generating the histogram clustering. This 
automated process could aid in understanding existing 
correlations among various types of large datasets.  Here, 
this automated clustering reproduced the manual clustering 
of the disease related SNPs geographic profiles.  This study 
also confirmed the feasibility of the previously proposed 
predictor through a set of microarray analysis result dataset. 
 
A. Osteoporosis and Space Exploration 
Fractures, as a result of osteoporosis, have a significant 
negative impact on an individual’s health, quality of life, and 
work performance. Some modern occupations inevitably 
expose workers to a significantly increased risk of 
developing osteoporosis.   An obvious example is space 
flight.  Within a few days of Zero Gravity (zero G), 
astronauts begin to lose both muscle and bone mass. There 
are also a zero G suppression effect on the immune system, 
as well as an increase in the aging process of particular cells. 
These effects occurred for all individuals who exposed 
themselves to zero G environment [25].  It is reasonable to 
assume that a predisposition to osteoporosis might increase 
the rate of occurrence of the condition. Having a reasonably 
reliable predictive model to reveal the predisposition for 
osteoporosis could be of great benefit for the future 
commercialization of space. 
Over 7 TB of genomic data has been sequenced by the 
1000 Genome Project [1]. These datasets consist of over 
2,500 individuals from all around the world [2]. Such large 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-639-2
BIOTECHNO 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

genomic datasets allow for the study of complex disease 
states, such as osteoporosis and cardiovascular disease.   
These pathologies involve not only multiple gene mutation 
interactions, but also nutritional and age-related components. 
[9][20]. 
There are over 100 genes that are proven to be related to 
osteoporosis, according to Genome-Wide Association 
Studies (GWAS) [7]. However, many of these gene 
mutations still maintain some level of phenotypic ambiguity 
[22].  Understanding and treating such complex conditions 
could benefit through modern Machine Learning analysis.  
An effective method for early forecast of a patient-specific 
frequency of occurrence for a particular genetic disorder in 
later life would allow for appropriate preventative measures 
to be followed. 
 
B. Mutations: SNPs 
This paper analyzes 35 SNPs, that are commonly 
observed as genetic disease related mutations. It is a 
mutation of one base for another, which occurs in more than 
one percent of the general population [14].  7 of these SNPs 
have direct indications in the expression of osteoporosis [9], 
while the other 28 SNPs have implications in both CVD and 
osteoporosis [4].  
 
C. Preceding Related Work 
 
   i. Osteoporosis-related-SNP selection 
The 7 osteoporosis-related-SNPs were chosen based on 
the study led by Hsu et al [9], published in 2010. The 
phenotypic association of these SNPs to osteoporosis was 
demonstrated by the GWAS study [26]. 
 
   ii. Genetic Pleiotropy 
Using False Discovery Rate (FDR) statistical methods, 
Reppe et al [4] revealed a potential genetic link between 
Cardio-Vascular 
Disease 
(CVD) 
and 
Osteoporotic 
conditions. In this paper, the potential mutant gene 
interactions between the osteoporosis-related SNPs and CVD 
SNPs are analyzed with: big data processing and analytics, 
predictive analytics based on machine learning algorithms, 
data visualization, and clustering. 
This paper is organized as follows: in Section II, the 
methods and materials employed during the analysis and 
experimental developments are introduced. Included topics 
are the datasets and  methods used, feature selections and 
dataset label, and evaluation methods. In Section III, the 
results and observations are discussed. 
II. METHODS AND MATERIALS 
This section discusses the datasets employed, the design of 
the analysis and research, algorithms and techniques utilized 
in the study so far. 
 
A. Datasets 
     Two big datasets have been used in this paper:  
The first one is the genotypes from the 1000 Genome 
Project for the 35 SNPs. This dataset includes 2504 human 
subjects, containing both male and female from 26 regions 
worldwide [2].  
The second dataset is from Reppe et al’s study mentioned in 
Section I-C-ii [28]. The samples of this dataset are collected 
from the 84 post-menopausal females between the ages of 
50 to 86 years old in Lovisenberg Diakonale Hospital 
located in Sweden. There are two components to this 
dataset: 
   (1) The result of Affymetrix Microarray analysis of the 
patients, the Affymetrix microarray signal values per 
sample, one “.CELL” file per patient. 
   (2) A set of biopsy results, sample ID (anonymous), age, 
gender, and the biopsy results of bone density scores, both 
T- and Z-scores, consisting of average neck, total hip, and 
average spine of each subject. 
     In this paper, all “.CELL”  files from (1) were processed 
and interfaced with the library, pd.hg.u133.plus.2 [27], to 
obtain the gene symbol per an array cell. Then, it was 
interfaced with SNP identifier (e.g., #rsxxx..x, with x 
composing an integer) to acquire the existing SNP(s) data 
per each sample. In acquisition of SNP existence, the signal 
threshold value was determined the average score of all 
samples per column (per array cell). Such determination was 
made based on the preceding study which defined signal 
thresholds in DNA microarray analysis [29]. 
     The label per sample was acquired based on the data 
from (2). Samples with the T-scores of -2.5 or less in one or 
more of neck, hip, and spine are marked as osteoporotic. 
The threshold was determined, following the World Health 
Organization (WHO) international reference standard for 
osteoporosis diagnosis [30]. T-scores were used instead of 
Z-scores, based on the sample’s age and the guidelines 
provided by WHO. 
 
B. Method Design 
 
   i. Problem Definition  
 
The previous study investigated the occurrence of 7 selected 
osteoporosis-related SNPs [3] and its correlation to 28 CVD 
with 6 subdivisions, related SNPs [4], shown in Table 1 and 
2. The CVD related SNPs were divided into six 
subcategories: High Density Lipids proteins cholesterol 
(HDL), Low Density Lips proteins cholesterol (LDL), 
Systolic Blood Pressure (SBP), Diatonic Blood Pressure 
(DBP), Type 1 Diabetes (T1D), and Triglycerides (TG). The 
table of osteoporosis-related SNPs describes the SNP 
identification number, normal (ancestral) base, high-risk 
(mutated) base, and the homozygous base pairs that are 
associated with a high risk of Bone Mineral Density (BMD) 
loss, and consequently the development of osteoporosis.  
(See Section I-C-i for osteoporosis-related SNPs). In this 
paper, we also validate the predictor design by utilizing the 
new dataset introduced in Section  I-A. 
 
 
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-639-2
BIOTECHNO 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

   ii. Feature Selection and Label 
As mentioned in the Section II-C-ii, 28 CVD-related SNPs, 
and age of each subject were fed to the predictive model. 
The output of this predictor is a boolean value, whether the 
individual has developed osteoporosis or not. 
 
   iii. Predictive Analytics Algorithms 
To develop a software method for predicting a tendency for 
disease occurrence, various machine learning algorithms 
were tried for building the predictive model: KNN (the best 
value of K determined by trial and error was K=9), Logistic 
Regression, Decision Tree, Naive Bayes, Adaboost, 
Random Forest, and Support Vector Machine (the best 
parameters of SVM determined by Grid Search include 
C=1, 
kernel='rbf', 
gamma=0.0007). 
A 
systematic 
aggregation of these classifier results is future work, for 
example using an ensemble learning algorithm. 
 
TABLE 1: SNP ASSOCIATED WITH OSTEOPOROSIS 
 
 
TABLE 2: SNP ASSOCIATED WITH CVD 
 
 
Affymetrix microarray consists of a grid of oligonucleotide 
probes produced to have a known DNA sequence.  The grid 
Microarray thus holds a specific SNP mutation at a specific 
locus on the grid.  Preparations of labelled mRNA       
(cDNA/cRNA) taken from the individual patients can then 
be exposed to the entire grid containing the variety of SNP 
mutations.  Identification of a specific SNP in the patient is 
determined by the measured level of hybridization with the 
corresponding target grid position and the labelled 
cDNA/cRNA. The corresponding SNP IDs were mapped 
through the affy ID and a gene symbol that are assigned to 
each cell, as well as the manual mappings of the target SNPs 
through a capability of the genome browser provided by 
University of California, Santa Cruz [31]. 
   
   iv. Evaluation Method 
The accuracy of the predictive model was evaluated using 
30-fold cross-validation [32]. The performance was 
measured by the Area Under Curve (AUC) of the Receiver 
Operator Curve (ROC) . ROC AUC method accounts for the 
number of true positive predictions against the number of 
false positive predictions. Statistically, only about 30% of 
all postmenopausal women develop osteoporosis during 
their life time [35] thus, the testing dataset is unbalanced. 
The ROC-AUC can be an effective metric to measure and 
present the performance of the prediction model.  
 
  v. Phenotype Expression Measurement 
The predictor execution on this particular dataset was 
expected to evaluate the geno-pheno-transfer rate. This will 
also validate the predictor developed in the previous study.  
 
  vi. Visualization  
This study visualizes the dataset of over 30 essential 
features by generating various histograms and applying a K-
mean clustering algorithm to automatically cluster the 
resulting plots into groups in a data-driven manner. As 
demonstrated in the result section, existing correlations 
among the dataset is clearly displayed through this 
visualization method. The proposed visualization method 
can aid the observers in developing an intuitive 
understanding of the dataset, and effectively mirroring the 
datasets’ characteristics and patterns in them. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
This section discusses the result obtained from the predictor 
model and the histogram clustering automation. 
A. Predictor results – Dataset from 1000 Genome Project 
In the previous study, the predictive models were built 
and tested on 32 sets of inputs, where each set is an element 
of the powerset of 6 CVD related conditions. The results 
obtained from various combinations of SNP inputs showed a 
strong correlation between the 7 osteoporosis-related SNPs 
and the HDL2 SNPs. Similarly, another strong correlation 
was found between the 7 osteoporosis-related SNPs and 
SBP2 SNPs. The best classification result was achieved 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-639-2
BIOTECHNO 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

using Logistic Regression classifier with the accuracy of 
0.7769. Furthermore, there is a strong implication that the 
likelihood 
of 
developing 
osteoporosis 
could 
be 
determined/predicted by the existing CVD-related factors 
such 
as 
Cholesterol 
levels, 
Blood 
Pressure, 
and 
Triglycerides, levels [34].  
 
B. Predictor results – Affy dataset  
The performances of the predictive model for 3 different 
scenarios are listed in the following. The performance 
measurement was obtained through ROC AUC as mentioned 
in Section II-B-v. Unlike the previous experiment, this 
experiment setting did not distinguish high-risk heterozygous 
pair vs. high-risk homozygous pair. Here are the results for 3 
different scenarios: 
Scenario 1: Osteoporosis SNPs only – AUC = 0.7285 
Scenario 2: CVD SNPs only – AUC = 0.7569 
Scenario 3: Both CVD and Osteo SNPs - AUC = 0.8571 
The predictor strategy developed here has been 
confirmed with the available disease related database of 
Reppe et al.  The predictor was shown to be correct in the 
majority of the patients. These results also confirm the 
correlation of osteoporosis SNPs with CVD SNPs reported 
in the above Section. In most cases, the chance of a mutant 
genotype expressing its aberrant phenotype is much less than 
100%. As a well-studied example, the two mutations related 
to Breast Cancer, BRCA – 1 and BRAC – 2, show such 
facts.  The chances these two mutations expressing their 
phenotypes by the time a woman is 70 years old are as 
follows, according to a report by the Susan G. Komen 
Foundation [33]: 
• 
BRCA 1 - 55% 
• 
BRCA 2 - 45%  
The accuracy of the predictor developed with this paper 
of close to 70% demonstrated an effective prediction.  Such a 
score would thus be reasonably sufficient to caution 
individuals about having a higher risk of BMD loss. With 
such knowledge, individuals can take the necessary 
preventative measures to prevent the development of 
undesirable conditions and disease, starting at an early stage 
of their lives. 
 
C. Data Visualization 
Various histograms were drawn and clustered effectively 
to 
demonstrate 
the correlations among 
these 
high 
dimensional datasets. The results demonstrated distinct 
region-specific SNP frequency profiles. They confirmed the 
genetic links between osteoporosis, and displayed the 
intricacy of the interrelationship among the SNPs.  Grouping 
the results demonstrated the divides in sample’s SNP 
characteristics. These results are consistent with the idea that 
an individual’s genetic and gene variant profile is related to 
the region in which his/her ancestors came from. As it was 
introduced in the previous study [34]. Figure 1 demonstrates 
the claimed regional divides clearly. CVD (Systolic Blood 
Pressure)-related 
SNPs 
are 
colored 
in 
green, 
and 
osteoporosis-related SNPs are in orange. The trends that are 
obvious in all 28 regions are similar here. Again, the regional 
divides are well maintained. This type of histogram 
comparison table was originally introduced in the previous 
study [34]. 
The result was also consistent with the fact that European 
women show higher incidents of osteoporosis and hip 
fractures when compared with populations from other 
regions. Europeans have higher frequency of osteoporotic 
mutations than African [8]. 
 
D. Clustering Automation 
An automated clustering process was developed for 
grouping the histograms to better visualize the results. The 
results of clustering clearly confirms the regional divide of 
the histogram profiles. Figure 2 displays a sample result of 
this automated clustering. Sample groups obtained in 
automated histogram clustering result. The results verify the 
regional divide of osteoporosis- and CVD-related SNP 
profiles. The left most column of Figure 2 shows European 
region, Iberian region in Spain, Utah region (CEPH) with 
Northern and Western European Ancestry, British region in 
England and Scotland, Finnish region in Finland, Toscani 
region in Italia. The middle column shows Bengali region of 
Bangladesh, Sri Lankan region, Tamil from the UK, Indian 
region, Telugu region in the UK, Gujarati Indian ancestry in 
Houston, Texas, Punjabi region from Lahore, Pakistan. The 
right most column shows Peruvians from Lima, Peru, Puerto 
Ricans from Puerto Rico, Mexican Ancestry from Los 
Angeles USA, Colombians from Medellin, Colombia. 
To demonstrate the value of this clustering automation, the 
final number of clusters to be formed by the algorithm was 
varied. As shown in Figure 3, when the number of clusters is 
set to 12, the algorithm groups South Asian regional SNP 
profiles and American regional SNP profiles into two 
separate groups, perfectly distinguishing the two separate 
regions. However, when the number of cluster is set to 11,  
 
Finnish in Finland 
 
African Caribbeans in Barbados 
 
Iberian Population in Spain 
 
Esan in Nigeria 
 
Figure 1: SBP SNP Profile, European Region vs. African Region 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-639-2
BIOTECHNO 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
Figure 2: A Sample Histograms Demonstrating Regional Devides 
the South Asian regional profiles and American regional 
profiles are bundled up into a single group. Such a result 
shows the possibility of further dissection of the regionalism 
seen here by the automated process. Automation of the 
histogram profiles also allowed increased number of SNPs to 
be analyzed all at once. 
 
E. Summary of the Results 
   i. The high correlation between a person’s regional 
background and the occurrence of the selected 35 SNPs         
associated with osteoporosis and/or CVD shown in the 
previous investigation were confirmed by this new 
methodology. It was confirmed that the highest fracture rates 
and osteoporosis related SNPs are found in white women of 
European descent; African Americans tend to have higher 
Bone Mineral Density (BMD) with few osteoporosis related 
SNPs [8], as introduced in the previous study [34].  
   ii. The set of CVD-/osteosis-related SNPs from Reppe et 
al's dataset can be used to predict a person's likelihood of 
developing osteoporosis with the accuracy of approximately 
64% on their own.  
  iii. The CVD-osteoporosis related SNPs from Reppe et al's 
dataset outperformed osteoporosis-related SNPs (see Section 
I-C-i) in predicting osteoporosis. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS 
This paper extended on the previous publication [34] with 
the following contributions: 1) Validated the predictor model 
introduced in the previous publication based on the second 
dataset, using "Area Under Curve" of the "Receiver Operator 
Curve" evaluation method.  The model predicts an 
individual’s likelihood of BMD loss over time. 2) Confirmed 
that an individual’s predisposition to osteoporosis can be 
linked a predisposition to CVD related conditions. 3) 
Confirmed a correlation between individual’s regional 
background and the SNP occurrence profiles. 
 
N = 11 
 
 
N = 12 
Cluster A 
Cluster B 
 
 
 
Figure 3: A Sample Auto-Clustering Result 
 
4) Automated clustering of the histograms of SNP 
occurrence profiles, using the K-mean clustering algorithm. 
This study also proposed a histogram auto-clustering 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-639-2
BIOTECHNO 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

approach to effectively visualize the correlations that exists 
among a high dimensional dataset.  
The United Kingdom is now half way through its 100,000 
genome project.  The goal of obtaining this massive human 
genome dataset was to determine genetic predisposition to 
genetic related diseases, such as cancer, CVD and 
osteoporosis.  The automated systems developed here will 
be of great assistance in achieving these goals.  
Revisiting our future in space, as introduced in Section I-
A,  the exact effects of the outer space specific 
environments on human biological systems are unknown. 
Understanding such effects on skeletal system, nervous 
system, reproductive system, and our genome is crucial 
when attempting to adapt to an unknown environment.  
NASA and other space agencies are actively investigating 
these issues.  Being able to use an astronaut’s genetic 
predisposition to predict how that individual’s body might 
respond to zero or low Gravity could help individuals take 
proper precautions, improve the outcome of space flight, 
and support the expansion of humanity into space.  It will 
also provide an equal and safer opportunity to everyone who 
wishes to go  to outer space. As we explore into various 
unknown environments of outer space, capabilities to 
quickly collect and analyze large amounts of information 
will be essential. Placing such data into the learning 
algorithms to update the predictor will allow the explorer 
appropriately respond to the new environments. With such a 
system on board, astronauts’ well-being and success of the 
mission can be supported. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] IGSR and the 1000 Genomes Project. [Online] Available at: 
http://n.internationalgenome.org/ [retrieved: Nov. 2017]. 
[2] Which populations are part of your study? [Online] Available at: 
http://www.internationalgenome.org/faq/which-populations-are-part-
your-study [retrieved: Nov. 2017]. 
[3] D. Karasik, H. Yi‐Hsiang, Y. Zhou, L. A. Cupples, D. P. Kiel, and S. 
Demissie. "Genome ‐ wide pleiotropy of osteoporosis ‐ related 
phenotypes: the Framingham study." Journal of Bone and Mineral 
Research 25, no. 7, pp. 1555-1563, 2010. 
[4] S. Reppe, Y. Wang, W.K. Thompson, L. K. McEvoy, A. J. Schork, V. 
Zuber 
et 
al. 
GEFOS 
Consortium. 
“Genetic 
sharing 
with 
cardiovascular disease risk factors and diabetes reveals novel bone 
mineral density loci.” PloS one 10, no. 12, e0144531, 2015. 
[5] O. Hitomi, S. Sasaki, H. Horiguchi, E. Oguma, K. Miyamoto, Y. Hosoi, 
M. K. Kim, and F. Kayama. "Dietary patterns associated with bone 
mineral density in premenopausal Japanese farmwomen–." The 
American journal of clinical nutrition 83, no. 5, pp. 1185-1192, 2006. 
[6] J. B. Richards, H. F. Zheng, and T. D. Spector, "Genetics of 
osteoporosis from genome-wide association studies: advances and 
challenges," Nature Reviews Genetics, 2012. 
[7] GWAS Catalog. [Online] Available at: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/ 
[retrieved: Nov. 2017]. 
[8] N. Hae-Sung, S. S. Kweon, J. S. Choi, J. M. Zmuda, P. C. Leung, L.  Y. 
Lui, et al. "Racial/ethnic differences in bone mineral density among 
older women." Journal of bone and mineral metabolism 31, 2013. 
[9] H. Yi-Hsiang, et al. "An integration of genome-wide association study 
and gene expression profiling to prioritize the discovery of novel 
susceptibility Loci for osteoporosis-related traits." PLoS genetics 6, 
no. 6, e1000977, 2010. 
[10] L. Langsetmo, et al. "Using the same bone density reference database 
for men and women provides a simpler estimation of fracture risk." 
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research, no.10, pp. 2108-2114, 2010. 
[12] J. Greenbaum, K. Wu, L. Zhang, H. Shen, J. Zhang, and H. W. Deng. 
"Increased detection of genetic loci associated with risk predictors of 
osteoporotic fracture using a pleiotropic cFDR method." Bone 99, pp. 
62-68, 2017. 
[13] D. Karasik, and M. Cohen-Zinder. "Osteoporosis genetics: year 2011 
in review." BoneKEy reports 1, no. 8, 2012. 
[14] U.S. National Library of Medicine | What are Single Nucleotide 
Polymorphisms 
(SNPs)? 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/primer/genomicresearch/snp 
[retrieved: 
12 
Nov. 2017]. 
[15] Y. H. Hsu, et al. "An integration of genome-wide association study 
and gene expression profiling to prioritize the discovery of novel 
susceptibility Loci for osteoporosis-related traits." PLoS genetics 6, 
no. 6, e1000977, 2010. 
 [17] I. M. Meyer, and R. Durbin. "Gene structure conservation aids 
similarity based gene prediction." Nucleic acids research 32, no. 2, 
pp. 776-783, 2004.  
[18] R. J. Carter I. Dubchak, and S. R. Holbrook. "A computational 
approach to identify genes for functional RNAs in genomic 
sequences." Nucleic acids research 29, no. 19, pp. 3928-3938, 2001.  
[19] T. Chen, M. Y. Kao, M. Tepel, J. Rush, and G. M. Church. "A 
dynamic programming approach to de novo peptide sequencing via 
tandem mass spectrometry." Journal of Computational Biology 8, no. 
3, pp. 325-337, 2001. 
 [20] US Department of Health and Human Services. "Bone health and 
osteoporosis: a report of the Surgeon General." Rockville, MD: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Surgeon 
General 87, 2004. 
 [21] P. Salari, and M. Abdollahi. "The influence of pregnancy and 
lactation on maternal bone health: a systematic review." Journal of 
family & reproductive health 8, no. 4, p. 135, 2014. 
[22] L. Qin, Y. Liu, et al "Computational characterization of osteoporosis 
associated SNPs and genes identified by genome-wide association 
studies." PloS one 11, no. 3, e0150070, 2016. 
[23] E. R. Spector, S. M. Smith, and J. D. Sibonga. "Skeletal effects of 
long-duration 
head-down 
bed 
rest." 
Aviation, 
space, 
and 
environmental medicine 80, no. 5, A23-A28, 2009. 
[24] The Matplotlib API [Online] Available at:        .                           
https://matplotlib.org/2.0.2/api/index.html [retrieved: Nov. 2017]. 
[25] E. Roberge. "The Gravity of It All: From osteoporosis to 
immunosuppression, exploring disease in a microgravity environment 
holds promise for better treatments on Earth." IEEE pulse 5, 2014. 
[26] 
Ensemble 
Genome 
Browser 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
https://uswest.ensembl.org/index.html [retrieved: Jan. 2018]. 
[27] Bioconductor 3.6 Annotation package,  
         pd.hg.u133.plus.2 
[Online] 
Available 
at:                       
http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/data/annotation/html/pd.hg.u
133.plus.2.html [retrieved: Jan. 2018]. 
[28] E-MEXP-1618 - Transcription profiling of bone biopsies from 
postmenopausal females identifies 8 genes highly associated with 
bone 
mineral 
density 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/E-MEXP-1618/files/  
[retrieved: Jan. 2018]. 
[29] M. Bilban, L. K. Buehler, S. Head, G. Desoye, and V. Quaranta. 
"Defining signal thresholds in DNA microarrays: exemplary 
application for invasive cancer." BMC genomics 3, no. 1, 19, 2002. 
[30] 2015 ISCD Official Positions – Adult [Online] Available at: 
https://www.iscd.org/official-positions/2015-iscd-official-positions-
adult/ [retrieved: Jan. 2018]. 
[31] UCSC Genome Browser on Human Dec. 2013 (GRCh38/hg38) 
Assembly [Online] Available at: https://genome.ucsc.edu/ [retrieved: 
Jan. 2018]. 
[32] The documentation for sklearn.model_selection.cross_val_score 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
http://scikit-       
learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.model_selection.cross_val
_score.html  [retrieved: Jan. 2018]. 
[33] Susan G. Komen Available at: ww5.komen.org [retrieved: Jan. 2018]. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-639-2
BIOTECHNO 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

[34] K. Sawada, M. W. Clark, N. Alshurafa, and M. Pourhomayoun, 
“Analyzing the Mutation Frequencies and Correlation of Genetic 
Diseases in Worldwide Populations Using Big Data Processing, 
Clustering, and Predictive Analytics,” International Conference on 
Computational Science and Computational Intelligence, pp. 1459 – 
1464, 2017. 
[35] Epidemiology by International Osteoporosis Foundation [Online] 
Available at: https://www.iofbonehealth.org/epidemiology. 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-639-2
BIOTECHNO 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

