Smartphone Application for Post-operative Gastric Patients: Surgery Diary 
 
Jin-Ming Wu 
Department of Surgery of National Taiwan University 
Hospital 
Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronics and 
Bioinformatics of National Taiwan University  
Taipei, Taiwan 
e-mail: kptkptkpt@yahoo.com.tw 
 
 
Ming-Tsan Lin 
Department of Surgery of National Taiwan University 
Hospital 
Taipei, Taiwan 
e-mail: linmt@ntu.edu.tw 
 
 
 
 
Te-Wei Ho, Xing-Yu Su 
Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronics and 
Bioinformatics of National Taiwan University  
Taipei, Taiwan 
e-mail: skbaskba@gmail.com, aipeople0513@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
Feipei Lai 
Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronics and 
Bioinformatics of National Taiwan University 
Department of Computer Science and Information 
Engineering of National Taiwan University 
Department of Electrical Engineering of National Taiwan 
University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
e-mail: flai@ntu.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract—Gastric cancer is one of the most common 
gastrointestinal diseases around the world. In general, surgical 
resection is the only intervention. Surgical gastric cancer 
patients may suffer from malnutrition, which can be associated 
with gastrointestinal complications, surgical stress, and cancer 
cachexia. 
Malnourished 
patients 
typically 
have 
poor 
oncological outcomes and a decreased quality of life. To hasten 
the recovery of post-gastrectomy patients, we developed a 
smartphone application (app) that implements the functions of 
nutrition monitoring, medical information management, 
follow-up of drains, and wound care. This app is written using 
objective-C and the iOS (previously iPhone OS) 6.1 SDK 
(Software Development Kit), which provides iOS 5.1 and later 
compatibility. To integrate users’ records, mySQL was used 
for data management and computing. Moreover, this app 
includes clinical rule support that informs patients of severe 
body weight loss or possible internal bleeding. Using this app, 
patients are able to monitor their general condition, wound, 
and nutritional status by themselves. Based on the preliminary 
analysis from users, this app is considered a useful tool that 
users can use it to reduce the impact on body weight loss 
significantly. More importantly, this app acquires a high 
degree of support with 93.3 percent from users. 
Keywords-smartphone; application; gastric cancer; surgery 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Gastric cancer is the fourth most common cancer in the 
world [1].  In general, radical surgical resection is the only 
potentially curative treatment. However, most patients are 
usually diagnosed at an advanced stage owing to occult 
clinical presentation, and the five-year survival rate is less 
than 10 percent. Moreover, patients diagnosed with gastric 
cancer have a higher proportion of malnutrition (60 to 85 
percent) [2], which may be related to a cancer-inducing 
gastrointestinal obstruction, cancer cachexia, or perioperative 
stress. Surgical patients may suffer from wound pain, 
anorexia, malaise, and gastrointestinal digestion disorders [3], 
which can also result in malnutrition. Reduced gastric 
functioning is associated with both diminished food intake 
and malabsorption of vitamins, fats, and proteins [4]. If the 
malnourished status is not recognized, patients will have 
inferior clinical outcomes and a decreased quality of life 
compared to those with suitable nutritional status [5][6]. 
With the popularity of smartphones, people have changed 
their method of accessing information. There is an increased 
interest in smartphone applications (apps) as a tool for 
medical professionals and patients to deliver medical 
information. It is reported that the market for mobile health 
apps for smartphones and tablets will be US $26 billion by 
2017 [7]. As of 2013, there are an estimated forty thousand 
medical apps available on the market. It has been indicated 
by previous studies that smartphone apps for patient self-
monitoring are feasible [8][9]. Hence, for the purpose of the 
high-quality care, the aim of this study was to create a 
smartphone app, including perioperative medical education, 
long-term follow-up of body weight implemented with 
clinical rule support, and wound care for post-operative 
gastric cancer patients. In addition, we evaluate the utility of 
this app and assess the feasibility of it. 
The construction of this paper is organized as follows: 1) 
System Architecture, where the development of the 
application system is presented in detail; 2) Result, which 
presents the demographics of users, and the results obtained 
for the assessment for the app; and 3) Conclusion and Future 
Work, which resumes this paper by summarizing our 
contributions and discussing directions for future work. 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
                                                                                                                          
Figure 1.   The architecture of application system 
 
   
   
 
                                                                                                                                                          
Figure 2.   The home page of smartphone application 
II. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
This app was developed using the objective-C language 
and iOS (previously iPhone OS) 6.1 SDK (Software 
Development Kit), which provides iOS 5.1 and later 
compatibility. To integrate users’ records, mySQL was used 
for data management and computing. Besides, the app 
automatically synchronizes data with a server-side database 
implemented by the C# language in a .NET framework. To 
provide web services, a Microsoft SQL (Structured Query 
Language) server is utilized for data storage in the study. 
Figure 1 shows the architecture of the application system. 
A. Interfaces Implementation 
We divided the major functions of this app into six 
interfaces, such as home page, my weight, my drains, wound 
pictures, surgery, and symptoms. 
1) Home page: The interface of the home page (Figure 
2), which is grouped from two parts. The first part shows 
the summary of patient’s health status and the days after 
surgery. According to the last uploaded data from patients, 
we divide the summary into three categories by the rules of 
physicians’ suggestions. Hence, the categories are defined 
as "well general condition", "fair general condition", and 
“poor general condition", respectively. The well general 
condition means normal in both weight and drain. The fair 
general condition means abnormal in body weight 
decreasing by 5 to 10 percent. The poor general condition 
means either the last body weight decreasing more than 10 
percent or the last drain fluid turning red. With these alarms, 
the patient could contact with case managers, and receive 
appropriate suggestions from them. Besides, we employ a 
corresponding facial expression icon to easily represent a 
condition that the patient has. Another part of the home page 
represents the shortcut of each function, such as my weight, 
my drains, symptoms, surgery, and wound pictures. 
2) My weight: For the purpose of continual care, we 
recommend patients to upload the body weight each day. 
The interface will illustrate the weight with a trend by one 
week and three months (Figure 3; left), then we can easily 
undertake observation in the variance of body weight on it. 
Besides 
using 
the 
clinical 
rule 
support, 
the 
app 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

   
 
                                                                                           
Figure 4.   Select the characteristic of drains 
   
 
                                                                                                                      
Figure 3.   Trend of weight records by 1 week and 3 months 
   
 
                                                                                                                 
Figure 5.   The interface of drain records 
automatically calculates the change in body weight over the 
past three months or the date of operation. Specifically, we 
define the orange sign to express the patient’s body weight 
decreases by 5 to 10 percent, more than 10 percent for red 
and normal range (less than 5 percent) for green, 
respectively (Figure 3; right). Likewise, patients could 
receive the alert message on the homepage due to the 
decline in body weight. Through these manners, it may be 
able to give patients assistance to know their body weight 
condition much easier. 
3) My drains: The gastrectomy is a complex operation, 
which may be associated with complications such as 
leakage. Previously, the patient recorded the data on paper, 
which was not convenient or reliable. With the app, the 
patient can easily record the drain information by 
himself/herself. First, the patient needs to select the feature 
of drains at first time. What is more, the patient must choice 
the kind of drains by their own selection with the position, 
type and body side. Also, he/she can add a new drain with 
the same setting format about last time (Figure 4). Next, the 
patient could input the daily color and volume of any drain 
by color charts, including red, orange, green, yellow, and 
gray (Figure 5; right). Generally, these colors are the most 
commonly used for recording of drain fluids. Meanwhile, 
we draw the trend and the spot according to the historical 
records (Figure 5; left). The convenience of this graph is 
similar to that of weight graph. The patient can readily gain 
insight into the trend and the color points. It is worth noting 
that if the drain fluid turns red, it might be the symbol of 
internal bleeding, then both the patient and medical 
practitioners could receive alarm message from the system. 
4) 
Wound pictures: The patient can take pictures of the 
wound and drains if necessary. The pictures are sent to the 
web server, where the medical staff can check the condition 
of the wound. This function is also integrated with the 
telecare center at the National Taiwan University Hospital 
(NTUH). If the wound is infected, the medical staff can call 
the patient and pursue medical treatment. 
5) Surgery: This section provides the prescriptions of 
surgery that the patient has. The patient can understand the 
detail information about the disease and surgery. 
6) Symptoms: To give appropriate suggestions of 
symptoms that patients may encounter after the gastrectomy, 
the app automatically calculates the interval between the 
date of the operation and the present day. Next, according to 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

   
 
                                                                                                                 
Figure 6.   The interface of symptoms 
TABLE I.   CHARACTERISTICS OF PATIENTS BETWEEN GROUPS  
 
Variable 
App  
group 
(n=15) 
Control 
group 
(n=15) 
P value 
Gender (male: female) 
7:8 
8:7 
0.910 
Age (years) 
61.6±12.1 
60.7±18.1 
0.876 
Body mass index 
23.4±3.6 
22.7±3.9 
0.611 
Comorbidity 
8 
4 
0.135 
Indication of gastric surgery 
Gastric cancer  
Gastric tumor 
 
12 
3 
 
12 
3 
0.999 
Pathological staging 
Stage Ⅰ 
Stage Ⅱ 
Stage Ⅲ 
Stage Ⅳ 
 
5 
6 
4 
0 
 
6 
5 
4 
0 
0.912 
Pre-operative chemotherapy 
0 
0 
0.999 
Post-operative chemotherapy 
2 
3 
0.921 
 
the interval days, the function provides patients the 
information regarding typical weekly discomfort after the 
surgery (Figure 6; left). In addition, we offer more than ten 
general symptoms such as wound pain, fatigue, diarrhea, 
insomnia, and so forth. Patients can simply add or remove 
their specific symptoms with the detail information through 
the interface (Figure 6; right). Thus, the system would count 
the number of symptoms over time. 
B. Web Service and Auto Notification Service 
We designed and developed a platform for patients and 
medical staff. On the platform, they can review follow all of 
the historical upload record, such as weight, drain, 
symptoms, and wound pictures. The patient can access the 
platform to input their post-operative data if a smartphone is 
not available (not shown here). In addition, the web service 
will automatically send a cell phone message to the medical 
staff when the patient uploads wound pictures. With this 
service, medical professionals can immediately check the 
wound condition, and notify the patient if the wound 
infection should be investigated. 
C. Assessment of the App Performance  
We conducted a simple questionnaire to evaluate the 
usefulness of this app from users at the National Taiwan 
University Hospital. Besides, In order to compare with the 
app users group, we retrospectively collected subjects 
undergoing gastrectomy as a control group. More 
importantly, for the assessment of prognosis in both groups, 
we also collected the medical record in terms of outpatient 
clinic (OPC) visits, re-admission visits, and emergency 
room visits. In order to make a comparison between the app 
group and the control group, all values were expressed as 
mean with their associated standard deviations or frequency. 
The Mann-Whitney U test was used for continuous 
variables, and the Fisher's exact test was used for categorical 
variables. Data analyses were performed using SPSS 
software version 15.0. A 2-sided P value of less than 0.05 
was considered statistically signiﬁcant.  
III. 
RESULTS 
This app had been available since late June, 2013 on 
Apple App Store. There were 15 consecutive patients at 
NTUH accessing this app (app group). Besides, we 
retrospectively collected 15 cases undergoing gastrectomy 
as a control group. The demographics of both groups are 
shown in Table 1. Mean age of the app group was 61.6±12.1 
years, and that of the control group was 60.7±18.1 years. 
The mean body mass index of app group and control group 
were 23.4±3.6 and 22.7±3.9, respectively. Even though this 
study design did not use randomization, the two groups 
were similar in all variables with non-significant difference. 
For the clinical results (Table 2), the app group had the less 
proportion of body weight loss percentages compared to 
control group during six-month follow up (4.6±0.5 vs. 11.4±
1.2, P＜0.01). However, the patients of app group had more 
out-patient clinic (OPC) visits than the control group (10.8±
1.4 vs. 8.3±1.7, P＜0.01). With this application, the patients 
developing body weight loss more than 5 percent three 
months after operation could receive the warning from the 
app, which also inform the medical staff to do nutritional 
assessment and intervention for the malnourished cases, 
such as consultant of dietician. After all, nearly 93.3 percent 
of users are willing to recommend this app to others. As a 
result, the patients of app group visited the OPC more times 
to undergo the nutritional evaluation to achieve early 
diagnosis and early intervention. 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

                                                                                                                                                             
TABLE II.   THE CLINICAL OUTCOMES BETWEEN TWO GROUPS 
 
Variable 
App group (n=15) 
Control group (n=15) 
P value 
Percentages of body weight loss (compared 
to pre-operative status) 
4.6±0.5 
11.4±1.2 
＜0.01 
Number of outpatient clinic (OPC) visit 
10.8±1.4 
8.3±1.7 
＜0.01 
Re-admission 
2 (13.3%) 
3 (20.0%) 
0.598 
Emergency room visit 
0 (0.0%) 
1 (6.7%) 
0.999 
Would you recommend this App to others? 
Yes 
No 
 
14 (93.3%) 
1 (6.7%) 
- 
- 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Based on the preliminary analysis from users, this app is 
considered a useful tool that users can use it to reduce the 
impact on body weight loss significantly. More importantly, 
this app acquires a high degree of support with 93.3 percent 
from users. Smartphones have become increasingly popular 
with both medical professionals and patients in recent years. 
For this reason, the number of associated applications is 
dramatically increasing. The quality of the rapidly growing 
amount of information in these medical apps; however, could 
be inconsistent. It is well-documented that only 55.8 percent 
of the apps are associated with scientifically validated data, 
with the best quality information being developed by 
healthcare professionals or organizations [10]. To develop 
this app, we worked with the medical surgical staff and 
dieticians at the NTUH. The information, which consists of 
not only the educational data but also the clinical rules, is 
considered accurate and reliable.  
In this fast-changing arena, human communication and 
healthcare information-gathering methods have changed. 
With diverse online social networking services such as 
Facebook and YouTube, people are beginning to access 
these services to manage their health condition [11][12]. In 
the near future, combined services (the app and the platform) 
may become the leading trend in health care.  
However, there are several limitations or special 
considerations in this study. First, this app is not regulated by 
the medical authorities in Taiwan. The US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) has set some regulations to oversee 
medical apps that contain medical device accessory 
functionality or transform mobile communications into 
regulated medical devices [13]. In the future, wishing to 
augment the care provider in the healthcare process decisions, 
further studies are needed to integrate the medical record and 
communication services to the platform. Additionally, 
additional time and cases are required to prove if this app has 
clinical benefits such as improved quality of life or improved 
nutritional status. 
This app is implemented by information technology 
specialists, and it is also co-designed by medical staff with 
clinical rule support. It does not, even so, take the place of 
clinical intervention and judgment. In addition, patients input 
and store their information in the app, which is then 
transferred to a web server. The protection of patient data, 
which may be vulnerable to intentional or unintentional 
attack, is very important. In this study, we designed and 
implemented three secure layers to protect the privacy of the 
patients and their data on the web server as described 
previously [14]. 
This app is a feasible software solution for gastric cancer 
patients to record their post-operative information and as an 
alternative tool for self-care. However, the long-term clinical 
value must be validated in a future study, and number of 
patients are considered to be necessary to properly evaluate 
its effectiveness. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The two first authors Jin-Ming Wu and Te-Wei Ho 
contributed equally to this work and should be considered 
co-first authors. The authors would like to thank National 
Taiwan University Hospital for its financial support. The 
Grant No. is UN102-018. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. J. Price et al., “Management of advanced gastric cancer,” 
Expert. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol, vol. 6, pp. 199–209,  Apr 
2012. 
[2] C. Mariette, M. L. De Botton, and G. Piessen, “Surgery in 
esophageal and gastric cancer patients: what is the role for 
nutrition support in your daily practice,” Ann. Surg. Oncol, 
vol. 19, pp. 2128-2134, Jul 2012. 
[3] F. A. Moore, “Effects of immune-enhancing diets on 
infectious morbidity and multiple organ failure,” JPEN J. 
Parenter. Enteral Nutr, vol. 25, pp. S36-42, Mar 2001. 
[4] P. Senesse et al., “Nutritional support during oncologic 
treatment of patients with gastrointestinal cancer: who could 
benefit,” Cancer Treat. Rev,  vol. 34, pp. 568-575, Oct 2008. 
[5] V. Catalano et al., “Gastric cancer,” Crit. Rev. Oncol. 
Hematol, vol. 54, pp. 209-241, Jun 2005. 
[6] E. Van Cutsem and J. Arends, “The causes and consequences 
of cancer-associated malnutrition,” Eur. J. Oncol. Nurs, vol. 9, 
pp. S51-63, 2005. 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

[7] T. K. Burki, “Cancer apps,” Lancet Oncol, vol. 14, pp. 580-1, 
Jun 2013. 
[8] A. Rao, P. Hou, T. Golnik, J. Flaherty, and S. Vu, “Evolution 
of data management tools for managing self-monitoring of 
blood glucose results: a survey of iPhone applications,” J. 
Diabetes Sci. Technol, vol. 4, pp. 949-957, Jul 2010. 
[9] B. A. Rosser and C. Eccleston, “Smartphone applications for 
pain management,” J. Telemed. Telecare, vol. 17, pp. 308-312, 
2011. 
[10] A. Pandey, S. Hasan, D. Dubey, and S. Sarangi, “Smartphone 
apps as a source of cancer information: changing trends in 
health information-seeking behavior,” J. Cancer Educ, Vol. 
28, pp. 138-42, Mar 2013. 
[11] T. Sahama, J. Liang, and R. Iannella, “Impact of the social 
networking applications for health information management 
for patients and physicians,” Stud. Health Technol. Inform, 
vol. 180, pp. 803-807, 2012. 
[12] A. N. Vyas, M. Landry, M. Schnider, A. M. Rojas, and S. F. 
Wood, 
“Public 
health 
interventions: 
reaching 
Latino 
adolescents via short message service and social media,” J. 
Med. Internet Res, vol. 14, pp. e99, Jul 2012. 
[13] T. J. Orchard et al., “Haptoglobin Genotype and the Rate of 
Renal Function Decline in the Diabetes Control and 
Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions 
and Complications Study,” Diabetes, vol. 62, pp. 3218-3223, 
Jun 2013. 
[14] H. 
J. 
Yu 
et 
al., 
“A 
sharable 
cloud-based 
pancreaticoduodenectomy 
collaborative 
database 
for 
physicians: 
Emphasis 
on 
security 
and 
clinical 
rule 
supporting,” Comput. Methods Programs Biomed, vol. 111, 
pp. 488-497, Aug 2013 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

