Biological Digital Signal Processing 
Interpretation and Combination 
Ionescu Marius 
“Politehnica” University of Bucharest 
Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunications and Information Technology 
Bucharest, Romania 
Email: yonescumarius@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— In this work, we discuss methods, filters and 
algorithms for processing of biological signals, as well as the 
interpretation and display of the results. Biological signals can 
help us diagnose certain diseases, and their combination and 
interpretation can provide us with relevant information about 
our health. The discussed problem is related to how biological 
signals can be processed, combined, interpreted and displayed 
in order to make accurate diagnoses. The article illustrates a 
new prototype based on spectroscopic methods which uses near 
infrared sensors to monitor blood glucose levels. The prototype 
combines spectroscopic methods with other methods, such as 
Electrocardiography or Electromyography. The work focuses 
on light absorbance in matter and on non-invasive blood 
glucose 
detection 
using 
near 
infrared 
technology 
by 
colorimetric interpretation of the values transmitted. 
Keywords- Digital signal processing; Haar filter; Butterworth 
filter; signals combination; signals interpretation; spectroscopic 
signals. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In this paper, we discuss methods and algorithms for 
processing of biological signals, as well as the interpretation 
and display of the results using development platforms that 
enable digital acquisition and processing of biological 
signals. Digital signal processing is a bio-medical method 
that can help us make a faster diagnosis and provides more 
reliable treatment options for patients. Combining medical 
digital signals from Electrocardiography, Electroencephalog
raphy, Electromyography, or spectroscopic near infrared, 
can help us in monitoring diseases. Biological signals can 
come from different types of sources: audio, video, 
electrical, magnetic, etc. The challenge is to understand how 
these signals have been converted into electrical signals 
through methods of capturing and using transducers, such as 
sensors that measure physical and chemical values [1]. 
The challenge mentioned above is related to the 
interpretation of signals for the calculation and prognosis of 
diseases, such as diabetes, cancer or stroke. The prototype 
proposed in this article is an assembly between an Arduino 
board and two near infrared sensors for absorption and 
colorimetry. The signals acquired by Electrocardiography, 
Electromyography or light absorption sensors through 
biological tissues are processed and combined by a piece of 
software. Signal processing is based on the processing of the 
biological electrical properties of the body, which occur in 
tissues. Biological signals can be correlated with the 
mechanical, magnetic or spectroscopic signals, and used in 
biological analysis and signal processing [3]. 
Regarding the technique of acquiring biological signals, 
nowadays, Biological Signal Import Module (BSIM) is 
often used for acquiring biological signals [23]. It supports 
the acquisition of analog biological signals (2.5 V) from 
sensors like a pH electrode or an UV detector. BSIM uses 
multiple acquisition channels to acquire and interpret data 
using appropriate software for each channel. Thus, a module 
that receives signals from more than one electrode may be 
able to generate data for the analysis of Electrocardiography 
and Electromyography signals, as well as spectroscopic 
signals. This analysis is important because it helps with the 
detection of diseases that a patient may suffer from by 
processing biological signals. 
According to the studies of Lapique Nicolas [1], professor 
in the Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, 
Zurich, Germany, a biological signal processing circuit is 
based on a biological sensor that controls the activity of 
individual components using an internal timer. This 
prevents a sensor circuit from being active when the system 
is not in use and there is no need for processing biological 
data transmission. When the system is active, it transmits 
data via a control signal [1]. However, it is a challenge to 
combine different biological components to form a complex 
bio-signal in order to convey as much biological 
information as possible to the computer software for 
analysis and processing [21]. Lapique Nicolas [1] explains 
that biological signals travel differently through an 
electronic wire, and that, in biology, there is a variety of 
different signals from proteins to micro ribonucleic acid 
molecules [2]. A special feature in processing biological 
signals consists not only in transforming a signal into 
another, but also in transforming multiple input signals into 
multiple output signals.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II, we talk about processing, interpretation and display of 
signals, Electrocardiography, Electromyography and near 
infrared spectroscopy signals. In Sections III and IV, we 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-792-4
BIOTECHNO 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

present the filters that can be applied over these signals, 
such as Butterworth and Haar filters, for a more accurate 
interpretation and acquisition of channel settings. In Section 
V, we discuss the near infrared signals for glucose and 
blood analysis. We conclude the paper in Section VI. 
II. 
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY AND ELECTROMIOGRAPHY 
SIGNAL PROCESSING, COMBINING AND DISPLAYING 
Electrocardiography signals can be combined with other 
signals, or information can be extracted from signals coming 
from different sources, such as Electromyography or near 
infrared, spectroscopic signals [4]. 
The acquisition of Electrocardiography signals uses the 
latest 
generation 
of 
microprocessors. 
Before 
being 
forwarded, the signals are extensively processed. At the 
moment, the acquisition of Electrocardiography signals is 
investigated with silver/silver chloride electrodes. The Ag 
(silver)/AgCl (silver chloride) electrode is used in common 
Electrocardiography systems and has a maximum offset 
voltage of ± 300 mV. A ± 0.5 mV desired signal is 
superimposed on the electrode offset. In addition, the 
system also takes the noise 50/60 Hz power lines forming 
common mode signal. The amplitude of power line noise 
could be very large and must be filtered [5]. 
Signal processing is a big challenge as the real value of 
the signal will be in an environment of 0.5 mV offset by 
300 mV. Other factors, such as Alternating Current (AC) 
power interference, Radio-Frequency (RF) interference 
from surgery equipment, and implanted devices, or rhythm 
changes and physiological monitoring system, can also have 
an 
impact. 
The 
main 
sources 
of 
noise 
in 
Electrocardiography are: 
• Low frequency noise (drift); 
• Power line interference (50 Hz or 60); 
• Muscular noise (this noise is very difficult to remove 
because it is in the same region as the real signal. It is 
usually corrected by software); 
• Other interferences (ie., radio frequency noise from 
other equipment). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Combined graphical display of a raw ECG and an EMG chart. 
 
This article aims to discuss the acquisition, takeover and 
processing of Electrocardiography and Electromyography 
signals, combining and displaying them using software. The 
goal is to extract as much information as possible from the 
data that is captured by using a developed board, which uses 
an advanced microcontroller receiving advanced processing 
signals from transducers. The signals which came in through 
the serial computer software are processed and displayed 
using advanced graphics. 
The goal is to extract as much information as possible 
from the received data and display it in a more 
comprehensive way in order to be understood by 
bioengineers, doctors or trained personnel, based on which 
they can diagnose and predict certain diseases or 
information about the health of a patient or a pathological 
case (Figure 1). 
III. 
SIGNALS - HAAR AND BUTTERWORTH FILTERS 
For processing and filtering graphics, we used two filters. 
The Haar filter, which is part of a wavelet family, is used in 
mathematics for waves. Wavelet analysis is similar to 
Fourier analysis because it allows a target function to be 
represented as an orthonormal basis. Using the wavelets for 
Electrocardiograph representation is quite useful if the 
sampled signal is continuous and has sudden transitions 
(Figure 1). 
 
Figure 2.   Electrocardiography signal capture. 
 
One 
advantage 
of 
using 
a 
Haar 
filter 
for 
Electrocardiography signals graphical representation that it 
helps us represent any sample time as a continuous function, 
uniformly, approximated by linear combinations. Thus, this 
algorithm is extended to those areas where any function of 
this type can be uniformly approximated by continuous 
functions [14]. Samples are types of discontinuous functions 
that can distort the signal according to the formula below, 
where δn, k represent Kronecker delta and ψn, k represent the 
real line R [25]. 
 
 
      (1) 
Input sequences, which, in our case, are sampled 
Electrocardiography signals, are passed through a matrix 
type Haar by applying the wavelet transform discrete type, a 
4x4 matrix: 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-792-4
BIOTECHNO 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

                                 
 
                     (2) 
Butterworth had a reputation for solving “impossible” 
mathematical problems. At the time, this filter design 
required a considerable amount of designer experience 
because of the limitations of the theory in use. The filter has 
not been used for more than 30 years after its publication 
[24]. Butterworth has shown that close successive 
approximations were obtained by increasing the number of 
screening the correct values. At the time, filter waves 
generated substantial low-pass filter. Butterworth has shown 
that a low-pass filter can be designed with a cutoff 
frequency normalized to 1 radian per second and whose 
frequency response is: 
                                    
                   (3) 
  
where ω is the angular frequency in radians per second, and 
n is the number of poles in the filter equal to the number of 
reactive elements in a passive filter. If ω = 1, the magnitude 
of this type of filter passband is 1 / √2 ≈ 0.707, which is half 
power or -3 dB. Butterworth filters work only with an even 
number of poles in his work. He can ignore that these filters 
can be designed with an odd number of poles. He built his 
higher order filters, the filters with two poles separated by 
vacuum tube amplifiers. The frequency response plot of 2, 
4, 6, 8 and 10 pole filters is shown as A, B, C, D and E in 
his original chart. 
Butterworth solved the equations of two or four-pole 
filters, that show how the latter could be in waterfall when 
they are separated by vacuum tube amplifiers, allowing the 
construction of higher order filters despite the losses. 
In 1930, Butterworth used forms of coil with diameter of 
1.25 cm and 3 cm long, with plug-in terminals, capacitors 
and associated resistors contained inside a coil. Coil 
resistance forms part of the load plate. Two poles were used 
for each vacuum tube and RC coupling was used for the 
electric grid of the next tube [7]. 
The Butterworth filtering algorithm can be transformed 
with the Haar filter used for Electrocardiography graphics. 
That can help to sample the Butterworth signal processing, 
where the algorithm has a defined number of low and high 
pass Butterworth filters with three poles, and which works 
on a certain frequency threshold [17]. A band-pass filter can 
be implemented by applying sequential algorithms to filter 
high-pass and low-pass [15]. 
In this sense, we applied algorithms corresponding to 
impulse response filters, which were designed by applying 
the bilinear transformation to the transfer functions of the 
corresponding analog filters [9], resulting in a recursive 
digital filter with seven real coefficients. So, in this 
application, we will have Butterworth type filters with the 
following settings (Figure 3): 
• Butterworth_FreqHP - frequency high-pass which has 
the default 3 dB; 
• Butterworth_FreqLP - low-pass frequency is 170 dB 
default value; 
• Butterworth_Level - up crossing that has the default 1; 
• Butterworth_PowerHP - high-pass power that has the 
default 57; 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Settings the seven real coefficients for Butterworth filter 
 
• Butterworth_PowerLP - low-pass power that has the 
default 20; 
• Butterworth_UseHP - to enable high-pass, default is 
true; 
• Butterworth_UseLP - to enable low-pass, default is 
true; 
The expressions for filtering coefficients depending on 
the separation frequency and the sampling period are 
derived. The transfer function shows a plateau over the 
passband and a gradual attenuation more apparent at the 
frequencies above and below the cutoff frequency, with a 
slope of 60 dB / decade [8].  
There is an attenuation of 3 dB frequency cutting and a 
gradual increase in phase shift frequency at every 10 steps. 
Low-pass filters show a maximum of 8 % overshoot and 
high-pass filters down show a maximum overshoot of about 
35%. The algorithm to calculate filter coefficients for an 
arbitrary limit frequency of Electroencephalography may be 
useful in modern laboratories and for software designers for 
electrophysiological applications [19]. 
IV. 
SETTINGS AND USING CHANNELS FOR ARRHYTHMIA 
Current applications for processing biological signals can 
set and use multiple channels simultaneously, which can 
receive different signals. Each channel has its settings. For 
example, the heart rate settings can be used as follows: 
• Beat Level High; 
• Beat Level High Limit; 
• Beat Level Low; 
• Beat Level Low Limit; 
• Filter Haar; 
• Filter Butterworth; 
Each channel can sample its own independent set of 
signals and may apply a set of specified filters. In our case, 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-792-4
BIOTECHNO 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

the Electrocardiography signal can analyze, filter and 
display muscle activities in real time from the main sample 
data transmitted by a transducer. 
The application allows diagnosis mode that draws the 
PQST axis based on filters used at some point. The goal is 
to save the PQST state at certain time intervals [12]. 
The signals based on flows and electric excitations of the 
body, detected and transmitted by electrodes, can display, 
process and set various diagnoses, prognoses and can 
interpolate the obtained information, so that the area of 
diagnostics includes batch jobs related to other regions or 
functions 
of 
the 
biological 
body, 
such 
as 
Electrocardiography or Electromyography (Figure 4). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Settings channels of application processing signals 
 
Arrhythmia (Figure 5) is a problem with the rate or 
rhythm of the heartbeat. During an arrhythmia, the heart can 
beat too fast, too slowly, or with an irregular rhythm. If the 
heartbeat is below 60 beats per minute, the condition is 
called bradycardia and if it is over 100 beats per minute, the 
condition is called tachycardia. 
The arrhythmia algorithm calculation is based on data 
from the sampling difference every 6 beats. If a heartbeat is 
detected at each 6 beats, an anomaly is detected and the 
software will send alerts (Figure 6). 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Arrhythmia detector  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Acquisition data Electrocardiography and Electromyography 
 
The proposed prototype starts with Electrocardiography 
signals, which can be interpreted and displayed by the 
software. To this prototype were attached sensors, such as 
near infrared spectroscopic sensors, which measure the 
absorption of light through biological tissue. In this sense, 
an algorithm has been developed to calculate light 
absorption through the three layers of the skin [10], light 
absorption through blood, plasma and formed elements 
(erythrocytes, leukocytes and thrombocytes, as well as 
nutrients). In this article, we focus only on the absorption of 
light through glucose, as a biological signal correlated with 
Electrocardiography signals.  
V. 
NEAR INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY SIGNAL IN 
MEASURING GLUCOSE 
A. Introduction 
    One of the modern methods proposed in this paper at the 
development phase and research is non-invasive glucose 
detection in correlation with Electrocardiography signals. 
The prototype has two hardware modules that are 
interconnected 
through 
different 
interfaces. 
Electrocardiography helps spectroscopic measurement (in 
this case, glucose) by providing the moment of maximum 
blood flow through the body. 
    The invasive colorimetric method produces a chemical 
reaction activated by an enzyme, not oxidizing glucose. The 
process itself consists of placing a drop of blood on a test 
strip. The blood glucose will react with a chemical reagent 
(bromine or chlorine) that changes color. This modification 
of blood color is measured and interpreted as a blood 
glucose level. In this regard, the proposed prototype in this 
paper brings two general problems in detecting the glucose 
level in the blood [22]: 
• Non-invasive blood glucose detection using near 
infrared technology by colorimetric interpretation 
of the values transmitted by a sensor; 
• Absorption of light in matter; 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-792-4
BIOTECHNO 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

    The research proposes an interface that analyzes and 
calculates the colorimetric values transmitted by a 
development board through two near infrared sensors: one 
for light absorption and one for colorimetry. The blood 
glucose measurement algorithm is based on the absorption 
of the amount of monochromatic light that passes through 
the tissues to the capillaries that contain blood [10]. The 
blood glucose concentration is measured based on the 
amount of monochromatic light absorption through tissues 
[14]. The error rate can go up to 20% due to the light that 
has to pass through to the capillary veins. Also, the spectral 
bandwidth may have large errors in this sense. The paper 
proposes an interpretation algorithm based on the RGB 
interpretation of the data coming from the near infrared 
sensor, and only an interpretation of the monochromatic 
absorption. RGB data is interpreted based on tint and 
saturation to obtain the average blood glucose level [22].        
     Classical blood glucose measurement devices are based 
on colorimetry and measure the amount of light absorbed by 
matter [20].This way, the glucose concentration is measured 
by the detection of the luminous intensity passing through a 
blood sample, which contains the serum and chemical 
reagent products [6].  
      The measurement procedure is similar to urine analysis, 
where a urine sample passes through the yellow light and 
absorbs the blue and green lights [21]. 
 
B. Prototype 
     The proposed prototype uses light that passes through 
matter, for example, through our finger, so that the light can 
reach the capillaries. Tests were performed on a 
physiological serum that was mixed with 100g of glucose 
[18]. The near infrared sensor passes through the sample, 
being helped by the auxiliary light, and returns the RGB 
values in order to determine the amount of glucose in the 
sample. To analyze and measure blood glucose, some 
standard measures should be taken (Table I). 
TABLE I.  STANDARD ABSORBANCE 
1. Wavelength (400 ~ 800 nm) 
2. The standard amount of glucose used in the test 
3. Incubation time 
4. Standard sample quantity 
5. Volume of the reagent 
6. Limit of Absorbance 
7. RGB color standard 
 
        The principle of measurement is based on the uniform 
dispersion of light through matter to capillary. This is 
facilitated by the auxiliary light that allows the near infrared 
sensor to collect better values of the RGB in the blood. To 
measure the density of blood glucose, the data of a 
polynomial mathematical function is utilized [21]. 
Maximum glucose absorption is detected between 260 
nm and 270 nm and the one of xyloses is from 245 nm to 
255 nm. At 270 nm, absorption of xyloses is only half of the 
glucose. The 6 channels of the sensor detect the light 
absorbance at a given wavelength (R = 610nm; S = 680nm; 
T = 730nm; U = 760nm; V = 810nm; W = 860nm) on which 
blood glucose can be detected. We know that normal blood 
glucose is between 4.4 millimole and 6.7 millimole per liter 
(ie., between 0.8 and 1.2 grams per liter) taken at no more 
than 6.7 millimols per liter (1.2 grams per liter) two hours 
after having a meal [22]. 
People who do not have diabetes should have a value 
below 6.9 mmol / L (0.25 g / L) and those with diabetes 
have a value between 5.0-7.2 mmol / 0.9-1.3 g / L) before 
meals and less than 10 mmol / L (1.8 g / L) after meals, 
according to [22]. 
The application of near infrared spectroscopy on the 
human body is based on the fact that absorption of near 
infrared light from human body tissues contains important 
information about changes in hemoglobin concentration, 
which is very important for the detection of glucose in 
tissues. When a certain area of the brain is activated, it 
detects that the volume of blood in the area is changing 
rapidly [13]. Near infrared spectroscopy technology can be 
used as a rapid monitoring tool for cases of intracranial 
hemorrhage by placing the scanner on the head [11]. When 
it is internal bleeding from a stroke, the blood can be 
concentrated in a single location where the near infrared 
light will be more absorbed than in other locations [22].  
The prototype proposed is based on optical spectroscopy 
that quantifies the level of glucose in human blood based on 
several near infrared sensors. The proposed prototype 
device has not yet been tested on the real human body to 
determine the level of blood glucose. 
A module that contains more sensors stays on top and 
passes through the finger that sits on a device. The bottom 
module is equipped with an internal module to retrieve the 
signals transmitted by the sensors [22]. The process involves 
inserting the near infrared light beam into the test samples 
(tissues) and detecting the amount of light passing through 
these samples. Near infrared transmission spectroscopy is 
practiced on the fingertips or ear lobes, while for the 
forearms and cheeks, reflexive spectroscopy is not used due 
to the fact that the near infrared does not have the same 
penetration power. When near infrared light passes through a 
tissue, glucose is detected when the tissue absorption rate is 
very low. It should be noted that near infrared spectroscopy 
is renowned for its simple concept and its applications. This 
technique can be used to monitor the water content in the 
blood that can be avoided by selecting a specific infrared 
range. 
The prototype (Figure 7) is an assembly between an 
Arduino board and two near infrared sensors of absorption 
and colorimetry. The signals are taken and processed by 
software resulting in a combination of Electrocardiography, 
Electromyography and light absorption through biological 
tissues. AS7263 is the near infrared version of the spectral 
sensor capable of measuring 610, 680, 730, 760, 810 and 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-792-4
BIOTECHNO 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

860 nm of light, each with a maximum detection error of 
20nm. The 6 light channels have the following wavelengths: 
R = 610nm; S = 680nm; T = 730nm; U = 760 nm; V = 
810nm; W = 860nm. 
TABLE II.  PROTOTYPES RESULTS ACQUISITION 
 
Glucose/nm 
R-610 
S-680 
T-730 
U-760 
V-810 
W-860 
200 mg Gl 
235.25 
84.75 
27.79 
16.67 
20.77 
15.45 
400 mg Gl 
135.25 
78.75 
20.79 
18.91 
22.77 
17.45 
600 mg Gl 
94.36 
30.99 
15.0 
9.95 
10.89 
8.14 
800 mg Gl 
78.42 
67.15 
62.52 
57.73 
58.40 
48.85 
1000 mg Gl 
65.42 
30.99 
57.52 
55.22 
49.30 
43.15 
For glucose measurement in vitro, a high glucose solution 
(100 mMol) was used and the near infrared spectra were 
measured. The software application receives the results 
from channels and tempF signals from a module based on 
an Arduino device to which a near infrared sensor module 
has been attached. Two aqueous glucose solutions were 
prepared in advance for in vitro testing. An initial solution 
of ~ 100 mMol and one ~200 mMol were prepared. Several 
readings were performed for each concentration. Finally, an 
average of each reference set was taken (Figure 7). If the 
glucose concentration (mMol) increases (reading), the 
output voltage increases. 
 
Figure 7. Hardware prototype 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Channels analysis receiving multiple signals can be very 
useful in the diagnosis and prognosis of many diseases, 
especially when the channels contain rich information that 
can 
be 
extracted 
from 
Electrocardiography, 
Electromyography, Electroencephalography, near infrared 
spectroscopy etc. In this case, the Electrocardiography 
signal can be processed and correlated with other signals 
using specially developed algorithms to analyze and display 
more useful information in a comprehensive way. In the 
future, the program will try to implement periodograms, 
correlograms, and other signal analysis tools to display a 
rich variety of information that may be useful for 
bioengineering and medical staff [22]. 
The application aims to implement in the future: 
• an 
advanced 
graphical 
display 
for 
Electrocardiography 
and 
Electromyography 
that 
can 
correlate with and illustrate muscles activity; 
• an 
advanced 
graphic 
display 
of 
Electrocardiography arrhythmia; 
• real time display of possible diseases based on 
Electrocardiography signals; 
• attaching new sensors, which makes possible the 
display a heartbeat correlation with muscles activity in real-
time; 
• saving and creating a database of transmitted and 
processed values in real time to create a history. 
       ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work has been funded by the Operational Program 
Human Capital of the European Funds Ministry through 
Financial 
Agreement 
51675/09.07.2019, 
SMIS 
code 
125125. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Lapique and Y. Benenson, “Digital switching in a biosensor circuit 
via programmable timing of gene availability”, Nature Chemical Biology, 
14 October 2014, pp 1020–1027.  
[2] L. Prochazka, B. Angelici, B. Häfliger and Y. Benenson, “Highly 
modular bow-tie gene circuits with programmable dynamic behavior”, 
Nature Communications, 14 October 2014, pp 1-12. 
[3] B. Widrow et al., “Adaptive noise cancelling: Principles and 
applications”, Proc. IEEE, vol. 63, 1975, pp. 1692-1716. 
[4] A. Bharadwaj and U. Kamath, “Techniques for accurate ECG signal 
processing”, Cypress Semiconductor Corp., February 2011, pp 1-7. 
[5] G. Bianchi and R. Sorrentino, “Electronic filter simulation & design”, 
McGraw-Hill Professional, 2007,  pp. 17–20. 
[6] J. Smith, M. Jr. Jones and L. Houghton, Future of health insurance. N 
Engl. J. Med. 965, 1999, pp. 325–329 
[7] S. Updike and G. Hicks, “The enzyme electrode”, Nature, Vol. 214, 
1967, pp. 986–988. 
[8] A. Caduff, M. Talary and P. Zakharov, “Cutaneous blood perfusion, as 
a perturbing factor for noninvasive glucose monitoring”, Diabetes Technol. 
Ther., vol. 12, 2010, pp. 1–9. 
[9] G. Dongmin, D. Zhang, L. Zhanga and L. Guangming, “Non-invasive 
bloodglucose monitoring for diabetics by means of breath signal analysis”, 
Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 173, October 2012, pp. 106–113. 
[10] A. N. Bashkatov, "Optical properties of human skin, subcutaneous and 
mucous tissues in the wavelength range from 400 to 2000 nm", Journal of 
Physics D: Applied Physics, vol. 38, 2005, pp. 2543-2555. 
[11] K. Kong, "Multiphoton microscopy in life sciences", Journal of 
Microscopy, vol. 200-2, 2000, pp.83-104. 
[12] Jurgen C. de Graaff, "Influence of Repetitive Finger Puncturing on 
Skin Perfusion and Capillary Blood Analysis in Patients with Diabetes 
Mellitus", DutchHeartFoundation,1999, pp 1-12. 
[13] L. Florea and D. Diamond, “Advances in wearable chemical sensor 
design for monitoring biological fluids,” Sensors Actuators B Chem., vol. 
211, 2015, pp. 403–418. 
[14] J. M. McMillin, “Clinical methods: The history, physical, and 
laboratory examinations,” Blood Glucose, 3rd ed., Boston, MA, USA: 
Butterworth, 1990, ch. 141. 
[15] 
Glucosemeters4u.com, 
“Glucometers 
comparison,” 
2015. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.glucosemeters4u.com/. [Accessed 9, 2020] 
[16] C.-F. So, K.-S. Choi, T. K. S. Wong and J. W. Y. Chung, “Recent 
advances in noninvasive glucose monitoring,” Med. Devices Evidence 
Res., vol. 5, June 2012, pp. 45–52. 
[17] A. Tura, S. Sbrignadello, D. Cianciavicchia, G. Pacini, and P. 
Ravazzani, “A low frequency electromagnetic sensor for indirect 
measurement of glucose concentration: In vitro experiments in different 
conductive solutions,” Sensors, vol. 10, no. 6, 2010, pp. 5346–5358. 
[18] D M Nathan et. al., Diabetes Control and Complications Trial 
Research Group, ‘‘The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on the 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-792-4
BIOTECHNO 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

development and progression of long-term complications in insulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus’’, N. Engl. J. Med. 329, 977, 1993. 
[19] L. H. Xu, Z. F. Liu, I. Yakovlev, M. Y. Tretyakov and R. M. Lees, 
Infrared Phys. Technol. 45, March 2004, pp. 31. 
[20] C. S. Sunandana, Physical applications of photoacoustic spectroscopy 
[Online]. Available: http://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/doi/ I O. I 1050 
102/abstract, February 15, 2006, 10 02/pssa.22. 
[21] M. Ionescu, “Measuring and detecting blood glucose by methods non-
invasive”, pp 1-7, Ecai 2018 - International Conference – 10th Edition 
Electronics, Computers and Artificial Intelligence 28 - 30 June, 2018, Iasi, 
Romania, pp 5-6. 
[22] M. Ionescu and P. Sever, “Algorithms of Absorbance and Colorimeter 
for Measuring Blood Glucose”, pp 3-6, Atee 2019 - The 11th International 
Symposium On Advanced Topics In Electrical Engineering March 28-30, 
2019, Bucharest, Romania, 1999, pp 5-6. 
[23] BioLogic 
Signal 
Import 
Module, 
[Online] 
www.bio-
rad.com/webroot/web/pdf/lsr/literature/4006229.pdf  [Accessed 9, 2020] 
[24] Wikipedia, Butterworth filter, [Online] en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Butterw
orth_filter 
[25] Wikipedia, Haar filter, [Online] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haar_wa
velet
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-792-4
BIOTECHNO 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

