Codifying Primary Protein Structure as Peptides Frequencies Vector 
An Efficient Alternative Method to Investigate Relationships among Genes and Organisms
Braulio R. G. M. Couto1, Bruna A. Coimbra1, Gabriel B. Tofani2, Gustavo P. Irffi2 and Cinthia T. V. Rocha1 
1Instituto de Engenharia e Tecnologia- IET; 2Instituto de Ciências Biológicas e da Saúde - ICBS 
Centro Universitário de Belo Horizonte - UniBH 
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil 
braulio.couto@unibh.br, brunatecquimica@hotmail.com, bandeiragt@yahoo.com, palmer.gustavo@gmail.com, 
cinthia.rocha@prof.unibh.br
 
Marcos Augusto dos Santos 
Departamento de Ciência da Computação - DCC 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais - UFMG 
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil 
marcos@dcc.ufmg.br
 
 
Abstract—There are no uniquely correct methods for inferring 
phylogenies. In this scenario, Linear Algebra methods and 
visualization techniques are essential to better analyze complex 
systems and can be very helpful to categorize species. Thus, if 
proteins are represented as vectors, it will be possible to apply 
Linear Algebra methods in order to investigate relationships 
among genes and organisms. To investigate whether or not 
primary protein sequences and genomes can be represented as 
vectors and processed by Linear Algebra methods to generate 
accurate phylogenetic relationships, four sets of sequences 
were analyzed by classical phylogenetics techniques, based on 
pairwise multiple alignments, and by Linear Algebra and 
optimization methods. The results showed that primary 
protein sequences and genomes can be represented as vectors 
in multidimensional space in such way that when they are 
mapped into 3D space the relationships among species are 
consistent with classic phylogenetic trees. 
Keywords-protein sequences; phylogenetics; linear algebra 
methods. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Phylogenetics or cladistics aims to reconstruct the 
evolutionary relationship among genes and organisms and to 
establish classifications that reflect those genealogies. Its 
fundamental axiom is that, as a product of evolution, nature 
is hierarchically ordered [1]. Unfortunately, there are no 
uniquely correct methods for inferring phylogenies, and 
many methods have been used [2].  Given an alignment and 
a tree scoring function, there are no efficient methodologies 
to calculate an optimal phylogeny. In this scenario, Linear 
Algebra methods and visualization techniques are essential 
to better analyze complex systems and can be very helpful to 
categorize species. So, if proteins are represented as vectors, 
it will be possible to apply Linear Algebra methods to 
investigate relationships among genes and organisms.  
Here, we investigated whether or not primary protein 
sequences and genomes can be represented as vectors in 
multidimensional space in such way that when they are 
mapped into 3D space it generates relationships among 
species consistent with classic phylogenetic trees. The 
objective of our study is to answer three questions:  Is it 
possible to represent proteins and genomes as tripeptide 
frequency vectors? Are phylogenetic trees constructed by 
using Euclidean distance between protein vectors consistent 
with phylogenetic trees constructed with alignments 
(classical phylogenetic trees)? Do images of genomes 
represented by multidimensional vectors and visualized in 
reduced tridimensional space generate relationships among 
species consistent with those described by classical 
phylogenetic trees? 
In Section II we present the material and methods to 
codify proteins and genomes as tripeptide frequency vectors, 
and how to build phylogenetic trees by using Euclidean 
distance between protein vectors. In the same section, we 
show the visualization technique of genome vectors in 
reduced space. In Section III, we present and discuss the 
results. Section IV concludes the paper. 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
Four sets of sequences were analyzed by classical 
phylogenetics techniques, based on pairwise alignments, and 
by Linear Algebra and optimization methods. Firstly, the 
origin of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) was 
analyzed, retrieving from GenBank the three longest coding 
regions from seventeen different isolated strains of the 
Human and Simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV): the gag 
protein, the pol polyprotein and the envelope polyprotein 
precursor [3][4][5]. The second database was composed by 
the complete genome of five strains of Chlamydophila 
pneumoniae that were retrieved from the NCBI (National 
Center for Biotechnology Information) website [14].  
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

The third dataset was similar to that used by reference [6] 
being composed by 59 whole mitochondrial genomes from 
the NCBI genome database, each one with 13 genes, totaling 
767 proteins. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is one of the 
most fundamental evolutionary markers for phylogenetics 
due to the absence of recombination, high mutation rate and 
ease of sequencing. The following genes were analyzed: 
ATP Synthase F0 subunit 6 (ATP6), ATP Synthase F0 
subunit 8 (ATP8), Cytochrome C Oxidase subunit 1 
(COX1), Cytochrome C Oxidase subunit 2 (COX2), 
Cytochrome C Oxidase subunit 3 (COX3), Cytochrome B 
(CYTB), NADH Dehydrogenase subunit 1 (ND1), NADH 
Dehydrogenase subunit 2 (ND2), NADH Dehydrogenase 
subunit 3 (ND3), NADH Dehydrogenase subunit 4 (ND4), 
NADH Dehydrogenase subunit 4L (ND4L), NADH 
Dehydrogenase 
subunit 
5 
(ND5), 
and 
NADH 
Dehydrogenase subunit 6 (ND6). The 59 species were: 
Goldfish, Tasseled-mouth loach, Commom Carp, Zebrafish, 
Atlantic Cod, Olive flounder, Ornate Bichir, inbow trout,  
Atlantic salmon, Salvelinus, Brook trout, Redhead (Bird), 
Oriental Stork, White Stork, Peredrin Falcon, Red 
Junglefowl, Rook (Bird), Grey-headed Broadbill, Village 
Indigobird, Rhea, Ostrich, Cattle (Cows), Hippopotamus, 
Sheep, Wild boar, Dog, Cat, Grey Seal, Harbor seal, Blue 
Whale, Fin Whale, Jamaican Fruit Bat, Nine-Banded 
Armadillo, 
Virginia 
Opossum, 
Wallaroo, 
European 
Headhog, European rabbit, Platypus, White Rhinoceros, 
Asinus, Horse, Indian rhinoceros, Western Gorilla, Human, 
Orangutan, Chimp Vellerosus, African Bush Elephant, 
Guinea Pig, House Mouse, Edible Dormouse, Brown Rat, 
European mole, Aardvark, American Alligator, Ryukyu odd-
tooth snake, Mole Skink, Green Sea Turtle, Painted Turtle, 
and African helmeted turtle.  
The 
last 
database 
analyzed 
was 
composed 
by 
mitochondrial D-loop sequences for the Hominidae taxa 
(pongidae) [7]-[10]. We used this dataset because 
mitochondrial D-loop is very useful for comparing closely 
related organisms provided that it is one of the fastest 
mutating sequence regions in animal DNA. The origin of 
modern man is a highly debated issue that has recently been 
tackled by using mtDNA sequences. The limited genetic 
variability of human mtDNA has been explained in terms of 
a recent common genetic ancestry: all modern-population 
mtDNAs originated from a single woman who lived in 
Africa less than 200,000 years ago [7][8][9]. This family 
embraces the gorillas, chimpanzees, orangutans and the 
humans. Species description (and GenBank access code): 
German Neanderthal (AF011222), Russian Neanderthal 
(AF254446), European Human (X90314), Puti Orangutan 
(AF451972), Jari Orangutan (AF451964), Mountain Gorilla 
Rwanda 
(AF089820), 
Western 
Lowland 
Gorilla 
(AY079510), Eastern Lowland Gorilla (AF050738), Chimp 
Schweinfurthii (AF176722), Chimp Vellerosus (AF315498), 
Chimp Verus (AF1767310), and Chimp Troglodytes 
(AF176766). Both HIV and primates analysis (the first and 
fourth datasets) were based on demos of the bioinformatics 
toolbox from MATLAB (The MathWorks, Inc).  
In order to visualize the genomes, we must represent 
each one as a point in space. The distance between the points 
should represent the differences in the genomes as a whole. 
Therefore, we might expect similar species to be close 
together in space. The genome proteins were represented as 
vectors of frequencies of groups of amino-acids. In this 
study, a sliding window of size 3 was used to measure the 
frequency (tripeptide frequency vectors). To represent the 
genome we used the vector sum of all its proteins. Therefore, 
we can obtain a database of genomes, S, as a rectangular 
matrix, X, where each line corresponds to one of the n 
genomes: 














nm
n
n
m
m
T
n
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X







2
1
2
22
21
1
12
11
2
1
)
,...,
,
(
 
With 20 amino-acids, each primary protein structure is 
codified as a vector with m = 203 = 8,000 dimensions. In the 
above matrix, Xij represents frequency o tripeptide i in the 
genome j (i = 1, 2, …n; j = 1, 2, …m; where n = number of 
genomes and m = 8,000 possible tripeptides). To codify a 
complete genome, the vector representations of genes from 
individual species are summed [6][11][12]. Therefore, both 
genes and genomes are represented as tripeptide frequency 
vectors with 8,000 dimensions. To generate a suitable 
visualization of these vectors, it is necessary to reduce the 
dimensionality of the space, with the minimum loss of 
information. Reference [13] presented a visualization 
technique to analyze chemical databases. We used that 
technique as a basis to develop a method for using genomes 
to visualize relationships among species in reduced space 
(3D). Actually, the high-dimensional visualization problem 
in m can be formulated as a distance-geometry problem:  to 
find n points in low space (2D or 3D) so that their interpoint 
distances match the corresponding values from m as closely 
as possible. When a representation in reduced space, Y, is 
generated for the database matrix X, we can calculate an 
error function E as the following: 
 
where δij is the Euclidean distance between protein vector 
(or genome) i and j in the original space,  represented in the 
matrix X,  and γij  is the Euclidean distance between protein 
vector (or genome) i and j in the reduced space,  represented 
in the matrix Y. The best representation of X in the reduced 
space will be the Y with the minimal associated error 
function.  Therefore, we must solve an unconstrained 
optimization problem. Many methods can be used to solve 
this problem [13]. In this study, we used a technique based 
on the interior-reflective Newton method, actually the 
conjugated gradient Newton's method [11]. Classical 
phylogenetic tree reconstructions were made by using 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

pairwise alignments algorithms. Alternative phylogenetic 
trees were obtained by UPGMA or Neighbor-Joining 
methods using, as pairwise distances, the Euclidean distance 
between each protein or genome vector of the dataset.  
III. 
RESULTS 
Phylogenetic tree reconstruction of 17 strains of the 
Human (HIV) and Simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) in 
the first dataset were made for each coding region. For the 
GAG coding region we used the Tajima-Nei method to 
measure the distance between the sequences and the 
unweighted pair group method using arithmetic averages 
(UPGMA) for the hierarchical clustering. Phylogenetic tree 
for the POL polyproteins was made by using the Jukes-
Cantor method to measure distance between sequences and 
the weighted pair group method using arithmetic averages 
(WPGMA) for the hierarchical clustering. For the ENV 
polyproteins we used the normalized pairwise alignment 
scores as distances between sequences and the UPGMA 
method. Given that the three trees showed slightly different 
results, a consensus tree using all three regions was built 
using a weighted average of the three trees (Figure 1). All 
three sequences from the GAG, POL, and ENV regions of 
the 17 HIV and SIV strains were codified as tripeptide 
frequency vectors that can be visualized in tridimensional 
space (Figure 2). Phylogenetic tree of HIV and SIV viruses 
reconstructed by Neighbor-joining method using as pairwise 
distances the Euclidean distance between each tripeptide 
frequency vectors (Figure 3). Both phylogenetic trees (Figure 
1 and 3) and the vectors in 3D space (Figure 2) illustrate the 
presence of two clusters and some other isolated strains. The 
most compact cluster includes all the HIV2 samples, and the 
second cluster contains the HIV1 strain (not as compact as 
the HIV2 cluster). From the trees it appears that the 
Chimpanzee is the source of HIV1. 
Nucleotide sequences of five isolated strains of 
Chlamydophila pneumoniae were converted into amino-acid 
sequences, codified as tripeptide frequency vectors and 
projected  in reduced space (3D): strains J138 and TW-182 
occupy the same region of space, near CWL029 strain and 
far from AR39 and LPCoLN. Before applying the method 
proposed herein, we tried to generate multiples alignments 
using the complete genomes of Chlamydophila pneumonia 
for reconstructing the classical dendogram (Figure 4) in 
MATLAB. An “out of memory error” occurred in a 
computer with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i5 processor and 6GB 
RAM memory. It was impossible to reconstruct the classical 
phylogenetic tree in that computer because the genome was 
more than 1,200,000 nucleotides long and there were more 
than 400,000 amino-acids. The computer time and memory 
consumption grew quickly due to the size of each genome, 
generating computational fatal error. This was not a problem 
for the Linear Algebra method proposed here: all five 
genomes were codified as tripeptide frequency vectors and 
projected in 3D space using the same computer. 
Phylogenetic tree reconstructed with the Euclidean distance 
between each tripeptide vectors (Figure 5) was equal to the 
classical dendogram in Figure 4. For the third dataset, 
amino-acid sequences of thirteen mitochondrial genes from 
59 different species were codified as tripeptide frequency 
vectors and projected in reduced space (3D): we observed 
exactly 13 compact clusters related to each gene analyzed 
(Figure 6). When these genes vectors were summed and the 
resultant genome vectors projected in tridimensional space, 
the four classes analyzed formed compact and distinct 
clusters (Figure 7). Species from the same class 
(Actinopterygii, Aves, Mammalia, and Reptilia) were placed 
in a monophyletic branch in the phylogenetic tree of the 59 
whole mitochondrial genomes reconstructed by Neighbor-
joining method using as pairwise distances between species 
the Euclidean distance between each tripeptide frequency 
vectors. When the phylogenetic tree for Mammalia species 
was reconstructed by using Euclidean distance between 
vector species, we observed a pattern compatible with 
classical trees (Figure 8). The last database evaluated was 
composed by mitochondrial D-loop sequences for the 
Hominidae taxa. Pairwise distances using the Jukes-Cantor 
formula and the phylogenetic tree with the UPGMA distance 
method were reconstructed (Figure 9). In this classical 
phylogenetic tree, Human resembles Neanderthal and Chimp 
species. 
However, 
when 
amino-acid 
from 
these 
mitochondrial D-loop sequences for the Pongidae taxa were 
codified as tripeptide frequency vectors and projected in 
reduced space (3D), we observed that European Human was 
more closely related to Gorilla than to Chimp species (Figure 
10). In the phylogenetic tree built using Euclidean distance 
between vector species (Figure 11) Neanderthal, Chimp and 
Orangutan form monophyletic groups. However, differently 
from the classical tree, Human and Gorilla species were in 
the same branch.   
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
Figure 1.  Phylogenetic consensus tree from multiple strains of the HIV and SIV viruses: the tree illustrates the presence of two clusters and some other 
isolated strains, showing possible origins for two characterized strains of human AIDS viruses, type 1 (HIV-1) and type 2 (HIV-2).  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Nucleotide sequences from the GAG, POL, and ENV coding regions of seventeen different isolated strains of the Human and Simian 
immunodeficiency viruses were converted into amino-acid sequences, concatenated, codified as tripeptide frequency vectors and projected in reduced space 
(3D): the two clusters containing HIV1 and HIV2 are identified, as in the phylogenetic tree (Figure 1).  
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
Figure 3.  Phylogenetic tree of HIV and SIV viruses reconstructed by Neighbor-joining method using the Euclidean distance between each tripeptide 
frequency vectors: the pattern obtained is identical as that showed in classical phylogenetic tree from Figure  
 
Figure 4.  Classical dendogram, constructed based on genomic BLAST, for five strains of Chlamydophila pneumoniae (available at reference [14]). 
 
Figure 5.  Phylogenetic tree of Chlamydophila pneumoniae strains reconstructed by Neighbor-joining method using as pairwise distances between strains 
the Euclidean distance between each tripeptide frequency vectors: there in no difference between this tree and the classical dendogram from Figure 4. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
Figure 6.  Visualization in reduced space (3D) of thirteen mitochondrial genes from 59 different species, codified as tripeptide frequency vectors: there are 
exactly thirteen compact and well defined clusters of genes. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Amino-acid sequences of thirteen mitochondrial genes from 59 different species were codified as tripeptide frequency vectors, summed to 
represent each specie vector and projected in reduced space (3D): there are exactly four compact clusters related to the four class analyzed (Actinopterygii, 
Aves, Mammalia,  and Reptilia). 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
Figure 8.  Phylogenetic tree of whole mitochondrial genomes from 32 Mammalia species reconstructed by Neighbor-joining method using Euclidean 
distance between each sum vector. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Classical phylogenetic tree from mitochondrial D-loop sequences for the Hominidae taxa reconstructed by pairwise distances using the Jukes-
Cantor formula and the UPGMA distance method. 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
Figure 10.  Mitochondrial D-loop sequences for the Hominidae taxa were codified as tripeptide frequency vectors and projected in tridimentional reduced 
space: groups of Neanderthal, Orangutan, Gorilla, and Chimp species occupy specific regions in the space. European Human is closer to Gorilla than Chimp.  
 
 
 
Figure 11.  Phylogenetic tree from mitochondrial D-loop sequences for the Hominidae taxa reconstructed by using the Euclidean distance between specie 
vectors: Human and Gorilla are at the same branch.  
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Primary protein structure from four different datasets 
were codified as peptides frequencies vector, visualized in 
reduced space (3D) and analyzed by using Euclidean 
distance as pairwise distances between genes and species. 
According to our results, the Linear Algebra method 
proposed seems to work very well, i.e., primary protein 
sequences and genomes can be represented as vectors in 
multidimensional space in such way that when they are 
mapped into 3D space they generate relationships among 
species consistent with classic phylogenetic trees. We 
illustrated 
by 
the 
previous 
results 
biological 
and 
computational benefits of such a methodology.  
Therefore, it is possible to represent proteins and 
genomes as tripeptide frequency vectors and the analysis 
done with these vectors are consistent with classical analysis 
using multiple alignments. Besides, phylogenetic trees 
constructed by using Euclidean distance between vectors of 
proteins are compatible with trees constructed with 
alignments (classical phylogenetic trees). Images of genomes 
represented by multidimensional vectors and visualized in 
reduced tridimensional space generate relationships among 
species consistent with those described by classical 
phylogenetic trees.  
Computationally, and mathematically the proposed 
method simplifies the study of the evolutionary chain of 
genes and genomes. It is a richer model to investigate 
relationships among sets of organisms than classical 
phylogenetics trees, because it takes into account not only 
pairwise distances but also the geometric position of each 
genome in a multidimensional space. As a result, 
computational load is substantially lowered and complete 
genome, as shown in Chlamydophila pneumonia analysis, 
can be easily done in a modest computer.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. V. Crisci, L. Katinas, and P. Posadas, Historical 
Biogeography: an Introduction, Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge, 2003. 
[2] M. Salemi and A. M. Vandamme, The Phylogenetic 
Handbook: a Practical Approach to DNA and Protein 
Phylogeny, 1st ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
2003. 
[3] F. Gao, et al., “Origin of HIV-1 in the chimpanzee Pan 
troglodytes troglodytes,” Nature 397(6718), 1999, pp. 436-41. 
[4] H. W. Kestler 3rd, et al. “Comparison of simian 
immunodeficiency virus isolates,” Nature 331(6157), 1998, 
pp. 619-622. 
[5] M. Alizon, S. Wain-Hobson, L. Montagnier, and P. Sonigo, 
“Genetic variability of the AIDS virus: nucleotide sequence 
analysis of two isolates from African patients,” Cell 46(1), 
1986, pp. 63-74. 
[6] G. W. Stuart, K. Moffett, and J. J. Leader, “A comprehensive 
vertebrate phylogeny using vector representations of protein 
sequences from whole genomes,” Molecular Biology and 
Evolution 19(4), 2002, pp. 554–562. 
[7] I. V. Ovchinnikov, A. Götherström, G. P. Romanova, V. M. 
Kharitonov, K. Lidén, and W. Goodwin, “Molecular analysis 
of Neanderthal DNA from the northern Caucasus,” Nature 
404(6777), 2000, pp. 490-493. 
[8] A. Sajantila, et al., “Genes and languages in Europe: an 
analysis of mitochondrial lineages,” Genome Research 5(1), 
1995, pp. 42-52. 
[9] M. Krings, A. Stone, R. W. Schmitz, H. Krainitzki, M. 
Stoneking, and S. Pääbo, “Neandertal DNA sequences and the 
origin of modern humans,” Cell 90(1), 1997, pp. 19-30. 
[10] M. I. Jensen-Seaman, and K. K. Kidd, “Mitochondrial DNA 
variation and biogeography of eastern gorilas,” Molecular 
Ecology 10(9), 2001, pp. 2241-2247 
[11] L. S. Marcolino, B. R. G. M. Couto, and M. A. Santos, 
“Genome Visualization in Space,” Advances in Soft 
Computing, 2010, pp. 225-232. 
[12] A. Seetharam and G. W. Stuart, “Whole genome phylogenies 
for multiple Drosophila species,” BMC Research Notes 2012, 
vol. 5, p. 670. 
[13] D. Xie and T. Schlick, “Visualization of chemical databases 
using the singular value decomposition and truncated-Newton 
minimization,” In: C. A. Floudas, P.M. Pardalos (eds), 
“Optimization in Computational Chemistry and Molecular 
Biology: Local and Global Approaches,” vol. 40, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Dororecht/Boston/London, 2000, pp. 
267-286. 
[14] National Center for Biotechnology Information [Online] 
Available from: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/171> 
2014.02.28 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

