The Sustainable Growth Use of Renewable Energy Based on Spatial Energy Planning 
Valentinas Klevas and Audrone Kleviene  
Laboratory for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency 
Lithuanian Energy Institute 
Kaunas, Lithuania 
Valentinas.Klevas@lei.lt 
Abstract— The aim of the research is to apply the approach 
enabling assessment of external benefit for the use of 
renewable energy sources, which is usually not assessed for 
individual projects. Regional programs may be appropriate 
tools for reducing renewable energy adaptation costs, 
increasing competitiveness in the market and promoting the 
development. 
Support 
measures 
must 
shape 
uniform 
technological programs for long-term periods. The sustainable 
growth of renewable energy is based on the formulated 
methodology, which enables to achieve maximal benefit with 
minimal support for beneficiaries as well as for the state. 
Modified levelized cost of energy method enables analysis of 
economic benefit for the selected project investor, as well as 
relates the achieved results to macroeconomic indicators using 
external parameters. After the evaluation of external benefit 
for solar, wind, and geothermal energy projects, the results 
could be interpolated and used for assessment of selected 
technology or support scheme for wider use in the context of 
spatial energy planning in urban areas.  
Keywords- renewable energy, sustainable development, 
evaluation principles, external benefits. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Economic research of Renewable Energy Sources 
(further in the text – RES) has intensified in the recent years 
through implementation of European Union directives, with 
particular emphasis on the role of a territorial aspect (cities, 
districts). Incentives for wider use of RES are declared both 
in the European Union and in Lithuanian laws. Adoption of 
the Directive 2009/28/EC “On the promotion of the use of 
energy 
from 
renewable 
sources” 
[1] 
required 
the 
development of a National Renewable Energy Action Plan 
for 2010-2020 and many other documents at the local level.
This indicates that the development of RES takes an 
increasingly more significant role in the energy policy of all 
member states, including the Republic of Lithuania. 
The main obstacle to the widespread use of RES is the 
failure to address the key issue – to measure the benefits to 
the society (reduction of pollution, energy supply for the 
future generations, huge and never-ending potential of 
energy resources such as solar and wind energy), when 
introducing RES-technologies and, on the basis of these 
benefits, to encourage investors. Therefore, when formally 
calculating, 
RES-technologies 
are 
not 
sufficiently 
competitive compared to fossil-fuel technologies. This work 
deals specifically with the problem of the impact of RES-
technologies. The impact analysis of RES-technologies on 
social welfare (on job creation) and on health (on the basis 
of environmental impact) has allowed the formation of a 
targeted, reliable methodology compatible with the status of 
existing statistical information. On the basis of it, algorithms 
calculating the impact for individual types of RES are 
formed. 
Given that in the newly developed Energy Strategy the 
high hopes to use RES-technologies are linked to the 
extremely low used energy sources, such as solar, wind and 
geothermal energy, significant efforts are needed to 
organize the accounting and statistics of decentralized RES-
producers. Apart from this important condition, it is difficult 
to expect the proper process management of mastering the 
RES. The analysis of positive and negative impact of RES 
usage in the research of Lithuania and other countries has 
shown that the major part of the positive impact of the RES 
development is related to Green House Gas (further in the 
text – GHG) and other pollutant emissions, job creation and 
rural development. The positive effects of biofuels, biogas 
and biofuel manufacturing sectors are mainly reflected on 
the increase of employment level in the regions, the 
reduction of heat prices and lower emissions of some fossil 
fuels, which in the long run could affect the decline in the 
incidence of certain diseases. The development of biogas 
production and use also plays an important role in solving 
the problem of organic waste management. The main 
positive effects of solar and wind energy technologies are 
the reduction of GHG emissions compared to the use of 
fossil fuels and biofuels as well as the creation of temporary 
jobs in Lithuania by installing new solar power plants or 
wind farms. Developing the manufacturing technology 
industry in Lithuania also has a positive effect on the 
creation of additional permanent jobs.  
Section II describes the concept of external utility of 
implementation of RES technologies. Evaluation of such 
utility may show the advantages, which are underestimated 
in in the investment decisions. Section III presents a 
solution of the identified scientific problem; it is based on a 
system of territorial urban planning. In Section IV is 
presented a description of how RES programs can 
consolidate related urban development programs. This may 
serve to formation financing assumptions and sources for 
their implementation. The methodology, which is based on 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-639-2
BIOTECHNO 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

spatial planning, identifies certain aspects that usually are 
not covered by routine investment valuation techniques, 
namely, the existing problems in cities: high atmospheric 
pollution, unemployment, etc., may determine the validity 
conditions that allowing interpolating results to assess 
technology for spatial energy planning for solving problems 
mentioned above. Long distances to centralized electricity 
and heat networks are defind by geolocation factors and 
may determine financial acceptability of small decentralized 
renewable energy technologies due to their technical 
benefits. 
II.
CONCEPT OF EXTERNAL BENEFIT OF RES
TECHNOLOGIES
In recent years, consumption of fossil fuel and 
mitigation of climate change have become major challenges 
for governments all over the world. To engage these 
challenges, 
many 
countries 
are 
pursuing 
research, 
development, and demonstration of RES [2]. In the past few 
years, usage of RES rapidly increased all over the world. 
RES have become important alternative energy sources to 
realize energy diversification. During the last few years, 
political support for renewable energies has been growing 
continuously both at the national and international level 
[3][4]. 
Looking at renewable energy use since 2006, it was a 
natural gas price boom, increase of social and political 
pressure for fast development in clean energy, and financial 
crisis, which required adequate government measures to 
stimulate the economy. The industry of renewables could be 
important to generate employment and stimulate growth [5]. 
Investment in RES may bring considerable profits, so more 
and more enterprises will be involved in this field. The 
increased use of RES in the heat market can significantly 
alleviate the negative effects of high energy costs on the 
national 
economy. 
Successful 
commercialization 
of 
indigenous, non-fossil energy resources is expected to 
promote regional economic development and employment, 
enable to increase national energy security and to reduce a 
substantial portion of the increasing trade deficit necessity 
to import fossil fuels [6]. 
The use of renewable energy in rural as well as urban 
areas became the significant development thus adding to 
mitigation of climate change [7][8], reducing differences 
between rural and urban dwelling options [9], bringing new 
RES options for diversifying energy supply [10][11][12]. 
The role of local governance for energy and urban 
development appears highly important here [13]. 
The stimulation of energy producers and consumers to 
use RES is one of the major goals of energy policy in 
Lithuania. Policies and measures that aim to enhance the use 
of RES are mainly driven by EU policy. Unstable state 
energy policy and changes of incentive measures destabilize 
the investment initiatives. The lack of economic evaluation 
on both demand and supply sides is the main challenge to 
achieve the expected goal. Unreasonably huge role is 
assigned to biomass in usage projections of RES. Biomass is 
an energy resource that is the result of economic activity 
and depends on continuity of economic activity. Meanwhile, 
the use of an inexhaustible solar and geothermal energy 
potential is insufficient.  
The scientific problem is evaluation of the social utility 
of RES that can show the advantages, which is 
underestimated in the investment decisions [14]. The most 
important benefits of RES are inexhaustibility and 
possibility to ensure sufficiency of energy resources for 
future generations. Also, utilization of particular RES 
technologies, such as solar energy, solves environmental 
issues. Therefore, RES may be additionally financed from 
other sources. The main issue is the diversity of RES 
utilization opportunities and incentives. The energy 
phenomenon is inexhaustibility of RES that could change 
exhaustible types of fossil fuel, such as oil and natural gas, 
and could be replaced with few different types of energy. 
This could be solar, wind, and geothermal energy. On the 
other hand, social utility of RES differs from the social 
utility of oil and natural gas, because RES guarantees the 
supply of energy resources for future generations.  
Renewable energy policy is a complex system, where a 
balance 
among 
three 
aspects 
of 
sustainability 
– 
environment, economy, and social life – is needed. A good 
performance and well-balanced RES policy requires efforts 
from different stakeholders. Although each country has 
different starting conditions, namely, developed technical 
infrastructure and own energy resources, development of 
energy from RES should be shaped on the basis of long-
term macroeconomic policy [15]. This means that a good 
and scientifically-based theoretical background is needed as 
well as indicators reflecting economic development and a 
method for assessing the impact of certain type of energy 
from RES on these indicators are required. In other words, 
this is a reliable energy supply at an affordable price, which 
causes as positive environmental impact as possible.  
Support for RES is required to promote a wider use of 
renewable energy. What is more, energy market failure is a 
serious obstacle to promote the development of RES. 
External positive benefits of using RES, such as public 
interest, are not evaluated here. This benefit is related to 
introduction of new technologies, their development, and 
positive impact on environment [16][17]. Subsidies for RES 
must be based on a positive external utility. Therefore, one 
of the most effective methods could be integration of RES 
technologies into regional energy development [18]. 
Regional 
programs 
may 
be 
appropriate 
tools 
for 
subordinating market mechanisms (reducing renewable 
energy adaptation costs, increasing competitiveness in the 
market and promoting the development), which are required 
to overcome market barriers [19][20].  
As a rule, the impact of RES-technologies on economic 
and social indicators is supported by statistical correlation 
analysis based on historical trends in RES development and 
their impact on macroeconomic indicators. However, the 
anonymity of this method and the probability of a certain 
error cannot provide a clear understanding of the actual 
impact of specific parameters when analysing specific 
projects under individual RES-technologies [21]. Also, this 
method does not provide tools or ways to optimize the 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-639-2
BIOTECHNO 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

development of the RES-Sector or to put in place support 
measures to maximize macroeconomic benefits with 
minimal resources. Therefore, valuation is inseparable from 
the microeconomic analysis of the project chosen by the 
individual investor (taking into account the economic 
benefits to the developer), using external parameters for 
macroeconomic indicators [22]. Results obtained in one 
project may be interpolated to assess the potential impact of 
the support scheme at the urban level. 
Levelized Cost Of Energy (LCOE) is one of the most 
popular approaches for comparison of different energy 
generation options on equal basis - present value of total 
life-cycle cost. The elaborated LCOE approach, which was 
applied in a paper of V. Bobinaite and D. Tarvydas [23] 
gives an opportunity to quantitatively assess the influence of 
certain RES support measures on the cost of energy 
production. Also, it provides the investors a tool which 
could be used to compare different RES investment projects. 
III.
SPATIAL ASPECT FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF BENEFIT 
FROM USING RES TECHNOLOGIES IN URBAN AREAS
The use of renewable energy in rural as well as urban 
areas became the significant development thus adding to 
mitigation of climate change, reducing differences between 
rural and urban dwelling options [24], bringing new RES 
options for diversifying energy supply [25]. The role of 
local governance for energy and urban development appears 
highly important here [26]. 
The stimulation of energy producers and consumers to 
use RES is one of the major goals of energy policy in 
Lithuania. Policies and measures that aim at enhancing the 
use of RES are mainly driven by EU policy. The scientific 
problem is evaluation of the social utility of RES that can 
show the advantages, which is underestimated in the 
investment decisions [27][28]. Moreover, it is transfer of 
their economic interpretations on uniform rules and 
economic laws into specified dimension, in this case trying 
to reduce different opinions as much as possible [29].  
The main indicators of external benefit are considered to 
be the use of domestic capital; taxes paid to the state budget 
and newly created job positions. Combination of different 
types of RES may create a large external effect and make a 
significant impact not only on individual consumers of RES, 
but also on the society. Therefore, the benefit from using 
RES, especially in urban areas, should be evaluated during 
the decision making process.  
Each RES has different value in terms of external 
benefit, thus respective promotion schemes can and must 
differ significantly. This depends on the environmental 
situation in certain area. External conditions and current 
infrastructure for RES technologies differ, thus spatial 
planning, such as urban energy development plans, is the 
most appropriate tool for the benefit assessment. All 
countries pay little attention to the support of RES 
technologies on the demand side. Support for the consumers 
is the most appropriate via support programs (and not by 
supporting scattered consumers), as it enables to achieve 
actual effect. The external benefit analysis for small wind 
power plants, geothermal heat pumps, and solar collectors 
was performed to find their niche in urban and rural areas. 
The external effect indicators for different scenario cases are 
shown in Table 1. Data in Table 1 show the comparison of 
external benefit using different types and scale of RES 
technologies. The main indicators of external benefits are 
considered to be the use of domestic capital; taxes paid to 
the state budget and newly created job places. 
TABLE 1. 
EXTERNAL BENEFIT OF USING SOLAR, WIND AND 
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY TECHNOLOGIES (CASE OF LITHUANIA) 
Indicators 
Wind power 
plants 
Geothermal 
heat pump 
and solar 
collectors 
in 
multifamily 
building 
Solar 
collectors 
in district 
heating 
system 
4 kW 
10kW 
126kW 
7000kW 
Production, MWh 
6,8 
17,5 
185 
4500 
Domestic capital, 
1000 EUR 
8.02 
21.08 
25.01 
1380.88 
Social insurance, 
1000 EUR 
0.81 
1.51 
9.27 
119.23 
Personal income 
taxes, 1000 EUR 
0.29 
0.55 
3.46 
44.46 
New jobs (man 
months) 
2.3 
4.2 
31.9 
409.4 
Combination of different types of RES may create a 
large external effect and make significant impact not only 
on individual consumers of RES, but on the society as well. 
Therefore, the benefit from using RES, especially in urban 
areas, should be evaluated during the decision making 
process. If direct support is applied for RES or 
environmental technologies, the impact will depend on the 
volume of support and the source of funding. For example, 
if the direct assistance is financed from the state budget, the 
promotion measures would increase the budget deficit in 
addition to the positive aspects mentioned above. Therefore, 
it is essential that the promotion would be cost-effective: the 
benefits should exceed the negative effects. Inexhaustible 
types of RES (wind, solar, and geothermal energy) enable 
greater benefit than the subsidies it might require, while 
penetration into the market is growing. 
The idea of eco-villages has been analysed since the last 
decades of XX century all over the world. Modelling 
methods were used for resources management and 
sustainability assessment [30]. The most recent research 
concentrates on eco-innovations, eco-efficiency and eco-
effectiveness, cultivations of eco-sustainability on various 
social-economic-environmental levels. The investigations 
also involve the role of eco-cultural diversity, renewable 
energy in eco-communities and understanding the eco-
complexity and ecosystem approach [31]. 
The principle of ecological movement can be expressed 
by the quote “think globally, act locally”. Progress in 
solving environmental problems can be achieved more 
quickly if the principles of our activities and the functions of 
natural laws system are harmonized. This was the main 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-639-2
BIOTECHNO 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

principle of the development of green settlements. The 
energy sector of green settlements duplicates the processes 
in the nature which is a perfect example of waste-free 
technology. The volume of waste generated in energy sector 
can be reduced by increasing the usage efficiency of 
primary energy sources and promoting the use of RES. The 
negative impact to the environment can be mitigated 
through more efficient use of RES in energy sector 
developed under the circular economy model and 
bioregional development principles. The use of RES in the 
regions can create unique environment for resource 
utilization. The exploitation of energy resources must not 
exceed the nature’s resilience limits otherwise RES can be 
treated as non-renewable resources. The development of 
regional energy sector, according to the principles of 
circular economy, is encouraging the use of a wide range of 
local and renewable resources. 
IV.
BALANCING OF RES SUPPORT FORMS BY USING 
SPATIAL PLANNING METHOD
Different types of RES have a very broad and distinctive 
scale of use, therefore, each renewable requires its own 
specific support. This topic has been focussed on the 
potential analysis of wind, solar, and geothermal energy for 
small scale applications. Every renewable has a wide 
developing scale of technologies, which is becoming 
cheaper due to the growth of supply. What is more, every 
renewable has different significance level in terms of 
external 
benefit, 
thus 
support 
schemes 
can 
differ 
significantly. This depends on the environmental situation in 
various areas. External conditions and current infrastructure, 
where RES technologies could be applied, differ as well; 
therefore, spatial planning via urban energy development 
plans is the most appropriate tool for benefit assessment.  
Most countries support RES technologies mainly on the 
supply side, while existing opportunities to use solar energy 
at the consumers’ side, such as small systems of solar 
collectors in multi-apartment buildings, are significant as 
well. Support for the consumers is the most appropriate via 
support programs (and not by supporting scattered 
consumers), as it enables achieving actual effect. 
Renovation of buildings by districts enables planned 
actions, which could solve technical and financial problems 
for district heating companies due to reduced consumption. 
Application of the schemes mentioned above for small 
producers increases administration costs and is often not 
acceptable due to high complexity level. Therefore, 
territorial administration is needed. The main problem is 
that the programs for implementation of legally delegated 
functions have no consolidating unity. This might lead to 
serious problems: renovation of multi-apartment residential 
houses would reduce the heat consumption significantly. As 
a result, the district heating tariffs would increase due to 
growing fixed heat generation and supply costs.  
Although the EU directives and national laws provide 
for the functions of the municipalities of the Republic of 
Lithuania in developing software documents for the energy 
sector in general and for RES-technologies are rather 
precise, in practice, plans are just beginning to be formed. 
Having analyzed the current laws of the Republic of 
Lithuania, it is clear that they regulate in a sufficiently 
detailed manner the responsibilities of municipalities and 
the development of the use of RES. But the main problem is 
that separate programs are being developed for the 
implementation of individual EU directives, which do not 
have a consolidated unity. Meanwhile, functions such as the 
Special Needs Planning Development Plan, as well as future 
Environmental Protection 
Plans, 
which are 
already 
beginning to plan for the implementation of commitments 
made under the Paris Agreement, are directly linked to the 
development of RES, are formed separately. In this way, the 
financial resources and modest forces of specialists working 
in municipalities are dispersed. A stable and balanced 
program with carefully selected subsidizing, enabling the 
interaction between consumers and heat suppliers, is 
necessary for solving these problems, as proposed in Fig. 1.  
Figure 1. Methodology of the use of RES in large scale. 
Periodization of economic age and assessment of various 
RES support forms, with regard to the specifics, has 
Methodology of the use of RES in large scale 
A) Consolidation of 
energy programs on 
local basis 
B) Consolidation of the 
financing funds 
Funding of DH 
special plans 
The practical consequence: economic - organizational - 
financial assumptions for the use of RES technologies in 
large scale 
Consolidation of funds on the bases of 
spatial planning 
(on the basis of cities‘ programs)
Environmental funds
RES support 
funds
Programs of multi-
family buildings 
renovation
Environmental 
programs 
RES programs 
DH special plans 
Heat sector plans of 
cities
Support funds for 
renovation of 
buildings 
Private 
investment
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-639-2
BIOTECHNO 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

different goals and tasks from the macroeconomic 
perspective.  
There are two blocks of local programs and financing 
sources, which are to be described: A) and B). 
A.
Consolidation of cities energy programs on the uniform 
basis of knowledge economy 
Lithuanian legal system of self-government has granted 
fairly broad opportunities to participate in increasing energy 
efficiency and development of renewable energy. Law on 
Local 
Self-Government 
in 
Lithuania 
distinguishes 
independent functions of municipalities, such as preparation 
and implementation of municipal strategic planning 
documents and planning documents implementing them. 
Law on Energy from Renewable Sources initiates preparing 
local 
RES 
development 
plans. 
Municipalities 
also 
administer the implementation of measures of Rural 
Development Programme such as carrying out the delegated 
function of the State. Law on Local Self-Government 
establishes that municipalities organize the heat supply 
within their territory. Law on Heat Sector regulates the 
special planning of heat, which is one of the implementation 
mechanisms of those obligations. In addition to broad 
responsibilities for the preparation of planning documents, 
the role of municipalities has been reinforced for renovation 
(modernization) of multi-family buildings in recent years. 
The need for single energy policy formation with an 
economic support system for RES (as one of the 
compounds) has been notified for several years already. 
Such program consolidation might be organizational and 
the integration of technologies could be financed using 
Structural Funds.  
B.
The second block shows consolidation of the financing 
funds program for sustainable development.  
It is necessary not only to foresee the results that are 
expected in the use of RES but also to form the best 
prerequisites and financial resources that it would be 
possible to realize positive external effects. However, 
considering the possibility of incorporating efficient use of 
resources 
and 
RES 
into 
planning 
documents 
of 
municipalities, there is an issue of financing. Independent 
functions of municipalities, including implementation of the 
program documents, are funded from local budgets. These 
funds are limited; therefore, it is difficult to expect a 
decision of allocating funds to these areas on a larger scale. 
Therefore, the main role of municipalities is organizational, 
which would allow mobilizing larger resources. A special 
issue is lack of energy specialists who could prepare 
complex programs. 
Scattered generation character and the fact that most of 
these installations can be implemented on demand side are 
left for private initiative. In order to involve hardly 
competing energy sources, the institution for investment 
management is required. Municipalities could act as 
institutions seeking for the development of wide scale RES 
technologies. Actual legislation in Lithuania shows that 
municipal powers and responsibilities regarding RES are 
regulated in detail. There are no barriers, except financing 
issues for the actions of municipalities. Some of them have 
signed the Covenant of Mayors; some have adopted RES 
development action plans, however, only a few of them are 
actually acting. 
The promotion of RES on wider scale was implemented 
in EU by creating green settlements or so-called eco 
villages. [32]. For example, the state funded the project 
Climate Menu in Netherlands, which enabled towns to 
select sectors which needed exceptional attention in order to 
meet 
national 
obligations. 
Environmental 
policy 
is 
implemented by towns, where the best possibilities are 
concentrated and problems are the most visible.  
V.
CONCLUSION
A particular obstacle to the widespread use of RES is the 
lack of evaluation of the benefits to society (reduction of 
pollution, energy supply of the future for generations, huge 
and never-ending potential of energy resources such as 
solar, wind energy) when introducing RES-technologies. 
Therefore, when formally calculating, RES-technologies are 
not sufficiently competitive compared to fossil-fuel 
technologies. This work deals specifically with the problem 
of the impact of RES-technologies.  
The analysis of the positive and negative impact of the 
use of RES on research in Lithuania and other countries has 
shown that the major part of the positive impact of the 
development of RES is related to GHG and other pollutant 
emissions, job creation and rural development, increase in 
employment in the regions, the reduction of heat prices and 
the lower emissions of some fossil fuels. Investigation has 
allowed the formation of a targeted, reliable methodology 
compatible with the status of existing statistical information.  
Each RES has a different value in terms of external 
benefit, thus respective promotion schemes can and must 
differ significantly. This depends on the environmental 
situation in certain area. External conditions and current 
infrastructure for RES technologies differ, thus spatial 
planning, such as urban energy development plans, is the 
most appropriate tool for the benefit assessment.  
Combination of different types of RES may create large 
external effect and make a significant impact not only on 
individual consumer of RES, but on the whole society as 
well. Therefore, the benefit from using RES, especially in 
urban areas, should be evaluated during the decision making 
process. 
Urban programs should be the main form for the 
consolidation of investment funds and promotion on the 
basis of possible rational use of investment as a complex 
macroeconomic effect can be measured and achieved on the 
territorial basis. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was supported by the Research Council of 
Lithuania (09.3.3-LMT-K-712-06-0236). 
REFERENCES
[1]
European Council. Directive 2009/28/EC of the European 
Parliament and of the Council on the promotion of the use of 
energy 
from 
renewable 
sources 
and 
amending 
and 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-639-2
BIOTECHNO 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

subsequently 
repealing 
Directives 
2001/77/EC 
and 
2003/30/EC. Off. J. Eur. Communities, 5.6.2009, L 140/16, 
2009. 
[2]
Y. C. Shen, G.T. Lin, K. P. Li, B. J. and C Yuan, “An 
assessment of exploiting renewable energy sources with 
concerns of policy and technology,” Energy Policy, vol. 38, 
pp. 4604–4616, 2010. doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2010.04.016. 
[3]
European Commission. State aid: Commission adopts new 
rules on public support for environmental protection and 
energy [Online]. Available from: http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_IP-14-400_en.htm. 2014. 
[4]
European Commission. European Commission guidance for 
the design of renewable energy support schemes, Commission 
staff working document, 2013. 
[5]
A. C. Marques, J. A. Fuinhasand and J. R. Pires Manso, 
“Motivations 
driving 
renewable 
energy 
in 
European 
countries: a panel data approach,” Energy Policy, vol. 38, pp. 
6877–6885, 2010 doi:10.1016/j .enpol. 2010.07.003. 
[6]
 R. Camagni, “On the concept of territorial competitiveness: 
sound or misleading?,” Urban Stud., vol. 39, pp. 2395–2411, 
2002. 
[7]
 B. J. de Vries, D. P. van Vuuren and M. M. Hoogwijk, 
“Renewable energy sources: their global potential for the 
first-half of the 21st century at a global level,” Energy Policy, 
vol. 
35, 
pp. 
2590–2610, 
2007. 
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2006.09.002. 
[8]
N. L. Panwar, S. C. Kaushik and S. Kothari “Role of 
renewable energy sources in environmental protection: a 
review.” Renew Sustain Energy Rev., vol. 15, pp. 1513–152, 
2011. doi:10.1016/j.rser.2010.11.037. 
[9]
A. Bergmann, S. Colombo and N. Hanley, “Rural versus 
urban preferences for renewable energy developments” Ecol 
Econ. , vol. 65,:616–625, 2008.  doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon. 
2007.08.011. 
[10] J. Hofierka and J. Kaňuk,“ Assessment of photovoltaic 
potential in urban areas using open-source solar radiation 
tools,” Renew Energy, vol. 34, pp. 2206–2214, 2009. 
doi:10.1016/j.renene.2009.02.021. 
[11] W. T. Chong, M. S. Naghavi, S. C. Poh, T. M. I. Mahlia and 
K. C. Pan, “Techno-economic analysis of a wind–solar hybrid 
renewable energy system with rainwater collection feature for 
urban high-rise application,” Appl Energy, vol. 88, pp. 4067–
4077, 2011 doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2011.04.042. 
[12] P. Droege, Urban Energy Transition. Elsevier, 2008. 
doi:10.1016/B978-0-08-045341-5.00029-3. 
[13] V. Castán Broto and H. Bulkeley,“A survey of urban climate 
change experiments in 100 cities,” Glob Environ Change, vol. 
23, pp. 92–102, 2013. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.07.005. 
[14] E. Strantzali and K. Aravossis, “Decision making in 
renewable energy investments: A review,” Renew Sustain 
Energy 
Rev., 
vol. 
55, 
pp. 
885–898, 
2016. 
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.11.021 
[15] V. Klevas, Justification of long-term economic policy of 
renewable energy sources. ISBN 978-1-63483-203-8 (print). 
ISBN 978-1-63484-020-0 (e-book). New York: Nova Science 
Publishers,  2015. 
[16] G. Tanguay, J. Rajaonson, J. Lefevre and P. Lanoie, 
“Measuring the sustainability of cities: An analysis of the use 
of local indicators,” Ecol Indic., vol. 10, pp. 407–418, 2010.  
[17]
Y. Xing, R. Horner, M. El-Haram and J. Bebbington, “A 
framework model for assessing sustainability impacts of 
urban development,” Account Forum, vol. 33, pp. 209–224, 
2009. 
[18] V. Klevas, Regional approach for policies and measures 
aiming to sustainable energy development. In: Paths to 
sustainable energy, Rijeka: InTech, , pp. 117-132, 2010 ISBN 
978-953-307-401-6. 
[19]  V. Klevas, Analysis of support assumptions and measures for 
promotion of renewable energy sources demand in regional 
aspect. In: Advances in energy research, New York: Nova 
Science Publishers, pp. 99–122, 2012. ISBN 978-1-61470-
485. 
[20] V. Klevas, K. Bieksa and L. Murauskaite, “Innovative method 
of RES integration into the regional energy development 
scenarios,” Energy Policy, vol. 64, pp. 324–336, 2014. 
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.08.088. 
[21] R. Wang, D. Hu, F. Li and B. Larry, “Understanding eco-
complexity: Social-Economic-Natural Complex Ecosystem 
approach,” Ecol Complex., vol. 8, pp. 15–29, 2011. 
doi:10.1016/j.ecocom.2010.11.001. 
[22] L. Dusonchet, E. Telaretti, “Economic analysis of different 
supporting policies for the production of electrical energy by 
solar photovoltaics in eastern European Union countries,” 
Energy 
Policy, 
vol. 
38, 
pp. 
4011–4020, 
2010. 
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2010.03.025.  
[23] V. Bobinaite and D. Tarvydas, “Financing instruments and 
channels for the increasing production and consumption of 
renewable energy: Lithuanian case,” Renew Sustain Energy 
Rev., 
vol. 
38, 
pp. 
259–276, 
2014. 
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2014.05.039. 
[24] I. 
Harmaajärvi, 
“EcoBalance 
model 
for 
assessing 
sustainability in residential areas and relevant case studies in 
Finland,” Environ Impact Assess Rev., vol. 20, pp. 373–380, 
2000. doi:10.1016/S0195-9255(00)00048-2. 
[25] A.P. Palojarvi, Experiences with ecological technologies and 
practices. Vilnius: BMK Press, 2013. 
[26] K. Tzoulas et al., “Promoting ecosystem and human health in 
urban areas using Green Infrastructure: a literature review,” 
Landsc. Urban Plan., vol. 81, pp. 167–178, 2007. 
doi:10.1016/j.landurbplan.2007.02.001. 
[27] H. Bulkeley and M. Betsill, “Rethinking Sustainable Cities,” 
Multilevel Governance and the “Urban” Politics of Climate 
Change, 
vol.14, 
pp. 
42–63, 
2005. 
doi:10.1080/0964401042000310178. 
[28] C. Kalenda, Ecological ethics [in Lithuanian]. Vilnius: 
Rosma, 2007. 
[29] B. Bayulken and D. Huisingh, “Are lessons from eco-towns 
helping 
planners 
make 
more 
effective 
progress 
in 
transforming cities into sustainable urban systems: a literature 
review,” 
Clean 
Prod., 
2015. 
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.12.099. 
[30] D. Hu and R. Wang, “Exploring eco-construction for local 
sustainability: An eco-village case study in China,” Ecol. 
Eng., Vol. 11, pp. 167–176, 1998. doi:10.1016/S0925-
8574(98)00032-9. 
[31] Y.Y. Zheng and S. Gao, “Exploration on the Eco-Village 
Planning from the Perspective of Low-Carbon,” Appl. Mech. 
Mater., 
pp. 
357–360,2013. 
doi:10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMM.357-360.1945. 
[32] H. Barton, Sustainable Communities: The Potential for Eco-
neighbourhoods. London: Earthscan Publications, 2000. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-639-2
BIOTECHNO 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

