Cluster Based Analysis Of Petri Net Properties
Marcin Radom
Institute of Computing Science
Poznan University of Technology
Pozna´n, Poland
mradom@cs.put.poznan.pl
Agnieszka Rybarczyk
Institute of Computing Science
Poznan University of Technology
and
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry
Polish Academy of Sciences
Pozna´n, Poland
arybarczyk@cs.put.poznan.pl
Piotr Formanowicz
Institute of Computing Science
Poznan University of Technology
and
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry
Polish Academy of Sciences
Pozna´n, Poland
piotr@cs.put.poznan.pl
Abstract—
Systems biology is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld of study
based mainly on biology, mathematics and computer science. In
systems biology, the analysis of complex biological systems of
interacting objects is being made. Before the analysis starts, a
model is being created, representing the analysed system. The
theory of Petri nets offers a necessary tool for such a task. Places
in such a net correspond to the static elements of the system like
chemical compounds. Transitions correspond to the reactions. The
rules of transitions activation and ﬁring allow the modelling of
the biological system dynamics. Having a Petri net one can start
the analysis which is based on the invariants, maximum common
transition sets and t-clusters. Such analysis requires various tools
using different ﬁle formats which adds to the complexity of such
a task. We have developed a Java-based environment to help in
the process of net creation, simulation and the analysis in the
classical and time Petri nets, while the different formats in which
Petri net data is being stored can be used there. Exporting data
to other Petri net tools has also been implemented.
Keywords–Systems biology; Petri nets; model analysis.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Systems biology is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld of study based
on biology, mathematics and computer science which focuses
on the analysis of complex biological systems. The ﬁrst step
before the analysis is the creation of a model of the system,
and its further analysis can lead to the potential discoveries
of the behaviors of the system [1] [2]. One of the possible
tools for the creation and analysis of such a model is the Petri
net theory. A structure of a Petri net is a bipartite directed
graph of places and transitions. Places correspond to the static
element of the system like chemical compounds, products,
substrates, etc. Transitions on the other hand allow modelling
of the system dynamics. They represent the reactions taking
place within the system. Transitions in the Petri net can be
activated and ﬁred depending on the status of the places. The
latter depends on the number of tokens in each place, i.e., the
number of products of substrates a given place represents. A
semi-positive (i.e., non-negative) vector describing the number
of tokens in each place is called a marking. Finally, weighted
arcs in a Petri net deﬁne how many tokens in places a ﬁred
transition consumes and produces.
Analysis of such a model is not an easy task and it is
divided into different consecutive steps. First, the qualitative
and behavioral properties of the net must be determined.
Classical Petri net can always be described using a so called
incidence matrix. Each entry of this (place × transition) matrix
C gives the token change on a particular place by ﬁring of the
respective transition.
On the base of such matrix, the transition invariants can
be computed. A t-invariant is a vector x ∈ N m where
C · x = 0 where m is the number of transitions. Every t-
invariant corresponds to a set of transitions whose ﬁring a
number of times reproduces a given marking of the net. Firing
number for each transition is deﬁned within the x vector. Such
a chain of reactions that each t-invariant describes, represents
some basic behavior of the modelled biological system.
Next, the maximum common transition sets (MCT) can
be computed based on the set of t-invariants. The MCT-sets
partition the set of transitions into disjoint subsets whose
biological meaning can be determined [2]. In other words, the
MCT sets consist of the reactions linked with each other.
The most difﬁcult task, yet giving the most valuable
knowledge about the modelled system is the cluster analysis.
In this phase the set of t-invariants is being divided into disjoint
subsets called clusters. To perform this task various tools and
methods are necessary. Invariants have to be converted into csv
ﬁle, which then can be used in, e.g., R language environment.
Using cluster algorithms and distance metrics from the R
libraries and scripts specially prepared for this task, one can
compute different clusterings (i.e., sets of clusters). In order to
evaluate clusterings and choose the optimal one, the additional
evaluation metrics are necessary. Often Mean Split Silhuette
(MSS) and Celiski-Harabasz index [3] are used for such a
task. Finally, when the correct clustering has been chosen, the
biological meaning of clusters can be determined. This step can
lead to the potential discoveries of the new facts concerning
the modelled biological system.
All these steps are quite difﬁcult and the number of
methods and tools used adds to the overall complexity of Petri
net analysis. Drawing a Petri net requires knowledge not only
about the biological system, but also about current structural
properties of the created Petri net that must be computed. All
these problems on a way of successful Petri net model analysis
were the reasons to develop a Java-based program, providing
aid in all steps of the task: creating, simulating and analysing
the given net.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-409-1
BIOTECHNO 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Program interface
Figure 1. IPNE Java-based environment.
A. Software
The proposed tool is a Java-based program consisting of
various modules supporting different phases of Petri net-based
model analysis [4] [5]. In the current version, the user can draw
a classical Petri net, time Petri net and also a net consisting of
both classical and time components. The main window of the
proposed tool is given in Figure 1. Net qualitative properties
can be easily computed and displayed right from the very
beginning of drawing the net, which often helps in detection
and avoidance of potential problems within the net structure.
One of the popular editors for Petri nets is a program called
Snoopy [6]. Our application can both load and save nets in the
Snoopy format.
When the net is ready, invariants can be obtained using
either implemented algorithm within the program or from the
external source like Integrated Net Analyzer (INA) [7]. MCT
sets are computed as well by our algorithm and both the
invariants and the MCT sets can be displayed on the structure
of the net within program main window. Additionally, when
displaying each given invariant, the number of ﬁrings for each
transition is also given.
The most complex task lies in the cluster analysis as we
have already stated. Our program integrates various R scripts
used to compute clusterings using different cluster algorithms
and different metrics. Seven cluster algorithms and eight dis-
tance metrics can be used, for each of them results for a range
of numbers of clusters are given. This allows the user to choose
the optimal clustering based on MSS and Celiski-Harabasz
evaluation metrics which are computed as well. All these
computations are performed in the background by our scripts
within the R language, and when the computations are ﬁnished
our program integrates the data into a table of clusterings.
Every clustering (i.e., set of clusters for a given clustering
algorithm, distance metric and the number of clusters) can be
chosen for more detailed computations. Given the information
about the appearance of each invariant within a speciﬁc cluster
one can obtain important knowledge about the clusters which
helps in ﬁnding their biological meaning. The number of MCT
sets within the cluster and the number of ﬁrings of transition
are given, along with the MSS measures for each cluster within
the clustering. The user can send this data into the Petri net
displayed in the main window of the program and analyse
the structure of the clusters seeing each transition and its role
within them.
II.
CONCLUSION
The described tool is still being developed, but even now
we obtained a quite powerful tool aiding the tasks of Petri net
drawing, simulation and analysis. The most time consuming
task, i.e., the clusters analysis have been made much simpler
and faster. Therefore, more time can be devoted to detailed
analysis, while all the computations and potential problems
with different ﬁle formats describing Petri nets are solved in
the background by the program. Each clustering and every
cluster within it can be analysed thoroughly, while the data
concerning them are given in separate windows.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been partially supported by the Polish
National Science Centre grant No. 2012/07/B/ST6/01537.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-409-1
BIOTECHNO 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

REFERENCES
[1]
D. Formanowicz, A. Kozak, T. Glowacki, M. Radom, and P. Formanow-
icz, “Hemojuvelin-hepcidin axis modeled and analyzed using Petri nets,”
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 46, 2013, pp. 1030–1043.
[2]
D. Formanowicz, A. Sackmann, A. Kozak, J. Blazewicz, and P. For-
manowicz, “Some aspects of the anemia of chronic disorders modeled
and analyzed by petri net based approach,” Bioprocess and Biosystems
Engineering, vol. 34, 2011, pp. 581–595.
[3]
T. Calinski and J. Harabasz, “A dendrite method for cluster analysis,”
Communications in statistics, vol. 3, 1974, pp. 1–27.
[4]
H. Andrzejewski, P. Chabelski, and B. Szawulak, “Integrated system for
the creation, simulation and analysis of the Petri nets,” Poznan University
of Technlogy, B.Sc. (eng.) thesis, 2013.
[5]
B. Szawulak, “Integrated system for creation, simulation and analysis of
timed Petri nets,” Poznan University of Technlogy, M.Sc. thesis, 2014.
[6]
M. Heiner, M. Herajy, F. Liu, C. Rohr, and M. Schwarick, “Snoopy A
Unifying Petri Net Tool,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 7347,
2012, pp. 398–407.
[7]
“Integrated Net Analyzer,” 2001, URL: http://www2.informatik.hu-
berlin.de/ starke/ina.html [retrieved: 2015-03-02].
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-409-1
BIOTECHNO 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

