BioGraphDB: a New GraphDB Collecting Heterogeneous Data
for Bioinformatics Analysis
Antonino Fiannaca, Massimo La Rosa, Laura La Paglia, Antonio Messina, Alfonso Urso
ICAR-CNR, National Research Council of Italy
Palermo, Italy
Email: {fiannaca, larosa, lapaglia, messina, urso}@pa.icar.cnr.it
Abstract—Current
bioinformatics
databases
provide
huge
amounts of different biological entities such as genes, proteins,
diseases, microRNA, annotations, literature references. In many
case studies, a bioinformatician often needs more than one type
of resource in order to fully analyse his data. In this paper, we
introduce BioGraphDB, a bioinformatics database that allows the
integration of different types of data sources, so that it is possible
to perform bioinformatics analysis using only a comprehensive
system. Our integrated database is structured as a NoSQL graph
database, based on the OrientDB platform. This way we exploit
the advantages of that technology in terms of scalability and
efﬁciency with regards to traditional SQL database. At the
moment, we integrated ten different resources, storing and linking
data about genes, proteins, microRNAs, molecular pathways,
functional annotations, literature references and associations
between microRNA and cancer diseases. Moreover, we illustrate
some typical bioinformatics scenarios for which the user just
needs to query the BioGraphDB to solve them.
Keywords–Integrated database; Graph database; GraphDB; Ori-
entDB; Bioinformatics database.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the last years, the use of computational approaches
allowed researchers in bioinformatics and systems biology
to produce, store and share a lot of data, such as genes,
proteins, metabolic pathways, and so on. In most cases, data
are collected in different databases, each of which has a proper
framework and storage technology. For this reason, although
the scientiﬁc community makes available to biologists and
bioinformaticians a large amount of data, it is a big challenge
to interconnect results from heterogeneous data sources, where
each database can identify the same biological entity on one’s
own account. For all those reasons, it is important to provide
an integrated database offering, in a modular framework, all
the information contained in different available databases.
In this work, we propose BioGraphDB, an efﬁcient bioin-
formatics NoSQL graph database, collecting data related to
genes, microRNA (miRNA), proteins, pathways and diseases
from 10 online public resources. Since we aim at integrating
heterogeneous resources modelling pathways, interactions and
relations among a lot of biological entities, we chose to
implement a graph database; it has been highlighted by [1]
that graph databases both allow for efﬁcient queries and
give advantages in scalability with respect to any relational
database. The proposed database is built on the OrientDB
platform [2], because previous works [3], [4] demonstrated
that it outperforms the other NoSQL databases in terms of
ﬂexibility and performances.
Moreover, in this work we propose some cases of study in
the ﬁeld of biological and clinical research that can be resolved
using the proposed database. The paper has the following
structure: in Section II similar integrated DBs are presented;
Section III presents the main components of the proposed
DB; in Section IV it is described how the different resources
have been imported and linked each other; in Section V we
present four application scenarios and ﬁnally in Section VI
some conclusions, as well as future developments, are drawn.
II.
RELATED WORKS
Due to the overwhelming size and type of biological
data, the need of biological databases that integrate many
different resources has risen. The National Center for Biotech-
nology Information (NCBI) [5] perhaps offers the most pop-
ular platform of integrated biological databases. It includes,
among the others, the Entrez database [6] consisting of 37
different databases containing data related to genes, proteins,
taxonomy, gene expression and so on; the PubMed system
[7] for the scientiﬁc literature, the RefSeq [8] database that
hosts non-redundant sets of curated genomic, proteomic and
transcriptomic sequences; and the BioSystems [9] database that
integrates and cross-links information about molecular path-
ways. The molecular pathways are at the basis of the KEGG
integrated databases project [10]. In addition to information
about pathways, KEGG has also information about genes,
compounds, reactions, diseases and drugs.
In recent years, with the focus on the study of non-
coding RNA and especially miRNA, many integrated resources
have been developed considering miRNA as their core. The
miR`o knowledge base [11] is a system that integrates data
about miRNAs, their validated and predicted gene targets,
functional annotations provided by Gene Ontology (GO) [12]
and gene-disease relations taken from the Genetic Associ-
ation Database (GAD). Another miRNA-centric integrated
database is miRWalk 2.0 [13], [14]. Besides data about miR-
NAs, GO annotations, miRNA-mRNA interactions and gene-
disease associations, miRWalk stores and integrates data about
pathways and gene and protein classes. Moreover miRWalk
web service implements several pre-deﬁned search methods
that allow the user to query the database in order to ﬁnd,
for example, gene-miRNA-pathway relations, gene-miRNA-
GO annotations, disease-miRNA relations. Even if miRWalk
integrates several type of biological data, it however only
allows to query them using the above described pre-deﬁned
search tools. The proposed BioGraphDB, in turn, lets the user
access all of the data in order to assemble his own set of
queries, thanks to its graph structure and a specialized query
language (see Section IV and Section V).
Since in many cases it is needed only a limited set of
bioinformatics resources, it would be useful to build a cus-
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-488-6
BIOTECHNO 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Figure 1. A graphical representation of the proposed integrated database based on OrientDB framework.
tom integrated database. The Java BioWareHouse (JBioWH)
platform [15] offers a Java library that allows the importation
and integration of different data sources into a SQL-based
framework which deﬁnes a set of data types related to bio-
entities, such as genes, proteins, pathways and drugs.
All the above described integrated databases, as well as the
JBioWH library, are built upon a standard SQL architecture.
With advances in the developing of NoSQL databases, which
provide a more ﬂexible and performing environment, new
ways for integrating different resources have been studied.
For example authors in [16] presented ncRNA-DB, a NoSQL
database based on the OrientDB platform that put together
many biological resources that deal with several classes of
non-coding RNA (ncRNA) such as miRNA, long-non-coding
RNA (lncRNA), circular RNA (circRNA) and their interactions
with genes and diseases. More recently a graph-based database,
called Bio4j, has been developed by [17]. Bio4j is based on
a Java library that allows to build an integrated cloud-based
data platform upon a graph structure. Bio4j is protein-centric,
in fact it only includes data about proteins, GO and enzymes.
Since Bio4j has fewer resources rather than our proposed
BioGraphDB (see Section III-B), it is difﬁcult do directly
compare them, especially because the number and type of
resolvable scenarios are quite different (see [17] and Section
V).
III.
BIOGRAPHDB COMPONENTS
All the components used in this work are discussed in the
following. In details, in the next subsection we introduce the
OrientDB framework, that represents the platform used to build
the proposed work. In the subsection III-B we deﬁne all the
databases we used in this work. Figure 1 shows a graphical
representation of public databases integration.
A. OrientDB
OrientDB is an open source NoSQL database management
system (DMBS) developed in Java by Orient Technologies
LTD. It collects features of document databases and graph
databases, including object orientation. In graph mode, ref-
erenced relationships are like edges, accessible as ﬁrst-class
objects with a start vertex, end vertex, and properties. This
interesting feature let us represent a relational model as a
document-graph model, maintaining the relationships.
OrientDB supports an extended version of SQL, to allow all
sort of Create, Read, Update and Delete (CRUD) and query
operations, and Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability
(ACID) transactions, helpful to recover pending document at
the time of crash. It is easily embeddable and customizable
and it handles HTTP Requests, RESTful protocols and JSON
without any 3rd party libraries or components. Finally, it is
fully compliant with TinkerPop Blueprints [18], the standard of
graph databases. It is distributed under the open source Apache
2 license [19], therefore it is totally free for any kind of use
and its enterprise features are not limited.
B. Data Source
In order to build a database containing the most updated
resources related to genes, proteins, miRNAs, metabolic path-
ways and their references in literature, it is useful to integrate
the last versions of different publicly available data sources.
For this aim, we take into account those on-line databases that
represent the state-of-art in bioinformatics. In the following
the list of databases we have considered for populating the
proposed graph database, as showed in Figure 1.
1) miRBase [20]: The microRNA database (miRBase) is
a searchable database of published miRNA sequences and
annotation. It contains both hairpin and mature sequences of
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-488-6
BIOTECHNO 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

223 species, and for each of them, it provides name, keywords,
genomic location, references and annotations.
2) UniProtKB [21]: The UniProt Knowledgebase (UniPro-
tKB) is the largest public collection of annotated functional
information on proteins and it is updated every four weeks. It
stores both computationally analysed and manually annotated
records, including classiﬁcations, cross-references and quality
indications available to scientiﬁc researchers.
3) Gene Ontology [12]: The Gene Ontology (GO) is the
most complete and daily updated public resource for genes and
proteins annotation. It provides annotations for gene products
in biological processes, cellular components and molecular
functions.
4) Reactome [22]: Reactome is a database containing
validated metabolic pathways in human biology and compu-
tationally inferred pathways for 20 non-human species. Each
pathway is annotated as a set of biological events, dealing with
genes and proteins.
5) Entrez Gene [6]: The NCBI Entrez Gene database
contains a wide set of details related to all the genes that
have been studied in literature. For each gene, there is a
record containing a lot of information, such as the genomic
context, a list of ortholog/homolog genes, annotated pathways,
interactions with other genes and so on.
6) Refseq [8]: The Reference Sequence (RefSeq) database
is a collection of computationally and manually curated an-
notations for identiﬁcation and characterization of genomes,
transcripts and proteins.
7) Pubmed: Pubmed is a structured information resource
on scientiﬁc publications in the ﬁeld of biomedical literature.
It allows to perform clinical queries for speciﬁc studies,
categories and scopes. Due to copyright restrictions, only an
open-access subset of this database is available for download.
8) mirCancer [23]: The microRNA Cancer association
database (mirCancer) provides associations between miRNAs
and related human cancers Pubmed entries. These associations
are ﬁrst extracted from Pubmed database by means of text
mining algorithms and then manually revised. In addition,
mirCancer gives, for each association, the miRNA expression
proﬁle.
9) HGNC [24]: The HUGO Gene Nomenclature Com-
mittee (HGNC) is the authority responsible for the gene
nomenclatures (also known as gene symbols) for the human
species. The HGNC database contains, for each gene symbol, a
list of synonyms and a list of corresponding entries in the most
popular gene databases (e.g. Refseq, Entrez gene). HGNC is
the main source for synonyms disambiguation for genes and
proteins.
10) miRNA-Target Interactions: This resource is a collec-
tion of publicly available miRNA-target interactions databases.
It contains both validated and predicted interactions. The
published experimentally validated interactions, including their
experimental conditions, are provided by mirTarBase database
[25]. A list of putative interactions are obtained by combining
results of ﬁve different databases: miRNATIP [26], TargetScan
[27], Diana micro-T [28], Pita [29] and miRanda [30].
IV.
DATA INTEGRATION
The publicly databases listed in the previous section give
us a huge amount of data, that we have to integrate in an
harmonious and consistent way. It is relatively easy to read
and parse the various source ﬁles, but they often contain
redundancies and useless data for our purpose, because, for
example, at the moment we are only interested in the human
species. Loading and linking the actual useful data is the goal.
Moreover, the databases are available for download in
several different formats, such as tab-delimited plain-text,
structured XMLs, SQL database dumps. The latest available
release of OrientDB has a powerful tool to move data from
and to a database by executing an Extract-Transformer-Loader
(ETL) process, described by a JSON conﬁguration ﬁle. How-
ever, its Extractor supports almost all data source types but
XML. Therefore, in order to avoid mixed solutions, we decided
to develop an ad hoc set of Java based ETLs.
As general rule, each biological entity and its properties
have been mapped respectively into a vertex and its attributes,
and each relationship between two biological entities has been
mapped into an edge. If a relationship has some properties,
they are also saved as edge’s attributes. Vertices and edges are
grouped into classes, according to the nature of the entities.
For example, all the genes imported from NCBI Gene become
instances of the gene vertex class, and all the proteins from
UniProtKB become instances of the protein vertex class.
Moreover, all the relationships between genes and proteins
extracted from HGNC, in the form of “gene G codes for
protein P”, become instances of the coding edge class.
The ETLs can be grouped in the following ﬁve categories:
•
Pubmed ETL: It is not a real ETL, because actually we
do not import any Pubmed publication. It is just used
to create a vertex class used to store those Pubmed
IDs found in the other databases.
•
Tab-delimited ETLs: They were used to import NCBI
Gene, miRNA-target interactions, HGNC, and mir-
Cancer. Because all interactions have several virtually-
searchable attributes, they have been mapped to ver-
tices and then linked to the related gene and miRNA.
By using the protein-coding gene ﬁeld from HGNC,
we were able to link each gene to its encoded proteins.
•
XML ETLs: Starting from the related XML Schema
Deﬁnition (XSD) [31] ﬁle and thanks to the unmar-
shalling capabilities of the standard JAXB library [32],
they were used to import UniprotKB and GO.
•
miRBase ETL: miRBase is available in a EMBL
format text ﬁle, hence we used the BioJava library
[33], in order to process the data in a simple and
efﬁcient way.
•
Reactome ETL: The Reactome database import was
not so easy. It is available for download only as SQL
database dumps and its schema is not documented,
hence we have installed the relational DBMS MySQL
[34] and followed the available installation guide [35]
in order to properly load the database from the dumps.
After studying the database structure and tables deﬁ-
nitions, we have created some ad hoc SQL views to
extract the useful data, afterwards exported as a set
of tab-delimited text ﬁles. Finally, we were able to
import pathways data and to link the proteins to their
pathways.
HGNC and UniprotKB databases provide conversion tables
storing the synonyms for respectively gene and protein names,
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-488-6
BIOTECHNO 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

TABLE I. OVERALL SIZE OF BOTH IMPORTED AND PROPOSED
DATABASES.
External DBs
BioGraphDB
Public DBs size
Overall input lines
Vertices
Edges
> 10 GB
> 185 millions
∼ 7.4 millions
∼ 15 millions
as well as their accession IDs to the most common biobanks.
In our BioGraphDB we inserted those data into two different
vertexes and linked them to the corresponding gene and protein
vertexes. The same strategy can be applied for managing
synonyms for other kinds of data.
The imported DBs have not overlapping information, that
eventually could be contradictory, because we selected one
source for each considered biological entity. In any case, when
a new database will be imported, its data will be labelled (as
attribute) with details about the source. For instance, if we
import more than a miRNA target prediction database, then
each prediction will contain an attribute declaring its original
source. The advantage of this representation is that a user
can deﬁne speciﬁc queries implementing consensus among
different predictors or apply proper ﬁlters.
In order to guarantee data consistency and proper rela-
tionships, ETLs were executed in a precise order. Since each
imported DB has dependencies with the other ones, it is of
course important that all the depending resources are already
present into the graphDB when a new resource is loaded.
The following importation order assures that the dependencies
among the integrated resources are correctly satisﬁed:
1)
Pubmed (schema creation)
2)
NCBI gene (import)
3)
miRBase (import, links to Pubmed)
4)
mirCancer (import, links to miRBase and to Pubmed)
5)
miRNA-target interactions (import, links to gene and
to miRBase)
6)
UniprotKB (import, links to Pubmed)
7)
HGNC (links from genes to proteins, gene synonyms
import, links from synonyms to gene)
8)
Reactome (import, links from pathways to proteins)
9)
GO (import, links to genes and to pathways)
The import process lasted several hours and most of the time
was spent in the creation of the vertices and links related to the
miRNA-gene interactions. The size of both imported DBs, in
terms of data size and number of input lines, and BioGraphDB,
in terms of number of vertices and edges, is reported in Table
I. The whole graph assembled by means of the intgration of
all the DBs can be traversed using proper query languages,
such as Gremlin [18]. Each graph traversal represents a set of
queries that are enough in order to solve several bioinformatics
scenarios, and some of them will be described in Section V.
V.
RESULTS
BioGraphDB can be used for the analysis in clinical re-
search of different real life problems. Here we brieﬂy introduce
four scenarios representing typical bioinformatics problems
that can be faced by means of suitable queries over the
proposed DB. As an example, for the last scenario we provide
a more detailed explanation and a query in the graph traversal
language Gremlin [18] that resolves it.
Figure 2. A gremlin query for the proposed “Target analysis of differentially
expressed miRNAs in cancer” scenario.
•
Analysis of gene functions and pathways. Starting
from the gene ID or gene sequence it is possible to
investigate its role in the cellular context by exploring
its functional annotations and location in pathways.
Moreover it can be investigated the enrichment of
that gene. This scenario requires the use of different
databases: Entrez gene, RefSeq, GO, Reactome.
•
Analysis of protein motifs linked to cellular pathway.
The aim is searching the most representative protein
motifs related to a speciﬁc cellular pathway. In this
context, the study can be implemented by means of
functional annotations related to these proteins. This
scenario can be resolved using 3 databases: UniProt,
Reactome, Gene Ontology.
•
Analysis
of
tumour-suppressor/oncogenic
miRNA.
Starting from group of genes involved in a speciﬁc
cellular pathway or cellular condition it is possible
to identify potential miRNA targets that could have
oncogenic or tumour-suppressor functions. This im-
plies the use of 4 resources: Reactome, miRNA-target
interactions, mirBase, mirCancer.
•
Target analysis of differentially expressed miRNAs in
cancer. Starting from a list of differentially expressed
miRNAs linked to a speciﬁc disease, we would verify
what are the major target proteins of these miRNAs
belonging to particular cellular pathways. This analy-
sis needs the use of 4 resources: mirCancer, mirBase,
miRNA-target interactions, Reactome.
With regard to the last scenario, using publicly available
resources, the following interactions steps are required. First of
all, starting from a speciﬁc cancer type, a set of differentially
expressed (DE) miRNAs can be obtained by the miRCancer
database. The obtained miRNAs represent the input for the
miRNA target interaction tools. Querying those tools, a list
of putative miRNA targets is obtained. Filtering by energy
scores, it is possible to evidence those targets that are more
strongly linked to the DE miRNAs. The last step of the analysis
is to verify if there are speciﬁc pathways that the selected
targets belong to. This last step can be done through the use
of pathways analysis tools such as Reactome. Reactome, in
fact, given a list of input genes, provides a set of pathways
containing those genes. A typical way in order to solve
the described scenario would be to use each different DB
(mirCancer, mirBase, miRNA-target predictors, Reactome) at
once. In this situation, the user has to collect intermediate
results and has to gain enough skill for using all the DBs.
Instead of querying each biological resource singularly, all
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-488-6
BIOTECHNO 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Figure 3. BioGraphDB response to the gremlin query depicted in Figure 2 for the proposed “Target analysis of differentially expressed miRNAs in cancer”
scenario.
Figure 4. A graphical representation of the response produced by BioGraphDB, as seen in Figure 3. Starting from a speciﬁc disease (“acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia”), we obtain 11 correlated biological pathways, marked with their Reactome ID.
of these steps can be easily performed using our integrated
database by means of the Gremlin query shown in Figure 2.
For instance, if we set the cancer name to “acute lym-
phoblastic leukaemia” and the energy score threshold to
“−30”, we obtain as result eleven pathways, as showed in
Figure 3. Figure 4 reports a graph representation of this result:
starting from the “acute lymphoblastic leukaemia” disease, we
obtain the “hsa-let-7b” DE miRNA, that interact with three
genes (SLC35B4, ZNF589, PDP2). Each gene codes for a
protein, that, in turns, is contained in at least a biological
pathway. In this scenario, the query provides eleven Reactome
pathways, marked with their Reactome ID. The complete set
of results is summarized in Table II, where we reported the
miRNA name and the pathway descriptions lacking in Figure
4.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
In this work, we proposed BioGraphDB, an integrated
graph database for biological data. This database was designed
to overcome problems related to the lack of a structural orga-
nization and interoperability of publicly available biological
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-488-6
BIOTECHNO 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

TABLE II. RESULT OF THE GREMLIN QUERY IN FIGURE 2.
Pathology
Mature miRNA
Gene
Reactome Pathway
Pathway Description
Acute
lymphoblastic
leukemia
hsa-let-7b-5p
SLC35B4
R-HSA-425407
SLC-mediated transmembrane transport
R-HSA-727802
Transport of nucleotide sugars
R-HSA-382551
Transmembrane transport of small molecules
R-HSA-425397
Transport of vitamins, nucleosides, and related molecules
PDP2
R-HSA-1430728
Metabolism
R-HSA-70268
Pyruvate metabolism
R-HSA-1428517
The citric acid cycle and respiratory electron transport
R-HSA-204174
Regulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase
R-HSA-71406
Pyruvate metabolism and Citric Acid
ZNF589
R-HSA-74160
Gene Expression
R-HSA-212436
Generic Transcription Pathway
resources. Finally we presented some cases of study where
the use of the database can give a concrete advantage to the
scientiﬁc community. Because our BioGraphDB stands at a
prototypal stage, we are unable to provide at the moment a
full performance evaluation, that will be done in future works.
Further developments will be done in the near future. Of
course, thanks to the ﬂexibility of the proposed database, other
biological resources will be integrated where necessary. At the
same time, we are developing proper automated mechanism in
order to update on a regular schedule our BioGraphDB with
the latest releases of its integrated DBs. After the data sources
integration, we will develop a collection of web services
with a common user-friendly web-interface and explicit search
methods implementing proper database views. This way, it will
be possible to solve some of the most common bioinformatics
scenarios, like the ones proposed in this paper. In addition, we
are working on a web service in order to provide the users a
computer aided methodology to build their own custom views
and search methods.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. T. Have and L. J. Jensen, “Are graph databases ready for bioinfor-
matics?” Bioinformatics, vol. 29, no. 24, pp. 3107–3108, 2013.
[2]
Orient
Technologies
LTD,
“OrientDB.”
[Online].
Available:
http://orientdb.com [accessed: 2016-02-19]
[3]
M. Dayarathna and T. Suzumura, “XGDBench: A benchmarking plat-
form for graph stores in exascale clouds,” in 4th IEEE International
Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science Proceedings.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 363–370.
[4]
A. Messina, P. Storniolo, and A. Urso, “Keep it simple, fast and
scalable: a Multi-Model NoSQL DBMS as an (eb)XML-over-SOAP
service,” in The 30th IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Information Networking and Applications (AINA-2016).
IEEE, 2016,
pp. 220–225.
[5]
NCBI Resource Coordinators, “Database resources of the National
Center for Biotechnology Information,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 41,
no. D1, pp. D8–D20, 2013.
[6]
G. D. Schuler, J. A. Epstein, H. Ohkawa, and J. A. Kans, “Entrez:
molecular biology database and retrieval system.” Methods in enzymol-
ogy, vol. 266, pp. 141–62, 1996.
[7]
“PubMed” [Online] Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed
[accessed: 2016-02-19]
[8]
K. D. Pruitt, T. Tatusova, and D. R. Maglott, “NCBI reference sequences
(RefSeq): a curated non-redundant sequence database of genomes,
transcripts and proteins,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 35, no. Database,
pp. D61–D65, 2007.
[9]
L. Y. Geer, et al., “The NCBI BioSystems database.” Nucleic acids
research, vol. 38, no. Database issue, pp. D492–6, 2010.
[10]
M. Kanehisa, Y. Sato, M. Kawashima, M. Furumichi, and M. Tanabe,
“KEGG as a reference resource for gene and protein annotation,”
Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 44, no. D1, pp. D457–D462, 2016.
[11]
A. Lagana, et al., “miRo: a miRNA knowledge base,” Database, vol.
2009, 2009.
[12]
The Gene Ontology Consortium, “Gene Ontology Consortium: going
forward,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 43, no. D1, pp. D1049–D1056,
2015.
[13]
H. Dweep, N. Gretz, and C. Sticht, “miRWalk Database for miRNA-
Target Interactions.” Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 1182, pp. 289–
305, 2014.
[14]
H. Dweep and N. Gretz, “miRWalk2.0: a comprehensive atlas of
microRNA-target interactions,” Nature Methods, vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 697–
697, 2015.
[15]
R. Vera, Y. Perez-Riverol, S. Perez, B. Ligeti, A. Kertesz-Farkas, and
S. Pongor, “JBioWH: an open-source Java framework for bioinformatics
data integration,” Database, vol. 2013, pp. bat051–bat051, 2013.
[16]
V. Bonnici, F. Russo, N. Bombieri, A. Pulvirenti, and R. Giugno, “Com-
prehensive Reconstruction and Visualization of Non-Coding Regulatory
Networks in Human,” Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology,
vol. 2, 2014.
[17]
P. Pareja-Tobes, R. Tobes, M. Manrique, E. Pareja, and E. Pareja-Tobes,
“Bio4j: a high-performance cloud-enabled graph-based data platform,”
Era7 bioinformatics, Tech. Rep., 2015.
[18]
Apache Software Foundation, “Apache TinkerPop.” [Online]. Available:
http://tinkerpop.incubator.apache.org [accessed: 2016-02-19]
[19]
Apache Software Foundation, “Apache License Version 2.0.” [Online].
Available:
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
[accessed:
2016-02-19]
[20]
A. Kozomara and S. Grifﬁths-Jones, “miRBase: integrating microRNA
annotation and deep-sequencing data.” Nucleic acids research, vol. 39,
no. Database issue, pp. D152–7, 2011.
[21]
The UniProt Consortium, “UniProt: a hub for protein information,”
Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 43, no. D1, pp. D204–D212, 2015.
[22]
D. Croft,et al., “The Reactome pathway knowledgebase,” Nucleic Acids
Research, vol. 42, no. D1, pp. D472–7, 2014.
[23]
B. Xie, Q. Ding, H. Han, and D. Wu, “miRCancer: a microRNA-
cancer association database constructed by text mining on literature,”
Bioinformatics, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 638–644, 2013.
[24]
K. A. Gray, B. Yates, R. L. Seal, M. W. Wright, and E. A. Bru-
ford, “Genenames.org: the HGNC resources in 2015,” Nucleic Acids
Research, vol. 43, no. D1, pp. D1079–D1085, 2015.
[25]
S.-D. Hsu, et al., “miRTarBase update 2014: an information resource
for experimentally validated miRNA-target interactions,” Nucleic Acids
Research, vol. 42, no. D1, pp. D78–D85, 2014.
[26]
A. Fiannaca, M. La Rosa, L. La Paglia, R. Rizzo, and A. Urso,
“MiRNATIP: a SOM-based miRNA-target interactions predictor,” BMC
Bioinformatics, in press.
[27]
B. P. Lewis, C. B. Burge, and D. P. Bartel, “Conserved seed pairing,
often ﬂanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes
are microRNA targets.” Cell, vol. 120, no. 1, pp. 15–20, 2005.
[28]
M. D. Paraskevopoulou,et al., “DIANA-microT web server v5.0: service
integration into miRNA functional analysis workﬂows,” Nucleic Acids
Research, vol. 41, no. W1, pp. W169–W173, 2013.
[29]
M. Kertesz, N. Iovino, U. Unnerstall, U. Gaul, and E. Segal, “The role
of site accessibility in microRNA target recognition.” Nature genetics,
vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 1278–1284, 2007.
[30]
B. John, A. J. Enright, A. Aravin, T. Tuschl, C. Sander, and D. S. Marks,
“Human microRNA targets,” PLoS Biology, vol. 2, no. 11, 2004.
[31]
World
Wide
Web
Consortium
(W3C),
“W3C
XML
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-488-6
BIOTECHNO 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Schema
Deﬁnition
Language
(XSD)
1.1.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-1/ [accessed: 2016-02-21]
[32]
Java Community Process, “JSR 222: Java Architecture for XML Bind-
ing (JAXB) 2.0.” [Online]. Available: https://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=222
[accessed: 2016-02-21]
[33]
A. Prlic, et al., “BioJava: an open-source framework for bioinformatics
in 2012,” Bioinformatics, vol. 28, no. 20, pp. 2693–2695, 2012.
[34]
Oracle
Corporation,
“MySQL.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.mysql.com [accessed: 2016-02-22]
[35]
Website
3
Installing
SOP,
“Reactome.”
[Online].
Available:
http://wiki.reactome.org/index.php/Website Installing SOP
[accessed:
2016-02-22]
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-488-6
BIOTECHNO 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

