Parallel Signal Acquisition by an Embedded System for Monitoring and Analysing 
Multimodal Signals of Aliveness and Non-aliveness of Biological Objects 
 
Oliver Czepulowski, Stefan Weidemann, Anett Bailleu 
 
Department I – Energy and Information 
HTW Berlin, University of Applied Sciences 
12459 Berlin, Germany 
 e-mail: Czepul@htw-berlin.de, Stefan.Weidemann@htw-berlin.de, Anett.Bailleu@htw-berlin.de
 
 
Abstract—The multimodal sensor system that is presented in 
this paper has been developed to measure and analyze typical 
information of biological objects. The heart of the system 
consists of a field of light emitting diodes combined with 
photodiodes. The light emitting diodes are characterized by 
several peak wavelengths in the visible and in the near infrared 
range. Primarily, these optoelectronic components have the 
function to measure the heart rate and the oxygen saturation of 
a person’s finger. Furthermore, the special arrangement of the 
optoelectronic components is implemented to measure the 
remission of diffuse reflectance from the depth of a few 
millimeters of the measurement object. A hardware fusion 
with ancillary sensors to measure the temperature, the bio-
impedance and the humidity of the measurement object is 
realized, too. All sensor signals are measured with a high 
sample rate in the presented system. 
Keywords-Multimodal sensor system; hardware fusion; 
additional tool for biometric application. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With smart devices, watches and fitness tracker, there is a 
variety of utensils for the acquisition of individual data of 
personal health condition. Most devices use only a limited 
number of sensors and estimate from these data the actual 
variables of interest (e.g., fitness activity by pulse and Global 
Positioning System (GPS) coordinates; quality of sleep by 
the heart frequency). Often these devices only communicate 
online with a server, or send the resulting final value via an 
App to a mobile phone. Thereby, it is not possible to get a 
detailed insight of the original acquired data, not to mention 
a deeper and comprehensive analysis of these data. 
In this work, we present the development of a bio-
monitoring system, which makes it possible to make 
statements about the heart rate, the variability of the heart 
rate and the bio impedance, the ElectroDermal Activity 
(EDA) and other bio and vital parameters. Even other, non-
human, biological objects, for example food, can be analyzed 
by this combined sensor system, so a rating about the aging, 
the decomposition level and a consumption recommendation 
could be created. Here again, other approaches use only 
optical analysis methods. 
In Section II, we show the concept of the measurement 
system in principle and describe the details of the built-in 
hardware like the used sensors and other components of the 
embedded system. In Section III, we explain some features 
of the measurement system and sketch possible areas of 
application. In the end, in Section IV, we summarise the 
central points and give an outlook for further development 
and the future use. 
II. 
SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT 
A. Sytem concept 
We developed a multifunctional measurement device for 
monitoring different parameters of biological objects. This 
device is used for acquisition, digital storage and for time-
series visualization of the measured parameters.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Block diagram of the device with the communication channels 
from the sensors/elements, via the microcontroller through to the data 
output/storage. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
We designed the device as an embedded system (Figure 1).   
It consists of parallel channels to measure the remission, the 
bio-impedance, the humidity and the temperature of objects 
almost simultaneously.  
By using a battery and an Secure Digital Memory Card 
(SD-card), the device operates as a stand-alone system in 
most cases. It can also operate as a PC-controlled unit.  
B. Details of  realising the sensitive hardware  
The size of the measurement device should be kept small 
so the device is still handy (Figure 2). It contains a small 
chamber to measure the humidity, the temperature and the 
bio-impedance of a biological object, for instance a living 
person’s finger. Furthermore, there are Light Emitting 
Diodes (LEDs) and an area of photo diodes on the contact 
area of this chamber (Figure 3).  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Design of the measurement device, useable as an about fist-
sized, stand-alone, mobile monitoring and analysing system. Exploded 
view showing, top to bottom, the display and control elements, the 
measurement chamber and the electronic components, microcontroller-
board, SD-card slot and USB port.  
For some applications, e.g., for liveness detection in 
biometric applications, it is very important to get all the 
information of the object from a measurement of a small, 
spot-sized area [1]-[3]. That is why all sensors of the system 
are placed relatively close to each other, like illustrated in 
Figure 3. 
The heart of the system is an optical field (upper part of 
Figure 3.(a)) consisting of three LEDs and five photo diodes. 
The LEDs are located in the center of this field, whereas the 
photo diodes are arranged around the center. Therefore, it is 
possible to detect phenomena of intrinsic absorption of the 
objects, in the lateral dimension and into the depth of the 
object [4][5].  
To get information of the depth of biological objects, it is 
important to emit wavelengths of the so-called tissue-optical 
window in the range of approximately 650 – 950 nm [6][7]. 
We 
choose 
a 
660 
nm 
RED-LED 
(type: 
SML-
LXFM0603SRC) 
and 
a 
940 
nm 
NIR-LED 
(type: 
VSMB1940X01) for this. 
Furthermore, 
we 
integrated 
a 
RGB-LED 
(type: 
SMLVN6RGB) in the optical field. Hence, the user of the 
measurement system gets the possibility to tune an emitting 
wavelength of the visual light range by the software control 
of the RGB-LED. Optionally, an UV-LED can be placed 
instead of this, if it seems to be more advantageous for 
samples and special objects [8].  
To detect the diffuse remission from the biological 
objects, high-sensitive photo diodes (type: ADPD2211) are 
used. Each of them has an integrated current-amplifier, so a 
separate transimpedance amplifier is not necessary.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  The heart of the measurement device. (a) measurement chamber 
with the optical field (three LEDs and five photo diodes), two electrodes 
with superimposed contact springs and a combined sensor for measuring 
the temperature, pressure and humidity (the grey square). (b) Finger 
superimposed on the contact area.  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Near the optical field, two electrodes in the form of two 
broad metal strips can be seen (Figure 3.(a)), which are 
added with superimposed contact springs for a better contact 
to an applied finger, or sample. These electrodes are there to 
measure the bio-impedance [5][9]. In dependency of the 
distance of the electrodes on one hand and in dependency of 
the stimuli-voltages respective currents on the other hand, it 
is possible to get electrical impedance information of 
different depths of the biological measurement object 
[4][10]. 
In 
our 
case, 
the 
realized 
bio-impedance 
measurement works by using a constant current source. 
While injecting a constant current into the skin the system 
measures the voltage drop and the phase shift in relation to 
the current. Next, the system calculates the impedance from 
the measured values. 
Finally, you find on the contact area (at the bottom of 
Figure 3 (b)) a combined sensor (type: BME280) to measure 
the humidity and the temperature of a presented 
measurement object (This combined sensor is able to 
measure the pressure, too. However, we do not use this 
functionality in our applications). 
C. Details of the embedded system hardware 
The measurement device, which is about fist-sized, 
consists of an embedded system hardware. The developed 
measurement device is based on a 32-bit ARM-processor, 
the 
NXP/Freescale 
MK64FX512VMD12Cortex-M4F 
processor with 120 MHz, 512 kB flash memory and 192 kB 
RAM. As microcontroller-board a Teensy 3.5 is used. This 
microcontroller is compatible to Arduino and its firmware 
was designed in the Arduino IDE. 
The measurement device is equipped with an SD-card 
unit and is powered by a rechargeable battery. Therefore, this 
design enables a stand-alone use as a small mobile device.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Graphical User Interface (GUI) of the LabVIEW-software-PC 
monitoring results of exemplary measuring signal courses of the reflections 
of the different LED wavelengths. Here, three pulse curves are shown. In 
addition other biological parameters, like, for instance, amplitude and 
phase shift of the bio impedance measurement can be displayed 
additionally. Also, the PC control elements are available in this LabVIEW 
GUI. 
An USB port allows the measurement device to 
communicate to a PC and thereby the data export from the 
microcontroller to a PC is possible. So, the measurement 
signals can be visualized and analyzed directly and, at the 
same time, it is possible to store them as a base for the 
further development of multimodal analysis routines for 
various issues. 
The PC Software is implemented with LabVIEW and the 
PC graphical user interface is shown in Figure 4. The signals 
of the photo diodes are shown for the three different LEDs 
and the DC- and AC-parts are presented separately. 
III. 
ADVANTAGE AND BENEFIT OF THE          
MEASUREMENT DEVICE 
In contrast to conventional pulse oximeters [1][6], which 
typically output averaged values of the heart rate and the 
oxygen saturation, our measurement device provides much 
more information about the status of the probed persons. For 
instance, the information received includes the time-resolved 
heart rate (and out of this the heart rate variability is 
identifiable), changes of the respiratory rate, the temperature 
and investigation of tonic and phasic EDA (variability of the 
bio-impedance). 
In 
addition, 
information 
about 
the 
transpiration and the peripheral blood flow through a 
person’s finger pad are also available. Different time regimes 
can be useful depending on the investigation purpose. Figure 
5 shows the results of two different measurement 
options/variants. 
The 
figure 
shows 
the 
heart 
rate 
measurement 
results 
obtained 
with 
two 
different 
wavelengths. Through the respective pulse curves, it is 
possible to calculate the oxygenation of the blood in a 
noninvasive method [8]. Two alternatives to get the blood 
oxygenation level are presented as a function of time. 
For the first method, shown in Figure 5 (a), one needs the 
acquisition of multiple, at least five, periods of the heart beat 
obtained by infrared radiation (940 nm) and save the AC and 
DC parts. Then one irradiate the tissue with red light (660 
nm), again for at least five periods of heart beat and then 
calculate the oxygenation of the blood [7][8]. 
In the second method, shown in Figure 5(b), the system 
is alternating switching on and off the red (660 nm) and 
infrared (940 nm) LED with a high frequency, for example 
with 1 kHz, in equally spaced time intervals. By doing this, 
one can calculate the oxygenation of the blood again 
(theoretically after two periods of the heart beat) [6]. For 
both methods of oxygenation level determination, a low-pass 
filtering of the signals is necessary. Furthermore, the second 
method has the advantage to reduce the potential negative 
influence of environmental light/ambient light. 
An additional operational scenario for this measurement 
device is the inspection and evaluation of food, e.g.[11]. 
Through the multimodal analysis of the measured signals, it 
is possible to obtain a lot more information about inherent 
material properties of biological measurement objects. For 
instance, it is possible to get insights about the freshness, 
respectively about the age of food. It is commonly known 
that the aging of meat, fish, cheese, eggs, vegetables and so 
on, causes generally the drying and colour change of these 
food products. Both can be measured by our device. In 
addition, a qualitative evaluation with respect of the 
composition of processed food products (ingredients, inferior 
food 
additives, 
preservatives, 
artificial 
colours 
and 
flavourings) can be possible. Through this analysis, a 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
Figure 5.  Two options of monitoring results- measurement graphs for different timescales of the measurement procedure. 
consumption recommendation could be made, which is 
independent of the best-before-date or other manufacturer's 
specifications. 
Within our department, the developed measurement 
device is used as a multifaceted measuring platform for the 
education of students of the "health electronics" study 
program, as well. Additionally, it will be used for the further 
development of intelligent algorithms for multimodal signal 
analysis, which aim to find yet unknown correlations of 
metabolic processes that could be useful for therapy-
supporting or diagnostic procedures. 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
We presented the development of a bio-monitoring 
system measurement device for the acquisition of a variety 
of information of human tissue or other biological objects. 
This measurement device detects the pulsatile and non-
pulsatile parts by quasi-simultaneous, subsequent one after 
another, irradiation with light of three different wavelengths 
and both parts are measured and recorded quasi-parallel. 
Even without the pulsatile (dynamic) part, the static part of 
the light reflection is detected. Compared to a conventional 
pulse oximeter [1][6] our system is extended by electrodes 
for measuring the bio impedance (a constant current power 
supply is applied and the voltage drop and the phase shift is 
measured). A third essential measurement component is a 
combined sensor for measuring the relative humidity and 
the temperature on the surface of a measurement object. The 
bio-monitoring system is designed as a mobile, stand-alone 
device and therefore, it is equipped with a SD-card slot and 
a rechargeable battery. Data transfer is also possible via 
serial communication by a USB port to a PC for further 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

analysis. We intend the development of analysis algorithms 
for detecting new correlations of the measured parameters 
on biological objects. A further development is focused to a 
miniaturization toward a Lab-on-a-chip design [12]. 
Hereby, a simple use for personal health data acquisition 
and/or a clinical use is thinkable. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the "Center for 
biomedical image and information processing (CBMI)", 
which enables joint research and development as a platform 
and promotes professional, interdisciplinary exchange and 
productive discussions. The project “Innovation Hub Digital 
Health” (IHDH), funded by the European Union (EFRE), 
aims at bringing together research groups of the HTW and 
companies in the health sector for creation, evaluation and 
assessment of digital data. It is linking highly specific 
competencies 
concerning 
medicine 
and 
health 
with 
information technology. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Kaniusas, “Biomedical Signals and Sensors I - Linking 
Physiological Phenomena and Biosignals”, Springer -Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, ISBN 978-3-642-24842-9; DOI: 
10.1007/978-3-642-24843-6 
[2] E. Kaniusas, “Biomedical Signals and Sensors II - Linking 
Acoustic and Optic Biosignals and Biomedical Sensors”, 
Springer -Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2015, ISBN 978-3-662-
45105-2; DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-45106-9 
[3] A. Kumar, “Fingerprint spoof detection using blood flow 
analysis”, 
SPIE 
Newsroom, 
2009, 
DOI:10.1117/2.1200909.1794 
[4] S. Grimnes and Ø. G. Martinsen, "Bioimpedance", Wiley 
Encyclopedia of Biomedical Engineering, 2006; DOI: 
10.1002/9780471740360.ebs0128 
[5] S. Grimnes and Ø. G. Martinsen, "Bioimpedance and 
Bioelectricity Basics", 3rd Ed., Academic Press, ISBN: 
9780124114708, 2014 
[6] J. Webster (Ed.). ”Design of Pulse Oximeters”. Boca Raton: 
CRC Press, (1997) https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420050790 
[7] E. Rabe et al.,: "Praktische Phlebologie", 2006, DOI: 
10.1055/b-0034-8814 
[8] E. Kochs and K. Zacharowski (Ed.): “anesthesia preparation 
and perioperative monitoring“ (“Anästhesievorbereitung und 
perioperatives Monitoring“), Stuttgart: Georg Thieme Verlag, 
pp. 113 - 115, 2015, DOI: 10.1055/b-0034-101489 
[9] Data Input GmbH: "Das BIA-Kompendium", III. Ausg.; 
http://www.data-input.de/media/pdf-
deutsch/Kompendium_III_Ausgabe_2009.pdf; 
Darmstadt, 
Germany, 2009, 2019.04.20 
[10] Ø. G. Martinsen and S. Grimnes, „“Volume specific 
charcterization of human skin by electrical immitance“, 
International Patent Application WO03094724, 2003 
[11] Ø. G. Martinsen, S. Grimnes, and P. Mirtaheri, “Non-invasive 
measurements of post mortem changes in dielectric properties 
of haddock muscles – a pilot study“, J. Food Eng., 43(3), pp. 
189-192, 2000 
[12] EP 
2 
435 
993 
B1, 
“Mikrosystem 
zur 
Erkennung 
vorbestimmter 
Merkmale 
von 
Wertpapieren, 
Sicherheitsdokumenten 
oder 
sonstigen 
Produkten” 
[In 
English: “microsystem for identification of predetermined 
features of securities, security documents and other products“] 
in 
Patentblatt 
2016/27, 
06.07.2016
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

