Protein-Protein Interaction 
in the Light of the Maximum Ordinality Principle 
 
Corrado Giannantoni 
 
ENEA’s Researcher and Consultant of 
Duchenne Parent Project Onlus  
Rome, Italy 
email: c.giannantoni@parentproject.it, corrado.giannantoni@tin.it 
 
 
Abstract – The present paper is aimed at showing how it  
is possible to obtain Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) in 
explicit formal terms, when this process is modeled by 
adopting the Maximum Ordinality Principle (MOP) as 
the basic reference criterion.  
 
Keywords-Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI); Maximum 
Ordinality Principle (MOP); Molecular Docking; Drug 
Design. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) decisively represents a 
fundamental process in Pharmacology. However, in spite 
of its recognized importance, PPI has not manifested all its 
related potentialities yet, mainly because of the intrinsic 
unsolvability, in explicit terms, of the famous “Three-body 
Problem”, as demonstrated by H. Poincaré in 1889 [1]. 
This result represents a strong limitation, because it is 
also valid in Protein Dynamics. Not only (and especially) 
in Protein Folding, but also in PPI. 
On the other hand, the research for a numerical solution 
often overcomes the computation capacities of the most 
powerful computers at present available (10 Petaflops). 
Under such conditions, about 40 different approaches to 
PPI have been proposed in Literature. All of them, 
however, always introduce some (more or less) marked 
approximations. For example, the two interacting proteins 
are sometimes modeled as they were “rigid bodies”. 
Consequently, apart from the solution to some particular 
(and specific) cases of PPI, such approximations do not 
always lead to satisfactory general solutions, when 
compared with experimental data. 
This is because, in the absence of an explicit formal 
solution to PPI problem, all the various approaches adopted 
are also characterized by a correlative absence of an 
effective predictive capacity. In particular, when the latter 
is referred to the three-dimensional configuration of the 
final compound.  
In the framework of such a “state of the art”, the main 
aim of this paper is to bring out the possibility of obtaining 
Protein-Protein Interaction, in a fast and reliable way, as 
the formal solution to an N-body interaction problem, when 
the process is modeled on the basis of the Maximum 
Ordinality Principle (MOP).   
This is because, after having obtained the solution to 
the “Three-body Problem” in terms of fractional incipient 
derivatives [2], previously introduced in [3][4], the 
extension to the case of N bodies was obtained in the 
contest of the mathematical formulation of the MOP [5]. 
This result immediately suggested its application to 
Protein Folding [6][7] and, now, to the case of PPI. 
 In this respect, Section 2 will preliminary present the 
input/out of the mathematical model adopted. Section 3 
will illustrate the solution process through an ostensive 
example. The related informatics advances will be 
discussed in Section 4, while Section 5 will consider a 
possible extension of the same approach to other 
pharmacological fields. Section 6 (devoted to the 
conclusion) will reconsider all the previous aspects in the 
light the basic principles of self-organizing systems of 
ordinal nature. 
 
 
II. INPUT/OUPUT OF THE  
MATHEMATICAL MODEL 
 
The formal enunciation of the MOP, with specific 
reference to biological problems, was presented in [6][7]. 
Such a formulation is able to facilitate the solution to the 
PPI problem because, when the amino acids of a protein 
are modeled as they were “atoms” of a macromolecule, 
the 3D structure of the protein can be obtained without 
necessarily knowing its primary structure (that is, the 
specific linear sequence of its amino acids).  
In fact, it is sufficient:  
i)   to know the total number of amino acids (N);  
ii) to assign three parameters 
)
,
,
(
12
12
12



that define, 
in polar coordinates, the reciprocal positions of two 
arbitrary amino acids, understood as being one sole 
“isolated” entity. This is also the reason why the latter is 
referred to its own internal reference system;  
iii) to assign, in addition, six appropriate parameters 
)
,
,
,
,
,
(
3
2
1
3
2
1
   
 
, that define the internal Relation 
Space (RS) of the protein analyzed. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-409-1
BIOTECHNO 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

More specifically: 
)
,
,
(
3
2
1

 
characterize the spatial 
orientation of the protein (understood as a whole), with 
respect to its internal reference axes; whereas
)
,
,
(
3
2
1
  
 
define the periodicities (along the three basic axes) of the 
mathematical solutions which “emerge” from the MOP. 
These solutions are precisely those that give the 
positions of all the amino acids with respect to the 
internal axes of the considered protein. In this way, the 
afore-mentioned solutions characterize any considered 
protein as a unique, specific and irreducible entity. 
Under such conditions, each protein, precisely 
because modeled as a “self-organizing” system of ordinal 
nature (see Section 6), is also characterized by its own 
specific self-organizing capacity, whose activity can 
faithfully be represented by its associated “virtual work”, 
defined (in polar coordinates) as  
            
})
(
)
(
)
{(
2
1
1
1
1
1





N
j
j
j
j
j
j
W
 
 

        (1) 
where the subscript 1j indicates the couples of amino 
acids successively considered in the sum. 
In the case of PPI, when there exists a given affinity 
between the interacting proteins, the resulting compound 
generally shows a “virtual work” 
3
W  that “exceeds” the 
sum of the “virtual works” 
1
W  and 
2
W  pertaining to the 
interacting proteins. Consequently, the ratio between 
such an excess of “virtual work” 
                                     
)}
(
{
2
1
3
W
W
W
W




               (2) 
and the sum of virtual works of the interacting proteins, 
that is 
                                   
)
/(
2
1
W
W W


                        (3) 
can be assumed as a “measure” of the reciprocal affinity 
between the interacting proteins or, equivalently, as their 
elective propensity to realize a stable compound. 
    
 
III. AN OSTENSIVE EXAMPLE 
 
The example deals with diabetic therapy. It is well-
known that human insulin has a reduced affinity with 
blood albumin, so that the subcutaneously injected insulin 
cannot efficiently be conveyed by blood albumin in the 
various parts of the body. 
The therapy then consists in adopting a modified form 
of insulin, which presents a higher affinity with blood 
albumin. The modified form of insulin usually adopted is 
insulin detemir, also termed as levemir.  
 Figure 1 represents the three-dimensional structure of 
human insulin (51 amino acids), obtained by means of an  
 
  
 
    Figure 1 - Three-dimensional structure of human insulin 
                  (51 amino acids: 21 in subunit A and 30 in subunit B) 
 
appropriate simulator, run on a simple PC (109 Flops), 
in less than 1 s.  
The simulator was termed as Emerging Quality 
Simulator (EQS), precisely because based on the MOP 
and its corresponding “emerging solutions” (see later 
on). The 3D structure so obtained can easily be 
modified (if needed) by means of slightly variations of 
some parameters of the RS. 
This allows us to achieve a more accurate 
comparison, not only with the spatial configurations 
available in Literature (e.g., at the level of secondary 
structure), but also, and especially, with X-Ray 
Crystallography and/or Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
(NMR) images available in qualified Protein Data 
Banks. This is because the output of the simulator, apart 
from the 3D structure, also gives the associated 
coordinates of all the amino acids, together with some 
other important indicators. Among others, and in 
particular, the corresponding “virtual work” associated 
to the protein. 
Figure 2, in turn, represents the three-dimensional 
structure of blood albumin, made up of 585 amino 
acids. This spatial configuration was also obtained by 
means of the same simulator, run on the same PC, in a 
computation time of about 1 s. 
 As in the previous case, such a 3D structure can 
easily be compared with the corresponding spatial 
configurations available both in Literature and in 
Protein Data Banks. 
 At this stage, if we consider the interaction process 
between the two afore-mentioned proteins, we obtain 
that: i) insulin and albumin result as being characterized 
by virtual works whose values, expressed in the scale 
units usually adopted in EQS, are 
1
W = 88.38 and 
2
W = 
587.66, respectively; ii) whereas the virtual work 
associated to the resulting compound is 
3
W = 683.65.  
 Consequently, the corresponding ratio (3) gives 
                     
.0 0112
/
W W3 
                      (4) 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-409-1
BIOTECHNO 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

                   
Figure 2 - Three-dimensional structure of blood albumin 
    (585 amino acids) 
         
This result clearly shows that human insulin has a 
very reduced affinity with albumin (about 1%). At the 
same time, it also explains why human albumin is usually 
modified in the form of levemir, in order to achieve a 
higher affinity.  
Levemir insulin differs from human insulin in that the 
amino acid in position B30 is omitted, and a C14 fatty 
acid chain (termed as myristic acid) is attached to the 
amino acid B29. 
Figure 3 represents the 3D structure of levemir, whose 
virtual work now results as being 
1*
W = -29.95.  
The negative value obtained simply indicates that the 
modified protein has an inverse chirality with respect to 
its primary form of insulin. This aspect generally favors 
the interaction process. In fact, the virtual work 
associated to the resulting compound now becomes 
3*
W = 
667.29. 
Consequently, 
the 
interaction 
process 
between 
levemir and albumin (obtained by means of the same 
simulator in less than 2 s) gives origin to a final 
compound characterized by a higher “excess” of virtual 
work (2). 
 
Figure 3 - Three-dimensional structure of levemir 
(50 amino acids plus the chain of 14 atoms of C) 
 
Correspondingly, ratio (3) now gives 
     
.0 1965
)
)}/(
(
{
2
*
1
2
*
1
3*




W
W
W
W
W
  (5) 
This result clearly shows that such a modified form of 
human insulin presents an affinity of about 20% with 
respect to blood albumin. A value that allows levemir to be 
conveyed by albumin, without preventing, however, its 
subsequent release in the various parts of the body. 
 
 
IV. INFORMATICS ADVANCES 
 
The improvements here considered are directly 
referable to the formal properties that are intrinsic to the 
mathematical models adopted. In fact, any system modeled 
on the basis of the MOP, always presents explicit solutions 
in terms of Incipient Differential Calculus (see [3] and [4]).  
This means that the method proposed has the capacity 
of predicting the 3D structure of the resulting compound 
essentially because the latter is understood as a self-
organizing system of ordinal nature, and thus as 
intrinsically “irreducible” to functional relationships 
between its parts. 
This correlatively also means: i) a reduced number of 
computations; ii) a reduced need of High Performance 
Computing (HPC); iii) a reduced incidence of special 
numerical methods to be adopted to get the corresponding 
solution.  
What’s more, the explicit solutions so obtained can also 
be termed as “emerging solutions” (see [5] and [8]), 
because they always show an ordinal information content 
which is much higher than the corresponding content of the 
initial formulation of the problem. 
This is because the MOP is specifically finalized to 
describe “self-organizing” systems according to a holistic 
approach, in which, as is well-known, “the whole is much 
more than the sum of its parts”. 
 
 
V. BIO-INFORMATICS IN THE LIGHT OF 
THE MAXIMUM ORDINALITY PRINCIPLE 
The method of solution previously illustrated with 
specific reference to Protein-Protein Interaction is also 
applicable to the majority of biological problems usually 
dealt with through informatics methods. In this sense, PPI 
only represents an ostensive example.  
The same approach, in fact, has previously been 
adopted to improve the efficiency of the exon skipping 
method, usually used in Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy [9]. 
In such a case, the method enabled us to select the most 
appropriate Antisense Oligo-Nucleotides (AONs) with 
reference to four specific Exons: 51, 48, 44 and 39.  
The pertinent experimental tests (in vitro and in vivo)   
are still in progress  at  LUMC ( Leiden University Medical  
 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-409-1
BIOTECHNO 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Center) and the corresponding final results will be available 
at the end of next May. 
This would indicate that the methodology here 
proposed could also be adopted in the case of Molecular 
Docking and Drug Design. In fact, it allows us to choose 
the optimal ligand, that is the one which is characterized by 
the most appropriate researched affinity (3), as in the case 
of exon skipping in DMD, previously mentioned.  
Consequently, when considered from a more general 
point of view, the paper would intend to show that, in the 
light of the MOP, it is possible to realize mathematical 
models of several biological Systems, with very significant 
related advantages. 
 
 
                             VI. CONCLUSION 
 
The methodology here proposed seems to be able to 
give a significant contribution to Pharmacology. This is 
because the results previously shown indicate that the 
dynamic evolutions of a wide variety of biological 
processes can adequately be described by adopting the 
same reference principle (namely, the MOP).  
Consequently, the various biological processes to be 
analyzed, when modeled by means an appropriate 
simulator, can be run on a simple personal computer and, in 
addition, in a computation time of a few seconds (or one 
minute, at the most). 
This means that, by adopting the afore-mentioned 
approach, any researcher would be able to analyze the 
dynamic behavior of any biological process of interest by 
means of his/her own PC, simply sitting at his/her own 
desk. 
The solutions obtained, in fact, will always describe a 
System whose parts are related to each other according to 
ordinal relationships. In other words, according to the 
same “relationships” that precisely take origin from 
generative processes, such as, for instance, the genesis of 
two brothers. 
“Brothers”, in fact, are properly defined as such, not 
because of their direct relationships. That is: because they 
respect each other or they love each (in fact, they might 
also hate each other). They are “brothers”, in essence, 
because generated by the same father (or the same mother, 
or both). That is, because of their direct relationship with 
the generative cause of their being born. 
Such a genetic relationship represents in fact something 
that is unique, specific and irreducible. Consequently, they 
cannot simply be accounted for as “two” (1+1), but as one 
sole entity (that is, as a whole), in spite of their clear 
reciprocal distinction. Consequently, the proper meaning of 
“brothers” refers to a clear “irreducible extra”.  
Precisely that represented by their specific relationship 
with the same genetic principle. 
In accordance with such a concept of ordinal 
relationship, in the case of a given protein the direct 
relationship between two any amino acids is considered as 
being of the second order.  
The first order relationship, in fact, is that which relates 
all the amino acids to the same generative activity of the 
protein, always understood as a whole.  
This is why the explicit solutions that “emerge” from 
the MOP immediately give the positions of all the amino 
acids with respect to the internal axes of the protein (see 
Introduction, in particular, points i) and ii)).  
The same concept is evidently valid for any self-
organizing system, when described on the basis of the 
MOP.      
The formal enunciation of this principle, in fact, first 
given in [5], is nothing but the reformulation of the 
Maximum Em-Power Principle, proposed by H.T. Odum in 
[10][11][12], understood as an updated version of the 
Fourth Thermodynamic Principle, first enunciated by 
Boltzmann and afterwards by Lotka, in [13] and [14], 
respectively. 
Odum’s enunciation, in fact, after having received an 
appropriate mathematical formulation under dynamic 
conditions in [15], was reformulated in more general terms 
in [5], by means of a new concept of derivative, the 
“incipient” derivative, whose mathematical definition was 
first introduced in [3] and further developed in [4]. 
The corresponding verbal enunciation of the MOP then 
became: “Every system tends to maximize its own 
ordinality, including that of the surrounding habitat”. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. Poincaré, “Les Méthodes Nouvelles de la Mécanique 
Céleste”, 1889. Ed. Librerie Scientifique et Technique A. 
Blachard. Vol. I, II, III, Paris, 1987. 
[2] C.  Giannantoni, “From Transformity to Ordinality, or better: 
from Generative Transformity to Ordinal Generativity”. 
Proceedings of the 5th Emergy Conference. Gainesville, 
Florida, USA, January 31-February 2, 2008, pp. 581-598. 
[3] C. Giannantoni, “The Problem of the Initial Conditions and 
Their Physical Meaning in Linear Differential Equations of 
Fractional Order”. Applied Mathematics and Computation 
141, 2003, pp. 87-102.  
[4] C. Giannantoni, “Mathematics for Generative Processes:    
Living and Non-Living Systems”. Applied Mathematics and 
Computation 189, 2006, pp. 324-340. 
[5] C. Giannantoni, “The Maximum Ordinality Principle. A 
Harmonious Dissonance”. Proceedings of the 6th Emergy 
Conference. Gainesville, USA, January 14-16, 2010, pp. 55-
72. 
[6] C. Giannantoni, “Protein Folding, Molecular Docking, Drug 
Design. The Role of the Derivative “Drift” in Complex 
Systems Dynamics”. Proceedings of the Third International 
Conference on Bioinformatics. Valencia, Spain, January 20-
24, 2010, pp. 193-199. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-409-1
BIOTECHNO 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

[7]   C. Giannantoni, “Bio-Informatics in the Light of the Maxi-
mum Ordinality Principle. The Case of Duchenne Muscular 
Dystrophy”. 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
4th 
International 
Conference on Bioinformatics. Rome, January 26-29, 2011, 
pp. 244-250. 
[8]   C. Giannantoni, “The Relevance of Emerging Solutions for 
Thinking, Decision Making and Acting. The case of Smart 
Grids”. Ecological Modelling 271, 2014, pp. 62-71. 
[9]   A. Aartsma-Rus, W. E. Kaman, R. Weij, J. T. Den Dunnen, 
G. J. van Ommen, J. C. van Deutekom, “Exploring the 
Frontiers of Therapeutic Exon Skipping for Duchenne 
Muscular Dystrophy by Double Targeting within One or 
Multiple Exons”. Molecular Therapy, Vol. 14, 2006, pp. 
401-407. 
[10] H. T. Odum, “Ecological and General Systems. An      
Introduction to Systems Ecology”. Re. Edition. University 
Press Colorado, 1994. 
[11]  H. T. Odum, “Environmental Accounting”. Environmental  
Engineering Sciences. University of Florida, 1994. 
[12]  H. T. Odum, “Self Organization and Maximum Power”.  
Environ. Engineering Sciences. University of Florida, 1994. 
[13] L. Boltzmann, “Der zweite Haupsatz der mechanishen 
warme Theorie“. Almanach der K. Acad. Wiss Mechanishe, 
Wien, 1905, Vol. 36, pp. 225-299 (printing of a lecture 
given by Boltzman in 1886). 
[14]  A. J. Lotka, “The Law of Evolution as a Maximal Principle”. 
Human Biology, a record of research. September 1945, Vol. 
17, n. 3. 
[15]  C. Giannantoni, “The Maximum Em-Power Principle as the 
basis for Thermodynamics of Quality”. Ed. S.G.E., Padua, 
2002, ISBN 88-86281-76-5. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-409-1
BIOTECHNO 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

