A New Phased Array Magnetic Resonance Imaging Coil For Hbo2 Studies 
Azma Mareyam1, Erik Shank2, Laurance Wald1, 
Michael Qin3, and Giorgio Bonmassar1 
1 A. A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, USA. 
e-mail: giorgio.bonmassar@mgh.harvard.edu 
2 Department of Anesthesia,  
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, USA, 
e-mail:  eshank@mgh.harvard.edu 
3 Office of Naval Research,  
United States Department of Defense · Navy, 
Arlington, USA. 
e-mail: michael.qin@navy.mil
Abstract—Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) 
measures brain activity by detecting blood flow changes as 
cerebral blood flow and neuronal activation are coupled. fMRI 
is noninvasive, is considered safe, and may allow studying the 
brain under hyperbaric conditions. This new coil may be 
necessary for studying decompression sickness and disorders 
of hyperbaricity, including nitrogen narcosis. This study 
focuses on the safety and technical details of building fMRI 
coils for human hyperbaric studies. One of the most 
remarkable properties of this novel technology is that the new 
multichannel arrays provide high-quality images at 3 Tesla (T) 
MRI, one of the highest strength magnets among the most 
common MRI scanners available in the market. The paper 
describes all the risks associated with simultaneous MRI and 
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBO2) and discusses mitigation 
strategies and regulatory testing. One of the most significant 
risks for this type of study is a fire in the hyperbaric chamber 
caused by the sparking of the MRI coils due to high voltage RF 
arcs. RF pulses at 128MHz elicit signals from the human 
tissues, and RF sparking occurs commonly and is considered 
safe in normobaric conditions. We describe how we built a coil 
for HBO2-MRI studies by modifying an eight-channel phased-
array MRI coil with all the mitigation strategies discussed. The 
coil was fabricated and tested with a unique testing platform 
that simulated the worst-case RF field of a 3 Tesla MRI in a 
Hyperlite hyperbaric chamber at 3 atm pressure. The coil was 
also tested in normobaric conditions for image quality in a 3 T 
scanner in volunteers and SNR measurement in phantoms. 
Further studies are necessary to completely characterize the 
coil safety for HBOT/MRI studies by following the Guidance 
for Industry and Food and Drug Administration titled 
"Testing and Labeling Medical Devices for Safety in the 
Magnetic Resonance (MR) Environment". 
Keywords-hyperbaric oxygen therapy; MRI; safety; diving 
medicine. 
I. INTRODUCTION
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and functional 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) have rapidly gained 
acceptance as "the gold standard" for diagnosing and 
evaluating neurologic conditions. This adoption comes from 
MRI's perceived non-invasiveness, avoidance of ionizing 
radiation, and ability to elucidate the human nervous 
system's fine anatomic and functional nuances. MRI and 
fMRI have, however, not been utilized in the study of 
Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy (HBO2) due to the genuine 
dangers that these two challenging environments present. 
HBO2 has been accepted for the treatment of many 
neurological conditions (e.g., decompression sickness, 
carbon monoxide poisoning, cerebral arterial gas emboli, 
etc.) and postulated to help in many others (stroke, cerebral 
palsy, and even autism); however, there has not been a safe 
method to utilize the tools of MRI and fMRI to evaluate 
mechanisms and efficacy of HBO2. The hyperoxic high-
pressure environment of HBO chambers and the powerful 
magnetic fields of the MRI scanner are traditionally 
incompatible. There are genuine risks of mechanical injury 
to the integrity of most chambers by magnetic forces, space, 
and access challenges to the patients in both monoplane 
chambers and MRI scanners, and --likely the most 
concerning-- the risk of fire from radio frequency (RF) MRI 
generated arcing in a hyperoxic environment. For many 
years HBO2 has provided safe and effective treatments for 
many diseases. Hyperbaric chambers provide oxygen 
administration in a manner that has few side effects. 
Combining these two technologies (HBO2 and MRI) can 
reveal other illnesses that HBO2 and fine-tuning established 
HBO therapies can treat, such as stroke rehabilitation [1]. In 
this paper, we discuss the risks as well as strategies and 
technological approaches to mitigate these risks and enable 
MRI and fMRI studies to be performed under hyperbaric 
conditions. We hope that these technological breakthroughs 
will permit both an increased understanding of HBO2 
mechanisms as well as a clinical tool to evaluate the 
efficacy of HBO2. 
II. METHODS
A new type of receive array MRI coil was designed and 
built to minimize fire hazards by using a combination of 
electronic protection components and fire retardant epoxy 
for insulation. Figure 1 (left panel, Top), in which eight 
surface coils are connected each to an independent amplifier 
and receiver channel (see below). The outputs from the 
receiver channels are combined in an optimum manner with 
a phase correction dependent on the point in space from 
which the signal is originated. Technical issues related to 
the mutual inductance of the coils have been addressed by 
using partial loop overlap [2]. In contrast, we followed the 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-971-3
BIOTECHNO 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

current state-of-the-art MRI systems by adopting a phased 
array coil design.  
III. RESULTS 
The new MRI coil for HBO2 was fabricated (Figure 1, 
left panel) and tested at 3 Tesla. The constructed array coil 
passed the safety tests [3] without additional adjustment 
beyond the bench adjustments. The design included an 8-
channel phased array with extremely large area coil loops 
that have resulted in very high image quality. The head coil 
was composed of (Figure 1 left panel, middle): (A) lattice 
balun with a PIN diode for detuning during transmit and 
every soldering was inspected and photographed, (B) copper 
wires loops, (C) distributed capacitors, and (D) fuses. 
The following image acquisitions were performed on a 
human volunteer for a total scan time of approximately 2 
hours. Figure 1A (right panel) shows the amplitude and 
phase of a field map. A field map can help reconstruct high-
fidelity images as it is typically acquired during the MRI 
system tuning. Furthermore, lipid suppression can be much 
more robust by measuring the field map and adjusting the 
acquisition parameters.  
One of the most common MRI sequences is the T1-
weighted scan which depicts differences in signal based 
upon intrinsic T1 relaxation time of various tissues. Figure 
1B-C (right panel) shows the typical and high-quality T1-
weighted images. In these images, fat tissue realigns its 
longitudinal magnetization with B0, which appears bright. 
Conversely, tissues predominately made out of the water, 
such as central spinal fluid, have a much slower longitudinal 
magnetization realignment after an RF pulse and appear 
dark. 
Separate MRI and HBO2 studies have shown that 
imaging is a quantitative biomarker that can help guide and 
optimize HBO2 therapy [4]. However, only performing 
simultaneous fMRI and HBOT will enable studying the 
brain-altering effects of nitrogen narcosis or oxygen 
toxicity.  
IV. CONCLUSIONS
 To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work 
aiming at imaging the brain in extreme pressurized 
environments, 
like 
HBOT, 
which 
have 
significant 
repercussions for understanding the brain in conditions like 
decompression sickness, which are currently poorly 
understood. We expect to complete the safety studies and 
request IRB/IDE to complete the HBO2/fMRI studies in 
future work. 
REFERENCES
[1] 
R. Boussi-Gross, et al., "Improvement of memory 
impairments in poststroke patients by hyperbaric oxygen therapy," 
Neuropsychology, vol. 29 pp. 610-21, 2015. 
[2] 
P. B. Roemer, et al., "The NMR phased array," Magn 
Reson Med, vol. 16, pp. 192-225, 1990. 
[3] 
A. Ghotra, et al., "A size-adaptive 32-channel array coil 
for awake infant neuroimaging at 3 Tesla MRI," Magn Reson Med, 
vol. 86: pp. 1773-1785, 2021. 
[4] 
C. Q. Li, S. Gerson, and B. Snyder, "Case report: 
hyperbaric oxygen and MRI findings in radiation-induced optic 
neuropathy," Undersea Hyperb Med, vol. 41, pp. 59-63, 2014.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-971-3
BIOTECHNO 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Figure 1  (LEFT PANEL) The MRI Coil. (Top) Design of the layout and schematics of the 8-channel Phased Array Coil System. (Middle) The new coil: 
(Bottom) lattice balun. (RIGHT PANEL) 3 Tesla normobaric MR images. (Top) Field map images of magnitude (A) and phase (B), sagittal (C), and axial 
(D) T1-weighted MPRAGE images. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-971-3
BIOTECHNO 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

