Design and Development of an Information System to Manage Clinical Data about 
Usher Syndrome Based on Conceptual Modeling 
 
 
Verónica Burriel, M. Ángeles Pastor, Matilde Celma, J. Carlos Casamayor, Laura Mota 
Centro de Investigación en Métodos de Producción de Software PROS 
Universitat Politècnica de València 
Valencia, Spain 
<vburriel, mapastor, mcelma, jcarlos, lmota>@pros.upv.es 
 
Abstract — The inefficient management of clinical data in 
many research environments is a problem which slows down 
the service provided to patients. The benefits of an Information 
System created following the conceptual modeling rules have 
been proved in multiple environments with data management 
difficulties. The main hurdle to overcome is the large gap 
between 
the 
language 
and 
concepts 
employed 
by 
informaticians and the ones used by biologists. The work 
described in this paper shows how these technologies can also 
be applied to the clinical domain, after a long period of mutual 
approaching in order to understand each other. The research 
clinical data of an expert research group on Usher syndrome 
have been studied, analyzed and redesigned using conceptual 
modeling, helping this group to offer a better service. 
Keywords-information system; usher syndrome; database; 
conceptual modeling. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Usher syndrome is a condition characterized by hearing 
loss or deafness and progressive vision loss. The loss of 
vision is caused by an eye disease called retinitis pigmentosa 
(RP) which affects the layer of light-sensitive tissue, at the 
back of the eye (the retina). Vision loss occurs as the light-
sensitive cells of the retina gradually deteriorate. Usher 
syndrome is thought to be responsible for 3 percent to 6 
percent of all childhood deafness and about 50 percent of 
deaf-blindness in adults. This disease is estimated to occur in 
at least 4 per 100,000 people. 
Mutations in the CDH23, CLRN1, GPR98, MYO7A, 
PCDH15, USH1C, USH1G, and USH2A genes cause Usher 
syndrome. These genes provide instructions for proteins that 
play important roles in normal hearing, balance, and vision. 
They have influence in the development and maintenance of 
hair cells, which are sensitive cells in the inner ear that help 
to transmit sound and motion signals to the brain. In the 
retina, these genes are also involved in determining the 
structure and function of light-sensitive cells called rods and 
cones. In some cases, the exact role of these genes in hearing 
and vision is unknown. Most of the mutations responsible for 
Usher syndrome lead to a loss of hair cells in the inner ear 
and a gradual loss of rods and cones in the retina. 
Degeneration of these sensitive cells causes hearing loss, 
balance problems, and vision loss characteristic of this 
condition.  
For research groups related to this disease, having data 
properly stored and classified is very important in order to 
access them easily. Furthermore, it is possible to detect 
relationships between the data if it is correctly structured and 
linked. This would help to improve the understanding of the 
disease. 
However, 
despite 
the 
advances 
in 
information 
technologies, nowadays there are still research groups in 
health which store their data in spreadsheets or simply sheets 
of paper. The most advanced groups use simple databases to 
store information about their patients, but most of these 
databases are focused on the solution-space. Despite that it is 
not the most appropriate solution, these tools are a first 
approximation to a solution, but they lack a previous 
conceptual scheme. This problem entails poor management 
of the involved data and the consequent loss of quality of 
information and simplicity of operation. The conceptual 
modeling ensures the adequacy of the stored data, improving 
their usefulness and maintenance, aspects currently seldom 
taken into account in the clinical domain. The main difficulty 
for solving this deficiency, following our experience, is the 
enormous distance between the concepts and languages used 
by the scientists from the life areas in front of these used by 
the technics in informatics. This problem has been 
highlighted every time when our group has shared a work 
with biologists or doctors.  
The Genoma research group of PROS (Centro de 
Investigación en Métodos de Producción de Software) is a 
research group with expertise in Information Systems and 
Bioinformatics, which is working for a while in the design of 
a model to represent all the knowledge acquired so far about 
the 
genomic 
domain 
using 
conceptual 
modeling 
technologies. This is the main step to create a Genomic 
Information System with a database capable of storing 
comprehensive genomic information [1-3]. This knowledge 
about genomics and Information Systems is the perfect 
environment to solve the problem described above.  
In following sections, the information system developed 
will be explained in detail. In section II, similar solutions to 
different departments will be exposed. In section III, the 
current system of data storage used by the clinicians before 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

installing this information system is detailed. The advantages 
of having an information system modeled by a conceptual 
scheme are reasoned in section IV. The conceptual scheme 
created to develop this information system is deeply 
explained in section V. In section VI and VII, the database 
implemented and the loading and managing processes are 
defined. Finally, the conclusions and future work are 
described in detail in section VIII of this paper. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Despite being well-known that Health Information 
Systems have a great potential to improve quality of clinical 
services and reduce costs, only about 17 percent of doctors 
and 8 percent to 10 percent of U.S.A. hospitals use electronic 
medical records. Most medical institutions do not want to 
risk installing these systems due to lack of formal 
evaluations 
and 
evidence 
regarding 
its 
successful 
implementation [4] . 
However, there are some groups that have implemented 
Information Systems for a clinical environment with 
satisfactory results. In University Medical Centre Ljubljana 
(Slovenia) a clinical information system is used to support 
medication process (prescribing, ordering, dispensing, 
administration and monitoring) and offer  participating 
medical teams real time warnings and key information 
regarding medications and patient status, thus reducing 
medication errors [5]. 
Other example of the success of Health Information 
Systems is installed in the University Cancer Centre in 
Frankfurt (Germany). The hospital information system gives 
physicians the possibility to access to all patient information 
in a hospital. Furthermore, a special query and reporting tool 
has been integrated in the health information system to 
recognize patients with a specific disease and with basic 
inclusion and exclusion criteria for a specific clinical trial 
[6]. 
Instead, this progress of health information systems has 
not been so relevant in Information Systems with genomic 
information. Predefined online databases have been used to 
store information about the patients in these situations, 
instead of personalized health information systems. One 
example of this situation is the locus-specific database for 
mutations in GDAP1 gene created in the INSERM of Angers 
(France). It helps in the analysis of genotype-phenotype 
correlations in Charcot-Marie-Tooth diseases type 4A and 
2K [7]. A complete health information system can offer 
much more services than a simple database and could be 
more useful in this purpose. 
Due to the different ways of working in every health and 
research centre, a specific information system adapted to 
every center or centers with similar needs will be the easier 
way to introduce information systems in these domains 
without changing too much their current working methods. 
III. 
CURRENT SYSTEM OF DATA STORAGE 
As an example of this problem, the storage of data from a 
center for research in neurosensory diseases has been 
analyzed [8-10]. This center studies patients with Usher 
Syndrome coming from every hospital in Spain, gathering 
together a lot of data from this disease. To obtain all these 
data, they use several methods: questionnaires, which are 
given to the patients and relatives to be fulfilled to obtain 
certain data about the severity of the disease, and genetic 
analysis in order to obtain some objective data from the 
blood sample of a patient. 
When a patient arrives to the hospital with signs and 
symptoms of suffering Usher Syndrome, a first diagnosis is 
done by the doctor, who creates a diagnosis report with these 
signs and symptoms. During the same visit, a questionnaire 
is given to him or, in case he is not able to fill it, to his 
parents. Next, a sample of blood is extracted from the patient 
in order to be analyzed genetically. Sometimes, some genetic 
analyses are also performed to the relatives, looking for the 
disease genetic heritage. These samples are analyzed using a 
sequencer which directly produces the results in electronic 
support. All the information obtained from the diagnosis 
report, questionnaires and genetic analyses are used by the 
clinicians to make the definitive diagnosis of the disease 
suffered by the patient.  
The information extracted from these processes is stored 
using different methods. The questionnaires and diagnosis 
reports are filed in physical folders sorted by families and 
following an alphabetical order. On the other hand, the 
genomic data is saved in Excel files and one Access table 
without any kind of structure behind it.  
Once the questionnaires have been filled by the patients 
and their relatives on a set of sheets of paper, introducing all 
this information into an information system is a hard work 
that requires a lot of time, and the clinicians are too busy to 
do it. If these questionnaires had been done by computer 
directly, the information would have been introduced 
instantly into a database. The same problem appears with the 
diagnosis reports. This solution would help a lot to the 
clinicians and would save a lot of time and space. 
Sorting the information by families is a peculiar 
classification which is very common when information about 
a genetic disease is stored. It is very important and relevant 
to know the genetic profile of the members of the family of 
the patient, because they have a high probability of suffering 
the same disease or being carriers of it. 
Another problem found among the data is the lack of 
formalism. This means that information is repeated in 
multiple places creating redundancy. Often some data are 
missed or represented using cryptic codes without clear 
semantics. 
This case study is not an isolated case. There are many 
research groups or clinical departments that do not store their 
data in an information system based on conceptual models. 
IV. 
ADVANTAGES OF CONCEPTUAL MODELING 
Nowadays, the most advanced approximations of 
Information Systems development, which are oriented 
towards producing quality systems, propose the use of 
conceptual model-based methodologies[11]. Conceptual 
modeling is widely used in the Information Systems field 
because it helps developers in the understanding and 
description of the problem domain before implementation. In 
this way, conceptual modeling improves the developed 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

system helping to manage its evolution in the future [11, 12]. 
For a long time, conceptual modeling techniques have been 
used successfully to build IS in many different domains  
[13]. 
Quality clinical practice must necessarily be based on a 
data set of maximum reliability and accurate interpretation. 
To make this possible, it is necessary to develop conceptual 
schemas that characterize the information to be stored, used 
and modified to ensure its continued updating. 
To create this conceptual schema, a strong knowledge of 
the domain is strictly necessary. To deal with this problem 
we were helped by the clinicians from the Center for 
Research in Neurosensory Disease, who explained us the 
domain in great detail, enabling us to understand every piece 
of stored information and validating our interpretation of the 
domain. After the understanding of the domain, all the 
information has been correctly represented in a conceptual 
schema by our group.. 
From the conceptual schema, the corresponding database 
schema will be generated. This schema, then, will be used to 
create a database to correctly store the data ensuring their 
quality. This will provide a system to store and access data in 
a much easier and faster way, allowing much more complex 
queries on these data than before. Having all the information 
linked into this information system, the possibility of 
discovering the relation between data and improving the 
treatments for the patient is more feasible.  
The new Information System will improve the quality of 
information stored by the clinicians and consequently, the 
service provided to the patient, as well as the time saving for 
doctors in the management and recovery of the information. 
V. 
CONCEPTUAL SCHEME DESCRIPTION 
The conceptual schema shown in Figure 1 represents all 
the information handled by the Center for Research in 
Neurosensory Group. To understand it easily, this section 
explains in detail its contents. The information about the 
persons studied in its laboratory is represented in this schema 
by Person class. There is a relevant attribute of Person to 
take into account, family_id, which connects the relatives. 
This attribute is very useful to analyze samples of new 
members of the same family, who can have the same 
variations. Other relevant attribute is origin_code, where the 
code from the department that sends the sample is stored. 
Basic data for a person registration as name, surname and 
date of registration in included in this class too. A person can 
be related with two persons through the associations father 
and mother which represent the parents. Being one of the 
few hospitals in Spain experts in this disease, samples of 
every Spanish hospital are received in the laboratory. The 
provenance of these samples is conveniently stored in the 
Provenance class. 
In addition, a person can be a patient or not, depending if 
this person suffers this disease or not. This is represented by 
the Patient class. It is also important to take into account if 
studies about segregation and consanguinity have been done 
to the patient. Sometimes, the diagnosis of the patient is not 
totally clear and this lack of sureness is represented in 
diagnosis_reliability attribute.  
The common use of markers to identify which genes 
-*person_id
-person_id_LaFe
-family_id
-type
-date
-surname
-name
-origin_code
Person
-consanguinity
-diagnosis_reliability
-comments
-segregation
-result (derived)
Patient
-*diagnosis_id
-description
-is_usher
Diagnosis
-*study_id
-technique
-date
-who_send
Study
-*laboratory_id
-name
-address
Laboratory
-*allele
Result
-*variation_id
-description
-uv_code
Variation
-*gene_name
Gene
*
0...1
-*date
-comments
Report
*
1
*
0...1
*
1
-*provenance_id
-description
Provenance
*
0...1
-value
*
*
-exons
-studied_relative
*
*
-{id}
*
-{id}
*
-{id}
*
*
*
0..1
*
0..1
*
Mother
Father
Has
Study - Gene
Marker
Sent_to
Comes_from
Made_by
Contains
Refers_to
Belongs_to
Associated_to
Include
 
Figure 1.  Information System Conceptual Schema 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

(represented by Gene class and its gene_name attribute) are 
inherited from the patient's mother and father has promoted 
the inclusion of a Marker class in this conceptual scheme. 
These markers help to exclude the non-mutated genes from 
the study, knowing previously the non-mutated genes of the 
parents. The value obtained from the marker is stored in 
value attribute, which is referred only to one patient and one 
gene. 
As in any clinical service, a Diagnosis is associated to a 
patient and one or more genes. In this case, the diagnosis_id 
content represents one of the three cataloged types of the 
disease (Usher I, Usher II or Usher III), a combination of 
them if it is not clear, to the Usher Syndrome if it is not 
possible be more specific, or any other disease if it is 
necessary. 
The process to analyze a sample of a person to define if 
he suffers the disease or if he is a carrier of it, is defined by 
the Study class. Knowing the person who_send the sample to 
an external laboratory to analyze it and the date of the 
sending is very interesting to value if the study is precise 
enough. To ensure the reliability of the study, storing the 
technique used to analyze the genes is very important too.  
The studies are done gene by gene (represented by the 
Study-Gene class), so if the variation is not found in that 
gene, a new study has to be done. It is also important to store 
the studied exons (transcriptable DNA within a gene), 
defining which exons have been analyzed when the gene has 
not been completely analyzed, and to notify if a previous 
study of that gene in a relative has been done, which is 
expressed by the studied_relative attribute.  
As mentioned before, every study can be done in a 
different laboratory so, it is important to store basic 
information about the laboratory, such as name and address, 
where the study has been done using the Laboratory class. 
Obviously, after a study has been done, some results, 
which are represented by Result class, have been found. 
These results are related only to one allele and they can 
contain some variations which may have been found during 
the study. 
The variations found into the DNA are represented by the 
Variation class and are related to a gene. The HGVS code of 
the variation is included in the variation_id attribute, 
complementing this information with a description attribute. 
Additionally, the standard uv_code is used to express the 
pathogenicity of the variation.  
Finally, after making a complete genetic study of the 
person, a report has to be presented to inform the person 
about the results. The date and the comments related to this 
report are represented by the Report class. 
VI. 
DATABASE AND LOADING PROCESS 
From the conceptual scheme explained below, a 
database, which is able to store data from the sources 
mentioned below, has been created. The conceptual scheme, 
on which this database is based on, ensures the correct 
structure of data and the efficiency of this database. It has 
been produced following the Conceptual Modeling rules, 
ensuring the quality of information and the efficiency of 
storage of genomic information.  
Furthermore, this database has been designed and 
implemented using Microsoft Access technologies. This tool 
used to develop the database, has been chosen taking into 
account that it is a well-known environment used by the 
clinicians. Another aspect that was taken into account is that 
the quantity of data handled in this research centre is not too 
large, so it is not necessary to use a more sophisticated 
System Management Database. This choice will make the 
information system easy to be used by clinicians. 
Once the database has been developed, loading the 
information into the database is the next step. This process 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Patient Management Form 
 
 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

can't be done directly due to the peculiar form of the 
information in the original sources. As explained in section 
II, the data is saved in sheets of paper, Excel files and some 
Access tables without any kind of structure behind it. Storing 
different data into the same cell of the spreadsheet or 
expressing the same information in different formats, are 
some of the encountered problems. Facing this situation 
together with the clinicians trying to clarify the information 
found in the sources is the essential step to start the loading 
process.  
Some loading modules have been developed in order to 
introduce the information. These modules have been 
implemented analyzing the information contained in the 
sources, extracting the information, transforming it to the 
new format and loading it into the database. The 
"transforming" step is essential to introduce the information 
with the appropriate format and structure into the new 
Information System, avoiding the mentioned above format 
mistakes. 
VII. MANAGING THE DATA 
To achieve an efficient use and avoid inaccurate 
management of the created Information System, a user 
interface has been implemented. Specific Microsoft Access 
forms have been developed to introduce new data and 
manage the database. There are five different forms that can 
be accessed by a Main Menu form.  
These five forms help users correctly enter data into the 
information system and make queries to extract the 
information previously introduced. Information about 
Diagnosis, Gene, Study, Patient and Person is correctly 
stored thank to the corresponding forms. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The implementation of developed information system has 
allowed the clinicians to overcome previous drawbacks as 
the waste of time looking for physical papers, the manual 
work, the use of different sources of information, the 
personal use of identification symbols to describe the data, 
etc. as we mentioned in section III. With this information 
systems-based policy, the quality of the stored data has 
significantly improved. The ambiguity of their data has 
disappeared and they can access to all the information faster 
and easier. It has also increased the usefulness of their data 
because the data can be more precisely searched and multiple 
parameters can be used, and even the information that 
previously was stored in folders can be searched through. 
This information system has helped this clinical research 
group to properly manage their data, but the problem is not 
an isolated case and an information system based on 
conceptual models can resolve problems like this in many 
other research centers or medical departments. Conceptual 
modeling technique has been used in many areas to ensure a 
correct management of the data, but in the clinical area, most 
information systems lack a conceptual model base. This 
work has shown that conceptual modeling is also effective in 
the clinical field. This work has reaffirmed us in the idea that 
the main difficulty for achieving this improvement in quality 
is the long time consuming meetings that are needed in order 
to experts from the informatics area understand the experts 
from the life sciences area. 
As future work, connecting all the information about this 
disease would be very useful to the research about Usher 
Syndrome. The information system explained in this paper 
can help to achieve this future goal. If this information 
system was installed into every centre of research in Usher 
Syndrome, connecting these information systems to share the 
information between them would be possible. This big 
information system about Usher Syndrome would join all the 
information about the disease, making easier and faster the 
research about it. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been developed under support of the 
director of PROS, Dr. Oscar Pastor, and jointly with Dr. José 
María Millán, Dr. Elena Aller and Dr. Teresa Jaijo, who 
belong to the Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades 
Neurosensoriales of the Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria 
La Fe in Valencia (Spain).  
In addition, it is also important to highlight that this work 
has been done under the framework of the Cátedra 
Tecnologías para la Salud of the Universitat Politècnica de 
València financed by INDRA Systems. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
O. Pastor, "Conceptual Modeling Meets the Human 
Genome," Conceptual Modeling-ER 2008, pp. 1-11, 2008. 
[2] 
O. Pastor, A. Levin, J. Casamayor, M. Celma, L. Eraso, et 
al., "Enforcing Conceptual Modeling to improve the 
understanding of human genome," 2010, pp. 85-92. 
[3] 
M. Pastor, V. Burriel, and O. Pastor, "Conceptual Modeling 
of Human Genome Mutations: A Dichotomy Between What 
we Have and What we Should Have," in BIOSTEC 
Bioinformatics, Valencia, 2010, pp. 160-166. 
[4] 
J. C. Goodman, "Health Information Technology: Benefits 
and Problems." 
[5] 
A. Cufar, A. Droljc, and A. Orel, "Electronic medication 
ordering with integrated drug database and clinical decision 
support 
system" 
Studies 
in 
health 
technology 
and 
informatics, vol. 180, p. 693-697, 2012. 
[6] 
M. Koca, G. Husmann, J. Jesgarz, M. Overath, C. Brandts, et 
al., "A special query tool in the hospital information system 
to recognize patients and to increase patient numbers for 
clinical trials" Studies in health technology and informatics, 
vol. 180, p. 1180-1181, 2012. 
[7] 
J. Cassereau, A. Chevrollier, D. Bonneau, C. Verny, V. 
Procaccio, et al., "A locus-specific database for mutations in 
GDAP1 allows analysis of genotype-phenotype correlations 
in Charcot-Marie-Tooth diseases type 4A and 2K" Orphanet 
Journal of Rare Diseases, vol. 6, p. 87-94, 2011. 
[8] 
F. P. M. Cremers, W. J. Kimberling, M. Külm, A. P. de 
Brouwer, E. van Wijk, et al., "Development of a genotyping 
microarray for Usher syndrome" Journal of medical genetics, 
vol. 44, pp. 153-160, 2007. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

[9] 
J. M. Millán, E. Aller, T. Jaijo, F. Blanco-Kelly, A. 
Gimenez-Pardo, et al., "An update on the genetics of usher 
syndrome" Journal of ophthalmology, 2010. 
[10] C. Nájera, M. Beneyto, J. Blanca, E. Aller, A. Fontcuberta, et 
al., "Mutations in myosin VIIA (MYO7A) and usherin 
(USH2A) in Spanish patients with Usher syndrome types I 
and II, respectively" Human Mutation, vol. 20, pp. 76-77, 
2002. 
[11] A. Olivé, Conceptual modeling of information systems, 
Springer, 2007. 
[12] O. Pastor and J. C. Molina, Model-driven architecture in 
practice: a software production environment based on 
conceptual modeling, Springer, 2007. 
[13] E. D. Falkenberg, W. Hesse, P. Lindgreen, B. E. Nilsson, J. 
L. H. Oei, et al., "A framework of information systems 
concepts" in IFIP WG, 1998. 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

