Assessment of Physiological States of Plants in situ 
An Innovative Approach to the use of Electrical Impedance Spectroscopy 
 
Elisabeth Borges, Mariana Sequeira, André F. V. 
Cortez, Helena Catarina Pereira, Tânia Pereira, Vânia 
Almeida, João Cardoso and Carlos Correia 
Physics Department of the University of Coimbra 
Instrumentation Center 
Coimbra, Portugal 
eborgesf@gmail.com 
Teresa M. Vasconcelos, Isabel M. Duarte and Neusa 
Nazaré 
Escola Superior Agrária de Coimbra of the Instituto 
Politécnico de Coimbra 
Centro de Estudos de Recursos Naturais Ambiente e 
Sociedade 
Coimbra, Portugal 
tvasconcelos@esac.pt
 
 
Abstract— The fast spread of asymptomatic forest diseases, 
with no cure available to date, constitute a problem of 
economical and forestall huge proportions. Furthermore, there 
is a lack of equipments and systems able of assessing and 
characterizing the physiological state of plant organisms, both 
in the diagnosis of disease and as a mean for supporting 
physiological studies. It is known that electrical impedance 
measurements 
have 
been 
proving 
its 
value 
in 
the 
characterization of vegetal tissues. However, the available 
commercial solutions are expensive, unfeasible for in vivo and 
in situ measurements and unspecific for biological applications. 
Herein is proposed the usage of impedance techniques to assess 
the physiological state of plants. Emphasis is given to the 
assessment of the hydric stress level of plants and its relation 
with the disease condition. To accomplish the study, a portable 
electrical impedance spectroscopy system was designed 
attending the biological application purpose.  In order to show 
the potential of this technique and system, the procedure and 
the results obtained for three different species (Pinus pinaster 
Aiton, Castanea sativa Mill and Jatropha Curcas L), with 
economical and/or forestall interest, is also presented.  
Keywords-plant disease; physiological state; hydric stress; 
biodiesel; impedance techniques 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Plant organisms, being a plant organism any kind of 
living plant (tree, bush, or other), are affected by numerous 
diseases promoted by biological agents (such as fungus, 
virus, bacteria, nematodes, insects, and others) and/or 
inhospitable environmental conditions (such as drought, 
fires, extreme heat, contamination of soil and air, and 
others) [1]. It is worth adding that the knowledge of the 
health state of the plant organisms is important, particularly 
when diseases affect crops with economic and/or forestall 
impact. Currently there are some diseases strongly affecting 
specific crops with significant economical relevance in 
specific countries or regions. Such cases include, for 
instance, the pinewood nematode, affecting mostly the 
Pinus pinaster Aiton specie, the ink disease in the chestnuts 
and the esca disease in the grapevines. Whether these 
diseases are caused by fungus, nematodes or other biotic or 
abiotic agents, they are mostly asymptomatic, exhibit fast 
spread rate and currently have no cure properly developed 
and commercialized [1, 2].   
The standard method to diagnose diseases in plant 
organisms is the symptomatology visualization by skilled 
personnel [1, 2]. However, usually, the external symptoms 
are only able of being visually accessible during the 
terminal stages of the diseases [1]. The plant organism that 
is considered affected is cut and destroyed. In order to avoid 
the fast spreading, the neighbor plant organisms are also cut 
and burned, even if visual symptoms are not accessible [2]. 
This preventive act poses a problem: the deforestation, and 
the resulting economic losses, caused by the massif felling.  
In a similar way, but in the perspective of marketing and 
consumption, the characterization of plant organisms, which 
are important in processes like, for instance, the production 
of biodiesel [3] and the physiological studies of plant 
organisms for new applications [3, 4], also lacks a detailed 
and similar technical analysis [4]. The techniques available 
for characterizing plant organisms require expensive 
laboratory equipments and materials, are time consuming 
and hard to implement [1, 5]. 
Hereupon, it can be said that, in general, there is a lack 
of equipments and systems able of assessing and 
characterizing the physiological state of plant organisms. 
This overall described panorama motivated the present 
work. Herein, the authors propose an Electrical Impedance 
Spectroscopy, EIS, system and the usage of impedance 
techniques to assess the physiological states of plant 
organisms. Emphasis was giving to the assessment of the 
hydric stress level and its relation with the disease 
condition. 
The hydric stress refers the internal hydration condition 
of a plant organism and it is one of the most relevant 
parameters to assess physiological states [5]. This parameter 
takes special significance in the assessment of diseases, 
since water absorption by the plant is one of the 
physiological processes firstly and strongly affected during 
a biotic or abiotic disease condition [5]. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 EIS has been proving efficacy and utility in a wide range 
of areas, from the characterization of biological tissues to 
living organisms [6]. The electrical impedance of a 
biological material is a passive electrical property that 
measures the opposition relatively to an alternating current 
flow applied by an external electric field. The current I, as it 
passes across a section of a material of impedance Z, drops 
the voltage V, established between two given points of the 
same section, yielding the well-known generalized Ohm’s 
law: V=IZ, where V and I are complex scalars and Z is the 
complex impedance. Hence, the result of the EIS 
measurements is a set of complex (magnitude and phase) of 
impedance versus frequency. 
Cell membranes, intracellular fluid (cytosol) and 
extracellular fluid are the major contributors of the 
impedance of biological tissues [6]. A commonly used 
circuit to represent biological tissues consists of a parallel 
arrangement between a resistor, simulating the extracellular 
fluid, and a second serial arrangement connecting a resistor, 
this one of the cytosol, and a capacitor, of the membrane [7, 
8]. 
The model commonly used to represent impedance 
values is the Cole bioimpedance model, in which the 
bioimpedance spectrum is represented by means of a Cole-
Cole plot that explores resistance versus reactance, allowing 
the determination of the ohmic values of the cytosol and the 
extracellular fluid [9].  
The physiological changes, due to diseases and 
nutritional or hydration levels, have direct influence in the 
impedance spectrum. The phase angle and other interrelated 
indices, such as Z0/Z∞ [6] and Z0/Z50 [10], have been used to 
extract information about the physiological condition of 
biological materials.  
The nature of the impedance excitation signal varies 
depending on the application. It is possible to excite the 
sample with a current and measure a voltage or to do the 
exact opposite. The discussion on what source, voltage or 
current, is the most convenient remains. Current sources, 
CS, provide suitably controlled means of current injection 
[11] and present reduced noise due to spatial variation when 
compared with voltage sources, VS [12]. However, CS 
accuracy decreases with high frequency [13], especially due 
to their output impedance degradation [12]. Since the 
impedance measurements are limited to field strength where 
the current is linear with respect to the voltage applied [8], 
or vice-versa, CS need high-precision components [14] and 
a limited bandwidth operation range [13, 14] to overcome 
the stated limitation. On the other hand, VS, although 
producing less optimal electrical impedance spectroscopy, 
EIS, systems [14], can operate over a sufficient broad 
frequency range [13, 14] and are built with less expensive 
components [14].  
Nowadays, instruments with high precision, high 
resolution and frequency ranges extending from some Hz to 
tens of MHz are commercially available [6]. However, in 
what concerns to the range of low or high frequencies 
(already above 100 kHz), the degradation of the excitation 
signal affects the accuracy of the measurements [6]. 
Besides, the typical solutions consist in impedance 
analyzers and LCR meters which are desktop instruments 
[6], unfeasible for in vivo [6] and in field applications.  
The EIS system presented herein is able to perform AC 
scans within a selectable frequency range. The system 
implements the phase sensitive detection, PSD, method and 
can drive either a current or a voltage signal to excite a 
biological sample in situ or in vivo. The instrumentation was 
designed to be cost-effective and usable in several 
applications.  
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF SPECIﬁCATIONS OF THE EIS SYSTEM 
 
In this paper it is also resumed the most relevant studies 
obtained for three different plant species, with economical 
and/or forestall impact: pine (Pinus pinaster Aiton), 
cheastnut (Castanea sativa Mill) and Jatropha Curcas L.  
The following sections of this paper are: 1) System 
Design, where the developed EIS system is presented in 
detail; 2) Assessment of the Hydric Stress Level, which 
presents the method and the results obtained for the hydric 
stress assessment for the three studied species; 3) Study of 
Disease Condition, which presents the method and the 
results obtained for the study of the nematode disease in 
Pinus pinaster specie; and 4) Conclusions, which resumes 
the main obtained results. 
 
II. 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
A. General Description 
The developed EIS system employs two electrodes and 
consists of three main modules: signal conditioning unit, 
acquisition system (PicoScope® 3205A) and a laptop for 
data processing (Matlab® based software).  
The electrodes being used are beryllium cooper gold 
platted needles with around 1.02 mm in diameter. The 
bioimpedance measurement requires the most superficial 
possible penetration of the electrodes in order to reduce the 
dispersion of the needles surface current density [9], and also 
to reduce damage on the biologic sample.  
 
Range 
Parameter 
Current Mode 
Voltage Mode 
Measuring method 
2 electrodes 
Frequency 
1 kHz to 1 MHz 
Signal amplitude 
25 uA 
4.6 V 
Impedance magnitude 
100 Ω to 
100 kΩ 1 
1.5k Ω to 
2.2 MΩ1 
Impedance phase 
-π rad to π rad 
-π rad to π rad 
Mean absolute 
magnitude error 
1675.45 Ω 
709.37 Ω 
Mean absolute phase 
error 
2.45 % 
2.06 % 
Mean distortion 
0.29 % 
0.48 % 
Mean SNR 
117.0 dB 
118.8 dB 
Calibration 
Automatically calibrated by software 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

The digital oscilloscope PicoScope® 3205A has dual 
functionality: 1) synthesizes and provides the excitation AC 
signal to the conditioning unit (ADC function); 2) digitizes 
both excitation and induction signals at high sampling rates 
(12.5 MSps) and transfers data to the computer via USB 
where it is stored. The signal conditioning unit receives the 
exciting AC signal, coming from the PicoScope®, and 
amplifies it to be applied, through an electrode, to the 
specimen under study. The induced AC signal is collected by 
a second electrode and is redirected to the conditioning unit 
where it is also amplified. Both excitation and induced 
signals are conduced to the PicoScope® to be digitized. 
The features of both excitation modes are described 
below. 
B. Design Specifications 
The current mode circuit employs the current-feedback 
amplifier AD844 in a non-inverting ac-coupled CS 
configuration (see Figure 1), already studied by Seoane, 
Bragós and Lindecrantz, 2006 [15]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Schematic of the EIS system conditioning unit - 1) AC current 
source; 2) AC voltage source; 3) current/voltage sense. 
A 
common 
problem 
inherent 
to 
bioimpedance 
measurements is the charging of the dc-blocking capacitor 
between the source and the electrode due to residual DC 
currents [15]. This effect lead to saturation of the 
transimpedance output of the AD844. The DC feedback of 
the implemented configuration maintains dc voltage at the 
output close to 0V without reducing the output impedance of 
the source. Subsequently, the output current, is maintained 
almost constant over a wide range of frequencies. 
The high speed voltage-feedback amplifier LM7171 is 
employed in the voltage mode circuit (see Figure 1). This 
behaves like a current-feedback amplifier due to its high 
slew rate, wide unit-gain bandwidth and low current 
consumption. Nevertheless it can be applied in all traditional 
voltage-feedback amplifier configurations, as the one used. 
These characteristics allow the maintenance of an almost 
constant voltage output over a wide range of frequencies. 
Current or voltage signals resulting from voltage or 
current excitation modes, respectively, are sensed by a high 
speed operational amplifier, LT1220 (see Figure 1), which 
performs reduced input offset voltage and is able of driving 
large capacitive loads.  
Gain values of both current excitation source and voltage 
excitation source can be changed in order to extend the range 
of impedance magnitude. The transductance gain of the 
LT1220 is currently set to 5.1 kΩ and defines the gain of the 
system. Since the gain values are known and also the 
amplitude of the AC excitation signal, V1, from the 
PicoScope®, the EIS system is calibrated automatically by 
software. 
C. Cables Capacitance 
For an optimized signal-to-noise ratio, coaxial cable must 
be used. Nevertheless, this type of cable is prone to introduce 
high equivalent parasitic capacitances, which translate in 
errors in the bioimpedance measurements, especially at high 
frequencies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Bode and Cole-Cole diagram showing the reduction of cables 
capacitive effect by the application of the driven shield technique. The 
voltage mode excitation was used to analyze the circuit at the right top. The 
reduction is more noticeable at high frequencies where the capacitive 
effects have more influence. 
When assessing bioimpedance, the capacitive effects 
from cables are not the only exerting influence. In fact, phase 
shift effects, perceptible especially in the high frequencies 
range, are introduced mainly by the amplifiers. The influence 
V1
   VCCS
( AD844)
A
    V/I
Mode SW
LT1220
RS
Load
C
V
I
Pico A
Pico B
DS
DS
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
1
2
3
4
x 10
4
Module (Ohms)
Frequency (kHz)
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
0
5
10
15
20
Phase Shift (º)
Frequency (kHz)
2
2.5
3
3.5
x 10
4
-2000
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Reactance
Resistance
39kΩ 
39kΩ 
180pF 
1) 
2) 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

of phase shift errors has a cumulative effect that is translated, 
in the impedance spectra, as an inflexion that occurs at high 
frequencies (see Figure 2).  
This behavior can be simulated by an equivalent circuit 
as it is like the system analyzes any load always in parallel 
with a capacitor.  
The impedance magnitude, at high frequencies, is also 
affected. It presents a characteristic decline as the bode 
diagrams of the Figure 2 show. In the developed EIS system, 
the slight decline of the impedance magnitude is due to the 
loss of the product gain-bandwidth of the LT1220 for high 
frequencies. 
Since stray capacitances are considered systematic errors 
of the system, thus affecting all the measurements, theirs 
influence doesn’t directly affect the results.  Although, it is 
convenient to have an approached sense of the real 
equivalent circuit (see Figure 3), in such a way that the effect 
of all the parasitic elements can be considered and/or 
discounted where justified.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Equivalent electric circuit of all parasitic elements affecting 
impedance measurements of a load, ZLOAD. The effect of the stray 
capacitances from cables, CCABLE, is minimized by the driven shield. Other 
stray capacitance effect, CSTRAY, due primarily to the phase shift of 
amplifiers, can be minimized by software. 
 
III. 
ASSESSMENT OF HYDRIC STRESS LEVEL  
A. Materials and Methods 
Assessing physiological states of plants, using impedance 
techniques, implies the knowledge of the typical EIS profiles 
of the species under study, i.e., the EIS profiles for healthy 
individuals under controlled environment conditions. For this 
reason, the studies presented herein required an exhaustive 
EIS assessment and monitoring, performed over months, and 
extensive data analysis. In addition, the populations of 
different plant species were kept under controlled 
environment conditions (temperature, luminosity, soil 
content and watering), in order to reduce the quantity of 
variables that may change EIS profiles. 
For assessing EIS profiles and studying the hydric stress 
level there were used: 1) eight young healthy pine trees 
(Pinus pinaster Aiton), with about 0,8 meters tall and 1 to 2 
centimeters in diameter; 2) eight young healthy chestnuts 
trees (Castanea sativa Mill), with about 0,5 meters tall and 1 
to 2 centimeters in diameter; and 3) four young healthy 
Jatropha Curcas L. trees, with about 0,2 meters tall and 3 to 
4 centimeters in diameter. 
The choice of the plant species under study is 
substantiated by the economic and/or forestalls relevance 
they have. Chestnuts and pines have a crucial economic 
impact in our country and are currently affected by 
uncontrolled diseases: the nematode disease, in the case of 
pine trees, and the ink disease, in the case of chestnut trees. 
Jatropha curcas, by other hand, is a tropical species, lacking 
physiological studies, which seed are used for biodiesel 
production. 
To perform the EIS measurements, the electrodes were 
placed in the trunk of each tree, in a diametric position, and 
about 20 cm above the soil, in the case of the pine and 
chestnut trees, and about 10 cm above de soil, in the case of 
Jatropha curcas. It was used the portable EIS system version 
in the voltage mode of excitation and a frequency range 
between 1 kHz and 1 MHz. Routine acquisitions took place 
between 11 a.m. and 13 p.m. since it was already verified in 
previous studies that at this time period the trees impedance 
is higher and presents few variation (see Figure 4). 
To study the hydric stress level variation, there was 
performed EIS monitoring over two months for one 
individual of each plant species. Plants were kept one month 
without watering and, during the remaining month, plants 
were watered regularly. This process was repeated three 
times for each case. 
B. Results 
For each obtained impedance spectrum, there were 
assessed several impedance parameters. Due to paper space 
limitation and also because it is a well-known impedance 
parameter, it will only be presented the results obtained for 
the ratio Z1/Z50. Note that it is used the index 1, that 
corresponds to the lowest analyzed frequency (1 kHz), 
instead of the index 0, as explained in the Introduction 
section. 
The EIS measurements revealed that EIS profiles have a 
daily oscillation. To analyze this behavior it was calculated 
the R1/R50 ratio (R represents module) for a period of 4 days.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Variation of the R1/R50 ratio during the monitoring of a healthy 
pine tree. The impedance values show a daily oscillation that is 
characteristic of the studied trees. 
To confirm the daily oscillation it was calculated the Fast 
Fourier Transform of this ratio. A frequency of 11,57 µHz 
RCABLE 
ZLOAD 
CCABLE 
CSTRAY 
RCABLE 
RCABLE 
RCABLE 
CCABLE 
Day Period 
Night Period 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

was clearly founded, which corresponds to a frequency of 24 
h. The lower values of the ratio R1/R50 correspond to the 
night period, while the higher values correspond to the day 
period where the temperature and luminance are higher 
(between 11 a.m. and 15 p.m.). Previous studies on plants 
also shown that, during the day period, the variation of 
impedance values is lower than the one observed at the 
night period.  
Data obtained for the EIS monitoring and the study of the 
hydric stress level, revealed a consistent behavior for all the 
studied species. The Z1/Z50 ratio tends to increase with 
higher values of hydric stress, for the pines and chestnut 
trees. After introducing regular watering, the same 
parameter progressively tended to the typical values of 
hydrated trees. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Evolution of the Z1/Z50 ratio during the monitoring of a healthy 
chestnut tree a) while kept without watering and b) with regular watering. 
The arrows indicate the direction of the Z1/Z50 ratio evolution. 
In the case of Jatropha curcas, the impedance behavior 
with the hydric stress level variation was completely 
different. The found different results could be explained due 
the fact that this species contain latex vessels, while pine 
and chestnut trees do not. In this case, the Z1/Z50 tend to 
decrease for higher values of hydric stress level and, after 
introducing regular watering, the ratio abruptly assumed the 
typical values. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Evolution of the Z1/Z50 ratio during the monitoring of a healthy 
Jatropha curcas tree while kept without watering. The arrow indicates the 
direction of the Z1/Z50 ratio evolution. 
 
IV. 
STUDY OF DISEASE CONDITION 
A. Materials and Methods 
Twenty four healthy pine trees (Pinus pinaster Aiton), 
with about 2,5 meters tall and 2 to 3 centimetres in diameter, 
constituted the population for the conducted study. The pine 
trees were placed in vases in a controlled water environment 
at a greenhouse. Half of the tree population was watered 
during 5 minutes per day (~ 133,37 mL/day), while the other 
half were watered during only 2 minutes per day (~ 66,67 
mL/day). This second half was less watered to maintain a 
relevant level of hydric stress. 
After one month elapsed since the pine trees were placed 
in the greenhouse, the inoculations with pinewood nematode, 
PWN, (Bursaphelenchus xylophilus Nickle) and with the 
bark beetle (T. destruens Wollaston) were performed. Six 
pines were inoculated with PWN, other 6 pines were 
inoculated with bark beetles, other 6 pines were inoculated 
simultaneously with PWN and bark beetles, while the 
remaining 6 were kept under normal conditions, i.e., healthy. 
The position of the pines in the greenhouse was made so that 
each sub-group had the same number of pines with normal 
watering (5 min/day) and with reduced watering (2 min/day). 
To perform the inoculations with bark beetles, callow 
adults were collected immediately after emergence. In each 
tree, a box containing 15 beetles were placed in the middle 
and the device was covered using Lutrasil tissue to avoid 
beetles escape.  
The inoculation with the PWN followed an innovative 
approach. Firstly, three 2 x 2 cm rectangle of cork were 
removed from the first tiers of the trunk (about 1,80 m above 
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
2.1
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
1.45
1.5
1.55
1.6
1.65
Resistance
Reactance
1.8
1.85
1.9
1.95
2
2.05
2.1
2.15
2.2
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
Resistance
Reactance
a) 
b) 
2.25
2.3
2.35
2.4
2.45
2.5
2.55
2.6
2.65
2.7
2.75
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
1.45
1.5
1.55
1.6
1.65
Resistance
Reactance
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

the soil) and  exposed  phloem  was erased with a scalpel in 
order to increase the adhesion of the PWN. Afterward, 0,05 
mL of of a PWN suspension was placed on in each incision. 
In the total, 6000 nematodes were inoculated per tree. To 
finalize the task, the removed rectangle of cork was fixed in 
the respective place and wrapped with plastic tape. 
Seventy 
days 
after 
the 
inoculations, 
the 
EIS 
measurements were performed in all the tree population. At 
this time, the pine trees inoculated with PWN presented 
some visually symptoms of the PWD. The decay of those 
trees, rounded 40 %. Two of the healthy pines died (decay of 
100 %) due to hydric stress. All remaining individual 
appeared healthy. 
To perform the EIS measurements, the electrodes were 
placed in the trunk of each tree, in a diametric position, and 
about 30 cm above the soil. It was used the portable EIS 
system version in the voltage mode of excitation and a 
frequency range between 1 kHz and 1 MHz. There were 
taken two measurements for each tree. The acquisitions also 
took place between 11 a.m. and 13 p.m.  
In order to relate the EIS data with the PWD and the 
stage of the disease, the trunk of the pine trees inoculated 
with PWN were cut in three distinct regions to perform a 
count of nematodes. The cuts were executed: a) immediately 
below the inoculation incision (180 cm above the soil); b) 30 
cm above the soil (where EIS measurements took place); and 
c) in the middle of the previous two cuts (approximately 80 
cm above the soil). 
After the EIS measurements, two healthy pines were 
monitored by two independent portable EIS systems. After a 
week of monitoring, the same pines were inoculated with 
PWN, and the measurements continued during 7 more 
weeks. The main purpose of this last experiment was to 
study the variation of the pine EIS profiles during the decay 
due to the PWD. 
B. Results 
In order to compare results between the different 
physiological states of the trees, several impedance 
parameters were assessed. The impedance parameter that 
showed better results was the Z1/Z50 ratio. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Values of the impedance parameter Z1/Z50 for each of the 24 
pine trees. Note that there are represented two values for each pine. 
The analysis of the obtained results shown that the 
healthy pines and the pines inoculated with bark beetles have 
similar Z1/Z50 values. In fact, the bark beetles doesn’t 
damage the inner structure of the trees, therefore it was 
expected that the impedance profiles were similar between 
healthy pines and pines inoculated with bark beetles. 
On the other hand, Z1/Z50 values for the pines inoculated 
with 
nematodes 
and 
also, 
for 
those 
inoculated 
simultaneously with nematodes and bark beetles, locates in 
the same region, different from the previous one, of the 
graph of Figure 7. Those values present a relatively high 
dispersion in terms of reactance. It was later confirmed that 
higher reactance Z1/Z50 values correspond to higher number 
of nematodes in the tree (see Figure 8). 
The pines that died due to hydric stress (decay of 100%) 
were also studied and the Z1/Z50 parameter present high 
resistance values in relation to all the other pines. 
The counting of nematodes in the several cut sections 
revealed that the concentration of nematodes was higher in 
the cut sections b) and c) for the pines less watered (pines 1, 
2 and 3) – see Table II. It is known that the nematodes move 
toward watered regions along the trunk. For this reason, the 
concentration of nematodes in the lower parts of the trunks 
was much higher for the pines with less watering than for 
those with regular watering (pines 4, 5 and 6).  
TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF NEMATODES IN THE TRUNKS OF PINE TREES 
PER CUT SECTION 
Tree 
Cut Section 
Number of nematodes in 0,05 mL 
1 
a 
1 
b 
0 
c 
133 
2 
a 
0 
b 
43 
c 
1 
3 
a 
0 
b 
0 
c 
112 
4 
a 
4 
b 
20 
c 
0 
5 
a 
0 
b 
17 
c 
0 
6 
a 
0 
b 
0 
c 
14 
 
These results for the nematodes counting support the 
already referred results obtained for the Z1/Z50 impedance 
parameter. In fact, it is observed a clear relation between the 
number of nematodes and the reactance dispersion for the 
Z1/Z50 parameter, as Figure 8 shows. The higher the number 
of nematodes is, the higher is the reactance value of Z1/Z50. It 
is considered that the dispersion in terms of resistance is not 
significant when compared with values from pines in other 
physiological condition – see Figure 7. 
 
 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Resistance
Reactance
Legend: 
 
■ Healthy Pines; 
■ Pines inoculated with bark beetles; 
■ Pines inoculated with nematodes; 
■ Pines inoculated simultaneously 
with nematodes and bark beetles; 
■ Pines with a decay of 100 % due to 
hydric stress (dead pines) 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Values of the impedance parameter Z1/Z50 for the pines 
inoculated with nematodes and with low watering (pines 1, 2 and 3 from 
the Table II). Note that there are represented two values for each pine. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  a) Evolution of the Z1/Z50 during the monitoring time (8 
weeks). b) Closer view from the Z1/Z50 evolution, showing a hysteresis-like 
behaviour. 
 
There were monitored two healthy pines, one with low 
watering (2 min/day) and another with regular watering (5 
min/day). After one week from the beginning of the 
monitoring, both pines were inoculated with nematodes. It 
was shown again a dispersion of the reactance values of the 
Z1/Z50 parameter, as Figure 11 shows. As time passed the 
reactance values became higher. The higher values of 
reactance were achieved for the pine with less watering. 
According to the previous presented results, it was expected 
that the number of nematodes increase in the below part of 
the trunk for the pines with less watering; and consequently, 
to observe a higher rising of the reactance of the Z1/Z50 
parameter. After the 6th week, pines start to decay strongly 
and it was observed a relevant decrease of the reactance and 
a significant increase of the resistance for the same 
parameter – see Figure 9. The higher values of resistance 
were achieved for the pine with less watering, and also in a 
shorter period of time. At the end of the monitoring, the 
decay of the pines, evaluated by an expertise, was about 80 
% for the pine with regular watering and 100 % for the pine 
with less watering. 
From the Figure 9 b), that represents a closer view of the 
Z1/Z50 values for the monitoring, it is possible to observe that 
the path followed during the period of nematodes population 
increasing is different from the path followed during the 
period of decay, i.e., it is observed an hysteresis-like 
behavior.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The EIS system was developed in order to ensure a 
robust, efficient and fast bioimpedance analysis. The 
adaptability 
to 
different 
biological 
applications, 
the 
portability and the usage of easily accessible and affordable 
components, were preferred aspects taken into account. In 
this manner, the system allows the user to choose the settings 
of the analysis that best fit to a specific application.  
The system is able to perform AC scans within a 
frequency range from 1 kHz to 1 MHz. The frequency limits 
and the number of intervals of the scan can be selected at the 
user interface (developed with Matlab® tools). The type of 
signal used to excite de sample, voltage or current, can be 
preselected by an external switch. This allows the usage of 
the source with the best behavior in a concrete application. 
To overcome problems inherent to stray capacitive 
effects from cables, a driven shield technique is applied. The 
maximum phase shift reduction is estimated at 20.4 % for the 
current excitation mode and at 35.8% for the voltage mode. 
The biological application study aimed at discriminating 
between different physiological states of three plant species: 
pine (Pinus pinaster Aiton), cheastnut (Castanea sativa 
Mill) and Jatropha Curcas L.  
The obtained results suggest that the implemented 
method may constitute a first innovative approach for the 
assessment of physiological states of plant organisms and to 
the early diagnosis of plant diseases. The consistency of the 
results obtained for the three studied species reveals the 
transversality of the method. Since EIS profiles are obtained 
1.03
1.04
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.08
1.09
1.1
1.11
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Resistance
Reactance
Legend: 
 
■ Pine 1; 
■ Pine 2; 
■ Pine 3. 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Resistance
Reactance
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Resistance
Reactance
80 % of decay 
begining of decay 
inoculation 
a) 
b) 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

for healthy individuals of a given plant organism it is 
possible to assess and study the physiological states. 
EIS profiles showed a consistent behavior whit the hydric 
stress level of the three studied species. The Z1/Z50 
impedance parameter presents increased values of both 
reactance and resistance when the hydric stress is high, for 
the pines and chestnuts. In the case of Jatropha curcas, this 
parameter presented decreased values of both reactance and 
resistance when the hydric stress was high. This inverse 
behavior may be explained due to the presence of latex 
vessels in this species. 
The evolution of the Z1/Z50 impedance parameter may be 
used to predict risky hydric stress level of a plant organism. 
In addition, the achieved impedance parameters allow 
discriminating three different physiological states for pine 
trees: healthy trees, trees with PWD and trees in hydric 
stress.  
The trees with PWD present Z1/Z50 ratio with high values 
of reactance, suggesting that the current flows preferably 
trough the cytosol. In fact, the action of the nematodes inside 
the tree may destroy cell membranes. This means that 
membranes capacitor effect becomes less significant in the 
impedance measurement. 
It was also shown that the number of nematodes and 
Z1/Z50 impedance parameter are related. The higher the 
number of nematodes is, the higher the reactance of the ratio 
is.  
The action of bark beetles seems not to interfere, at least 
in measurable terms, in the level of hydric stress of pine 
trees. 
Healthy trees, with high values of hydric stress (decays 
above 80 %), and also trees with PWD at advanced stages, 
revealed low reactance and high resistance for the same 
studied parameter. The high values of resistance are justified 
due to the water loss in the tree. Consequently, it means that 
for this specific case, the method cannot distinguish between 
trees with PWD or trees with high level of hydric stress but 
with no disease. However, it is known that advanced stages 
of PWD promote high levels of hydric stress. This means 
that both cases represent, in practical terms, the same 
situation, i.e., the tree presents high probability to die. In 
addition, in the stages where the method is able to 
distinguish between healthy trees and trees with PWD, the 
decay was determined to round the 40 %. Therefore, if a cure 
is available, this diagnosis could help to administrate a 
treatment and reverse the disease evolution.  
Hence, the main conclusion of the developed study is that 
the implemented method could be used to assess 
physiological states (such as the hydric stress) of living trees, 
and that the Z1/Z50 impedance parameter could be applied as 
a risk factor. 
 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We acknowledge support from Fundação para a Ciência 
e Tecnologia, FCT (scholarship SFRH/BD/61522/2009). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Martins, J. Castro, W. Macedo, C. Marques and c. Abreu, 
“Assessment of the spread of chestnut ink disease using 
remote sensing and geostatistical methods,” Eur J Plant 
Pathol, vol. 119, pp. 159–164, April 2007. 
[2] CABI and EPPO, “Data sheets on quarantine pests – 
Bursaphelenchus 
xylophilus,” 
EPPO 
quarantine 
pests, 
contract 90/399003. 
[3] W. Parawira, “Biodiesel production from Jatropha curcas: a 
review,” Scientific Research and Essays, vol. 5(14), pp. 
1796–1808, July 2010. 
[4] T. Repo, G. Zhang, A. Ryyppo and R. Rikala, “The electrical 
impedance spectroscopy of scots Pine (Pinus sylvestris L.) 
shoots in relation to cold acclimation,” Journal of 
Experimental Botany, vol. 51 (353), pp. 2095–2107, 
December 2000. 
[5] A. Pirzad, M. K. Shakiba, S. Zehtab-Salmasi, S. A. 
Mohammadi, R. Darvishzadeh and A. Samadi, “Effect of 
water stress on leaf relative water content, chlorophyll, 
proline and soluble carbohydrates in Matricaria chamomilla 
L.,” Journal of Medicinal Plants Research, vol. 5(12), pp. 
2483–2488, June 2011. 
[6] L. Callegaro, “The metrology of electrical impedance at high 
frequency: a review,” Meas. Sci. Techno, vol. 20, 022002, 
February 2009. 
[7] U. G. Kyle, I. Bosaeus, A. D. De Lorenzo, P. Deurenberg, M. 
Elia, J. M. Gómez, et al, “Bioelectrical impedance analysis – 
part I: review of principles and methods,” Clinical Nutrition, 
vol. 23(5), pp. 1226–1243, October 2004. 
[8] U. Pliquett, “Bioimpedance: a review for food processing,” 
Food Engineering Reviews, vol. 2(2), pp. 74–94, June 2010.  
[9] S. Grimnes and O. G. Martinsen, “Bioimpedance and 
bioelectricity basics,” 2nd Edition, Academic Press of 
Elsevier, 2008. 
[10] T. Hayashi, M. Iwamoto and K. Kawashima, “Identification 
of irradiated potatoes by impedance measurements,” Biosci 
Biotechnol Biochem, vol. 56(12), pp. 1929–1932, December 
1992. 
[11] M. Rafiei-Naeini, P. Wright and H. McCann, “Low-noise 
measurement for electrical impedance tomography,” IFMBE 
Proceedings, vol. 17(10), pp. 324–327, 2007. 
[12] A. S. Ross, G. J. Saulnier, J. C. Newell and D. Isaacson, 
“Current source design for electrical impedance tomography,” 
Physiol Meas, vol. 24(2), pp. 509–516, May 2003. 
[13] P. J. Yoo, D. H. Lee, T. I. Oh and E. J.Woo, “Wideband bio-
impedance spectroscopy using voltage source and tetra-polar 
electrode configuration,” Journal of Physics, vol. 224(1), pp. 
224-228, 2010. 
[14] G. J. Saulnier, A. S. Ross and N. Liu, “A high-precision 
voltage source for EIT,” Physiol Meas, vol. 27(5), pp. 221–
236, May 2006. 
[15] F. Seoane, R. Bragós and K. Lindecrantz, “Current source for 
multifrequency broadband electrical impedance spectroscopy 
systems – a novel approach,” Proceedings IEEE Eng Med 
Biol Soc, vol. 1, pp. 5121–5125, August 2006. 
[16]  T. Yamamoto, Y. Oomura, H. Nishino, S. Aou and Y. 
Nakano, “Driven shield for multi-barrel electrode,” Brain 
Research Bulletin, vol. 14(1), pp. 103-104, January 1985. 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

