System Biology on Mitochondrion Genomes
Michael G.Sadovsky
Institute of computational modelling SB RAS
660036 Krasnoyarsk, Russia
msad@icm.krasn.ru
Natalia A. Zaitseva
Siberian Federal univeristy
Svobodny prosp., 79
660041 Krasnoyarsk, Russia
zaiceva-5@g-service.ru
Yulia A. Putintseva
Siberian Federal univeristy
Svobodny prosp., 79
660041 Krasnoyarsk, Russia
kinommanka5@mail.ru
Abstract—Relations between the triplet composition of mi-
tochondria genomes, and the phylogeny of their bearers is
considered. It is shown that the genomes are split into several
classes in the space of information values of the triplets. The
classiﬁcation exhibits a feasible correlation to the phylogeny
attribution of the genomes. The stability of the classiﬁcation,
as well as the impact of various techniques of a data pre-
treatment is analyzed. A strong and fruitful correlation between
the structure of trinucleotide composition of mitochondrion
genomes, and the taxonomy of the bearers of these genomes is
proven.
Keywords-frequency, entropy, mutual entropy, order, phy-
logeny, elastic map, knowledge retrieval
I. INTRODUCTION
A study of statistical properties of nucleotide sequences
may bring a lot towards the relation between structure
and function encoded in these former. A consistent and
comprehensive investigation of the features and peculiarities
is based on the study of frequency dictionary of a nucleotide
sequence [1], [2], [3]. Such approach answers the ques-
tions concerning the statistical and information properties
of DNA sequences. A frequency dictionary, whatever one
understands for it, is rather multidimensional entity.
In particular, a relation between a structure (i. e., oligonu-
cleotide composition and their frequency), and the taxonomy
of the bearers of DNA sequences is of great importance.
Here we studied this relation for the set of mitochondrion
genomes. They exhibit a signiﬁcant violation of the second
Chargaff’s rule. Such violation may provide another oppor-
tunity for knowledge retrieval from the statistical properties
of them [7], [8].
Consider a continuous symbol sequence from four-letter
alphabet {A, C, G, T} of the length N. No other symbols or
gaps in a sequence are supposed to take place. Any coherent
string ω = ν1ν2 . . . νq of the length q is a word. A set of all
the words occurred within a sequence makes the support of
that latter. Counting the numbers of copies nω of the words,
one gets a ﬁnite dictionary; changing the numbers for the
frequency
fω = nω
N
one gets the frequency dictionary Wq of the thickness q.
This is the main object of our study.
Further, we shall study the triplet composition only, i. e.,
consider the frequency dictionaries W3. Thus, any genome
is represented as a point in 63-dimensional space. What is
the pattern of the distribution of genomes in that space,
and whether the distribution exhibits a correlation to a
phylogeny of the genome bearers are two key questions
of our study. Reciprocally, all genomes are known for a
symmetry: frequencies of a couple of string composing a
complimentary palindrome1 are pretty close. This proximity
is not an absolute equivalence, and the deviation varies for
various genomes; mitochondria are well known to be the
most variable, from that point of view [1], [4], [5].
To address these questions, we have implemented an
unsupervised classiﬁcation of the mitochondrion genomes,
in various spaces of frequencies (or information values) of
triplets. Then, the taxa composition of the classes developed
due to the classiﬁcation has been studied; a considerable
correlation between taxa composition, and the class occupa-
tion was found. Some results of the study of the correlation
of the distribution of bacterial taxa in the information value
space, developed over 16S RNA are presented in [4], [5].
To study the effects of a structure peculiarities of a
genome expressed in the violation of the symmetry men-
tioned above (for W3, we developed similar classiﬁcations in
32-dimensional symmetrized spaces; the former is the space
of differences of the frequencies of two triplets composing
a complementary palindrome, and the latter is the space of
differences of information values of two triplets composing
a complementary palindrome.
The paper presents the evidences of the strong relation
between the structure of mitochondrion genomes, and the
taxonomy of their bearers. Section II describes the source
of the genetic data, Section III provides a short description of
the techniques of the classiﬁcation and knowledge retrieval.
The results of the study are present at Section IV, where
the subsection IV-A provides the results of the study of the
impact of a symmetry violation towards the relation between
structure and taxonomy, and the subsection IV-B shows the
results proving the high level of interrelation between the
1For example, the couples ATC
↔
GAT and GGCAATC
↔
GATTGCC are the complementary palindromes. One must bear in mind,
that such entities are determined over a single strand!
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-007-9
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Figure 1.
Unsupervised classiﬁcation developed in 63-dimensional space
of frequencies separates mitochondrion genomes into 3 classes; shown in
principal components, raw database.
structure, and taxonomy. Finally, the biological issues, as
well as some more mathematically oriented questions are
discussed in Section V.
II. DATABASES AND METHODS
Mitochondrion genomes were retrieved from EMBL–
bank. The the list of genomes available at EMBL–bank is
inhomogeneous, from the point of view of the equity of
the number of species of various genders enlisted into the
database. The excessive number of closely related genomes
(not speaking about the strains and variants) may yield a
cluster of increased density2 that overweights other points
at the space, thus resulting in a distortion of the real pattern
of a genome distribution at the space of information value
of words.
To eliminate the effect of the possible bias described
above, we hashed the databases: a single genome from a
gender was selected randomly, while the other ones were
eliminated from the database. It resulted in a decrease of
the number of entries in the database up to 1651 ones.
Another problem in database structure results form an
abundant set of entries representing taxonomically rather
high clade solely: a single genome is deciphered in a clade.
The scattered nature of the database conspires the effects
of the correlation between taxonomy and statistical features
of the genomes. Thus, we have also hashed the database,
excluding the entries which are less than 50 taxons within
a class, or an order; ﬁnally, 1132 entries was gathered into
the database.
2And they do, in reality.
Figure 2.
A distribution of seven clades in the space determined by
principal components. See text for details.
III. CLASSIFICATION
A standard unsupervised classiﬁcation technique was im-
plemented to develop a classiﬁcation of the genomes in the
information value space. We used ViDaExpert software [9]
to do that; the algorithm of the classiﬁcation development
see in [4], [5].
An unsupervised classiﬁcation does not increases a num-
ber of classes: if no separability condition is veriﬁed, then
the number remains the same. Separability of classes means
that two classes are discrete with respect to a relation of a
distance between their centroids, and their radii. An excess
of a distance between two centroids over the sum of the radii
of the relevant classes is the strongest separability condition.
On the contrary, one faces the weakest separability condi-
tion, if the greater radius (among two classes to be checked
for a separability) is not longer than the distance between
two centroids of the classes.
We did not check formally the separability conditions, for
the classiﬁcation developed over the genomes. Meanwhile, a
stability of the abundance of each class, and the maintenance
of the class occupation were checked.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Fig. 1 shows an example of an unsupervised classiﬁcation
of the mitochondrion genomes. This is a typical pattern of
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-007-9
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Figure 3.
The data distribution around the elastic map (with high rigidity).
Seven clades (see text for details) are shown in color.
Figure 4.
A distribution of 1132 genomes in 63-dimensional space of
triplet frequencies. An averaged local density is shown in grey tone.
the separation of the genomes into three classes; namely, in a
series of independent experiments with classiﬁcation devel-
opment, when a random initial distribution of the genomes
takes place, the classiﬁcation exhibits three outcomes: the
genomes could gather into three classes, two classes, and
all of them may occupy a single class (with very few
exceptions).
Since the classiﬁcation exhibits not so high instability in
the separation of genomes into classes (the separation into
Figure 5.
Unsupervised classiﬁcation of genomes shown on the elastic
map (inner coordinates).
three classes seems to be the most stable one), we checked
it through a series of experiments. A series of independent
classiﬁcations were developed, with independent and ran-
dom redistribution of the genomes into the initial classes.
We traced the preference in the class occupation by the
same genome; indeed, the greatest majority of the genomes
always occupy the same group, if any. Few genomes are
quite volatile. They change the class occupation very often,
with no regular pattern of the behaviour. Such genomes have
been excluded from the database, total number of excluded
entities was 41.
A distribution of the clades of various taxonomy level is
of great interest; Fig. 2 shows the distribution of seven clades
in the space determined by the principal components. This
ﬁgure shows a distribution of seven (rather different in abun-
dance) clades; moreover, these latter belong to different tax-
onomy levels. There are three clades of very high taxonomy
level: Fungi (khaki, 50 entities), Viridoplantae (bright green,
31 entities), and Rhodophyta (reddish-brown, 3 entities).
Four other clades are of lower taxa: ﬁshes (Actinopterygii)
are shown in yellow (507 entities), Amphibia are shown
in green-blue (66 entities), and incests (Neoptera) are pink
(143 entities). Finally, Mammalia are shown in light blue
(212 entities). Small very dark-blue triangles show all other
genomes.
To analyze the patterns of the interdependence of taxon-
omy and distribution in the space determined by the triplet
composition of the genomes, we have implemented elastic
map technique; Figure 3 shows such (rigid) map, and the
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-007-9
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

distribution of the genomes around it. Fig. 4 shows similar
elastic map in the inner coordinates; it makes obvious a non-
random pattern of the distribution of clades in the space.
Moreover, the nonlinear statistical approach (i. e., elastic
map implementation) identiﬁes more than three classes: from
seven to ten clusters are identiﬁed, depending on a rigidity
of the map.
An unsupervised classiﬁcation similar to that one shown
in Fig. 1 developed for the distribution of clades projected to
the elastic map presented in the inner coordinates is shown
in Figure 4. A direct comparison of Figs. 4 and 5 clearly
exhibits a character of the distribution of clades over these
three classes obtained due to the unsupervised classiﬁcation
implementation. One should avoid a misconduct: the colors
in these two ﬁgures have nothing to do each other; colors in
Fig. 3 represent the clades, while the colors in Fig. 5 repre-
sent the classes obtained from the unsupervised classiﬁcation
implementation.
A. Symmetry and asymmetry impact on classiﬁcation
Complementary palindromes exhibit close ﬁgure for the
frequencies of the strings composing them. Similar (while
less) proximity is observed for information values of the
strings. This symmetry has been observed at the very begin-
ning of the decipher of genetic sequences [7]. A violation of
the second Chargaff’s rule is the example of the asymmetry
Figure 6. Unsupervised classiﬁcation of genomes shown in 32-dimensional
symmetrized space of information values.
Figure 7.
A distribution of 7 clades in 32-dimensional symmetrized space
of information values. The distribution of shown on elastic map in internal
coordinates.
observed for W1. Yet, very few attention is paid to the
phenomenon of the symmetry [8].
Figure 8.
An unsupervised classiﬁcation shown on elastic map in principal
components.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-007-9
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Different genomes exhibit different level of the symmetry
violation [8]; mitochondria are known for very high level of
the violation. Such effect may bring additional knowledge
towards the relation between structure (frequency dictionary)
and taxonomy, or a function encoded at genetic entity. To
test this idea, we have implemented a series of classiﬁca-
tions both in direct, and symmetrized spaces determined by
information values of triplets.
Figures 6, 8 and 7 show the distributions similar to those
described above, while these latter were developed in the
symmetrized 32-dimensional space of information values
of triplets. It is evident, that the details of the shape of
the distribution, especially the distribution of clades looks
rather different. This difference means that the asymmetry
in complementary triplets information values play some role
in the statistical properties of mitochondrion genomes, while
the details of that role are still conspired from a researcher,
and await for further investigations.
B. Relation of classiﬁcation and taxonomy
The relation between the classes obtained due to the
separation of the genomes by various statistical techniques,
and the taxonomic composition of those classes is the key
issue of the paper. In general, the answer on this question
is positive.
Fig. 2 shows that taxonomically close entities occupy an
obviously isolated subspace, in total genomes distribution.
Meanwhile, this ﬁgure does not prove an inverse statement.
A direct comparison of the composition of the classes shows
that there exists a strong correlation in the composition of
a class determined statistically, and the taxonomy of its
members.
The ﬁrst class3 contains genomes of Actinopterygii taxon:
it contains 457 entries of that taxon, from 506 ones, totally.
The second class contains Neoptera genomes (137 entries),
8 genomes of Amphibia and a genome of Mammalia.
The third class exhibits the most complicated pattern. It
bears 49 Actinopterygii genomes, 39 Amphibia genomes,
the genomes of Archosauria and Lepidosauria, 97 and
87 entries, correspondingly. Also, this class incorporates
almost all mammalian genomes (210 entries) and Testudines
genomes: 24 entries (all of them are in the class). Besides,
the class contains also 4 genomes of insects.
It should be said that the genomes of Amphibia are
separated between two classes in rather non-random way:
the occupation of a class is predominated by the genomes
of the same taxon, of lower level. We checked, whether the
classiﬁcation developed over a single clade4 yields similar
pattern, and found that it works. By isolating the genomes of
the same class (or other taxonomic level), and developing an
unsupervised classiﬁcation within that latter, one faces the
3Here we understand class as statistically determined cluster.
4That must be sufﬁciently abundant, of course.
similar behaviour of genetic entities: the statistically deter-
mined classes are predominantly occupied by the entities of
the same taxon.
V. CONCLUSION
We addressed the problem of the relation between a
structure of DNA sequence, and the sense encoded in that
latter. A triplet composition with information values of these
latter was considered to be a structure. Genetically, the
mitochondrion genomes are rather conserve, thus providing
a good raw for knowledge extraction. The distribution of
mitochondrion genes in 63-dimensional space of triplets fre-
quency, 32-dimensional space of symmetrized frequencies,
and in the relevant spaces determined by information values
of triplets is far from a random one.
Statistically (i. e., with no external or additional knowl-
edge, or assumptions), the considered genomes are gath-
ered into several clusters. Linear analysis (unsupervised
classiﬁcation implementation) fails to discrete the genomes
properly, providing three clusters, at best. An implementa-
tion of some techniques of the nonlinear statistical analysis
improves the situation. Self-organized elastic maps clearly
identify at least four clusters in the spaces mentioned above.
Reciprocally, the genomes from the came clade always
occupy a single cluster; moreover, the clades yield obvious
discrete groups within a cluster. It is very important, that
the genomes from the same clade never share themselves
among two (or more) clusters.
The patterns and relations standing behind the observed
distribution of the clades over the clusters is the key issue;
a the ﬁrst glance, there is no simple order in the distribution
that could be easily interpreted in the terms of classic
systematics or traditional biology. Here are the following
options in the studies of the relation between structure and
taxonomy (or structure and function encoded in some genetic
entities).
Comparative study of the distribution of clades (or
functional groups) in frequencies vs. that one in information
values: this study aimed to compare and ﬁgure out the
differences in the composition of the clusters observed in
two different spaces may reveal the role and signiﬁcance of
a symmetry observed in triplet composition;
Detailed study of the clade composition of various
clusters: this study is the most essential. It is evident, that
clades occupy some very peculiar areas in the spaces used
to ﬁgure out a distribution of genomes. Moreover, there are
no clade shared among two (or several) clusters.
Thus, the composition of those clusters is not random,
or accidental. The point is that the very different clades
occupy the same cluster. What makes them be close each
other? Classical biologists consider them to be very far
from; meanwhile, the statistics of their genomes seems to
be pretty similar. A comprehensive analysis of the triplets
that provide the proximity of very far species may reveal
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-007-9
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

the inner relations in the genetical entities observed in
various taxonomy levels. Such relation does not disprove
the classical taxonomy; it just provides another dimension
for a study of genetic entities and their bearers;
Studying of distributions of the genomes in the space
of longer oligonucleotides: this is an obvious expansion
of the approach presented above. Here we presented some
preliminary results of the comparison of statistical properties
of trinucleotide composition of genomes, and the taxonomy
of their bearers. Meanwhile, one make pose a question
whether the distributions described above are stable against
the growth of the strings taken into consideration. Indeed,
suppose we changed triplets for octanucleotides; then, what
happens with the structure of the clusters described above,
and would happen with the distributions?
Exponential growth of the dimension of the relevant space
is the main problem here. Indeed, even an abundant database
is small enough to exceed the dimension of the space
determined by the frequency dictionary W8. Probably, the
most fruitful approach here is the efﬁcient reduction of the
space of oligonucleotides. If a greater number of strings have
the same frequency, then they make no contribution into
the discretion of the genomes, and they might be eliminated
from the analysis. In reality, such strings have very proximal,
but different frequency. Thus, one needs to identify the
strings providing the most signiﬁcant distinctions of the
genetic entities.
A dual problem reveals such strings: one should study
the distribution of strings in the “space” of genetic entities,
instead of the studying of the distribution of the entities in
the space of frequencies. The solution of this dual problem
would identify the strings that prove the greatest difference
among the genetic entities under consideration. The set
of such strings may be rather meager, thus providing a
researcher with a good space for direct problem solution.
More detailed discussion of all these approaches and options
falls beyond this paper.
Another surprising point is that we have studied two,
formally speaking, incompatible issues: the former is a
proximity between the structures of mitochondrion genomes,
and the latter is a taxonomy of the bearers determined
morphologically. The point is that the evolution of the bear-
ers, strictly speaking, is quite diverse from the evolution of
mitochondrion genomes. The results shown above actually
prove that the (co)evolution of mitochondrion genomes and
the genetic entities of the bearers runs extremely tightly.
This proof could be veriﬁed through the study of the relation
between taxonomy and statistically deﬁned structuredness of
the bearer genomes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are thankful to Andrew Zinovyev for the
promoting interest, help in ViDaExpert software adoption
and valuable discussion.
REFERENCES
[1] M.G. Sadovsky, A.S. Shchepanovsky, and J.A. Putintzeva,
Genes, Information and Sense: Complexity and Knowledge
Retrieval // Theory in Biosciences (2008). V.127, pp. 69 – 78.
[2] M.G. Sadovsky, Comparison of real frequencies of strings
vs. the expected ones reveals the information capacity of
macromoleculae // J.of Biol.Physics (2003). V.29, pp. 23 –
38.
[3] M.G. Sadovsky, Information capacity of nucleotide sequences
and its applications // Bulletin of Math.Biology (2006). V.68,
pp. 156 – 178.
[4] A.N. Gorban, T.G. Popova, M.G. Sadovsky, and D.C. Wun-
sch, Information content of the frequency dictionaries, re-
construction, transformation and classiﬁcation of dictionaries
and genetic texts. Intelligent Engineering Systems through
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, 11 — Smart Engineering System
Design, N.-Y.: ASME Press, (2001). pp. 657 – 663.
[5] A.N. Gorban, T.G. Popova, and M.G. Sadovsky, Classiﬁcation
of symbol sequences over thier frequency dictionaries: to-
wards the connection between structure and natural taxonomy
// Open Systems & Information Dyn. (2000). V.7(1), pp. 1 –
17.
[6] N.N. Bugaenko, A.N. Gorban, and M.G. Sadovsky, Maximum
entropy method in analysis of genetic text and measurement of
its information content // Open Systems & Information Dyn.
(1998). V.5(3), pp. 265 – 278.
[7] G.R. Day, and R.D. Blake Statistical signiﬁcance of symmetri-
cal and repetitive segments in DNA // Nucl. Acids Res. (1982)
V.10(24), pp. 8323˙-- 8339.
[8] D. Mitchell, and R. Bridge A test of Chargaff’s second rule //
Biochem. and Biophys. Res. Commun. (2006) V.340, pp. 90 –
94.
[9] http://bioinfo-out.curie.fr/projects/vidaexpert/ March, 2011.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-007-9
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

