Improving Recovery Engagement for Patients with Substance Use Disorder in the 
Emergency Department 
Kory London, MD 
       Les Sztandera, PhD 
Department of Emergency Medicine 
                     Kanbar College of Design, Engineering, and Commerce 
Thomas Jefferson University 
       Thomas Jefferson University 
Philadelphia, PA  
       Philadelphia, PA 
Kory.London@Jefferson.edu
Les.Sztandera@jefferson.edu
Abstract— 
The 
overdose 
crisis 
our 
communities 
are 
experiencing is a profound and multifactorial challenge to 
public health. Political headwinds have placed increased 
scrutiny and support in finding solutions.  Emergency 
departments (ED) play an essential role in the care for patients 
with substance use disorders (SUD). Peer support, using those 
with lived experience to assist in recovery, is an emerging tool 
in hospitals. Combining medical and behavioral health 
interventions may result in improved outcomes. In a 
retrospective analysis, an ED based peer support program in 
five hospitals in Philadelphia engaged  5821 individuals over 25 
months. The program has resulted in an increase in direct 
referral to recovery services from 3% before the program to 
20.5%. Peer support is a valuable tool in recovery engagement, 
further study is required to determine other benefits of peer 
support and long-term outcomes. 
Keywords- Public Health; Substance Use Disorder; Opioid 
Use Disorder; Emergency Medicine; Addiction; Recovery; Peer 
Support 
I.
INTRODUCTION
 
The United States is experiencing a nearly unprecedented 
epidemic that transcends social strata and bears no easy 
answers - the overdose crisis.  What grew as a sequela of the 
dramatic increase in prescription opioids in the early 21st
century, this crisis has now entrapped countless individuals 
in a cycle of addiction [1].  The infiltration of fentanyl and 
veterinary tranquilizer (xylazine) into the heroin supply and 
now into the supplies of other drugs has led to a dramatic rise 
in polysubstance use and the inevitable increase in deaths 
when individuals mix drugs [2]. We are witnessing an era 
where overdose deaths greatly exceed those of violent crime 
[3].  Substance use disorders (SUD) represent a public health 
emergency that requires novel solutions to these exceptional 
problems. 
     Emergency Departments are legally required to see all 
patients who arrive for evaluation [4].  The risk of overdose, 
on top of other medical complications of SUD, including 
skin, spinal and heart valve infections as well as complex 
wounds [5], lead many patients to visit emergency 
departments for care [6].  Emergency departments are 
manifestly focused on discovering and treating conditions 
that threaten the immediate health of their patients, leaving 
advocacy for chronic conditions, such as SUD, an 
afterthought. National data show fewer than 2% of patients 
with SUD received treatment within the past year [7].    
     Peer support is an emerging trend in recovery services 
[8]. Utilizing individuals in mature phases of recovery to 
engage and advocate for recovery is important for a number 
of reasons.  Primarily, individuals who have not experienced 
SUD often have difficulty understanding and empathizing 
with those currently suffering. Secondarily, even if engaged 
by a empathetic and caring provider, many individuals have 
experienced traumatic healthcare experiences or believe 
recovery to be impossible, limiting their engagement. Peers 
have immediate credibility in these situations and can act as 
experiential interpreters for these patients and their 
caregivers. Lastly, navigating the recovery ecosystem is a 
time consuming and often byzantine journey, one that does 
not mesh well with the fast paced, constantly task switching 
environment of the ED. Peers can be tasked with this as 
their primary work, freeing others to provide care while 
their recovery is still addressed. 
    Given the above, it is unsurprising peers are entering the 
hospital environment [9]. Peers have been shown to improve 
uptake of buprenorphine, a medication for opioid use 
disorder (MOUD) [10].  They also have been shown to 
improve rates of discharge with naloxone, a medication that 
can reverse the effects of overdose [11].  They are relevant 
to visits both related to overdose and other reasons for 
hospitalization [12]. They are also able to address other 
social determinants of health (SDOH), another emerging 
and related topic in social medicine [13]. Their overall 
impact on referral to recovery services, especially for non-
opioid use disorders, is still being defined. 
    This study aims to evaluate a public health initiative 
placing peer support specialists in a series of urban 
emergency departments. We describe the demographics of 
patients who are engaged by peers, their primary drugs of 
choice, and their recovery outcomes.  Additional data 
discussed includes rates of referral to SDOH resources.  
Lastly, we discuss the impact of CRS in the ED and wider 
hospital-based healthcare ecosystem. 
II.
METHODS
This represents the collected data from the first 25 
months of an emerging public health intervention.  Left 
unstated are the dedicated contributions of many in the 
development, deployment and continued function of this 
program. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-058-2
BIOTECHNO 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

A. Study Population 
The program represents a collaborative partnership 
between Jefferson Health and the City of Philadelphia 
Department of Heath and began in December 2020.  Five 
emergency departments were included: two urban academic 
hospitals, two urban community hospitals and one suburban 
community hospital.                   
Certified recovery specialist (CRS) is the term given by 
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for these peers.  CRS 
are individuals in long term recovery, who partake in 
didactic and practical classes to improve their skills in 
engaging patients about recovery services, supporting 
individuals in early recovery and navigating the recovery 
system.  CRS placed in the ED are able to meet with patients 
who are be admitted to the hospital with serious medical 
conditions as well as those being discharged after their ED 
visit.  Importantly, while the focus of the program was 
engaging patients with opioid use disorders, CRS are able to 
assist patients regardless of primary substance. They work 
collaboratively with providers, nurses and social workers to 
help improve patient care. 
Referrals to the CRS are low barrier, akin to pastoral care 
and social work consultations and occur both through the 
electronic health record and via role cellphone. They can be 
provided by any staff member who interacts with a patient 
who may benefit from a CRS visit, as long as the patient is 
able to consent to meeting with one. Patients both in the ED 
and on the inpatient units were engaged by CRS, providing a 
robust and diverse patient cohort. 
B. Study Design 
     This project is a retrospective analysis of a cohort of 
patients seen in the Jefferson Health emergency departments 
in the greater Philadelphia, PA area.  Data was collected via 
two separate sources.  The electronic health records of the 
patient, EPIC (EPIC Systems, Madison, WI) as well as a 
separate encrypted record system that organized data 
requested by the city, LAURIS (LAURIS Online, Roanoke, 
VA). CRS met with patients, speaking on a variety of 
topics, including the challenges of being in the hospital, the 
different options for MOUD and other recovery support 
services including group and solo therapy and family 
outreach.  They are also able to assist with other SDOH, 
such as lack of identification documents, housing instability, 
food insecurity and employment services. 
      Data is collected by the CRS if the patient verbally 
consents to the encounter.  Patient demographics (age, 
gender, race), primary drugs of choice, results of their 
recovery engagement and referrals for SDOH services are 
the primary variables measured.  Data included in this study 
track from the onset of the program in December 2020 
through January 2023.  This study has been reviewed by the 
relevant IRB and deemed exempt. 
III.
RESULTS
461910 ED visits occurred from December 2020 to 
January 2023 in the five hospital sites. Of these, 23766 
received behavioral health diagnoses (5.1%).  During the 
study period, a total of 5821 patients were engaged at least 
once by a CRS (24.5%) (Table 1).  The mean age of the 
patients was 42 years (SD = 11.4) and 4015 (69.0%) 
identified as male (30.8% female, 0.2% transgender or 
other). 3379 (58.0%) reported their primary drug of choice 
were opioids (27.0% alcohol, 10% stimulants, 5.0% others). 
TABLE I. PATIENT DEMOGRAPHICS
Patient Demographics 
Age (Mean) 
42 
Engagements 
5,821 
Hospital 
     TJUH 
2583 (44.0) 
     Frankford 
1824 (31.0) 
     Torresdale 
793 (14.0) 
     Methodist 
451 (8.0) 
     Bucks 
170 (3.0) 
Gender 
      Male 
4015 (69.0) 
      Female 
1796 (30.8) 
      Transgender 
10 (.2) 
Drug of Choice 
     Opioids 
3379 (58.0) 
     Alcohol 
1567 (27.0) 
     Stimulants 
600 (10.0) 
     Other 
275 (5.0) 
Patient Disposition 
     Referred to Tx 
1,195 (20.5) 
     Incomplete 
993 (17.0) 
     Refused Tx 
3,633 (62.5) 
SDOH Referrals 
1,486 (25.0) 
Internal data from 2019 showed that 3% of identified 
patients with SUD were referred for recovery services from 
the hospital emergency department. During the study period, 
1195 patients were referred directly to recovery services 
(20.5%), 3633 patients refused referral (62.5%) to recovery 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-058-2
BIOTECHNO 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

services, and 993 were interested but were without referral at 
the time of their hospital disposition (17.0%). An additional 
1495 patients received referrals to services that address 
SDOH in addition to their recovery conversations.   
Of the 5821 patients engaged by a CRS, 3376, a majority 
were seen in an academic hospital emergency department 
(58.0%).  The largest cohort seen in a community hospital 
was at the hospital located closest to the epicenter of the 
overdose crisis in Philadelphia (31.0%) and the smallest 
cohort engaged was present at the suburban community 
hospital (3.0%). 
IV.
DISCUSSION
    Many patients with chaotic substance use and SUD 
actively avoid hospitals until they have grave health 
consequences. Matching medical and behavioral treatment in 
a multidisciplinary fashion is becoming more common as 
hospitals try to treat patients holistically, rather than in a 
problem-based fashion. By engaging patients when they are 
experiencing severe sequelae of their use, health systems 
may better be able to engage patients. A framework of this 
strategy is shown in Figure 1.  In this retrospective, 
multicenter cohort evaluation, a large number of patients 
receiving ‘acute unplanned care’ were able to get 
concomitant medical and behavioral health services in the 
emergency department and hospital setting. The cohort’s 
demographics largely matches national studies of patients 
with substance use disorder: white, male and young-middle 
aged [14].  It is important to note that many minority 
populations receive disparate medical and behavioral health 
care [15].  Assuring that these programs are able to engage 
and assist all eligible patients is imperative to reducing these 
disparities. 
Figure I. Medical/Behavioral Engagement Framework 
    Much of the focus on SUD related care comes from the 
increased awareness and scrutiny that surrounds the care of 
patients with opioid use disorders.  The reasons for this are 
numerous, but include the excess mortality related to OUD 
as compared other substances, the insidious and questionable 
practices of pharmaceutical companies that led to opioids 
being prescribed for acute and chronic pain and the 
infiltration of fentanyl and other synthetic opioids into other 
drug supplies.  While the program was officially developed 
as a response to the opioid overdose crisis, it is also 
important to note that almost half of the patients engaged by 
the CRS had a non-opioid primary drug of choice.   
     Successfully connecting patients to recovery services is a 
well-documented challenge.  As previously stated, less than 
2% of patients nationally with SUD receive any recovery 
services and previous programs prior to this intervention 
referred a total of 3% of identified patients.  By utilizing 
CRS, referrals to recovery services increased almost seven-
fold.  This represents a crucial success, especially sustaining 
that level of improvement over two full years.  Saying that, 
nearly two thirds of patients refused recovery services and an 
almost equal number to those successfully referred were 
unable to be connected, due to lack of availability or other 
logistical barriers.  While CRS add clear value, there are 
many patients who an alternate approach may be appropriate 
[16]. 
It is sadly common that patients with multiple SDOH 
issues frequently visit the ED, regardless of concomitant 
SUD [17].  Whether afflicted with homelessness, food 
insecurity or lack of access to primary care, many challenges 
associated with SUD also bring patients to the ED. The 
ability to engage patients with other social services acts as a 
force multiplier for the CRS.  Addressing addiction is a 
critical feature of recovery but must be met with a holistic 
system that addresses the cycles of trauma and other barriers 
to long term recovery.  By actively addressing these SDOH, 
patient behavior is reinforced and the process to get 
appropriate individuals integrated into the public health 
system is supported. 
There are several limitations to this study.  First, the data 
reported is retrospective, limiting the variables that can be 
studied.  The trial is also uncontrolled, meaning it is possible 
that the impact witnessed was related to another, unrelated 
aspect of our care.  Third, the city’s system mandated 
patients provide a single ‘primary drug of choice’, despite 
many of our patients explicitly being polysubstance users.  
While it appears the majority of our patients used opioids 
primarily, it is possible they are also using other drugs.  
Recognition of polysubstance use is increasingly important 
and impacts both the withdrawal symptoms the patients 
encounter and the complexity of their recovery support. 
Lastly, the definition of referral was made by the city and 
relates to services the patients goes to directly from the 
hospital.  A fair number of the patients in the ‘incomplete’ 
row received recovery services subsequent to their 
hospitalization as a result of the CRS engagement. It is 
highly likely the cited figure underrepresents the number of 
patient referrals.  
Despite the limitations, we believe the study provided 
much needed insights to all of the stakeholders involved. By 
actively encouraging involvement in the implementation 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-058-2
BIOTECHNO 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

strategies, we ensured widespread buy-in and increased the 
odds of making an impact on the community health. The 
support of hospital leadership was essential for securing 
funding and resources to implement desired strategies. 
Externally, engaging the local / city health administration, 
and reinforcing and strengthening the relationship was 
essential as hospitals moved from the assessment phase to 
developing and implementing strategies to address identified 
community health priorities.  
The Collective Impact Framework indicates that no 
single entity or department alone can address the society’s 
most complex and challenging problems [18]. The health 
needs identified in the conducted study were indeed the 
result 
of 
complex 
social, 
economic, 
as 
well 
as 
environmental 
factors, 
making 
Collective 
Impact 
Framework (Fig. 1) an appropriate model to apply. 
Widespread collaboration among community stakeholders 
around shared health challenges could reinforce positive 
changes in the community. While these engagements and 
referrals play an important initial role in recovery, it will 
require a more longitudinal study to determine the ultimate 
outcomes of an intervention like the one described. 
V.
CONCLUSION
Peer support is an emerging tool to improve patient 
engagement for recovery services in a hospital setting.  The 
challenges involved in connecting patients to services from 
the hospital are myriad for patients and healthcare works. 
Peers are able engage with a variety of individuals with 
varied SUD and provide both in hospital recovery support as 
well as referrals to a variety of services. In this retrospective 
cohort study, there are positive signals indicating that peers 
improve connection to recovery and social services.  By 
matching medical and behavioral therapies, patients needs 
will be better serviced. Future studies should evaluate harm 
reduction strategies for CRS in patients who refuse recovery 
support, patient attitudes towards peer support, and barriers 
to recovery referral. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
KSL would like to acknowledge Dr. Rebecca Jaffe for 
development 
of 
the 
medical/behavioral 
engagement 
framework. 
REFERENCES
[1]
Kolodny, Andrew, David T. Courtwright, Catherine S. 
Hwang, Peter Kreiner, John L. Eadie, Thomas W. Clark, and 
G. Caleb Alexander. "The prescription opioid and heroin 
crisis: a public health approach to an epidemic of addiction." 
Annual review of public health, 559-574, 2015. 
[2]
Friedman, Joseph, Fernando Montero, Phillippe Bourgois, 
Rafik Wahbi, Daniel Dye, David Goodman-Meza, and 
Chelsea Shover. "Xylazine spreads across the US: a growing 
component of the increasingly synthetic and polysubstance 
overdose crisis." Drug and alcohol dependence, 233, 109380, 
2022. 
[3]
Centers for Disease Control. Drug Overdose Deaths in the 
U.S. Top 100,000 Annually. [Online] Available from 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/pressroom/nchs_press_releases/202
1/20211117.htm
[4]
Bitterman, Robert A. "EMTALA and the ethical delivery of 
hospital emergency services." Emergency Medicine Clinics 
24, no. 3, 557-577, 2006. 
[5]
Malayala, Srikrishna V., Bhavani Nagendra Papudesi, 
Raymond Bobb, and Aliya Wimbush. "Xylazine-Induced 
Skin Ulcers in a Person Who Injects Drugs in Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA." Cureus 14, no. 8, 2022. 
[6]
 Zhang, Xingyu, Ningyuan Wang, Fengsu Hou, Yaseen Ali, 
Aaron Dora-Laskey, Chin Hwa Dahlem, and Sean Esteban 
McCabe. "Emergency department visits by patients with 
substance use disorder in the United States." Western Journal 
of Emergency Medicine 22, no. 5, 1076, 2021. 
[7]
SAMHSA. Key Substance Use and Mental Health Indicators 
in the United States: Results from the 2019 National Survey 
on 
Drug 
Use 
and 
Health. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/reports/rpt293
93/2019NSDUHFFRPDFWHTML/2019NSDUHFFR090120.
htm
[8]
McGuire, Alan B., Kristen Gilmore Powell, Peter C. Treitler, 
Karla D. Wagner, Krysti P. Smith, Nina Cooperman, Lisa 
Robinson, Jessica Carter, Bradley Ray, and Dennis P. 
Watson. "Emergency department-based peer support for 
opioid use disorder: Emergent functions and forms." Journal 
of substance abuse treatment 108, 82-87, 2020. 
[9]
Shalaby, Reham A. Hameed, and Vincent IO Agyapong. 
"Peer support in mental health: literature review." JMIR 
mental health 7, no. 6, e15572, 2020. 
[10] McGuire, Alan B., Kristen Gilmore Powell, Peter C. Treitler, 
Karla D. Wagner, Krysti P. Smith, Nina Cooperman, Lisa 
Robinson, Jessica Carter, Bradley Ray, and Dennis P. 
Watson. "Emergency department-based peer support for 
opioid use disorder: Emergent functions and forms." Journal 
of substance abuse treatment 108, 82-87, 2020. 
[11] Ramdin, Christine, Marshall Guo, Scott Fabricant, Cynthia 
Santos, and Lewis Nelson. "The impact of a peer-navigator 
program on naloxone distribution and buprenorphine 
utilization in the emergency department." Substance Use & 
Misuse 57, no. 4, 581-587, 2022. 
[12] Ashford, Robert D., Matthew Meeks, Brenda Curtis, and 
Austin M. Brown. "Utilization of peer-based substance use 
disorder and recovery interventions in rural emergency 
departments: Patient characteristics and exploratory analysis." 
Journal of rural mental health 43, no. 1, 17, 2019. 
[13] Anderson, Erik S., Suzanne Lippert, Jennifer Newberry, 
Edward Bernstein, Harrison J. Alter, and Nancy E. Wang. 
"Addressing social determinants of health from the 
emergency department through social emergency medicine." 
Western Journal of Emergency Medicine 17, no. 4,  487, 
2016. 
[14] SAMHSA. Key Substance Use and Mental Health Indicators 
in the United States: Results from the 2019 National Survey 
on 
Drug 
Use 
and 
Health. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/reports/rpt293
93/2019NSDUHFFRPDFWHTML/2019NSDUHFFR090120.
htm
[15] Sanchez, Katherine, Rick Ybarra, Teresa Chapa, and Octavio 
N. Martinez. "Eliminating behavioral health disparities and 
improving 
outcomes 
for 
racial 
and 
ethnic 
minority 
populations." Psychiatric Services 67, no. 1, 13-15, 2016. 
[16] Taylor, R. Morgan, and Cynthia S. Minkovitz. "Warm 
handoffs for improving client receipt of services: A 
systematic review." Maternal and child health journal 25, 
528-541, 2021. 
[17] Doran, Kelly M., Nathan M. Kunzler, Tod Mijanovich, 
Samantha W. Lang, Ada Rubin, Paul A. Testa, and Donna 
Shelley. "Homelessness and other social determinants of 
health among emergency department patients." Journal of 
Social Distress and the Homeless 25, no. 2, 71-77, 2016. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-058-2
BIOTECHNO 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

[18] Hanleybrown, F., Kania, J., and Kramer, M. (2012). 
Channeling 
change: 
Making 
collective 
impact 
work. 
Available 
from: http://jcisd.org/cms/lib/MI01928326/Centricity/Domain
/218/Making%20Collective%20Impact%20Work%20Stanfor
d%202012.pdf
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-058-2
BIOTECHNO 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

