Nichrome Electrode Technology for Cell Culture Monitoring 
 
Andrzej Kociubiński, Dawid Zarzeczny,  
Maciej Szypulski, Tomasz Lizak, Krzysztof Muzyka 
Institute of Electronics and Information Technology 
Lublin University of Technology 
Lublin, Poland 
e-mail: akociub@semiconductor.pl, 
dawid.adrian.zarzeczny@gmail.com, 
szypulski.maciej@gmail.com, tomasz@lizak.pl, 
krzysztof.muzyka.1990@gmail.com 
Monika Prendecka, Dominika Pigoń,  
Teresa Małecka-Massalska 
Chair and Department of Human Physiology 
Medical University of Lublin 
Lublin, Poland 
e-mail: monika.prendecka@umlub.pl, 
dominika.pigon@umlub.pl,  
teresa.malecka-massalska@umlub.pl
 
 
Abstract—The aim of this work was to present a method of 
tissue culture research by measuring the impedance of cells 
cultured in the presence of nichrome. For this purpose, the 
Electric Cell-substrate Impedance Sensing (ECIS) system was 
used with the substrate consisting of nichrome electrode 
arrays. The electrodes were made using a thin film magnetron 
sputtering. In the experimental part, the culture of cells of 
mouse fibroblasts on the prepared substrate was performed. 
Keywords-BioMEMS; ECIS; nichrome (NiCr); thin film. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A local heating of biological substances in Biomedical  
MicroElectroMechanical Systems (BioMEMS) devices can 
be performed using a contact or noncontact method. For the 
contact method, the heating element is mainly fabricated 
using 
thin 
film 
deposition 
techniques 
(e.g., thermal 
evaporation or magnetron sputtering). The selected material 
should be biocompatible and should not react with the active 
substance. Due to the ability to withstand high temperatures, 
good chemical stability and biocompatibility, platinum is the 
most commonly used material for contact heating [1]. 
However, alternative metals are used for many biomedical 
applications, in particular for disposable structures, or for 
short-term applications. Some other metals offer different 
chemical, physical and electrical properties than platinum, 
which is also an expensive material. In biomedical 
microdevices, the heaters are also made of nickel, aluminum, 
tungsten, silver alloys, aluminum alloys and Indium-Tin 
Oxide (ITO) [2]. However, one of the most interesting 
materials is nichrome (Ni-Cr 80/20 wt. %), due to its high 
stability of electrical properties, high resistivity, low 
Temperature Coefficient of Resistance (TCR), adequate 
price and technological simplicity [3][4].  
The main problem of the choice of material for the heater 
in biomedical applications is the assessment of the influence 
of its presence on the cells or substances tested [5]. The aim 
of this work is the presentation of the extension of the 
Electric 
Cell-substrate 
Impedance 
Sensing 
(ECIS) 
method [6] to study the activities of cells grown in tissue 
culture in the presence of nichrome. 
The paper consists of 4 sections. Section II describes the 
fabrication approach of the nichrome electrode array. The 
results of monitoring the cells behavior in tissue culture are 
presented in Section III. We conclude the work in Section 
IV. 
II. 
TECHNOLOGY OF NICHROME ELECTRODE ARRAY 
The original ECIS method was used for the first time in 
1984 by competing with microscopic methods. This 
impedance-based cell monitoring technology uses sterile, 
disposable arrays of gold electrodes placed on a 
biocompatible substrate [7][8]. Based on standard 8 well 
arrays, a mask was designed with eight electrodes located on 
a single substrate to work with ECIS instruments. Single 
electrodes were designed as comb capacitors in which the 
width of a single finger was 200μm. 
A 2mm thick polycarbonate was used as the substrate. The 
key step in the sequence of technological processes was the 
fabrication of the metallization layer by magnetron 
sputtering using the Kurt J. Lesker NANO 36™ deposition 
tool. The next step was to obtain shapes in the lithography 
process and to etch the nichrome layer. Special polystyrene 
wells were placed on the electrodes and fixed using 
biocompatible silicone (Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1.  Polycarbonate substrate with 8 wells and electrodes made of 
nichrome 
Each of the 8 wells with a volume of 600μL and a 
substrate area of 0.8cm2 contains a single comb active 
electrode. For the whole setup to be sterile, ready-made 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

substrates with attached wells are subjected to bactericidal 
ultraviolet radiation. 
In the experiment, cells of mouse fibroblast cell line, - 
NCTC clone 929 [L cell, L-929, derivative of Strain L] 
(ATCC® CCL-1™) derived from ATCC organization were 
cultured according to the instruction manual in complete 
Eagle MEM medium (Sigma Aldrich) supplemented with 
10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) Good HI, in an Galaxy 
170R incubator, under controlled growth conditions, 
constant humidity and air saturation of 5% CO2. After 
(approx. 7–14 days) the culture reached at least 75% 
confluence, the next stage was culturing the cells on the 
tested nichrome electrode array. Inoculation of arrays was 
carried out by 300 microliters per well of cell (L929) 
suspension at ~1.2×105cell/ml. Every cell type has its 
characteristic adhesion and growth curve that can be 
manipulated by, e.g., varying seeding density or other stimuli 
like concentration of substances in the medium [9]. 
III. 
RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT 
During the experiment, it was found that the resistance 
increased, reaching 4750 ohms, during the initial 10 hours of 
cells culturing (Figure 2). This indicates good cell viability 
and proliferative potential. The following drop in resistance 
indicates that the nichrome electrode used in the system 
makes it difficult to achieve stabilization in culture. After the 
time of 20 hours, resistance begins to fall, which should be 
interpreted as a progressive cell death. However, it should be 
noted that despite the difficulties, the fibroblast cells used in 
the study, as a result, maintain the growth and proliferation 
process (as evidenced by a stable resistance value of over 
2500 ohms) in the environment of the nichrome electrode.  
 
Figure 2.  Resistance response measured by an ECIS sensor array at 4kHz. 
 
Figure 3.  Capacitance response measured by an ECIS sensor array at 
64kHz. 
Similar fluctuation was observed for the high-frequency 
capacitance. The resistance represents the quality and 
function of the cell barrier and therefore takes into 
consideration the resistance towards para- and trans-cellular 
current flow. Capacitance provides an overall measure of 
electrode coverage [10]. The decrease in capacitance (Figure 
3) reached during the initial 10 hours indicates fibroblast cell 
proliferation while the increase in the resistance should be 
interpreted as cell proliferation and for that matter both 
values complement each other and should be analyzed in 
parallel as a standard. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
In this paper, we demonstrated that the nichrome 
electrode had a significant effect on the resistance and 
capacitance of L929 cell line but did not kill them, that 
indicates the possibility to use the examined medium. 
However, as the studies have been carried out on cells 
characterized by stable growth, it is necessary to test the 
nichrome electrode for other types of cells, including 
cancerous ones. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Trau et al., “Genotyping on a Complementary Metal Oxide 
Semiconductor Silicon Polymerase Chain Reaction Chip with 
Integrated DNA Microarray,” Analytical Chemistry, 2002, 
vol. 74, pp. 3168–3173. 
[2] K. Scholten and E. Meng, “Materials for microfabricated 
implantable devices: a review,” Lab on a Chip, 2015, vol. 15, 
pp. 4256–4272. 
[3] J. Rölke, “Nichrome Thin Film Technology and its 
Application,” ElectroComponent Science and Technology, 
1981, vol. 9, pp. 51–57. 
[4] R. Kilaru, Z. Celik-Butler, D. P. Butler, and I. E. Gonenli, 
“NiCr MEMS Tactile Sensors Embedded in Polyimide 
Toward Smart Skin,” Journal of Microelectromechanical 
Systems, 2013, vol. 22, pp. 349–355. 
[5] S. S. Stensaas and L. J. Stensaas, “Histopathological 
evaluation of materials implanted in the cerebral cortex,” Acta 
Neuropathologica, 1978, vol. 41, pp. 145–155. 
[6] I. Giaever and C. R. Keese, “A morphological biosensor for 
mammalian cells,” Nature, 1993, vol. 366, pp. 591–592. 
[7] I. Giaever and C. R. Keese, “Monitoring fibroblast behavior 
in tissue culture with an applied electric field,” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 1984, vol. 81, pp. 3761–3764. 
[8] ECIS Cell-based Assays from Applied BioPhysics. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.biophysics.com 
[retrieved: 
04.2019]. 
[9] M. Prendecka et al. “Effect of exopolysaccharide from 
Ganoderma applanatum on the electrical properties of mouse 
fibroblast cells line L929 culture using an electric cell-
substrate impedance sensing (ECIS) – Preliminary study,” 
Annals of Agricultural and Environmental Medicine, 2016, 
vol. 23, pp. 280–284. 
[10] R. Szulcek, H. J. Bogaard, and G. P. van Nieuw Amerongen, 
“Electric 
Cell-substrate 
Impedance 
Sensing 
for 
the 
Quantification of Endothelial Proliferation, Barrier Function, 
and Motility,” Journal of Visualized Experiments, 2014, 
vol. 85, pp. e51300-1–e51300-12. 
 
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

