SymRec - Web Tool for Planned Parenthood and Hormonal Therapy 
 
Michal Gála, Ivana Gálová, Zuzana Judáková, Branko Babušiak 
Department of Electromagnetic and Biomedical Engineering 
University of Žilina 
Žilina, Slovak Republic 
michal.gala@fel.uniza.sk, ivana.galova@fel.uniza.sk, zuzana.judakova@fel.uniza.sk, branko.babusiak@fel.uniza.sk 
 
 
Abstract — The Symptothermal method is based on 
monitoring, recording and evaluation of fertility-related 
symptoms. 
The 
mentioned 
method 
can 
help 
prevent 
unintended conception, assist achieve conception, help identify 
various gynecological diseases and timing of hormonal 
treatment. The Symptothermal method is the preferred 
method for planned parenthood to hormonal contraception 
because it has no adverse side effects. Regular paper tables 
used in gynecology wards require significant user knowledge. 
However, the digitized data tables require only simple data 
entry from the user. The developed web interface allows for 
automatic analysis, evaluation and data archiving. Table 
records in electronic form significantly save user time, simplify 
the workflow and include long-term data pertaining to patient 
health status, thus playing an important role in the early 
diagnosis of diseases and successful treatment. 
Keywords - Basal temperature; cervical mucus; diagnosis of 
gynecological diseases; hormonal therapy; cervix; planned 
parenthood;  symptothermal method.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The transition from traditional paper-based health records 
to their electronic counterparts is currently a top priority in 
many countries. Electronic health records offer a simplified 
and rapid access to patient data under various circumstances 
(e.g., heath risk, early diagnosis) The reproducibility and 
transferability of patient data allows remote consultation 
with medical staff (telemedicine, home care) [1][2]. This 
paper deals with implementation of our web tool for users in 
Slovak Republic. 
Symptothermal records used in planned parenthood are 
also considered to be health records since they offer 
additional information when diagnosing various gynecologic 
diseases, including newly detected or long-term health states 
and may also be used in case of infertility-related treatments 
[3]. The use of the mentioned records can help unnecessary 
medical therapy in cases where incorrectly timed sexual 
intercourse is the cause of infertility. They can also be used 
for setting-up hormonal therapy and advanced treatment 
monitoring [4]. Longer records (several years) can help 
diagnose even minimal menstrual cycle deviations pertaining 
associated with possible health risks and thus allow for the 
early diagnosis (cervix cancer) and complete patient 
recovery. 
This paper consists of several parts. Section 2 of the paper 
describes symptothermal method in general. All rules, which 
are used by the symptothermal method in our web tool, are 
described in Section 3. Sections 4 and 5 describe the 
structure of SymRec web tool. These sections deal with user 
interface, parts of SymRec web tool window and security of 
stored data. Section 6 describes the future work.  
II. 
SYMPTOTHERMAL METHOD 
The symptothermal method is a universal approach 
consisting of monitoring, recording and evaluation of fertility 
symptoms to either prevent or facilitate conception. The 
mentioned method is natural (without medication) and has 
no adverse side effects. The process includes the monitoring 
of basal temperature changes, cervix and quality of cervical 
mucus. Basal body temperature is the lowest temperature 
attained by the body during rest (usually during sleep). 
Lowest values are attained early morning and then continue 
to slowly increase each half an hour by approximately 
0.05°C. Monitored symptoms are recorded in the record 
table. In Figure 1, it is shown one record table, which is used 
to store menstrual cycle data (42 day limit) and offers 
overview of fertile days and cycle changes. 
 
The cycle is divided into four phases: 
1. Menstruation, 
2. 1st phase – pre-ovulation infertility, 
3. 2nd phase  – fertile days, 
4. 3rd phase – post-ovulation infertility. 
The mentioned phases are not identical with physiological 
changes of the endometrium (proliferative phase, ovulation, 
secretive phase) except for menstruation, because they 
include the mutual pair fertility (life time of sperm) [5][6]. 
III. 
EVALUATION OF THE 3
RD PHASE OF POST-OVULATION 
INFERTILITY 
Post-ovulation infertility commences after the egg 
reaches its lifetime and begins to degrade within 48 hours 
post-ovulation. This phase can also be described as 
completely non-fertile because progesterone generated by the 
yellow body suppresses any possible ovulation. Monitoring 
of fertility symptoms does not allow the precise 
determination of ovulation, however it does allow precise 
post-ovulation infertility phase. Numerous rules are used to  
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
 
Figure 1.  Regular (paper) record in Slovak language.
determine this phase, combining various temperature curves 
and mucus changes. The mentioned rules are based on 
various observed situations in monitored cycles. 
 
The following rules are currently used: 
1. R, based on works published by Dr. Jozef Rötzer, 
2. B, based on works published by Dr. John Billings, 
3. K, based on works published by Konald Prem and 
John Kippley. 
All mentioned rules are based on the assumption that the 
greater the temperature increase, the fewer the number of 
days of mucus drying necessary for accurate prediction of 
non-fertile phase. Higher accuracy can be obtained by 
adding one day to the 3rd cycle phase determined by these 
rules. 
 
A. R rule 
The phase of post-ovulation infertility begins in the 
evening of the 3rd day of temperature rise after maximum 
mucus day, if the mentioned day is also the 3rd day of mucus 
drying. The following conditions must be fulfilled for the 
temperature rise – all temperatures are valid, follow after 
each other, the first or second temperature is at least 0,1°C 
higher than lower boundary and third temperature has 
reached 
or 
surpassed 
the 
upper 
boundary. 
Valid 
temperatures within one cycle are measured each morning, 
within the same time range (± 30 minutes) and the same 
place (e.g., vagina, mouth or rectum), during complete body 
rest and healthy state. 
 
B. B rule 
The phase of post-ovulation infertility begins in the 
evening of the 3rd day of temperature rise after maximum 
mucus day, if the mentioned day is also the 4th day of mucus 
drying. The following conditions must be fulfilled for the 
temperature rise – all temperatures are valid, they are at 
least 0.05°C higher than the lower boundary, no temperature 
decrease has occurred and one temperature has reached or 
surpassed the upper boundary. The temperatures are 
measured analogous to R rule, during complete body rest 
and healthy state. The temperatures in the temperature rise 
may follow after each other and one temperature can be 
missing between them [7]. 
 
C. K rule  
The phase of post-ovulation infertility begins in the 
evening of the 3rd day of full temperature rise if the 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

mentioned day is also at least the 2nd day of mucus drying. 
A full temperature rise comprises three temperatures after 
each other (without interruption), all of which must be at the 
upper boundary or beyond. 
In case only one fertility symptom is available for a 
certain non-standard situation, we can use rules based on 
monitoring only one fertility symptom. Insufficient control 
with additional symptom(s) is compensated by adding an 
additional day. However, these rules are unable to resolve 
certain abnormal manifestations of menstrual cycle during 
the female fertile period and thus are less effective than 
previous rules. The mentioned rules include the 4T rule (four 
temperatures), 5T rule (five temperatures) and Marshall Rule 
[3]. 
 
IV. 
RULE IMPLEMENTATION WITHIN THE WEB INTERFACE 
Based on obtained information and rules we created a 
record table integrated into a web interface. The mentioned 
application may be used for controlling or supporting female 
fertility. Another possible use is the early diagnosis of 
gynecological diseases and proper timing of hormonal 
therapy. Conventional paper records require significant user 
knowledge of the underlying evaluation rules. By digitizing 
the mentioned data we facilitate this process by automatic 
computer analysis, evaluation and archiving of entered data 
and automatic prediction of 3rd phase of post-ovulation 
infertility. The area is defined based on the determined local 
minima and maxima [8]. The developed interface evaluates a 
single symptom – basal body temperature. 
 
V. 
WEB INTERFACE OF SYMREC WEBTOOL 
The electronic record table is used for daily data entry 
and evaluation. Data must be entered periodically each day 
and thus rely either on new user registration or existing user 
data. Data are saved in a database. We used MySQL open 
source database which is running on our server. The data are 
secured by name and password. Cryptographic hash function 
SHA1 is used. 
Upon providing valid credentials the user is presented 
with a record table. Figure 2a shows that the first application 
screen contains information about the user account including 
the user name, record history, help, printing and user log-out. 
In Figure 2, it is shown the page which consists of 
(ordered from top to bottom): 
a) user account information, 
b) header, 
c) menstrual bleeding records, 
d) basal temperature array, 
e) notes, 
f) evaluation box, 
g) Evaluate and Reset buttons 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Webinterface of SymRec webtool. 
The header contains record information for single cycle, 
including record number, month, year, age and the length of 
shortest and longest previous cycle, time and location of 
measurement. 
The first day of menstrual bleeding must be recorded for 
the current cycle and also on the first day of the successive 
cycle. This will determine the cycle length calculated by the 
program and shown in the “Evaluation” box (Figure 2f, 
bottom right). 
The temperature array consists of rows and columns. 
Rows represent the basal temperature from 36.2°C to 37.3°C 
and columns represent cycle days. The basal temperature 
during one cycle must be evaluated under identical 
conditions and only valid values must be entered into the 
table. The temperature is measured each morning, same 
timeframe within one cycle and same place. Measurement 
must be performed using a thermometer with two decimal 
precision for more exact evaluation of fertile days. No 
physical activity has to be performed 1 hour prior to 
measurement. Temperature measured during illness is not 
considered valid and thus not recorded that day. 
Notes or cycle irregularities may be noted in the “Notes, 
irregularities” box. 
Figure 2g shows that the table header (daily record, 
month and year), basal temperatures and menstrual bleeding 
are confirmed using the “Evaluate” button. Entered data are 
stored in the database, analyzed and results are written to the 
“Evaluation” box. In Figure 3, it is shown the evaluation 
box.  In evaluation box, it is written when the infertility starts 
by different rules and how long the period takes. 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
Figure 3.  Detail of “Evaluation” box. 
Evaluation of older records allows monitoring of 
minimum cycle deviations. The application is thus 
appropriate not only for fertility management but also for 
early diagnosis of gynecologic diseases and hormonal 
treatment timing. The web application also includes 
extensible help detailing all application controls. In Figure 4, 
it is shown the sample of extensible help. There is written 
about registration, correct measurement of the temperature 
and correct notation of the symptoms. User can also find 
information about records history and evaluation there.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The developed web interface fulfills the requirements of 
the symptothermal method and additionally allows storing, 
analysis, evaluation and archiving of entered data. 
Evaluation calculates the third phase of post-ovulation 
infertility and predicts the cycle length. The interface may be 
used for controlling or promoting female fertility. Moreover, 
early diagnosis of gynecological diseases and hormonal 
treatment timing is also possible. Future development will 
add other evaluation criteria (calculation of the first phase of 
pre-ovulation infertility, mucus quality and cervix state) in 
order to obtain more precise calculation of the third phase of 
post-ovulation infertility. This time is the web tool available 
only in Slovak language however internationalization work 
is underway to include English.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is supported by the following project: 
University Science Park of the University of Zilina (ITMS: 
26220220184) supported by the Research&Development 
Operational Program funded by the European Regional 
Development Fund. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Hayrinen, K. Saranto, and P. Nykanen, “Definition, 
structure, content, use and impacts of electronic health 
records: A review of the research literature,” International 
Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 77, no. 5, May 2008, pp. 
291-304, doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2007.09.001. 
[2] M. Penhaker, M. Cerny, and J. Floder, “Embedded 
Biotelemetry System for Home Care monitoring,” Proc. 
International Congresses on Bioelectromagnetism (ICBEM 
2007), Aizu Wakamatsu, Japan, Oct. 2007, pp. 122-126, 
ISBN 978-4-9903873-0-3. 
[3] J. Predáč and S. Predáčová, Handbook of symptothermal 
method PPR, 2nd ed., Olomouc: Matice cyrilometodějská, 
2006, pp. 125, ISBN 80-7266-244-9. 
[4] W. L. Larimor and J. B. Standford, “Postfertilization Effects 
of Oral Contraceptives and Their Relationship to Informed 
Consent,” in Arch Fam Med, vol. 9, Feb. 2000, pp. 126-133. 
[5] A. Roztočil, Modern gynecology, Praha: Grada Publishing, 
2011, pp. 508, ISBN 978-80-2472-832-2. 
[6] L. Rob, A. Martan, and Karel Citterbart, Gynecology, Praha: 
Galen, 2008, pp. 319, ISBN 978-80-7262-501-7. 
[7] E. L. Billings, J. J. Billings, and M. Catarinich, Atlas of the 
ovulation method, Trnava: Spolok svätého Vojtecha, 2011, 
pp. 103, ISBN 978-80-7162-859-0. 
[8] Š. Borik and I. Čáp, “Investigation of Pulse Wave Velocity in 
Arteries,” 
Proc. 
35th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Telecommunications and Signal Processing (TSP 2012), 
Brno, Czech Republic, July 2012, pp. 562-565, ISBN 978-1-
4673-1116-8. 
 
Figure 4.  Help for users (This time is the help available only in Slovak). 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

