Limits of a Glucose-Insulin Model to Investigate Intestinal Absorption in Type 2
Diabetes
Work in progress
Danilo Dursoniah, Maxime Folschette, C´edric Lhoussaine
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL,
F-59000 Lille, France
email: danilo.dursoniah@univ-lille.fr
maxime.folschette@centralelille.fr
cedric.lhoussaine@univ-lille.fr
Rebecca Goutchtat, Franc¸ois Pattou, Violeta Raverdy
Univ. Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U1190 - EGID,
F-59000 Lille, France
email: rebecca.goutchtat@vet-alfort.fr
francois.pattou@univ-lille.fr
violeta.raverdy@univ-lille.fr
Abstract—Abnormal regulation of glucose absorption in the
small intestine is an important cause of Type 2 Diabetes (T2D).
Even if this hypothesis is clinically well-known, it has not been
fundamentally validated yet, mainly due to a lack of reliable
metabolic knowledge on the glucose regulation. The main objec-
tive of this paper is to test this hypothesis on a highly referenced
model composed of ordinary differential equations. This model is
tested on an original dataset featuring the observations of obese
diabetic patients. It shows its limits to predict our post-prandial
glycemia and insulinemia time series especially with regard to
the crucial complexity of gastro-intestinal regulation.
Keywords—Ordinary Differential Equation; Systems Biology;
Type 2 Diabetes; Intestinal Glucose Absorption.
I. INTRODUCTION
Diabetes is a chronic metabolic disease characterized by a
lack of insulin secretion and a decreased peripheral insulin
response. Insulin is a hormone that down-regulates blood
sugar concentration. Consequently, the balance of glucose and
insulin concentrations in different tissues, called homeostasis,
is pathologically perturbed: hyperglycemia is observed both
during fasting and post-prandial periods. It gradually leads to
tissues damages and subsequent diseases, i.e., a high rate of
comorbidity [6].
More precisely, Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) results from the
body’s ineffective use of insulin. Most patients (∼ 90%)
with diabetes have T2D. Around 400 millions of people are
affected worldwide by the disease representing a major public
health issue in most developed countries [7]. It is commonly
accepted that this type of diabetes is largely caused by
physical inactivity combined with an high-carbohydrate diet.
However, through bariatric surgery, obese patients with T2D
have seen their physiological glycemia immediately restored,
independently to their weight loss [1]. This observation leads
us to consider Intestinal Glucose Absorption (IGA) as a critical
cause of T2D, among others. Bariatric surgery, and more
precisely Roux-en-Y Bariatric Surgery (RYGB), anatomically
leads to the decrease of the glucose absorption surface, which
would explain, at least partially, this unexpected clinical ben-
eﬁt. Furthermore, the gastro-intestinal tract includes:
• enzymatic and mechanical transformation of starch (amy-
lopectine and amylose) into absorbable glucose,
• incretin secretion and effects on the blood sugar,
• and the small intestine microbiota, which may modulate
dietary responses.
This landscape of hypothetical causal factors shows that fun-
damental research effort on T2D must continue despite precise
clinical understanding of the disease. However, all represen-
tations of glucose-insulin homeostasis largely underestimate
the importance of the gastro-intestinal tract into the blood
sugar consequences. Instead, they tend to model with increas-
ing details the interaction of insulin with its related tissues
(pancreas, liver and insulino-dependent tissues). We want to
investigate the contribution of IGA to glucose homeostasis and
its potential role in diabetes. To this aim, and as a preliminary
work, we consider a typical and state of the art homeostasis
glucose-insulin model [5] formalized as a system of Ordinary
Differential Equations (ODEs). Our objective is twofold:
• test if this model can predict a signiﬁcant improvement of
glucose homeostasis by simulating RYGB as is observed
experimentally,
• test if this model can predict the time-course data of an
original dataset of diabetic patients.
In Section 2, we brieﬂy describe the model. In Section 3,
we present our parameter ﬁtting results both from the original
parameters of [5] and for our own dataset We discuss the
partial results in Section 4 and present the on-going and future
work in Section 5.
II. MODEL
Many simulation models of the glucose-insulin system for
the postprandial period have been developed [8]. In this work,
we consider a highly cited model, proposed in [5], to simulate
the postprandial physiological events of their own cohorts of
normal subjects and T2D patients. This model is made of
12 ODEs and 36 parameters describing ﬂuxes of glucose and
insulin between physiological compartments: gastro-intestinal
tract, plasma, liver, pancreas, muscle and adipose tissues
(Figure 1). We recall in the following, in informal terms, how
the physiological modules interact.
The Gastro-Intestinal Tract module describes the digestion
process, from the stomach to the gut, and can be considered
as the input of the whole system. It includes the complexity of
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-859-4
BIOTECHNO 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Figure 1: Simpliﬁed interaction graph of physiological compartments describ-
ing the model of [5].
the gastric emptying depending on the proportion of the solid
and liquid phases of the alimentary bolus [4]. Only the liquid
phase that ends up in the gut is absorbed by the intestine and
discharged to the peripheral blood. Incretins are not modeled.
The Liver module describes the hepatic activity responsible
for the endogenous glucose production down-regulated by the
insulin. The glucagon hormone is not modeled. The Pancreas
secretes insulin, which is up-regulated with the amount of
glucose in the blood. The uptake of glucose by the (muscle
and adipose) Tissues is regulated by the insulin. The Kidney is
responsible for the glucose excretion-reabsorption. The insulin
degradation is due to its lifespan and liver clearance. Even
though the insulin independent glucose uptake by the brain
is modeled (not in shown in Figure 1) the regulation of the
glucose by the brain is neglected in [5].
Using tracer-to-tracee ratio clamp technics [3], the authors
of [5] measured the time course of the glucose concentration
in various compartments. This was done following a mixed-
meal received by several normal and diabetic subjects. The
parameters were estimated to ﬁt this experimental data, which
resulted in two sets of parameter values modeling respectively
normal and T2D behaviors. For practical reasons, we fully
reimplemented the model in the Julia programming language
(version 1.5.3) with the DifferentialEquations package (ver-
sion 6.17.0).
III. RESULTS
A. From T2D to normal model
In the following, we call normal model, resp. T2D model,
the model instantiated with the normal, resp. diabetic, pa-
rameter values given in [5] (Table 1). We consider several
parameter subsets corresponding to the previous modules:
gastro-intestinal tract (also denoted as Ra in [5]), liver (EGP),
tissues (GK+U), pancreas (IK+S) and kidney (RE).
Starting from the T2D model, we re-estimated, in turn,
each of these subsets of parameters, while leaving the other
parameters ﬁxed, in order to ﬁt the plasma glucose dynamics of
the normal model. Based on the data of [5], our ﬁrst objective
is to evaluate the capability of the model to predict, for each
module alone, its capability to restore a normal glycemia. We
estimate the parameters twice: with and without estimation of
the basal values for insulin secretion by the pancreas, glucose
production by the liver and utilization by the tissues. From
the resulting 10 inferred models, we plotted the time course
of the observed variables.
In this short paper, we only report (Figures 4a to 4d) the
most relevant plots for our purpose: plasma glucose (G),
plasma insulin (I) and the rate of intestinal absorption (Ra) for
the two models obtained from the estimations of the gastro-
intestinal tract and pancreas compartments, with and without
basal estimation. In order to compare the models’ performance
in ﬁtting the normal model, we collect in a bar plot (Figure 3)
the residual sum of squares for each model.
B. Parameter estimation of obese diabetics and RYGB
Our second objective is to test whether the model of [5]
can predict the time course concentrations of glucose and
insulin obtained from our own dataset of diabetic patients who
underwent RYGB surgery. For each patient, we use data before
(hereafter referred to as visit A) and 3 months after (visit B)
surgery. We ﬁrst estimate all the parameters in order to ﬁt
the time course data of glucose and insulin from the visit A
dataset. The model that we obtain is called the visit A model.
Figure 2 shows the glucose and insulin plasma concentrations
predicted by this model as well as the ﬁtted data points. Then,
as previously, we estimate each subset of parameters in order
to ﬁt the visit B dataset. Here, we only consider the case
where we also estimate the basal concentrations, which indeed
changed 3 months after surgery. We report in Figure 4 the time
course of G, I and Ra after estimation of the parameters of
the gastro-intestinal tract and pancreas.
IV. DISCUSSION
Estimating the basal values for insulin secretion, endoge-
nous glucose production and insulino-dependent glucose uti-
lization, can be interpreted as a prediction of the “long-
term” effect of the parameter changes in the best case
(since the model does not incorporate any long-term recovery
mechanisms). Thus, not estimating these basal values can be
interpreted as a “short-term” (or worst case) prediction.
A. From T2D to normal model
Our re-estimations of the parameters based on the data
of [5] predict (Figure 3) that the best performing compartments
to restore a normal glycemia are pancreas and tissues, and
then the intestinal tract. As expected, estimating the basal
concentrations (i.e., long-term effect) improves the perfor-
mance especially for the intestinal tract (see also G curve
in Figures 4b and 4c), which is consistent with experimental
observation. However, the performance of the pancreas should
be modulated. Indeed, Figures 4b and 4a show that, in order to
improve the glycemia, a very high plasma insulin concentra-
tion is necessary if only the pancreas parameters are modiﬁed.
This seems physiologically unrealistic, meaning that the good
performance of this compartment is over-estimated. Similarly,
the estimation of the gastro-intestinal tract parameters on the
short term (Figure 4d) indicates an unrealistic decrease of
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-859-4
BIOTECHNO 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Figure 2: Parameter estimation of all parameters, including basal concentrations, to ﬁt ”Visit A” data.
Figure 3: Loss from the parameters estimation applied on the different
compartments.
plasma insulin concentration. Finally, the “long-term” esti-
mation of the gastro-intestinal tract parameters (Figure 4c)
allows a good improvement of the glycemia with a realistic
concentration of insulin and a decrease of intestinal absorption,
which is consistent with observation.
B. Parameter estimation of obese diabetics and RYGB
From Figure 2, it is primarily interesting to notice that the
T2D data of [5] is signiﬁcantly different from ours. Indeed,
glucose in visit A is higher than in T2D model whereas insulin
in visit A is lower than in T2D model. Despite this difference,
the ﬁtting is satisfying with all parameters set as free. This
ﬁtting is sensitive to the parameters estimation methods.
In Figures 4e and 4f, the parameters are set free for the
pancreas (IK+S) and the gastro-intestinal tract (Ra), respec-
tively. Such process can be interpreted as surgery simulations
targeting respectively the pancreas and the gastro-intestinal
tract. No ﬁtting attempt seems satisfying. On the one hand,
freeing IK+S parameters seems to be satisfying for ﬁtting the
glycemia but clearly overestimates the insulinemia (cf. Fig-
ure 4e). On the other hand, by freeing Ra parameters, the rate
of appearance is decreased as observed in experimental data
(based on our D-xylose data, an alimentary glucose marker).
Still, the parameter estimation fails completely to ﬁt visit B
glycemia and insulinemia (cf. Figure 4f).
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
The parameter estimation performed by the authors of [5]
is based on training data generated by tracer-to-tracee clamp
technique [3], which, despite its efﬁciency, remains an un-
common and complex method to monitor exogenous solutes.
In practice, plasma glycemia and insulinemia are usually the
only accessible clinical data. However, and as our model
assessment suggests, this may raise parameter identiﬁability
issues. To overcome this problem, we ﬁrst plan to use the
available additional D-xylose data, a marker that can be used
to ﬁt the rate of appearance (Ra) [2]. We also plan, by
exploiting proﬁle likelihood and sensitivity analysis, to study
model reduction in order to eliminate the potential sources of
non-identiﬁability. Other original datasets are currently used
for the parameter estimation, generated from experiments on
minipigs. Such biological models allow for more experiments
and reproducibility, and decreased individual variabilities thus
improving the reliability of parameter estimation. In this direc-
tion, another possibility, is to use publicly available datasets.
It should be noted that the failure of parameter estimation
may be due to structural problems inherent to the model of [5]
which sub-model of IGA is largely simpliﬁed. For instance,
it ignores the spatial none uniform glucose absorption rate
along the intestin and the secretion of incretins. We plan to
extend the model of [5] with these aspects while simplifying
the others to overcome identiﬁability issues that could emerge
from additional parameters related to the gastro-intestinal tract.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Baud et al., “Sodium glucose transport modulation in type
2 diabetes and gastric bypass surgery,” Surgery for Obesity and
Related Diseases, 12(6), pp. 1206–1212, 2016.
[2] I. T. Bjarnason and R. A. Sherwood, Clinical biochemistry of
the gastrointestinal tract, pp. 214–230. Elsevier, 2014.
[3] C. Cobelli, G. Toffolo, and D. M. Foster, “Tracer-to-tracee ratio
for analysis of stable isotope tracer data: link with radioactive ki-
netic formalism,” American Journal of Physiology-Endocrinology
And Metabolism, 262(6), pp. 968–E975, 1992.
[4] C. Dalla Man, M. Camilleri, and C. Cobelli, “A system model of
oral glucose absorption: validation on gold standard data,” IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 53(12), pp. 2472–2478,
2006.
[5] C. Dalla Man, R. A. Rizza, and C. Cobelli, “Meal simulation
model of the glucose-insulin system,”
IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering, 54(10), pp. 1740–1749, 2007.
[6] A. Ghasemi and R. Norouzirad, “Type 2 diabetes: An updated
overview,” Critical Reviews in Oncogenesis, 24(3), pp. 213–222,
2019.
[7] L. Goedeke, R. J. Perry, and G. I. Shulman, “Emerging phar-
macological targets for the treatment of nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes,” Annual review
of pharmacology and toxicology, 59, pp. 65–87, 2019.
[8] A. Mari, A. Tura, E. Grespan, and R. Bizzotto, “Mathematical
modeling for the physiological and clinical investigation of glu-
cose homeostasis and diabetes,” Frontiers in Physiology, 11, pp.
1548–1565, 2020.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-859-4
BIOTECHNO 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

(a) Parameter estimation of IK+S compartment and basal concentration to ﬁt the normal model for the T2D model.
(b) Parameter estimation of IK+S compartment only to ﬁt the normal model for the T2D model.
(c) Parameter estimation of Ra compartment and basal concentration to ﬁt the normal model for the T2D model.
(d) Parameter estimation of Ra compartment only to ﬁt the normal model for the T2D model.
(e) Parameter estimation of IK+S compartment and basal concentrations, to ﬁt visit B model from visit A model.
(f) Parameter estimation of Ra compartment and basal concentrations, to ﬁt visit B model from visit A model.
Figure 4: Glucose (G), insulin (I), and rate of appearance (Ra) after parameter estimation, with and without basal concentrations, of pancreas (a, b), gastro-
intestinal tract (c, d) compartment for ﬁtting normal model from TD2 model and for ﬁtting visit B from visit A model (e, f).
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-859-4
BIOTECHNO 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

