Tabu Search Algorithm for RNA Degradation Problem
Agnieszka Rybarczyk, Marta Kasprzak, Jacek Blazewicz
Institute of Computing Science
Poznan University of Technology
Piotrowo 2, 60-965 Poznan, Poland
and
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry
Polish Academy of Sciences
Noskowskiego 12/14, 61-704 Poznan, Poland
Email: arybarczyk@cs.put.poznan.pl
Email: mkasprzak@cs.put.poznan.pl
Email: jblazewicz@cs.put.poznan.pl
Abstract—In the last few years, there has been a great interest
in the RNA (ribonucleic acid) research due to the discovery of
the role that RNA molecules play in biological systems. They do
not only serve as a template in protein synthesis or as adaptors
in translation process but also inﬂuence and are involved in the
regulation of gene expression. It was demonstrated that most
of them are produced from larger molecules due to enzyme
cleavage or spontaneous degradation. In this work, we would
like to present our recent results concerning the RNA degradation
process. In our studies, we used artiﬁcial RNA molecules designed
according to the rules of degradation developed by Kierzek and
co-workers. On the basis of the results of their degradation, we
have proposed the formulation of the RNA Partial Degradation
Problem (RNA PDP) and we have shown that the problem is
strongly NP-complete. We would like to propose a new efﬁcient
heuristic algorithm based on tabu search approach which allows
us to reconstruct the cleavage sites of the given RNA molecule.
Keywords–RNA degradation; tabu search; computational com-
plexity.
I.
INTRODUCTION
For the last few years, there has been an increased inter-
est in RNA because of its involvement in controlling gene
expression. The sequencing projects and analysis of higher
eukaryotic genomes have revealed that in contrast to prior
expectations, only a small fraction of the genetic material codes
for proteins. It has been demonstrated that the vast majority
of genomes of complex organisms are transcribed into an
abundance of non-protein coding RNA molecules that perform
not only housekeeping but also regulatory functions in the cell.
It became evident that not only large RNAs (e.g., messenger
(mRNA) or transfer RNA (tRNA)) are responsible for proper
functioning of living organisms. There exist plenty of smaller
RNAs, called small regulatory RNA, which are involved in
the cellular processes. In contrast to housekeeping RNAs (like
tRNA, rRNA (ribosomal RNA), tmRNA (transfer-messenger
RNA), snRNA (small nuclear RNA)), which are constitutively
expressed, regulatory RNAs exhibit the expression pattern de-
pendent on organism’s developmental stage, cell differentiation
or the interaction with the external environment [1].
Small RNAs are 19-28 nucleotide sequences, which are
produced through enzyme cleavage or spontaneous degradation
of large RNA molecules. The nature of the latter mechanism
is now heavily investigated by the researchers [2].
Numerous studies demonstrated that all components of the
degradation machinery affect the RNA molecules in the same
manner, but some RNAs apparently are more stable than others
e.g., in mammalian cells c-fos mRNA lasts 15 minutes while
β–globuline over 24 hours [3]. It has been noted that there
exist many sequence elements, which can inﬂuence the mRNA
stability. Those sequences act through stimulating or inhibiting
the degradation of mRNA and, e.g., in mammalian cells were
identiﬁed as rich in adenosine and uridine elements (AURE).
The mRNA stability is strongly dependent on the location of
AURE elements within the molecule. It is suggested that the
spatial structure combined with the sequence motifs decides
that the degradation process performs differently in case of
distinct RNAs.
In this paper, we would like to report our recent results
concerning the degradation of RNA molecules. In our studies
we have used artiﬁcial RNA molecules, which were designed
in such a way that they should be unstable, according to
the rules developed by Kierzek and co-workers [4]. On the
basis of the results of their degradation, we have proposed a
formulation of a new problem, called RNA PDP and we have
shown that the problem is strongly NP-complete [5]. Here, we
would like to propose a new efﬁcient heuristic algorithm based
on tabu search approach that allows to reconstruct the cleavage
sites of the given RNA molecule.
The organization of the paper is as follows. In Section
2, the combinatorial model of the decision version of RNA
PDP problem is presented. Section 3 introduces the tabu search
algorithm for RNA PDP problem. In Section 4, the results of
the computational tests are given, while Section 5 points out
the directions for further research.
II.
PROBLEM FORMULATION
To analyze the degradation process dependent on RNA
structure, we carried out two types of experiments [5]: in-
volving multi-labeled and single-labeled RNA. The aim of
the ﬁrst type of experiment was to visualize all fragments
generated during degradation. In this case, the exact location of
the fragments within analyzed RNA molecule is missing. The
second type of experiment was carried out to visualize only
those fraction of degradation products, which contained labeled
5’ end of the RNA molecule. In this case, their location within
the tested molecule is known. In this way, two collections
of fragments are created. Each fragment is represented by its
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-409-1
BIOTECHNO 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

length.
We will denote as D = {d1, . . . , dk} the multiset of
fragments (lengths) obtained during the multi-labeled RNA
degradation and as Z = {z1, . . . , zn} the set of fragments
(lengths) coming from the single-labeled RNA degradation.
Moreover, we will distinguish between two types of cleavage
sites: primary and secondary. Primary cleavage sites occur
only within input RNA molecule of the full length while
secondary cleavage sites only within lengths obtained as a
result of primary cleavages. The computational phase of the
reconstruction of the cleavage sites of the given RNA molecule
is strongly NP–hard [5]. Hence, there is a need for developing
an efﬁcient heuristic.
The mathematical formulation of the RNA PDP is pre-
sented below [5]. P1 stands for the set of primary cleavage
sites in the solution and P2 for the set of secondary ones.
Problem 1: RNA PDP — decision version (ΠRNAPDP) .
Instance: Multiset D = {d1, ..., dk} and set Z = {z1, ..., zn} of
positive integers, positive integer L, constant C ∈ Z+ ∪ {0}.
Question: Do there exist sets P1 and P2 such that:
P1 ∪ P2 = P = {p1, ..., pm}, ∀pi∈P 0 < pi < L,
(1)
D ⊆ D′, D′ ⊇ R = {pi − pj :
pi, pj ∈ P1 ∪ {0, L}
∧ pi > pj},
(2)
D′ \ R =
[|T |
i=1 D′
i,
(3)
T = {ti = (pa, pb, pc) :
pa, pc ∈ P1 ∪ {0, L}
∧ pb ∈ P2
∧ pa < pb < pc
∧ d′
i1 = pb − pa
∧ d′
i2 = pc − pb
∧ {d′
i1, d′
i2} = D′
i},
(4)
∀ti,tj∈T, ti=(pia,pib,pic), tj=(pja,pjb,pjc)
i ̸= j → {pia, pic} ̸= {pja, pjc},
(5)
Z ⊆ Z′, Z′ ⊆ P ∪ {L}, Z′ ⊇ P1 ∪ {L},
(6)
Z′ \ [P1 ∪ {L}] = {pb : (pa, pb, pc) ∈ T
∧ pa = 0},
(7)
P2 = {pb : (pa, pb, pc) ∈ T},
(8)
|D′| + |Z′| ≤ k + n + C ?
(9)
III.
TABU SEARCH ALGORITHM
The heuristic algorithm that works for the case of RNAPDP
problem with negative experimental errors (i.e., missing frag-
ments in D and Z) presented in this section is based on tabu
search metaheuristic, which is a kind of local search procedure.
Its aim is to ﬁnd the coordinates of primary and secondary
cleavage sites in a given RNA molecule, taking negative errors
into account. The algorithm is implemented in C programming
language and runs in a Unix environment. The algorithm takes
as an input the data containing fragment lengths obtained via
the biochemical experiments, i.e., multiset D of k positive
integers and set Z of n positive integers. The main algorithm
consists of two parts: inner and outer tabu search method. The
outer tabu search method was designed to ﬁnd the coordinates
of primary cleavage sites including negative errors. In this
part, four kinds of moves are initially deﬁned: add missing
primary fragment to set Z, add missing secondary fragment
to set D, prevent from considering element of Z as a primary
cleavage site, consider element of Z as a primary cleavage
site. The inner tabu search of the algorithm was designed to
reconstruct the coordinates of the secondary cleavage sites
including negative errors, basing on the results of the inner
part. After performing a number of moves not leading to an
improvement of the solution quality, the method is restarted,
i.e., some randomly generated feasible solution becomes an
initial solution. If a speciﬁed number of restarts is performed
than the algorithm stops. By analyzing the obtained results, we
noticed that the algorithm performs very efﬁciently and fast.
IV.
TABU SEARCH ALGORITHM
In this section, results of the tests of the algorithm solving
the RNA PDP problem in the case of erroneous data are pre-
sented. The algorithm has been tested on PC with Pentium(R)
4, 2.40 GHz processor and 1 GB RAM in Unix environment.
As a testing set, a group of randomly generated data was
prepared (See [5] for details). Table I summarizes exemplary
average running time results for the proposed tabu search
algorithm tested on the random instances. In the results, each
entry corresponds to 100 instances of the same number of
secondary and primary cleavage sites and number of negative
errors, i.e., to 100 runs of the algorithm.
TABLE I. AVERAGE COMPUTATIONAL TIMES FOR RANDOMLY
GENERATED ERRONEOUS INSTANCES. SECONDARY CLEAVAGE SITES
OCCUR IN 75% OF ALL PRIMARY FRAGMENTS, THE NUMBER OF THE
LATTER BEING EQUAL TO (r+2
2 ), WHERE r IS THE NUMBER OF PRIMARY
CLEAVAGE SITES IN THE INSTANCE. ADDITIONALLY, THE INPUT DATA SET
WAS SEPARATELY TESTED WITH THE NUMBER OF MISSING FRAGMENT
LENGTHS RANGING FROM 1 TO 5.
No. of reconstructed primary
cleavage sites
No. of reconstructed
secondary cleavage sites
Average computational time [s]
Number of negative errors
1
2
3
4
5
4
10
0.05
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.04
5
15
0.40
0.54
0.44
0.41
0.41
6
20
0.30
0.33
0.34
0.33
0.31
7
26
0.82
0.93
0.77
0.85
0.90
8
33
1.18
1.34
1.37
1.35
1.34
10
49
4.71
5.26
5.40
5.48
5.43
12
68
16.44
19.21
19.72
20.12
20.00
14
90
57.13
61.23
63.99
64.95
64.82
Tabu search algorithm was also tested on 3630 randomly
generated instances without negative errors and was able to
ﬁnd optimal solution in 3578 cases (98.57% of the whole data).
V.
CONCLUSION
The computational phase of the reconstruction of the
cleavage sites in RNA PDP is a computationally hard problem
if there are errors in the input data. Hence, the need of
developing good polynomial time heuristics arises. In this
work, an algorithm based on tabu search approach has been
presented and its effectiveness has been tested. The com-
putational tests conﬁrmed high efﬁciency of the proposed
algorithm. This algorithm may be very useful in practice as a
tool that facilitates the analysis of the output of the biochemical
experiment.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Szymanski, M. Barciszewska, M. Zywicki, and J. Barciszewski,
“Noncoding RNA transcripts,” Journal of Applied Genetics, vol. 44,
2003, pp. 1–19.
[2]
M. Nowacka and et al., “2D-PAGE as an effective method of RNA
degradome analysis,” Mol Biol Rep, vol. 39, 2011, pp. 139–146.
[3]
M. Deutscher, “Degradation of Stable RNA in Bacteria,” Journal Biol.
Chem., vol. 278, 2003, pp. 45 041–45 044.
[4]
R. Kierzek, “Nonenzymatic Cleavage of Oligoribonucleotides,” Methods
Enzymol., vol. 341, 2001, pp. 657–675.
[5]
J. Blazewicz, M. Figlerowicz, M. Kasprzak, M. Nowacka, and A. Ry-
barczyk, “RNA Partial Degradation Problem: motivation, complexity,
algorithm,” J Comput Biol, vol. 18, 2011, pp. 821–834.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-409-1
BIOTECHNO 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

