Effect of Insulating Layers in Loop Applicators for Cardiac Cryoablation
Michael Handler∗, Gerald Fischer∗, Michael Seger∗, Roland Kienast∗, Adrian Schuette† and Christian Baumgartner∗
∗Institute of Electrical, Electronic and Bioengineering
University for Health Sciences, Medical Informatics and Technology
Eduard Walln¨ofer-Zentrum 1, 6060 Hall in Tirol, Austria
Email: {michael.handler|gerald.ﬁscher|michael.seger|roland.kienast|christian.baumgartner}@umit.at
†Fraunhofer-Institute for Production Technology IPT
Steinbachstraße 17, 52074 Aachen, Germany
Email: adrian.schuette@ipt.fraunhofer.de
Abstract—Cryoablation for the treatment of cardiac arrhyth-
mias inactivates the electrical conduction of arrhythmogenic
tissue by freezing. This method has major advantages but also
disadvantages compared to radiofrequency ablation. Modeling
and simulation of the cryoablation process can be used to
reduce the intervention duration and optimize the cryoablation
result. In this work, different variants of cryo loops are
modeled and simulated using the Finite Element Method. As
the wall of the applicator tube has the same thickness in all
dimensions the ablation efﬁciency in tissue direction is reduced
by the heating ﬂux of the streaming blood surrounding the
applicator. The effects of different insulation layers in blood
direction are compared by using heat ﬂux estimations on
stationary temperature distributions. As the applicator tube
and the insulation layers consist of different ﬁber materials,
anisotropic thermal conductivity is considered in the models.
The estimation of thermal longitudinal and transversal conduc-
tivity values by a material modeling approach is presented in
detail. It is concluded that insulation layers can have positive
and unexpected negative effects depending on the insulation
position.
Keywords-cryoablation; loop applicator; ﬁnite element method;
heat ﬂux; anisotropic thermal conductivity
I. INTRODUCTION
Ablation as treatment for cardiac arrhythmias has been
established as a method of choice whenever medical treat-
ment fails or cannot be applied [1]. In this minimally
invasive procedure, an applicator is inserted via a sheath
through either the femoral artery or vein, or through the
subclavian artery into the right or left heart’s chambers (atria
or ventricles) with X-ray guidance. The aim of ablation
techniques in the treatment of cardiac arrhythmias is the
electrical inactivation of the arrhythmogenic tissue either by
heating (radiofrequency ablation) or freezing (cryoablation).
Radiofrequency (RF) ablation has become the gold stan-
dard of the catheter-based approach to tachyarrhythmia
ablation [2]. In the late 1990s, catheter-based cryoablation
became available as alternative to RF ablation [3]. Cryoab-
lation enables the creation of an elongated lesion in one
single ablation (freeze) cycle by using a loop applicator. An
additional advantage is the application of ice mapping. This
technique enables the cardiologist to temporarly inactivate
the electrical conduction of small areas of cardiac tissue
to test ablation scenarios by cooling to mild temperatures.
Another advantage of cryoablation is that it leads to less
endothelial disruption than RF ablation [3].
Disadvantages of cryoablation are (i) a higher recurrence
rate [4] due to the possible reactivation of the elecrical con-
ductivity, and (ii) a longer intervention duration compared
to RF ablation [1].
To improve the efﬁciency of cryoablation and thus re-
ducing the previously mentioned disadvantages, modeling
and simulation of the cryoablation process contributes a
better understanding of the freezing effects. Seger et al. [1]
published a model to simulate the effects of cryoablation
mimicking the geometry of a loop shaped cryo-applicator
as shown in Figure 1. Such a loop shape applicator enables
the creation of a circumferential elongated lesion (approx. 7
cm length) around vessel structure. It can be applied in pul-
monary vein ablation for the treatment of atrial ﬁbrillation.
Only a part of the cooling power delivered by the refrig-
erant is withdrawn from the target tissue. A signiﬁcant part
of the cooling power will create a therapeutically unrelevant
heat ﬂow from the circulating blood stream to the cryo-
applicator (Figure 1c). Thus, heat exchange between the
refrigerant and the blood is considered an undesired loss
of cooling power. The spatial limitations imposed by human
anatomy onto the construction of catheters also limit the
amount of refrigerant which can be used. Efﬁcient use of
the refrigerant is therefore crucial. The major scope of this
simulation study is to investigate the effect of insulation
layers assembled onto elongated cryo-applicators built from
ﬁber reinforced polymers.
In this work, three applicator variants are presented (with-
out insulation, inner insulation, outer insulation). The cool-
ing ﬂux proﬁles of these variants are compared with each
other by creating two dimensional models of the applicators’
cross sections. These cooling ﬂuxes are estimated using
stationary temperature distributions calculated by the Finite
Element Method (FEM).
For realizing mechanically stable loop applicators the ma-
terial of the applicators consists of carbon ﬁbers embedded
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-190-8
BIOTECHNO 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1.
Loop applicator.
(a) Photo of active loop applicator in water (ablation loop partially surrounded by ice).
(b) Position of loop applicator inside the left atrium during cryoablation.
(c) Schematic illustration of applicator loop in left atrium with cross sectional cutthrough demonstrating tissue direction (blue) and blood direction (red)
used in the models of Figure 5.
in a silicone matrix. These carbon ﬁbers are spirally wound
to form the applicators tube. The insulation layers consist of
quartz ﬁbers surrounded by a silicone matrix to withstand
mechanical stress. The different thermal conductivities of
these materials need to be considered in order to create a
representative temperature distribution within the applicator.
Therefore, the anisotropic conductivity parameters, longitu-
dinal and transversal thermal conductivity, are estimated in
this work for these ﬁber materials and considered with regard
to the ﬁber orientation in the applicator variants.
In Section II, the mathematical background for the
computation of the stationary temperature distribution and
anisotropic conductivity parameters is explained and the esti-
mation of the thermal ﬂux to allow comparison of applicator
variants is derived. Section III compares the thermal ﬂux
properties of the applicator variants, which are discussed in
Section IV.
II. METHODS
In this section, the heat diffusion equation used for the
computation of the stationary temperature distributions is
described. Subsequently the computation of the parameters
of the anisotropic thermal conductivity is explained in detail.
A. Simulation of Stationary Temperature Distribution
For the models presented in this work, the general heat
diffusion equation (1)
−∇ · k(r)∇[T(r)] = Qr(r),
r ∈ Ω
(1)
has been used to simulate the stationary temperature distri-
butions [5].
The space dependent parameter k [Wm−1K−1] repre-
sents the thermal conductivity; r holds the cartesian coor-
dinates x and y [m] in two dimensional models; T is the
unknown stationary temperature [K]; Qr deﬁnes the power
contribution of distributed volumetric heat sources due to
externally applied spatial heating/cooling [Wm−3]; and Ω
denotes the analyzed spatial domain. Qr is set to 0 in the cur-
rent models as the heating/cooling of tissue is integrated into
the model by following two types of boundary conditions:
Dirichlet boundary conditions deﬁne known temperatures at
the related boundaries. Cauchy boundary conditions were
used to model the thermal ﬂux of blood/tissue (heating)
and the refrigerant (cooling). The thermal ﬂux induced by
Cauchy boundary conditions is deﬁned as [1]
∂ ˙Q(r)
∂nΓ(r) = α(r) · [T(r) − Tc(r)];
r ∈ Γ
(2)
and depends on the difference between the boundary surface
temperature T and the external Temperature Tc. ˙Q is the heat
power [W], α the heat transition coefﬁcient [Wm−2K−1],
Γ the boundary line and nΓ the outward normal to Γ.
Additionally, homogenous Neumann boundary conditions
were used at the symmetry boundaries of the models.
For the numerical computation the analyzed spatial do-
main is discretized, boundary conditions are applied and the
model is solved using the Finite Element Method (FEM).
Simulations for cryoablations using loop applicators have
been performed similarly by [1]. In a ﬁrst approximation,
the creation of an elongated lesion can be modeled by an
essentially cylindrical geometry. Thus, the cross section of
the cryo-applicator tube is a two-dimensional plane, which
is considered in this study.
B. Estimation of Thermal Longitudinal and Transversal
Conductivity of Anisotropic Materials
At a macroscopic scale it is not possible to consider each
single ﬁber embedded in the polymeric matrix of the tubing.
Thus, we ﬁrst estimate average material properties along
and across the ﬁbers assuming that the essentially parallel
ﬁbers are arranged in a regular pattern. The applicator tube
modeled in this study consists of carbon ﬁbers surrounded
by a silicone matrix (Figure 2).
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-190-8
BIOTECHNO 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Figure 2.
Sketch of the ﬁber material of the applicator tube. The
material consists of equally distributed carbon ﬁbers (red) surrounded by
a silicone matrix (green). The red rectangle indicates analyzed domain for
the evaluation of thermal transversal conductivity (see Figure 3).
For a proper evaluation of the stationary temperature
distribution, the thermal longitudinal and transversal conduc-
tivity must be calculated. The average thermal longitudinal
conductivity kl is computed by a weighted average of both
the ﬁber (kf) and the matrix material thermal conductivities
(km) (3):
kl = pf · kf + (1 − pf) · km
(3)
pf deﬁnes the volumetric density (0 ≤ pf ≤ 1) of ﬁber
in the material.
The thermal transversal conductivity was computed by
generating a triangular mesh (Figure 3a) of the area within
the red rectangle depicted in Figure 2. This area is sufﬁcient
for the computation of the thermal transversal conductivity
because it represents the repetitive pattern for the cross
section of the ﬁber material. The geometry of the simulated
area was determined from the diameter of the carbon ﬁbers
(7 µm) and the volumetric density of carbon ﬁbers in the
material (pf = 0.6).
To generate the model depicted in Figure 3a by using the
ﬁber radius r and the ﬁber density in the material pf the area
covered by ﬁber Af (area of a semicircle) can be calculated
by (4)
Af = r2 · π
2
.
(4)
By using the known ﬁber density of the material, the
simulation area As was computed as follows (5):
As = Af
pf
(5)
The height h is exactly the half of the diagonal of the
model d. The parameter d describes the spatial difference
between the centers of two neighboring ﬁbers. As depicted
in Figure 2 the height h (see left boundary of red rectangle
indicating the simulated area) is exactly half the distance
from the centers of the top ﬁber to the next ﬁber directly
beneath of it. Using the Pythagorean theorem and deﬁning
that d = 2h, the relation between the width w and height h
can be calculated by (6)
w =
p
d2 − h2 =
p
4h2 − h2 =
√
3h.
(6)
The product of width w and height h results in the size
of the simulation area As. Therefore the width w can be
determined by (7)
w = As
h =
√
3As
w
=
q√
3As.
(7)
Summarized the width w and height h of the model can
be calculated by (8)
w =
s√
3·r2·π
2·pf
,
h = w
√
3.
(8)
Note that the mesh was created by using the software
package Altair HyperMesh 10 (Altair Eng. Inc.) and for the
visualization of the models AmiraDev 3.0 (TGS Template
Graphics Software, Inc.) was used.
Using the result of the stationary temperature distribution
of the model as shown in Figure 3b the average thermal
transversal conductivity kt can be estimated. The sum of
heating power ˙Q at the bottom of the model is deﬁned as
follows:
˙Q = kt · △T · w·l
h , and
(9)
˙Q = −l·
Z
Γb
k(r)·∇T(r)·nbdr, r ∈ Γb
(10)
where w and h are the width and height of the simulated
area; l is the length of the ﬁctive model volume in z-
direction; ∆T is the temperature difference between the top
and the bottom boundary (as Dirichlet boundary conditions
were used +1◦C at the top and −1◦C at the bottom bound-
ary of the model); Γb is the lower boundary of the model;
nb is the outward normal at Γb (nb =

(a)
(b)
Figure 3.
FEM simulation of the selected red rectangular area in Figure 2 to compute the thermal transversal conductivity of the ﬁber material with
carbon ﬁber density of 60 % and carbon ﬁber diameter of 7 µm.
(a) Meshed model (red: carbon ﬁber, green: silicone matrix)
(b) Stationary temperature distribution after applying constant temperatures of +1◦C at the top boundary and -1◦C at the bottom boundary of the model
From (9) and (10) we obtain
kt = − h
w· 1
∆T ·
Z
Γb
k(r)∇T(r)·nbdr;
r ∈ Γ.
(12)
For the insulating layers, a quartz ﬁber material was
used. Computation of kl and kt for this material is done
analogously to the carbon ﬁber material. The resulting values
for kl and kt for both materials are listed in Table I.
Table I
MATERIAL PROPERTIES USED IN SIMULATIONS.
kl AND kt REFLECT THE COMPUTED LONGITUDINAL AND
TRANSVERSAL CONDUCTIVITIES BASED ON (3) AND (12).
Applicator
Insulation
Fiber material
Carbon
Quartz
pf
0.6
0.5
kf [Wm−1K−1]
17
1
Matrix material
Silicone
km [Wm−1K−1]
0.17
kl [Wm−1K−1]
10.27
0.59
kt [Wm−1K−1]
0.66
0.36
The parameters for the thermal conductivity of carbon
and quartz ﬁber were taken out of the material description
provided by the manufacturer of the material. The thermal
conductivity of silicone was obtained from [7].
C. Thermal Flux Computation
We can now consider the cryo-applicator tubing at a
macroscopic scale by using the average transversal and
longitudinal conductivities computed above.
In this work, applicators with different insulation types
in blood direction are compared with each other and with
an applicator without insulation. To allow a comparison of
ablation efﬁciency the thermal ﬂux was computed over the
applicator surface.
Therefore, models of the applicator variants were created
(Figure 5). Due to the symmetry only the right half of two
dimensional cuts of the applicator variants were modeled.
The diameter of all applicator variants is 2.3 mm; the
applicator tube without insulation has a thickness of 181 µm
and the maximum insulation thickness for both insulated
variants is 245 µm. The spatial domain of the models
was discretized to allow the numerical computation of the
stationary temperature distributions within the applicator
variants during cryoablation.
For computation of the stationary temperature distribution
the anisotropic thermal conductivities depicted in Table I
were used. The carbon ﬁbers of the applicators are aligned
clockwise with a winding angle of β = 80◦, whereas the
ﬁbers of the insulating material are aligned perpendicular to
the cross section (see Figure 4). Therefore, the longitudinal
conductivity is not considered in the insulating material as
only the transversal conductivity of the insulating material
is needed.
Cauchy boundary conditions were assigned to the re-
frigerant boundary Γi (α
=
3000 Wm−2K−1, Tc
=
−90◦C) and to the blood/tissue boundary Γo (α
=
3000 Wm−2K−1, Tc = 36.5◦C) [7].
After computing the stationary temperature distribution
of the applicators, the thermal ﬂux into the applicator
P [Wm−2] at the boundary Γo can be computed similarly
to the Cauchy boundary condition in (2):
P(r) = − ∂ ˙Q(r)
∂nΓ(r) = α(r) · [Tc(r) − T(r)],
r ∈ Γ
(13)
P is obtained from the Cauchy boundary condition. Heat
ﬂow from the tissue to the applicator is deﬁned as positive.
Therefore the multiplicative factor -1 was added to (13).
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-190-8
BIOTECHNO 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.
Model of applicator variants. Angle ϕ is used in Figure 6 for the comparison of the heat ﬂux. (a) without insulation; (b) with inner insulation;
(c) with outer insulation; (d) temperature distribution without insulation; (e) temperature distribution with inner insulation; (f) temperature distribution with
outer insulation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4. Fiber orientation in applicator models. The ﬁber orientation of the
applicator tube is spirally wound with winding angle β = 80◦ in z direction
and the ﬁber orientation of the insulation layer is parallel to the z axis
(winding angle 0◦). (a) Cross section of the applicator variant with inner
insulation (blue: carbon ﬁbers of tube; yellow: silicone matrix of carbon
ﬁber material; black: quartz ﬁbers of insulation layer; pink: silicone matrix
of insulation layer) (b) Perspective along the applicator surface depicting
carbon ﬁbers (blue) spirally wound with winding angle β = 80◦ in z
direction.
III. RESULTS
Using the stationary temperature distributions of the mod-
els depicted in Figure 5 and the thermal ﬂux equation (13)
for the surface Γo the angle dependent thermal ﬂux values
were computed and compared with each other in Figure 6.
The visualization of the thermal ﬂux starts at the thickest
insulation point in blood direction at ϕ = 0◦ and proceeds
counterclockwise with increasing ϕ in tissue direction until
ϕ = 180◦.
Figure 6.
Comparison of angle dependent thermal ﬂux values of the
three applicator variants depicted in Figure 5 with ϕ = 0◦ at the bottom
(blood side) and ϕ = 180◦ at the top (tissue side). Angle increases
counterclockwise.
As depicted in Figure 6, the thermal ﬂux over the surface
of the applicator without insulation has a constant value of
12.3 W/cm2.
The applicator with inner insulation shows a decrease of
the cooling ﬂux in blood direction. The minimal thermal ﬂux
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-190-8
BIOTECHNO 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

of 7.4 W/cm2 is present at ϕ = 0◦ (maximal thickness of
insulation layer). It increases with rising ϕ and reaches its
maximum of 11.8 W/cm2 at ϕ = 180◦.
The thermal ﬂux proﬁle of the applicator with outer
insulation shows an even lower value of 5.9 W/cm2 than
both other variants at ϕ = 0◦ (maximal thickness of
insulation layer). Contrary to the inner insulated applicator
the maximum cooling ﬂux is located at ϕ = 120◦ with the
value of 13.7 W/cm2 and reduces with increasing ϕ until
it reaches the value of 12.6 W/cm2 at ϕ = 180◦.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The major scope of this study is the development of
simulation tools, which should guide the development of
efﬁcient applicator tubings for the creation of elongated
lesions. Three different applicator constructions using ﬁber
reinforced polymers were compared.
As depicted in Figure 6 the best of the three applicator
variants presented in this work (without/inner/outer insu-
lation) is the outer insulated applicator. One of the main
reasons for the efﬁciency of this applicator type is the
anisotropic thermal conductivity property of the carbon ﬁber
material that directs the cooling power from behind the
insulation layer to the tissue front where it is required.
Obviously, the applicator variant without insulation (blue),
showed no considerable variations of the thermal ﬂux along
the outer boundary. Note that the small variations are caused
by spatial discretization and numerical effects.
The applicator variant with inner insulation (red) shows
the desired effect of reducing the power loss in blood
direction. As a negative side effect the thermal ﬂux in
tissue direction is also reduced. This may be caused by the
anisotropy of the surrounding carbon ﬁber material. The
inner insulation in blood direction allows for a stronger
heating effect of the carbon ﬁber. Due to the higher thermal
conductivity along the carbon ﬁber the temperature differ-
ence between the blood side (warm) and tissue side (cold)
is reduced.
The outer insulation of the applicator showed the best
results of the applicator variants presented in this investi-
gation. In the direction of blood, a signiﬁcant cooling ﬂux
reduction is seen. Additionally, there is an improved cooling
ﬂux in the tissue direction. The maximum at ϕ = 120◦
(insulation end for both insulation variants) can be explained
by the low temperatures of the carbon ﬁber material within
the insulating layer and the low thermal conductivity of
the insulation layer from ϕ = 0◦ to ϕ = 120◦. After
the insulation layer vanishes at ϕ = 120◦ the thermal
conductivity rises immediately. At the end of the insulating
layer the highest temperature gradient occurs that reduces
progressively until ϕ = 180◦.
The manufacturing of an applicator with an additional
layer on the outside that does not surround the whole surface
may cause mechanical instability of the applicator. Due to
the missing linkage between the two layers it would be
necessary to add additional material around the applicator
to adhere the insulation to the applicator. Although this
provides a possible solution to the problem, this method
might reduce the cooling effect of the applicator in tissue
direction.
Comparison was carried out by computing a stationary
temperature ﬁeld in a two-dimensional geometry. Such a
model seems to be justiﬁed for making principle decisions
(insulation inside or outside) when starting the development
of a production process. Fiber reinforced polymers have been
successfully applied in other ﬁelds of medical devices such
as MR compatible materials [8] and have the potential to
increase the efﬁciency of cryoablation in the future. The
results obtained in this study are based on the assumption of
an ideal production process, which delivers optimal contact
of ﬁbers and polymeric matrix material. In future studies
the results should be validated by comparing the simulated
predictions with manufactured tubings.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the K-Regio-Project of the
Standortagentur Tirol, Innsbruck, Austria.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Seger, G. Fischer, M. Handler, F. Hintringer, and C. Baum-
gartner, “Simulating the Spatio-Temporal Spread of Cooling
Flux in Cardiac Tissue due to Catheterized Cryoablation,”
in Proc. 8th IASTED Int. Conf. on Biomedical Engineering.
ACTA Press, 2011, pp. 83–88.
[2] D. Lustgarten, D. Keane, and J. Ruskin, “Cryothermal Abla-
tion: Mechanism of Tissue Injury and Current Experience in
the Treatment of Tachyarrhythmias,” Progress in Cardiovascu-
lar Diseases, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 481–498, 1999.
[3] A. Skanes, G. Klein, A. Krahn, and R. Yee, “Cryoablation:
Potentials and Pitfalls,” J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol, vol. 15,
no. 10 Suppl, pp. S28–S34, 2004.
[4] B. Schwagten, Y. Van Belle, and L. Jordaens, “Cryoablation:
how to improve results in atrioventricular nodal reentrant
tachycardia ablation?” Europace, vol. 12, no. 11, p. 1522,
2010.
[5] J. Lienhard and J. Lienhard, A Heat Transfer Textbook, 4th ed.
Phlogiston Press, 2011.
[6] M. Delfour, G. Payre, and J. Zolesio, “Optimal Design of a
Minimum Weight Thermal Diffuser with Constraint on the
Output Thermal Power Flux,” Applied Mathematics & Opti-
mization, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 225–262, 1982.
[7] H. Kuchling, Taschenbuch der Physik.
Hanser Verlag, 2007.
[8] A. Schuette, C. Brecher, S. Kr¨uger, and G. Krombach, “New
Materials for Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) – Fiber-
Reinforced Guide Wires and Catheters for Minimal Invasive
Interventions,” in World Congress on Medical Physics and
Biomedical Engineering, September 7-12, 2009, Munich, Ger-
many.
Springer, 2009, pp. 163–165.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-190-8
BIOTECHNO 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

