 
  
Incorporating Protein Sequence and Evolutionary Information in a Structural 
Pattern Matching Approach for Contact Maps  
 
Hazem Radwan A. Ahmed 
School of Computing and Information Science  
Queen’s University 
Kingston, Ontario, Canada. K7L 3N6  
Email: hazem@cs.queenu.ca  
Janice I. Glasgow 
School of Computing and Information Science  
Queen’s University 
Kingston, Ontario, Canada. K7L 3N6  
Email: janice@cs.queensu.ca
 
 
Abstract— Protein structure prediction from the primary 
sequence 
remains 
a 
major 
challenging 
problem 
in 
bioinformatics. 
The 
main 
issue 
here 
is 
that 
it 
is 
computationally complex to reliably predict the full three-
dimensional structure of a protein from its one-dimensional 
sequence. A two-dimensional contact map has, therefore, been 
used as an intermediate step in this problem. A contact map is 
a simpler, yet representative, alternative for the three-
dimensional protein structure. In this paper, we propose a 
pattern matching approach to locate similar substructural 
patterns between protein contact map pairs using protein 
sequence information. These substructural patterns are of 
particular interest to our research, because they could 
ultimately be used as building blocks for a bottom-up 
approach to protein structure prediction from contact maps. 
We further demonstrate how to improve the performance of 
identifying these patterns by incorporating both protein 
sequence and evolutionary information. The results are 
benchmarked using a large standard protein dataset. We 
performed statistical analyses (e.g., Harrell-Davis Quantiles 
and Bagplots) that show sequence information is more helpful 
in locating short-range contacts than long-range contacts. 
Moreover, 
incorporating 
evolutionary 
information 
has 
remarkably improved the performance of locating similar 
short-range contacts between contact map pairs.    
 
Keywords-protein structure prediction; protien contact maps; 
structural pattern matching; evolutionary information; harrell-
davis quantiles. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Since the human genome sequence was revealed in April 
2003, the need to predict protein structures from protein 
sequences has dramatically increased ‎[1]. Proteins are 
macromolecules with a wide range of biological functions 
that are vital for any living cell. They transport oxygen, ions, 
and hormones; they protect the body from foreign invaders; 
and they catalyze almost all chemical reactions in the cell. 
Proteins are made of long sequences of amino acids that fold 
into three-dimensional structures. Because protein folding is 
not easily observable experimentally ‎[2], protein structure 
prediction has been an active research field in bioinformatics 
as it can ultimately broaden our understanding of the 
structural and functional properties of proteins. Moreover, 
predicted structures can be used in structure-based drug 
design, which attempts to use the structure of proteins as a 
basis for designing new ligands by applying principles of 
molecular recognition ‎[3]. 
In recent decades, many approaches have been proposed 
for understanding the structural and functional properties of 
proteins. These approaches vary from time-consuming and 
relatively expensive experimental determination methods 
(e.g., X-ray crystallography ‎[4] and NMR spectroscopy ‎[5]) 
to less-expensive computational protein modeling methods 
for protein structure prediction (e.g., ab-initio protein 
modeling ‎[6], comparative protein modeling ‎[7], and side-
chain geometry prediction ‎[8]). While the computational 
methods attempt to circumvent the complexity of the 
experimental methods with an approximation to the solution 
(predicted 
protein 
structures 
versus 
experimentally-
determined structures), analyzing the three-dimensional 
structure 
of 
proteins 
computationally 
is 
not 
a 
straightforward 
task. 
Hence, 
two-dimensional 
representations of protein structures, such as distance and 
contact maps, have been widely used as a promising 
alternative that offers a good way to analyze the 3D 
structure using a 2D feature map ‎[9]. This is because they 
are readily amenable to machine learning algorithms and 
can potentially be used to predict the three-dimensional 
structure, achieving a good compromise between simplicity 
and competency ‎[26].  
     The paper is organized as follows: Section II provides 
the reader with the background material required to 
understand the concepts used in this study. It describes 
distance and contact maps, gives examples of structural 
patterns of contact maps, and discusses protein similarity 
relationships at different representational levels of detail, as 
well as the structural classification of protein domains. 
Section III presents the experimental setup and the details of 
the multi-regional analysis of the contact map method used 
in our experiments. Section IV discusses the experimental 
benchmark dataset used in this study and shows the 
performance of the proposed method using statistical 
analyses, including a quantile-based analysis as well as a 
correlation analysis. The final section highlights the 
contributions and summarizes the main results of the study. 
It also presents a set of potential directions for future 
research.   
49
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-137-3

 
  
II. 
BACKGROUND MATERIAL 
Contact and distance maps provide a compact 2D 
representation of the 3D conformation of a protein, and 
capture useful interaction information about the native 
structure of proteins. Contact maps can ideally be calculated 
from a given structure, or predicted from protein sequence.  
The predicted contact maps have received special attention 
in the problem of protein structure prediction, because they 
are rotation and translation invariant (unlike 3D structures). 
While it is not simple to transfer contact maps back to the 
3D structure (unlike distance maps), it has shown some 
potential to reconstruct the 3D conformation of a protein 
from accurate and even predicted (noisy) contact maps ‎[10].   
A. Distance and Contact Maps 
A distance map, D, for a protein of n amino acids is a 
two-dimensional n x n matrix that represents the distance 
between each pair of alpha-carbon atoms of the protein, as 
shown in Figure 1(a). The darker the region is, the closer the 
distance of its corresponding atom pairs is. The distance 
information can be used to infer the interactions among 
residues of proteins by constructing another same-sized 
matrix called a contact map.  
A contact map, C, is a two-dimensional binary 
symmetric matrix that represents pairs of amino acids that 
are in contact, i.e., their positions in the three-dimensional 
structure of the protein are within a given distance threshold 
(usually measured in Ångstroms), as shown in Figure 1(b).  
According to extensive experimental results presented 
in ‎[11], contact map thresholds, ranging from 10 to 18 Å 
allow the reconstruction of 3D models from contact maps to 
be similar to the protein’s native structure. 
An element of the ith and jth residues of a contact map, C(i,j), 
can be defined as follows: 
                               1;    if  D(i,j)    Threshold 
         C(i,j) =   
                                0;    otherwise 
Where D(i,j) is the distance between amino acids i and j, 1 
denotes contacts (white), and 0 denotes no contacts (black). 
 
 (a)                                               (b) 
Figure 1.  (a) Distance map for a protein of 99 amino acid residues. (b) 
contact map for the same protein of 99 amino acids after applying a 
distance threshold of 10 Ångstrom (1 nm) on its distance map.                                     
(local contacts < 3.8 Å are ignored – refer to Section III-C for details.) 
B. Structural patterns of Contact Maps 
Different 
secondary 
structures 
of 
proteins 
have 
distinctive structural patterns in contact maps. In particular, 
an α-helix appears as an unbroken row of contacts between 
i, i ± 4 pairs along the main diagonal, while beta-sheets 
appear as an unbroken row of contacts in the off-diagonal 
areas. A row of contacts that is parallel to the main diagonal 
represents a pair of parallel β-sheets, while a row of contacts 
that is perpendicular to the main diagonal represents a pair 
of anti-parallel β-sheets ‎[12]. 
C. The Classification of Protein Domains 
The Structural Classification of Proteins (SCOP) database 
was designed by G. Murzin et al. ‎[15] to provide an easy 
way to access and understand the information available for 
protein structures. The database contains a detailed and 
comprehensive 
description 
of 
the 
structural 
and 
evolutionary relationships of the proteins of known 
structure. Structurally and evolutionarily related proteins are 
classified into similar levels in the database hierarchy. 
Evolutionarily-related proteins are those that have similar 
functions and structures because of a common descent or 
ancestor.  The main levels in the classification hierarchy of 
the SCOP database are as follows: 1) Family level that 
implies clear evolutionary relationship, 2) Superfamily level 
that implies probable common evolutionary origin, and 3) 
Fold  level that implies major structural similarity.  
D. Protein Similarity Relationships 
Understanding protein similarity relationships is vital for 
the further understanding of protein functional similarity 
and evolutionary relationships. Although a protein with a 
given sequence may exist in different conformations, the 
chances that two highly-similar sequences will fold into 
distinctly-different structures are so small that they are often 
neglected in research practice ‎[13]. This suggests that 
sequence similarity could generally indicate structure 
similarity. Furthermore, a pair of proteins with similar 
structure has similar contact maps ‎[14]. Therefore, as shown 
in Figure 2, by the transitivity relationship, a logical 
inference could be drawn regarding the association between 
sequence similarity and contact map similarity. The premise 
of the method of multi-regional analysis of contact maps in 
this paper is based on this transitive similarity relationship 
between contact map and protein sequence (via structure).  
 
 
Figure 2.  Protein similarity relationships at different levels of detail. 
50
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-137-3

 
  
III. 
METHOD AND EXPERIMENTAL SETUP  
This section describes the multi-regional analysis of the 
contact maps method used in the experiments. The method 
examines whether sequence similarity information helps in a 
pattern matching approach to locate regions of similarity in 
contact maps (the target substructural patterns) that 
correspond to local similarities in protein structures. The 
first stage of this method aims to align pairs of protein 
sequences for each combination pair of contact maps to find 
the most local similar subsequences. The next stage aims to 
quantify the similarity of contact maps regions that 
correspond to these similar subsequences found in the first 
stage. Finally, different statistical analyses were considered 
to evaluate the performance of the method, and to determine 
how well local protein sequence similarity leads to 
corresponding local contact map similarity. 
A. Experimental Dataset 
The benchmark Skolnick dataset is adopted for our 
experiments. The Skolnick dataset is a standard benchmark 
dataset of 40 large protein domains, divided into four 
categories as shown in Table I. It was originally suggested 
by J. Skolnick and described in ‎[16]. The dataset has been 
used in several recent studies related to structural 
comparison of proteins ‎[16]‎[17]‎[18]. 
TABLE I.  
PROTEIN DOMAINS IN SKOLNICK DATASET  
Categories 
     Global sequence   
           similarity 
Sequence length 
(residues) 
Domain 
indices 
1 
      15-30%    (low) 
124 
1-14 
2 
 7-70%     (Med) 
170 
35-40 
3 
 35-90%   (High) 
  99  (Short) 
15-23 
4 
 30-90%   (High) 
 250 (Long) 
24-34 
B. Sequence Analysis 
For the sequence analysis stage, we align every 
combination pair of sequences. The SIM algorithm ‎[19] is 
used for this purpose. This algorithm employs a dynamic 
programming 
technique 
to 
find 
user-defined, 
non-
intersecting alignments that are the best (i.e., with the 
highest similarity score) between pairs of sequences. The 
results from the alignments are sorted descendingly 
according to their similarity score ‎[20].  
In this method, we are only interested in alignments of 
subsequence of at least 10 residues, and at most 20 residues. 
We are not interested in alignments of length less than 10 
residues because these alignments would not form a 
complete substructural pattern (for example, the lengths of 
alpha helices vary from 4 or 5 residues to over 40 residues, 
with an average length of about 10 residues ‎[21]). We are 
also not interested in long alignments because most methods 
for contact maps analysis are known to be far more accurate 
on local contacts (those contacts that are clustered around 
the 
main 
diagonal), 
than 
nonlocal 
(long-range) 
contacts ‎[22]. Thus, to eliminate one source of uncertainty 
of the long-range contacts, alignments of a length greater 
than 20 residues are not considered.  
In this experiment, BLOSUM62 ‎[23] is used as the 
similarity metric to score sequence alignment. As for gaps, 
the open and extended gap penalties are set to 10 and 1 
respectively. This is because a large penalty for opening a 
gap and a much smaller one for extending it have generally 
proven to be effective ‎[24]. An open gap penalty is a penalty 
for the first residue in a gap, and an extended gap penalty is 
a penalty for every additional residue in it. To analyze pairs 
of sequences, the best 100 local subsequence alignments are 
generated from every pair of sequences. Then, a selection 
strategy is used to select the two alignments of 10-20 
residues with the most and least similarity score (to check 
the performance in case of low and high similarity).  
C. Contact Map Analysis 
The second stage of the method is to locate contact map 
regions that correspond to the most and least similar protein 
subsequences. In order to unbiasedly analyze the diagonal 
contact map regions, we ignored local contacts between 
each residue and itself on the main diagonal. Comparing the 
main diagonal of contact maps (protein backbone) will 
neither add meaningful information for their similarity nor 
dissimilarity, (for example, even too distant contact maps 
will share a similar main diagonal). Based on the fact that 
the minimum distance between any pair of different residues 
cannot be less than 3.8 Å ‎[22], every local contact of each 
residue and itself that is less than this threshold is ignored.  
Jaccard’s Coefficient (J) ‎[25] is used as a similarity 
metric to score contact map regions. J is suitable for 
measuring contact map similarity, because it does not 
consider counting zero elements in the matrix (no contacts) 
of both contact maps, removing the effect of the “double 
absence” that has neither meaningful contribution to the 
similarity, nor the dissimilarity, of contact maps.  
00
11
C
S
C
J


                                        (‎1) 
Where C11 is the count of nonzero elements (contacts) of 
both contact maps, C00 is the count of zero elements (no- 
contacts) of both contact maps, and S is the contact map size 
(i.e., the square of the sequence length for the contact map). 
D. Sequence Gap and Region Displacement Problem  
The displacement problem happens when a pair of 
aligned subsequences is very similar (greater than 70%), but 
their corresponding diagonal contact map regions are not as 
similar (less than 50-60%). This is noticed to occur as a 
result of a slight shift in the aligned subsequence pair either 
because of a gap in the alignment, or because of a slightly 
shifted alignment. In this case, if the right displacement is 
considered for one of the aligned subsequence in the correct 
direction with the correct number of residues, their 
corresponding diagonal contact map regions will perfectly 
overlay one another and their similarity can go up to 90%, as 
shown in Figure 3. The current experimental setup, however, 
(e.g., open gap penalty, extended gap penalty, etc.) are 
optimized to minimize the displacement problem. As shown 
51
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-137-3

 
  
in Figure 4, the proposed method was successful in locating 
the exact correct boundaries of contact map regions that 
perfectly overlay one another, in an effort to maximize their 
similarity. That is, if any boundary is shifted only by one or 
two residues, the local contact map similarity will be 
significantly dropped, as shown in Figure 3 and Figure 5.   
Figure 3.  One example of the calculated region boundaries (n1 = 94 &     
n2 = 95) shows that the selected boundaries have the maximum Jaccard’s 
coefficient (J = 94%) as opposed of 68% and 56% if the lower boundary is 
shifted by only one residue at a time, or 62% and 53%  if the upper 
boundary is shifted by one residue at a time, instead. 
Figure 4.  An illustration of the displacement problem between two 
highly-similar proteins (1AMK & 1AW2A). The gap length is subtracted 
from the start position of the upper boundary (n1 of Ex. a) and the lower 
boundary (n2 of Ex. b), since contact maps have no representation of gaps.  
 
Figure 5.  Another example of the calculated region boundaries of (Ex. b)  
also shows that the selected boundaries have the maximum Jaccard’s 
coefficient (J = 73%) as opposed of 62% and 50% if the lower boundary is 
shifted by only one residue at a time, or 58% and 50% if the upper 
boundary is shifted by one residue at a time, instead.  
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. The Big Picture 
To see the big picture of the problem, an all-against-all 
pair-wise analysis is performed on the benchmark Skolnick 
dataset, yielding several hundreds of pairwise alignment 
instances. The entire results of sequence and contact map 
similarity of each pairwise instance are presented as a 2D 
scatter plot to study the correlation between them, as shown 
in Figure 6. This figure draws a clear distinction between the 
correlation between sequence similarity and their contact 
map similarity in the diagonal area (short-range contacts), 
and the correlation between sequence similarity and their 
contact map similarity in the off-diagonal areas (long-range 
contacts).  
Firstly, for long-range contacts, no matter how high the 
sequence similarity is the majority of the corresponding 
contact map similarity is very low (less than 20%). Thus, 
even high sequence similarity cannot help to suggest 
corresponding similarity for the long-range contacts.    
Secondly, for the short-range contacts, the plot reveals two 
different trends: 1) when sequence similarity is low (less 
than 60%), contact map similarity is indiscriminately 
dispersed between a very low similarity level (35%) and a 
very high one (90%), making it hard to reliably associate 
low sequence similarity to short-range contact map 
similarity. 2) When sequence similarity is high (greater than 
60%), contact map similarity is apparently clustered in the 
upper-right corner of the plot (around 80%), suggesting a 
high correlation between local sequence similarity and 
short-range contact map similarity.  
   
 
Figure 6.  A 2D scatter plot showing the correlation between sequence 
similarities and their contact map similarities in the diagonal area (short-
range contacts ) and the off-diagonal areas (long-range contacts). 
B. Harrell-Davis Quantiles 
In an effort to improve performance in locating similar 
patterns in the diagonal regions of contact map pairs, 
evolutionary information (represented in SCOP family 
information) is proposed to be incorporated with the 
sequence information. As described in ‎[18], the 40 protein 
52
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-137-3

 
  
domains of the Skolnick dataset are classified into five 
SCOP families.  Based on SCOP family information, the 
results are distributed into four different groups: 1) the first 
group includes the results of pairs of protein subsequences 
that are most similar and of the same SCOP family. 2) The 
second group includes the results of pairs of protein 
subsequences that are most similar and of a different SCOP 
family. 3) The third group includes the results of pairs of 
protein subsequences that are least similar and of the same 
SCOP family. 4) The last group includes the results of pairs 
of protein subsequences that are least similar and of a 
different SCOP family.  
Quantile-based analysis is performed to compare the 
different groups. The qth quantile of a dataset is defined as 
the value where the q-fraction of the data is below q and the 
(1- q) fraction of the data is above q. Some q-quantiles have 
special names: the 2-quantile (or the 0.5 quantile) is called 
the median (or the 50th percentile), the 4-quantiles are called 
quartiles, the 10-quantiles are called deciles, and the 100-
quantiles are called percentiles. For example, the 0.01 
quantile = the 1st percentile = the bottom 1% of the dataset, 
and the 0.99 quantile = the 99th percentile = the top 1% of the 
dataset.  
Using the online R statistics software in ‎[27], the Harrell-
Davis method for 100-quantile estimation is computed for 
this study. The Harrell-Davis method ‎[29] is based on using 
a weighted linear combination of order statistics to estimate 
quantiles. The standard error associated with each estimated 
value of a quantile is also computed and plotted as error bars, 
as shown in Figure 7.  Error bars are commonly used on 
graphs to indicate the uncertainty, or the confidence interval 
in a reported measurement. Figure 7(a) clearly shows that the 
results of contact map similarity of the same family are much 
better (higher) than those of a different family as in      
Figure 7(b). This supports the previous hypothesis that 
incorporating evolutionary information with sequence 
information 
improves 
the 
performance 
of 
locating 
remarkably better (highly-similar) diagonal contact map 
region.  Comparing Figure 7(a) and Figure 7(c) reveals that 
low sequence information considerably deteriorates the 
method performance, even for the results of the same SCOP 
family.  Whereas, comparing Figure 7(c) and Figure 7(d) 
demonstrates that with low sequence information, the 
performance is almost the same (poor), no matter if the 
protein pairs are of the same or of a different SCOP family.   
C. Bagplots 
A bagplot, initially proposed by Rousseeuwet et al. ‎[30],  
is a bivariate generalization of the well known boxplot ‎[31]. 
In the bivariate case, the “box” of the boxplot changes to a 
convex polygon forming the “bag” of the bagplot. The bag 
includes 50% of all data points. The fence is the external 
boundary that separates points within the fence from points 
outside the fence (outliers), and is simply computed by 
increasing the bag by a given factor. Data points between the 
bag and fence are marked by a light-colored loop. The loop 
is defined as the convex hull containing all points inside the 
fence.  The hull center is the centre of gravity of the bag. It is 
either one center point (the median of the data) or a region of 
more than one center points, usually highlighted with a 
different color. Therefore, the classical boxplot can be 
considered as a special case of the bagplot, particularly when 
all points happen to be on a straight line. The bagplot 
provides a visualization of several characteristics of the data: 
its location (the median), spread (the size of the bag), 
correlation (the orientation of the bag), and skewness (the 
shape of the bag) ‎[30].  
In this statistical analysis, we study the effect of the 
global sequence similarity on the method performance. Thus, 
the factor that varies in this analysis is the global similarity 
information, while other factors will be fixed at their best 
settings obtained from Figure 7(a). In particular, 1) for the 
local similarity information, the subsequence pairs of the 
most local similarity will be used. 2) For the region of 
similarity, short-range contacts in the diagonal area will be 
considered. 3) For the evolutionary information, protein pairs 
will be of the same protein SCOP family.  According to the 
global similarity information of the four categories of the 
Skolnick dataset (shown in Table I), the pair-wise results are 
further grouped into four clusters. Namely, 1) Low vs. Low, 
2) Med vs. Med, 3) High vs. High (Short), and 4) High vs. 
High (Long). Using the online R statistics software in ‎[28], 
the bagplots are computed for each cluster, in an effort to 
perform an in-depth correlation study of the experimental 
results between short-range contacts and most similar local 
subsequences at different ranges of global similarity. 
Although the available samples at the best settings are found 
to be considerably few, the global sequence information 
does appear to affect the method performance, as shown in 
Figure 8. For example, in Figure 8(a), even at the best 
settings, the centre of gravity of the bag is fairly low (around 
~62% for contact map similarity) in the case of low global 
similarity (15-30%). As for the rest of plots, the center of 
gravity is higher and remains almost the same (around 80% 
for contact map similarity), when global sequence similarity 
is medium and high.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper proposes a pattern matching approach that 
incorporates both protein sequence and evolutionary 
information, with the goal of locating similar substructural 
patterns between contact map pairs. These patterns could 
ultimately be used as building blocks for a computational 
bottom-up approach to protein structure prediction from 
contact maps ‎[9]. A standard benchmark dataset of carefully-
selected 40 large protein domains (Skolnick dataset) is 
adopted for this study as the experimental dataset. 
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first-of-its-kind 
study to utilize sequence and evolutionary information in 
locating similar contact map patterns, with no comparable 
state-of-the-art results. The paper provides an extensive 
analysis for the three different factors believed to affect the 
performance of short-range pattern matching in the diagonal 
area, in particular, 1) local sequence information, 2) 
evolutionary 
information, 
and 
3) 
global 
sequence 
53
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-137-3

 
  
Figure 7.  Harrell-Davis quantiles for different categories of the results, along with the error bars of the associated standard error for each reported quantile. 
(a) Shows the first category of the results of pairs of protein subsequences that are most similar and of the same protein class. (b) Shows category 2 of pairs 
of protein subsequences that are most similar and of the different protein class. (c) Shows category 3 for pairs of protein subsequences that are least similar 
and of the same protein class. (d) Shows the last category of pairs of protein subsequences that are least similar and of the different protein class.  
Figure 8.  Bagplots for different clusters of the pair-wise results of most similar local subsequences and short-range contacts. (a) Shows the results of first 
cluster of pairs of protein sequences that are of low global sequence similarity (15-30%). (b) Shows the results of pairs of protein sequences that are of 
medium global sequence similarity (7 – 70%). (c) Shows the results of pairs of protein sequences that are of high global sequence similarity (35 – 90%) and 
short length (99 residues). (d) Shows the results of pairs of sequences that are of high global sequence similarity (30-90%) and long length (250 residues).  
54
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-137-3

 
  
information. Firstly, for local sequence information, high 
sequence similarity (above 60%) has demonstrated (using a 
scatter-plot analysis) to be a good indicator of a 
corresponding high diagonal contact map similarity (around 
70-90%). This correlation, however, does not appear to be 
suitable when contacts are long-range (i.e., in the off-
diagonal areas of contact maps), or when local sequence 
similarity is low (less than 60%). Secondly, for evolutionary 
information, the results proved (using a quantile-based 
analysis) to be considerably higher when protein pairs have 
a clear evolutionary relationship, i.e. when they are of the 
same SCOP family.  Lastly, for global sequence 
information, the results are observed (using a bagplot 
analysis) to be superior when the global sequence similarity 
is not low (more than 30%).    
Possible future work to improve pattern matching in the 
diagonal area would be to perform a dynamic expandable 
multi-regional analysis of contact maps to reduce any 
possibility of region displacement. That is, we may consider 
looking further in the neighborhood of the corresponding 
regions of similar local subsequences.  As for the off-
diagonal areas, alternative approaches could be employed 
instead of sequence and evolutionary information that both 
did not appear helpful in these areas. We are currently 
looking into exploring Swarm Intelligence techniques ‎[32] 
as a promising way to tackle the problem in the off-diagonal 
areas of contact maps, where the most uncertain, yet 
important, long-range contacts exist.     
REFERENCES 
[1] 
F. Collins, M. Morgan, and A. Patrinos, “The human genome project: 
lessons from large-scale biology,” Science, vol. 300, 2003,              
pp. 286–290.  
[2] 
R. D. Schaeffer and V. Daggett, “Protein folds and protein folding,” 
Protein Engineering, Design and Selection, Vol. 24, no. 1-2, 2010, 
pp. 11-19.  
[3] 
A. C. Anderson, “The process of structure-based drug design,” 
Chemistry and Biology, vol. 10, 2003, pp. 787–797. 
[4] 
J. Drenth, “Principles of protein X-ray crystallography,” Springer-
Verlag, New York, 1999, ISBN 0-387-98587-5.  
[5] 
M. Schneider, X. R. Fu, and A. E. Keating, "X-ray versus NMR 
structures as templates for computational protein design," Proteins, 
vol. 77,     no. 1,  2009, pp. 97–110.  
[6] 
A. Kolinski (Ed.), "Multiscale approaches to protein modeling," 1st 
Edition, Chapter 10,  Springer, 2011, ISBN 978-1-4419-6888-3. 
[7] 
P. R. Daga, R. Y. Patel, and R. J. Doerksen, "Template-based protein 
modeling: recent methodological advances," Current Topics in 
Medicinal Chemistry, vol. 10, no. 1, 2010 , pp. 84-94. 
[8] 
C. Yang et al., "Improved side-chain modeling by coupling clash-
detection 
guided 
iterative 
search 
with 
rotamer 
relaxation," 
Bioinformatics, 2011, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr00. 
[9] 
J. Glasgow, T. Kuo, and J. Davies, “Protein structure from contact 
maps: a case-based reasoning approach,” Information Systems 
Frontiers, Special Issue on Knowledge Discovery in High-
Throughput Biological Domains, Springer, vol. 8, no. 1, 2006,         
pp. 29-36. 
[10] I. Walsh, A. Vullo,  and G. Pollastri, "XXStout: improving the 
prediction of long range residue contacts,” ISMB 2006, Fortaleza, 
Brazil. 
[11] M. Vassura et al., “Reconstruction of 3D structures from protein 
contact maps,” Proceedings of 3rd International Symposium on 
Bioinformatics Research and Applications, Berlin, Springer, vol. 
4463,  2007, pp. 578–589. 
[12] X. Yuan and C. Bystroff, “Protein contact map prediction,” in 
Computational Methods for Protein Structure Prediction and 
Modeling,  Springer, 2007, pp. 255-277, doi:10.1007/978-0-387-
68372-0_8. 
[13] E. Krissinel, “On the relationship between sequence and structure 
similarities in proteomics,” Bioinformatics, vol. 23, 2007, pp. 717–
723. 
[14] Dictionary of secondary structure of proteins: available at 
http://swift.cmbi.ru.nl/gv/dssp/, 14.03.2011. 
[15] A. G. Murzin, S. E. Brenner, T. Hubbard, and C. Chothia, “SCOP: a 
structural classification of proteins database for the investigation of 
sequences and structures,” J. Mol. Biol., vol. 247, 1995, pp. 536–540. 
[16] G. Lancia, R. Carr, B. Walenz, and S. Istrail, “101 Optimal PDB 
structure alignments: A branch-and-cut algorithm for the maximum 
contact map overlap problem,” Proceedings of Annual International 
Conference 
on 
Computational 
Biology 
(RECOMB), 
2001,               
pp. 193-202.  
[17] W. Xie and N. V. Sahinidis, ”A branch-and-reduce algorithm for the 
contact map overlap problem,” Proceedings of RECOMB of Lecture 
Notes in Bioinformatics, Springer, vol. 3909, 2006, pp. 516-529.  
[18] P. Lena, P. Fariselli, L. Margara, M. Vassura, and R. Casadio, “Fast 
overlapping of protein contact maps by alignment of eigenvectors,” 
Bioinformatics, vol. 26, no. 18, 2010, pp. 2250-2258. doi: 10.1093 
[19] H. Xiaoquin and W. Miller, “A time-efficient, linear-space local 
similarity algorithm,” Advances in Applied Mathematics, vol. 12, 
1991, pp. 337-357. 
[20] SIM: Alignment Tool for Protein Sequences, available at 
http://ca.expasy.org/tools/sim-prot.html, 14.03.2011. 
[21] V. Arjunan, S. Nanda, S. Deris, and M. Illias, “Literature survey of 
protein secondary structure prediction,” Journal Teknologi, vol. 34, 
2001,  pp. 63-72. 
[22] Y. Xu, D. Xu, and J. Liang (Eds.), “Computational methods for 
protein structure and modeling,” Springer, Berlin, 2007, ISBN: 978-
1-4419-2206-9  
[23] Henikoff and Henikoff, “Amino acid substitution matrices from 
protein blocks,” Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 
USA, vol. 89, 1992, pp. 10915-10919. 
[24] S. F. Altschul and B. W. Erickson, “Optimal sequence alignment 
using affine gap costs,” Bull. Math. Biol., vol. 48, 1986, pp. 603-616. 
[25] L. Lee, “Measures of distributional similarity,” Proceedings of the 
37th annual meeting of ACL, 1999, pp. 25–32. 
[26] H. R. Ahmed and J. I. Glasgow,  “Multi-regional analysis of contact 
maps towards locating common substructural patterns of proteins,”    
J Communications of SIWN,  vol 6,  2009, pp.90-98. 
[27] P. Wessa,  “Harrell-Davis quantile estimator”,  in Free Statistics 
Software, Office for Research Development and Education, 2007, 
URL: http://www.wessa.net/rwasp_harrell_davies.wasp/, 14.03.2011.  
[28] P. Wessa, “Bagplot,” in Free Statistics Software,  Office for Research 
Development and Education, 2009,  URL: http://www.wessa.net/ 
rwasp_bagplot.wasp/, 14.03.2011. 
[29] F. E. Harrell and C. E. Davis, “A new distribution-free quantile 
estimator,” Biometrika, vol. 69, 1982, pp. 635-640.  
[30] P. J. Rousseeuw, I. Ruts, and J. W. Tukey, “The bagplot: A bivariate 
boxplot,” The American Statistician, vol. 53, 1999, pp. 382–387.  
[31] D. F. Williamson, R. A. Parker, and J. S. Kendrick, “The box plot: a 
simple visual method to interpret data,” Ann Intern Med, vol. 110, 
1989, pp. 916-921. 
[32] S. Das, A. Abraham and A. Konar, “Swarm Intelligence Algorithms 
in Bioinformatics,” Studies in Computational Intelligence. vol. 94, 
2008,  pp. 113–147. 
 
55
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-137-3

