Chronological Prediction of Certainty in Recall Tests using
Markov Models of Eye Movements
Noaya Takahashi and Minoru Nakayama
Human System Science, The Graduate School of Decision Science & Technology
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Meguro, Tokyo 152-8552 Japan
Email: ntakahashi@nk.cradle.titech.ac.jp, nakayama@cradle.titech.ac.jp
Abstract—To predict chronologically certainty levels of un-
derstanding of question statements during recall tests using
observed eye movements, the hidden Markov model was em-
ployed. The feasibility of predicting the accuracy of responses
was examined using optimization and simulation of the model
together with experimental eye movement data. Chronological
prediction accuracy could be calculated using this model,
and the accuracy decreased with task difﬁculty. The highest
accuracies were observed at 550 msec. after onset of stimuli.
The certainty of correct responses was calculated using the
probability of transition. This certainty was the highest during
the 100-250 msec. after stimuli onset, and decreased with the
duration of the response. These results provide the possibility
of estimating the progress of understanding.
Keywords-Eye Movements; Hidden Markov Model; Cer-
tainty; User Intention
I. INTRODUCTION
Most web sites ask viewers to provide responses to
questions about whether they understand or are interested in
the content they are viewing, such as pressing the “Like”
button. Even in the human-computer interaction environ-
ment, various systems ask users if they understand the
speciﬁc situation or prefer the service the system provides.
For example, many web sites often invite users to make
responses such as “yes”, “no” or “Like”, to conﬁrm their
understanding of the context of an idea or explanation.
According to the item response theory for tests, response
correctness or validity is related to the certainty of the
response [1]. Using a different approach, users can make
correct responses or provide satisfactory reactions acceptable
to the application software, when the level of certainty is
high. The theory uses eye movements which occur during
the reading of statements to estimate certainty or levels of
understanding of statements [2], [3]. It has been proposed
that the user’s intent can be predicted using eye ﬁxation
behavior [4]. Recently, many studies deal with predicting the
viewer’s intent using eye movement features and machine
learning procedures, and have achieved a high level of
accuracy [5].
These approaches use all of the data from onset of
stimulus to response, and the progress of decision making
is not a concern. To investigate the decision making process
as the reason why users accept the statements or services
offered, a dynamic or time series analysis is required. The
process of reading questions has been studied using eye
movements to analyze the ways of understanding informa-
tion which is read [6]. When some mental states are deﬁned,
transitions of states can be generated in time series, using
behavioral data. For examples, the transition of cognitive
states of drivers of automobiles was analyzed using the
hidden Markov model (HMM) [7] using the pattern of eye
movements [8]. The transition between states, which occurs
when reading documents to determine their relevancy was
established using HMM and features of eye movements [9].
According to previous studies, it may be possible to create
a model to predict the level of certainty and the accuracy
of responses using HMM while eye movements during the
reading of question statements are observed. As mentioned
above, the model may provide the possibility of interpolation
for decision making. Analysis of the transition of states using
eye movements during the early stages of reading statements
will reveal the visual information process. This information
may contribute to the improvement of usability of human
interfaces and other HCI issues.
In this paper, the hidden Markov model was used to
determine the levels of certainty of understanding by ob-
serving eye movements. The novelty of this approach is
to present a possibility of conducting a dynamic or time
series analysis to investigate the decision making process.
The feasibility of predicting the accuracy of responses and
estimating the levels of certainty were examined while the
model was applied to recall tests [3].
Section 2 will summarize the related works. Section 3
will describe the experimental procedure and measurements.
Section 4 will explain the development procedure of hidden
Markov model for this experiment. Section 5 and 6 will
evaluate and discuss the results. Section 7 will summarize
our ﬁndings.
II. RELATED WORK
As mentioned in the introduction section, many studies
about assessing usability [10] and predicting user intent [4]
using eye movements exist. The ways of approaching the
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

(a)
(b)
Figure 1.
The screen on the left (a) shows a sample of a deﬁnition statement: “A theater is located on the east side of the police station.” The screen on
the right (b) shows a sample of a question statement: “There is a post ofﬁce on the south side of the theater.”
matter can be divided into two categories, discrimination
analysis, which uses all of the data, and state transition,
which uses time series data. Mental states are deﬁned as
explicit in the former and implicit in the latter.
A previous study used two interface operations (zooming-
in and zooming-out), which indicate a user’s intent. Intent
was predicted using a liner discrimination function with
eye gaze data [4]. As machine learning studies advance,
smaller sizes and sparser data sets can be used to create
classiﬁers, though more speciﬁc features of eye movements
are required. Various features which are related to a mental
status, which is explicit may contribute to performance, as
the extraction of features is a key issue in the development
of the model. The appropriate combination of features can
be used to perform discriminate analysis with a high level
of accuracy, therefore the selection of these features is often
discussed in detail [3], [5].
Another approach is the analysis of eye movement data
as sequential data. The conventional approach is to em-
ploy scanpaths of eye movements [11]. Both ﬁxations and
saccades of eye movements are analyzed as temporal and
spatial behavior data. However, analysis of scanpaths of
eye movements is not useful sometimes. Markovian analysis
of eye movements has been introduced to estimate user
intent. In particular, HMM is preferred for the analysis of
sequential data, such as speech recognition, hand writing
recognition, analysis of biological sequence and others [7].
Liu (1999) deﬁned some implicit cognitive states for drivers
of cars, where the model parameters for left-to-right HMM
were estimated from a data set of eye movements. This
approach enabled recognition of driver’s intentions from the
eye movement data [8]. HMM was also applied to an infor-
mation retrieval task, which consisted of two implicit states
such as relevance and irrelevance while eye movements
were observed [9]. As a result, the model could provide
implicit relevance feedback by making inferences from the
eye movement data.
According to the previous studies, implicit states may be
ﬂexibly deﬁned if they are related to eye movement behavior.
There are a variety of possible applications. Also, sequential
0 
0.5 
1 
Mean RT for Correct
Mean RT for Incorrect
Accuracy 
3 
5 
7 
Number of statements
4 
2 
3 
1 
0 
Time (sec.) 
Accuracy 
Figure 2.
Correct rate and mean reaction times for responses
Figure 3.
An example of scan-paths
behavior analysis of viewers or users may be possible by
using their eye movement data. In this paper, a contextual
understanding and transition among internal mental states
has been employed, and both understanding and the decision
making processes are analyzed.
III. EXPERIMENT
A. Experimental task
First, participants were asked to understand and memorize
a number of deﬁnition statements which describe locational
relationships between two objects (Figure 1a). Each deﬁ-
nition statement was presented for 5 seconds. Second, ten
questions were given in statement form, to determine the
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4.0
correct
incorrect
3
5
7
Number of statements
Frequency / sec.
Figure 4.
Frequency of saccadic eye movements by response correctness.
degree of understanding. These questions asked participants
to select one of two choices about whether each question
statement was “Yes (True)” or “No (False)” as quickly as
possible (Figure 1b). Each question statement was shown
for 10 seconds. All texts were written using Japanese Kanji
and Hiragana characters, and the texts were read from left
to right. This is a Prolog-like test for human subjects [12]. If
the participant can understand the context of the deﬁnition
statements, they can make the correct decision. No feedback
about response accuracy was given. At deﬁnition statements
3, 5 and 7 the difﬁculty of the deﬁnition statements in-
creased because the amount of information to be memorized
increased. Again, during the experimental session, a set
of deﬁnition statement containing a number of statements
(3, 5, or 7), is presented as shown in Figure 1a, and the
10 question statements in Figure 1b are presented after
that. This experimental condition was assigned randomly to
participants, to prevent any sequential effects. Five sets of
statements were created for each of the three task levels.
In total, there were 150 data responses divided into 15 task
sets. The subjects were 6 male university students ranging
from 23 to 33 years of age. They had normal visual acuity
for this experiment.
The correct rates and mean reaction times of responses
for question statements are summarized in Figure 2 [3]. As
shown in the ﬁgure, the response accuracy decreases with
the number of deﬁnition statements, and mean reaction times
depend on whether the responses are correct or incorrect.
B. Eye-movement measuring
The task was displayed on a 20 inch LCD monitor
positioned 60 cm from the subject. During the experiment,
participant’s eye movements were observed using a video-
based eye tracker (EMR-8NL). Eye-movement was tracked
on a 640 by 480 pixel screen at 60 Hz, and was recorded
on a PC as time course data, while participants read and
understood the content of each statement.
The tracked eye movement data was extracted for the
period of time participants viewed each question statement
Certainty
[C]
Uncertainty
[U]
Figure 5.
Trellis diagram of a transition.
before they pressed the mouse button. The tracking data was
converted into visual angles according to the distance be-
tween the participants and the display. Differences between
viewing positions were calculated using the recorded time
course data, and eye movements were divided into saccades
and ﬁxations using a threshold of 40 degrees per second
[13].
In Figure 3, eye movements including ﬁxation and saccade
are superimposed on a question statement. The dots indicate
ﬁxation points, and the lines indicate saccade paths. The
appearance of ﬁxations and saccades are related to the
correctness of the answers. The frequency of saccades per
seconds are summarized in Figure 4. The horizontal axis in-
dicates the number of deﬁnition statements, and the vertical
axis indicates the saccade frequency. The frequencies are
summarized by correct responses and incorrect responses.
As shown in the ﬁgure, there is a signiﬁcant difference
between answer correctness [14]. Also, selected features
of eye movements, such as saccadic eye movements, have
been discussed previously [2], [3]. The eye movements are
observed at a sampling rate of 60 Hz, and features of eye
movement (saccades or ﬁxations) appear in every sample.
In this paper, we suppose that the viewer has certainty
about an answer when the response is correct. Otherwise,
the viewer has uncertainty when the response is incorrect.
Though the viewer’s certainness about an answer may be
ﬁxed at the time of responding, the certainness is not ﬁxed
during the thinking about the answer. According to Figure 3,
viewers repeatedly read the question statements. Therefore,
their certainness about the answer may change before their
ﬁnal response. Here, two states of certainness about answers
can be deﬁned as “Certainty” and “Uncertainty”, and the
level of certainness frequently moves between the two states.
As Figure 4 shows that eye movements reﬂect answer
correctness, eye movements may also suggest the state of
certainty during the reading of question statements.
IV. HIDDEN MARKOV MODELING
According to the correct and incorrect responses in the
task results, it is supposed that there are two internal states
used when making choices. As mentioned in the previous
section, these two internal states are deﬁned as “Certainty”
and “Uncertainty”. The state transition is illustrated as a
Trellis diagram in Figure 5. Initially viewers are in a state of
“Uncertainty”. Then a transition to “Certainty” occurs after
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

P(U|U)
auu
P(C|C)
acc
P(U|C):auc
P(C|U):acu
Certainty
[C]
Uncertainty
[U]
P(fix|C->C)
P(sac|C->C)
P(fix|U->C)
P(sac|U->C)
P(fix|C->U)
P(sac|C->U)
P(fix|U->U)
P(sac|U->U)
Figure 6.
HMM diagram.
that. Also, eye movements may be related to the transition,
therefore, speciﬁc eye movements such as outputs happen
when these state transitions occur.
The outputs are simply saccades (sac) and ﬁxations (ﬁx),
as mentioned in the above section. The series of observed
eye movements, as the set of time series data, O can be
deﬁned using the following formula:
O
=
{o1, o2, o3, · · · , ot}
ot
=
”sac” : saccade ∨ ”fix” : fixation
(1)
t
=
T × 60 − 1, T : sampling time(sec.)
60 : samplingfrequency(Hz)
In this paper, a hidden Markov model (HMM), which
has two states of certainty for contextually understanding
question statements, is employed as a dynamic arithmetic
model [7]. A diagram of the model is illustrated in Figure
6. The two states indicate levels of high or low certainty for
two responses know as Certainty and Uncertainty. When the
internal state changes during eye movement, the probability
of a correct response is high when the internal state stays
high (“Certainty”), and the probability of such a response
is low when the state stays low (“Uncertainty”). When the
question statements are displayed, the certainty must be low,
thus the ﬁrst transition is movement from a low to high state
of certainty. The transition is illustrated as a trellis diagram
in Figure 5. The transition happens for every sample, as
shown in the ﬁgure.
As a result, the model λ can be deﬁned as follows:
λ
=
{S, Y, A, B, π}
S
=
{si|”C” : certain ∨ ”U” : uncertain}
Y
=
{fix, sac}
(2)
A
=
{aij, i, j = C, U|acc, acu, auu, auc},
∑
j
aij = 1
B
=
{bij(k), i, j = C, U, k = fix, sac},
∑
k
bij(k) = 1
π
=
{πC = 0, πU = 1}
The HMM λ can be measured using a series of output
symbols O, as mentioned above. A set of parameters,
θ ≡ (A, B) is optimized using experimental data. The
Baum-Welch algorithm, which uses a likelihood function,
is employed as shown in (3) [7].
log P(S|O, θ)
(3)
The Forward algorithm provides a series of state transi-
tions S, which maximize the likelihood function [7].
The performance of predicting the states and responses
was evaluated using the leave-one-out technique. One set of
responses, such as a data set for one level of difﬁculty for
one subject, was used as a test set, while the remainder of
the data was assigned as training data, to optimize the set
of parameters in θ. Using the model and a series of output
symbols of eye movements, state transitions were simulated.
As previously stated, correct and incorrect responses were
predicted, and the estimation accuracy was also evaluated
during the time series.
In Figure 6, circles represent two states, which are levels
of high and low certainty. The probability (Pr) of remaining
in one state can be deﬁned as c for “certain” and u for
“uncertain”, while Pr(c) + Pr(u) = 1. According to the
features of the Markov transition, the transitional probability
can be calculated as shown in (4). Then, the probability of
certainty can be stated as a time series.
lim
m→∞
[ acc
auc
acu
auu
]m
×
[ cini.
uini.
]
→
[ c
u
]
(4)
V. RESULTS
The results of the simulation were summarized as a
contingency table in Table I, for three of the deﬁnition
statements, at 550 msec. (0.55 sec.) after onset of the
question statement. Here, when a transition remains in a state
of certainty at that time, the response may be correct. When
the state of uncertainty occurs at that time, the response
may be incorrect. According to this hypothesis, the accurate
predictions are certainty-correct and uncertainty-incorrect.
The prediction accuracy is given as 83.3% ((242+8)/300).
The accuracy of the time series is calculated using the same
procedure. The results for each condition between 0 and 1
second of the commencement of the statement presentation
are summarized in Figure 7. In the ﬁgure, “3 tasks” means
the prediction accuracy when three deﬁnition statements are
used.
The accuracy when three deﬁnition statements are used
is almost always the highest. The accuracy decreases as
the number of deﬁnition statements increases from 3 to 7.
The accuracy of the responses coincides with the level of
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Table I
PREDICTION ACCURACY OF 3 STATEMENTS AT 550
MSEC.(ACCURACY=83.3%)
Prediction
Certainty
Uncertainty
Correct
242
41
Incorrect
9
8
1
50
60
70
80
90
100
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Sampling time (sec.)
Estimation accuracy (%)
N of task=3
N of task=5
N of task=7
Figure 7.
Temporal changes in prediction accuracy.
prediction accuracy. The procedure can not be concerned
with the rate of correct responses because the training data
consists of a series of equation symbols representing eye
movements. According to the changes in prediction accuracy
during observation, the accuracy for three statements is high
from 0-250 msec. Also, the accuracy for all conditions is
high around 550 msec. The highest accuracies, observed at
550 msec., are 83.3% for three statements, 76.3% for ﬁve
statements, and 70.7% for seven statements. This 550 msec.
produces a local accuracy maximum.
The accuracy performance is equivalent to the rates of
estimation using all eye-movement data from before the mo-
ment when participants responded [3]. Time series prediction
produces many response accuracy prediction beneﬁts. Dur-
ing the reading process, accuracy depends on the duration
of the decision making process. When eye movements
are observed in real time, the response accuracy can be
estimated.
According to (4), the probability of remaining in a state
of certainty (Pr(c), at m = t) can be calculated using the
time sequence as well as the sampling rate (t in (1)). Again,
the possibility of a correct response is also high when the
probability is high at the time. The average probabilities for
three levels of task difﬁculty in the time course are illustrated
as bar graphs in Figure 8. The times (t) are between 0 and 1
seconds, and also at 2, 3, and 4 seconds. As shown in Table
I, the distributions of both responses and predictions shift to
the certain state. Therefore, all probabilities are higher than
0.7, but the changes in probability indicate the sensitivity
of correct responses. The probability is high from 100-250
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
3 Tasks
5 Tasks
7 Tasks
Probability of Staying in a State of Certainty
1
2
3
4
Seconds
Figure 8. Change in probability of staying a state of certainty by durations.
msec., and decreases with the duration. In particular, the
rates decrease gradually after 1 second. The mean reaction
times during the experiment are around 3 seconds, and the
results indicate that the probability of certainty decreases
along with the process of reading the statements. These
results may suggest that understanding and decision making
are occurring at an early stage, prior to decision responses.
VI. DISCUSSION
Both prediction accuracy and the probability of remaining
in a state of Certainty are affected by the high rate of correct
responses. The distribution of training data sometimes shifts
to the Certainty state. However, the results for the condition
of 7 tasks showed a similar tendency, though the correct rate
was smaller than 50%. Since the deviations of the estimation
accuracy and the probability along the time course are
observed, the model can simulate the transitions of internal
states.
The temporal changes in prediction accuracy and the
probability of certainty may be concerned with the process
of reading statements, because this task requires participants
to understand question statements and to recall knowledge
memorized from the deﬁnition statements. The reading pro-
cess is tracked using eye movements [6], but the analysis is
performed step by step. A typical analysis of the process of
reading statements uses event related potentials (ERP). The
negative peak is at around 400 msec. (N400) after statement
presentation has been affected by the context [15]. This
result suggests that statement reading requires more than
400 msec. The local maximum peak of prediction accuracy,
concentrated around 550 msec., is included in the same
period as the N400 peak. The results of both character
perception and eye movement during reading suggest that
150-200 msec. is required to understand the ﬁrst parts of
the statements [6], [16].
According to the evidence, it is possible to suppose that
contextual understanding is made between 150 and 400
msec. and that correct or incorrect responses are made after
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

that. When the response is delayed, the level of certainty
decreases with the duration, because the viewer can not
make a certain decision or hesitates to respond. Further
examination of these processes will be a subject of our
further study.
In this paper, a recall test was employed to measure tran-
sitions from an internal state of “Certainty” to “Uncertainty”
and back, using eye movements. This basic approach can be
applied to general user interface issues. If the internal states
are deﬁned as sets of “Good usability” and “Poor usability”,
then “Like” and other selectable icons, eye movements may
indicate a change in user’s intentions while the user is
interfacing with an application. The examination of this
possibility will also be a subject of our further study.
VII. CONCLUSION
The hidden Markov model, which consists of two hidden
states, has been created to predict the correctness of answer
choices in response to questions in recall tests. The model
was optimized using observations of participant’s responses
and their eye movements. The prediction accuracy was
calculated using the sequence of eye movement data, and
the accuracy decreased with the difﬁculty of the task. The
highest accuracy was observed at 550 msec. after stimuli
onset. The probability of choosing the correct response while
remaining in a state of certainty was calculated using the
probability of transition. The certainty was the highest from
100-250 msec. after stimuli onset, and decreased as the
duration increased. The results of the simulation coincided
with the experimental observations. These results provide
evidences that the model presents a possibility of conducting
a dynamic or time series analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was partially supported by the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), Grant-in-Aid for
Challenging Exploratory Research (23650528: 2011-2012).
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Zhang, An Item Response Model on Probability-Testing (in
Japanese).
Tokyo, Japan: University of Tokyo Press, 2007.
[2] M. Nakayama and Y. Takahasi, “Estimation of certainty
for responses to multiple-choice questionnaires using eye
movements,” ACM TOMCCAP, vol. 5, no. 2, p. Article 14,
2008.
[3] M. Nakayama and Y. Hayashi, “Estimation of viewer’s
response for contextual understanding of tasks using fea-
tures of eye-movements,” in Proceedings of ACM Sympo-
sium on Eye-Tracking Research & Applications (ETRA2010),
A. Hyrskykari and Q. Ji, Eds. New York, USA: ACM, 2010,
pp. 53–56.
[4] J. H. Goldberg and J. C. Schryver, “Eye-gaze determination
of user intent at the computer interface,” in Eye Movement
Research, Volume 6: Mechanisms, Processes and Applica-
tions (Studies in Visual Information Processing), J. Findlay,
R. Walker, and R. Kentridge, Eds.
Elsevier, 1995, pp. 491–
502.
[5] R. Bednarik, H. Vrzakova, and M. Hradis, “What do you
want to do next: A novel approach for intent prediction in
gaze-based interaction,” in Proceedings of ETRA 2012: ACM
Symposium on Eye-Tracking Research & Appliations, J. B.
Mulligan and P. Qvarfordt, Eds.
New York, USA: ACM,
March 2012, pp. 83–90.
[6] K. Rayner, “Eye movements in reading and information
processing: 20 years of research,” Psychological Bulletin, vol.
124, no. 3, pp. 372–422, 1998.
[7] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning.
New York, USA: Springer Science+Business Media, 2006.
[8] A. Liu, “What the driver’s eye tells the car’s brain,” in Eye
Guidance in Reading and Scene Perception, G. Underwood,
Ed.
Elsevier, 1998, pp. 431–452.
[9] Y. Puolam¨aki, J. Saloj¨arvi, E. Savia, J. Simola, and S. Kaski,
“Combining eye movements and collaborative ﬁltering for
proactive information retrieval,” in Proceedings of ACM-
SIGIR 2005, A. Heikkil, A. Pietik, and O. Silven, Eds., ACM.
New York, USA: ACM Press, 2005, pp. 145–153.
[10] R. J. K. Jacob and K. S. Karn, “Eye tracking in human–
computer interaction and usability research: Ready to deliver
the promises,” in The Mind’s Eye: Cognitive and Applied
Aspects of Eye Movement Research, Hyona, Radach, and
Deubel, Eds.
Oxford, UK: Elsevier Science BV, 2003.
[11] J. H. Goldberg and X. P. Kotval, “Computer interface evalu-
ation using eye movements: methods and constructs,” Indus-
trial Ergonomics, vol. 24, pp. 631–645, 1999.
[12] W. Takita and M. Nakayama, “Inﬂuence of audio-visual pre-
sentation style for sentences on their understanding,” IEICE
Technical Report, vol. 104, no. 132, pp. 17–22, 2004.
[13] Y. Ebisawa and M. Sugiura, “Inﬂuences of target and ﬁx-
ation point conditions on characteristics of visually guided
voluntary saccade,” The Journal of the Institute of Image
Information and Television Engineers, vol. 52, no. 11, pp.
1730–1737, 1998.
[14] M. Nakayama and Y. Hayashi, “Feasibility study for the use
of eye-movements in estimation of answer correctness,” in
Proceedings of COGAIN2009, A. Villanueva, J. P. Hansen,
and B. K. Ersboell, Eds., 2009, pp. 71–75.
[15] M. Kutas and S. A. Hillyard, “Reading senseless sentences:
Brain potentials reﬂect semantic incongruity,” Science, vol.
207, pp. 203–208, 1980.
[16] H. Abe and M. Nakayama, “Event-related potential study
of Kanji perception process,” The Journal of the Institute
of Image Information and Television Engineers, vol. 60, pp.
397–404, 2006.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

