Simpati: Network-based System for Patients' Classification Reveals Disease Specific 
Pathways Driven by Cohesive Communities 
 
Luca Giudice 
A.I. Virtanen Institute for Molecular Sciences 
University of Eastern Finland 
Kuopio, Finland 
luca.giudice@uef.fi 
Claudia Mengoni, Rosalba Giugno 
Department of Informatics 
University of Verona 
Verona, Italy 
claudia.mengoni@univr.it,  rosalba.giugno@univr.it
 
Abstract—Patient classifiers should be able to rely on the 
strength of machine learning methodologies while not losing 
biological interpretability. So far, most of the developed 
methods lack in one of the two aspects. We propose Simpati, a 
pathway-based tool for patient classification, which enables 
accurate classification focusing on the detection of relevant 
biological features and patient cohesive communities. The tool 
makes it possible to classify patients and investigate the 
features which were mostly representative of each class. It 
presents ad-hoc algorithms for the processing of patient 
similarity networks and proposes an effective simulation 
strategy as a recommender system to predict a patient's class 
based on graph topology. Its computational performance, 
classification performance and biological validation were 
performed on genetic data from different types of cancer and 
compared favorably with state-of-the-art competitors. 
 
Pathway-based classification; Network-based propagation; 
Patient similarity network; Subgroup cohesive algorithm. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
High-throughput biological data provide valuable 
information to clinicians for the prognosis and treatment 
response of patients. They offer quantitative and qualitative 
evidences to biomedical scientists for developing a study or 
confirming wet-lab results. Pathway-based analysis is a 
technique to investigate these data and detect molecular 
mechanisms related to the patients [1][2]. The pathway 
space is more robust to noise than the single feature level, 
summarizes the information of multiple patient’s molecules 
into the pathway activity (inhibited or activated), reduces 
the model complexity and maintains predictive accuracy 
[3][4]. Nowadays, pathway-based analysis is mostly 
performed through enrichment tools, fundamental methods 
which provide to clinicians understanding of the cellular 
functions affected in a patient, so that they can better define 
a disease phenotype and manually classify patients. 
Although some attempts have been made to couple pathway 
enrichment with classification [5], pathway-based classifiers 
that do not require pathway enrichment (i.e., supervised 
classifiers able to integrate simple pathway information to 
classify biological samples), are not yet strongly developed.  
Among them there are two classifiers that exploit the idea of 
pathway. The first is PASNet [6], which incorporates 
biological pathways in a Deep Neural Network. The neural  
 
network is composed by an input gene layer, a pathway 
layer, 
a 
hidden 
layer 
that 
represents 
hierarchical 
relationships among biological pathways and an output layer 
that corresponds to the patient classes. The second is netDx 
[7] and represents pathways thanks to the Patient Similarity 
Network (PSN) paradigm. In a PSN, each node is an 
individual patient and an edge between two patients 
corresponds to pairwise similarity for a given patient’s 
feature (e.g., gender, height, gene expression). All the user-
provided data are converted into PSNs and molecular data 
can be converted into networks representing pathways. This 
made netDx a pioneer classifier able to combine multi-
omics and pathway specific features. The decision system of  
the software relies on GeneMANIA [8], state-of-art gene 
function predictor, to select the best patient similarity 
networks and to use them in the classification. netDx 
revealed to be better than canonical machine learning 
algorithms and to provide a good level of interpretability 
based on the network's graphical representation. However, 
the software requires the user to define a similarity measures 
for each input data and manually tune hyper-parameters, 
making the results highly dependent on users choices. 
Additionally, netDx does not consider the topology of the 
networks for inferring the relationships between training and 
testing patients, providing a black box prediction difficult to 
interpret. 
A classifier should be able to benefit both from the 
interpretability of pathway-based enrichment tools and the 
strength of machine learning methodologies [9]. We want to 
stand up to the challenge by proposing the pathway-based 
classifier Simpati. Our method provides a novel feature-
selection strategy for classifiers based on patient similarity 
networks, implements a subgroup cohesive algorithm for 
extracting patient communities in PSNs and proposes an 
effective simulation strategy to predict a patient's class 
based on graph topology. Plus, the method introduces ad-
hoc operations for genetic data to reduce the number of 
hyper-parameters, similarity measures, or external software 
that the user has to define or install, it naturally handles 
outliers and integrates a graphical user interface to allow the 
visualization of the networks. 
This text is structured as follows: in the Methods section 
the general workflow of the tool is described and different 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-971-3
BIOTECHNO 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

subsections detail the implementation of each step. These 
include all steps necessary for data preparation, feature 
selection and prediction, as well as a description of required 
input data and possible downstream analyses. In the Results 
section, Simpati performances are compared to those of  two 
state-of-the-art competitors, both in terms of computational 
requirements, classification performance and biological 
interpretation. Finally, the Conclusions section remarks the 
impact of this classifier, its limitations, and its future 
development.  
II. 
METHODS 
In this section, a general overview of Simpati’s workflow is 
given, then the other subsections detail the specific aspects 
of implementation of each step. The R package to use 
Simpati and its graphical interface can be found online 
[10][11]. 
A. Overview 
Simpati is a binary patient classifier, which exploits the 
similarity of patients’ molecular profiles at the pathway-
level. An overview of the method is shown in Figure 1. It 
takes as input patients' genetic profiles similarly to a gene 
differential analysis setting where counts have been library 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
normalized and two classes are to be compared. The method 
has to be provided also with a list of pathways and a gene  
interaction network. Simpati transforms the profile of each 
individual patient to take into account the interconnectivity 
of genes. Each profile is propagated over the interaction 
network and the transformed data are used in the 
downstream analysis. Next, Simpati creates, selects and 
cleans PSNs. For each set of genetic features falling into a 
pathway, Simpati creates a Pathway-Specific PSN (psPSN), 
tests if the two patient classes show separability and finds 
cohesive communities inside each class. A psPSN is 
retained if it shows a strong intra-similarity between patients 
of one class, while having at the same time a weak intra-
class similarity in the other class and a weak inter-class 
similarity. Once a network is selected as significant, Simpati 
removes patients showing an outlier pathway activity as 
compared to the rest of patients in the same class. Signature 
pathways are then used to classify patients of unknown 
class, based on their similarity to labeled patients.  
B. Network-based data preparation 
The first step is the transformation of patients’ biological 
profiles using a network-based propagation algorithm. Each 
single-level feature gets a new value based on its a priori  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 
 
Figure 1. Simpati’s workflow: (a) Overview of the main steps. (b) Input: matrix of features by patients, feature interaction network, features grouped by 
pathways. (c) Each patient’s profile is propagated on the interaction network. (d) Within each pathway’s subnetwork patient’s similarity is computed. 
Patient’s similarities are the edges of Pathway-Specific Patient Similarity Networks (psPSNs). (e) A psPSN is signature if intra-class similarities are 
stronger that intra-class similarities of the other class and inter-class similarities. (f) Unknown patients are classified based on their similarity to other 
patients and on how well they resemble class representatives. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-971-3
BIOTECHNO 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

information (e.g., gene expression) and on its associations 
with all the other molecules in the network. At first, the 
values of the patient’s genetic features are mapped to their 
corresponding nodes in the provided interaction network, 
then 
Simpati 
propagates 
their 
values 
through 
the interactions. Each node, including the ones without a 
value, gets a score, which reflects its starting information 
and the amount given and received from its neighbors. 
Simpati propagates using the random walk with restart 
algorithm on the row-normalized network [12]. Propagating 
a patient’s profile starting from the genetic single-value 
features allows us to obtain a genome-wide profile. This is 
relevant because the profile can be compared across patients 
and gives a genome-wide overview of all the genes. 
Moreover, this is particularly beneficial when we deal with 
sparse data (e.g., somatic mutation data) where fewer 
features are identified from the analysis [13].  
C. Pathway specific patient similarity  
Simpati computes a pairwise similarity between patients 
for each set of genetic features falling into a specific 
pathway. In this way, Simpati creates a database of psPSNs 
reflecting the similarity of patients in each pathway. The 
nodes of a psPSN are all the patients with known class and 
the edges are weighted to reflect the pairwise similarity of  
patients in the features belonging to the pathway. 
The approach of measuring similarity on a pathway-
level, not only allows to reduce the dimensionality of the 
features to be compared across patients, but it also creates a 
feature space, which is more robust to noise compared to 
single features, while still retaining predictive accuracy [14]. 
Pathway-specific patient similarity is computed as a 
linear combination score of three factors. The first one (1) is 
the Weighted Jaccard and determines how similar the 
propagated values between two profiles are; the second 
factor (2) determines how high or low the propagated values 
are, while the third factor is the opposite of their difference 
(3). The similarity increases as the two patients have similar 
values and at the same time high values for the same single-
level feature. This is reflected in the final similarity 
measure, called Trending Matching (4): 
 
WJp(Pa,Pb) = ∑g min(mg,a, mg,b)                                 (1) 
                                                        ∑g max(mg,a, mg,b) 
  
 
MGp(Pa,Pb) = ∑g (mg,a+ mg,b)/2                                  (2) 
                                                           |p|                                          
 
DIFFp(Pa,Pb) = 1-|WJp(Pa,Pb)-MGp(Pa,Pb)|                          (3) 
 
TMp(Pa,Pb) = WJp(Pa,Pb)+MGp(Pa,Pb) +DIFF(Pa,Pb)              (4) 
 
where p is a pathway, Pa and Pb are two patients, g are all the 
features | g  ∈ p, and m is the matrix of features by patients. 
D. Feature selection and Best Friend Connector algorithm 
Simpati evaluates which pathways are signatures for one 
of the classes. The members of one class must be more 
similar (strong intra-similarities of one class) than the 
members of the opposite class (weak intra-similarities of the 
other class) and the two classes are not similar (weak inter-
similarities). In other words, the topology of the psPSN 
must reflect the presence of a clique of nodes belonging to 
the same class being more strongly connected than the rest 
of the patients. Despite this criterion being genetically 
intuitive, it is not easy to satisfy due to the complex 
structure of a patient similarity network where each patient 
is connected to any other member of the classes in 
comparison. One patient can easily be more similar to the 
patients of its opposite class in one specific pathway activity 
and decrease the separability of the groups. To account for 
this situation and making the feature selection more robust 
to outliers at the level of the single pathway, we developed 
an algorithm called Best Friends Connector algorithm 
(BFC). The latter is a cohesive subgroup detection algorithm 
implemented specifically for PSNs to find the strongest 
community of patients from each class in a network. The 
algorithm relies on the definition of the concepts of first 
order best friend (1BF), second order best friend (2BF) and 
outsiders. Given a root node, its 1BFs are its most similar 
nodes. 2BFs are the nodes that are not among the root’s 
1BFs but are 1BFs to one of the root’s 1BFs. Outsiders do 
not belong to any of the previous definitions. The algorithm 
performs the following operations. It first adjusts the 
weights of the intraclass connections. Precisely, it increases 
the similarity of two patients when they both have a weak 
similarity with outsiders and it decreases it in the opposite 
case. Then, it iteratively considers one patient as root, it 
assesses the average of the intraclass connection weights of 
the subgroup composed by his 1BFs and 2BFs. When each 
patient has been considered, the algorithm retrieves the set 
of best friends who got the strongest connections. The 
cardinality of the 1BFs and 2BFs subgroups, as well as the 
size of the final subgroup, are customizable.  
E. Classification 
The signature pathways identified by Simpati are used to 
classify unknown patients. Each of them is compared to 
already annotated patients and assigned to the same class of 
who is most similar to. However, the only strength of 
similarity could be misleading. The unknown patient could 
have the strongest similarity with outlier members of the 
class. Therefore, we designed Simpati to consider also how 
much the unknown patient represents the class. 
The patient to be classified undergoes the same 
preprocessing described for annotated patients: its profile is 
propagated in the interaction network and its pairwise TM 
similarity to each annotated patient is computed, so that the 
unclassified patient becomes itself a node in each signature 
psPSN. Then, Simpati associates the profile to one of the 
classes based on the results of two approaches. For the first, 
it determines the average similarity of the patient to the 
members of each class. The patient would be assigned the 
class to which it has the strongest similarity. For the second 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-971-3
BIOTECHNO 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

approach, Simpati pretends that the patient belongs to one 
class and measures how far it is from being considered an 
outlier. The patient would be assigned the class in which it 
is considered less of an outlier with respect to the other 
members. More specifically, the patient is simulated to 
belong to one class and the BFC algorithm is run iteratively. 
At each run, the algorithm is asked to return a smaller 
number of strongly connected individuals. The iteration 
stops when the patient does not belong to the best subgroup. 
A large number of iterations reflects a strong similarity of 
the patient to the class representatives. Due to this, the 
patient would be a candidate to be assigned the class in 
which it survived the highest number of iterations. Simpati 
assigns the patient to the class that has been predicted by 
both the approaches. In case, the results are not concordant, 
then Simpati does not make the prediction and the pathway 
together with its PSN are removed from the downstream 
operations. This step is performed for all signature psPSNs, 
then the patient’s definitive class is the one to which the 
patient has been most frequently assigned. 
The classification performance are evaluated with a 
leave one out cross validation approach, such that iteratively 
one patient is considered unknown and composes the testing 
set, while the others are known and are used as training to 
determine which pathways are signature. The performance 
on the testing set are computed using area under the receiver 
operator characteristic curve (auROC) and area under 
precision recall curve (auPR) metrics. 
F.  Downstream Analysis 
The signature pathways that are used to classify at least 
one patient are reported in the final output of Simpati and 
information about which class they were identified to be 
signature for. To further pinpoint the most relevant 
pathways and confirm their signature role for a class, an 
empirical probability value is computed. On each signature 
psPSN it is tested whether by randomly shuffling the 
patients between the two classes, the pathway is still 
predictive of the original signature class. 
To improve the interpretability of the results some other 
information is computed. First, it has been established that 
signature pathways reflect strong similarity between 
members of one class. However, Simpati also reports 
whether the members are similar in having high values (e.g., 
high gene expression), reported as up-involved signature 
pathway, or low values (e.g., low gene expression), reported 
as down-involved signature pathway. Additionally, based on 
the BFC results, it is reported how many times a patient has 
been considered an outlier for its class. 
When the features of the profiles provided as input to 
Simpati are genes and the classification aims to determine 
association to a disease, it is possible to validate the 
biological relevance of the identified pathways within 
Simpati. Queries to the gene-disease associations database 
(DisGeNet) [15] and to the Human Protein Atlas [16] allows 
detecting whether the features returned are already known to 
be associated with the disease being tested. 
To obtain a graphical representation  of the psPSNs of 
interest, Simpati offers a graphical interface, which allows 
to obtain a compact representation of the networks. Patients 
are grouped based on their similarity so that, instead of 
plotting all nodes, only some representatives are depicted, 
making the interpretation of the figure much more feasible. 
G. Data preparation for testing 
Simpati performances were tested by classifying patients 
from five cancer types, extracted from The Cancer Genome 
Atlas (TCGA) using the R packages curatedTCGAData 
(v1.1.38) [17] and TCGAutils [18]. Two  types of biological 
omics were tested for each cancer type, gene expression 
from RNAseq data and somatic mutations. The classes 
assigned to the patients were based on disease stage 
progression binarized into Early (stage I and II) or Late 
(stage III and IV). Data preparation for the RNAseq 
followed the workflow defined by Law et al. [19], while 
somatic mutation data have been converted into a binary 
matrix, where a value equal to one was indicating a mutated 
gene in a patient and zero otherwise. Finally, the six 
datasets  were composed of the following number of 
samples: 14 Liver hepatocellular carcinoma (LIHC) (7 
Early, 7 Late), 21 Stomach adenocarcinoma (STAD) (8 
Early, 13 Late), 37 Kidney renal clear cell carcinoma 
(KIRC) (24 Early, 13 Late), 45 Bladder Urothelial 
Carcinoma (BLCA) (8 Early, 37 Late), 75 Lung squamous 
cell carcinoma (LUSC) (60 Early, 13 Late) and 152 
Esophageal carcinoma (ESCA)  (91 Early, 61 Late) 
patients.  
Pathways were collected from the major databases 
MSigDB [20] and GO [21] and KEGG [22], while a Biogrid 
network (v4.2.191) [23] was used  to model the biological 
feature’s interactions.  
III. 
RESULTS 
Simpati 
classification 
results 
and 
computational 
performance were compared to those obtained with netDx 
(v1.2.0 14-10-2020) for both gene expression and somatic 
mutations on the prepared TCGA datasets and with PASNet 
only for gene expression, as this tool does not handle sparse 
data. Additionally, a biological validation of the pathways 
retrieved was performed on Simpati and netDx. An online 
repository is available with a tutorial on how to replicate the 
results [24]. 
The classification comparison was performed on the 
metrics supported by both netDx and PASNet, the auROC 
and the auPR. These were obtained from a 10-fold cross-
validation approach in netDx and a stratified 5-fold cross-
validation repeated 10 timed in PASNet, based on the 
authors’ vignette, while for Simpati it was obtained through 
the leave one out cross validation approach. Figure 2 shows 
how Simpati performs better than the competitors in both 
the measures and the biological omics. Simpati also proves  
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-971-3
BIOTECHNO 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

   
Figure 2. Classification performance comparison between methods. The 
top box shows performance on the RNAseq datasets, the bottom box on the 
somatic mutation datasets. 
 
to be more reliable in each dataset with a standard error 
equal to zero due to its leave-one out cross-validation 
approach.   
The patient similarity network paradigm used by Simpati 
and netDx brings many advantages both in the feature 
selection, in the classification phase and in the overall 
interpretability of the software. However, these pros come 
with a price, which is the software scalability already 
introduced as a challenge by Pai et al. [5]. A PSN is a 
complete graph that the methods build with all the patients 
and for every pathway. This means that an increment in the 
number of patients and in the number of annotated pathways 
lead the methods to require more computational resources. 
netDx and Simpati faced this point with different 
approaches. netDx is implemented in R and Java, uses the 
disk to save temporary files and applies a sparsification of 
the PSNs to decrease the number of edges and so the 
amount of information associated with them.  Simpati is 
implemented completely in R, natively supports parallel 
computing and handles all the data of the workflow as 
sparse matrices or vectors. The RAM usage and the running 
time required to classify the TCGA datasets were monitored 
with the same hardware settings for all tools (32-Core 
Processor, 251 Gigabyte System memory). Simpati 
compared favorably in the usage of the resources, as 
reflected in Figure 3. On average across the datasets, 
Simpati it’s ~ 16 times faster than netDx and requires ~ 1.5 
times less Gb of RAM. Both netDx and Simpati 
outperformed PASNet performance. 
Both Simpati and netDx provide the most relevant pathways 
they detect during the workflow. These pathways should 
help characterize patient’s classes and improve the 
interpretability of the method. For this reason, Simpati 
integrates into its workflow a biological validation step 
exploiting DisGeNet and the Human Protein Atlas. For each 
dataset, a set of key words describing the disease are 
defined, then the percentage of key words associated with 
the pathway in DisGeNet at least once are reported. 
Additionally, Simpati reports the percentage of features in 
each pathway which are associated with the cancer type in 
 
Figure 3. Computational performance comparison between methods. The 
top box shows running time in hours, the bottom box shows RAM usage in 
Gigabytes.   
 
the Human Protein Atlas.  In order to compare the biological 
validity of the methods, these values were computed for 
netDx and Simpati signature pathways and only the most 
biologically relevant pathways were kept. Two criteria for 
retaining relevant pathways were tested: pathways having at 
least one key word associated in DisGeNet and pathways 
having more than 90% of features associated with the cancer 
type in the Human Protein Atlas. The number of pathways 
satisfying these constraints were compared and results are 
shown in Figure 4.  
 
Figure 4. Biological validation comparison. The top box shows the relative 
proportion of signature pathways associated with relevant dataset key-
words between the two methods and the bottom box shows the relative 
proportion of signature pathways associated with disease-type between the 
two methods. 
 
This analysis highlights how Simpati is able to select 
biologically significant pathways directly associated with 
the patients it classifies and it performs better than the 
competitor.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Simpati is a pathway-based classifier of patient classes 
for genetic data. It is the first classifier employing novel ad-
hoc algorithms for PSNs to detect pathway-specific 
similarities. The tool is strongly centered around providing a 
good interpretability, as it provides signature pathways to 
unveil the altered biological mechanisms of  a disease 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-971-3
BIOTECHNO 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

phenotype. Thanks to a propagation algorithm that considers 
the interconnected nature of the cell’s molecules, Simpati 
can classify dense, sparse, and nonhomogeneous genetic 
data. Future work will be focused on the development of 
strategies for the integration of multiple omics and on 
improving scalability for larger datasets. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
L.G developed the method, implemented and tested the 
software, wrote the text, and produced the images. C.M. 
tested the software and prepared the text. R. G. coordinated 
the project and revised the text. 
This work was supported by the European Union's 
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under 
grant agreement 814978 (TUBE), and by the JPND 
Personalized Medicine for Neurodegenerative Diseases 
project 334799 (ADAIR). 
REFERENCES 
[1]   L. Jin et al., “Pathway-based analysis tools for complex 
disease: a review”, Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics, no. 
12, pp.210-220, 2014. 
[2]  Y. Drier, M. Sheffer, and E. Domany, “Pathway-based 
personalized analysis of cancer”, PNAS, no.110, pp.6388-
6393, 2013. 
[3]   M. P. Segura-Lepe, H. C. Keun, and T. M. D. Ebbels, 
“Predictive modelling using pathway scores: robustness and 
significance of pathway collections”, BMC Bioinformatics, 
no.20, pp.543, 2019. 
[4]   E. Lee, H. Y. Chuang, J. W. Kim, T. Ideker, and D. Lee, 
“Inferring 
pathway 
activity 
toward 
precise 
disease 
classification”, PLoS Comput Biol, 2008. 
[5]  M. Yousef, E. Ülgen, and O. U. Sezerman, “CogNet: 
classification of gene expression data based on ranked active-
subnetwork-oriented KEGG pathway enrichment analysis”. 
PeerJ Computer Science no7, pp336, 2021. 
[6]   J. Hao, Y. Kim, T. K. Kim, and M. Kang, “PASNet: pathway-
associated sparse deep neural network for prognosis 
prediction from high-throughput data”, BMC Bioinformatics, 
no.19 pp.510, 2018. 
[7]   S. Pai,  et al., “netDx: interpretable patient classification using 
integrated patient similarity networks”, Mol Syst Biol no.15, 
2019. 
[8]   S. Mostafavi, D. Ray, D. Warde-Farley, C. Grouios, and Q. 
Morris, “GeneMANIA: a real-time multiple association 
network integration algorithm for predicting gene function”, 
Genome Biology, vol.9, 2018. 
[9]   F. Fabris, D. Palmer, J. P. de Magalhães, and A. A. Freitas 
“Comparing enrichment analysis and machine learning for 
identifying gene properties that discriminate between gene 
classes”, Brief Bioinform, no.21, pp.803–14, 2020. 
[10] Simpati 
R 
package. 
[Online]. 
Available 
at: 
https://github.com/InfOmics/Simpati. 
[11] Simpati 
 
GUI. 
[Online]. 
Available 
at: 
https://github.com/LucaGiudice/propaGUIation. 
[12]   D. H. Le, “Random walk with restart: A powerful network 
propagation 
algorithm 
in 
Bioinformatics 
field”, 
4th 
NAFOSTED Conference on Information and Computer 
Science,  p. 242–247, 2017. 
[13]   M. Hofree, J. P. Shen, H. Carter, A. Gross, and T. Ideker, 
“Network-based stratification of tumor mutations”, Nat 
Methods, no.10, pp.1108–1115, 2013.  
[14]   M. P. Segura-Lepe, H. C. Keun, and T. M. D. Ebbels, 
“Predictive modelling using pathway scores: robustness and 
significance of pathway collections”, BMC Bioinformatics 
no.20, pp.543, 2019. 
[15]  J. Piñero et al., “DisGeNET: a comprehensive platform 
integrating information on human disease-associated genes 
and variants”, Nucleic Acids Res, no.45, pp.D833–9. , 2017. 
[16] M. Uhlen et al., “A pathology atlas of the human cancer 
transcriptome”, Science vol.357, 2017. 
[17] Multiomic Integration of Public Oncology Databases in 
Bioconductor 
- 
PubMed 
n.d. 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33119407/ [retrieved May, 
2021]. 
[18] M. Ramos, L. Schiffer, S. Davis, and L. Waldron. 
“TCGAutils: TCGA utility functions for data management”, 
 R package version 1.10.1, 2021. 
[19] C. W. Law et al., “RNA-seq analysis is easy as 1-2-3 with 
limma, Glimma and edgeR”, F1000Res vol.5, 2015 
[20] A. Subramanian et al., “Gene set enrichment analysis: a 
knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide 
expression profiles”, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, no.102, 
pp.15545–50, 2005. 
[21]  M. Ashburner et al., “Gene ontology: tool for the unification 
of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium.” Nat Genet, 
no.25, pp.25–29, 2000. 
[22] M. Kanehisa M., and S. Goto. “KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of 
genes and genomes”, Nucleic Acids Res no.28, pp.27–30, 
2000. 
[23] R. Oughtred et al., “The BioGRID database: A comprehensive 
biomedical resource of curated protein, genetic, and chemical 
interactions”, Protein Sci, no.30, pp.187–200, 2021.  
[24] Simpati’s Supplementary for results replication. [Online]. 
Available at: https://github.com/LucaGiudice/supplementary-
Simpati. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-971-3
BIOTECHNO 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

