RNA_Seq Viewer: A Mobile App for Displaying NGS Gene Expression Data
Chien-Yuan Chiu, Yu-Chieh Lin and Wen-chang Lin 
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica 
Taipei, Taiwan, R. O. C. 
e-mail: jychiu_tw@yahoo.com.tw, joycelin18@gmail.com, wenlin@ibms.sinica.edu.tw
 
Abstract— In recent years, Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) 
technology has dramatically advanced genome researches and 
biomedical sciences, which generates and accumulates a large 
amount of biological data rapidly. Nowadays, there is a rapid 
expansion of tablets and smart phone devices, replacing the 
traditional personal computers and notebooks commonly used 
for information retrieval and display. However, there are little 
bioinformatic 
related 
mobile 
applications 
developed 
specifically for NGS data visualization on mobile devices. To 
demonstrate the feasibility of displaying large NGS data using 
the mobile devices, we designed and implemented a new iOS 
App - the RNA_Seq Viewer, for the visualization of The 
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) gene expression datasets. This 
iOS App could efficiently display gene expression information 
systematically over the human chromosome framework. We 
have processed over 2,500 human cancer patients in nine 
cancer types retrieved from the TCGA web site. This mobile 
App could be potentially utilized in future personalized 
medicine applications by serving as the essential visualization 
core component to easily access the personal genomic and 
medical information through the cloud based data warehouses. 
Keywords-bioinformatics; NGS; App; TCGA; RNA-Seq. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, genome sequence information has been 
accumulated rapidly thanks to the completion of human 
genome project and the development of Next Generation 
Sequencing (NGS) platform technologies. Therefore, many 
bioinformatic databases and tools are generated for the 
visualization and analysis of massive genomic sequence 
information [1]. It is not an easy task to efficiently display 
vast amount of biological annotation information in addition 
to the genomic sequences and chromosomal organizations 
using web browsers. There are several renowned web-based 
bioinformatic tools and databases to accomplish such 
challenges, including UCSC Genome Browser [2] and 
Ensembl [3]. However, over the last few years, it is worth 
noting that tablets and smart phone devices (such as iPad and 
iphone) are widely popularized and disseminated on the 
World, replacing the traditional personal computers. These 
devices utilize the multi-touch technology as the core user 
interface, and gradually transform the user experience and 
machine interface design.  
The computer software development sector is also 
heavily affected by this trend, with the rapid expansion of 
mobile applications (Apps) for mobile devices. Many 
developers have been concentrated on the App developments 
in addition to the traditional desktop software development. 
Few tablet Apps were created to retrieve and display text 
based genome annotation information [4]. However, there 
are no bioinformatic mobile applications developed 
specifically for the visualization of huge genome information 
as well as the NGS sequence data. Since the widely 
adaptation of handheld smart devices, there become the 
common platform for daily information retrieval and 
exchange. Therefore, we attempt to develop such novel 
mobile application software for mobile devices and 
demonstrate the feasibility of visualization of genome 
information on the mobile devices.  
We first focused on the visualization of The Cancer 
Genome Atlas (TCGA) data. TCGA is a comprehensive and 
coordinated effort to accelerate the understanding of the 
molecular basis of cancer through the utilization of large 
scale sequencing experiments using NGS platforms [5]. We 
have retrieved NGS RNA-Seq cancer gene expression 
information from thousands of cancer patients in various 
cancer types collected in TCGA project. Our RNA_Seq 
Viewer mobile application is designed to display the RNA-
Seq gene expression information systematically for easy 
interrogation and visualization.  
Herein, in Section II, the development environment and 
data source were introduced. In Section III, the represented 
screen displays were demonstrated and basic functionalities 
were briefly described. Finally, we discussed the future 
improvements of this new App in Section IV.  
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The development and implement of RNA_Seq Viewer 
was done using the Apple development software, Xcode 
5.02. The programming language used was Object-C and 
database used was SQLite. All TCGA cancer level-3 RNA-
Seq data were retrieved and gene expression RPKM (reads 
per kilobase per million) values were processed for SQLite 
tables. We obtained a total of nine different cancer types 
with over 2,500 cancer samples. The RNA_Seq Viewer App 
can be obtained freely through Apple iTune App Store. 
Additional information can be accessed from [6]. 
III. 
RESULTS 
RNA_Seq Viewer is a mobile application built for iOS to 
provide biologists a new user experience in interrogating 
large-scale NGS data intuitively on the iPad or iPhone. Users 
can further interrogate differentially expressed genes by 
interrogating differentially expressed regions from the 
overall chromosome display view and quickly zooming into 
regions of particular interest.  
The 
RNA_Seq 
viewer 
displays 
gene 
expression 
information (RPKM value) on the chromosome level. 
Initially, an illustration of the 22 autosomes and two sex 
chromosomes are displayed (Figure 1). The navigational and 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-409-1
BIOTECHNO 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

functional buttons are arranged on the bottom row. Users 
should first select the cancer type of interest by clicking the 
list button on the left. Detailed information includes the 
TCGA sample ID and sex/age, as well as cancer stage 
information on the bottom line (Figure 1). 
Once selected, the cancer gene expression information of 
an individual patient is loaded and displayed. Since the 
matching normal tissues were not always available in TCGA, 
we used the average expression values from all available 
normal tissues for that particular cancer type to represent the 
background expression levels. The gene expression value of 
cancer tissue is illustrated by a blue line, and the expression 
value of normal tissue is illustrated by the overlapping gray 
line in the background. User then can zoom in and out of the 
screen to interrogate the regions of their interest (Figure 2).  
By adjusting the intensity bar on the right of the function 
row, the user can dim the blue line to a lighter color, which 
allows users to compare the expression difference between 
cancer and normal tissues, especially on the overexpressed 
genes in cancer. Once a region of interest is identified, users 
can click on the gene(s) of interest to activate the red-pin 
icon and show detailed gene information and expression 
values (Figure 2). The gene name/RefSeq ID and expression 
values are now displayed before the patient’s sample 
information. The RPKM values of tumor (T) and normal (N) 
tissues are displayed (Figure 2). Users can then click on the 
NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology Information) 
button to retrieve the detailed gene information. 
 
  
Figure 1.  User interface of RNA_Seq Viewer (global view). 
 
Figure 2.  User interface of RNA_Seq Viewer (detailed view). 
Users can also submit their very own RNA-Seq data to 
display in our App here. Users simply obtain the user.agv db 
file from the web site and fill in the RPKM values of the 
normal and cancer tissues using any SQLite tools before 
synchronization to the mobile devices. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
As proof of concept, we demonstrated that RNA-Seq 
data could be visualized and interrogated efficiently on the 
mobile devices. This mobile App is useful for displaying 
multiple genome data onto global chromosome context. In 
the future, it can be expanded to integrate additional NGS 
data and developed for Android platform. This App could be 
utilized as a fundamental visualization component for 
personalized genome information display and retrieval.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. C. Li, et al., “Identification of homologous microRNAs in 
56 animal genomes,” Genomics, vol. 96, Jan. 2010, pp. 1-9. 
[2] D. Karolchik, et al., “The UCSC Genome Browser database: 
2014 update,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 42, Jan. 2014, pp. 
D764-D770. 
[3] P. Flicek, et al., “Ensembl 2014,”, Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 
42, Jan. 2013, pp. 749-755. 
[4] C. Wu, I. Macleod, and A. I. Su, “BioGPS and MyGene.info: 
organizing online, gene-centric information,” Nucleic Acids 
Res., vol. 41, Jan. 2013, pp. D561-D565. 
[5] Cancer Genome Altas Netwrok, “Comprehensive molecular 
portraits of human breast tumours,” Nature, vol. 490, Oct. 
2012, pp. 61-70. 
[6] http://tdl.ibms.sinica.edu.tw/NGS_viewer_1/NGS_Viewer/Ge
neral_Introduction.html.  
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-409-1
BIOTECHNO 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

