Patient-centric Data Warehouse Design 
An Empirical Study Applied in Diabetes care 
 
Lichin Chen 
Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronics and 
Bioinformatics 
National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
e-mail: d98945012@ntu.edu.tw 
Chiou-Shiang Wang, I-Ching Wang, Hui-Chu Yu 
Department of Nursing 
National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan 
University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
Hui-Yu Peng, Hui-Chuen Chen 
Department of Dietetics 
National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan 
University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
Chia-Hsiun Chang, Tien-Jyun Chang, Yi-Der Jiang, 
Lee-Ming Chuang 
Department of Internal Medicine 
National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan 
University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
Feipei Lai 
Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronics and Bioinformatics, 
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
Abstract — There are many healthcare settings dedicated for 
different diseases and treatments. As the information of the 
patients is collected in different healthcare settings, there is an 
opportunity to reveal further knowledge and understanding of 
the patients when the information is integrated. However, the 
services and evaluation are often isolated. The aim of this 
research is to design a data warehouse based on a patient-
centric vision and to integrate the data to enable inner 
knowledge exploration. The design is initially applied in the 
case of diabetes. This study initially integrated the data of 
regular visits and telehealthcare program of diabetes care, and 
the data of 61 patients, who participates in both service settings, 
are collected. The results show that the data inputted by the 
patients outside the medical institutes are reliable and do 
represent patient’s conditions. The potential value of the data 
warehouse is promising, and it is valuable to integrate the data 
across healthcare settings based on a patient-centric vision. 
Data 
warehouse; 
diabetes; 
diabetes 
self-management 
education; data integration. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Diabetes is a chronic disease, which refers to a person 
who has high blood sugar, either because the pancreas does 
not produce enough insulin, or because cells do not respond 
to the insulin that is produced [1]. Diabetes control relies 
heavily on patient self-management and life style 
adjustment. The treatments of diabetes are aimed to 
postpone and prevent the development of complications, 
including medications, regular screening, self-management 
skill education, and long-term follow-ups. Traditionally, 
patients visit the medical institutes every three month for 
laboratory tests, diabetes self-management education 
(DSME), and receive complication screening annually. The 
data are commonly collected and recorded in information 
systems and the patient outcomes are evaluated based on the 
three-month interval data. Recently, telehealthcare has 
become popular that is designed to enhance self-care 
behaviors for diabetic patients outside the medical institutes. 
It combines the information communication technology and 
the commercialized biometric sensor devices to address 
disease 
management 
at 
a 
distance 
and 
facilitates 
longitudinal health status monitoring [2]-[5]. Patients are to 
record their daily activities on the online self-management 
information system, and monitor their glucose and other 
vital signs with the glucometer or other biometric sensors. 
The online self-management information system is often 
integrated with the biometric sensors, which enable data 
uploaded automatically. Patients often record their data on a 
daily or weekly time interval. Nevertheless, the services 
mentioned above are usually isolated and rarely connected 
to one another, and the information systems and the 
databases are commonly scattered. When it comes to 
evaluate patient’s performances and outcomes, the two 
services are commonly done individually. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
Figure 1 Process flow of data warehousing 
 
However, integrating data from different perspectives 
offers an opportunity to further explore and understand 
patient conditions. Meanwhile, data warehousing has 
become prevalent in the healthcare industry because of the 
provision of manipulating large quantities of data and the 
decisions made based on the data [6]. It represents the 
process of data centralization, and duplicates the data from 
the online operational systems and organizes them into the 
analytical data structures. Data warehousing has the 
potential to integrate various data among applications, 
support massive data analysis, and improve the ability of 
future data mining, big data manipulation, and knowledge 
discovery [6]-[11]. The aim of this article is to design a data 
warehouse and offers an opportunity to integrate patient 
data and further explore patient conditions. 
This article will first start with three hypotheses to 
evaluate patient condition and further introduce the data 
processing flow of the presented data warehouse in the 
method section. Based on the hypotheses, the result section 
presents the evaluation outcomes of patient conditions, and 
the result is interpreted in the discussion section, and 
concludes in the conclusion section. 
II. 
METHODS 
The aim of this research is to design a data warehouse, 
which is based on a patient-centric perspective, and further 
to explore the knowledge of diabetes through the integration 
of the data from regular visits and telehealthcare program of 
diabetes care. This study is applied in an educational 
hospital in northern Taiwan, which has highlighted the 
values of health information technology, and developed 
information systems for many clinical practices. 
The hospital has implemented a shared care program for 
diabetes, which supports the patients with regular physician 
visits, DSME, laboratory tests, and routine follow-ups, and 
has additionally provided a telehealthcare program recently. 
The telehealthcare program allows the patients to interact 
with an online information system and upload daily glucose 
through an off-the-shelf, 3G glucometer [12]. Patients may 
participate in one of the programs, shared care program and 
telehealthcare program or both. The information generated 
from the services of diabetes patients is shown in Table I. It 
can be observed that the data are integrated from three 
healthcare settings and three heterogeneous databases. 
After the construction of the data warehouse, this 
research initiates three hypotheses to evaluate patient’s 
conditions. 
1. In order to validate the reliability of the data given 
by the patients themselves. It is meaningful to find 
out how does daily glucoses correspond to the 
HbA1c tests results? 
2. Does telehealthcare program strengthen the skill of 
patients in choosing appropriate food ingredient 
after participating telehealthcare program? 
3. Does 
telehealthcare 
program 
induce 
more 
performances in the frequency of self-monitoring 
of blood glucose (SMBG)? 
 
This research focused in analyzing the data of twenty-
one-month duration, from September, 2011 to June, 2013, 
and compared patient’s skills evaluated by the certificated 
diabetes educators (CDEs). The daily glucose monitoring 
data are grouped based on a three-month interval, which 
matched to the corresponding HbA1c results. The skill 
evaluations discussed here consist of the eating behavior 
and the performing of SMBG. The eating behaviors of 
patients are evaluated through four aspects of food 
ingredient intake, including fiber, good fat, high fat, and 
sodium & desserts, the questionnaires are shown in Table II. 
Each question scores one point for achieving good behavior, 
and become the scoring of each ingredient intake. The 
frequencies of patients performing SMBG were recorded to 
see the effect of telehealthcare on patients performing 
SMBG. The frequency is calculated into weekly frequency 
and daily frequency. The first skill evaluation (T1) acts as 
the baseline of the self-care ability of patients, and the 
baseline is compared to the second (T2), and third (T3) 
evaluations if available. 
A. Process of data warehousing 
The data warehousing centralizes the data from the 
online operational systems and integrates them based on the 
analytical requirements. The data warehouse represents as a 
central data repository, and also consists of various kinds of 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

defined analysis dimension tables, which enables the 
reusability among different analyses. The data warehouse 
applications commonly consist of three stages of data 
processing, 
including 
data 
transcription 
stage, 
data 
manipulation stage, and data visualization stage, as shown 
in Fig. 1. The data transcription stage is done through the 
use of Extract, Transform and Load (ETL) tools to duplicate 
the data from the online systems to a staging database in its 
original format. This is to ensure that the work of data 
warehousing does not interfere with the online systems. 
TABLE I.  
INFORMATION IN DIABETES TREATMENT. 
Information 
Service 
Source 
System 
Database 
Frequency 
Diagnosis 
Outpatient 
setting 
Outpatient 
information 
system 
Oracle 
Every 3 
month 
Medication 
Outpatient 
setting 
Outpatient 
information 
system 
Oracle 
Every 3 
month 
Laboratory 
results 
Outpatient 
setting 
Laboratory 
information 
system 
Oracle 
Every 3 
month 
Diabetes 
education 
and 
assessment 
Shared care 
program 
Disease 
management 
information 
system 
Sybase 
Every 3 
month 
Self-
management 
records 
Telehealthcare 
Online self-
management 
information 
system 
SQL 
server 
Daily 
Glucose and 
other vital 
signs 
monitoring 
Telehealthcare 
Online self-
management 
information 
system 
SQL 
server 
Daily 
 
 
Figure 2 Example of XMLA 
 
During data manipulation stage, the data are integrated, 
calculated, and manipulated in the intermediate database 
based on the topic and analysis requirements, which is 
known as the data marts. It is restructured into a Multi-
dimensional Data Model (MDM) format based on the 
analytical requirements. Based on the MDM, the data are 
aggregated into an XML for Analysis (XMLA) format 
through on-line analytical processing (OLAP). The XMLA 
is also known as the OLAP data cube (shown as Fig. 2), 
which is designed to pre-calculate all the defined numerical 
values to facilitate instantaneous data queries and multi-
factor comparisons [13]-[14]. 
Finally, the data visualization stage simply visualizes the 
data cube through a viewer. The users are free to drag the 
analyzing aspects into the analyzing column to obtain 
instantaneous queries and explore the data freely. The 
numbers of analyzing aspect are not limited. The MDM is 
usually interpreted into the structure of star schemas or 
snowflake schemas, which consists of a fact table in the 
middle and numerous dimension tables surrounding it. Each 
dimension represents a defined analysis aspect. Among the 
dimensions, few of the characters consisted of multiple-
choice items that could refer to more than one option, such 
as medication. The star schema is suitable for singular items, 
and the snowflake schema is able to aggregate data in a 
normalized 
way. 
The 
relationships, 
attributes, 
and 
hierarchies between dimensions and fact tables are also 
defined during this stage. 
TABLE II.  
QUESTIONNAIRES OF THE SKILL EVALUATIONS. 
Ingredient 
Questionnaire 
Fiber 
At least 2 meals consist of grain crops and rice each day. 
At least 1.5 bowl of vegetable a day. 
Eating fruit every day. 
Food fat 
 
Not taking in fat meat weekly. 
Not using pig fat at home. 
Not drinking complete fat milk. 
Not having saturated, trans fat and cholesterol-rich foods 
twice a week. 
High fat 
 
Not having deep fry more than 3 times a week. 
Not having 7 meals or more outside every week. 
Sodium & 
desserts 
Not having 2 times or more unplanned biscuits or dessert 
weekly. 
Not having pickled food 3 times or more weekly. 
TABLE III.  
DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION OF PATIENTS. 
 
 
n 
% 
Diabetes 
Type 
Type I 
19 
31.1 
Type II 
42 
68.9 
Age 
< 40 
14 
23.0 
40 ~ 65 
38 
62.3 
> 65 
9 
14.8 
Gender 
Male 
30 
49.2 
Female 
31 
50.8 
Insulin 
Yes 
45 
73.8 
No 
16 
26.2 
Oral 
hypoglycemic 
agents 
Yes 
40 
65.6 
No 
21 
34.4 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
Figure 3 Relationship between daily glucose and HbA1c 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
A total of sixty-one patients participate in both service 
settings, and Table III shows the demographic information of 
the patients recruited. Fig. 3 illustrates the correlation of the 
daily glucose and the HbA1c results, and the patients are 
arranged and listed according to their HbA1c level. It can be 
observed that the two values are highly related and the daily 
glucose recorded by the patients does represent their 
outcomes. 
TABLE IV.  
SCORES OF HEALTHY EATING. 
 
Ingredient (Score) 
Mean 
SD 
T1 
(n = 60) 
Fiber score (3) 
1.40 
0.89 
Good fat score (4) 
1.79 
1.61 
High fat score (2) 
0.69 
0.74 
Sodium score (2) 
0.51 
0.75 
T2 
(n = 26) 
Fiber score (3) 
1.65 
1.09 
Good fat score (4) 
1.04 
1.51 
High fat score (2) 
0.38 
0.64 
Sodium score (2) 
0.27 
0.60 
T3 
(n = 7) 
Fiber score (3) 
1.29 
1.11 
Good fat score (4) 
1.71 
1.70 
High fat score (2) 
0.57 
0.79 
Sodium score (2) 
0.71 
0.95 
T4 
(n = 2) 
Fiber score (3) 
2.00 
1.41 
Good fat score (4) 
1.00 
1.41 
High fat score (2) 
0.50 
0.71 
Sodium score (2) 
0.50 
0.71 
Table IV shows the food ingredient score of the patients. 
Ninety-eight percent (n=60) of the patients were educated 
with healthy eating, but only 43% (n=26) of the patient were 
educated the second time, and even less were educated the 
third time. Comparing to T1, fiber score has increased in T2 
and T4, good fat score and high fat score have decreased in 
T2, T3, and T4, and sodium score has decreased in T2 and 
T4. Table V shows the frequency of patients performing 
SMBG. 100% (n=61) of the patients were educated with 
SMBG, and 95% (n=58) of the patients were educated the 
second time. The frequency of SMBG has increased in T2 
and T4. 
TABLE V.  
SCORES OF BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING. 
 
 
Mean 
SD 
T1 
(n = 61) 
Weekly 
7.42 
9.62 
Daily 
1.06 
1.37 
T2 
(n = 58) 
Weekly 
8.34 
10.13 
Daily 
1.19 
1.45 
T3 
(n = 38) 
Weekly 
7.30 
11.07 
Daily 
1.04 
1.58 
T4 
(n = 8) 
Weekly 
8.25 
5.87 
Daily 
1.18 
0.84 
T5 
(n = 2) 
Weekly 
3.50 
4.95 
Daily 
0.50 
0.71 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The reuse of data and data warehousing has become 
more prevalent due to the large quantities of data stored and 
the amount of decisions based on the data. The data 
warehouse offers the opportunity of obtaining better 
information, which results in better quality of care. The data 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

warehouse supports dynamic comparison among multiple 
factors and provides instantaneous query, and is a powerful 
tool in the development of protocols for treatments and 
further knowledge exploration of diseases. The cleaning and 
the verifying of data require a lot of efforts. When the 
original design of the online information system offers free 
text input to provide the convenience of data input, it is 
common to obtain data that are easy for human to interpret 
but difficult for the machine to recognize, such as inputting 
“Y” for yes and the entire word “YES” means the same, but 
requires extra definitions for the system to recognize and 
identify them as the same meaning.  
The result shows that while there are still debates on the 
reliability of the data that are inputted by the patients 
outside the medical institutes, the result in this study shows 
that the data do correspond to the results of the blood tests, 
and implies that the data are reliable. The eating behavior 
and the performing of SMBG are basic skills in self-
management for diabetes patients. The result shows an 
unstable variation but a moderately positive outcome for 
patients in the behavior of healthy eating and SMBG 
performing. Generally, fiber score has increased and the 
other scores have decreased. Less desirable outcomes appear 
in T3 for eating behaviors and SMBG performing, the 
causes of such condition require further study. 
Missing data and incomplete records are common when 
collecting data from online information systems. Meanwhile, 
there are seven skills to be enhanced in self-care behaviors. 
It is unlikely for CDEs to educate individual skill repeatedly 
or over three times in a short period of time, and it is 
difficult see the changes of the patients without repeated 
evaluation. Also, the evaluations were done by four 
different CDEs, and the results may differ from one to 
another, which has become a limitation of this study. More 
work is needed to further explore the behavior and outcome 
of patients. It would be promising in revealing more 
information by adding the laboratory results into the 
analysis. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
As the services and treatments of healthcare become 
more and more advanced, and the involvement of the 
information communication technology increases, the 
integration of healthcare services has become essential in 
future service development. 
The integration the data across healthcare settings based 
on a patient-centric vision is valuable and is supportive in 
the development of the research field of integrated 
healthcare. This study initially explored the integration of 
the data of diabetes care and applied in the validation of 
three hypotheses about patient conditions. The result shows 
that daily glucoses do correspond to the HbA1c tests results, 
and the data inputted by the patients are reliable. The result 
shows a moderately positive encouragement for patients in 
the behavior of healthy eating and SMBG performing. 
However, the causes of the changes require further study. 
More work is required to specify the role of data warehouse 
in the healthcare industry and patient care. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Chen, H. C. Yu, H. C. Li, Y. V. Wang, H. J. Chen, I. C. 
Wang, C. S. Wang, H. Y. Peng, Y. L. Hsu, C. H. Chen, L. M. 
Chuang, H. C. Lee, Y. Chung, and F. Lai, “An architecture 
model for multiple disease management information 
systems,” Journal of Medical Systems, 37(2): pp. 9931, 2013.  
[2] H. Y. Chiu and C. M. Chen, “Telenursing: The Integration of 
Information Technology and Community Health Nursing,” 
Yuan-Yuan Nursing, 4 (2), pp. 5-10, 2010. 
[3] L. Heinemann, “Measuring glucose concentrations: daily 
practice, current and future developments,” Journal of 
Diabetes Science and Technology, 2 (4), pp. 710-717, 2008. 
[4] E. H. Wagner, “The role of patient care teams in chronic 
disease management,” British Medical Journal, 320 (7234), 
pp. 569-572, 2000. 
[5] S. Y. Liu, J.L. Hsiao, J. L. Shen, and H. Q. Li, “A Research 
for Information Integration in Case Management System of 
Diabetes Mellitus,” The Journal of Nursing, 4 (2), pp. 169-
179, 2006. 
[6] M. Silver, T. Sakata, H. C. Su, C. Herman, S. B. Dolins, and 
M. J. O Shea, “Case study: how to apply data mining 
techniques in a healthcare data warehouse,” Journal of 
Healthcare Information Management, 15 (2), pp. 155-164, 
2001. 
[7] T. T. Lee, C. Y. Liu, Y. H. Kuo, M. E. Mills, J. G. Fong, and 
C. Hung, “Application of data mining to the identification of 
critical factors in patient falls using a web-based reporting 
system,” International Journal of Medical Informatics, 80 (2), 
pp. 141-150, 2011. 
[8] M. de Mul, P. Alons, P. van der Velde, I. Konings, J. Bakker, 
and J. Hazelzet, “Development of a clinical data warehouse 
from an intensive care clinical information system,” 
Computer methods and programs in biomedicine, 105, pp. 22-
30, 2012. 
[9] M. J. Ball, C. Weaver, and P. A. Abbott, “Enabling 
technologies promise to revitalize the role of nursing in an era 
of patient safety,” International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, 69 (1), pp. 29-38, 2003. 
[10] M. C. Tremblay, R. Fuller, D. Berndt, and J. Studnicki, 
“Doing more with more information: Changing healthcare 
planning with OLAP tools,” Decision Support Systems, 43 (4), 
pp. 1305-1320, 2007. 
[11] J. H. Lubowitz and P. A. Smith, “Current Concepts in Clinical 
Research: Web-Based, Automated, Arthroscopic Surgery 
Prospective Database Registry,” Arthroscopy: The Journal of 
Arthroscopic & Related Surgery, pp. 425-428, 2011. 
[12] L. Chen, L. M. Chuang, C. H. Chang, C. S. Wang, I. C. Wang, 
Y. Chung, H. Y. Peng, H. C. Chen, Y. L. Hsu, Y. S. Lin, H. J. 
Chen, T. J. Chang, Y. D. Jiang, H. C. Lee, C. T. Tan, H. L. 
Chang, and F. Lai, “Evaluating Self-Management Behaviors 
of Diabetic Patients in a Telehealthcare Program: 
Longitudinal Study Over 18 Months,” Journal of medical 
Internet research, 15 (12), pp. e266, 2013. 
[13] M. C. Tremblay, R. Fuller, D. Berndt, and J. Studnicki, 
"Doing more with more information: Changing healthcare 
planning with OLAP tools," Decision Support Systems, vol. 
43, pp. 1305-1320, 2007. 
[14] N. Prat and J. Akoka, “A UML-based data warehouse design 
method,” Decision Support Systems, 42, pp. 1449-1473, 2006. 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-335-3
BIOTECHNO 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

