Using a Synthetic Probe to Study the Robustness of the Segregation Process of 
Protein Aggregates in Escherichia coli 
Andre S. Ribeiro, Samuel M.D. Oliveira 
Laboratory of Biosystem Dynamics, Department of Signal Processing, Tampere University of Technology 
Tampere, Finland. 
e-mail: andre.ribeiro@tut.fi, samuel.oliveira@tut.fi 
 
 
Abstract—Even though the processes of protein production and 
folding are not immune to errors, Escherichia coli lineages are 
capable to maintain a stable cell lineage, provided viable 
environmental conditions. One of the internal processes that 
makes this possible consists of segregating unwanted protein 
aggregates to the cell poles by nucleoid exclusion, which, 
combined with cell divisions, generates asymmetries in the 
aging process of the population, with some individuals aging 
faster while others exhibit rejuvenation. A recent study showed 
that this process is not immune to sub-optimal temperature 
conditions due to increased cytoplasm viscosity, which weakens 
the anisotropy in aggregate displacements at the nucleoid 
borders. This was made possible by the usage of a synthetic 
fluorescent probe, consisting of a RNA sequence with multiple 
binding sites for the MS2-GFP synthetic protein, which can be 
tracked in time-lapse microscopy images. Here we provide a 
description of the findings from these measurements and 
investigate with an In Silico model the consequences in the 
context of cell lineages.  
Keywords-segregation; polar retention; protein aggregates; 
cold temperature conditions; synthetic probes; cell lineages. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Escherichia coli are able to segregate unwanted protein 
aggregates to the cell poles by nucleoid exclusion. This 
process is essential for cell lineages to generate cells that are 
free from aggregates. Such ‘rejuvenated’ cells have been 
shown to exhibit faster division time than ‘older’ cells, where 
aggregates accumulate at, and are thus essential for the 
maintenance of vitality of the lineages [1].  
The exclusion of aggregates from midcell is made 
possible by the presence of the nucleoid at midcell, which 
causes anisotropy in the dynamics of the aggregates that 
generates the preference for polar localization [2].  
Recent studies, making use of a synthetic fluorescent 
probe that allows observing the processes of segregation and 
retention with single aggregate sensitivity, showed that at 
lower temperatures, the degree of viscosity of the cytoplasm 
increases, which hampers the anisotropy [3]. These synthetic 
probes are ideal in that they behave similarly to natural 
aggregates, have long life-times with highly stable 
fluorescence levels, and are robust to photobleaching [2]. In 
addition, and contrary to natural aggregates, the synthetic 
aggregates have all the same fluorescence level and do not 
interact with one another or with other cellular components, 
facilitating their counting from the images.  
Here, based on the empirical data that was obtained by 
observing cells containing these probes and placed in 
environments at different temperatures 
while under 
microscope observation, we investigate the long-term 
consequences to future cell generations of the temperature-
dependence of the aggregate segregation and subsequent 
polar retention processes, following the occurrence of sub-
optimal conditions. 
 
II. 
PREVIOUS FINDINGS 
In our previous study [3], we compared the efficiency 
with which aggregates are segregated to and retained at the 
cell poles by the nucleoids in optimal and in sub-optimal 
temperature conditions.  
Observing cells with one nucleoid, and by probing the 
positioning of both nucleoids and aggregates, we found that 
at lower temperatures the aggregates are not preferentially 
located at the poles. Results are shown in Table I.  
From the table, note how the relative concentration of 
aggregates at the poles is close to 1 (corresponding to 
uniform distribution along the major cell axis) for low 
temperatures. Meanwhile, at the higher temperatures, it is 
much larger than 1. Note also how, according to the 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, the behavioral change is 
statistically significant between 24 and 37 degrees. 
 
TABLE I. 
AGGREGATES AT THE POLES 
 
T (°C) 
Concentration of Aggregates at the poles 
Relative 
nucleoid length 
Relative concentration of 
Aggregates at poles 
P value of 
KS test 
10 
0.63 
1.32 
 
24 
0.56 
1.09 
0.11 
37 
0.53 
1.86 
< 0.01 
43 
0.47 
1.79 
0.05 
 
Next, in cells with two nucleoids, the concentration of 
aggregates in between the nucleoids was measured. From 
Table II, the relative concentration of aggregates in between 
nucleoids in cells close to division decreases significantly as 
the temperature increases [3]. Thus, one can conclude that 
the relative concentration of the aggregates at the poles is 
increasing with increasing temperature. 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-488-6
BIOTECHNO 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
TABLE II.  
AGGREGATES IN BETWEEN NUCLEOIDS 
 
T (°C) 
Concentration of Aggregates in between nucleoids in 
cells close to dividing 
Relative 
nucleoids 
length 
Relative concentration of 
Aggregates in between 
nucleoids 
P value of the 
permutation 
test 
10 
0.75 
0.85 
 
24 
0.68 
0.78 
< 0.01 
37 
0.72 
0.69 
< 0.01 
43 
0.70 
0.68 
< 0.01 
 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
Note that, in division, while the aggregates at the poles 
will remain at the old pole of the cells of the new generation, 
those at midcell will be at the new poles. As such, changes in 
the fractions at midcell prior to division should affect the 
distributions of aggregates in individual cells of future 
generations. In particular, we hypothesized that at lower 
temperatures, as the ability of cells to exclude the aggregates 
to the poles is significantly reduced, future cell generations 
will have more homogenous distributions of unwanted 
protein aggregates, which is expected to hamper the 
rejuvenation process of the lineage. To validate our 
hypothesis, we developed a simple stochastic model.  
In this model, we start with a cell near division 
(generation 0), with 200 aggregates whose location (in 
between nucleoids or at the poles) is defined by the empirical 
values in Table II. Then, the cell divides and the aggregates 
are placed in the ‘old’ and ‘new’ pole of the two daughter 
cells, in accordance with their location in the mother cell 
prior division (i.e., in the pole or in between nucleoids, 
respectively). In this regard, the aggregates that were at 
midcell were placed randomly in either daughter cell. Note 
that, at this stage (i.e., generation 1) all aggregates are at the 
poles in all cells. Finally, these daughter cells also divide, 
producing four cells (generation 2). Two of these cells will 
inherit the original poles of the mother cell, while the 
remaining ones will inherit only poles generated during the 
two division processes. Meanwhile the partitioning processes 
of the aggregates follow the same rules as before. 
Using this model, we compared the outcomes at different 
temperatures, 
by 
setting 
different 
concentrations 
of 
aggregates in between nucleoids of the original mother cell 
in accordance with the empirical values in Table II. Namely, 
for each condition, we obtained the mean and standard 
deviation of the numbers of aggregates in individual cells in 
the last generation from 10.000 independent simulations. 
Results are shown in Table III.  
 
TABLE III.  
AGGREGATES IN THE LAST GENERATION 
 
T (°C) 
Distributions of aggregates in cells of the last generation 
Mean number of 
Aggregates per cell 
Standard deviation of the 
number of aggregates per cell 
10 
50 
10.5 
24 
50 
12.2 
37 
50 
16.7 
43 
50 
17.4 
 
From Table III, first, as expected, temperature does not 
affect the mean number of aggregates in each cell (50 as we 
started with 200 and 2 rounds of division took place). Also, 
we find that as temperature increases (and thus, the relative 
concentration of aggregates at the poles decreases), as 
expected, the variability in the aggregates numbers in cells of 
future generations increases. The decrease at lower 
temperatures, most likely, will result in the hampering of the 
rejuvenation process of the lineage in these conditions. 
We conclude that the effects of lower temperatures at the 
single cell level have long term consequences in the 
functioning of cell lineages aging and rejuvenation 
processes. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A.B. Lindner, R. Madden, A. Demarez, E.J. Stewart, F., and 
Taddei (2008) “Asymmetric segregation of protein aggregates 
is associated with cellular aging and rejuvenation”. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 105: 3076–3081. 
[2] A. Gupta, J. Lloyd-Price, R. Neeli-Venkata, S.M.D. Oliveira, 
and A.S. Ribeiro (2014) In vivo kinetics of segregation and 
polar retention of MS2-GFP-RNA complexes in Escherichia 
coli. Biophys J 106: 1928–1937. 
[3] S.M.D. Oliveira, R. Neeli-Venkata, N. Goncalves, J.A. 
Santinha, L. Martins, H. Tran, J. Mäkelä, A. Gupta, M. 
Barandas, A. Häkkinen, J. Lloyd-Price, J.M. Fonseca, and 
A.S. Ribeiro (2016) “Increased cytoplasm viscosity hampers 
aggregate polar segregation in Escherichia coli.” Mol. 
Microbiol. 99(4), 686–699.  
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-488-6
BIOTECHNO 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

