Automated Image Processing for the Analysis of
DNA Repair Dynamics
Thorsten Rieß∗, Christian Dietz∗†, Martin Tomas†‡, Elisa Ferrando-May‡ and Dorit Merhof∗§
∗Interdisciplinary Center for Interactive Data Analysis, Modelling and Visual Exploration (INCIDE)
†Department of Physics, Center for Applied Photonics (CAP)
‡Department of Biology, Bioimaging Center (BIC)
§Visual Computing
University of Konstanz, 78457 Konstanz, Germany
E-Mail: {thorsten.riess, christian.dietz, martin.tomas, elisa.may, dorit.merhof}@uni-konstanz.de
Abstract—The efﬁcient repair of cellular DNA is essential for
the maintenance and inheritance of genomic information. In
order to cope with the high frequency of spontaneous and induced
DNA damage, a multitude of repair mechanisms have evolved.
These are enabled by a wide range of protein factors speciﬁcally
recognizing different types of lesions and ﬁnally restoring the
normal DNA sequence. This work focuses on the repair factor
XPC (xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group C), which
identiﬁes bulky DNA lesions and initiates their removal via
the nucleotide excision repair pathway. The binding of XPC to
damaged DNA can be visualized in living cells by following the
accumulation of a ﬂuorescent XPC fusion at lesions induced by
laser microirradiation in a ﬂuorescence microscope.
In this work, an automated image processing pipeline is
presented which allows to identify and quantify the accumulation
reaction without any user interaction. The image processing
pipeline comprises a preprocessing stage where the image stack
data is ﬁltered and the nucleus of interest is segmented. After-
wards, the images are registered to each other in order to account
for movements of the cell, and then a bounding box enclosing
the XPC-speciﬁc signal is automatically determined. Finally, the
time-dependent relocation of XPC is evaluated by analyzing the
intensity change within this box.
Comparison of the automated processing results with the
manual evaluation yields qualitatively similar results. However,
the automated analysis provides more accurate, reproducible
results with smaller standard errors.
The image processing pipeline presented in this work allows
for an efﬁcient analysis of large amounts of experimental data
with no user interaction required.
Index Terms—automated intensity measurement; DNA repair;
ﬂuorescence microscopy;
I. INTRODUCTION
Damage to the DNA of cells occurs either due to environ-
mental factors (exogenous damage) or due to natural metabolic
processes (endogenous damage). Exogenous damage may be
caused by exposure to UV light or other types of radiation in-
cluding γ-rays, or toxins and chemicals. Endogenous damage
is mostly caused by reactive oxygen species produced from
normal metabolic byproducts, and also includes replication
errors during mitosis.
DNA damage occurs at a rate of 1,000 to 1,000,000 molec-
ular lesions per cell per day [1], affecting only 0.000165 % of
the human genome’s approximately 6 billion bases (3 billion
base pairs). However, unrepaired damage in critical genes
(such as tumor suppressor genes) may interfere with normal
cell physiology and signiﬁcantly increase the likelihood of
tumor formation.
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) [2] is a fundamental pro-
tective system that promotes genome stability by eliminating
a wide range of DNA lesions. Transcription-coupled repair
(TCR), which takes place when the transcription machinery is
blocked by obstructing lesions in the transcribed strand [3],
and global genome repair (GGR) are the two alternative
mechanisms of the NER pathway.
The xeroderma pigmentosum group C (XPC) protein is an
important protein involved in the GGR pathway. It recognizes
DNA damage and initiates the DNA excision repair of helix-
distorting base lesions. In healthy cells, the damage is excised
by endonucleases, the missing sequence is replaced by DNA
polymerase, and a ligase completes the reaction.
An important research question in the ﬁeld of DNA repair
concerns the mechanisms by which the sensor-like protein
XPC actually ﬁnds base lesions among a large excess of
native DNA in a typical mammalian genome [4], [5]. One
approach to investigate how XPC searches for aberrant sites
within the DNA consists in the visualization of the time-
dependent relocation of ﬂuorescently labeled XPC to sites of
DNA damage induced at high spatial resolution by irradiation
with a femtosecond laser [6]. For this purpose, XPC was
marked with green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP), which allows
to investigate the damage-dependent recruitment of the fusion
product XPC-GFP by confocal microscopy.
In the analysis pursued in [6] the accumulation of XPC-GFP
at the induced lesions was quantiﬁed by manually deﬁning a
bounding box enclosing the lesion and measurement of the
intensity change due to accumulation of XPC-GFP in this box
over time.
From an image processing point of view, such a manual
analysis is unsatisfactory and error-prone for several reasons:
First of all, a manual analysis of a signiﬁcant amount of
mammalian cells is a tedious and time consuming task for the
investigator. Furthermore, the results obtained from a manual
analysis are not rater-independent and lack robustness and
31
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-137-3

reproducibility.
The challenges for implementing an automated image pro-
cessing pipeline are the low resolution of the image stacks,
movements of the cells over time, other obscuring cells and
structures, and the low contrast between the DNA damage and
the surrounding nucleus. An overview of current methods for
the analysis of ﬂuorescent microscopy images can be found
in [7] and references therein.
In this work, these issues are addressed and an automated
image processing approach is proposed. This approach allows
for automatically detecting the region of XPC accumulation
on image stacks showing the cell nuclei and for evaluating
the damage-induced changes of XPC dynamics in the nuclear
compartment over time. The approach comprises a prepro-
cessing stage, where the image stack data is ﬁltered and the
nucleus under consideration is segmented in each image. The
images are then registered to each other in order to account
for movements of the cell and a bounding box enclosing the
DNA damage is automatically determined. Finally, the time-
dependent relocation of XPC is evaluated by analyzing the
intensity change due to accumulation of XPC-GFP.
II. MATERIAL AND METHODS
In this section, the image acquisition and the image pro-
cessing methods for evaluating the time-dependent relocation
of XPC-GFP are presented. The microscopy image stacks
are acquired in an experimental setup explained in Sec-
tion II-A. The image stacks are then imported into the software
framework KNIME, which is described in Section II-B. The
image processing pipeline is implemented in KNIME and
consists of a segmentation and registration step, as outlined
in Section II-C, and the detection of the region of interest
(ROI). A scoring algorithm for this detection is presented in
Section II-D. Finally, the pixel intensity measurement within
the ROI is explained in Section II-E.
A. Biological model system and image data acquisition
Recruitment of the DNA repair factor XPC to sites of DNA
damage was monitored in live cells by confocal microscopy.
To this end ﬂuorescent fusions of wildtype (WT) XPC and
of various XPC mutants (F733A, F756A, F797A, F799A,
N754A, W531A, W542A, W690A, W690S) were expressed
in either Simian virus 40-transformed human XP-C ﬁbroblasts
or in Chinese Hamster Ovary cells (CHO). Cells were then
irradiated at the microscope stage (Zeiss LSM 5 Pascal) using
an in-house femtosecond Er-ﬁber laser focused through a
40x oil immersion objective lens. DNA lesions were induced
at 775nm by multiphoton absorption [8]. A cell nucleus
expressing XPC-GFP was placed in the center of the ﬁeld
of view and imaged prior to and at deﬁned time intervals
after femtosecond laser irradiation. XPC-GFP ﬂuorescence
was detected using a 488nm Ar-laser. The acquired image
stacks consist of one pre-irradiation frame, one dark frame
recorded while scanning with the ﬁber laser and 60 or 52 post-
irradiation frames for experiments with XP-C cells and CHO
cells, respectively. The frames were acquired at time steps of
6–7 seconds and the frame size is either 512 × 512 pixels or
580 × 580 pixels. The femtosecond laser was scanned along
a vertical line of 10µm in length [6], [9].
B. Software framework
The software platform KNIME (The Konstanz Informa-
tion Miner [10]) is an open-source tool for data integration,
processing, analysis and exploration. Essentially, KNIME is
designed to import, transform and visualize large data sets in
a convenient and easy to use way. KNIME workﬂows consist
of interacting nodes, which may each represent an algorithm,
a single import routine or a visualization tool. The exchange
of data between nodes is accomplished via data tables which
are passed from one node to another by node connections.
The graphical user interface makes it possible to construct
workﬂows consisting of different nodes and their interconnec-
tion via a simple drag-and-drop mechanism. The data ﬂow
is visually represented by connections between the nodes,
typically starting with a node to import the data, followed
by one or more processing nodes and ﬁnally one or more
output nodes. Recently, KNIME has been extended to provide
basic image processing nodes such as image input/output and
standard thresholding algorithms.
In this work, KNIME is used as a basis to implement
a fully automated system that measures ﬂuorescence and
quantiﬁes the accumulation of XPC-GFP. The image process-
ing workﬂow consists of several custom KNIME nodes that
are combined with standard image processing nodes. This
concept allows to batch process large amounts of image stacks
and automatically save the results. Additionally, due to the
modular design of KNIME workﬂows, it is possible to assess
intermediate results at every stage of the processing pipeline.
In contrast to other software frameworks (e.g. IMAGEJ), the
concept of KNIME workﬂows allows to apply the same
processing pipeline to an arbitrary number of images and to
have full control over the output of the analysis.
C. Segmentation and registration
The image processing steps required to quantify the ac-
cumulation kinetics of XPC comprise the segmentation of
the nucleus, a registration step, and the identiﬁcation of the
irradiated area (the ROI).
In order to identify the nucleus of interest (NOI) in each
frame of the image stack, the image is smoothed using a stan-
dard Median ﬁlter with radius three, and an Otsu thresholding
algorithm [11] is applied. This results in a coarse segmentation
of each NOI candidate. Since the region scanned during image
acquisition is adjusted such that the NOI is located at the center
of the image, the NOI can be identiﬁed even if multiple cell
nuclei are visible in the image by comparing the center of
gravity of the NOI candidates. The center of gravity of the
NOI is then used to create a polar image [12], [13], which
is convolved with a Gaussian Blur ﬁlter with σ = 2 and a
standard Median ﬁlter of radius three. Then Otsu thresholding
is applied to the ﬁltered polar image, which results in a binary
image separating the nucleus from the background. In this
32
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-137-3

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 1.
Segmentation process for an exemplary image. (a) Original image
with the nucleus of interest (NOI) in the middle and surrounding (undamaged)
objects. (b) Binary image after a Otsu thresholding, the center of gravity of the
NOI is marked. (c) Polar image. (d) Smoothed polar image. (e) Binary image
resulting from thresholding the smoothed polar image. (f) Masked original
image (segmentation result).
binary image, the contour of the nucleus can be detected
easily. Finally, the original image is masked using this contour,
which concludes the segmentation process. The usage of the
polar image improves the segmentation result compared to
pure smoothing and thresholding of the cartesian image. To
get the same result on the cartesian image only, a much more
elaborate pipeline than in the proposed approach would be
needed.
Figure 1 illustrates the different steps of the segmentation
process and shows the original image including the NOI and
surrounding nuclei (a), then the Otsu-thresholded image with
the marked center of gravity (b) and the polar image (c).
Panel (d) shows the smoothed polar image, which is again
thresholded and the binary image is shown in panel (e). The
ﬁnal result is the masked original image shown in panel (f).
The resulting segmentation is very accurate and suitable for
further processing steps.
In the next step, registration of the individual frames is
required due to potential movement and deformation of the
nucleus over time. For this purpose, a rigid body registration
algorithm [14] is applied to the cropped images from the
previous segmentation step. As a result, the position of the
NOI remains the same across all frames, and also the area
of induced damage remains stationary. This allows us to
determine a single ROI which comprises the area of intensity
change due to accumulation of XPC-GFP for all image frames
in the stack. In very rare cases the nucleus deforms during
image acquisition and this deformation also affects the treated
area. The rigid body registration does not compensate for this
deformation, hence the ROI that is used in the following step
is chosen slightly larger than necessary if the nucleus does not
deform, but still gives a sufﬁcient accuracy.
D. Detection of the area of XPC-GFP accumulation
In order to detect the ROI, a time-averaging projection, avg-
t-projection for short, of the registered image stack is created
in a ﬁrst step. In this projection, the damaged area is expected
to show up as a vertical line of high intensity. In some image
stacks, this area can be clearly identiﬁed also by a non-expert,
in others it is at the limit of visual detection. The ROI is a
box of ﬁxed size that exactly covers the irradiated area; for
the automatic detection the user can adjust the exact width
and height that is used in the algorithm. The box orientation
is always such that the long side is vertical, since the irradiated
area is a vertical line segment, and the movement/deformation
of the nucleus after registration is negligible.
For the automated detection of the correct region, a sum-
y-projection is applied to the avg-t-projection image, which
sums up the intensity values for each column of the image.
This results in an intensity proﬁle of the columns, where the
damaged area is expected to show up as a peak. A Median
ﬁlter with radius three is applied to this intensity proﬁle for
smoothing. Due to noise, poor image quality and additional
bright spots in the nucleus, this peak is not unique and not
straight-forward to identify in some experimental images. For
this reason, a combination of three different scoring methods is
employed to detect the correct peak. The ﬁrst scoring method
is the height of the peak compared to the neighbouring peaks.
The second score is obtained by calculating the response of
a “Haar-like” feature [15] centered at the peak and with a
ﬁxed width slightly larger than the width of the ROI. This can
be interpreted as locally measuring the difference of the area
underneath the peak with neighbouring areas. Finally, the third
score is the distance of the peak to the center of the nucleus.
In an ideal experiment, the irradiation is applied exactly at the
center of the NOI, and hence a peak close to the center is more
likely to be the correct one. For the automatic evaluation, all
three scores are weighted equally and the peak with the highest
overall score is chosen.
After the correct peak has been identiﬁed, the ROI is chosen
such that it is centered at the x-position of the peak and has
the predeﬁned width and height. If the height of the nucleus
exceeds the height of the ROI, the y-position of the ROI
is adjusted such that the intensity in the avg-t-projection is
maximized. Examples are shown in Figure 3 below.
E. Intensity measurement
The time-dependent relocation of XPC is evaluated by
analyzing the intensity change due to accumulation of XPC-
GFP. The measurement is performed on the pre-processed
and registered image stack and is accomplished as follows:
First, the background is subtracted from the ROI for each
image frame in order to improve the results of the intensity
measurement. The average pixel intensity of the region of
interest IROI, as well as the average pixel intensity value INOI
of the whole NOI, is then measured at every time-step. The
quotient IROI/INOI of these values is computed and scaled
such that the value of the ﬁrst image (pre-irradiation) is always
equal to one.
In order to validate the presented approach, time-lapse
series of a total of 11 different XPC mutants have been
analyzed, with each series repeated at least 8 times. The XPC
mutants were expressed in two different cell types, human
XPC ﬁbroblasts and CHO cells.
The measurement values for each mutant and each cell
type were averaged at each time-step and the standard errors
were computed, which allows easy comparison to the manual
evaluation described in [6], [9].
33
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-137-3

10µm
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
t = 0s
t = 150s
t = 300s
avg-t
Fig. 2.
Microscopy images. Each row shows four images, the ﬁrst one
recorded at the beginning of the experiment (pre-irradiation), the second after
150 seconds and the third after 300 seconds. The fourth image shows the
avg-t projection after the segmentation and registration algorithm has been
applied. The XPC-GFP accumulation within the nucleus in row (a) is clearly
visible. The nucleus in row (b) deforms and moves during image acquisition.
Row (c) shows a nucleus where the accumulation is hardly detectable. The
whole nucleus in row (d) is very bright, hence the XPC-GFP accumulation
is hardly visible. Note that all microscopy images shown here are contrast
enhanced.
III. RESULTS
The results of the automated measurement are presented in
the following. In particular, the segmentation performance is
evaluated in Section III-A, and the measurement results are
compared to the manual evaluation in Section III-B.
A. Segmentation Performance
In order to evaluate the image processing pipeline proposed
in this work, approximately 100 image stacks with 52 or
60 frames per stack were processed. The processing pipeline
comprises a user interface which is presented to the user
at the end of the analysis and allows to review the results.
The segmentation results were veriﬁed by an expert biologist
who rejected image stacks where the ﬁrst or second image
processing step failed.
The ﬁrst processing step (segmentation of the nuclei) was
successful in almost 99 % of all cases. Out of the correctly
segmented image stacks, the second processing step (identify-
ing the site of irradiation and deﬁning the ROI) was accurate
in 99 % of all cases.
It should be noted that the 100 image stacks included
into the analysis also comprise very difﬁcult segmentation
scenarios, e.g. cases where the cell moves signiﬁcantly during
(a)
I
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 3.
The detection of the ROI. The top row shows representative images
of avg-t-projections, the bottom row shows the associated intensity proﬁle,
the intensity is denoted by I. The detected ROI is marked in each avg-t-
projection image, as well as the associated peak in the intensity proﬁle. The
panels (a)–(d) correspond to the images shown in Figure 2 (a)–(d). Note that
panel (d) shows a negative example: the irradiated area lies to the left of the
incorrectly determined ROI.
image acquisition, or where confounding factors such as air
bubbles or other cells (albeit without lesion) are present in the
image. A selection of difﬁcult segmentation scenarios where
our approach was still successful in most cases is shown in
Figure 2. Each row shows sample images that were acquired
during the experiment and the avg-t-projection image of the
segmented and registered image stack. Row (a) shows a very
good example where the accumulation is clearly visible and
the cell hardly moves. Rows (b) and (c) are difﬁcult to segment
and to measure due to cell movement and deformation of
the nucleus (b) or hardly detectable accumulation (c). Row
(d) is another difﬁcult example where the intensity within
the nucleus is so high that our algorithm detects a wrong
ROI. The ROI detection for all of these image stacks is
shown in Figure 3. The top row shows the avg-t-projection
and the detected ROI is overlaid. The bottom row shows the
corresponding intensity proﬁle, indicating the peak that the
scoring algorithm chooses. Note that the ROI detection in
image (d) failed, the actual accumulation takes place to the
left of the detected ROI; this is the only case of all processed
image stacks where the ROI detection failed.
The processing time per image stack is in the range of 1–2
minutes per stack on a PC with a 2.83 GHz processor and
4GB RAM. In the whole processing pipeline, the registration
and preprocessing stages are the most time consuming steps.
B. Manual vs. Automated Analysis
For a more detailed assessment of the results of the au-
tomated image processing approach, the automated measure-
ments are compared to the manual evaluation in [6] and [9].
The manual evaluation is achieved similarly to the automated
evaluation. First, the image stack is registered, then the ROI
is determined manually and the intensity of the ROI in each
image of the stack is measured and the quotient IROI/INOI is
determined. In contrast to the automated evaluation, the ROI
size is not ﬁxed, but adjusted to ﬁt the most visible part of the
lesion.
Figure 4 (a) shows the result of our automatic inten-
34
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-137-3

(b)
 0.95
 1
 1.05
 1.1
 1.15
 1.2
 1.25
 1.3
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 400
WT
F799A
F756A
F797A
N754A
Time(s)
IROI/INOI
(a)
 0.98
 1
 1.02
 1.04
 1.06
 1.08
 1.1
 1.12
 1.14
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 400
WT
F799A
F756A
F797A
N754A
Time(s)
IROI/INOI
Fig. 4.
Results of the automatic measurement (a) and the manual measure-
ment (b). Shown are the mean values and their standard errors of the intensity
quotient IROI/INOI of several image stacks for ﬁve different XPC mutants
in CHO cells.
(b)
 0.95
 1
 1.05
 1.1
 1.15
 1.2
 1.25
 1.3
 1.35
 1.4
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 400
WT
W531A
W542A
F733A
W690A
W690S
Time(s)
IROI/INOI
(a)
 0.96
 0.98
 1
 1.02
 1.04
 1.06
 1.08
 1.1
 1.12
 1.14
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 400
WT
W531A
W542A
F733A
W690A
W690S
Time(s)
IROI/INOI
Fig. 5.
Results of the automatic measurement (a) and the manual mea-
surement (b). Shown are the mean values and their standard errors of the
intensity quotient IROI/INOI of several image stacks for different XPC
mutants expressed in XP-C ﬁbroblasts.
sity measurements for four different XPC mutants (F756A,
F797A, F799A, N754A) and wild-type XPC expressed in
CHO cells. The quotient IROI/INOI is plotted versus the
time of acquisition. Shown are the mean values of at least
8 image stacks per mutant, the error bar is given by the
standard error of these mean values. The computed results
are compared to those obtained by manual evaluation [9] as
shown in Figure 4 (b). Note that the graphs show the same
qualitative behaviour, but there is a quantitative difference. The
intensity increase determined by the automated approach is
much lower. However, at the same time there is a reduction
of the standard error, hence preserving e.g. the statistically
signiﬁcant difference between the data from XPC-WT and the
various XPC mutants (in this case, the statistical signiﬁcance
is simply provided by non-overlapping standard error bars).
What is more, the automatically measured intensity changes
of the N754A mutant are lower than intensity changes of the
F-mutants. Whether the improved ability of the automated
analysis to differentiate between the N and the F mutants has
a biological correlate is a question beyond the scope of this
work and will be investigated in future studies.
Figure 5 (a) shows the automatically measured intensity
changes for ﬁve different XPC mutants (W531A, W542A,
F733A, W690A, W690S) and wild-type XPC expressed in
XP-C cells. The quotient IROI/INOI is plotted versus the
time, and again the mean values of several image stacks per
XPC mutant are shown. The results of the manual evaluation
from [6] are shown in Figure 5 (b); note that the graphs show
the same quantitative differences as the graphs in Figure 4. The
qualitative features are largely preserved, with the exception
that the automatically measured values of W531A and W542A
are separated in the time interval starting at 50s and ending at
220s. This separation cannot be seen in the manual evaluation
and it is not entirely clear if there are biological reasons for
this separation or if it is due to the image quality of the W542A
mutants, which is also expressed in the high standard error in
the automated analysis result.
Summarizing, the results of the automated measurements
preserve the features that were discovered in the manual
evaluation, and on top of that have the advantage of repro-
ducibility and unbiasedness, and, last but not least, time saving.
Moreover, the measurement seems to be more accurate, the
N754A mutant appears clearly separated from the F-mutants
in the experiments involving the CHO cells, which is not the
case for the manual evaluation.
IV. DISCUSSION
The results of our automated image processing approach are
satisfactory for our purposes. Almost 99 % of the cell nuclei
were correctly segmented and 99 % of the ROIs were correctly
determined in our data set of approximately 100 image stacks.
Moreover, the comparison with a manual evaluation of the
data set shows that the automated measurement not only
supports the qualitative results from the manual evaluation,
but also has a lower standard error. In the presented case,
the automated evaluation shows that the N754A mutants
35
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-137-3

behave signiﬁcantly different from the other evaluated mutants.
Whether the improved ability of the automated analysis to
differentiate between the N and the F mutants has a biological
correlate is a question beyond the scope of this work and will
be investigated in future studies.
The quantitative differences of the measured intensity values
in the manual and in the automated evaluation are likely due to
the choice of the ROI size. In the manual evaluation, the ROI
has been chosen smaller for the XPC mutants where the XPC-
GFP accumulation is clearly visible, and larger for the XPC
mutants where hardly any accumulation is visually detectable.
This choice inﬂuenced the measured intensity changes. In
particular, the values for mutants with high accumulation are
much higher than in the automated analysis, where the ROI
has a constant size throughout the analysis. Although this auto-
mated approach performs very well for our experimental data
sets, there is room for improvements regarding the registration
algorithm — a nonlinear registration algorithm [16] would be
able to compensate deformations of the irradiated area — and
computation time.
V. CONCLUSION
We presented an automated system for measuring the
performance of XPC in the DNA repair process based on
intensity changes in microscopy images. The image processing
pipeline comprises several steps that are based on standard
image processing algorithms in combination with a customized
segmentation algorithm and a speciﬁc scoring method to detect
the correct ROI.
Laser microirradiation in combination with ﬂuorescence
microscopy has become a popular method for studying the
dynamics of DNA repair in live cells. Computational tools
that facilitate the extraction of quantitative data from such
experiments are therefore of great interest to the biology
community. Further work will be directed at recognizing more
complex irradiation and damage patterns.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Interdisciplinary Center for Interactive Data Analysis,
Modelling and Visual Exploration (INCIDE) is funded via a
grant of the German Excellence Initiative by the German Re-
search Foundation (DFG) and the German Council of Science
and Humanities awarded to the University of Konstanz. The
Center of Applied Photonics (CAP) is supported by the Min-
istry of Science, Research and the Arts Baden-W¨urttemberg.
We thank D. Tr¨autlein and H. Naegeli for providing image
data. We gratefully acknowledge A. Leitenstorfer, M. Horn
and O. Deussen for fruitful discussions and support.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Lodish, A. Berk, P. Matsudaira, C. A. Kaiser, M. Krieger, M. P. Scott,
L. Zipursky, and J. Darnell, Molecular Biology of the Cell. New York:
WH Freeman, 2004.
[2] L. C. Gillet and O. D. Sch¨arer, “Molecular mechanisms of mammalian
global genome nucleotide excision repair,” Chemical Reviews, vol. 106,
no. 2, pp. 253–276, 2006.
[3] P. C. Hanawalt and G. Spivak, “Transcription-coupled DNA repair:
two decades of progress and surprises,” Nature Reviews Molecular Cell
Biology, vol. 9, pp. 958–970, 2008.
[4] O. D. Sch¨arer, “Achieving broad substrate speciﬁcity in damage recogni-
tion by binding accessible nondamaged DNA,” Molecular Cell, vol. 28,
no. 2, pp. 184–186, 2007.
[5] K. Sugasawa and F. Hanaoka, “Sensing of DNA damage by XPC/Rad4:
one protein for many lesions,” Nature Structural & Molecular Biology,
vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 887–888, 2007.
[6] U. Camenisch, D. Tr¨autlein, F. C. Clement, J. Fei, A. Leitenstorfer,
E. Ferrando-May, and H. Naegeli, “Two-stage dynamic DNA quality
check by xeroderma pigmentosum group C protein,” The EMBO Journal,
vol. 28, pp. 2387–2399, 2009.
[7] Z. Gitai, “New ﬂuorescence microscopy methods for microbiology:
sharper, faster, and quantitative,” Current Opinion in Microbiology,
vol. 12, pp. 341–346, 2009.
[8] D. Tr¨autlein, F. Adler, K. Moutzouris, A. Jeromin, A. Leitenstorfer, and
E. Ferrando-May, “Highly versatile confocal microscopy system based
on a tunable femtosecond Er:ﬁber source,” Journal of Biophotonics,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 53–61, 2008.
[9] F. Clement, N. Kaczmarek, N. Mathieu, M. Tomas, A. Leitenstorfer,
E. Ferrando-May, and H. Naegeli, “Dissection of the xeroderma pigmen-
tosum group C protein function by site-directed mutagenesis,” Antioxid
Redox Signal, vol. (to appear), 2010.
[10] M. R. Berthold, N. Cebron, F. Dill, T. R. Gabriel, T. K¨otter, T. Meinl,
P. Ohl, C. Sieb, K. Thiel, and B. Wiswedel, “KNIME: The Konstanz
Information Miner,” in Proc. Data Analysis, Machine Learning and
Applications, pp. 319–326, 2008.
[11] N. Otsu, “A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms,”
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 62–66, 1979.
[12] P. Bamford and B. Lovell, “Unsupervised cell nucleus segmentation with
active contours,” Signal Processing, vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 203–213, 1998.
[13] M. Kvarnstr¨om, K. Logg, A. Diez, K. Bodvard, and M. K¨all, “Image
analysis algorithms for cell contour recognition in budding yeast,” Optics
Express, vol. 16, no. 17, pp. 12943–1257, 2008.
[14] P. Th´evenaz, U. Ruttimann, and M. Unser, “A pyramid approach to
subpixel registration based on intensity,” IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 27–41, 1998.
[15] R. Lienhart, E. Kuranov, and V. Pisarevsky, “Empirical analysis of
detection cascades of boosted classiﬁers for rapid object detection,” in
In DAGM 25th Pattern Recognition Symposium, pp. 297–304, 2003.
[16] I.-H. Kim, R. Eils, and K. Rohr, “Non-rigid alignment of multi-channel
ﬂuorescence microscopy images of live cells for improved classiﬁcation
of subcellular particle motion,” vol. 7262, p. 72620S, SPIE, 2009.
36
BIOTECHNO 2011 :  The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-137-3

