A Bioinformatics Pipeline for Evaluating Protein Misfolding Impact on the Tertiary 
Structure in Alzheimer’s Disease
Antigoni Avramouli, Eleftheria Polychronidou, Panayiotis Vlamos 
BiHELab – Bioinformatics and Human Electrophysiology Lab 
Department of Informatics of Ionian University 
Corfu, Greece 
e-mail: c15avra@ionio.gr, c13poly@ionio.gr, vlamos@ionio.gr 
 
Abstract— Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common cause 
of neurodegenerative disorder in the elderly individuals. To 
support the biomarker research on Alzheimer’s Disease 
progression, this study describes a bioinformatics pipeline for 
the evaluation of the mutations impact on the tertiary 
structure of AD causative genes.  
Keywords: protein structure; protein misfolding; machine 
learning; Alzheimer’s Disease. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Proteins are large, complex biomolecules made up of 
amino acids. Proteins play a significant role in almost all 
biological processes. The functional properties of proteins 
rely upon their three-dimensional structures. The three-
dimensional structure arises because the polypeptide chains 
fold to produce (starting from linear sequences) compact and 
independent structural regions with specific structures. 
Predicting the three-dimensional structure of proteins by 
their amino acid sequence contributes to understanding their 
biological function. Prediction is not always possible: despite 
the remarkable efforts of recent years, the problem of folding 
remains one of the major problems in molecular biology. In 
addition, proteins that do not get the right configuration can 
bind abnormally to other biomolecules, as well as form 
aggregates that are highly toxic to the body [1]. Aggregates 
are organized into fibrillar structures, a common feature of 
many neurodegenerative diseases [2]. 
Alzheimer's Disease (AD), characterised as a protein 
misfolding disease, is the most common progressive form of 
dementia [3]. Typical pathological findings are misfolded 
and aggregated amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides and intracellular 
neurofibrillary tangles of tau protein. The most well-known 
predisposing genetic factor for the disease is the presence of 
the e4 allele of apolipoprotein E (ApoE) [4]. In the e4 allele 
(frequency 13.7%), the codon 112 has been replaced by 
arginine. However, the frequency of the e4 allele increases 
dramatically to ~ 40% in patients with AD. This mutation is 
associated with a change in the tertiary structure of the 
protein and the accumulation of β-amyloid in neurons, as 
well as with the induction of inflammatory responses, while 
it is the most prone isoform to proteolysis. In this context, 
changes in the tertiary structure of proteins, which are 
components of major signaling pathways of AD, could 
justify the genetic background of this heterogeneous 
disorder. 
In recent years, the correlation of the different tertiary 
structures of the isoforms of the ApoE gene with the 
pathogenesis of AD has been studied worldwide [5, 6]. In 
particular, a study published by the Paralvrez-Marin group in 
Sweden proposed a computational model of the abnormal 
interaction of the β-amyloid peptide with the e4 isoform of 
ApoE, due to the incorrect tertiary structure of the second 
[7]. However, apart from ApoE-related studies, to date, 
changes in the tertiary form of proteins due to gene 
mutations have not yet been investigated in AD. Prior to the 
discovery of mutations in genes associated with disease 
onset, no molecular signaling pathways were implicated. 
Recent genetic studies have identified many candidate genes 
that are associated with an inherited form of AD. Even if 
mutations in these genes account for a small proportion of 
Familial AD (FAD), knowledge of these genes and 
correlated biochemical cascades will provide several 
potential targets for treatment of AD and aging-related 
disorders. Also, the different pathogenetic mechanisms of the 
disease involve a combination of genetic factors (with 
different severity for the disease from person to person), 
indicating that it is essentially a set of disorders with 
common characteristics rather than a distinct disease. 
The present research paper aims to contribute to the 
reduction of the research gap created by the study of the 
tertiary structure, to understand the pathogenesis of the 
disease. In recent years, research interest has focused on 
identifying all the genetic sites associated with the disease 
and the different alleles of these genes using high-resolution 
technologies. In contrast, there is the tertiary form of these 
mutant proteins, which has not yet been studied in depth. In 
addition, some of the AD-related proteins have not yet had 
their crystal structure determined.  
Approaches that allow the prediction of three-
dimensional structures of proteins through computers are 
relatively new in the medical sciences [8], but their 
contribution is increasingly recognized as a tool for 
characterizing changes in the structure of proteins and 
detecting rare molecular events. These principles make it 
easier for us to understand how the protein structure is 
created, to identify common structural issues, to relate 
structure and function, but also to see the fundamental 
relationships between different proteins. Deciphering the 
mechanisms of the loss of the tertiary structure of a protein is 
essential for understanding the pathogenesis of diseases, such 
as AD and essential for explaining neuronal damage during 
aging. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-859-4
BIOTECHNO 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

This pipeline is described by four steps: (a) the 
evaluation of the online prediction tools and the selection of 
the most suitable for AD protein structures, (b) the prediction 
of the mutated structures, (c) the AI/ML classification of the 
tertiary structures into discrete groups and (d) the evaluation 
of the pathogenicity of each group to gain evidence for the 
impact of the mutations and to suggest a characterization for 
the mutations with unclear etiology. This is an on-going 
research and thus preliminary results on Presenilin one will 
be presented here. 
II. 
METHODS 
The first step towards the implementation of the pipeline is 
to collect data from biological databases, to evaluate the 
existing data and finally to apply machine learning 
approaches and classify proteins into groups with similar 
characteristics. 
A. Data Consolidation 
Here some of the most AD pathogenic mutated alleles 
will be studied. As many of these mutations affect protein 
stability, modeled protein structures for the mutant proteins 
will be compared with the native protein to evaluate stability 
changes. The genetic loci that will be analysed further 
through protein 3D structure include APP (Amyloid 
precursor protein), PSEN1 (Presenilin one), PSEN2 
(Presenilin two), CLU (Clusterin), CR1 (Complement 
receptor 1), PICALM (Phosphatidylinositol binding clathrin 
assembly protein), BIN1 (Myc box- dependent- interacting 
protein 1), ABCA7 (ATP binding cassette transporter 7), 
MS4A (Membrane- spanning 4- domains, subfamily A), 
EPHA1 (Ephrin type-A receptor 1), CD33 (CD33 antigen), 
CD2AP (CD2 associated protein), SORL1 (Sortilin-related 
receptor 1), ΤΡΕΜ2 (Triggering receptor expressed on 
myeloid cells 2) [9]. These genes are linked to 
inflammation, oxidative stress, vascular regulation, immune 
system function, and the function of specific proteases.  
Successful mapping of these genes and their association 
with the onset of the disease has led to the formulation of 
the amyloid hypothesis [10]. This hypothesis sets as the 
main pathogenetic mechanism the increased production of β 
amyloid peptide fragments. Nevertheless, there are cases 
where the onset of symptoms occurs at a much younger age. 
In a unique clinical case so far, the onset of the disease 
occurred in the mid-forties and in some people from the age 
of thirty. Members of this family had a mutation in the 
PSEN1 gene (Presenilin 1 E280A) [11]. The mutations 
related to the proteins were identified through literature and 
used for the next steps of this pipeline. More particular, so 
far 69 mutations were identified for APP, 112 for MART, 
326 for PSEN1, 68 for PSEN2, and 68 for TREM2.  
B. Evaluation of Protein Structures 
Since the three-dimensional shape of most of the related 
proteins 
is 
not 
determined 
through 
experimental 
methodologies, the most established servers were evaluated 
for predicting the mutated structures and estimate the impact 
of the mutations to the 3-dimensional structure. A list of the 
selected methodologies is presented on the Table I below:  
TABLE I.  
LIST OF SELECTED METHODOLOGIES 
Methodology 
Description 
How was used 
Uniprot [12] 
A comprehensive resource 
for protein sequence and 
annotation data 
To 
understand 
the 
protein function, and 
the most related protein 
structures 
PolyPhen-2 
[13] 
A tool which predicts 
possible 
impact of 
an 
amino acid substitution on 
the structure and function 
To 
understand 
how 
mutations 
affect 
the 
structure and function 
of the protein 
iTASSER 
[14] 
A hierarchical approach to 
protein structure prediction 
and 
structure-based 
function annotation 
To predict the mutated 
and 
unmutated 
3D 
protein structures 
PDBeFold 
[15] 
An interactive service that 
allows you to identify 
structures that are similar 
to that of your reference 
protein 
To 
compare 
the 
mutated and unmutated 
structures on residues 
level 
CATH 
/ 
Gene3D [16] 
A 
protein 
family 
classification methodology 
To identify if there is 
any 
relationship 
between 
mutations 
impact 
and 
protein 
families 
 
The methodologies are currently used based on the order 
of the table, to determine the protein structures and 
understand in detail the impact of the mutations to the 
proteins. Furthermore, STRING [17] server is used to 
analyse protein-protein association networks and assess any 
change that might occur on the mutated protein networks 
(Figures 1&2). 
C. Clustering of protein structures 
To analyze further the mutated structures, an established 
methodology from the field of 3D object recognition was 
applied [18]. The combination of the above local descriptors 
was applied to the 3D structures to extract the appropriate 
features for the comparison. 
 
Figure 1. Example of APP network in STRING network analysis.  
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-859-4
BIOTECHNO 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

In order to evaluate the accuracy of clustering using the 
3D descriptors, a first round of experiments was conducted, 
using an annotated dataset. This dataset included every 
mutated structure while the label of each structure was 
aligned with the pathogenetic impact of each mutation 
according to literature data.   
 
 
Figure 2. Structural Analysis of the protein. Each protein is mapped to the 
experimental determined structures (one or more) included in PDB(e).   
 
 
Figure 3. Example of PolyPhen-2 output for the A673V mutation of the 
APP protein. Percentage of prediction is taken into consideration for the 
annotation of the clustering output. 
 
The k-medoids, Agglomerative Hierarchical clustering 
and Density-based spatial clustering of applications with 
noise (DBSCAN) methods were used to cluster the data 
using the extracted descriptors [19]. After extracting 
descriptors from each pair of aligned proteins, the root-
mean-square distances (RMSD) between each pair of 
descriptors is computed, forming a square distance matrix.   
 
In this computational analysis work, preliminary results 
of our study on PSEN1 mutations are presented and are 
compared to available clinical data for PSEN1 variants 
known to cause AD (Figures 3&4). To the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first study of its kind investigating 
performing comparative and ab initio prediction of protein 
structure for mutated forms of PSEN1. The experimental 
results verify that the use of 3D descriptors can be 
effectively applied to distinguish structural differences of 
proteins based on the pathogenic categories of the 
mutations. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Results of hierarchical clustering are presented for the PSEN1 
protein based on the 3DCS and the RSD descriptors type that was applied 
to each case. 
 
The same process will be repeated for all the other 
proteins related to the AD progression described in the Data 
Consolidation section. However, due to the limitations in 
the prediction time of the online servers, the proof of 
concept of the PSEN1 is presented here.  
III. 
CONCLUSION 
It is known that there is no cure for AD to date. The 
collective failure of recent clinical trials in the treatment of 
AD suggests the need for a fuller understanding of the 
complex biological processes underlying this disease to 
develop effective, targeted therapeutic approaches. To date, 
several genetic sites have been identified that are involved 
in the onset or evolution of AD. Also, AD, like other 
neurodegenerative diseases, seems to be a biological 
phenomenon distinct from the phenomenon of normal aging 
and not an accelerated and pathological version of it. These 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-859-4
BIOTECHNO 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

data indicate the multiplicity of etiological factors that 
contribute to the occurrence of AD. 
The therapeutic targeting of protein folding has created 
unique challenges for the discovery and development of 
new drugs. To achieve this, we must first understand the 
dynamic nature of the protein species involved and discover 
the structure and folding of each protein (formation of 
monomers, oligomers or insoluble aggregates) as well as 
whether this leads to cell toxicity. To date, our lack of 
understanding of how proteins interact with other cell 
proteins and the lack of well-characterized biomarkers that 
can be used in clinical trials is another bet for the research 
community. 
In the present study, a comprehensive methodology for 
the analysis of the impact of the AD related proteins is 
presented. Based on the approach, a combination of well-
established online tools can support the prediction of 3D 
protein 
structures 
that 
have 
not 
been 
determined 
experimentally yet.  Furthermore, the use of Poly-phen2 and 
CATH can support the identification of evidence of the 
impact of mutations to the protein structure. Finally, a 
combination of bioinformatic and object recognition 
clustering methodology is applied to group the tertiary 
structures. The annotation of the groups based on the 
pathogenic characterization of the mutations along with the 
networks produced by STRING server can reveal evidence 
on how each mutation affects the protein network.  
As mentioned in Section II, the prediction process 
through online servers consumes significant time and thus a 
proof of concept is presented here. Since this is an on-going 
work, the complete analysis will be available as soon as the 
models are obtained. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is co-financed by Greece and the European 
Union 
(European 
Social 
Fund- 
ESF) 
through 
the 
Operational Programme «Human Resources Development, 
Education and Lifelong Learning 2014-2020» in the context 
of the project “Analysis of the tertiary protein structure and 
correlation of mutations with the clinical characteristics of 
Alzheimer's disease”, Project no. 5067210. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. M. Dobson. “Protein folding and misfolding”. Nature 426, 
pp. 884–890, 2003. 
[2] C. Soto and S. Pritzkow. “Protein misfolding, aggregation, 
and conformational strains in neurodegenerative diseases”. 
Nature neuroscience, 21(10), pp. 1332–1340, 2018. 
[3] V. Vingtdeux, N. Sergeant and L. Buee, “Potential 
contribution of exosomes to the prion-like propagation of 
lesions in Alzheimer's disease”. Front Physiol. 3 pp. 229, 
2012.  
[4] B. V. Zlokovic, “ Cerebrovascular effects of apolipoprotein E: 
implications for Alzheimer disease”. JAMA Neurol. 70 pp. 
440–444, 2013. 
[5] V. V. Giau, E. Bagyinszky, S. S. An and S. Y. Kim, “Role of 
apolipoprotein 
E 
in 
neurodegenerative 
diseases”. 
Neuropsychiatric disease and treatment, 11, pp. 1723–1737, 
2015. 
[6] P. Huebbe and G. Rimbach, “Evolution of human 
apolipoprotein E (APOE) isoforms: Gene structure, protein 
function and interaction with dietary factors”. Ageing 
Research Reviews, 37, pp. 146–161, 2017. 
[7] J. Luo, J. D. Maréchal, S. Wärmländer, A. Gräslund and A. 
Perálvarez-Marín, “In silico analysis of the apolipoprotein E 
and the amyloid beta peptide interaction: misfolding induced 
by frustration of the salt bridge network”. PLoS Comput Biol. 
5;6(2) pp. e1000663, 2010. 
[8] E. Polychronidou, I. Kalamaras, A. Agathangelidis, L. A., 
Sutton, X. J. Yan, V. Bikos, et. al, “Automated shape-based 
clustering of 3D immunoglobulin protein structures in chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia”. BMC bioinformatics 19.14: 414, 
2018. 
[9] M. Calabrò, C. Rinaldi, G. Santoro, and C. Crisafulli, “ The 
biological pathways of Alzheimer disease: a review”. AIMS 
neuroscience, 8(1), pp. 86–132, 2020.  
[10] D. J. Selkoe and J. Hardy, “The amyloid hypothesis of 
Alzheimer’s disease at 25 years”. EMBO Mol Med. 8(6), pp. 
595–608, 2016. 
[11] D. Sepulveda-Falla, L. Chavez-Gutierrez, E. Portelius, J. I. 
Vélez, S. Dujardin, A. Barrera-Ocampo, F. Dinkel, et al, “A 
multifactorial model of pathology for age of onset 
heterogeneity 
in 
familial 
Alzheimer's 
disease”. 
Acta 
neuropathologica, 141(2), pp. 217–233, 2021.  
[12] UniProt Consortium “UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein 
knowledge”. Nucleic acids research, 47 (D1), pp. D506-D515, 
2019. 
[13] I. A. Adzhubei, S. Schmidt, L. Peshkin, V. E. Ramensky, A. 
Gerasimova, P. Bork and S. R. Sunyaev, “ A method and 
server for predicting damaging missense mutations”. Nature 
methods, 7(4), pp. 248-249, 2010. 
[14] J. Yang and Y. Zhang, “I-TASSER server: new development 
for protein structure and function predictions”. Nucleic Acids 
Research, 43: W174-W181, 2015. 
[15] E. Krissinel and K. Henrick, “Protein structure comparison in 
3D based on secondary structure matching (PDBeFold) 
followed by Ca alignment, scored by a new structural 
similarity function. In: Andreas J. Kungl & Penelope J. Kungl 
(Eds.)”, Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on 
Molecular Structural Biology, Vienna, September 3-7, p.88, 
2003. 
[16] I. Sillitoe, N. Bordin, N. Dawson, V. P. Waman, P. Ashford, 
H. M. Scholes, et.al., “CATH: increased structural coverage 
of functional space”. Nucleic Acids Res. 49(D1) pp. D266-
D273,2021. 
[17] D. Szklarczyk, A. L. Gable, D. Lyon, A. Junge, S. Wyder, J. 
Huerta-Cepas, M. Simonovic, et. al, “STRING v11: protein-
protein association networks with increased coverage, 
supporting functional discovery in genome-wide experimental 
datasets”. Nucleic Acids Research, 47(D1), pp. D607-D613, 
2019.  
[18] E. 
Polychronidou, 
A. 
Avramouli 
and 
P. 
Vlamos, 
“Alzheimer’s Disease: The Role of Mutations in Protein 
Folding”. Adv Exp Med Biol., 1195, pp. 227-236, 2020. 
[19] M. Ester, H.P. Kriegel, J. Sander, X. Xu, “A Density-Based 
Algorithm for Discovering Clusters in Large Spatial 
Databases with Noise”. KDD Proceedings pp. 226-231, 1996. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-859-4
BIOTECHNO 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

