Clustering MicroRNAs from Sequence and Time-Series Expression 
 
 
Didem Ölçer, Hasan Oğul 
Department of Computer Engineering  
Baskent University  
Ankara,Turkey 
e-mail: dtokmak@baskent.edu.tr, hogul@baskent.edu.tr  
 
 
Abstract— Inferring co-operative actions of microRNAs is 
crucial for analyzing large-scale gene regulatory networks. We 
introduce here a probabilistic generative model to cluster 
microRNAs from their mature sequences and time-series 
expression profiles. Sequence model is defined over the 
distribution of k-mers, all possible k-length substrings from 
RNA alphabet. The expression model is built upon a spline-
basis function over a Gaussian assumption. Two models are 
integrated to form a single likelihood. Cluster enrichment 
analysis has shown that the data integration over a Bayesian 
framework could improve the clustering ability and produce 
biologically more plausible patterns. 
Keywords- microRNA expression; microRNA regulation; 
graphical model; data integration; time-series data analysis 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Post-transcriptional regulation of genes is mainly 
directed by small non-coding RNAs called microRNAs 
(miRNAs). It has been shown that they are abundantly 
found in many organisms and affiliated with several 
biological processes such as development, aging and 
apoptosis [4][5][9][12][17]. It is proven that various 
diseases are associated with the abnormal behaviors of 
specific miRNAs [13][14][18]. Recent studies have shown 
that miRNAs usually operate in a co-operative manner to 
perform their activities [1]. This suggests that some 
miRNAs can form context-specific modules, i.e., cluster of 
entities, while regulating gene expression. Since the 
elucidation of gene regulatory networks comprising all 
actors is one of the ultimate goals of systems biology, which 
miRNAs are functionally similar in a certain context is high-
potential knowledge for the researchers and clinicians 
working in this domain. Here, a functional similarity refers a 
common regulatory behavior in a certain context, e.g., a 
specific disease condition or temporal response to a stimuli. 
Several features can be employed to infer functional 
miRNA clusters. An obvious indicator for miRNA's 
regulatory 
function 
is 
its 
expression 
profile. 
Its 
differentiation usually results with a consequential change in 
the expression of its target genes, thus in relevant regulatory 
pathways. On the other hand, a similarity between the 
expression profiles of two miRNAs does not necessarily 
imply a similarity about their genome-wide functions. 
Several other factors may affect the regulation of miRNAs, 
and therefore they may arbitrarily express in a similar way. 
Sequence information can also unveil the structural 
similarity between miRNAs since the target selection 
process is usually mediated by a complementarity between 
mature miRNA sequence and its target mRNA sequence [4]. 
We can easily argue that two miRNAs having similar 
sequences will have similar binding preferences, which lead 
them in target mRNA regulation. However, it was shown 
that a miRNA may not always be active in a certain context 
although its binding affinity is very high [6]. Hence, 
sequence information alone is not expected to give reliable 
results in miRNA functional similarity associations. In this 
study, we propose to use both information in a single model 
to obtain functional miRNA clusters. While designing our 
model, we were inspired from Kundaje et al. [11] where 
they combined the promoter sequence motifs with gene 
expression profiles to infer transcriptional modules. We 
adopt their model for miRNA expression profiles and 
propose a novel approach to integrate mature miRNA 
sequence into overall framework. The framework is built 
upon a probabilistic graphical model, which simultaneously 
integrates sequence and time-series expression data to infer 
coherent miRNA clusters. It enables to adjust and 
understand the contribution of each information to final 
cluster assignments. Experimental validation on a real 
biological data set demonstrates that the integration can 
improve the clustering ability and produce biologically more 
plausible patterns. 
The rest of paper is organized as follows. We explain 
methods in Section II. A description of analysis and results 
can be found in Section III, followed by conclusion in 
Section IV. 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Probabilistic Graphical Model 
The problem is to learn the functional clusters of miRNAs 
where their similarity is explained by a common regulatory 
mechanism at the transcriptional level and consequential 
regulatory effect in post-transcriptional level. We define a 
probabilistic framework which assigns the miRNAs to 
clusters based on two types of data for each miRNA  : its 
time-series expression profile, i.e., a set of temporal 
expression values,   , and a set of features representing its 
mature sequence,    . We let the variable     refer to the 
cluster assignment of miRNA  . Since we assume that both 
sequence and expression of a miRNA is conditioned on its 
cluster assignment, following graphical model can be used: 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
     
(1) 
 
 
The joint probability distribution for a single miRNA 
can be written as                                  , 
where    and    are assumed to be conditionally 
independent for given cluster assignment     Having the 
joint probability model, the task is then to learn the model 
parameters that maximize the likelihood of input data for a 
given set of cluster assignments. Since the expression and 
sequence data have different characteristics in nature, two 
independent sub-models are provided to define their 
conditional probabilities. 
B. Sequence Model 
Mature miRNA sequences might be of different lengths, 
usually between 22-24 nucleotides. For the probabilistic 
model defined above, the sequence is needed to be modeled 
by a fixed number of numerical features, which potentially 
represent its regulatory behavior. We select 3-mer model for 
this representation. In k-mer model, defined over RNA 
alphabet A={'A','G','U','C'}, a sequence s1s2...sm of miRNA i 
is represented by                    where     denotes 
the count of jth k-length substring among all possible 
substrings composed by the same alphabet A, and P is the 
number of such substrings. In our case, 3-mer representation 
involves P=43 distinct count values of all possible 3-length 
substrings from A. This scheme is able to consider the 
content of the miRNA sequence as well as the order of 
residues inside the sequence, which is one of the major 
determinants of miRNA binding. Similar representations 
have been successfully applied in several domains [15].  
For model integration, we represent the mature sequence 
for miRNA    as the sparse vector     of count of k-mers that 
it contains, where    is indexed by all possible k-mers     
               . We let     
        
 be the total count 
of k-mers observed in miRNA  . For each cluster  , we 
define another vector of k-mer frequencies observed in the 
miRNAs of same cluster;                    , where 
 
          
  The sub-model for miRNA sequence then 
becomes a multinomial model, defined by the following 
conditional probability;  
 
              
   
          
   
   
  
    
  
(2) 
 
With the assumption that observation of each k-mer is 
independent from each other, the model parameter to be 
evaluated here is     
C. Expression Model 
In the expression model, we define each cluster by a 
Gaussian distribution over spline parameters that model the 
common time-course behavior of its member miRNAs. This 
model was originally proposed by Bar-Joseph et al. [3] and 
successfully applied for inferring temporal gene regulatory 
mechanisms [3]. In our framework, each miRNA expression 
profile is represented by a spline curve. More formally, for 
each miRNA   assigned to cluster   , its expression profile is 
given as a function of time as                        , 
where               are spline basis functions. Here,     
denotes the mean of coefficients for cluster     denotes the 
number of spline control points used and     is the miRNA 
specific variation of coefficients, which is treated as a latent 
variable.     is assumed to be normally distributed with 
mean 0 and covariance matrix    .           is the random 
Gaussian noise. If we have   time points of observation 
denoted by          the expression profile is given as: 
 
    
      
 
      
 
 
 
      
 
      
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
(3) 
 
The probability of miRNA expression conditioned on 
any cluster assignment then becomes:  
 
                       
     
      
 
      
  
                          
 
               
             
   
      
 
 
 (4) 
As suggested by Bar-Joseph et al. [3], natural cubic 
splines are used where the size   of spline basis is equal to 
the number of evenly-spaced knots. Optimal value of   and 
number of clusters are selected using 2-fold cross-validation 
to maximize the likelihood computed from the sum of the 
log loss function at each fold. 
Parameter estimation and cluster assignment are done 
using a set of alternating Expectation and Maximization 
(EM) steps. Initial clusters are obtained by k-means 
algorithm using only expression data. At each E-step, the 
algorithm calculates       , the probability of gene   being 
in cluster  , and the expectations for latent variable    . M-
step updates the parameters based on the expected values.  
These alternating iterations repeat until the likelihood 
convergences. The results of last M-step reports the final 
miRNA clusters and corresponding parameters inferred. 
III. 
RESULTS 
We perform our experiments in a recently released 
miRNA expression data for transcriptome analysis on 
ovarian cancer [7]. The data set involves the Affymetrix 
measurements for expression profiles of several miRNA 
probes at six time points in three replicates. In the 
experiment, they studied the pathways and growth 
properties of cultured human ovarian cancer cells that are 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

expressing luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR). Their 
particular interest was to understand the changes in the 
expression as a result of the activation of receptor by its 
cognate ligand, gonadotropin (LH). They used SKOV3 
ovarian cancer cell line stably transfected with LHR, and 
investigated the response of these cells in culture following 
exposure to LH. They chosen the parent SKOV-3 ovarian 
cancer cell line, which did not express LHR, as a control in 
the experiments and observed the alterations in gene 
expression elicited by LH. Resulting data set is composed of 
six groups of SKOV-3 cells: LHR- (parent cell line), LHR+ 
(just after transfection), and LHR+ incubated with LH in 
four time points: 1, 4, 8, and 20 h. To pre-process the data, 
we average over three replicates and calculate differential 
expression all miRNAs with respect to LRH- condition. For 
integrative analysis, we remove the miRNAs with no 
sequence information. This gives us a dataset of differential 
expression profiles of 80 miRNAs at five different time 
points.  
To assess the functional homogeneity of clusters, we use 
the enrichment of Gene Ontology (GO) terms [2]. We 
extract a collection of confirmed miRNA targets from the 
TarBase [16], miRecords [19], miRTarBase_MTI [10] and 
circuitDB [8] databases. For each cluster, we build a target 
set by taking corresponding miRNAs and setting the union 
of their targets. We then evaluate the functional enrichment 
of GO terms in each target set based on biological process 
category, using a Bonferroni-corrected hypergeometric test 
with an original p- value of 0.01.  
Two-fold cross-validation on expression data set 
suggests us an optimal model with q=4 (number of spline 
points) and c=5 (number of clusters). We run both single 
model and integrated model with these parameters. To see 
the effect of different number of clusters, we also compile 
the same setup for c=10. At the end of each run, we ignore 
the outliers by removing the clusters having less than three 
miRNAs from final cluster set. 
GO-enrichment test results are shown in Table 1 for 
sequence model, expression model and integrative model 
for c=5 and c=10. For each run, we report the number final 
clusters obtained and the percentage of clusters with at least 
one GO-term enriched for targets of more than two 
miRNAs.  
According to Table 1, each single model can achieve a 
fairly well percentage of GO-enrichments in resulting 
cluster set. This implies that coherent clusters can be 
obtained by using either sequence or expression data. On the 
other hand, the table demonstrates that the integration of 
two different data types can remarkably increase the number 
of clusters enriched with significant functional GO-terms. 
This result obviously suggests that the data integration can 
improve the clustering ability and helps to obtain 
biologically meaningful patterns. 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF THE CLUSTERING ABILITY OF MODELS 
WITH REGARD TO MIRNA TARGET GENE FUNCTIONAL ENRICHMENT 
 
 
c=5 
c=10 
Sequence 
Expression 
Combined 
Sequence 
Expression 
Combined 
Number of 
clusters 
5 
4 
4 
9 
8 
8 
Number of 
GO-enriched 
clusters 
3 
2 
4 
5 
4 
6 
Percentage of 
GO-enriched 
clusters (%) 
60 
50 
100 
56 
50 
75 
  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Inferring similar miRNAs can provide valuable 
information for understanding regulatory mechanisms 
behind gene expression. Mature miRNA sequence can 
explain the post-transcriptional regulation of miRNAs, but it 
cannot give any information about how miRNA itself is 
regulated. Their expression values can provide some clues 
about how they are regulated but not about how they 
regulate since their differential expression might occur due 
to several random effects. Therefore, the integration of two 
information sources is essential to discover context-
dependent functional miRNA clusters. This study introduces 
an integrative model to combine two data sources over a 
probabilistic framework. Two independent models are 
designed for each type of information, which can also be 
compiled to obtain only transcriptional (using expression 
data solely) or only post-transcriptional (using sequence 
data solely) miRNA groups. The experiments performed on 
real biological data sets reveals that employing both 
information can improve the explanatory power of final 
clusters obtained. 
Our study is ongoing to validate our model on larger 
datasets. Assessing the effects of different parameter 
selections, such as k in k-mer analysis, will be another future 
issue. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This 
study 
was 
supported 
by 
the 
Scientific 
and 
Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) 
under the Project 110E160. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A.V. Antonov, S. Dietmann, P. Wong, D. Lutter, and H.W. 
Mewes, 
“GeneSet2miRNA: 
finding 
the 
signature 
of 
cooperative miRNA activities in the gene lists,” Nucleic 
Acids Res, 37, 2009,  pp. W323-W328. 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

[2] M. Ashburner, C.A. Ball, J.A. Blake, D. Botstein, H. Butler, 
J.M. Cherry, A.P. Davis, K. Dolinski, S.S. Dwight, J.T. 
Eppig, et al., “Gene Ontology: Tool for the Unification of 
Biology,” Nat. Genet., 25, 2000,  pp.25-29. 
[3] Z. Bar-Joseph, G. Gerber, D.K. Gifford, T.S. Jaakkola, and I. 
Simon, “A New Approach to Analyzing Gene Expression 
Time Series Data,” Proc. 5th RECOMB Conf., 2002, Canada  
[4] D.P. Bartel, “MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, 
and function,” Cell, 116, 2004,  pp. 281-297. 
[5] D.P. Bartel, “MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory 
functions,” Cell, 136, 2009, pp. 215-233. 
[6] C. Cheng and L.M. Li, “Inferring microRNA activities by 
combining 
gene 
expression 
with 
microRNA 
target 
prediction,” PLoS ONE, 3, 2008, pp. 1-9. 
[7] J. Cui, J.B. Eldredge, Y. Xu, and D. Puett, “MicroRNA 
expression and regulation in human ovarian carcinoma cells 
by luteinizing hormone,” PLoS One, 67, e21730, 2011. 
[8] O. Friard, A. Re, D. Taverna, M. De Bortoli, and D. Cora, 
“CircuitDB: a database of mixed microRNA/transcription 
factor feed-forward regulatory circuits in human and mouse,” 
BMC Bioinf., 11, 435, 2010. 
[9] R.C. Friedman, K.K. Farh, C.B Burge, and DP. Bartel, “Most 
mammalian mRNAs are conserved targets of microRNAs,” 
Genome Res, 19, 2009, pp. 1-11. 
[10] S-D. Hsu, F-M. Lin, W-Y. Wu, C. Liang, W-C. Huang, W-L. 
Chan, W-T. Tsai, G-Z. Chen, C-J. Lee, C-M. Chiu, and et al., 
“miRTarBase: a database curates experimentally validated 
microRNA–target interactions,” Nucleic Acids Res., 39, 
2011, pp. D163-D169. 
[11] A. Kundaje, M. Middendorf, F. Gao, C. Wiggins and C. 
Leslie, “Combining Sequence and time series expression data 
to 
learn 
transcriptional 
modules,” 
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioi
nformatics, 2, 2005, pp. 194-202.  
[12] R.C. Lee, R.L. Feinbaum, and V.  Ambros, “The C. elegans 
heterochronic gene lin-4 encodes small RNAs with antisense 
complementarity to lin-14,” Cell, 75, 1993, pp. 843-854. 
[13] J. Lu, G. Getz, E.A. Miska, E. Alvarez-Saavedra, J. Lamb, D. 
Peck, A. Sweet-Cordero, B.L. Ebert, R.H. Mak, A.A. 
Ferrando and et al. “MicroRNA expression proﬁles classify 
human cancers,” Nature, 435, 2005, pp. 834–838. 
[14] S.F. Madden, S.B. Carpenter, I.B. Jeffery, H. Bjorkbacka, 
K.A. Fitzgerald, L.A. O'Neill, and D.G. Higgins,  “Detecting 
microRNA activity from gene expression data,” BMC Bioinf. 
11, 257, 2010. 
[15] H. Oğul and E. Mumcuoğlu, “A Discriminative Method for 
Remote 
Homology 
Detection 
Based 
on 
n-peptide 
Compositions 
with 
Reduced 
Amino 
Acid 
Alphabets,” Biosystems, 87, 2007,  pp. 75-81. 
[16] G.L. Papadopoulos, M. Reczko, V.A. Simossis, P. Sethupaty, 
and A.G. Hatzigeorgion, “The database of experimentally 
supported targets: A functional update of TarBase,” Nucleic 
Acids Res., 37, 2009, pp. D155-D158. 
[17] X. Peng, Y. Li, K.A. Walters, E.R. Rosenzweig, S.L. Lederer, 
L.D. Aicher, S. Proll and M.G. Katze, “Computational 
identification of hepatitis c virus associated microRNA-
mRNA regulatory modules in human livers,” BMC 
Genomics, 10, 373, 2009. 
[18] P.M. 
Voorhoeve, 
“MicroRNAs: 
Oncogenes, 
tumor 
suppressors or master regulators of cancer heterogeneity,” 
Bioc Bioph Acta, 1805, 2010, pp. 72-86. 
[19] F. Xiao, Z. Zuo, G. Cai, S. Kang, X. Gao, and T. Li, 
“miRecords: an integrated resource for microRNA-target 
interactions,” Nucleic Acids Res., 37, 2009, pp.  D105-D110. 
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-260-8
BIOTECHNO 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

