Analyzing Switch Regions of Human Rab7a and Rab10 by  
Molecular Dynamics Simulations 
Levy Bueno Alves, Sarah Sandy Sun and Silvana Giuliatti* 
Department of Genetics, University of São Paulo 
 Ribeirão Preto, Brazil 
e-mail: silvana@fmrp.usp.br 
 
 
Abstract— Rab7a and Rab10 are small GTPases that regulates 
cellular processes by alternating between its GDP-bound 
inactive and the GTP-bound active states. Studies have shown 
that functional deficiencies in the pathways of these enzymes 
are implicated in ciliophaties, cancer and neurodegenerative 
diseases.   Thus, the modulation of the activity of these targets 
may represent an interesting strategy in drug discovery for the 
treatment of several human diseases.  In order to identify 
potential Rab7a and Rab10 inhibitors, we studied the mobility 
of the switch1-interswitch-switch2 surface to understand the 
active “ON” and inactive “OFF” states of these enzymes. We 
use molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the atomic 
movements of the switch regions of these enzymes associated 
with GDP and GTP nucleotides. We found noticeable 
differences in the local flexibility of switch 1 when these Rab 
GTPases were bound to GDP. However, the deterministic 
method used was not able to successfully differentiate the 
flexibility of switch 2 region. We hypothesized that the 
flexibility of the switch 1 region can be used as an indicator of 
in silico studies that search potential competitive inhibitors 
based on nucleotides against these targets. Furthermore, the 
present study can be useful for research that involves the 
description on-to-off process of other target proteins. 
Keywords-Small GTPases; structural flexibility; in silico. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Rab7a and Rab10 are small monomeric enzymes that 
belong to the Rab GTPase family. They are responsible for 
regulating intracellular traffic in various pathways of 
different cellular sublocations, having roles in the 
endoplasmic reticulum, trans-Golgi network, endosomes, 
lysosomes, and primary cilium [1]. Several Rab GTPases are 
believed to be involved in cellular processes such as 
biogenesis, transport, and tethering of membrane-bound 
organelles/vesicles. However, functional dysregulations in 
the pathways of these enzymes are implicated in a few 
human 
diseases, 
such 
as 
ciliopathies, 
cancer, 
and 
neurodegenerative diseases [2]. For example, studies have 
shown that Rab10 and Rab7a have a relevant role in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), where Rab10 helps in the 
amyloidogenic processing of the amyloid precursor protein 
(APP) while Rab7a is involved in the hyperphosphorylation 
of the Tau protein [3] [4]. Furthermore, there are studies that 
correlate the inhibition of these enzymes with the induction 
of apoptosis in cancer cells [5]. Experiments show that 
changes in the expression of these enzymes can activate 
signaling pathways for cancer cells growth and survival, 
leading to cancer progression. Such evidence paves the way 
for the application of new drug targeting strategies for the 
treatment of various human diseases. Since Rab7a and 
Rab10 are associated with several human diseases, the 
modulation of the activity of these enzymes using small 
molecules may represent a promising alternative to delay the 
progression of these diseases, making them potential 
therapeutic targets. 
Rab GTPases regulates cellular processes by alternating 
the nucleotides guanosine triphosphate (GTP) and Guanosine 
diphosphate (GDP). When bound to GTP, they interact with 
a series of effector proteins promoting downstream signaling 
events. On the other hand, the hydrolysis of GTP results in 
conformational changes in the G domain of these enzymes, 
inactivating them [6]. The differences between the 
conformations of the G domain linked to GDP and GTP 
suggest that after the hydrolysis of GTP the switch 1 and 
switch 2 regions show a high degree of flexibility and 
disorder. In contrast, these regions are stabilized in the active 
state, which favors their recognition by effector proteins [7]. 
This occurs due to interactions with the phosphate binding 
motifs (PMs) of these enzymes, where GTP interacts with 
PM1-3 while GDP only with PM1 [8] [9]. 
In 2017, PYLYPENKO and collaborators conducted a 
study to obtain insights into the functional diversity of Rab 
GTPases. In this study, the authors analyzed, using in silico 
tools, 44 representatives of the subfamilies of human Rab 
GTPases, to obtain information on the primary sequences of 
these enzymes with partner proteins in the context of binding 
specificity and provide results functions of their interactions 
in the cell. In this study, the authors detailed precision the 
motives of the Rab GTPases that interact with GDP and 
GTP; however, it was not analyze the “on-to-off” process to 
understand the modifications conformational patterns of 
these enzymes when activated and inactivated. 
The present study aimed to detail the structural flexibility 
of the switch regions of Rab7a and Rab10, considering 200 
ns molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. In 2020, we 
performed MD simulations to investigate Rab10's internal 
movements in its activated and inactivated state. These 
results showed noticeable differences in local switch I 
flexibility when Rab10 was associated with GDP [10]. Thus, 
we hypothesize that the flexibility of the switch1 region can 
be used as an indicator of in silico studies that aim to identify 
potential competitive inhibitors against Rab10. In order to 
verify if the conformational change in the on-to-off process 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-058-2
BIOTECHNO 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

of Rab10 was not by chance, we extended our study to 
consider the Rab7a. Our new findings strengthen our 
hypothesis that the flexibility of the switch I region can be 
used as an indicator for studies aimed at identifying potential 
inhibitors of these enzymes.  
The rest of this work is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the methods used in each step of this study. Section 
III addresses the results and discussion, while Section IV 
describes the conclusion and next steps of this research. The 
acknowledgements close the article.  
II. 
METHODS 
In this section, the in silico approaches used during the 
development of this work. 
A. Molecular docking 
The structure of Rab7a (ID: 1T91), Rab10 (ID: 5SZJ) and 
GDP and GTP nucleotides were obtained from the Protein 
Data Bank (PDB) [11]. Modeller software v9.23 [12] was 
used to fill the missing atoms of Rab10. The addition of 
hydrogen in each structure, considering the protonation state 
of the atoms at physiological pH, was performed using the 
Open Babel 3.0.0 software [13]. The Autodock Vina 1.1.2 
software [14] was used to docking the nucleotides at the 
active site of Rab10. The grid box was defined by the mean 
of the Cartesian coordinates of the nucleotide GTP and 
phosphoaminophosphonic acid guanylate ester (GNP) co-
crystallized in Rab7a and Rab10, respectively. The co-
crystallized compounds were submitted to redocking to 
validate the docking study. The poses of each nucleotide 
were chosen by means of the lowest binding energy and the 
highest number of intermolecular bonds. The interactions 
between the ligands and receptor were calculated using the 
Maestro 12.3 interface [15]. 
B. Molecular dynamics 
The GROMACS package version 2019.3 [16] was used in 
the MD simulations of complexes with GDP and GTP. The 
force field used was CHARMM36 [17]. The ligand 
parameters were obtained by the CGenFF server [18]. The 
complexes were centralized in cubic boxes, where the 
distance between the solute and the edge was 14 Å. The 
molecules were solvated with TIP3P water molecules and 
neutralized by adding the appropriate number of Na+Cl- ions 
considering the ionic concentration of 0.15 M. The energy 
minimization was performed using the steepest descent 
method with a maximum force of 1000 Kj/mol.nm. After 
minimization, the systems were equilibrated in two stages: a 
canonical NVT set (number of particles, volume, and 
temperature) followed by an isothermal-isobaric NPT set 
(number of particles, pressure, and temperature). The NVT 
equilibrium was performed with a constant temperature of 
300 K for 500 ps. The NPT equilibrium was performed with 
a constant pressure of 1 bar and a constant temperature of 
300 K for 500 ps. The production step was carried out at 300 
K for 200 ns and the trajectories were saved every 10 ps. The 
tools of the root mean square deviation (RMSD), root mean 
square fluctuation (RMSF), radius of gyration (Rg) and 
solvent accessible surface area (SASA) were used for the 
trajectory analysis. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The results and discussion of this study are described in 
subsequent sections. 
A. Molecular docking study 
The lowest energy values for each test were grouped and 
their molecular interactions were analyzed. The most 
promising poses of each ligand are described in Table 1. The 
comparison between the co-crystallized ligands poses with 
the docking poses indicated RMSD ≤ 2.00 Å, suggesting 
that the docking protocol was validated. Thus, GDP and GTP 
nucleotides were successfully anchored in the active site of 
Rab7a and Rab10. These complexes showed notable 
intermolecular interactions. When in interaction with GDP, 
there are 6 hydrogen bonds with the residues located in PM1, 
while when interacting with GTP there are more hydrogen 
bonds.  
TABLE 1. SCORE BY THE VINA AND THE NUMBER OF INTERACTIONS 
CALCULATED BY MAESTRO 
Complex 
Score 
(Kcal/mol) 
Salt 
Bridge HBonds Stacking 
Rab7a-GDP 
-10.3 
3 
6 
2 
Rab7a-GTP 
-11.1 
3 
9 
2 
Rab10-GDP 
-10.7 
3 
6 
2 
Rab10-GTP 
-11.5 
3 
10 
2 
 
This occurs due to the presence of γ-phosphate in GTP, 
which interacts with the PM2 and PM3 motifs and can even 
increase the stability of the switch regions of these enzymes. 
Furthermore, the binding modes found for each complex are 
consistent with the interactions found in the Rab7a and 
Rab10 crystals [11] [12]. This indicates that the docking 
protocol 
was 
able 
to 
successfully 
reproduce 
the 
experimentally determined binding mode for the co-
crystallized ligands. 
B. Molecular dynamics study 
To verify whether Rab7a and Rab10 stabilized throughout 
the MD simulation, the RMSD of the G domain of these 
enzymes was calculated. Based on our results, the 
trajectories reached stability after 40 ns of simulation (Fig. 
1a). In the case of Rab7a, the backbone RMSD of the 
complexes associated with GDP and GTP stabilized close to 
0.23 and 0.24 nm, respectively. In relation to Rab10, the 
trajectories stabilized close to values of 0.30 nm for the 
inactive state and 0.25 nm for the active state. Through 
analysis of the trajectories, it was possible to observe that the 
complexes associated with the GTP have more restricted 
movements, since the trajectories showed predominantly 
lower peaks than the complexes linked to GDP.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-058-2
BIOTECHNO 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Analysis of the trajectories obtained in the MD simulation. (A) RMSD of G-domain backbone. (B) RMSD of switch I. (C) RMSD of interswitch. 
(D) RMSD of switch II. (E) RMSF of the amino acids residues. Switch 1 (S1) region is defined by positions 31-44, while interwitch (In) and Switch 2 (S2), 
45-65, 66-82, respectively. 
 
Local RMSD analysis was required to assess the inherent 
flexibility of switch regions. Fig. 1b shows the RMSD of the 
switch I region, where it is possible to visualize differences 
in the backbone when the enzymes analyzed were associated 
with the nucleotide GDP and GTP. Here, systems linked to 
GDP showed greater fluctuations compared to those linked 
to GTP. This can be explained because the phosphate portion 
of GDP contains only α and β-phosphate, causing switch I to 
suffer greater conformational flexibility due to the existence 
of smaller intermolecular interactions involving the PM2 and 
PM3 motifs. On the other hand, the presence of γ phosphate 
in GTP provides less flexibility in switch I due to the 
existence of greater intermolecular interactions with these 
motifs. The interswitch region was chosen as a control 
because it does not show conformational differences in both 
the activated and inactivated states of the Rab GTPases (Fig. 
1c). However, the switch II region showed no noticeable 
RMSD differences (Fig. 1d). This result may be associated 
with the presence of an α-helix in switch II, which can 
generate motions more restrictive with varying time, as each 
successive turn of the α-helix is held by adjacent turns by 
three or four hydrogen bonds, which gives a significant 
stability in relation to other secondary structures of these 
enzymes.  Fig. 1e shows the residues that make up the entire 
extension of the Rab7a and Rab10 enzymes, where it is 
possible to visualize the regions where the greatest 
fluctuations occur. These results show subtle differences in 
the flexibility of switch I, however, in all complexes where 
Rabs were inactivated, the fluctuation for this region was 
greater. 
Rg trajectories indicate that the G domain of Rab7a and 
Rab10 entered conformational equilibrium. Fig. 2a shows 
that the Rg values are constant, suggesting that the folded 
structures of these enzymes are stable. However, the Rg 
trajectories of the inactivated systems showed higher values 
than the activated state. While the difference in these values 
is subtle, it does indicate that the inactivated state is subject 
to decompression processes throughout the simulation. 
Furthermore, SASA analysis was performed to evaluate the 
molecular surface of these Rabs. Fig. 2b shows a slight 
increase in SASA for inactivated states, which can be 
explained due to greater mobility in the switch region I. 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
S1 
In 
S2 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-058-2
BIOTECHNO 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Analysis of compression and SASA. (A) Rg of the G-domain. (B) 
SASA of the G-domain. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
 
In short, the MD simulations used in this study were able 
to obtain notable differences in the switch 1 region of Rab7a 
and Rab10, enabling the identification of its active "ON" 
and inactive "OFF" states. However, the classical mechanics 
method was unable to predict the disordered movements of 
the switch 2 region. Our new findings strengthen our 
hypothesis that the flexibility of the switch I region can be 
used as an indicator for studies aimed at identifying 
potential inhibitors of these enzymes. Furthermore, the data 
discussed here may be useful for research involving the 
description of the on-to-off process of other proteins. The 
next steps of this research is to extend the analyzes to 
evaluate the on-to-off process of 44 representatives of 
human Rab GTPases, to understand the conformational 
modifications of these enzymes when activated and 
inactivated. Thus, it is expected that this study proposal 
provides useful information about the dynamics of these 
enzymes, allowing regions switches are used as indicators to 
select which putative drugs have the potential to inhibit or 
activate these enzymes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Coordination for the 
Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES), 
National 
Council 
for 
Scientific 
and 
Technological 
Development (CNPq), and Foundation to support Teaching, 
Research and Assistance at HCFMRP-USP (FAEPA). The 
authors acknowledge the Superintendence of Technology 
and Information at USP for the High-Performance 
Computing (HPC) Computing Resources. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Liu, X. Zheng, and X. Wu, “The Rab GTPase in the heart: 
Pivotal roles in development and disease”, Life Sciences, vol. 
306, no. 120806, pp. 1-8, 2022. 
[2] Y. Homma, S. Hiragi, and M. Fukuda, “RAB family of small 
GTPases: an updated view on their regulation and functions”, 
FEBS J., vol. 288, pp. 36-55, 2021. 
[3] P. G. Ridge et al., “Linkage, whole genome sequence, and 
biological data implicate variants in RAB10 in Alzheimer’s 
disease resilience”, Genome Medicine, vol.  9(1), no. 100, pp. 
1-14, 2017. 
[4] L. Rodriguez et al., “Rab7A regulates tau secretion”, Journal 
of Neurochemistry”, vol. 141(4), pp. 592-605, 2017. 
[5] G. D. P. Krishnan et al., “Rab GTPases: Emerging Oncogenes 
and Tumor Suppressive Regulators for the Editing of Survival 
Pathways in Cancer”, Cancers (Basel), vol. 12(2), no. 259, pp. 
1-20, 2021. 
[6] R. G. Good, M. P. Müller, and Y. Wu, “Mechanisms of action 
of Rab proteins, key regulators of intracellular vesicular 
transport”, Biological Chem., vol. 398(5-6), pp. 565-575, 
2017. 
[7] O. Pylypenko et al., “Rab GTPases and their interacting 
protein partners: Structural insights into Rab functional 
diversity”, Small GTPases, vol. 9(1-2), pp. 22-48, 2018. 
[8] J. Cherfils, and M. Zeghouf, “Regulation of Small GTPases 
by GEFs, GAPs, and GDIs”, Physiological Reviews, vol. 
93(1), pp. 269-309, 2013. 
[9] L. B. Alves, W. O. Castillo-Ordoñez, S. Giuliatti, “Analyzing 
Switch Regions of Human Rab10 by Molecular Dynamics 
Simulations”, Lecture Notes in Computer Science. 1ed., 
Springer International Publishing, vol. , pp. 215-220, 2020. 
[10] H. M. Berman et al., “The Protein Data Bank”, Nucleic Acids 
Research, vol. 28(1), pp. 235-242, 2000. 
[11] A. Sali, and T. L. Blundell, “Comparative protein modelling 
by satisfaction of spatial restraints”, J. Mol. Biol., vol. 234(1), 
pp. 779-815, 1993. 
[12] N. M. O’Boyle et al., “Open Babel: An open chemical 
toolbox”, J. Cheminformatics, vol. 3(1), no. 33, pp. 1-14, 
2011. 
[13] M. Trott, and A. J. Olson, “AutoDock Vina: Improving the 
speed and accuracy of docking with a new scoring function, 
efficient optimization, and multithreading”, J. Comput. 
Chem., vol. 31(1), pp. 455-461, 2010. 
[14] Schrödinger Release 2020-3., “Maestro”, New York, NY, 
2020. 
[15] D. V. D. Spoel et al., “GROMACS: Fast, flexible, and free”, 
J. Comput. Chem, vol. 26(1), pp. 1701-1718, 2005. 
[16] J. Huang, and A. D. MacKerell Jr, “CHARMM36 all‐atom 
additive protein force field: Validation based on comparison 
to NMR data”, J. Comput. Chem., vol. 34(1), pp. 2135-2145, 
2013. 
[17] K. Vanommeslaeghe, and A. D. MacKerell Jr., “Automation 
of the CHARMM General Force Field (CGenFF) I: Bond 
Perception and Atom Typing”, J. Chem. Inf. Model., vol. 
52(12), no. 12, pp. 3144-3154, 2012. 
A 
B 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-058-2
BIOTECHNO 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

