Enhancing the Potency and Longevity of Highly Valuable Peptides Using Gene 
Fusion 
Avri Havron Eyal Fima 
                   PROLOR Biotech  
              Weizmann Science Park 
                    Nes-Ziona, Israel 
eyal@prolor-biotech.com; 
avri@prolor-biotech.com  
 
Fuad  Fares, Naiel Azzam, Rinat Bar-Shalom 
Faculty of Natural Sciences 
 University of Haifa  
Haifa, Israel, 
ffares@sci.haifa.ac.il; 
naiel_azzam@walla.com; rinalamir@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract - One major issue regarding the clinical use of 
many peptides is their short half-life in the body, due to 
the rapid clearance from the circulation. To overcome this 
issue, the carboxyl-terminal peptide of human chorionic 
gonadotropin  subunit was ligated to the coding se-
quence of follitropin, thyrotropin, erythropoietin and 
growth hormone.  This peptide contains 28 amino acids 
and four O-linked oligosaccharide recognition sites. It was 
postulated that the O-linked oligosaccharides add flexibil-
ity, hydrophilicity and stability to the protein. Ligation of 
this peptide to the coding sequence of these hormones has 
no effect on receptor binding and in vitro bioactivity. 
However it is dramatically increased half-life and bioactiv-
ity in vivo. Interestingly, the new analogs of follitropin and 
growth hormone were found not immunogenic in human. 
Follitropin already passed successfully clinical trials 
phase III and approved by The European Commission for 
human use. In addition, our results indicated that long 
acting growth hormone is not toxic in monkeys and it 
passed successfully clinical trials phase II in adults. Other 
strategy to stabilize the peptide hormones was to convert 
the heterodimeric structure to a single chain by fusing the 
subunits to a single gene with or without the carboxyl-
terminal peptide of human chorionic gonadotropin  
subunit. The single peptide chains of human thyroptropin 
were active and have longer half-life in the circulation.  
 
Keywords -  recombinant   proteins; long acting;  
follitropin;  thyrotropin;  human chorionic gonadotropin; 
growth hormone;  erythropoietin. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
     The family of glycoprotein hormones consists of Thyrotro-
pin (TSH), Lutropin (LH), Follitropin (FSH) and Chorionic 
Gonadotropin (CG). These hormones are heterodimers, consist-
ing of the noncovalent association of a common  subunit with 
a unique  subunit that confers biological specificity to the 
hormone [1] [2]. The individual subunits have no known bio-
logical activity. Thus, formation of heterodimer is essential for 
activity [1] [2] [3]. The  subunit within a species has an iden-
tical amino acid sequence in all four members of this hormone 
family. The  subunit shares considerable amino acid homology 
with one another, indicating that most likely they evolved from 
a common precursor [4] [5] [6].  The subunits achieve their 
tertiary structures by the formation of internal disulfide bonds; 
5 in the  subunit and 2-6 in the   subunits. The location of 
cystein residues, which determines the 3-dimensional structure 
of the subunits by predicating their folding, in the   subunits 
is highly conserved among the various hormones as well as 
different species [4].  
     The glycoprotein hormones activate the target cells via 
adenylate cyclase-linked receptors through binding to the 
membrane receptors. FSH stimulates follicular development in 
the ovary and gametogenesis in the testes. LH, acts primarily in 
promoting luteinization of the ovary and in stimulating Leydig 
cell function of the testes. CG maintains the corpus luteum in 
the ovary during pregnancy. TSH is a major regulator of thyro-
id hormone synthesis and secretion from the thyroid gland. The 
thyroid hormones triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) 
regulate the synthesis and secretion of TSH from the pituitary 
[1] [3].  
     The  subunits contain one (TSH and LH) or two (, 
FSH and hCG) asparagine N-linked oligosaccharide chains 
[1] [2]. One unique structural difference among the subunits is 
the sequence of the carboxy terminus. TSH and LH subunits 
contain short hydrophobic stretches at their termini, deduced 
from gene sequencing [5]. However, the mature subunit does 
not contain the sequence due to a final deletion process. hCG 
subunit is distinguish from the other human  subunits in that 
it contains a unique 29 amino acid carboxyl-terminal peptide 
(CTP) bearing    four    O-linked    oligosaccharide    chains 
(Fig.1).  It  has  been  suggested  that  the   O-linked 
oligosaccharide chains play an important role in the secretion 
of intact hCG from the cell, enhaced bioactivity and prolonged 
its circulating half-life in vivo [6]. Deletion of the O-linked 
oligosaccharide chains from hCG, didn’t affect assemly of the 
subunits or secretion of the dimer from the cell and in vitro 
bioactivity. On the other hand, it was shown that truncated  
hCG without the CTP is 3 times less potent than intact hCG in 
vivo [7]. On the other hand, the O-linked oligosaccharide 
chains play a minor role in receptor binding and signal 
transduction. These findings indicate that the CTP of hCG 
and the associated O-linked oligosaccharides are not important  
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-190-8
BIOTECHNO 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
 
 
Figure 1. Human chorionic gonadotropin subunits. Localization of asparagine-
linked carbohydrates (N) in both subunits are indicated.  The CG subunit 
contain four sites of O-linked ologosaccharide chaines (O) in the CTP region.   
 
for receptor binding or in vitro signal transduction, but are 
critical for in vivo bioactivity  and half-life [6] 
      It was reported that the kidney is the main site of clearance 
for glycoprotein hormones [8]. On the other hand, much less 
hCG, which contains the CTP associatioted with the four O-
linked oligosaccharide chains, is cleared by the kidney [9]. 
Other studies indicated that sialic acid plays an important role 
in the survival of glycoproteins in the circulation [1] [2]. It has 
been suggested that more negatively charged forms of 
glycoprotein hormones have longer half-lives, which may be 
related to a decrease glomerular filtration [10]. Thus, the 
presence 
of 
the 
CTP 
with 
its 
sialylated 
O-linked 
oligosaccharides may prolonged the circulating half-life of the 
hormone secondary to a decrease in renal clearance.  
     Erythropoietin (EPO) is a glycoprotein hormone produced 
primarily by cells of the peritubular capillary endothelium of 
the kidney [11] [13].  EPO is a member of an extensive cyto-
kine family which also includes growth hormone, prolactin, 
interleukins 2 through 7, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor 
(G-CSF), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(GM-CSF), macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), 
oncostatin-M, leukemia inhibitory factor and ciliaryneuro-
trophic factor. EPO production is stimulated by reduced 
oxygen content in the renal arterial circulation. Circulating 
EPO binds to EPO receptors on the surface of erythroid pro-
genitors resulting in replication and maturation to functional 
erythrocytes by an incompletely understood mechanism.  
The gene encoding human erythropoietin was cloned in 1985 
leading to the production of recombinant human EPO (rhu-
EPO) [13]. The rhuEPO has been used successfully in a variety 
of clinical situations to increase production of red blood cells. 
Currently, this agent is licensed for use in the treatment of the 
anemia of renal failure, the anemia associated with HIV infec-
tion in zidovudine (AZT) treated patients, and anemia asso-
ciated with cancer chemotherapy. Administration of rhuEPO 
has become routine in the treatment of anemia secondary to 
renal insufficiency where doses of 50-75 U/Kg given three 
times per week are used to gradually restore heamatocrit and 
eliminate transfusion dependency.  
     Human Growth Hormone (GH) is a member of family of 
closely related hormones that include prolactin and placental 
lactogen. GH regulates wide variety of physiological processes 
including growth and differentiation of muscle, bone and 
cartilage cells. GH is secreted by the somatotrophs of the 
anterior pituitary gland and acts on various tissues to promote 
growth and influence metabolism. GH antagonizes insulin 
effects by increasing hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogeno-
lysis by decreasing peripheral glucose consumption, effect that 
attributed to lipolytic effect. Disturbances of the carbohydrate 
metabolism can modulate the secretion of GH. The use of GH 
for the treatment of children with impaired linear growth has 
been accepted as an important therapeutic modality for many 
years. In addition, beneficial effects of GH replacement therapy 
in hypopituitary adults are well established. GH replacement 
therapy reduced body fat and increased body mass. 
 
 
II.   RESEARCH TOPICS  
 
      One major issue regarding the clinical use of glycoprote-
in hormones is their relatively short half-life in vivo due to 
their rapid clearance from the circulation when it's injected 
intravenously. Thus, the therapeutic protocol used in the 
treatment of glycoproteins, required frequent injections. The 
recommended therapy with rhuEPO is 2-3 times per week by 
subcutaneous or intravenous injections. Similarly, FSH or 
GH is injected daily. Therefore, we anticipated that ligation 
the CTP to the coding sequence of glycoprotein hormones 
will increase the half-life and bioactivity in vivo. This may 
reduce the number of injections per week. Therefore, it was 
hypothesized that FSH dimmer, EPO or GH containing the 
CTP would have a prolonged half-life and higher bioactivity 
in vivo. On the other hand, assembly of the hTSH and α-
subunit is the rate limiting step in the production of func-
tional heterodimer [3]. Thus, we hypothesized that convert-
ing hTSH to a single chain form could increase the half-life 
and expand the range of TSH structure – function studies. 
Here, we describe the construction of biologically active 
hTSH single chains with or without the CTP.  
 
III.   DESIGNINING GLYCOPROTEIN ANALOGS  
 
     To address the issue of the relatively short half-life of 
FSH, EPO and GH, the CTP of hCG was fused to the car-
boxyl-terminal of hFSH [14] [15], hEPO [16] and to the N-
and C-terminal of human GH [17] coding sequences using 
overlapping PCR (Fig.2). Regarding the hTSH, the CTP was 
ligated to the C-terminal of  subunit. In addition the hete-
rodimeric structure of hTSH was converted to a single chain 
by fusing the carboxyl end of hTSH  subunit to the N-
terminus of α-subunit in the absence or presence of the CTP 
sequence as a linker between the subunits (Fig. 3). It was 
noted that the N-and C- terminals of the hormones have no 
role in receptor binding or bioactivity. Therefore, it was hy-
pothesized that ligation of these ends will not affect receptor 
binding or bioactivity. The designed chimeric genes were 
sequenced and ligateed into eukaryotic expression vectores. 
The plasmids were transfected into Chinese hamster ovary  
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-190-8
BIOTECHNO 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
 
 
                                 
 
 
Figure 2. Construction of FSH-CTP, EPO-CTP and GH-CTP chimeric genes. 
The coding sequence of CTP was ligated to the 3rd end of hFSH gene or EPO 
cDNA. One or two CTPs to be ligated to the N-terminal or to the C-terminal of 
GH cDNA, respectively.   
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Construction of hTSH-CTP chimeric gene and single peptide 
chains with or without CTP as a linker between the subunits.  
 
cells (CHO) and stable clones secreting the hormones were 
selected using selective antibiotics. Selected colonies   resis-
tant to antibiotics were harvested and screened for expres-
sion of the hormone. Collected media were concentrated and 
the hormones were detected  immunoradiometric assay and a 
double antibody. Receptor binding was detected by radiore-
ceptor assays. Bioactivity of the hormones was detected us-
ing in vitro and in vivo models.   
 
 
 
IV.   BIOACTIVITY OF THE DESIGNED ANALOGS  
 
A. FSH 
     FSH induces aromatase enzyme in granulosa cells, there-
fore, signal transduction of the modified FSH dimer was as-
sessed in vitro in the granulosa cell aromatase bioassay by 
measuring hormone-stimulated estrogen production. The 
detected steroidogenic activity of FSH-CTP chimeras was 
comparable to that of wild-type FSH. It was observed that 
ligation of CTP to the coding sequence of FSH subunit, 
didn’t affect receptor binding affinity or in vitro bioactivity. 
The in vivo bioactivity of wild-type FSH and the chimera was 
examined by determining ovarian weight augmentation and 
granulosa cell aromatase induction. It was found that ovarian 
weight increased significantly between animals treated with 
wild-type FSH and the FSH chimera. Treatment with FSH 
wild-type increased ovarian weight by 2 folds, where treatment 
with FSH-CTP increased ovarian weight by 3 folds. In addi-
tion, estrogen production by granulosa cells from chimera-
treated rats increased 3- to 5-fold over that seen in rats treated 
with wild-type FSH. FSH-CTP was expressed in LDLD cells, 
a CHO cells mutated in the enzymes involved in addition of 
O-linked oligosaccharide chains. The results indicated that 
FSH-CTP lacking O-linked oligosaccharide have similar 
bioactivity of hFSH-WT (Fig.4). 
     Because the increased bioactivity of the chimeras may 
reflect a change in their in vivo longevity, the circulatory 
half-life of the hormones was detected. It seems that the 
clearance of the chimera is much slower than that of wild-
type FSH; presumably. RIA determinations show that a high 
level of the chimera is still detectable in serum after 24 h and 
yet injected wild-type hFSH reaches basal level between 8 
and 24 h.  
     The safety, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
FSH-CTP were studies in hypogonadotrophic hypogonadal 
male subjects as a phase I in multi-center study. The results 
indicated that FSH-CTP use is safe and does not lead to de-
tectable formation of antibodies. Furthermore, pharmacokinet-
ic and dynamic profile of FSH-CTP seemed to be promising. 
Compared with recombinant FSH – WT (Puregon), the half-
life of FSH-CTP was increases 2-3 times [18] [19]. 
     Further studies in in vitro fertilization (IVF) patients, 
indicated that a single dose of FSH-CTP is able to induce 
multifollicular growth comparing to daily injection of FSH-
WT for 7 days [20]. According to the promising results de-
scribed above in clinical trials, on January 28, 2010 the 
European Commission (EC) gave Merck & Co. marketing 
approval with unified labeling valid in all European Union 
Member States for FSH-CTP. 
 
B. TSH 
 
     Because of TSH therapeutic potential, a longer acting 
analog of TSH was constructed by fusing the carboxyl-
terminal extension peptide (CTP) of hCG onto the coding 
sequence of TSH  subunit. When co-expressed either with 
alpha-subunit complementary DNA or alpha minigene in 
African green monkey (COS-7) or in human embryonic kidney 
(293) cells, the chimera was fully bioactive in vitro and  
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-190-8
BIOTECHNO 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
 
Figure  4. The effect of FSH on the level of estrogen in circulation of hypo-
physectomized rats. Recombinant FSH analogs were produced in CHO or 
LDLD cells'. ***P<0/001 
 
exhibited enhanced in vivo potency associated with a pro-
longed plasma half-life. Ligation of the CTP to the C-terminal 
of  TSH subunit did not affect the assembly and secretion of 
chimeric TSH [21]. Assembly of the glycoprotein hormone 
subunits is the rate-limiting step in the production of func-
tional heterodimers [21]. To bypass this problem of dimeriza-
tion of subunits, hTSH  and  subunits were genetically 
fused in a single chain hormone with or without the CTP as a 
linker between the subunits. Single chains of hTSH retained a 
biologically active conformation similar to that of the wild-
type heterodimer [22]. Moreover, it was found that the single 
peptide chains bind to the receptor with higher affinity and 
have higher bioactivity in vivo than the wild-type. 
 
C. Erythropoietin 
 
     The CTP was ligated to the coding sequence at the C-
terminal end of EPO. The in vitro biological activity of EPO-
CTP was demonstrated by measuring their ability to stimulate 
proliferation of erythroid burst forming colonies (BFU-E) 
from human peripheral blood. BFU-E colonies were grown 
from blood of healthy donors using a microwell modification 
of the methylcellulose technique. The optimal formation of 
BFU-E colonies in vitro achieved by EPO-CTP was similar to 
that achieved by EPO-WT and rhuEPO using 1 U/ml of the 
protein. Receptor binding assay indicated that ligation of the 
CTP to the carboxyl-terminal of EPO has no significant effect 
on the affinity of the hormone to the receptor.  
Further pharmacological evaluation of EPO-CTP, comparative 
pharmacodynamic studies of EPO-WT and commercial rhuEPO 
were performed in male C57BL mice (n=7/group) using differ-
ent frequencies and wide dose range. The in vivo efficacy was 
obtained by measuring the mean values of haematocrit percen-
tage in the blood. The results indicated that EPO-CTP is signif-
icantly (P0.05) more efficient than EPO-WT when adminis 
 
tered IV once a week with a dose of 200 mg/kg. EPO-CTP can 
successfully increase the haematocrit when administered once a 
week with a dose of 660 IU/kg. Once weekly dosing with the 
same concentration of commercial rhuEPO or EPO-WT was 
significantly (P0.001) less efficient than once weekly dosing 
of EPO-CTP. An interesting observation is the ability of a 
single injection once a week of EPO-CTP (660 IU/kg) to in-
crease the levels of haematocrit, whereas the same effect was 
achieved by administration of the same total dose of rhuEPO 
administered three times a week as 220 IU/kg per injection (Fig. 
5). 
     These results indicated the importance of sustained blood 
levels, rather than total dose of EPO. These findings are consis-
tent with the hypothesis that the ability of a single injection of 
EPO-CTP to increase haematocrit, results from its increased 
stability in the circulation.  The increased biopotency of the  
chimera may reflect a change in their metabolic clearance in 
vivo. Detecting the half-lives of EPO analogs in mice indicated 
that a higher level of the chimera is still detectable in serum 
after 24 h.  The half-life of EPO CTP is increased 2-3 folds 
comparing to EPO-WT. These data suggest that the mechanism 
of EPO metabolic clearance is affected by the presence of CTP 
[16].  
  
D. Growth Hormone 
 
     Crystallographic studies indicated that N-terminal and C-
terminal of GH are not important for binding of the hormone to 
its receptor. Therefore, CTP was fused to the N-terminal and 
C-terminal of hGH. The results indicate that ligation of CTP to 
the coding sequence of GH did not affect secretion of the 
chimeric protein into the medium. In vivo studies in hypophy-
sectomized rats indicated that, bioactivity and pharmacokinetic 
parameters, MRT, AUC, Tmax, Cmax and half-life, of GH 
bearing the CTPs were dramatically enhanced. The estimated 
half-life of CTP-GH-CTP- CTP is increased by 4-5 folds 
comparing to Biotropin. These data suggest that the mechan-
ism of GH metabolic clearance is affected by the presence of 
CTP [17]. Clinical trials phase I and phase II of GH-CTPs 
indicated that this peptide is safe for use and clinical trials of 
phase III is in the way. 
 
V.  CONCLUSIONS 
 
     Ligation of the CTP bearing four sites for O-linked oligo-
saccharide chains to different proteins indicated that the O-
linked glycosylation recognition sites of the CTP are pre-
served. Moreover, this ligation is not involved in secretion, 
receptor binding and in vitro bioactivity. However, both the in 
vivo bioactivity and half-life in circulation of proteins bearing 
the CTP were significantly enhanced. Proteins containing the 
CTP could serve as long acting agonists for clinical use. This 
strategy may have wide applications for enhancing the in vivo 
bioactivity and half-life of diverse proteins. On the Other hand, 
converting the hetrerodimeric structure of the hormone to a 
single-chain polypeptide chain did not affect receptor binding 
affinity and bioactivity. However, this strategy is important for 
designing of new analogs of heterodimeric proteins.   
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-190-8
BIOTECHNO 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
 
Figure 5. Ability of a single IV injection of EPO-CTP vs 3 IV injections of   
rHuEPO to increase haematocrit levels in mice. ICR mice (n=7/group) received 
a single IV injection/week for three weeks of EPO-CTP (660 IU/ kg) or wild-
type rHuEPO (220 IU/kg) that were injected IV three times a week for three 
weeks. Control animals were injected IV with F-12 medium free of serum. 
Blood samples were collected three times a week and haematocrit levels were 
detected. Each point represents the group average of haematocrit (%) ± SE. 
**P<0/01. 
 
VI.   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
  
     This work was supported by grant from the Israel Science 
Foundation. Grant No. 617/01.  We would like also to thank 
the Israel Ministry of Industry and Trade for supporting this 
research.   
 
VII.   REFERENCES 
 
[1] I. Boime, and D. Ben-Menahem J. Glycoprotein hormone structure-
function and analog design. Recent Prog Horm Res. vol. 54, pp. 271-288, 
1999. 
[2] M. Wallis, S.L. Howell, and K.W. Taylor. The biochemistry of the 
polypeptide hormones, New York: John Wiley and sons.  pp. 147-183, 
1985. 
[3]  M.W. Szkudlinski, V.  Fremont, C.  Ronin, and B.D. Weintraub. Thyroid-
stimulating hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor structure-
function relationship. Physiol. Rev. vol. 82,  pp. 473-502, 2002. 
[4]  S.D. Gharib, M.E. Wierman, M.A. Shupnik, and W.W. Molecular Biology 
of the pituitary gonadotropins, Endocrine Rev. vol 11,  pp. 177-199, 
1990. 
 [5]  Y. Hayashizaki, K.  Miyai, K.  Kato, and K. Matsubara. Molecular 
        cloning of the human thyrotropin-  bubunit gene, FEBS Lett. vol. 188, 
        pp. 394-400, 1985. 
[6]  M.M. Matzuk, A.J.W. Hsueh, P. Lapolt, A.  Tsafriri, J.L. Keene,  and I. 
Boime. The biological role of the carboxyl-terminal extension of human 
chorionic gonadotropin beta-subunit, Endocrinology. vol.126,  pp. 376-383, 
1990. 
[7]  M.M. Matzuk, M. Krieger, C.L. Corless, and I.  Boime. Effect of prevent-
ing O-glycosylation on the secretion of human chorionic gonadotropin in 
Chinese hamster ovary cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. vol. 84,  pp. 
6354-6358, 1987.  
[8] H.K. Amin, and W.M. Hunter. Human pituitary follicle-stimulating hor-
mone: distribution, plasma clearance, and urinary excretion as determined 
by radioimmunoassay, J. Endocrinol. vol. 48,  pp. 307-317, 1977. 
[9]  J.R. Sowers, A.E.  Pekary, J.M. Hershman, M.  Kanter, and JJ. DiStefano. 
Metabolism 
of 
exogenous 
human 
chorionic 
gonadotropin               
in men, J. Endocrinol. vol. 80,  pp. 83-89, 1979. 
[10] L. Wide. The regulation of metabolic clearance rate of human FSH in mice 
by Variation of the molecular structure of the hormone, Acta Endocrinol. 
(Copenh) vol. 112, pp.  336-44, 1986. 
[11] W. Jelkmann. Erythropoietin: Structure, control of production, and function. 
Physiol Rev. vol. 72, pp.449-487, 1992. 
[12] S. Schuster, J.H. Wilson, A.J. Erslev, and J. Caro. Physiologic regulation 
and tissue localization of renal erythropoietin messenger RNA. Blood vol. 
70,  pp. 316-318, 1987. 
[13] F.K. Lin, F.K.S. Suggs, C.H. Lin, J.K. Browne, R. Smalling, J.C. Egric, 
K.K. Chen, G.M. Fox, F. Martin, Z. Stabinsky, S.M. Badrawi, P.H. Lai, 
and E. Goldwasser.  Cloning and  expression of the human erythropoietin 
gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA vol. 82, pp. 7580-7584, 1985.  
[14] F.A. Fares, N. Suganuma,  K. Nishimori, P.S. LaPolt, A.J.W.  Hsueh, and I. 
Boime. Design of a long-acting follitropin agonist by fusing the C-terminal 
sequence of the  chorionic gonadotropin  subunit. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA. vol. 89, pp. 4304-4308, 1992. 
[15] P.S. Lapolt, K. Nishimori, F.A. Fares, E. Perlas, I. Boime, and AJW. 
Hsueh. Enhanced stimulation of follicle maturation and ovulatory potential 
by long acting follicle-stimulating hormone agonist with extended carboxyl-
terminal peptide, Endocrinology  vol. 131, pp. 2514-2520, 1992.  
[16] F. Fares, S. Ganem, T. Hajoj, and E. Agai. Development of a Long Acting 
Erythropoietin by Fusing the Carboxyl-Terminal Peptide of Human Cho-
rionic Gonadotropin to the Coding Sequence of Human Erythropoietin. En-
docrinology. vol. 148, pp. 5081- 5087, 2007.   
[17] F.  Fares, R. Guy, A. Bar-Ilan, Y. Felikman, and E. Fima. Designing a Long 
Acting Human Growth hormone by Fusing the Carboxyl-Terminal Peptide 
of Human Chorionic Gonadotropin  Subunit to the Coding Sequence of 
Human Growth hormone. Endocrinology. vol. 151, pp. 4410-4417, 2010.  
[18] P.M.G. Bouloux, D.J. Handelsman, F. Jockenhovel, E. Nieschlag, J. 
Rabinovici, W.L. Frasa, J.J. deBie, G. Voortman, and J Itskovitz-Eldor, J. 
First human exposure to FSH-CTP in hypogonadotrophic hypogonadal 
males. Hum. Reprod. vol. 16, pp. 1592-1597, 2001. 
[19] P. Devroey, B.C. Fauser, P. Platteau, N.G. Beckers, M. Dhont, and M. 
Mannaerts. Induction of multiple follicular development by single dose of 
long-acting recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH-CTP, Corifolli-
tropin Alfa) for controlled ovarian stimulation before in vitro fertilization, 
J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metabol. vol. 89, pp. 2062-2070, 2004. 
[20] N.G.M. Beckers, N.S. Mackolas, P.  Devroey, P. Platteau, P.J. Boerrigter, 
and B.C.J.M. Fauser. First live birth after ovarian stimulation using a chi-
meric long-acting human recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) 
agonist (recFSH-CTP) for in vitro fertilization, Fertil.  Steril. vol. 79, pp. 
621-623, 2003.  
[21] L. Joshi, Y. Murata, F.E. Wondisford, M.W. Szkudlinski, R. Desai, and 
B.D Weintraub. Recombinant thyrotropin containing a β-subunit chimera 
with the human chorionic gonadotropin-β carboxy terminal is biologically 
active with a prolonged plasma half-life: role of carbohydrate in bioactivity 
and metabolic clearance. Endocrinolgy. vol.  136, pp. 3839-3848, 1995. 
[22] F.A. Fares, S. Yamabe, D. Ben-Menahem, M.  Pixley, A.J.W. Hsueh, and I. 
Boime.  Conversion of thyrotropin heterodimer to a biologically active sin-
gle-chain, Endocrinology vol. 139, pp. 2459-2464, 1998. 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-190-8
BIOTECHNO 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

