Comparison of Two Paradigms Based on Stimulation with Images in a Spelling 
Brain-Computer Interface 
 
Ron-Angevin Ricardo 
Departamento de Tecnología Electrónica 
Universidad de Málaga 
Malaga, Spain 
e-mail: rron@uma.es 
Beasse Joseph, Clément Adrien, Dupont Clara, Le 
Gall Maïwenn, Meunier Juliette 
ENSC, Bordeaux INP 
Bordeaux, France 
email: {jbeasse, adclement, cdupont013, mlgall005, 
jmeunier}@ensc.fr  
 
Lespinet-Najib Véronique, André Jean-Marc 
Bordeaux INP 
CNRS UMR 5218, Laboratory IMS - Team CIH  
Bordeaux, France 
e-mail: {veronique.lespinet, jean-marc.andre}@ensc.fr  
 
Abstract— A BCI Speller is a typical Brain-Computer 
Interface (BCI) system for communication purposes. This 
technology can provide users with severe motor disability with 
an assistive device controlled by brain activity. The present 
preliminary study, with only four subjects, is focused on the 
control of a 5x5 P300-based speller matrix for communication 
purposes. In this work, we study the effect of flashing stimuli 
used to highlight the letters in two conditions: pictures and red 
famous faces (that is, famous faces coloured in red). These 
preliminary 
results, 
based 
on 
performance 
and 
the 
Information Transfer Rate (ITR), showed that both conditions 
are similar, obtaining very good performance compared to 
conventional P300-speller. In this sense, the use of pictures 
does not make the performance worse, allowing to develop 
more attractive and usable interfaces. More tests would 
confirm if there is a difference in performance between the two 
conditions proposed.  
Keywords- Brain-Computer Interface (BCI); P300; speller; 
stimuli; RCP paradigm. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) is based on analysis 
of the brain activity recorded during certain mental activities 
in order to control an external device. It helps to establish a 
communication and control channel for people with serious 
motor function problems, but without a cognitive function 
disorder [1]. Currently, the most commonly used BCI 
systems are those based on electroencephalographic (EEG) 
signals, mainly because they can be recorded in a non-
invasive manner and show adequate temporal resolution. 
A BCI Speller is a typical brain-computer interface 
system for communication purposes. This technology can 
provide users with severe motor disability as, for example, 
patients suffering from Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 
(ALS), with an assistive device controlled by brain activity.   
Most of the BCI spellers are based on the P300 Event-
Related Potential (ERP). The P300 signal is a positive 
deflection in voltage occurring about 300 ms after an 
infrequent or significant stimulus is perceived [1]. The P300 
wave amplitude is typically between 2μV and 5μV and is 
symmetrically distributed around the central scalp areas, 
showing greater amplitude in the occipital rather than the 
frontal region [2]. Most of these spellers are based on the 
P300 speller first developed by Farwell and Donchin [3]. In 
this BCI, a 6 x 6 matrix of letters, arranged in rows and 
columns, is shown to the subject. The user focuses his/her 
attention on the matrix element he/she wishes to select as 
each row and column is flashed (i.e., intensified) randomly, 
one after the other. After a number of flashes, the symbol 
that the user has supposedly chosen is presented on the 
screen. This 
paradigm is known as Row-Column 
Presentation (RCP) paradigm. 
In order to increase the performance of a BCI Speller 
based on the RCP paradigm, different stimulus presentation 
have been proposed. One of the stimuli which has resulted 
in improved BCI performance is the use of familiar faces [4] 
[5]. Effectively, regarding the nature of stimuli, it has been 
demonstrated that the presentation of Famous Faces (FF) 
instead of letters leads to an improvement in performance. 
Specifically, in [4], the stimulus used was composed of 
famous faces. In [5], the use of green familiar faces 
improves the BCI performance compared to the famous face 
paradigm. Carrying on this research line based on the use of 
stimuli with familiar faces, news studies have been recently 
proposed. In [6], the effects of a combinations of face 
stimuli with three primary colors (RGB) on BCI 
performance have been explored. The highest online 
averaged accuracy (93.89%) and (ITR) Information Transfer 
Rate 
(28.68 
bits/min) 
were 
obtained 
with 
red 
semitransparent faces. Based on this study, very recently the 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-980-5
BRAININFO 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

same research group showed that using a stimulus 
combining a famous face coloured in red (red famous face) 
with a white rectangle could improve the performance [7], 
getting an online average accuracy of 96.94%. It is 
important to notice that, in all these propositions, the stimuli 
used are always the same for all the symbols of the matrix. 
Besides, a study carried out by the research group of the 
University of Málaga – the UMA-BCI group – shows that 
the use of a set of varied different pictures (e.g., 
photographs of things, people or places) as flashing stimuli 
could also have a significantly improvement in the usability 
of a BCI-speller based on RCP [8]. Unlike the previous 
studies based on familiar faces, in this study, different 
images were used for each symbol of the matrix. This can 
have a great advantage in the design of a BCI-P300 speller. 
Effectively, the use of different images to stimulate the 
different symbols of the speller, allows to develop BCI 
speller based on pictograms or commands, increasing the 
options of communications and control. 
Due to the advantage of using images, the main 
objective of this preliminary study was to study if the 
performance of a BCI-P300 speller based on pictures 
stimulus presentation was similar to those based on red 
famous faces with a white rectangle.  
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes 
the experimental setup, and presents details about the 
spelling paradigms. The results and discussion are presented 
in Section 3, followed by the conclusion and future works in 
Section 4. 
II. 
 MATERIAL AND METHODS 
A. 
Participants 
Four healthy French university students (S1-S4) 
participated in this study. None of them had previous 
experience using a BCI system. The study was approved by 
the Ethics Committee of the University of Malaga and met 
the ethical standards of the Helsinki Declaration. According 
to self-reports, all participants had no history of neurological 
or psychiatric illness, had normal or corrected-to-normal 
vision, and gave informed consent trough a protocol 
reviewed by the ENSC-IMS (Ecole Nationale Supérieur de 
Cognitique – Intégration du Matériau su Systéme) Cognitive 
and UMA-BCI teams.  
B. 
Data acquisition and Signal Processing 
The EEG was recorded using the electrode positions: Fz, 
Cz, Pz, Oz, P3, P4, PO7 and PO8, according to the 10/20 
international system. All channels were referenced to the 
right earlobe, using FPz as ground. 
The EEG was amplified through a 16 channel biosignal 
amplifier gUSBamp (Guger Technologies). The amplifier 
settings were from 0.5 Hz to 100 Hz for the band-pass filter, 
the notch (50 Hz) was on, and the sensitivity was 500 μV. 
The EEG was then digitized at a rate of 256 Hz. EEG data 
collection and processing were controlled by the UMA-BCI 
Speller software [9], a BCI speller application developed by 
the UMA-BCI group which provides end users with an easy 
to use open source P300 speller. This software is based on 
the widely used platform BCI2000 [10] so, it takes 
advantage of the reliability that such a platform offers. The 
UMA-BCI Speller wraps BCI2000 in such a way that its 
configuration and use are much more visual and, therefore, 
easier. Users can configure their speller more appropriately 
using characters, images or sound cues, and they can 
navigate through different layouts, thus opening the door to 
complex speller configurations. As with a P300 speller 
developed with BCI2000, a Stepwise Linear Discriminant 
Analysis (SWLDA) of the data was performed to obtain the 
weights for the P300 classifier and calculate the accuracy. A 
detailed explanation of the SWLDA algorithm can be found 
in the P300Classifier user reference [11]. 
C. 
The spelling paradigms 
Two different paradigms were evaluated in this study. 
Both paradigms were based on the previously mentioned 
row-column lighted paradigm developed by Farwell and 
Donchin [3], however, the current proposal used a 5 x 5 
matrix (25 symbols, i.e., letters “A” to“Y”).  
The first paradigm employed a flash stimulus based on 
the study developed by [7], that is, red famous faces with a 
white rectangle (the same stimulus for all the symbols).  
The second paradigm, our proposal, used a flash stimulus 
based on pictures: one image for each symbol (that is, 25 
pictures). All the images were obtained from the 
International Affective Picture System (IAPS; [12]). The 
images were selected according two conditions: 1) neutral 
pictures (low arousal and medium valence images) and 2) 
images with the same proportion, that filled all the space and 
did not have black paddings. Both conditions are represented 
in Figure 1. 
For both paradigms, a Stimulus Onset Asynchrony 
(SOA) of 304 ms and an Inter-Stimulus Interval (ISI) of 96 
ms were used, so each stimulus was presented for 208 ms.  
 
 
a) 
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-980-5
BRAININFO 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

 
b) 
 
Figure 1.  Spelling paradigms used in the experiment: a) Red Famous Faces 
with a white rectangle (T1) with white rectangle, b) Images (T2). 
 
D. 
Procedure 
The experiment was carried out in an isolated room. 
Participants sat at a distance of, approximately, 60 cm from 
the screen. Each participant participated in one session to 
evaluate the two paradigms. The order of the paradigms was 
counterbalanced across participants. Each session consisted 
of a calibration phase and a copy-spelling phase.   
We used three words for calibration purpose and each 
one had four letters, having a total of 12 characters per 
condition, with a short break between words (variable at the 
request of the user). Each letter flashed 20 times and the user 
was asked to count these flashes to maintain the attention. 
The writing time for each character in this phase was 30.4 s. 
The specific French words were: “FEUX” (fire), “CHAT” 
(cat) and “PURE” (pure). In this phase, there was no 
feedback, and the recorded EEG was used to train the 
classifier. 
The copy-spelling phase started after the calibration and 
training of the classifier. In this phase, the number of trials 
used to select a target was dependent on the offline 
classification accuracies. The used criterion was that the 
number of trials should be one trial more than the minimum 
number of trials required to obtain 100% accuracy in the 
calibration phase. In the copy-spelling phase, participants 
had to spell four four letters French words: “ABRI” (refuge), 
“LUNE” (moon), “YOGA” (yoga) and “CHEF” (boss). In 
case of incorrect selection, the participants were instructed 
not to correct and to continue with the next target. During 
this phase, the selected symbols were shown at the top of the 
screen. 
E. 
Evaluation 
Two parameters were used to evaluate the effect of the 
paradigm and stimulus type on the performance: i) the 
accuracy in the copy-spelling phase (i.e., the number of 
correct selections divided by the total number of characters, 
that is, 16) and ii) the Information Transfer Rate (ITR, 
bits/min) based on the following formula [14].  
ITR = {log2 N + P log2 P + (1 - P) log2 [(1 – P)/(N - 1)]}/T 
 
where P denotes the classification accuracy, N denotes the 
number of targets (N was 25 in this experiment) and T 
denotes the time interval per selection (that is, the number of 
sequences to select a symbol in the copy-spelling phase). 
It should be advised that the pause between selections 
was not considered to calculate the ITR.  
Due to the small sample size, non-parametric analyses 
were carried out. Due to the preliminary nature of the 
present study, no correction method was applied for 
multiple comparisons. Thus, the obtained conclusions 
should be considered carefully, being admitted that more 
tests will be necessary to be carried out, increasing the 
number of participants and the number of characters in the 
copy-spelling phase. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Table 1 summarizes the obtained results for the accuracy 
and the Information Transfer Rate (ITR) in the copy-
spelling phase, for each condition and subject. 
Figure 2 and Figure 3 show, respectively, the mean 
classification accuracy and the ITR achieved by users for 
each paradigm (condition), in the copy-spelling phase. 
Despite the low number of users, these preliminary 
results show some trends that are worth to be mentioned. 
Firstly, the mean classification accuracy and the ITR 
obtained for the red famous faces with a white rectangle (T1) 
condition (93.75% and 27.33 bits/min, respectively) are 
similar to those obtained in [7] (96.94%) and [6] (28.68 
bits/min). In this sense, we can consider that we have 
correctly replicated the experiment carried out in [7].  
However, the most interesting results is that, even lightly 
lower, the obtained results when using neutral pictures as 
stimulus (T2) are almost the same as those obtained for the 
red famous faces with a white rectangle (T1). Effectively, 
the mean number of flashes used in the online copy-spelling 
phase are 3 for both conditions.  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Classification accuracy (mean ± standard error) of the two 
paradigms during copy-spelling phase (T1: Red Famous Faces with a white 
rectangle, T2: Images). 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-980-5
BRAININFO 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

TABLE I.  
TABLE TYPE STYLES 
 
 
Regarding the mean accuracy, we obtained 93.75% for 
the red famous faces with a white rectangle and 92.18% for 
the neutral image condition. A similar difference is obtained 
for the mean ITR (27.33 bits/min and 26.6 bits/min for red 
famous faces with a white rectangle and neutral image 
conditions, respectively). 
Even if these results are preliminary due to the low 
number of participants, they indicate that using neutral 
pictures as flashing stimuli does not make the performance 
worse. This paradigm has a huge advantage compare to the 
one proposed by [7]. If in the first condition (T1) the stimuli 
are the same for each element of the speller (a red famous 
face with a white rectangle), in the proposed paradigm, a 
different image is used for each element. These images can 
be used to develop more attractive and usable interfaces, 
allowing to create a speller based on pictogram or control 
systems in which each figure corresponds to a specific 
command.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Information Transfer Rate (ITR; mean ± standard error) of the 
two paradigms during copy-spelling phase (T1: Red Famous Faces with a 
white rectangle, T2: Images). 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The present preliminary study about the effect of 
different sets of flashing stimuli based on images has shown 
some trends that should be further explored in future 
proposals. The main finding is that the use of neutral pictures 
does not worsen the performance compared to one of the 
most effective BCI-spellers recently proposed in the 
literature and based on red famous faces with a white 
rectangle. Moreover, it would be necessary to increase the 
number of symbols in the copy-spelling phase and to use a 
larger sample of participants in order to carry out a statistical 
comparison and to obtain stronger results and conclusions. 
ACKOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the project 
SICCAU: 
RTI2018-100912-B-I00 
(MCIU/AEI/FEDER, 
UE) and by the University of Malaga. Moreover, the authors 
would like to thank all participants for their cooperation. 
This work has been carried out in a framework agreement 
between the University of Málaga and the University of 
Bordeaux (Bordeaux INP). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D. J. McFarland, G. 
Pfurtscheller, and T. M. Vaughan, “Brain-computer 
interfaces 
for 
communication 
and 
control,” 
Clin. 
Neurophysiol., vol. 113 (6), pp. 767–791, 2002. 
[2] 
D. J. Krusienski, E. W. Sellers, D. J. McFarland, T. M.  
Vaughan, and J. R. Wolpaw, “Toward enhanced P300 speller 
performance,” Journal of neuroscience methods, 167(1), pp. 
15-21, 2008. 
[3] 
L. A. Farwell and E. Donchin, “Talking off the top of your 
head: toward a mental prosthesis utilizing event-related brain 
potentials,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 70 
(6), pp. 510–523, 1988. 
[4] 
T. Kaufmann, S. M. Schulz, C. Grünzinger, and A. Kübler, 
“Flashing characters with famous faces improves ERP-based 
brain–computer interface performance,” Journal of Neural 
Engineering, vol. 8 (5), pp. 56016, 2011. 
[5] 
Q. Li, S. Liu, J. Li, and O. Bai, “Use of a green familiar 
faces paradigm improves P300-speller brain-computer 
interface performance,” PLoS One. 10, pp. 1–15, 2015. 
[6] 
S. Li, J. Jin, I. Daly, C. Zuo, X. Wang, and A. Cichocki, 
"Comparison of the ERP-Based BCI Performance Among 
Chromatic (RGB) Semitransparent Face Patterns," Frontiers 
in Neuroscience, pp. 1–15, 2020. 
[7] 
X. Zhang, J. Jin, S. Li, X. Wang, and A. Cichocki, " 
Evaluation of color modulation in visual P300-speller using 
new stimulus patterns," Cognitive Neurodynamics, pp. 1–14, 
2021.  
[8] 
A. Fernández-Rodríguez, F. Velasco-Álvarez, M.T. Medina-
Juliá, and R. Ron-Angevin, “Evaluation of emotional and 
neutral pictures as flashing stimuli using a P300 brain– 
computer interface speller,” Journal of Neural Engineering, 
vol. 16, pp. 1-11, 2019.  
[9] 
F. Velasco-Álvarez, S. Sancha-Ros, E. García-Garaluz, Á. 
Fernández-Rodríguez, M.T. Medina-Juliá, and R. Ron-
Angevin, “UMA-BCI speller: an easily configurable P300 
speller tool for end user,” Computer Methods and Programs 
in Biomedicine. doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.02.015, 2019.   
[10] G. Schalk, D. J. McFarland, T. Hinterberger, N. Birbaumer, 
and J. R. Wolpaw, “BCI2000: a general-purpose brain-
computer interface (BCI) system,” IEEE Transactions on 
Subject 
Condition 
Nº flashes 
online 
Accuracy (%) 
ITR (bits/min) 
S1 
T1 
3 
100 
30.55 
T2 
3 
93.75 
26.44 
S2 
T1 
3 
100 
30.55 
T2 
4 
100 
22.91 
S3 
T1 
3 
100 
30.55 
T2 
2 
75 
26.50 
S4 
T1 
3 
75 
17.67 
T2 
3 
100 
30.55 
Mean 
T1 
3 
93.75±6.25 
27.33±3.21 
T2 
3 
92.18±5.91 
26.6±1.56 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-980-5
BRAININFO 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

Biomedical Engineering, vol. 51 (6), pp. 1034–1043, 2004.  
[11] User 
Reference: 
P300Classifier. 
Available 
online: 
https://www.bci2000.org/mediawiki/index.php/User_Referen
ce:P300 Classifier (accessed on 2 September 2020). 
[12] P. J. Lang, M. M. Bradley, and B. N. Cuthbert, “International 
Affective Picture System (IAPS): Technical Manual and 
Affective Ratings,” NIMH Cent. Study Emot. Atten., pp. 39–
58, 1997. 
 
 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-980-5
BRAININFO 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

