Why Do Seniors Accept or Reject New Technologies?  
Towards Developing a Seniors Oriented Technology Acceptance Model  
 
Cosmina Paul1 , Alexandru Sterea1, Mircea Mârzan1, Aliki Economidou2, Iztok Žilavec3,  Luiza Spiru1,  
Adrian Gârleanu1          
1Ana Aslan International Foundation           2 Cyprus Neuroscience & Technology Institute     3Razvojni Center Informacijsko  
Bucharest, Romania  
 
 
Nicosia, Cipru 
 
 
 
         Ljubljiana, Slovenia  
office@anaaslanacademy.ro   
 
aliki@cnti.org.cy  
 
 
         Iztok.Zilavec@24alife.com 
 
 
 
Abstract— On the background of literature review and field-
research, this article proposes a new conceptual model for 
understanding why seniors accept or reject new technologies 
and gerontechnologies. This framework bears a special focus on 
the relation between TV and seniors because it has been 
developed in the context of a new gerontechnological TV device, 
Senior-TV. The already existent technology acceptance models 
are focusing on youth and people on the job, and little research 
has been carried out in the area of elderly people. Hence, we 
inquire into the seniors’ behavioral intention towards the use of 
new technologies, aiming to develop a multiple-perspective 
conceptual model: 1) by employing a gerontographics approach, 
which gives a more complex data disaggregation in order to 
better understand the needs of the seniors; 2) by overcoming the 
classic TAM and UTAUT models and refining the existent 
models of technology acceptance tailored to seniors’ market, 
and to incorporate other potential relevant explanatory 
variables; 3) by a more in-depth understanding of the relevance 
of technology attributed by seniors in their life; 4) by 
diversifying the key informers in order to have a multifaceted 
perspective, such as formal and informal caregivers and to 
better understand how do they relate to the relation between 
seniors and technology. The data for the analysis came from 
purpose sample of 148 seniors, a survey conducted over 2017-18 
in Slovenia, Romania and Cyprus and a follow-up survey 
conducted from February to April 2019 in the same countries, 
with a sample of 105 seniors, which informs on the new 
framework proposed here. Our research show that based on a 
gerontographics segmentation, scholars and practitioners alike 
may understand, on the one hand, the influences of seniors’ 
technology experimentation and acceptance, and, on the other 
hand, seniors’ openness towards specific types of technologies. 
In order to account for the seniors’ perspective on the relevance 
of technologies in their life, based on the gerontographics 
segmentation, we mapped their interests and predisposition 
towards the attributes of technologies. The degree to which 
developers meet these interest and predispositions of the seniors, 
give the ascendance of the new product or service of the seniors’ 
market. 
Keywords- 
technology 
adoption; 
gerontechnology; 
gerontographics; technology acceptance model. 
 
I. 
BENEFITS OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES AND 
GERONTECHNOLOGIES 
The population is ageing. It is widely believed that the 
development of new technologies and gerontechnologies can 
tremendously help societies in facing the challenges posed by 
the ageing population. The increasing number of seniors in 
our 
societies 
build 
a 
demand 
for 
entertainment, 
communication, education and health and open new markets 
for the new technology developers [1]-[3]. Though little is 
known of the seniors’ behavioral intention and preferences 
toward new technologies. Technology is of special focus due 
to the widespread and unchallenged societal acceptance that 
technology may improve the quality of elderly people not 
only in terms of their healthiness [4], but also in 
psychological and social terms, such as reducing loneliness, 
anxiety, social isolation [5], and lowering self-esteem, which 
impacts dramatically on the poor cognitive functioning [6]-
[8], mortality [9][10], impaired sleep [11], impaired mental 
health and Alzheimer’s disease [12]. The benefits brought by 
ICT for seniors are also discussed in the literature [13]-[15] 
and some research show that seniors benefit from ICT 
through perceiving the life stress much lower, due to the fact 
that via ICT the seniors improve their connection to outside 
world and so their life quality increases [16]-[18]. If 
technology 
advancement 
improves 
the 
ways 
of 
communication, information and entertainment while staying 
at home, this potential is highly appreciated for the beneficial 
improvements technology has made for the people aged over 
65. 
 
II. 
CURRENT BARRIERS IN TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION BY 
SENIORS 
There are two types of recurrent barriers which occur when 
developing new technologies for seniors. The first refers to 
assuming a relative homogeneous market of people aged over 
65 and, the second refers to overlooking the social influences 
of formal and informal carers and of the relevance and 
meaning 
attributed 
to 
new 
technologies 
and 
gerontechnologies by the seniors. 
Delello and McWhorter [19] emphasize that the obstacles 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

for the adoption of technology by elderly include: costs [20], 
inappropriate design, experience, awareness [21], attitude 
[22], self-efficacy [23], and a general lack of interest [24]. 
Demiris et al [25] address the psychological barriers 
identified as the privacy violations from the cameras, the 
replacement of human assistance by technology, the user-
friendliness of technology. The specific needs of the older 
persons are not taking into consideration when developing 
technology and, moreover, those who design and develop 
technology are young, who hold different needs and abilities 
[26]. Therefore, elderly people adopts with difficulty new 
technologies because of the age-related impairments, vision, 
hearing and memory loss, and loss of mobility, which lead to 
less of confidence and difficulties. Hence, Boulton-Lewis et 
al add embarrassment with lack of abilities, reduced dexterity 
and visual acuity and memory loss.  
Mitzner et al [27] found that the openness towards 
adopting new technology is related to the support offered by 
technology to everyday tasks, convenience and useful 
characteristics, while the reluctance is related to the 
inconveniences created, unhelpful characteristics, and 
security and reliability concerns. Oestlund [28] points out to 
the perception of a limited future, the increased feeling of 
fatigue and circumspection, which all significantly reduce the 
appetite for new technology.  
Bringing 
together 
older 
adults 
and 
technology, 
gerontechnology is a fast growing interdisciplinary domain 
[19]. The differentiation between the adoption of 
gerontechnology and of the new technology by seniors is also 
of crucial importance. Gerontechnology refers to inquiring 
into human-computer interaction for seniors and it requires 
an interdisciplinary journey into nursing, gerontology and 
social work, while new technologies adoption by seniors does 
not employ the nursing perspective. However, the 
gerontologists draw attention to the phenomenon of the too 
fast growing technology while the implications can be 
understood in time. 
III. 
TOWARDS A NOVEL MODEL OF TECHNOLOGY 
ACCEPTANCE BY SENIORS 
The first two pilot cycles employed by our research were 
aimed to adapt and test the most frequent used theoretical 
models on technology acceptance. The first field reseach 
cycle was based on Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) 
and Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 
(UTAUT) models, but they proved insufficiently explanatory 
when applied to the seniors due to the fact that these 
frameworks are constructed and tailored on students and 
people on the job. Therefore, most of the items were 
irrelevant for the older people and they failed to offer a 
conceptual understanding of how technology can be 
integrating with aging [29].  
In the last years, new research started to be developed to 
overcome TAM model and for developing a more in-depth 
understanding of gerontechnology. Technology Acceptance 
Model (TAM) was proposed by Davis [30] and it was at the 
center of an overwhelmingly high number of researches 
regarding technology adoption but, among all, just a few 
studies focused on senior citizens [3]. Afterwards, Davis 
proposed TAM2, adding subjective norms into the model. 
Because the research on seniors is quite rare, more research 
is needed for conclusive results for this specific target group. 
TAM model proves to be easy replicable and consistent 
across technologies [31] but, along Legris et al [32], 
researchers advice for a more systematic study of external 
variables. After about 20 years since the TAM model was 
proposed, Venkatesh et al. [33] discuss the fu 
ture of this model for research and emphasize that the 
model has been widely replicated because of its simplicity 
and easiness of generalizability, though its relevance is 
limited. Substantial changes have been introduced in The 
Unified Theory of Acceptance and the Use of Technology 
Model, UTAUT1 and UTAUT 2 models. Legris et al [32] 
suggest to integrate the model into broader frameworks 
which include human and social factors and the adoption of 
innovation model.  
For the third pilot cylce, we included the lessons learned 
from the first two cycles and tested two conceptual models in 
order to assess their explanatory power: the Senior 
Technology Acceptance Model (STAM), which was 
proposed by Renaud and Biljon [34] and the Gerontechnology 
Acceptance Model proposed by Chen and Chan [35]. The 
first stays as the earliest effort for conceptual theorization of 
predicting technology acceptance and adoption by seniors 
and it was designed to predict older adults’ mobile phone 
adoption. The model proposed by Chen and Chan [35] is built 
on the inquiry into gerontechnology acceptance by elderly 
from Hong Kong. Both models are based on TAM and 
UTAUT classic models. We complemented the findings with 
a qualitative inquiry into the contextual factors that shape 
technology adoption. Hence, we build up a conceptual 
framework to integrate both various models tested in 
quantitative studies and the qualitative research related to our 
topic. 
A. Methodology 
There are two field-research stages employed in our 
analysis which had been carried out under the Active and 
Assistive Living (AAL) Program with funding by the 
European Union. The data for the first analysis came from 
purpose sample of 148 seniors, two surveys conducted over 
2017-18 in Slovenia, Romania and Cyprus and the second 
analysis consists of a follow-up survey conducted from 
February to April 2019 in the same countries and having a 
sample of 105 senior respondents. The primary goal of the 
overall research was to explore the levels of adoption by 
senior consumers of a new emerging technology, Senior-TV. 
In order to recruit participants, the project coordinator of each 
country contacted the administrators of nursing homes, daily 
centers, hospitals and retirement houses, and independent 
seniors at home and asked for their permission to test the 
Senior TV product. To assure protection of human subjects, 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

the research did not employed any identifying details 
(including e-mails, phone numbers, addresses, etc.). It was 
not mandatory to answer all the questions, and if any question 
caused the participants even the mildest inconvenience, they 
could choose not to answer it. They were free to withdraw 
from the study at any time and for any reason. We have 
included the “Verbal Fluency Test” (VFT) which is an 
instrument for cognitive assessment and it has been also used 
in the previous two pilots and the short version of the Health 
Survey SF12, a scale which has been included to indicate the 
physical and psychological state of the respondents.  
B. Research Findings 
By developing a novel seniors’ oriented technology 
acceptance model, we aim to support the advancing research 
on technology adoption by seniors. Our research shows 
relevant aspects which need to be considered when 
discussing the relation between seniors and new technology.  
a) Gerontographics segmentation 
Seniors are internally a very diverse group in terms of 
age, culture, emotional state of health, cognitive abilities, 
social needs and preferences. Seniors’ heterogeneity and their 
attitudes towards engagement with new technologies and 
gerontechnologies shall be assessed through gerontographics 
approach [36]. The classic differences of young and old 
seniors is insufficient in tackling on the specificities of the 
seniors target groups. Our findings demonstrate that age, 
physical state of health and cognitive abilities do not have a 
direct and unmediated impact on the seniors’ performance 
with technology and on their behavioral intention to utilize 
technologies, validating the recommendations of going 
beyond the trite understanding of the concepts of biological 
and cognitive age [37]. Gerontographics segmentation is a 
useful tool in analyzing and targeting adult market [38]-[40] 
and it is based on the assumption that elderly manifest similar 
behavior as long as they had encountered similar 
circumstances, experiences and past events. Four segments of 
the elderly are considered: healthy indulgers, ailing outgoers, 
healthy hermits and frail recluses. Healthy indulgers 
experience good psychological physical and social aging; 
ailing outgoers in spite of a decline in the physical well-being 
manifest high level of psychological being and stay socially 
integrated; healthy hermits keep a good physical being but a 
low psychological well-being and stay isolated from society; 
the frail recluses have chronic health conditions and low 
psychological well-being.   
Chen and Chan [35] show that external variables, such 
as health and ability characteristics, have a direct and 
unmediated influence on usage behavior. Henceforth, the 
gerontographics segmentation, which are the lens through 
which we chose to look to our data, are in line with Chen and 
Chan [35] research findings and with the first model which 
refers to the ‘user context’.  
The fact that the framework proposed by Chen and Chan 
[35] emphasizes the relevance of contextual factors rather 
than of the product experience, is also confirmed by our field-
research: seniors habits, activities, interests and curiosities 
are a results of their life long experiences and, therefore, their 
adoption on new technologies depend on contextual factors 
and not on new technology products’ attributes. Moreover, 
the data from the first field-research cycle show that 
technologies cannot actively engage seniors per se, but the 
attitudes of the seniors towards the new technologies 
determine seniors’ engagement with new technologies and 
gerontechnologies. This attitude of the seniors is determined 
by the state of health of the respondents and by their current 
life style, which may be assessed through a gerontographics 
approach.  
b) Social influences versus ‘perceived usefulness’ 
Social influences or its lacking foster seniors’ acceptance 
or rejection of gerontechnologies and new technologies. In 
the case of dependent seniors, which are integrated into the 
category of frail recluses, the social influences of the nursing 
professionals and informal carers are key in the processes of 
experimentation and acceptance of new technologies or 
gerontechnologies. Social influence replace the variable of 
‘perceived usefulness’ for the categories of frail recluses and 
healthy hermits, the categories which have a certain degree 
of dependency and are isolated and/or self-isolated from 
society. A top-down approach is present in developing and 
promoting gerontechnologies by not considering seniors’ 
habits, values and desires and the same top-down approach is 
advanced when designing new technologies products or 
services and expect seniors to engage with them. 
‘Perceived usefulness’ is relevant for the two categories 
of healthy indulgers and ailing outgoers, which confirms the 
results presented by Selwin et al. [41] who show that 
independent seniors avoid ICT because of the perceived 
irrelevance in their lives. Therefore, instead of opting for 
gerontechnologies and any technology services which age-
stigmatize and are focused on health improvements, if the 
case, they prefer to opt for universal technologies. Our 
findings are also consistent with those of Boulton-Lewis et 
al. [26] who present the importance of promoting 
technological models within ethical frameworks, which see 
users as independent decision-makers, only as long as we 
target the healthy indulgers and ailing outgoers. 
The technologies tailored for senior users tend to focus 
on health improvements and supportive services, while 
independent seniors do not perceive themselves as dependent 
and in-need of health technologies. Moreover, those seniors 
opened towards the adoption of new technologies perceive 
themselves younger than their biological age. Therefore, our 
findings go in line with the research which shows that the 
main reason expressed by an overwhelming majority for the 
non-use of ICT is actually the perceived irrelevance of ICT 
in their lives [41]. 
c) Seniors’ predispositions and interests 
Our research findings show that watching TV does not 
have many symbolic associations for the healthy indulgers 
and ailing outgoers, while there are plenty of mentally 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

associations attributed to TV watching by healthy hermits 
and frail recluses. Healthy indulgers look for information 
(62.5%) and social integration (42.9%) and ailing outgoers 
look for information (66.7%), enjoyment (66.7%) and social 
integration (50%) when experimenting new technologies. In 
conclusion, gerontechnologies and other age-stigmatizing 
services such as those designed for health utility, fail to meet 
the needs of the socially integrated seniors. By contrast, the 
healthy hermits and frail recluses, who are not socially 
integrated, associate TV watching with decreasing loneliness 
and companionship to a high degree. 83. 6% of the healthy 
hermits associate TV watching with decreasing loneliness, 
80.3% with information and 61.5% declares that it sets their 
daily rhythm. Frail recluses prove to be the most dependent 
group of gerontechnology and new technologies. 89.5% of 
frail recluses associate TV watching with enjoyment, 76.5% 
with decreasing loneliness and 75% with companionship. 
Nevertheless, TV watching is largely associated with social 
integration, which matters for all four categories, though for                                                                                
a higher degree for the last two, as being one of a very few 
vehicles for their sense of belonging to society (60.6% for 
frail recluses, 57.7% for healthy hermits, 50% for ailing                                                                            
outgoers, and 42.9% for healthy indulgers). 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND  FUTURE WORK 
This analysis proposes a framework for analyzing the 
seniors’ 
relation 
with 
new 
technologies 
and 
gerontechnologies and it aims to increase the understanding 
about the factors affecting seniors’ acceptance or rejection of 
newly 
developed 
technologies. 
It 
was 
found 
that 
gerontographics segmentation can tremendously inform on 
the openness of the seniors towards certain products or 
services. Seniors who are independent and socially active, 
namely the categories of healthy indulgers and ailing 
outgoers, are open only towards new technologies and avoid 
age stigmatized gerontechnologies and health oriented 
products and services, while the categories of frail recluses 
and healthy hermits, who are more self-isolated and 
dependent, are more open towards new technologies and 
gerontechnologies alike. 
Frail recluses and healthy hermits, or in other words, 
seniors 
who are not socially integrated 
and feel 
psychologically ill, adopt technologies under the influences 
of their formal or informal caregivers. Hence, ‘perceived 
usefulness’ and ‘perceived ease of use’ of the technologies, 
factors which play a key role in the classic technology 
acceptance models, are replaced with social influences 
factors. These findings are consistent with the senior 
technology adoption framework developed by Chen and 
Chan [35]. Moreover, we found that a major key factor in the 
acceptance of technology by seniors is played by their 
predisposition in choosing technologies which carry out a 
specific role for them. Seniors who are socially isolated adopt 
technologies for decreasing loneliness and setting up a 
rhythm of the day, while those socially integrated accept 
technologies only for information and enjoyment. More 
research is needed in order to test the model proposed here on 
a wider range of technologies and in different cultural 
settings.  
 
Technology 
Acceptance by 
Seniors
Influence of Nursing Professionals 
and Informal Carers
Frail 
Recluses
Predispozition for 
Enjoyment, 
Decreasing
loneliness 
&Companionship
Interest in 
Information, 
Health and 
Gaming 
Healthy 
Hermits
Predispozition for 
Information, 
Decreasing 
Loneliness &
Ritual Habits
Interest in 
Information 
& Gaming
Openess towards 
Gerontechnologies 
and New 
Technologies
Healthy Indulgers & 
Ailing Outgoers
Openess towards 
New Technology
Predispozition 
for Information
Enjoyment & 
Social 
Integration
Interest in 
Information 
&Enjoyment
No social 
influences
Fig. 1 A novel framework for understanding seniors’ technology acceptance 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was performed in the frame of the EU project 
Senior-TV (AAL/Call2014/171, with implementation period 
Nov 2015 – April 2019), funded by the AAL Programme, co-
funded by the European Commission and the National 
Funding Authorities of Cyprus, Spain, Slovenia and Romania. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Langa, K.M., Foster, N.L. and Larson, E.B. “Mixed dementia: 
emerging 
concepts 
and 
therapeutic 
implications”. Jama, 292(23), 2004, pp.2901-2908. 
[2] Lehnert, T., Heider, D., Leicht, H., Heinrich, S., Corrieri, S., 
Luppa, M., Riedel-Heller, S. and König, H.H. “Health care 
utilization and costs of elderly persons with multiple chronic 
conditions”. Medical Care Research and Review, 68(4), 2011, 
pp.387-420. 
[3] Chen, M.L., Lu, T.E., Chen, K.J. and Liu, C.E. “A TAM-based 
study on senior citizens digital learning and user behavioral 
intention toward use of broadband network technology services 
provided via television”. African Journal of Business 
Management, 5(16), 2011, pp.7099-7110 
[4] Abowd, G.D., Bobick, A.F., Essa, I.A., Mynatt, E.D. and 
Rogers, W.A., 2002, July. The aware home: A living laboratory 
for technologies for successful aging. In Proceedings of the 
AAAI-02 Workshop “Automation as Caregiver”, pp. 1-7. 
[5] Khosravi, P. and Ghapanchi, A.H. “Investigating the 
effectiveness of technologies applied to assist seniors: A 
systematic literature review”. International journal of medical 
informatics, 85(1), 2016, pp.17-26. 
[6] Spiru, L., Turcu, I., Ioancio, I., Nuta, C., Ghita, C., Martin, M., 
Annicchiarico, R., Cortes, U. and Riano, D. “E-Health and 
Assistive Technology (AT) as suitable answers to global 
aging”. Alzheimer's & Dementia: The Journal of the 
Alzheimer's Association, 5(4), 2009, p.241. 
[7] Cacioppo, J.T. and Hawkley, L.C. “Perceived social isolation 
and cognition. Trends in cognitive sciences”, 13(10), 2009 
pp.447-454. 
[8] Shankar, A., McMunn, A., Banks, J. and Steptoe, A. 
“Loneliness, social isolation, and behavioral and biological 
health indicators in older adults”. Health Psychology, 30(4), 
2011, p.377-385. 
[9] Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T.B. and Layton, J.B. “Social 
relationships and mortality risk: a meta-analytic review”. PLoS 
medicine, 7(7), 2010, p.e1000316. 
[10] Shiovitz-Ezra, S. and Ayalon, L. “Situational versus chronic 
loneliness as risk factors for all-cause mortality”. International 
Psychogeriatrics, 22(3), 2010, pp.455-462. 
[11] Hawkley, L.C., Thisted, R.A., Masi, C.M. and Cacioppo, J.T. 
“Loneliness predicts increased blood pressure: 5-year cross-
lagged analyses in middle-aged and older adults”. Psychology 
and aging, 25(1), 2010, p.132-141. 
[12] Wilson, R.S., Scherr, P.A., Schneider, J.A., Tang, Y. and 
Bennett, D.A. “Relation of cognitive activity to risk of 
developing Alzheimer disease”. Neurology, 69(20), 2007, 
pp.1911-1920. 
[13] Selwyn, 
N. 
“Reconsidering 
political 
and 
popular 
understandings of the digital divide”. New media & 
society, 6(3), 2004, pp.341-362. 
[14] Dinham, A. “Faith and social capital after the debt crisis”. 
Springer, 2012. 
[15] Irizarry, C. and Downing, A. “Computers enhancing the lives 
of older people”. Australian Journal on Ageing, 16(4), 1997, 
pp.161-165. 
[16] Swindell, R. “U3A online: A virtual university of the third age 
for isolated older people”. International Journal of Lifelong 
Education, 21(5), 2002, pp.414-429. 
[17] Dickinson, A. and Gregor, P. “Computer use has no 
demonstrated 
impact 
on 
the 
well-being 
of 
older 
adults”. International 
Journal 
of 
Human-Computer 
Studies, 64(8), 2006, pp.744-753. 
[18] Velciu, M. and Grecu L. “Developing ICT’s skills for women  
practicing a hobby”, ICVL 2018: The 13th International 
Conference on Virtual Learning, October 26-27, 2018 Alba 
Iulia, Romania.  
[19] Delello, J.A. and McWhorter, R.R. “Reducing the digital 
divide: Connecting older adults to iPad technology”. Journal of 
Applied Gerontology, 36(1), 2017, pp.3-28. 
[20] Berry, T. “The great work: Our way into the future”. New York: 
Bell Tower, 1999. 
[21] Barrett, A.M. “An education Millennium Development Goal 
for quality: complexity and democracy”. Compare, 41(1), 
2011, pp.145-148. 
[22] Lenhart, A. Who’s not online [Online] Retrieved from: 
https://www.pewinternet.org/2000/09/21/whos-not-online/ 
2000. 
[23] Alvseike, H. and Brønnick, K. “Feasibility of the iPad as a hub 
for smart house technology in the elderly; effects of cognition, 
self-efficacy, 
and 
technology 
experience”. Journal 
of 
multidisciplinary healthcare, 5, 2012, p.299-306. 
[24] Cohen-Mansfield, J. and Biddison, J. “The scope and future 
trends of gerontechnology: consumers' opinions and literature 
survey”. Journal of Technology in Human Services, 25(3), 
2007, pp.1-19. 
[25] Demiris, G., Rantz, M.J., Aud, M.A., Marek, K.D., Tyrer, 
H.W., Skubic, M. and Hussam, A.A. “Older adults' attitudes 
towards and perceptions of ‘smart home’technologies: a pilot 
study”. Medical 
informatics 
and 
the 
Internet 
in 
medicine, 29(2), 2004, pp.87-94. 
[26] Boulton-Lewis, G.M., Buys, L., Lovie-Kitchin, J., Barnett, K. 
and David, L.N. “Ageing, learning, and computer technology 
in Australia”. Educational Gerontology, 33(3), 2007, pp.253-
270. 
[27] Mitzner, T.L., Boron, J.B., Fausset, C.B., Adams, A.E., 
Charness, N., Czaja, S.J., Dijkstra, K., Fisk, A.D., Rogers, 
W.A. and Sharit, J. “Older adults talk technology: Technology 
usage and attitudes”. Computers in human behavior, 26(6), 
2010, pp.1710-1721. 
[28] Östlund, B. “Watching television in later life: a deeper 
understanding of TV viewing in the homes of old people and 
in geriatric care contexts”. Scandinavian journal of caring 
sciences, 24(2), 2010, pp.233-243. 
[29] Interlandi. “We have the technology to reinvent aging. Why 
aren't 
we 
using 
it?”. 
Retrieved 
from: 
https://www.yahoo.com/tech/we-have-the-technology-to-
reinvent-aging-why-arentwe-85125591254.html, 2014. 
[30] Davis, F.D. “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and 
user acceptance of information technology”. MIS quarterly, 
1989, pp.319-340. 
[31] Burton-Jones, A. and Hubona, G.S. “The mediation of external 
variables in the technology acceptance model”. Information & 
management, 43(6), 2006, pp.706-717. 
[32] Legris, P., Ingham, J. and Collerette, P. “Why do people use 
information technology? A critical review of the technology 
acceptance model”. Information & management, 40(3), 2003, 
pp.191-204. 
[33] Venkatesh, V., Thong, J.Y. and Xu, X. “Consumer acceptance 
and use of information technology: extending the unified 
theory 
of 
acceptance 
and 
use 
of 
technology”. MIS 
quarterly, 36(1), 2012, pp.157-178. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

[34] Renaud, K. and Van Biljon, J. “Predicting technology 
acceptance and adoption by the elderly: a qualitative study. 
In Proceedings of the 2008 annual research conference of the 
South African Institute of Computer Scientists and Information 
Technologists on IT research in developing countries: riding 
the wave of technology (pp. 210-219), October 2008, ACM. 
[35] Chen, K. and Chan, A.H. “Predictors of gerontechnology 
acceptance 
by 
older 
Hong 
Kong 
Chinese”. Technovation, 34(2), 2014 pp.126-135. 
[36] Sthienrapapayut, T., Moschis, G.P. and Mathur, A. “Using 
gerontographics to explain consumer behaviour in later life: 
evidence from a 
Thai study”. Journal of Consumer 
Marketing, 35(3), 2018, pp.317-327. 
[37] Moschis, G.P. and Mathur, A. “How they're acting their 
age”. Marketing Management, 2(2), 1993, p.40. 
[38] Moschis, G.P. “Gerontographics: Life-stage segmentation for 
marketing 
strategy 
development”. 
1996, 
Greenwood 
Publishing Group. 
[39] Moschis, G.P. “Marketing to older adults: an updated overview 
of present knowledge and practice”. Journal of Consumer 
Marketing, 20(6), 2003, pp.516-525. 
[40] Moschis, G.P., Lee, E. and Mathur, A. “Targeting the mature 
market: opportunities and challenges”. Journal of consumer 
marketing, 14(4), 1997, pp.282-293. 
[41] Selwyn, N., Gorard, S., Furlong, J. and Madden, L. “Older 
adults' use of information and communications technology in 
everyday life”. Ageing & Society, 23(5), 2003 pp.561-582. 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

