Recruiting Neural Field Theory for Motor Imagery Data Augmentation 
 
Daniel Polyakov 
Department of Cognitive and Brain Sciences 
Agricultural, Biological, Cognitive Robotics Initiative 
Ben-Gurion University 
Be’er Sheva, Israel  
e-mail: polydani@post.bgu.ac.il 
Oren Shriki 
Department of Cognitive and Brain Sciences 
Department of Computer Science 
Ben-Gurion University 
Be’er Sheva, Israel  
e-mail: shrikio@bgu.ac.il 
 
 
Abstract—Brain-computer interfaces accuracy is often limited 
due to a lack of diverse training data. In this study, we face this 
problem by using a computational model of neural dynamics, 
specifically Neural Field Theory, to generate artificial 
electroencephalogram time series as additional training data. 
We fitted this model to common spatial patterns of each motor 
imagery class, jittered the fitted parameters, and augmented 
the training data by generating time series from the model. We 
then applied a linear discriminant analysis to classify motor 
imagery states based on total-power features and tested the 
accuracy improvement on the ‘2a’ data set from brain-
computer interfaces competition IV. Our findings show that 
data augmentation using Neural Field Theory can significantly 
improve the accuracy of brain-computer interface classifiers 
when the number of training samples is limited, providing a 
biophysically meaningful signal. 
Keywords: brain-computer interface, neural field theory, data 
augmentation, motor imagery, EEG. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) allow for controlling 
computer and robotic applications directly with brain 
activity. A common problem in BCI systems is poor 
classification accuracy due to a lack of diverse training data, 
which is typically collected during tedious calibration 
sessions. Training data augmentation is a possible solution to 
this problem. Previous studies have explored various 
techniques, 
such 
as 
Ensemble 
Empirical 
Mode 
Decomposition (EEMD) [1] and spectral noising [2], to 
augment Motor Imagery (MI) electroencephalogram (EEG) 
signals. 
Here we harness Neural Field Theory (NFT), a 
computational model of neural dynamics, to augment MI 
training data. NFT is a powerful method for constructing 
models of large-scale brain activity based on physiological 
principles. These models can be fitted to experimental EEG 
spectra and generate artificial time series accordingly [3], 
[4].  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
presents the materials and methods used in this study. In 
Section III, we present the results obtained from our 
research. Section IV analyzes these results and compares 
them to other works in the field. Finally, in Section V, we 
draw conclusions based on our findings and provide 
directions for future research. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
We applied Common Spatial Patterns (CSP) to the MI 
EEG epochs and computed the Total Power (TP) and 
Higuchi Fractal Dimension (HFD) of the CSPs. NFT models 
were fitted to each CSP time series of each MI class. The 
fitted parameters were jittered and artificial CSP signals were 
generated from the models. Linear Discriminant Analysis 
(LDA) was used to classify MI states based on TP and HFD 
features. To compare the effectiveness of our augmentation 
method, we also performed a naive augmentation by adding 
Gaussian noise to feature values. 
We evaluated the accuracy improvement of our 
augmentation method on the ‘2a’ data set from BCI 
competition IV, which consisted of 18 subjects performing 
right and left hand MI [5]. To imitate a small training set, we 
randomly divided each subject’s data into three equal folds 
and used the first fold for training and NFT augmentation, 
and the other two folds for validation (as shown in Fig. 1). 
III. 
RESULTS 
Our goal was to reach the classification accuracy of the 
full training set, by augmenting the small training set. In the 
case of TP-based classification, our data augmentation 
method increased the accuracy of the small training set from 
=0.79 (Cohen’s Kappa [6]) to =0.83, surpassing the 
accuracy of the full training set (=0.82). In comparison, an 
augmentation that was done by noising the features 
decreased the accuracy to =0.76. For HFD-based 
classification, our augmentation method did not result in any 
improvement in accuracy. Please refer to TABLE I for 
complete results.  
TABLE I.  
VALIDATION CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY  a 
 
Full 
training 
set 
Small 
training 
set 
Small training 
set + NFT 
augmentation 
Small training 
set + noise 
augmentation 
TP feature 
0.82 
0.79 
0.83 
0.76 
HFD feature 
0.89 
0.86 
0.84 
0.84 
a. 
Inter-subject average 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Our results demonstrate that the NFT-based data 
augmentation 
technique 
effectively 
improved 
the 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
BRAININFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

classification accuracy to the level of a full training set, 
enabling the use of shorter MI training sessions. The 
improvement was evident for TP-based classification but not 
for HFD-based, suggesting that NFT generates EEG signals 
that better preserve spectrum-based features compared to 
time-domain-based features. 
This augmentation technique outperformed the noise-
based augmentation method. This may be attributed to the 
physiological realism of the NFT-generated signals, which 
resemble real EEG signals and are distributed in a 
biophysical manner in a physiologically valid range. 
Its performance was at similar levels to the state-of-the-
art augmentation methods mentioned before. EEMD-based 
augmentation increased the accuracy from  =0.66 to 
=0.82, while spectral noising increased in from  =0.65 to 
=0.68, both on the ‘2a’ data set [1], [2]. A direct 
comparison is not feasible due to varying initial accuracy 
levels and evaluation methods in the studies. 
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we addressed the challenge of limited 
training data in BCIs by proposing a novel augmentation 
approach. We used NFT to fit a physiological model to MI 
EEG signals and generated diverse artificial data for training. 
Our approach improved the accuracy of MI-based BCI 
classifiers and provided biophysical meaning to the 
generated signals. Overall, our findings suggest that data 
augmentation using NFT can be an effective solution for 
improving BCI performance when the number of training 
samples is limited. To assess the generalizability of our 
method, the next step would be to evaluate its performance 
on other BCI paradigms, such as Steady State Visual Evoked 
Potentials (SSVEP) and P300. This would help determine if 
our results can be extended to other BCI applications. 
    Figure 1.  MI data augmentation performance evaluation procedure flow. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev through the Agricultural, Biological, 
and Cognitive Robotics Initiative, the Marcus Endowment 
Fund. It was also partially supported by a grant from the 
Israeli Directorate of Defense Research & Development. 
REFERENCES 
[1]
H. K. Lee, J. H. Lee, J. O. Park, and Y. S. Choi, “Data-driven
Data Augmentation for Motor Imagery Brain-Computer
Interface,” in International Conference on Information
Networking, 
Jan. 
2021, 
pp. 
683–686. 
doi:
10.1109/ICOIN50884.2021.9333908.
[2]
X. Zhang, M. Lei, and Y. Li, “An amplitudes-perturbation
data augmentation method in convolutional neural networks
for EEG decoding,” 2018 5th Int. Conf. Information, Cybern.
Comput. Soc. Syst., pp. 231–235, 2018.
[3]
P. A. Robinson, C. J. Rennie, D. L. Rowe, S. C. O’Connor,
and E. Gordon, “Multiscale brain modelling,” Philos. Trans.
R. Soc. B Biol. Sci., vol. 360, no. 1457, pp. 1043–1050, 2005,
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2005.1638.
[4]
R. G. Abeysuriya and P. A. Robinson, “Real-time automated
EEG tracking of brain states using neural field theory,” J.
Neurosci. Methods, vol. 258, pp. 28–45, Jan. 2016, doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2015.09.026.
[5]
M. Tangermann et al., “Review of the BCI competition IV,”
Front. Neurosci., vol. 6, no. July, pp. 1–31, 2012, doi:
10.3389/fnins.2012.00055.
[6]
J. Cohen, “A Coefficient of Agreement for Nominal Scales,”
Educ. Psychol. Meas., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 37–46, 1960, doi:
10.1177/001316446002000104.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
BRAININFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

