Exploring a P300 Brain-Computer Interface Based on Three Different RSVP 
Paradigms  
 
 
Ron-Angevin Ricardo 
Departamento de Tecnología Electrónica 
Universidad de Málaga 
Malaga, Spain 
e-mail: rron@uma.es 
Abadie Maëlle, Cloarec Maëlle, Filosa Martin, Jouault 
Maurine, Pestre-Sorge Quentin 
ENSC 
Bordeaux INP 
Bordeaux, France 
email: {mabadie003, mcloarec001, mfilosa001, mjouault, 
qpsorge}@ensc.fr  
Lespinet-Najib Véronique, André Jean-Marc 
Bordeaux INP 
CNRS UMR 5218, Laboratory IMS - Team CIH  
Bordeaux, France 
e-mail: {veronique.lespinet, jean-marc.andre}@ensf.fr  
García Liliana 
Bordeaux University 
CNRS UMR 5218, Laboratory IMS - Team CIH  
Bordeaux, France 
e-mail: liliana.audin@ims-bordeaux.fr  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— A BCI Speller is a typical Brain-Computer 
Interface (BCI) system for communication purpose. This 
technology can provide users with severe motor disability with 
an assistive device controlled by brain activity.  In the present 
preliminary study we investigated, in five subjects, the 
performance and the Information Transfer Rate (ITR) based 
on three different Rapid Serial Visual Presentation (RSVP) 
paradigms to control a BCI speller. The variants of the three 
paradigms were the stimuli presented: letters, images and 
famous faces. These preliminary results 
showed that 
performance can increase when using an RSVP paradigm 
based on images, and ITR can improves when using the images 
and the famous faces paradigms.  
Keywords- Brain-Computer Interface (BCI); P300; speller; 
stimuli; RSVP Paradigm. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) is based on analysis 
of the brain activity recorded during certain mental activities 
in order to control an external device. It helps to establish a 
communication and control channel for people with serious 
motor function problems, but without cognitive function 
disorder [1]. Currently, the most commonly used BCI 
systems are those based on electroencephalographic (EEG) 
signals, mainly because they can be recorded in a non-
invasive manner and show adequate temporal resolution. 
A BCI Speller is a typical brain-computer interface 
system for communication purpose. This technology can 
provide users with severe motor disability as, for example, 
patients suffering Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), 
with an assistive device controlled by brain activity.   
Most of the BCI spellers are based on the P300 Event-
Related Potential (ERP). The P300 signal is a positive 
deflection in voltage occurring about 300 ms after an 
infrequent or significant stimulus is perceived [1]. P300 
wave amplitude is typically between 2μV and 5μV and is 
symmetrically distributed around central scalp areas, 
showing greater amplitude in occipital rather than frontal 
region [2]. Most of these spellers are based on the P300 
speller first developed by Farwell and Donchin [3]. In this 
BCI, a 6 x 6 matrix of letters, arranged in rows and columns, 
is shown to the subject. The user focuses his/her attention 
on the matrix element he/she wishes to select as each row 
and column is flashed (i.e., intensified) randomly, one after 
the other. After a number of flashes, the symbol that the user 
has supposedly chosen is presented on screen. This 
paradigm is known as Row-Column Presentation (RCP) 
paradigm. 
In order to increase the performance of a BCI Speller 
based on the RCP paradigm, numerous variations have been 
proposed. Some works have been focused on modifying the 
stimulus presentation, such as the use of different color [4] 
or, even, the nature of the stimuli. One of the stimuli which 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

has result to better improve the BCI performance is the used 
of familiar faces [5] [6]. Specifically, in [5], the stimulus 
used was famous face. In [6], the use of green familiar faces 
improves the BCI performance compared to the famous face 
paradigm. 
Besides, a preliminary study carried out by the research 
group of the University of Málaga – the UMA-BCI group – 
shows that the use of a set of varied different pictures (e.g., 
photographs of things, people or places) as flashing stimuli 
could also significantly improve the performance of a BCI-
speller based on RCP [7]. 
The performance of a BCI-P300 speller based on the 
RCP paradigm depends, to some extend, on the user´s 
ability to gaze the different symbols of the matrix. 
Effectively, some studies have clearly demonstrated that the 
performance of the classical speller considerably decreases 
in cover attention mode [8] [9], that is, when subjects have 
to fixate the center of the screen while paying attention to 
the target using visual periphery. Unfortunately, some of the 
potential users of a BCI speller, that is, ALS patients, could 
have impaired in their visual function. For these users, a 
BCI speller based on the RCP paradigm is not useful. 
Different solutions have been proposed to develop visual 
BCI spellers independent of the eye gaze. One of this 
solution is based on the Rapid Serial Visual Presentation 
(RSVP) paradigm, proposed by Acqualagna et al. [10]. In 
this paradigm, the different symbols (letters) were presented 
one by one, in a random order, in the center of the screen. In 
a recent study [11], in order to study if the characteristics of 
stimuli can have an influence on the performance, three 
different RSVP paradigms were studied: colored ball, grey 
dummy faces and colored dummy face. For each paradigm, 
six different stimuli were presented (6 colors and 6 face 
expressions). The obtained results showed that the 
combination of colors and face expressions could improve 
the bit rate. 
As the use of stimuli based on famous face and pictures 
have been proven to improve BCI performance in a BCI 
speller based on RCP paradigm, the main objective of our 
study was to study if similar stimuli could improve the 
performance and the Information Transfer Rate (ITR) on a 
BCI speller based on the RSVP paradigm. To this end, three 
different stimuli sets were tested: letters, pictures and 
famous faces. 
This paper is organized as follows: section 2 describes 
the experimental setup, and present details about the spelling 
paradigms. The results and discussion are presented in 
section 3, followed by the conclusion and future works in 
section 4. 
II. 
 MATERIAL AND METHODS 
A. Participants 
Five healthy French university students (S1-S5) 
participated in this study. None of them had previous 
experience using a BCI system. The study was approved by 
the Ethics Committee of the University of Malaga and met 
the ethical standards of the Helsinki Declaration. According 
to self-reports, all participants had no history of neurological 
or psychiatric illness, had normal or corrected-to-normal 
vision, and gave informed consent trough a protocol 
reviewed by the ENSC-IMS (Ecole Nationale Supérieur de 
Cognitique – Intégration du Matériau su Systéme) Cognitive 
and UMA-BCI teams.  
B. Data acquisition and Signal Processing 
The EEG was recorded using the electrode positions: Fz, 
Cz, Pz, Oz, P3, P4, PO7 and PO8, according to the 10/20 
international system. All channels were referenced to the 
right earlobe, using FPz as ground. 
The EEG was amplified through a 16 channel biosignal 
amplifier gUSBamp (Guger Technologies). The amplifier 
settings were from 0.5 Hz to 100 Hz for the band-pass filter, 
the notch (50 Hz) was on, and the sensitivity was 500 μV. 
The EEG was then digitized at a rate of 256 Hz. EEG data 
collection and processing were controlled by the UMA-BCI 
Speller software [12], a BCI speller application developed 
by the UMA-BCI group which provides end users with an 
easy to use open source P300 speller. This software is based 
on the widely used platform BCI2000 [13] so, it takes 
advantage of the reliability that such a platform offers. The 
UMA-BCI Speller wraps BCI2000 in such a way that its 
configuration and use is much more visual and easier. It 
supports two P300 stimulations: RCP and RSVP. Users can 
configure their speller more appropriately using characters, 
images or sound cues, and they can navigate through 
different layouts, thus opening the door to complex speller 
configurations. As with a P300 speller developed with 
BCI2000, a Stepwise Linear Discriminant Analysis 
(SWLDA) of the data was performed to obtain the weights 
for the P300 classifier and calculate the accuracy. 
C. The RSVP Paradigms 
As it was mentioned, three different RSVP paradigms 
were tested by participants. These paradigms were: i) Letters 
(L), ii) Pictures or Images (I) and iii) Famous Faces (FF), 
and are represented in Figure 1. Each RSVP paradigm 
consisted in 9 different stimuli. In the L paradigm, the used 
letters were A, B, C, E, L, M, O, R and S. Each image of the 
I paradigm was chosen taking into account that the image 
had to start with the same letter as the one used in the L 
paradigm. For example, the tree is “ARBRE” in French, 
starting with the letter “A”. Boat is “BATEAU” in French, 
starting with the letter “B”. Bell is “CLOCHE” in French, 
starting with the letter “C”. For the FF paradigm, the chosen 
criterion was the same; the family name had to start with the 
same letter of the L paradigm: Woody Allen for letter “A”, 
Beyoncé for letter “B”, Hilary Clinton for letter “C”, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

                (a)                                             (b) 
  
 
 
                                            (c) 
 
 
Figure 1.  Spelling paradigms used in the experiment: a) Letters (L), b) 
Images (I) and c) Famous Faces (FF). 
 
 
For all the RSVP paradigms, a Stimulus Onset 
Asynchrony (SOA) of 300 ms and an Inter-Stimulus 
Interval (ISI) of 100 ms were used, so each stimulus was 
presented for 200 ms. Each trial included 9 flashes, and the 
duration of a trial was 2.7 s (9 x 300ms). A 5s pause was 
established between each selection. The flashing stimuli 
were presented in the center of the screen. Although not all 
the stimuli in each paradigm had the same dimension 
(depending on the Letter, Images or Famous Faces), Letters 
had a size around 3 cm × 4 cm, Images around 12 cm × 8.5 
cm and Famous Faces around 6 cm × 8.5 cm. 
D. Procedure 
Participants sat at a distance of, approximately, 60 cm 
from the screen. Each participant participated in one session 
to evaluate the three RSVP paradigms. The order of the 
paradigms was counterbalanced across participants. Each 
session consisted of a calibration phase and a copy-spelling 
phase.   
We used two four letters words for calibration purpose, 
having a total of 8 characters per paradigm, with a short 
break between words (variable at the request of the user). 
During the calibration phase, there were 10 trials so, each 
symbol (i.e., letters, images or famous faces) flashed 10 
times. The user was asked to mentally count the number of 
occurrences (10) of the target, always fixating the center of 
the screen. The writing time for each selection in this phase 
was 32s (2.7 s per trial X 10 trials + 5 s pause). The specific 
words were: “MARE” and “CLOS”. If for the Letter 
paradigm, the target was easy to identify, for the Image and 
the Famous Face paradigms, each target was signaled before 
the beginning of the trial flashes. In this phase, there was no 
feedback, and the recorded EEG was used to train the 
classifier. 
The copy-spelling phase started after the calibration and 
training of the classifier. In this phase, the number of trials 
used to select a target was dependent of the offline 
classification accuracies. The used criterion was that the 
number of trials should be two trials more than the minimum 
number of trials required to obtain 100% accuracy in the 
calibration phase. In the copy-spelling phase, participants 
had to spell three four letters French words: “MALE” (male), 
“ROSE” (rose) and “BOLS” (bowls). In case of incorrect 
selection, the participants were instructed not to correct and 
to continue with the next target. During this phase, the 
selected symbols was shown at the top of the screen. 
E. Evaluation 
Three parameters were used to evaluate the effect of the 
RSVP paradigm and stimulus type on the performance: i) 
the accuracy in the calibration phase, ii) the accuracy in the 
copy-spelling phase  (i.e., the number of correct selections 
divided by the total number of characters, that is, 9) and iii) 
the information transfer rate (ITR, bits/min) based on the 
next formula [14].  
 
ITR = {log2 N + P log2 P + (1 - P) log2 [(1 – P)/(N - 1)]}/T 
 
where P denotes the classification accuracy, N denotes the 
number of target (N was 9 in this experiment) and T denotes 
the time interval per selection (that is, the number of 
sequences to select a symbol in the copy-spelling phase). 
It should be advised that the pause between selections 
was not considered to calculate the ITR.  
Due to the small sample size, non-parametric analyses 
were carried out. Due to the preliminary nature of the 
present study, no correction method was applied for 
multiple comparisons. Thus, the obtained conclusions 
should be considered carefully, being admitted that more 
tests will be necessary to carry out, increasing the number of 
participants and the number of characters in the copy-
spelling phase. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Figure 2 shows the mean classification accuracy achieved 
by users for each RSVP paradigm, as a function of the 
sequences (due to the small simple size, statistical 
significance is not considered), in the calibration phase.  
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

 
Figure 2.  Classification accuracy (mean ± standard error) of the three 
RSVP paradigms as a function of the number of sequences during 
calibration (L: Letter RSVP paradigm; I: Image RSVP paradigm; FF 
Famous Faces RSVP paradigm). 
 
Despite the low number of users, these preliminary 
results show some trends that are worth to be mentioned. The 
I (Image) paradigm seems to require a lower number of 
sequences to get high classification accuracy. This paradigm 
starts with 72.5%, and achieves 97.5% in only three 
sequences. However, the other two paradigms need a higher 
number of sequences to get similar accuracy. Specifically, 
the FF (Famous Face) paradigm starts with the lowest 
performance in the first sequence (67.5%), but it gradually 
improves until it achieves 97.5% in the fourth sequences. 
Regarding the conventional RSVP paradigm, that is, the L 
(letter) paradigm, it starts with 75%, but needed 8 sequences 
to get 97.5% of accuracy. In this sense, in spite of the 
number of subjects is rather small, it is important to notice a 
sign of superiority of the I and FF paradigms compare to the 
L paradigm, requiring a much lower number of sequences to 
achieve good performance during the calibration phase. 
Figure 3 and Figure 4 show, respectively, the mean 
classification accuracy and the ITR achieved by users for 
each RSVP paradigm, in the copy-spelling phase. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Classification accuracy (mean ± standard error) of the three 
RSVP paradigms during copy-spelling phase (L: Letter RSVP paradigm; I: 
Image RSVP paradigm; FF Famous Faces RSVP paradigm). 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Information Transfer Rate (ITR; mean ± standard error) of the 
three RSVP paradigms (L: Letter RSVP paradigm; I: Image RSVP 
paradigm; FF Famous Faces RSVP paradigm). 
 
 
Classification accuracy and ITR are two important 
parameters to measure the performance of a BCI system. 
Regarding the classification accuracy during the copy-
spelling phase, even though the mean classification 
accuracies obtained in the three paradigms are high, we 
observe some differences. If the I paradigm was the best 
classified during the calibration phase, in the copy-spelling 
phase it has been the paradigm with the lowest classification 
accuracy, being the obtained values: 91.66%, 94.99% and 
96.62% of the I, L and FF paradigms, respectively. These 
classification accuracies combined with the number of 
sequences required in the calibration phase to obtain good 
performance, allow to reach the ITR showed in Figure 4. The 
mean ITR of the FF paradigm (12.43 bits min-1) was very 
similar to the ITR of the I paradigm (12.16 bits min-1) and 
both higher than the L paradigm (10.39 bits min-1), getting an 
improvement in the ITR of 2.04 bits min-1 and 1.77 bits min-1 
for the FF and the I paradigms, respectively. 
In the literature, there are some studies which try to 
improve the ITR of an RSVP speller system even achieving 
better results than those obtained in the present work. For 
example, in [14], the authors propose a P300 BCI speller 
based on the triple RSVP paradigm, stimulating characters 
every 250ms. This high frequency of stimulation (4 Hz) 
allows to obtain an ITR of 20.259 bits/min. In our study, 
each stimulus is presented each 300ms, decreasing the ITR. 
In this sense, it is important to mention that the main 
objective of our study was to compare three different 
paradigm presentations. The next step, could be to reduce the 
time presentation in order to increase the ITR. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The present preliminary study about the effect of 
different sets of flashing stimuli using an RSVP speller has 
shown some trends that should be further explored in future 
proposals. The main finding is that the use of images and 
famous faces could improve the ITR compared to a classical 
RSVP paradigm based on letters. Moreover, it would be 
necessary to increase the number of symbols in the copy-
spelling phase and to use a larger sample of participants in 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

order to carry out statistical comparison and to obtain 
stronger results and conclusions. 
ACKOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the project 
SICCAU: 
RTI2018-100912-B-I00 
(MCIU/AEI/FEDER, 
UE), 
by 
the 
project 
LICCOM: 
DPI2015-67064-R 
(MINECO/FEDER, UE), and by the University of Malaga. 
Moreover, the authors would like to thank all participants for 
their cooperation. This work has been carried out in a 
framework agreement between the University of Málaga and 
the University of Bordeaux (Bordeaux INP). 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D. J. McFarland, G. 
Pfurtscheller, and T. M. Vaughan, “Brain-computer 
interfaces 
for 
communication 
and 
control,” 
Clin. 
Neurophysiol., vol. 113 (6), pp. 767–791, 2002. 
[2] D. J. Krusienski, E. W. Sellers, D. J. McFarland, T. M.  
Vaughan, and J. R. Wolpaw, “Toward enhanced P300 
speller performance,” Journal of neuroscience methods, 
167(1), pp. 15-21, 2008. 
[3] L. A. Farwell and E. Donchin, “Talking off the top of 
your head: toward a mental prosthesis utilizing event-
related brain potentials,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. 
Neurophysiol., vol. 70 (6), pp. 510–523, 1988. 
[4] K. Takano, T. Komatsu, N. Hata, Y. Nakajima, and K. 
Kansaku, “Visual stimuli for the P300 brain-computer 
interface: a comparison of white/gray and green/blue 
flicker matrices,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 120 (8), pp. 
1562–1566, 2009. 
[5] T. Kaufmann, S. M. Schulz, C. Grünzinger, and A. 
Kübler, “Flashing characters with famous faces improves 
ERP-based 
brain–computer 
interface 
performance,” 
Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 8 (5), pp. 56016, 
2011. 
[6] Q. Li, S. Liu, J. Li, and O. Bai, “Use of a green familiar 
faces paradigm improves P300-speller brain-computer 
interface performance,” PLoS One. 10, pp. 1–15, 2015. 
[7] A. Fernández-Rodríguez, F. Velasco-Álvarez, and R. 
Ron-Angevin, “Evaluation of a P300 Brain-Computer 
Interface Using Different Sets of Flashing Stimuli,” The 
Third International Conference on Neuroscience and 
Cognitive Brain Information (BRAININFO2018) IARIA, 
Jun. 2018, pp. 1–4, ISSN: 2519-8653, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-649-1.  
[8] M. S. Treder and B. Blankertz, “Covert attention and 
visual speller design in an ERP-based brain-computer 
interface,” Behav. Brain Funct., vol. 6 (28), 2010. 
[9] P. Brunner et al., “Does the "P300" speller depend on eye 
gaze?,” J Neural Eng. vol. 7(5): 056013, 2010. 
[10] L. Acqualagna, M. S. Treder, M. Schreuder, and B. 
Blankertz, “A Novel Brain-Computer Interface Based on 
the Rapid Serial Visual Presentation Paradigm,” Proc. 
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 
(EMBC’10), 2010, DOI: 10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5626548. 
[11] L. Chen et al., “Exploring combinations of different color 
and facial expression stimuli for gaze-independent BCIs,” 
Front. 
Comput. 
Neurosci., 
doi: 
10.3389/fncom.2016.00005, 2016. 
[12] F. Velasco-Álvarez et. al, “UMA-BCI speller: an easily 
configurable P300 speller tool for end user,” Computer 
Methods 
and 
Programs 
in 
Biomedicine. 
doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.02.015, 2019.   
[13] G. Schalk, D. J. McFarland, T. Hinterberger, N. 
Birbaumer, and J. R. Wolpaw, “BCI2000: a general-
purpose brain-computer interface (BCI) system,” IEEE 
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 51 (6), pp. 
1034–1043, 2004.  
[14] Z. Lin, C. Zhang, Y. Zeng, L. Tong, and B. Yan, “A novel 
P300 BCI speller based on the triple RSVP paradigm,” 
Scientific Reports 8 (3350), 2018. 
 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

