Study on the Relationship between Postprandial Brain Function Decline and  
Blood Glucose Levels  
 
Yuichi Sato, Yudai Ishikawa, Gaochao Cui, Kosuke Nagano, Fumiya Kinoshita, Hideaki Touyama 
Toyama Prefectural University, Information Systems Engineering  
Laboratory of Human Information  
Imizushi, Japan 
e-mail: u155014@st.pu-toyama.ac.jp, u255004@st.pu-toyama.ac.jp, cuigaochao@pu-toyama.ac.jp,  
u055016@st.pu-toyama.ac.jp, f.kinoshita@pu-toyama.ac.jp, touyama@pu-toyama.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— Post-lunch drowsiness, also known as Post-Lunch 
Dip (PLD), is a symptom of impaired brain function. Currently, 
the hypothesis that PLD is caused by an increase in 
postprandial blood glucose level is supported as a possible 
explanation for the mechanism of PLD. However, few studies 
have examined the relationship between postprandial brain 
dysfunction and blood glucose levels by measuring both 
simultaneously. In this study, we measured blood glucose levels 
and 
Event-Related 
Potential 
(ERP) 
before 
and 
after 
consumption of two foods with different carbohydrate contents, 
and examined the relationship between postprandial blood 
glucose fluctuations and PLD. In the high-sugar food ingestion 
group, two slices of bread and water were given, and the low-
sugar ingestion group received low-carbohydrate bread and 
water. The results showed that the high-sugar food ingestion 
group had increased sleepiness, prolonged P300 latency, and 
increased early and late contingent negative variation 
amplitudes at 40 minutes postprandial ingestion. There were 
no significant differences in sleepiness, brain function, or blood 
glucose levels in the low-sugar ingestion group. In contrast, 
there was a significant increase in blood glucose levels 
immediately and 40 minutes after eating in the high-sugar food 
ingestion group resulting in brain function impairment. 
Therefore, it is suggested the postprandial increase in blood 
glucose level is related to the development of PLD. In addition, 
the blood glucose levels at 40 minutes after eating in the high-
sugar food ingestion group were significantly lower after ERP 
measurement than before ERP measurement. This suggests 
PLD occurs during hyperglycemia and when blood glucose 
levels fall.  
Keywords-Post-Lunch Dip (PLD); Event-Related Potential 
(ERP); P300; Contingent Negative Variation (CNV); Blood 
Glucose Level. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The transient decline in brain function caused by Post 
Lunch Dip (PLD) [1] has been highlighted as a possible 
cause of human error [2][3], and it is important to establish 
optimal intervention methods and prevention techniques 
against PLD. In recent years, research hypotheses that link 
postprandial 
brain 
dysfunction 
and 
blood 
glucose 
fluctuations have attracted attention as a possible explanation 
for the pathogenesis of PLD. Although the explanation of 
blood glucose spikes [4] and neuropeptide inhibition [5] are 
representative examples, neither hypothesis has been widely 
recognized as a research hypothesis explaining the 
mechanism of PLD yet, because the evidence for each 
hypothesis is insufficient. One of the reasons for this is that 
there have been few cases in which the decline in brain 
function due to postprandial sleepiness has been evaluated 
using quantitative indices. Therefore, our research group 
focused on electrophysiological responses using event-
related potentials, a type of electroencephalogram (EEG), as 
a quantitative evaluation index for PLD and conducted 
empirical experiments [6]. In addition to the basic rhythmic 
components of the EEG, such as alpha and beta waves, there 
is Event-Related Potential (ERP), which is induced by 
specific stimuli. Among ERPs, P300 and Contingent 
Negative Variation (CNV) are used to evaluate cognitive 
function and attention [7]. Our empirical experiments 
confirmed that simultaneous measurement of P300 and CNV 
is an effective objective measure of transient deterioration of 
brain function, fatigue, and sleep in PLD. Recently, however, 
Continuous Glucose Monitoring (CGM) devices have 
emerged that can measure blood glucose levels over time 
with a single puncture. CGM devices can continuously 
record the concentration of glucose in the interstitial fluid, 
which is highly correlated with blood glucose levels, using a 
sensor implanted in the subcutaneous tissue [8]. The CGM 
measures the glucose concentration in the interstitial fluid by 
changing the current in the enzymatic method. It has been 
highlighted that glucose in the interstitial fluid is slow to 
follow rapid fluctuations in blood glucose levels [9]. 
However, CGM has attracted attention as a simple and 
powerful tool for preventing blood glucose-related diseases 
because it enables monitoring of blood glucose levels over 
time. 
Therefore, in this study, we investigated the relationship 
between postprandial blood glucose changes and PLD by 
recording blood glucose levels, P300, and CNV before and 
after consumption of high and low carbohydrate foods over 
time. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the experimental protocol and the issues arising 
from the ERP. Section III describes the P300 and CNV 
analysis methods. Section IV describes the experimental 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
BRAININFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

results. Section V goes into more detail regarding the 
relationship between postprandial brain dysfunction and 
blood glucose fluctuations. Section VI provides a summary 
of this paper. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE 
In this study, experiments were conducted on three 
groups: 1) A high-sugar food ingestion group, 2) A water-
only control group, and 3) A low-sugar food ingestion group. 
All participants were young and healthy with no history of 
neurological disease. The high-sugar food ingestion group 
comprised 20 participants (Mean ± SD, 21.50 ± 0.86 years), 
the control group comprised 10 participants (Mean ± SD, 
22.5 ± 0.85 years), and the low-sugar food ingestion group 
comprised 10 participants (Mean ± SD, 21.80 ± 1.16 years). 
The participants were thoroughly informed about the 
experiment, and their consent was obtained. This experiment 
was approved by the Ethics Committee of Toyama 
Prefectural University [R3-6]. 
The measurement items used in this experiment were 
P300, CNV, electro-oculography, the Stanford Sleepiness 
Scale (SSS), and reaction time from stimulus presentation to 
pressing the button switch. Subjects were instructed to press 
the button switch with their dominant hand. Blood glucose 
levels were measured in subjects who belonged to the high-
sugar food ingestion group and the low-sugar food ingestion 
group. Blood glucose levels were measured in 10 subjects 
(Mean ± SD, 21.80 ± 1.16 years) in the high-sugar food 
ingestion group and in all subjects in the low-sugar food 
ingestion group. A FreeStyle Libre (Abbott Japan LLC), a 
CGM device, was used to reduce the measurement burden on 
subjects and to minimize measurement error due to needle 
puncture position. CGM records the glucose concentration in 
the interstitial fluid, not the blood glucose concentration. 
However, since the glucose concentration in the interstitial 
fluid has been reported to have a high correlation with the 
blood glucose concentration, the glucose concentration in the 
interstitial fluid is hereafter referred to as the blood glucose 
level. The sensor for measuring blood glucose was attached 
to the side of the upper arm opposite the dominant hand of 
each subject. 
A g.USBamp (g.tec medical engineering GmbH, Austria) 
was used to measure biological signals. The sampling 
frequency of the measurement device was 512 Hz, and a 
low-pass filter of 0.01 Hz, a high-pass filter of 30 Hz, and a 
notch filter of 60 Hz were applied for noise reduction. Based 
on the extended 10–20 method, the electrode positions for 
the EEG were Cz, which are the predominant areas of CNV, 
and Pz, which is the predominant area of P300, with AFz as 
the ground electrode and the left earlobe as the reference 
electrode. To exclude electrical noise associated with 
blinking, electrodes were affixed above and below the left 
eye, and the electro-oculogram was measured. To eliminate 
artifacts based on spatial independence, EEG measurements 
were also taken for Fz, F1, F2, C1, C2, P1, and P2. 
The experimental protocol is shown in Figure 1. Four 
ERP measurements were taken before (pre-consumption), 
immediately after (Post 1), 40 min after (Post 2), and 80 min 
after (Post 3) the meal, and the SSS was administered before 
each measurement. Blood glucose levels were measured 
once before and after each ERP measurement, and the mean 
value was used as the representative value at each 
measurement time. A previous study reported that intense 
sleepiness occurs after ingestion of high-sugar foods [10]. 
Therefore, the dietary load used in the high-sugar food 
ingestion group was white bread (two x 20 mm thick slices) 
and water (285 ml), which has a high glycemic index (GI) 
value indicating the increase in blood glucose levels due to 
 different foods [11]. The control group received only 
water (285 ml). The low-sugar food ingestion group was 
given low-sugar bread (approximately 120 g) and water (285 
ml) to control for food ingestion and dietary content, and to 
manipulate the carbohydrate content of the food. The total 
carbohydrate content of the bread in the high-sugar food 
ingestion group was approximately 63 g and the low-sugar 
food ingestion group was approximately 22 g. Eating and 
drinking were prohibited two hours prior to the start of the 
experiment, as well as the use of electronic devices, 
excessive exercise, eating, drinking, and sleeping outside of 
the measurement time. 
The oddball paradigm and the CNV paradigm are widely 
used for P300-evoked and CNV-evoked tasks, respectively. 
In the oddball paradigm, subjects were randomly presented 
with two types of stimuli with different presentation 
frequencies and were asked to respond only to the stimulus 
presented at a lower frequency [6]. The CNVs were elicited 
by presenting the second stimulus (S2) 3–7 seconds after the 
first stimulus (S1) and requesting a possible behavioral 
response to S2. In this study, to measure P300 and CNV 
simultaneously, we employed two types of stimuli for S2 in 
the CNV paradigm: low-frequency and high-frequency 
stimuli (see Figure 2). S1 was a pure tone at 1,000 Hz, 
presented as an auditory stimulus through an earphone 
attached to the subject's ear; S2 was a visual stimulus 
presented through an LCD placed 60 cm in front of the 
subject. The visual stimuli were "A" and "B" images in the 
center of the LCD screen as the low-frequency and high-
frequency stimuli, respectively. Participants were instructed 
to quickly press a button switch for the low-frequency 
stimulus. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Experiment protocol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Experimental paradigm 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
BRAININFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

III. 
ANALYSIS METHOD 
A. P300 Analysis 
A 0.5–7 Hz bandpass filter was applied to the EEG data 
at Pz. EEG and electro-oculogram data were then extracted 
for five seconds before and after the stimulus presentation 
(10 seconds in total) during each target stimulus. The 
InfoMax ICA algorithm [12] was applied to the EEG data to 
remove artifacts associated with blinking, and components 
with correlation coefficients greater than ± 0.6 with the 
electro-oculogram during the same time period were 
excluded. Finally, the baseline was corrected by subtracting 
the average voltage value during the 0.25 s before the 
presentation of the target stimulus. In the data of each EEG 
during target stimulation, we performed additive averaging, 
excluding trials in which the button switch was pressed 
incorrectly and where the voltage value exceeded ± 75 µV in 
the interval from 0.2 s before to 0.8 s after the presentation of 
the target stimulus. In this study, we identified the positive 
peak above 2.5 µV that appeared 0.2–0.6 s after presentation 
of the target stimulus as P300, and derived the P300 latency. 
The calculated P300 latencies were compared using the 
Wilcoxon signed-rank test for each value before and after 
feeding. The significance level was set at p < 0.05. A typical 
waveform of P300 measured in the same subject is shown in 
Figure 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Typical waveform of P300 for one participant: 
(a) high-sugar food ingestion group, (b) control group, 
(c) low-sugar food ingestion group 
 
B. CNV Analysis 
For CNV derivation, EEG and EOG data at Cz from four 
seconds before S1 presentation to four seconds after S2 
presentation (total 10 seconds) were extracted. To remove 
artifacts caused by blinking, the extracted EEG data were 
component decomposed with InfoMax ICA, and independent 
components with an absolute correlation coefficient of 0.7 or 
higher with the electro-oculogram at the same time were 
removed and reconstructed. The EEG data, excluding the 
effect of blinking, were baseline corrected by subtracting the 
average amplitude of 0.25 seconds before S1 presentation. 
For each of the above processed EEG data, an additive 
average was performed by excluding trials in which no 
button presses were observed within 0.5 seconds and trials in 
which the amplitude exceeded ±75 μV. In this study, the 
interval from 0.4 to 0.8 seconds after S1 presentation was 
defined as early CNV, and the interval from one second 
before S2 presentation to one second after S2 presentation as 
late CNV, and the mean amplitudes of these intervals were 
derived for each subject [13]. The mean amplitudes of the 
calculated CNVs were compared before and after feeding 
using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test for each value. The 
significance level was set at p < 0.05. A typical waveform of 
CNV measured in the same subject is shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Typical waveform of P300 for one participant: 
(a) high-sugar food ingestion group, (b) control group, 
(c) low-sugar food ingestion group 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
BRAININFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

IV. 
RESULTS 
Figure 5 shows the change over time of the mean value 
of each analytical index for all subjects. 
The mean value of the SSS in the high-sugar food 
ingestion group was 2.5 for pre-intake, and significantly 
increased to 3.2 in Post 2 (p < 0.05). In the mean values of 
the SSS in the low-sugar food ingestion and control groups, 
there was no significant difference between the pre- and 
post-intake values when compared using Wilcoxon's signed 
rank test for the pre- and post-intake values, respectively. 
Next, the mean reaction time from visual stimulus 
presentation to button press in the high-sugar food ingestion 
group was approximately 0.3 seconds at all measurement 
times, and the Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed no 
significant difference between the pre- and postprandial 
values. In the mean reaction time from visual stimulus 
presentation to button press in the low-sugar food ingestion 
group and the control group, a comparison using Wilcoxon's 
signed-rank test between the pre- and postprandial values 
showed no significant difference between them. Two out of 
10 subjects in the low-sugar food ingestion group were 
excluded from the analysis because the button switch did not 
work properly. 
Next, the mean value of P300 latency in the high-sugar 
food ingestion group was approximately 0.33 seconds for 
pre-intake, but was significantly longer in Post 2, 
approximately 0.36 seconds (p < 0.05). In the mean value of 
P300 latency in the low-sugar food ingestion and control 
groups, there was no significant difference between pre and 
post-intake when compared using Wilcoxon's signed rank 
test for each value in the pre- and post-intake groups. 
Next, the mean amplitude of the preprimary CNV in the 
high-sugar food ingestion group was approximately -2.5 μV 
for the pre-intake, but significantly increased to about -1.1 
μV in Post 2 (p < 0.05). In the mean amplitude of the early 
CNV in the low-sugar food ingestion and control groups, 
there was no significant difference between the pre- and 
post-intake values when compared using Wilcoxon's signed 
rank test for each value in the pre- and post-intake groups. 
Next, the mean amplitude of late CNV in the high-sugar 
food ingestion group was approximately -5.2 μV for pre-
intake, but significantly increased to about -2.9 μV in Post 2 
(p < 0.05). In the mean amplitude of late CNV in the low-
sugar food ingestion and control groups, there was no 
significant difference between pre- and post-intake values 
when compared using Wilcoxon's signed rank test for each 
value in the pre- and post-intake groups. 
The mean blood glucose level in the high-sugar food 
ingestion group was 97 mg/dL for pre-intake, but 
significantly increased to 114 mg/dL in Post 1 and 145 
mg/dL in Post 2 (p < 0.05). Blood glucose levels in Post 2 
were significantly higher than those in Post 1 and Post 3 (p < 
0.05) (see Figure 6). The mean values of blood glucose in the 
low-sugar food ingestion group showed no significant 
difference between the pre- and postprandial values using 
Wilcoxon's signed rank test. 
In Post 1, blood glucose significantly increased from 99.7 
mg/dL before ERP measurement to 128.8 mg/dL after ERP 
measurement (p < 0.05). The blood glucose level decreased 
significantly from 152.7 mg/dL before ERP measurement (p 
< 0.05) (see Figure 7).  
The mean blood glucose level of all subjects in the low-
sugar food ingestion group was 92.5 mg/dL after ERP 
measurement compared to 99.1 mg/dL before ERP 
measurement in Post 2, showing a significant decrease in 
blood glucose level (p < 0.05) (see Figure 7).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
BRAININFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Change over time in each analytical index (Mean ± SE), 
(a) stanford sleepiness scale, (b) reaction time, (c) P300 latency, 
(d) amplitude of early CNV; (e) amplitude of late CNV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Change over time in blood glucose level (Mean ± SE) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Blood glucose level before and after ERP measurement (Mean ± 
SE);(a) High-sugar food ingestion group, (b) Low-sugar food 
ingestion group 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Recent research hypotheses that link postprandial brain 
dysfunction to fluctuations in blood glucose levels have been 
proposed to explain the pathogenesis of PLD, and have 
attracted much attention. Although blood glucose spikes and 
neuropeptide inhibition are representative examples of such 
hypotheses, the mechanism of PLD remains to be elucidated. 
This is due to the fact that there have been few cases in 
which the decline in brain function caused by postprandial 
sleepiness has been evaluated using quantitative indices, and 
where brain function and blood glucose levels before and 
after eating have been recorded simultaneously. In this study, 
we investigated the relationship between postprandial brain 
function decline and blood glucose level fluctuations by 
measuring ERP and blood glucose levels before and after 
consumption of two foods with different carbohydrate 
contents. 
In the high-sugar food ingestion group that consumed 
white bread, a high GI food, there was an increase in the 
subjective sleepiness score, prolonged P300 latency, and 
increased early and late CNV amplitude in Post 2 compared 
to pre-intake. In addition, blood glucose levels measured at 
the same time were significantly increased in the high-sugar 
food ingestion group in Post 1 and Post 2 compared to pre-
intake. In contrast, there were no significant changes in any 
of the parameters in the low-sugar food ingestion group 
before and after the meal. In 1990, Pivonka et al. evaluated 
postprandial sleepiness after consumption of high-sugar 
beverages and water using the SSS [14]. The results showed 
that the group that consumed high-sugar beverages had 
significantly increased values on the SSS compared to the 
group that consumed only water. This is consistent with the 
results of this study, in which PLD was observed only in the 
high-sugar food ingestion group with significantly increased 
blood glucose levels. In 2019, Ogata et al. also fed 20 
university students with high- or low-GI foods and compared 
the number of students who fell asleep during lectures after 
lunch [15]. Ogata et al. also recorded blood glucose levels 
after lunch using a CGM, similar to this study. The results 
showed that blood glucose levels increased significantly 
when students consumed low-GI foods compared to when 
they consumed high-GI foods. In contrast, the number of 
students who dozed off during the lecture after lunch did not 
change even when the GI values of the foods were varied. 
However, Ogata et al. used the presence or absence of 
nodding off during lectures as an evaluation index for post-
lunch sleepiness, and did not use a quantitative index to 
evaluate the post-lunch decline in brain function. In this 
study, in addition to the subjective questionnaire and blood 
glucose level, we measured ERPs, which were suggested to 
be useful as quantitative evaluation indices for postprandial 
brain function decline. As a result, ERP fluctuated 
significantly with a significant increase in blood glucose 
level only when high GI foods were consumed, confirming 
the decline in brain function. Therefore, this study’s use of a 
quantitative evaluation index for postprandial decline in 
brain function provides new results that support the research 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
BRAININFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

hypothesis that postprandial blood glucose fluctuations affect 
brain function. 
In the high-sugar food ingestion group, there was a 
significant increase in blood glucose levels in Post 1 and Post 
2 compared to pre-intake. However, increased subjective 
sleepiness and decreased brain function were not observed in 
Post 1, but only in Post 2. One of the major research 
hypotheses explaining the mechanism of PLD is the 
explanation by neuropeptide inhibition, which is a 
neuropeptide that regulates arousal level. One of the major 
research hypotheses to explain the mechanism of PLD, the 
explanation by suppression of neuropeptides, proposes that 
PLD is caused by the suppressed secretion of orexin, a 
neuropeptide that controls arousal level [5]. It is known that 
orexin secretion is inhibited in response to the degree of 
blood glucose elevation [16]. Therefore, the inhibitory effect 
of orexin is small at the degree of elevation of blood glucose 
level that occurred in Post 1 of this study, and it is 
considered that brain function did not decrease. 
In addition, to investigate the tendency of blood glucose 
fluctuation during ERP measurement, blood glucose levels 
before and after ERP measurement were compared in this 
study. The results showed a significant increase in blood 
glucose levels before and after ERP measurement in Post 1, 
and a significant decrease in blood glucose levels before and 
after ERP measurement in Post 2 in the high-sugar food 
ingestion group. Therefore, PLD is thought to occur when 
blood glucose levels fall, not when they rise. The blood 
glucose spike explanation is a research hypothesis which 
posits that PLD is caused by the secretion of melatonin, 
which has hypnotic effects, in association with the additional 
secretion of insulin in response to the postprandial rise in 
blood glucose [4]. In other words, in the blood glucose spike 
explanation, PLD is thought to occur from the peak to the 
fall of blood glucose levels, when insulin secretion is 
prominent. In this study, PLD was also observed in Post 2, 
when blood glucose levels tended to decrease, and these 
experimental results support the blood glucose spike 
explanation. However, even in the low-sugar food ingestion 
group, where brain function did not decline after 
consumption, a significant decrease in blood glucose levels 
was observed before and after ERP measurement in Post 2. 
Therefore, it is possible that the postprandial decline in brain 
function does not necessarily occur when blood glucose 
levels fall, but rather when blood glucose levels fall after a 
postprandial increase to a high level. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
To elucidate the pathogenesis of PLD, it is important to 
establish a quantitative evaluation index to assess brain 
dysfunction caused by eating. Currently, the hypothesis that 
PLD is caused by an increase in postprandial blood glucose 
level is sup-ported as a possible explanation for the 
pathogenesis of PLD. However, few studies have 
simultaneously measured postprandial brain dysfunction 
and blood glucose levels, and examined the relationship 
between the two. In this study, we measured blood glucose 
levels and ERP before and after consumption of two types 
of foods with different carbohydrate contents, and examined 
the relationship between postprandial blood glucose 
fluctuations and PLD. 
The results showed that the SSS values increased 
significantly in the high-sugar food ingestion group in Post 
2 compared to pre-intake. The SSS significantly in-creased 
in Post 2. The P300 latency was significantly prolonged in 
Post 2, and the early and late CNV amplitudes were 
significantly increased in Post 2. However, in the control 
group without food, there were no significant changes in 
any of the parameters before or after drinking. Therefore, 
P300 and CNV are highly useful as quantitative indices to 
evaluate the transient decline in brain function caused by 
PLD. There were no significant differences in subjective 
sleepiness, brain function, or blood glucose levels before 
and after eating in the low-sugar food ingestion group. In 
contrast, there was a significant increase in blood glucose 
levels in the high-sugar food ingestion group with impaired 
brain function in Post 1 and Post 2 compared to pre-, and a 
peak increase in blood glucose levels was observed in Post 2. 
Therefore, it was suggested that the postprandial rise in 
blood glucose was related to the expression of PLD. In the 
Post 2 blood glucose levels in the high-sugar food ingestion 
group, there was a significant decrease after ERP 
measurement compared to before ERP measurement. This 
suggests that PLD occurs during hyperglycemia and when 
blood glucose levels fall. 
In the future, we will investigate the relationship between 
blood glucose and brain function decline in detail, such as 
when moderate GI foods are consumed and when multiple 
foods are consumed. If we can clarify the conditions under 
which PLD is induced by blood glucose levels, it will be 
possible to estimate the amount of food consumed and the 
way of eating that reduces the decline in performance after a 
meal. These research results can be applied to various fields, 
such as sports science and nutritional science. Furthermore, 
we aim to establish systematic evaluation criteria for PLD 
and transient decline in brain function by conducting 
continuous experiments using the number of chews and the 
amount of food consumed as factors. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Craig, “Acute effects of meals on perceptual and cognitive 
efficiency,” Nutrition Reviews. vol. 44(3), pp. 163–171, 1986. 
[2] J. Rutenfranz and W. P. Colquhoun, “Circadian rhythms in 
human performance, Scandinavian journal of work,” 
environment & health, vol. 5(3), pp. 167–177, 1979. 
[3] S. Garbarino, L. Nobili, M. Beelke, F. De Carli, and F. 
Ferrillo, “The Contributing Role of Sleepiness in Highway 
Vehicle Accident,” Sleep, vol. 24(2), pp. 203–206 ,2001. 
[4] A. Afaghi, H. O'Connor, and C. M. Chow, “High-glycemic-
index carbohydrate meals shorten sleep onset,” The American 
journal of clinical nutrition, vol. 43(1), pp. 25–35, 2003. 
[5] L. A. Panossian and S. C. Veasey, “Daytime Sleepiness in 
Obesity: Mechanisms Beyond Obstructive” Sleep Apnea—A 
Review. Sleep, vol. 35(5), pp .605–615,2012. 
[6] K. Nagano, K. Fumiya, amd T. Hideaki, “Quantitative 
Evaluation 
of 
Post-Lunch 
Dip 
Using 
Event-Related 
Potential,” Journal of Advanced Computational Intelligence 
and Intelligent Informatics, vol. 26(1), pp. 67–73, 2022.  
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
BRAININFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

[7] H. Nittono, “Event-related potentials (ERPs) and cognitive 
activity: A new perspective from engineering psychology,” 
Behavioral science research, vol. 42(1),pp.  25–35, 2003. 
[8] T. Bailey, B. W. Bode, M. P. Christiansen, L. J Klaff, and S. 
Alva, “The Performance and Usability of a Factory-Calibrated 
Flash Glucose Monitoring System,” Diabetes technology & 
therapeutics, vol. 17(11), pp. 787–794, 2015. 
[9] J. R. Castle and W. K. Ward, “Amperometric glucose sensors: 
Sources of error and potential benefit of redundancy,” Journal 
of diabetes science and technology, vol. 4(1), pp.221–
225 ,2010. 
[10] A. Smith, A. Ralph, and G. McNeill, “Influences of meal size 
on post-lunch changes in performance efficiency, mood, and 
cardiovascular function,” Appetite, vol. 16(2), pp. 85–91,1991. 
[11] K. Foster-Powell, S. H. Holt, and J. C. Brand-Miller, 
“International table of glycemic index and glycemic load 
values,” Am. J. Clin. Nutr, vol.  76(1), pp. 5–56, 2022. 
[12] A. Delorme and S. Makeig, “EEGLAB: An open source 
toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including 
independent component analysis, J. Neurosci. Methods, 
vol.134(1), pp. 9–21 2004. 
 
[13] A. Delorme and S. Makeig, “EEGLAB: An open source 
toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including 
independent component analysis, J. Neurosci. Methods, 
vol.134(1), pp. 9–21 2004. 
[14] Y. Nageishi, T. Shimura, and M. Shimokochi, “The Three 
Sub-Components of the Contingent Negative Variation,” 
Bulletin of The Faculty of Human Sciences Osaka University, 
vol. 10, pp. 225–243, 1991. 
[15] E. E. Pivonka and K. K Grunewald, “Aspartame- or sugar-
sweetened beverages: effects on mood in young women,” 
Journal of the American Dietetic Association, vol. 90(2), 
pp.250–255, 1990. 
[16] N. Ogata and K. Masaki, “Lunch suggestion for improving 
learning attitude in the afternoon. Annual report of the 
Institute of Living and Environmental,” Sciences,  vol. 51, pp. 
21–30, 2019. 
[17] T. Sakurai, The Science of Sleep. 2nd edn. Koudansha Ltd, 
Japan 2017. 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
BRAININFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

