Virtual Assistant for Healthy Aging: Benefits Perceived by Elders 
 
 
Magdalena Velciu  
Ana Aslan International Foundation  
Bucharest, Romania  
e-mail: magda.velciu@anaaslanacademy.ro  
 
Mircea Mărzan  
Ana Aslan International Foundation  
Bucharest, Romania  
e-mail: mdm@brainaging.ro 
 
Mariusz Kaczmarek  
Gdansk University of Technology  
Gdansk, Poland  
e-mail: mariusz.kaczmarek@eti.pg.edu.pl 
 
Alexey Andrushevich  
iHomeLab 
 Switzerland 
e-mail: Alexey.Andrushevich@ihomelab.ch  
 
Barry Teunissen,  
Livelife  
Netherlands 
e-mail: barryteunissen@icloud.com  
 
Luiza Spiru 
 Ana Aslan International Foundation 
 Bucharest, Romania 
 e-mail: lsaslan@brainaging.ro 
 
 
 
Abstract — We advocate for developing innovative products that 
help elderly people maintain their mental and physical health 
while aging, by enhancing their user experience. This article 
presents findings from our applied research activities which 
involve senior users throughout the development of elder-
friendly virtual technologies. We describe Ella4Life, an 
innovative solution that supports elderly people in improving 
their healthy aging and emphasizing the virtual assistant role 
for communication, interaction, staying informed, etc. The 
methodological approach is based on assessing the elderly 
requirements in terms of perceptions and their own 
representation of virtual assistance. We used a qualitative 
method for data collection, through focus group and in-depth 
interviews for identifying the requirements of the elders when 
facing a virtual assistant. Challenged with an innovative 
application including a virtual assistance, the elders gave us 
useful information about their expectations, the main findings 
being presented here. The involvement of elderly users living in 
different countries adds further value to our work with regard 
to the universal benefits gained from interacting with a virtual 
assistant and also offers useful insights for a better adaptation/ 
customization of the solutions for addressing their particular 
needs. 
Keywords- healthy and active aging, elderly user requirement, 
virtual assistant 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
In the upcoming years, the healthy brain aging needs to be 
considered from an interdisciplinary theoretical and practical 
perspective in order to understand the complex nature of 
processes of cognitive aging and to improve the quality of life. 
While researchers [1] emphasize new approaches for 
integrating perspectives across disciplines in the research for 
better understanding cognition, health, and aging, the impact 
of new technologies on aging well should also be better 
investigated. We have to develop new solutions and products 
that can improve people’s lives. For example, as new 
technologies emerge, the combination of appropriate online 
education and social communities could help patients cope 
better with Parkinson’s disease, promoting social inclusion 
and greater support for their wellbeing [2]. 
In the case of the elderly, virtual reality experiences 
enhance their communication and interaction taking place 
within a simulated environment, with auditory and visual 
feedback [3]. Stimulating interaction and communication 
skills are important because of their role in stimulating 
cognitive abilities. Also, virtual reality has applications in 
some areas of neuropsychology, psychotherapy, surgical 
education, post-stroke intervention, musculoskeletal recovery, 
pain mitigation, Alzheimer's disease [4]. 
There are emerging new technologies that could increase 
the effectiveness and quality of healthcare services across the 
world. 
The 
common 
thread 
between 
all 
digital 
implementations is that they all require human-machine 
interfaces [5]. The challenge is to design interfaces which will 
best fit the targeted users and enable smooth interaction, 
especially for the elderly users [6]. For instance, the idea of 
combining assistive technologies and personal help involving 
the social environment of people with dementia was well 
received by people with this condition [7].  On the other hand, 
it is important to provide easy to use friendly products with 
respect to multicultural differences. Even if in various 
European regions we have a different innovation performance 
score, according to the Regional Innovation Scoreboard, we 
have to better capitalize regional strengths that generate 
smarter public services [8] and focus on strengths and 
comparative advantages.  
A. The background and our contribution 
From the perspective of the innovative solution, it is 
important what benefits the product i.e. virtual assistant 
should provide. From the perspective of the people i.e. users, 
we have to focus on their behaviours, needs, and motivations. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

User-research has to be mainly about defining problems not 
about creating solutions [9]. All user-research work aims to 
place the people at the centre of their solutions to-be-
developed (user-centric approach). But beyond this, as 
products are increasingly being promoted internationally, the 
transnationally and intercultural usability issues become more 
important. Previous studies [10] evaluated the cross-cultural 
understanding of interface design and concluded that, for 
example, understanding of a website did indeed differ across 
people from various geographical regions i.e., North 
American, English, Japanese and Dutch users. 
Studies about older adults' experiences [11] confirm that 
virtual reality was reviewed positively, yet modifications are 
necessary in order to facilitate an optimal user experience and 
provide a potential benefit for this population segment. The 
work on virtual assistants designed for interacting with 
multicultural environments is still in its pioneering stage.  
This paper aims to highlight the benefits of using virtual 
assistance for healthy aging, tailored to multicultural 
environments, and to help remove barriers that potentially 
limit the benefits of great innovation. After the introduction, 
in Section 2, we present an innovative solution, Ella4Life 
including a virtual assistant, a cloud-centred platform 
supporting elderly persons to manage their health indicators, 
medication, chronic diseases, etc., combined with sensor-
based technology. In order to improve the usability of the 
product, in Section 3, we focus on assessing elderly user 
requirements, needs, and perceived benefits. The research has 
an attitudinal dimension meant to understand and assess the 
elderly stated beliefs and requirements. The methodology 
describes the method, the used tools, the group of participants 
living in four European countries (Romania, Poland, 
Switzerland and the Netherlands). Qualitative insights and 
results are presented. In Section 4, the conclusion reveals the 
main representations of elderly users challenged with the 
innovative application including virtual assistance. Their 
positive attitude boosts future work aiming at developing 
technological products in order to improve healthy brain 
aging.  
 
II. 
THE PROPOSED SOLUTION: A VIRTUAL ASSISTANT 
The project Ella4Life (your Virtual Personal Assistant for 
home and on the road), co-funded by the European AAL Joint 
Program (2018-2021), aimed to offer an application to help 
elderly, healthy or with a chronic disease or mental condition, 
to stay healthier and live a more pleasant life, independent and 
safe. Working on the project are organizations from the 
Netherlands, Switzerland, Poland, and Romania.   
Digital Ella4Life helps elders organize their daily structure, 
provides personalized entertainment and helps stimulating 
their mental condition. Professionals carers and informal 
caregivers and warned in case of emergency because 
Ella4Life is connected with them and will inform them when 
such situations occur. The application provides care and cure, 
both for when elders are on their way outdoors as well as at 
home, for health and wellbeing. Ella4Life is a virtual assistant, 
friendly and fun to use, obtained through the integration of 
three technologies, Emma, Anne and sensor technology. It is 
a speech-controlled system used in elder people's homes for 
care, medication and a healthy lifestyle. The proposed solution 
stimulates the elderly to communicate with the virtual 
assistant. Also, Ella interacts by voice recognition, in English 
and in local languages (upcoming work) and helps with daily 
activities and stimulates people mentally and physically as a 
‘lifestyle-coach'. As a virtual assistant, it generates a human 
realistic presence, sounds and other sensations that simulate 
the elderly's brain through communication and interaction in 
a domestic environment.     
III. 
ASSESSING ELDERLY USER REQUIREMENTS  
The process of enhancing the elderly user experience is 
complex and starts from developing a positive attitude 
towards the virtual (assistance) product and focuses on 
benefits that can be both practical and emotional. Research on 
user requirements is built on the fundamental idea that the 
contribution of the elderly people in the design and 
development of the right product leads to a superior solution. 
User requirements analysis draws clearly articulated 
statements about what do users expect the virtual solution to 
do, and what they want, considering their needs, satisfaction, 
and acceptance. Furthermore, the involvement of users 
stimulates a positive attitude towards the acceptance of the 
virtual world.  Country-specific requirements must be 
considered in order to achieve an overall acceptance, so 
involving people from different European countries assures 
the multicultural representativeness.    
A. The methodology 
To make sure that we are developing the right product that 
the elders would benefit from, we invited seniors who are 
(potential) beneficiaries of the integrated solution in order to 
express their opinion regarding the using of a virtual assistant 
in daily activities or to stay in contact with the healthcare 
professionals and with their informal caregivers. Participating 
users were persons who agreed to use new technologies and 
were willing to use virtual assistance and interaction.  
The evaluation method was based on qualitative research 
for understanding seniors' requirements (satisfaction, opinion, 
needs, etc.) in a specified context and using appropriate tools 
for analysing facts with a measurable approach. In particular, 
we used a combination of both focus groups and in-depth 
interviews because we intended to get a comprehensive 
evaluation of the benefits and everyday experiences of 
individual users. One important aspect analysed was the 
multicultural insight. The period of data collection was 
September – November 2018. All the responses are 
considered relevant (there are no wrong responses) and 
studied by comparing with the rest of the data to establish 
analytical categories. First, we focused on understanding the 
specific context of peoples' daily activities and after that we 
investigated 
the 
dimension 
of 
these 
characteristics. 
Information was analysed in order to obtain qualitative 
insights or through numerical comparisons for quantitative 
estimations, both considered as being relevant tools for 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

exploring new ideas and development of innovative ways for 
human-computer interaction.  
The respondents were recruited on a voluntary basis, being 
persons who usually do not know each other but are able to 
share experiences and express their opinion. They were senior 
adults, potential beneficiaries of the integrated solution 
provided by Ella4Life, within the age category 55 years and 
older, male and female, healthy or with a chronic disease or 
mental condition. There were involved 8 persons in Romania, 
7 persons in Poland, 8 persons in Switzerland and 5 persons 
in the Netherlands. All countries are considered developed 
economies, Romania and Poland being newer European 
Union (E.U.) member States, the Netherlands as an 
established member State, and Switzerland as non-member 
State. Only Romania is categorized as an upper-middle 
income, all others are high-income countries.  
B. The results  
a) Insights from focus groups revealed that Ella4Life 
solution including a virtual assistant was welcomed by elderly 
and seems to be very interesting because it is perceived as a 
real partner for elderly who need assistance and support. 
Elderly users were asked about the Ella4Life solution and 
particularly in relation to the idea of having a virtual assistant, 
monitoring certain health parameters and helping them with 
adapted suggestions and advice. About the interaction of the 
elderly with the virtual assistant, the perception is positive 
because all participants consider communication to be very 
important.  
In Romania, elders were willing to share information and 
interact with others. Moreover, they valued the possibility to 
build a network and share information. Seniors valued the 
connections, the feeling of being involved and staying active. 
Also, they valued that it brings people together and facilitates 
the connection between elders, and doctors. The virtual 
environment can assure elderly the needed interaction. So, 
they agreed with the idea of interacting with a non-human 
assistant because interaction and communication are a 
fundamental need, and elderly valued connection with others, 
even being virtual. 
Most participants from the Netherlands valued virtual 
assistant and believed that most people would first want to buy 
the voice recognition part of the proposed solution. 
Oppositely, the elders from Switzerland considered that 
talking to an avatar can lead to loneliness. Because the elders 
are no longer required to deal with others, the ability to have 
a coherent conversation can be lost. In communication, it is 
important to get the direct emotions of the other person. The 
use of an avatar should be limited to some previously defined 
time intervals per day. 
b) Findings from in-depth interviews. In order to quantify 
the elder's acceptance of using Ella4Life and to better collect 
the personal ideas about interacting with a virtual assistant, we 
collected data using an in-depth interview and analysed 
elders’ responses. Findings on acceptance to use and interact 
with virtual are optimistic.  
The question is “How do you think that interacting with 
your virtual assistant will be a benefit to you?” with multiple 
responses possibility. 
Figure 1 shows how interacting with a virtual assistant 
would help them in specific ways, in their opinion. 
Respondents appreciated that it will offer useful information 
in real time, as stated by 6 persons in Romania, 5 persons in 
Netherlands, 3 persons in Poland and 7 persons in 
Switzerland. Also, elders considered that interacting with a 
virtual assistant allows them receiving advice and coaching 
when needed, as mentioned by 7 persons in Romania, 2 
persons in the Netherlands, 1 person in Poland and 4 persons 
in Switzerland. The presence of a virtual assistant would be 
help seniors to improve their mood when they are feeling 
down, as answered by 3 persons in Romania, 4 persons in the 
Netherlands, 1 person in Poland and 8 persons in Switzerland. 
Also, 5 persons in Romania, 4 persons in the Netherlands, 5 
persons in Poland and 3 persons in Switzerland considered 
that the virtual assistant would help them stay in contact with 
family members and friends.  Others appreciated that it would 
 
 
Figure 1. Interacting with a virtual assistant (multiple choices) 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

help them get in contact with a doctor when needed. This was 
the opinion of 3 persons in Romania, 4 persons in the 
Netherlands, 5 persons in Poland and 5 persons in 
Switzerland.  
Overall, the elders had a positive opinion in terms of 
attitudes and acceptance of using the Ella4Life solution for 
improving their lives. In general, many people appreciated the 
benefits of interaction and connection, receiving advice and 
useful information in real time.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION  
Ella4Life supports elders in maintaining a healthier 
lifestyle and aging well. This article focuses on the 
involvement of the elderly in the development of Ella4Life in 
order to facilitate their acceptance and build a positive 
attitude. Research on user requirements aims to bring together 
insights about what they (elderly users from different 
countries) require this innovative solution to do, and what are 
the benefits, from a multicultural perspective. The results will 
help the specialists to improve the prototype of a superior 
integrated solution and offer a more qualitative product that 
can be used by people living in different European countries. 
The product will be further tested with people within the 
category 55 years and older in the near future. The user 
research on multicultural differences is essential in order to 
design an innovative product as a key part of the development 
process. 
Our insights reveal that the Ella4Life solution, based on a 
virtual assistant, was welcomed and appears to be very 
interesting because elders need to stay informed, to receive 
news and medical advice, and to network with others. They 
think interacting with a virtual assistant is a pleasant activity 
for them, sharing information in real time. In conclusion, 
elders have a positive opinion in terms of attitudes and 
acceptance for using Ella4Life to improve their lives. Elders 
are aware of their needs and want to mobilize their cognitive 
resources for their own benefit.  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. F. Alwin and S. M. Hofer, “Health and cognition in 
aging research,” The journals of gerontology. series B, 
Psychological sciences and social sciences, vol. 66 suppl 
1, 2011, pp.9-16. 
[2] L. Spiru, “LiveWell – Promoting healthy living and 
wellbeing for Parkinson patients through social network 
and ICT training: lessons learned and best practices,” 
International Journal of healthcare information systems 
and informatics, vol. 10., 2017, pp. 24-41.  
[3] B. K. Wiederhold, “Virtual reality enhances seniors' 
health and well-being,” Cyberpsychology, behavior, and 
social networking, 21(12), 2018, pp. 739–740 
[4] R. I. García-Betances, M. T. Arredondo Waldmeyer, G. 
Fico, and M. F. Cabrera-Umpiérrez, “A succinct 
overview of virtual reality technology used in 
Alzheimer's disease. Frontiers in aging neuroscience,” 7, 
2015 doi:10.3389/fnagi.2015.00080(2015). 
[5] E. Vaportzis, M. G., Clausen, and A. J. Gow, “Older 
adults perceptions of technology and barriers to 
interacting with tablet computers: a focus group study,” 
Frontiers in psychology, 8, 1687, 2017 
[6] A. Shaked Nava, “Avatars and virtual agents - 
relationship interfaces for the elderly,” healthcare 
technology letters. 4., 2017, 10.1049/htl.2017.0009. 
[7] C. Schneider, V. Willner, M. Feichtenschlager, A. 
Andrushevich, and L. Spiru, “Collecting user 
requirements for electronic assistance for people with 
dementia: a case study in three countries,” Proceedings 
of the eHealth2013. May 23-24; Vienna, Austria., 2013 
[8] R. Săftescu, E. Simion, C. Paul, and M. Mitroi, 
“Governance of smart specialization: experiences of four 
European regions,” Europolity, vol 10, 2, 2016 
[9] M. Kuniavsky, Observing the user experience: a 
practitioner's guide to user research. 1st edition, Elsevier, 
2003 
[10] V. Evers, “Cultural aspects of user interface 
understanding: An empirical evaluation of an e-
learning”, 2004  
[11] A. Roberts, B. De Schutter, K. Franks, and M. E. Radina, 
“Older adults' experiences with audiovisual virtual 
reality: perceived usefulness and other factors 
influencing technology acceptance”, Clinical 
Gerontologist., 2018 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was performed in the frame of the EU project 
Ella4Life 
(AAL/Call2017/035/2017, 
with 
implementation period June 2018 - May 2021), funded by 
the AAL Programme, co-funded by the European 
Commission and the National Funding Authorities of 
Netherlands, Poland, Romania, and Switzerland. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-726-9
BRAININFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information

