Evolutionary Process Engineering: 
User Guide and Case Study for Adequate Process Support 
 
Michael Seitz 
PRODATO Integration Technology GmbH 
Erlangen, Germany 
michael.seitz@prodato.de 
Stefan Jablonski 
University of Bayreuth 
Chair of Applied Computer Science IV 
Bayreuth, Germany 
stefan.jablonski@uni-bayreuth.de
 
 
Abstract— Evolutionary Process Engineering describes the 
development of business processes over time with the objective 
of increasing quality and performance, in order to meet – 
among other things – accreditation requirements. Maturity 
models like the Business Process Maturity Model support 
quality management and are perceived as convenient 
measurement for this evolution. In this paper, we follow up the 
investigation of how much technical support for process 
execution is adequate in dependency of specific maturity stages 
and which implementation (e.g., system-controlled approach 
like Workflow Management System or human-controlled 
approach like Checklist) complies best with the respective 
quality requirements. A user guide is introduced that assists 
practitioners stepwise with the application of the maturity 
model in order to design adequate process support. The user 
guide is demonstrated and evaluated within the scope of a case 
study about the introduction of a university degree program. 
By this means, also exceptional cases such as deviations from 
the development path recommended by the maturity model are 
discussed. It becomes apparent that the process quality can be 
enhanced without implementing the highest available degree of 
technical support for the whole process. 
Keywords – Process Evolution; Process Support; Quality 
Management; Business Process Maturity 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Business Process Management highly benefits from the 
development of the “computerization” described in [6] that 
enables entire technical integration and automation across 
enterprise boundaries. However, the spectrum of possibilities 
to support process execution is broad and it became evident 
that modern technology does not necessarily contribute to 
process improvement. Technical process support should 
rather be aligned with the currently demanded maturity (i.e., 
what is the required competency, capability or level of 
sophistication of the process implementation [4]). Maturity 
models (e.g., Business Process Maturity Model, BPMM 
[14]) therefore provide orientation and describe well-
established development paths. In our previous work we 
already pointed out implications of quality requirements on 
the degree of process support [13]. We investigated the 
spectrum of technical support for process execution, in 
particular to what extent information systems are involved, 
e.g., for information, monitoring, guidance or control 
purposes. Therefore, a maturity model extended by a 
dimension for process support was introduced. Its maturity 
stages describe which process support is needed to 
implement and prove the quality requirements efficiently. 
Admittedly, there are some difficulties arising from the 
practical application of maturity models in general: They 
indeed specify exactly what is necessary to reach their 
maturity levels but often lack in recommendations for 
concrete actions how to do so [9]. Furthermore, they are not 
provided with workarounds if the development by default 
does not seem to be appropriate for a special use case. 
Therefore, in this paper, a user guide is introduced and 
evaluated that is of assistance to practitioners with the 
application of the maturity model in order to identify 
adequate process support step by step. Besides the 
determination of a suitable degree of support it is also 
exemplified when it is not worth to achieve the suggested 
maturity. The user guide finally depicts how to identify a 
suitable implementation approach. Existing approaches and 
field reports about the evaluation and introduction of an 
information system as process support like [10], [3] and [11] 
are mainly focused on the domain of Workflow Management 
Systems, while in this paper, the whole spectrum of process 
support, also including human-controlled approaches, is 
considered. 
The paper is structured as follows: In Section II the 
conceptual approach is described. In Section III the approach 
is applied to an example process and the results of the case 
study are presented. In Section IV the findings are 
summarized and further research activities are discussed. 
II. 
APPROACH 
The approach is based on a maturity model that has been 
developed in [13] to determine the most suitable degree of 
process support considering both the expected process 
quality and the requirements to the underlying process 
model. The objective of the approach is to support the 
application of this maturity model by guiding the user 
through the evaluation and decision process. The user guide 
is composed of phases, activities and results and additionally 
provides users with appropriate methods and tools. With the 
application of the user guide, a concrete enactment approach 
providing appropriate process support can be identified. 
Firstly, process support is defined and the main 
enactment approaches are introduced (Section A). Secondly, 
the maturity model as well as its three characteristic 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

dimensions (process quality, process model and process 
support) are summarized (Section B). Thirdly, each step of 
the user guide is explained (Section C). Finally, supporting 
methods and tools are presented (Section D). 
A. Process Support 
There are many different types of processes, e.g., 
administrative or skill-intensive ones, making various 
demands on process support, e.g., through information, 
monitoring, guidance or control. For this reason the 
comprehension of process support used in this paper is 
determined. Therefore, the spectrum of process usage and 
the main enactment approaches covering this spectrum are 
introduced. 
Following the concept of process usage developed in [8], 
approaches for process support can be classified according to 
the degree of IT assignment (enactment dimension) and the 
degree of freedom (execution dimension). While external 
enactment at the one end of the spectrum implies planning 
and driving the process without using any information 
system (e.g., paper-based), internal enactment at the other 
end means that the process is defined and executed more or 
less under the control of an information system (e.g., a 
business process management software suite). The degree of 
freedom ranges between flexible and rigid execution. 
Process support is classified in terms of whether it allows 
process participants to decide on their own which execution 
step they want to perform next (flexible execution) or if it 
does not permit them to deviate from the pre-defined path 
(rigid execution). 
Within the scope of process support described above four 
representative enactment approaches are classified (see 
Figure 1. ): 
Workflow
Management
System
Wallpaper
Checklist
Process
Navigation
System
flexible
rigid
external
internal
Enactment
Execution
 
Figure 1.  Approaches for Process Support [8] 
 
Wallpaper: The process model is used as it is, e.g., 
printed out as wallpaper, outlined on a flip chart or 
published online as process graphic in wiki. Even if 
the model is provided electronically the process 
itself 
happens 
completely 
“offline” 
(external 
enactment). Participants are in charge of the way the 
process is actually performed (flexible execution). 
 
Checklist: The checklist contains a serialized list of 
process steps to be performed as well as expected 
results. After a task has been finished the responsible 
person signs the respective list entry. This approach 
is versatile and can be applied both paper-based and 
electronically (external and internal enactment). 
Depending on organization and implementation the 
checklist contents and the order of the entries are 
binding or not (rigid and flexible execution). 
 
Workflow Management System (WfMS): WfMS in 
the traditional sense strictly execute the process as it 
has been modeled (rigid execution) and thereby 
interact with human users and other information 
systems via defined interfaces (internal enactment). 
 
Process Navigation System (PNS) [5]: In contrast to 
WfMS the PNS approach grants the participants to 
decide on their own how to perform the process 
(flexible execution). It suggests possible execution 
steps and points to constraints. The PNS therefore is 
rather perceived as a decision support system 
(internal enactment). 
B. Maturity Model 
Maturity models constitute helpful instruments for 
organizations to increase the capability of specific areas, 
such as the management of business, processes and IT [4]. 
They are able to determine the as-is situation (descriptively, 
e.g., 
“how 
much” 
process 
support 
is 
currently 
implemented?), 
to 
identify 
improvement 
measures 
(prescriptively, e.g., what would do well to provide more 
suitable process support?) and to benchmark performance 
across processes and organizations (comparably, e.g., in 
what way process support of process X differs from the one 
of process Y?). They contain a series of maturity levels that 
represent a development path. Each maturity level (ML) is 
defined through characteristics and their respective values 
[1]. 
The model presented here aims to determine and to 
evaluate the degree of process support and to reveal 
necessary adjustments. A ML results from the measure of the 
process quality, the scope and detail of the process model 
and the degree of process support. The process quality (e.g., 
according to BPMM) can be applied to process results and 
accordingly the way they are created. While a low maturity 
just demands to achieve the results (for example a document) 
anyhow, a higher maturity requires creating them properly 
(e.g., accurate format and structure) and in time, or 
furthermore measuring their performance (e.g., processing 
time or consumption of resources) systematically. The 
maturity of the process model differentiates which 
perspectives (e.g., organization or behavior, see [7] for 
details) are specified and if those can be interpreted and 
executed by information systems, e.g., a workflow system, or 
not. The maturity of the process support finally depends on 
how the process model is enacted, or, to be more precise, to 
what extent the process is executed beyond the control of an 
information system. In contrast to conventional maturity 
models such as the Business Process Maturity Model 
(BPMM) that generally aim at a continuous increase of 
maturity [9], the approach presented in this paper is not 
intended to strive towards the highest level (e.g., to automate 
as much as possible) but rather to establish the most 
reasonable one, e.g., by creating a widely accepted process 
support that accurately ensures and also proves the quality 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

that is demanded by the customer. This means to aim at 
fitting both process model and process support to the current 
quality and performance requirements. 
C. User Guide for Adequate Process Support 
The user guide that will be introduced in this section 
constitutes an assessment method for the maturity model 
mentioned before. It contains three phases which in turn are 
divided into activities respectively. Each activity produces a 
specific result that is processed in subsequent activities. The 
creation of the results is supported by specific methods and 
tools. In the following the content of the user guide (see 
TABLE I. ) is described in detail. 
TABLE I.  
PROCEDURE MODEL 
Phase 
Activity 
Result 
Method / Tool 
A. Preparation 
1. Select Process 
Scope 
- 
 
2. Structure Process 
Process 
Sections 
- 
B. Evaluation 
1. Evaluate Process 
Sections (As-is) 
As-is 
Maturity 
Maturity Level 
Checklist 
 
2. Evaluate Process 
sections (Ref.) 
Reference 
Maturity 
Maturity Level 
Checklist 
(Quality) 
 
3. As-is/Reference 
Comparison 
To-be 
Maturity, 
Need for 
action 
Best Practices 
for Deviations 
C. Decision 
1. Consolidate To-
be Maturity 
Spectrum of 
Process 
Support 
Maturity 
Portfolio 
 
2. Derive 
Implementation 
Enactment 
Approach(es) 
Maturity 
Portfolio 
 
Phase A serves as preparation of the actual evaluation 
and leads to the subject matter. The first step (A1) is to select 
the process scope. The second step (A2) is to divide up the 
process into process sections so that the evaluation can be 
accomplished as clearly as possible in terms of quality. In the 
end it should be possible to assign one distinct quality ML 
for each process section. Since there is no generally admitted 
practice to break down a process, this activity has to be 
accomplished case-related, e.g., by separating creative, 
human controlled parts from administrative, well-structured 
system controlled parts. 
Phase B comprises the evaluation of the process in two 
respects. On the one hand, the as-is maturity is evaluated 
(B1). The maturity characteristics (quality, model and 
support) are rated independently for each process section in 
the first instance. The ML checklist (see TABLE II. ) 
contains the requirements for each characteristic and ML and 
thus is considered as criterion. On the other hand, the 
reference maturity is determined (B2) for each process 
section. Therefore, the maturity for both process model and 
process support is due to the to-be process quality (e.g., 
when a process should meet the quality requirements of 
ML3, the process model and the process support should also 
cope with ML3, not more or less). Again, the ML checklist 
can be consulted. Finally, the as-is maturity is reconciled 
with the reference maturity (B3) in order to determine the to-
be maturity and to identify appropriate need for action. In 
general, the reference maturity should be adopted, unless 
there are justifiable reasons. Recommendations for how to 
proceed in case of deviations between as-is and reference 
maturity are given in Section II.D.2. 
The previously determined to-be maturities are the basis 
for the decision that is made in phase C. At first, the to-be 
maturities are consolidated with the help of the maturity 
portfolio in order to identify the spectrum of process support 
(C1). Therefore, each process section is classified according 
to internal or external enactment and flexible or rigid 
execution using its to-be maturity. Since some MLs, from a 
quality point of view, can be construed as both rather flexible 
and rather rigid execution, it has to be decided for each 
process section which execution type is appropriate. At 
second, a suitable implementation is derived (C2). Each 
process section has to be assigned to an enactment approach 
that complies with the demanded maturity and execution 
type. Process sections within the same quadrant of the 
portfolio can be unified. 
D. Methods and Tools 
Below, some methods and tools are introduced that are 
intended to support the activities of the user guide. 
1) Maturity Level Checklist 
The ML checklist serves as measure for the maturity 
assessment (see activities B1 and B2 of the procedure model 
in TABLE I. ) of process quality, process model and process 
support, which are the characteristics of the maturity model 
presented in Section II.B. A ML is considered as applicable 
if all requirements are fulfilled. In turn, a process section is 
awarded the highest applicable ML. Below, the maturity 
stages according to BPMM and their requirements (see 
checklist in TABLE II. ) are described using the procurement 
of coffee beans as an example. The example process consists 
of the process steps need recognition and demand planning, 
supplier selection and ordering. 
For ML1 the results have to be achieved, which means 
that coffee beans are available. It doesn’t matter who is 
buying the beans and where. As for the process model it is 
completely satisfactory to describe what has to be purchased 
(data perspective), e.g., sort and package. Process support 
consists of publishing this information, e.g., by means of a 
bulletin board flyer near the coffee dispenser. 
ML2 additionally demands proper results in time, e.g., to 
avoid that coffee beans become short in supply or several 
people purchase independently of each other. Therefore, the 
process model is extended by the steps to be performed 
(functions), e.g., dial a number, a schedule (behavior) and 
responsibilities (organization), e.g., allocation of purchaser 
by calendar week. In point of process support, deviations 
from schedule are recognized, e.g., by the responsible person 
signing each order transaction on the schedule. 
Consistent and stable results according to ML3 can only 
be established by using a reference process. To make sure 
that each process instance produces similar results, e.g., with 
respect to coffee flavor, procurement costs and time of 
delivery, the standard path (generally the behavior) has to be 
specified, e.g., which supply channels are to be used or how 
to accept and store deliveries. The specification of all 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

required perspectives is necessary to enforce that the 
execution is consistent with the reference process. 
Compliance can be supported by task assignment, tool 
suggestion and templates. 
ML4 requires measurable results (e.g., reliability, 
adherence to delivery dates) and furthermore to take 
corrective action in case of an unexpected turn (e.g., 
replacement purchase or change of supplier). The process 
model therefore must incorporate KPIs that are collected and 
analyzed by the process support. In order to anticipate 
deviations process support must handle exceptions (if they 
are predefined) or at least allow for them (if they are not / 
cannot be predefined). 
ML5 calls for continuously improved results (e.g., reduce 
dead stock or combine orders). In order to implement 
improvements, the process model must deal with changes 
(e.g., invocation of new electronic market place) either 
through altering the formal specification or – if the new 
procedure cannot be expressed – through extending or 
switching the modeling language. Process support is 
considered to identify necessary improvements through 
suggestion or execution of suitable process steps and 
moreover to make sure that these improvements are 
incorporated into the reference process. 
TABLE II.  
MATURITY LEVEL CHECKLIST 
 
Process Quality 
Process Model 
Process Support 
ML1 
Initial: Results 
have to be achieved 
Results are 
effectively 
represented 
textually or 
graphically (data 
perspective) 
Information about 
expected results are 
provided 
ML2 
Managed: Proper 
results have to be 
achieved in time 
Functional and 
behavioral 
perspective is 
specified 
(schedule)  
Organizational 
perspective is 
represented 
(resources) 
Deviations from 
schedule are 
recognized and 
reported 
ML3 
Standardized: 
Consistent and 
stable results have 
to be achieved 
Standard path is 
defined completely 
All required 
perspectives are 
specified (reference 
process) 
Tasks are assigned 
Tools, applications 
and services are 
suggested or 
automatically 
invoked 
Templates are 
provided or 
automatically 
processed 
ML4 
Predictable: 
Results have to be 
measurable and 
corrigible 
KPIs are defined 
KPIs are measured 
and analyzed 
statistically 
Deviations are 
anticipated 
ML5 
Innovating: Results 
have to be 
improved 
continuously 
Formal 
specification can be 
altered 
(automatically) 
Modeling language 
can be extended 
(manually) 
Suitable process 
steps are suggested 
or executed 
automatically 
Improvements are 
incorporated into 
reference process 
 
The maturity stages described above are presumed to be 
suitable for the majority of processes but they are not 
universally valid. This is due to because the gaps between 
MLs are sometimes too big for the resources of an 
organization to close and it is not always worth to implement 
all requirements of a ML [9]. For this reason the ML 
checklist should not be perceived as binding but rather as 
recommendation and orientation. Maturity models also often 
lack in workarounds if not each requirement as prescribed by 
the ML is achievable or actually reasonable. In the next 
section some best practice examples are given for scenarios 
that break ranks and do not mesh with the maturity grid. 
2) Best Practices for Deviations 
As support for activity B3 of the procedure model in 
TABLE I.  some general recommendations for the handling 
of deviations between as-is and reference maturities are 
made in this section. 
If the ML of the as-is process support is lower than the 
reference quality maturity, the as-is support should be 
enhanced, unless the quality can be achieved and proved all 
the same or there is no gain of efficiency. For example, to 
align the procurement of coffee beans to the taste of the 
consumers (continuous improvement according to ML5) it 
makes a difference if the process is designed for a 
countrywide restaurant chain or a company’s kitchenette. 
While the restaurant chain would actually analyze customer 
behavior through performing a web-based opinion research 
and thus automatically align its sourcing strategy (ML5 
process support), as for the kitchenette it would rather be 
sufficient to make a yearly survey through posting up a tally 
sheet next to the coffee dispenser (ML1 process support). 
If the ML of the as-is process support is higher than the 
reference quality maturity, it should be checked if the 
process is adversely affected by the usage of the current 
execution support system. This may be the case if a certain 
process could achieve better results by granting the 
participants more flexibility instead of prescribing them each 
single step, e.g., by the WfMS. However, to come back to 
the kitchenette example (ML1 quality), it is also conceivable 
that – maybe due to corporate guidelines or just because the 
required software functions are implemented anyway – the 
coffee bean orders are processed by the central procurement 
system (up to ML5 process support) instead of keeping an 
account of them on a handwritten shopping list (ML1 
process support). 
Process execution support, especially in conjunction with 
the usage of information systems, is in need of an explicit 
representation of all relevant information. So if the ML of 
the as-is process model is lower than the reference process 
support maturity, the as-is process model must be enhanced. 
According to modeling principles, as stated in [2], only 
those facts should be modeled that are relevant and 
economically reasonable for execution support. So if the ML 
of the as-is process model is higher than the reference 
process support maturity, it should be reviewed if the current 
design of the process model providing larger scale and 
greater detail as actually needed is reasonable. It may be 
reasonable, for instance, if other processes or information 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

systems share it or a higher ML is considered in future 
anyway. Otherwise, unessential contents should be removed 
or not be maintained any more. 
3) Maturity Portfolio 
Basically, all requirements of the ML checklist (see 
TABLE II. ) can be fulfilled without using any information 
system and – as described in Section II.D.2 – each 
combination of maturity levels with respect to quality and 
process support is generally possible. However, observing 
the 80/20 principle, an increase in quality is accompanied by 
a certain enhancement of both the process support and the 
usage of information system. With the help of the maturity 
portfolio presented below it is possible to assign a given to-
be maturity of process support to a searched approach for 
process support (compare activities C1 and C2 of the 
procedure model in TABLE I. ). As mentioned earlier in 
Section II.A, the idea of classifying approaches for process 
support into flexible or strict execution and internal or 
external enactment goes back to spectrum of process usage 
developed in [8]. The integration of maturity levels was 
accomplished in [13]. The new portfolio view (see Figure 2. 
) arises through merging the maturity levels and the 
approaches for process support into the spectrum of process 
usage. It enables the assignment of a given ML to a certain 
approach for process support and vice versa. 
Workflow
Management
System
Wallpaper
Checklist
Process
Navigation
System
ML2
ML1
ML3
flexible
rigid
external
internal
Enactment
Execution
ML4
ML5
 
Figure 2.  Maturity Portfolio 
Enactment approaches that are identified in this way can 
be regarded as adequate process support, because they meet 
the requirements for process usage concerning execution and 
enactment requested by the respective maturity. 
III. 
CASE STUDY: INTRODUCTION OF A UNIVERSITY 
DEGREE PROGRAM 
In this section, the case study is presented in which the 
user guide approach is applied. The data for the case were 
attained through conducting interviews with the executing 
staff and studying the process and quality manual. 
A. Preparation 
The case study deals with the process of introducing a 
degree program at an example university. Breaking down the 
process results in the following process sections that are 
subject to the evaluation: 
 
P1 Form a degree program concept 
 
P2 Elaborate the degree program 
 
P3 Reach a decision on university level and request 
for state ministry agreement 
 
P4 Prepare introduction 
B. Evaluation 
The as-is process model consists of a textual and 
graphical reference process description of input and output 
documents (data), process steps on activity level (functions), 
responsibilities (organization) and sequence and conditions 
(behavior) using a formal modeling language that enables to 
define process models formally and clearly. Consequently, 
the as-is maturity of the process model is to be evaluated as 
ML3 for all process sections. 
The first process section is to form a degree program 
concept. After determining the degree program type and the 
coordinator the degree program description is created by the 
faculty. Upon approval by the school council the capacity 
plan is prepared by the QM (Quality Management) 
department. Both documents are reviewed by the executive 
board of the university. In case the degree program concept 
is followed up, an external evaluation under participation of 
the QM department is accomplished and the capacity plan is 
refined. Finally, the concept is forwarded to the department 
of academic administration. Particular attention is paid to the 
content of the resulting documents. The concept must be 
convincing in form and content to satisfy the decision 
makers. Therefore, miscellaneous checklists and statistics 
data are provided to ensure consistent and stable results. On 
the contrary, the real development process (deadlines or 
applied tools, for instance) is disregarded. Consequently, 
from a quality management perspective, purely the 
achievement of results is required (ML1). However, with 
respect to the output documents (data perspective), ML3 
quality is worthwhile (to-be). Currently, process support is 
limited to information about expected results (ML1). Even 
though ML3 process support is recommended for achieving 
ML3 quality, there is no need for action here, because the 
compliance with the reference process can be established 
anyway and also be proved through dated receipt stamps and 
signatures on the respective documents. 
The second process section deals with the elaboration of 
the degree program and is organized as a collaborative 
project. It takes about 8-10 weeks and is scheduled 
backwards from the school council meeting. Within the first 
4-6 weeks, the degree program documentation is elaborated 
by the school, the chairs, corresponding committees, the 
dean and the coordinator. Four weeks before the meeting, the 
documents are delivered to the department of academic 
administration for the purpose of a preliminary check. There 
are three weeks left to work in change requests. One week 
before the meeting, the final documents have to be 
submitted. In prior to that, the detailed resource plan is 
elaborated by various departments. Furthermore, the dean 
informs the student parliament about the new degree 
program. From a quality perspective, beside proper results 
there are also due dates to be adhered (ML2). Again, the 
process is focused on the output documents and therefore 
should comply with ML3 likewise. In order to observe 
deadlines, process support should be enhanced to ML2. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Waiving ML3 process support including task assignment is 
not detrimental to the success, because the process is rather 
collaborative than coordinative and the quality of the results 
is assured nevertheless. 
The third process section is concerned with the approval 
of the degree program by various authorities one after 
another, at first on university level and then on state ministry 
level. In each case the degree program documents are 
presented. In the event of rejection, the coordinator or the 
school is provided with editorial remarks for revision. In the 
event of acceptance, the next authority decides on the degree 
program. Firstly, the school comes to a decision. Secondly, 
the presidential committee is passed. Preferably before the 
resolution of the senate, the statement of the university 
council is obtained. At least one week before the meeting of 
the senate, the documents are brought before the senate. In 
case of acceptance the documents are forwarded to the state 
ministry. The degree program is then either approved or 
approved conditionally or declined. Finally, all stakeholders 
are informed and the degree program rules are published. 
Currently, ML2 quality is reached. The participants meet due 
dates and communication channels. However, the process 
prescribes a strict order and each application for a degree 
program should be handled equally. In order to head for a 
more standardized procedure, the process section should be 
raised to ML3. Therefore, the current process support should 
also be enhanced (ML3) as recommended by the maturity 
model, because not only the output documents but also 
organization and behavior have to comply with the reference 
model. 
In the last process section the introduction of the degree 
program is prepared. Various activities are initiated 
simultaneously but independently of each other: design and 
distribution of flyers, information of the student advisory 
service and other departments, appointment of responsible 
persons, 
long-term 
course 
planning, 
preparation 
of 
examination procedures and other degree program details. 
Responsibilities are clearly defined. ML1 quality seems to be 
sufficient 
here, 
because 
due 
dates 
are 
negligible. 
Consequently, also ML1 process support is reasonable, 
because the tasks are well-defined and there is not much of 
coordination effort. 
In TABLE III. the evaluation results are summarized. 
TABLE III.  
EVALUATION MATRIX 
Process 
Section 
Process 
Quality 
Process 
Model 
Process 
Support 
As-is  To-be 
As-is/Ref.  To-be 
As-is/Ref.  To-be 
P1 
ML1  ML3 
ML3/ML3  ML3 
ML1/ML3  ML1 
P2 
ML2  ML3 
ML3/ML3  ML3 
ML1/ML3  ML2 
P3 
ML2  ML3 
ML3/ML3  ML3 
ML1/ML3  ML3 
P4 
ML1  ML1 
ML3/ML1  ML3 
ML1/ML1  ML1 
C. Decision 
The process sections P1, P2 and P4 mainly focus on the 
respective results. Their time limits are either disregarded or 
perceived as directives. Furthermore, the actual arrangement 
and design of the degree program is in need of a certain 
creative scope that cannot be pre-defined. The quality is in 
the coordinator’s and the faculty’s interest. Consequently, a 
flexible, human controlled execution support seems to be 
more reasonable than prescribing each single step according 
to a rigid process model. However, within the deciding steps 
of process section P3 equal treatment for each degree 
program request has to be ensured. In order to standardize 
the organization and the behavior and to establish favorable 
terms for reaching the desired quality a rigid execution 
support is advisable. Consolidating the to-be maturity levels 
of the process support accordingly results in two categories: 
P1, P2 and P4 are mapped to external flexible process 
support, while P3 is mapped to internal rigid process support 
(Figure 3. ). The assignment of the process sections to the 
recommended enactment approaches is visualized in Figure 
4. and will be explained below. 
ML2
ML1
ML3
flexible
rigid
external
internal
Enactment
Execution
ML4
ML5
P1
P2
P3
P4
 
Figure 3.   
Spectrum of process support 
Workflow
Management
System
Wallpaper
Checklist
Process
Navigation
System
flexible
rigid
external
internal
Enactment
Execution
P1
P2
P3
P4
 
Figure 4.   
Enactment Approaches 
Regarding external, flexible process support, two 
enactment 
approaches 
come 
into 
consideration: 
the 
wallpaper and the checklist. The checklist seems to be more 
appropriate, because the wallpaper is not able to provide 
ML2 runtime support as demanded by P2. Even though for 
P1 and P4 mainly the results count it is important that 
actually all essential activities are performed and their 
resulting documents contain all required information. 
Therefore, the checklist approach could be designed as 
follows: On the one hand, there is a paper-based checklist on 
process level with a list of process steps to be performed. It 
is maintained by the coordinator and is intended to support 
him in keeping track of the project. In case of deviations, 
corrective action is taken manually, e.g., by phone or e-mail. 
On the other hand, there are checklists on document level, 
either paper-based or electronically, depending on the 
availability of the respective data. Each document header is 
provided with a bullet point list of the required content parts. 
The list entries are signed by the respective authors and 
thereby serve both as orientation for the persons in charge 
and as proof of conformity to the reference process (ML3 
quality for data perspective). 
Concerning internal, rigid process support, again two 
approaches are possible: the Checklist and the WfMS. Here, 
the WfMS seems to be more appropriate than the checklist, 
because the approval workflow, the task assignment, the data 
logistics and the collaborative access to documents can be 
clearly defined and actively controlled by WfMS standard 
functions. This approach is especially recommended when – 
as in the case of the example university – an already existing 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

communication and collaboration platform providing basic 
workflow functions can be used. The workflow that has to be 
implemented is initiated by the coordinator when the 
documents have to be brought before the school council (end 
of P2). It ends with the agreement of the state ministry and 
the publication of the degree program rules (end of P3). 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, a user guide was introduced that is intended 
to lead practitioners through the procedure of identifying 
adequate process support. It was showed how to determine 
the as-is situation, in particular how much support is 
currently provided and which quality level can be reached. 
Furthermore, it was pointed out how to identify appropriate 
need for action for both standard and exceptional cases of 
process evolution. On the one hand, best practice maturity 
stages were introduced that are meant to be a guideline in 
most instances. On the other hand, also exceptional cases 
were discussed that are not in line with the common process 
evolution. Moreover, it was presented how to reach a 
decision on the question which enactment approach is most 
suitable for the demanded quality and execution type. 
Finally, the application of the user guide was presented by 
using the example of the degree program introduction. The 
case study revealed that the highest degree of process 
support is by no means the most reasonable one and that the 
process quality can rather be enhanced through providing an 
adequate degree of process support at the right place. 
Our future research is concerned with the question how 
the approach can be further improved in order to provide an 
even more specific assessment of quality requirements and 
their impact on process model and process support. One 
starting point would be to initially evaluate each process 
perspective (data, organization, behavior, etc.) independently 
from each other. Another starting point is to differentiate 
process support by execution support (e.g., guidance) and 
documentation support (e.g., log generation). Generally, we 
aim for a more comprehensive evaluation of the conceptual 
approach in different domains and branches. Moreover, our 
activities head for the further specification and development 
of the conceptual approach presented in  [12] that is intended 
for the technical support of process evolution, in particular 
for the acceleration of transitions between maturity levels 
through attaining process models during execution. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Becker, R. Knackstedt, and J. Pöppelbuß, “Developing Maturity 
Models for IT Management – A Procedure Model and its 
Application“, in Business & Information Systems Engineering, vol. 1, 
2009, pp. 213-222. 
[2] J. 
Becker, 
M. 
Rosemann, 
and 
R. 
Schütte, 
„Grundsätze 
ordnungsmäßiger Modellierung“, in Wirtschaftsinformatik, vol. 37, 
1995, pp. 435-445. 
[3] J. Becker, C. v. Uthmann, M. zur Mühlen, and M. Rosemann, 
„Identifying the Workflow Potential of Business Processes”,  Proc. 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 32), 
Jan. 1999. 
[4] T. de Bruin, M. Rosemann, R. Freeze, and U. Kulkarni, 
“Understanding the Main Phases of Developing a Maturity 
Assessment Model”, Proc. Australasian Conference on Information 
Systems (ACIS 16), Sydney, Nov. 2005. 
[5] M. Faerber, S. Meerkamm, and S. Jablonski,”The Processnavigator – 
Flexible Process Execution for Product Development Projects”, Proc. 
International Conference on Engineering Design (ICED 17), 
Stanford, Aug. 2009, pp. 99-110. 
[6] E. Fleisch, „Von der Vernetzung von Unternehmen zur Vernetzung 
von Dingen“, in „Roadmap to E-Business. Wie Unternehmen das 
Internet erfolgreich nutzen“, C. Belz, T. Tomczak and M. Schlögel, 
Eds. Landsberg/Lech: Verl. Moderne Industrie, 2002, pp. 124-135. 
[7] S. Jablonski, “MOBILE: A Modular Workflow Model and 
Architecture”, Proc. International Working Conference on Dynamic 
Modeling and Information Systems (04), Noordwijkerhout, 1994. 
[8] S. Jablonski, “Do We Really Know How to Support Processes? 
Considerations and Reconstruction. Graph Transformations and 
Model-Driven Engineering”, in “Graph Transformations and Model-
Driven Engineering. Essays Dedicated to Manfred Nagl on the 
Occasion of his 65th Birthday”, G. Engels, C. Lewerentz, W. Schäfer, 
A. Schürr and B. Westfechtel, Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer, 2010, pp. 393-410. 
[9] N. 
Kamprath, 
„Einsatz 
von 
Reifegradmodellen 
im 
Prozessmanagement“, in HMD – Praxis der Wirtschaftsinformatik, 
vol. 282, S. Reinheimer and R. Winter, Eds. Heidelberg: dpunkt, Dec. 
2011, pp. 93-102. 
[10] P. Kueng, „A Process Model for Deployment of Workflow Systems“, 
in Institute Report 95.02, University of Linz, 1995. 
[11] M. Mühlen, „Workflow- und Prozessmodellierung bei einem 
Energieversorgungsunternehmen“, in Prozessmanagement, J. Becker, 
M. Kugeler and M. Rosemann, Eds. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer, 
2005, pp. 511-531. 
[12] S. Schönig, M. Seitz, C. Piesche, M. Zeising, and S. Jablonski, 
„Process Observation as Support for Evolutionary Process 
Engineering”, in International Journal On Advances in Systems and 
Measurements, vol. 5, Dec. 2012, pp. 188-202. 
[13] M. Seitz and S. Jablonski, „Evolutionäres Prozess-Engineering: Zum 
angemessenen Grad an Prozessunterstützung“, in HMD - Praxis der 
Wirtschaftsinformatik, vol. 287, D. Ingenhoff and A. Meier, Eds. 
Heidelberg: dpunkt, Oct. 2012, pp. 93-102. 
[14] Business Process Maturity Model (BPMM), Version 1.0, 2008. Last 
access: Mar. 2013. Available: http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMM/1.0/.
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

