Towards a Generalised e-Learning Business Process Model
Rawad Hammad, Mohammed Odeh and Zaheer Khan 
Software Engineering Research Group, Department of Computer Science and Creative Technologies,  
Faculty of Environment and Technology, University of the West of England, Bristol,  
BS16 1QY, United Kingdom 
Email: Rawad.hammad@uwe.ac.uk, Mohammed.odeh@uwe.ac.uk, Zaheer2.khan@uwe.ac.uk     
 
Abstract— Modelling learning scenarios is central for e-
learning domain. This has been manifested in the proliferation 
of the different Educational Modelling Languages, as well as in 
developed e-learning models. However, the existing modelled 
scenarios are deficient as they lack flexibility and the agility to 
respond to the dynamic nature of an e-learning process that is 
suitable to answer learners’ needs. This paper proposes a novel 
approach to develop a generalised business process model from 
a set of related business processes sharing the same goals and 
associated objectives. The proposed approach has been applied 
in the e-learning domain, which demonstrated its ability to 
develop a generalised e-learning business process model that is 
derived from the existing pedagogical models and technology-
enhanced learning artefacts. Moreover, the proposed approach 
has been evaluated to test its effectiveness in generalising a set 
of business processes, which paves the ground to apply it in 
different contexts. The generalised e-learning business process 
model has been modelled using the industrial standard 
Business Process Modelling Notations (BPMN 2.0) so that 
processes can be dynamically enacted in service-oriented 
environments and, at the same time, adapting to answering e-
learners’ learning requirements.  
Keywords- e-learning processes; business process models for 
e-learning; e-learning; technology-enhanced learning; process-
based e-learning; business process generalisation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Various educational organisations are increasingly 
adopting e-learning/Technology-Enhanced Learning (TEL) 
due to their ability to meet different e-learners’ needs and 
work with newly innovative e-learning models, such as 
connectivism and self-regulated learning [1]. This application 
of e-learning technologies differs from one organisation to 
another, which necessitates having a well-specified and 
generalised e-learning model. In this context, learning is the 
act by which behavioural change, knowledge, skills and 
attitudes are acquired [2], which can be described as a 
learning process. A process, from a computational 
perspective, involves activities which are performed by 
certain entities (i.e., human and/or machine) working in 
collaborative groups to achieve specific business goals [3]. 
However, evolved e-learning models rarely adopt the 
business process concept, which negatively impacts their 
agility and capability to respond to e-learners’ demands [4]. 
Thus, this paper is an attempt to understand widely published 
models of e-learning business processes, classify these 
processes, and then generalise them to form a generic e-
learning business process that is pedagogically sound and can 
adapt to different learning paths/processes based on e-
learners’ context.  
The rest of this paper is organised as follows: Section II 
discusses related work; Section III describes the proposed 
approach to deriving a generalised business process model 
from a set of related business processes having the same 
goal; Section IV applies and demonstrates the generalisation 
approach/process in the e-learning domain; Section V 
discusses the proposed approach and reflects on the results of 
adopting a case study-based evaluation approach to 
determine the effectiveness of the proposed generalisation 
method; and Section VI concludes the paper with future 
research directions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There exist various e-learning/TEL models, such as the 
Learning Management Systems and Learning Objects where 
the emphasis is on the role of technology in supporting 
learning and teaching. Such models are practice models; 
henceforth, they are considered as e-learning artefacts, 
mainly to distinguish them from pedagogical models 
underpinning e-learning. This section reviews both types 
(i.e., e-learning artefacts and pedagogical models) in order to 
form a better understanding of e-learning processes and 
potentials to improve these processes. Therefore, this section 
is divided into the following two sub-sections: (i) e-learning 
artefacts and (ii) e-learning pedagogy.  
A. e-Learning/TEL Artefacts  
The continuously changing learning contexts (e.g., 
learners’ demands, institutional settings, subjects taught, etc.) 
have led to the proliferations of diverse e-learning artefacts. 
These artefacts stretch from simple ones, such as Learning 
Object (LO) through complex ones, such as Instructional 
Management Systems Learning Design (IMS LD). This 
section reviews three e-learning artefacts and reflects on their 
process-related concerns. First, LO is the essential element 
that exists in all other artefacts. LO usually refers to: (i) 
instructional contents developed to address certain learning 
objectives, (ii) assessment activity, and (iii) metadata to 
describe the LO and make it discoverable [5]. In spite of LO 
strengths, such as reusability and interoperability, it is 
content-oriented and lacks the well-structured representation 
of learning concerns, which limits its pedagogical value [6].  
Second, the proliferation of different Educational 
Modelling Languages (EML), such as the Open University of 
Netherland EML (OU EML) [7] and the UNED University 
EML (PALO) [8] represent an advanced step towards 
decoupling the learning process from its contents instead of 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

having content-oriented artefacts (e.g., LO), where contents 
and processes are highly coupled. According to [9], OU EML 
has been acknowledged as the most powerful and expressive 
EML; and therefore, it has been standardised by the IMS 
Global Learning Consortium under the title “IMS LD”. IMS 
LD embodies a containment framework of elements that can 
formally describe the design of any teaching-learning 
process/scenario [10]. It is the only interoperability 
specification that allows designers to describe Units of 
Learning (UoL), where a UoL is the smallest unit providing 
learning events for learners, satisfying one or more 
interrelated learning objectives [11]. However, IMS LD has 
shortcomings that include: (i) lack of flexibility (e.g., tiny 
changes to contents are not possible unless essential 
modifications to the activity structures, act, role-part, 
method, 
properties 
and 
conditions 
are 
done), 
(ii) 
interoperability-oriented concerns (e.g., cannot save or 
retrieve information to/from external sources) [12], (iii) 
dynamic grouping for users is not possible, (iv) user 
behaviour is not recorded, (v) adaptation is limited (i.e., no 
adaptation based on previous user behaviour), and (vi) 
complexity, since it works as an integrative layer with other 
specifications [13]. Further limitations are discussed in [14]. 
Third, the above-mentioned limitations have led to the 
development of more process-oriented e-learning artefacts, 
such as Workflow-based e-Learning Platform (WeLP) [15]. 
WeLP aims at facilitating and enhancing the performance of 
e-learning systems through separating processes (i.e., 
activities, roles, conditions, etc.) from other e-learning 
ecosystem components, such as e-learning contents and other 
technical components. To do so, e-learning procedures have 
been divided into the following four aspects: (i) teaching that 
targets lecturers, (ii) learning that targets students, (iii) 
administration that targets administration and personnel, and 
(iv) infrastructure that targets infrastructure, technical 
experts and technicians. These four aspects represent four 
sub-processes that will be used to plan and design the process 
of various e-learning activities. Each process represents a list 
of activities that ensure its successful implementation. 
However, WeLP remains at the very high level of 
abstraction, leans toward design, and lacks a real evaluation 
that can prove its impact in terms of developing better e-
learning platforms. It intuitively analyses the relationships 
between the proposed sub-processes and activities but lacks 
detailed specification of activities. For instance, material 
delivery is a process by itself and cannot be squeezed into 
one simple activity. 
To conclude, process-based approaches are either: (i) not 
adopted in e-learning artefacts systems (e.g., LO), (ii) semi 
adopted (e.g., IMS LD) but in a very complicated approach 
where the e-learning process is cemented into the system, 
(iii) adopted in a superficial way where underpinning 
pedagogy is ignored, or (iv) remains at the concept/abstract 
level (e.g., WeLP). 
B. e-Learning Pedagogy 
As stated above, all e-learning artefacts are underpinned 
by certain pedagogical models or theories. Therefore, 
significant analysis for the available pedagogical strands is 
necessary to inform the e-learning processes derivation. 
Developing a proper understanding of e-learning pedagogy 
enables us to: (i) formally specify available e-learning 
models, (ii) understand how these e-learning models can be 
used by stakeholders, (iii) generalise these process models, 
and (iv) better decide what contextual information is needed 
to customise the generalised model for each learner based on 
his/her needs. There exist two schools of thought regarding 
understanding pedagogy. The first school does not believe in 
theory because the learning phenomenon cannot be explained 
by simple theories [16]. The second school, adopted in this 
research, believes that learning theories are essential to 
understand pedagogy [17]. Being the proponent of the second 
school of thought, it is worth recalling that there is no 
agreement on one single classification for pedagogical 
strands. In addition, this research embraces Greeno et al’s 
classification [18], where learning can be understood through 
the following three broad perspectives.  
First, we have the associationist perspective, where 
learning is the process of connecting the elementary mental 
or behavioural units through a series of activities. Various 
learning theories/processes fall in this perspective, such as 
instructional design and direct instructions [19]. Second, 
there is the cognitive/constructive perspective, where 
learning is about achieving understanding. Learning here is 
interpreting and constructing meanings, while knowledge 
acquisition is the outcome of interaction between learner’s 
new 
experiences 
and 
his/her 
previous 
structures/understanding. Learning by doing and problem-
based learning fall in this perspective. Third, we have the 
situative perspective, where learning is situated in various 
social practices and contexts. The e-learners’ relationship 
with their community shapes their knowledge, learning 
outcomes and ability to learn by participation [20]. 
Connectivism and community of practice learning theories 
fall in this perspective [21]. As explained above, each 
perspective encompasses various learning theories, but a 
more detailed discussion remains beyond the scope of this 
research.  The next section proposes a manual method to 
develop a generalised business process model from a set of 
related business processes having the same goal.  
III. 
THE PROPOSED APPROACH TO DEVELOP A 
GENERALISED BUSINESS PROCESS MODEL FROM A SET OF 
RELATED BUSESINESS PROCESSES HAVING THE SAME GOAL 
Process-based systems consist of various business 
processes. These business processes collectively aim at 
achieving the same business goals and objectives, but they 
may vary in the design of the process details (e.g., 
workflows, interactions, concurrent or sequential flow of 
activities, means of achieving the same objective and 
approaches to attend the tasks, etc.) Often, domain specific 
business processes possess common characteristics which 
can be generalised to promote reusability, consistency and 
interoperability among different business organisations.  For 
instance, the direct instruction learning process refers to 
learning by following instructor-designed learning processes, 
while the self-regulated learning process refers to self-
planning, self-monitoring and self-assessment for learning 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

processes. So, the goal of both processes is the same, but they 
use different mechanisms to achieve that goal. Therefore, an 
effective generalisation approach is needed. To do so, first, 
the existing e-learning literature is surveyed, which includes: 
e-learning artefacts, pedagogical models, various e-learning 
designs and principles adopted in authoring tools. Second, 
business 
process 
modelling 
(e.g., 
Business 
Process 
Modelling Notations (BPMN)) and business process 
architecture (e.g., Riva method) literature is reviewed. Third, 
lessons learnt from the previous two steps have been used to 
develop the proposed generalisation approach. In this respect, 
Riva is a methodological approach [22] to derive business 
process architectures for a certain organisation from its 
essential business entities. Riva and BPMN work on two 
different levels, the former targets the process architecture 
(i.e., more abstract level), while the latter targets the activities 
implemented to achieve process goals. Investigating related 
literature from both domains (i.e., business process 
modelling/architecture and e-learning) helps devise the 
proposed approach from different perspectives. For instance, 
Riva steps in classifying Essential Business Entities to 
identify Units of Work and considers different analytical 
perspectives/abstraction levels have been adapted to deal 
with the domain-specific concerns from a process 
perspective. The proposed generic method to generalise 
business processes is based on the following steps: 
1- Analyse all available business processes, their goals, 
activities, pedagogic models/theories influencing them 
and determine the boundary of these processes. This 
allows us to obtain insights about different e-learning 
processes, their scopes and whether they can be formally 
modelled 
using 
BPMN 
visual 
notations 
and 
corresponding machine readable formats (e.g., XML 
Metadata 
Interchange 
(XMI) 
and 
XML 
Schema 
Definition (XSD)). 
2- If necessary, classify the early-identified business 
processes based on domain-specific concerns to bring 
further coherence to the proposed processes/activities 
(e.g., as depicted in Fig. 2: e-Learning Process (LP1) to 
LP 9 have been classified in three different categories). 
This classification can help in capturing the semantics of 
various e-learning processes.  
3- Identify all process elements which include: (i) flow 
objects (events, activities and gateways), (ii) data (data 
objects, inputs, outputs and data stores), (iii) connecting 
objects (sequence flows, message flows, associations and 
data associations), (iv) swimlanes (pools and lanes) and 
(v) artefacts (group and text annotation). Some of these 
elements (e.g., text annotations) help to capture semantics 
of specific activities, which can be useful later on for 
business process enactment and execution in a Service-
Oriented Architecture (SOA)-enabled environment. 
4- Detect 
the 
common 
process 
elements 
and 
the 
special/unique ones from the early-identified process 
elements (i.e., the outcome of step 3). For instance, user 
login and set profile are common activities in various 
processes, while plan your e-learning activity is not 
common. 
5- Generalise the special/unique process elements (e.g., the 
following two activities: (i) “study a particular learning 
lesson” and (ii) “perform the following instructions” can 
be generalised in the following activity: “participate in 
the specified learning activity”). Careful considerations 
for the terms used is needed as they reflect different 
underpinning learning approaches (e.g., “perform” 
usually entails participatory learning while “study” does 
not). 
6- Define and specify the rules and the conditions that are 
essential to customise the generic e-learning process for a 
certain e-learner (i.e., generate a specialised business 
process from the generic one). For instance, define the 
following rule: e-learning process combines Self-
Regulated Learning (SRL) elements for those e-learners 
who have metacognitive skills. Such rules allow selecting 
the suitable process elements from the generalised 
business process elements. Specifying this rule requires 
adopting certain specification/standard that is suitable for 
this research context (i.e., capturing the semantics of e-
learning processes). For this research, the Semantic Web 
Rule Language (SWRL) has been selected due to its 
expressiveness and automated reasoning capabilities. 
Also, it is compatible with Web Ontology Language 
(OWL), which is used for contextualising e-learning 
processes. The above rule is translated to more machine 
readable format (e.g., “if then else rule”). For example, ‘If 
a particular e-learner has metacognitive skills then 
suggest SRL elements for his/her e-learning process’. In 
order to perform automated reasoning at process 
execution time, the above rule is translated to SWRL 
specifications, as depicted in Fig.1. A SWRL rule is 
composed of: (i) antecedent and (ii) consequent, that are 
separated by “->”. Both antecedent and consequence are 
composed of atoms connected with conjunctions, where 
conjunction is represented as “,”. Once the antecedent 
atoms are true the SWRL rule fires and execute the atoms 
on the left hand side. SWRL rules are executed using a 
software reasoner. 
 
Figure 1: SWRL Rule Syntax 
7- Make the information required to execute the early-
specified rules available (i.e., types of e-learner skills 
should be modelled in the e-learner behavioural model in 
order to make the above-mentioned rule executable). This 
is expressed in Fig. 1 by the atom matchLax(?str, 
“Metacognitive”). 
8- Identify, if any, potential conflicts between process 
elements (e.g., SRL e-learning processes contradict with 
Direct Instruction, especially in selecting learning goals. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

This has essential consequences on the process’s roles 
and their actions). 
9- Resolve the discovered contradictions by introducing 
intermediate process elements, further rules or making 
assumptions necessary to accurately specify the business 
process. For instance, “Decide Learning Approach” 
activity has been added to the generic e-learning process 
model, where this activity is backed by certain SWRL 
rules.  
10- If the early-identified business processes have been 
classified, then make one level of generalisation for each 
category. For instance, in Fig. 2: LP1, LP2 and LP3 have 
been generalised and led to Upper-Level eLearning 
Process (ULP1) and similarly LP4 to LP7 have been 
generalised and led to ULP2 and so on. 
11- Perform another level of generalisation for the outcome 
of the previous step (i.e., the early-generalised processes) 
using steps 4 to 10. For instance, ULP1, ULP2 and ULP 3 
have been generalised and led to the generalised e-
Learning Business Process.  
12- Cross-Verify whether the generalised e-learning process 
model can adapt all different detailed process models and 
their activities by going through the generalised process 
model and confirming its ability to accommodate 
elements from the early-identified detailed e-learning 
processes. 
In the next section, the above-proposed approach will be 
applied in e-learning domain to check its effectiveness in 
generalising an e-learning process model that could meet 
various e-learners’ requirements.  
IV. 
APPLYING THE PROPOSED APPROACH TO DEVELOP A 
GENERALISED E-LEARNING BUSINESS PROCESS MODEL 
This section covers the following three concerns: (i) 
applying the early-proposed approach in e-learning domain 
to develop a generalised e-learning business process, (ii) the 
nine detailed e-learning business processes and (iii) the 
generalised e-learning business process model. 
A. The Proposed Approach to Develop a Generalised e-
Learning Busines Processes 
This sub-section demonstrates how the early-proposed 
approach is applied in the e-learning domain. As previously-
mentioned, e-learning processes have not been properly 
identified which necessitates carrying out a thorough analysis 
for pedagogical theories and models underpinning e-learning 
artefacts as indicated in the first step. This has led to identify 
nine e-learning processes, as described in the next sub-
section. Second, the nine e-learning processes have been 
classified, as depicted in Fig. 2, based on domain-specific 
(i.e., pedagogical) concerns and scoped to cover learning-
oriented aspects only. Third, all process elements have been 
identified. Fourth, common and unique elements have been 
identified. Fifth, various unique elements have been 
abstracted using generic terms, such as participate in 
assessment activities, where assessment can take different 
forms stretching from simple quizzes through project-based 
approaches.  
Sixth, rules have been defined to explain which form will 
be chosen for a certain e-learner. Seventh, all constructs (e.g., 
feedback score, previous learning styles, etc.) required to 
execute the early-defined rules have been made available. 
Eighth, some contradictions (e.g., self-regulated e-learning 
processes versus instructor-directed ones) have been 
identified and resolved, as indicated in step nine, by 
introducing intermediate process elements. Tenth, three 
generalised e-learning processes have been developed. 
Eleventh, a final generalised e-learning process has been 
developed out of the outcome of the previous step. Twelfth, 
the final generalised e-learning process has been evaluated to 
ensure the inclusion of all detailed e-learning process 
elements, as will be explained later. 
 
Figure 2: The Generalised and Detailed eLearning Processes 
In this way, the generalised e-learning process is driven 
by pedagogy and informed by practice e-learning models. In 
the next two sub-sections, the nine e-learning processes will 
be briefly described under their classification, as depicted in 
Fig. 2. Then, the generalised e-learning process will be 
introduced.  
B. The Detailed e-Learning Business Processes  
This section covers nine detailed e-learning processes 
according to their pedagogical perspectives, as follows.  
Associationist e-Learning Processes, which consist of 
the following three e-learning processes. First, there is the 
Instructional Design (ID) e-learning process, which is a 
typical behavioural/associationist e-learning process. Like 
any other e-learning process, ID e-learning process starts 
with common login activities. Successful candidates will be 
able to explore the learning space provided by the e-learning 
system to the learners to interact with contents/activities and 
perform all the tasks to accomplish their goals. Then, the e-
learners will be able to select the topic required to study, 
perform the learning activity (e.g., read the learning 
objectives and proceed to the lesson if they wish). To check 
e-learners’ understanding, they are supposed to participate in 
the assessment activity specified by the instructor, which will 
usually lead to useful feedback. This feedback is automated 
and is quite generic - not specific for each e-learner. Well-
designed ID processes embody remedial contents for those 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

who were not able to accomplish their objectives. e-Learners 
are allowed, in such e-learning processes, to seek support 
from academic staff or initiate collaborative activities with 
their peers. 
Second, there is the Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) e-
Learning Process. ITS represents a wide spectrum of systems 
evolved in different ways that adopt various mechanisms 
including 
expectation 
and 
misconception 
tailoring, 
constraints-based modelling, model tracing, separate in class 
instruction, integrated class instruction, feedback provision, 
and misconceptions modelling. The ITS e-learning process 
based on misconception modelling will be modelled to 
represent this type of processes because modelling the 
expectation and misconception based on principal instruction 
is very common in ITSs, as shown in different studies (e.g., 
[23]). The main added value of ITS process is its ability to 
deliver a specific learning to each e-learner based on his/her 
model as well as the mechanism provided to provide 
feedback to e-learners. 
Third, Direct Instruction (DI) e-learning process offers 
more emphasis on the practice and consequently acting up on 
this practice via feedback. Therefore, the e-learner behaviour 
is observed by instructor in order to provide the relevant 
feedback that is suitable for the e-learner progress towards 
the attainment of the learning objectives. Observation can 
take different forms and similarly feedback as well. Feedback 
is composed of: evaluative part, which is related to the 
learning outcome and indicates the performance level 
achieved and the informational component, and consists of 
additional information relating to the concept, task, mistakes 
or how to proceed [24].  
Cognitive Constructive e-Learning Processes, which 
includes many processes. Below are some of the most used 
processes in current artefacts. First, we have Problem-Based 
e-learning process (PBL). PBL is not problem solving, but it 
ensures that learning happens in the context of problem 
solving or real world scenario. It is composed of the 
following steps [25]: (i) identify concepts of the problem that 
need clarification, (ii) define the problem, (iii) analyse the 
problem, brainstorm about solutions or causes, (iv) structure 
solutions or causes, (v) state learning objectives, (vi) self-
study directed towards learning objectives, and (vii) report 
things learned and application to the problem. Usually, 
assessment is measured against competencies acquired to 
show mastery in the field. 
Second, Self-Regulated e-Learning (SRL) process occurs 
when the e-learner takes the initiative with or without the 
help of others to diagnose their learning needs, formulate 
learning goals, identify resources for learning, select and 
implement learning strategies and evaluate their learning 
outcomes [26]. The SRL process is composed of the 
following activities [27]: (i) plan, e-learner provides input 
Figure 3: The Generalised e-Learning Process 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

regarding goals, preferences (e.g., profile-setting), (ii) 
prepare, e-learner finds and selects learning resources (e.g., 
explore or find contents), (iii) learn, e-learner works to 
attains knowledge, skills and competences using learning 
strategies and techniques (e.g., time management), and (iv) 
reflect, 
e-learner 
reflects 
and 
reacts 
on 
strategies, 
achievements and usefulness (e.g., self-evaluating).  
Third, there is the Recommender Systems (RecSys) e-
learning process. RecSys is applied in various domains, 
however, its application in e-learning significantly varies 
because of e-learning particularities (e.g., long terms 
educational goals) [28]. RecSys internal process focuses on 
two main aspects, either recommending learning resources or 
finding peers who share interests, goals and characteristics 
with the e-learner. Each type has different sequence of 
activities (e.g., finding peers RecSys check the e-learners’ 
history to identify e-learners with similar learning patterns). 
In contrast, resources’ recommendations RecSys require 
further check for the learning model, the domain model and 
the previous feedback.  
Fourth, Adaptive Systems e-learning process varies from 
one system to another, but generally consists of extracting the 
e-learner model, checking which learning goal, objectives or 
tasks need to be accomplished, checking the domain model 
to capture the proper content suitable for that learner, as well 
as proper presentation techniques, presenting contents and 
finally updating learner model based on feedback. 
Situated e-Learning Processes, which covers two main 
processes. First, Communication/Participation-based situated 
e-learning process that is dominated by the learner 
participation and communication with peers and instructor to 
learn new concepts. It shows how interactions can be done in 
situated learning environments. In such learning processes, 
the instructor is mainly facilitator rather than instructor. 
Connectivism learning theory is an active example on this 
category because it shows the roles of the non-human 
appliances in learning processes [21]. Second, we have 
Virtual-Enhanced e-learning (VEL) or Game-Enhanced e-
Learning (GEL) processes, which represent the use of virtual 
world and game-enhanced e-learning systems. Such models 
establish an identity for each e-learner, allow the e-learner to 
explore the whole environment, plan for progress, work 
according to plan, gain some achievements as a result of 
understanding the concepts or the knowledge presented and 
proceed with the next steps [29]. Generalising the above-
mentioned e-learning business processes is introduced in the 
next section. 
C. The Generalised e-Learning Business Process 
Fig. 3 shows the final outcome of applying the early-
proposed approach to develop a generalised e-learning 
process that can lead to different e-learning processes based 
on the hybrid input captured from the e-learner’s context. 
This context must have different behavioural information 
about the e-learner (e.g., his/her knowledge and learning 
preferences), topics, programme, peers, institutions, etc. The 
generalised e-learning process includes the following three 
roles: the e-learner, the instructor and the e-learning system. 
Generally, this e-learning process model consists of four key 
activities, as detailed below.  
First, the e-learner needs to login into the system. This 
includes certain seamless activities (e.g., check the e-
learner’s credentials) to be carried out by the system. Then 
successful login leads to initiating the early-specified 
“learning space” where the e-learner sees whatever is 
available on the system (e.g., modules and courses). The 
Learning Space provides contents/activities (e.g., learning or 
assessment activities) designed by instructors. However, the 
learning space and other activities in the business process 
model are adaptive, dynamic and responsive as they differ 
from one e-learner to another. This is mainly because this e-
learning business process model is supported by a 
comprehensive ontological model that captures the semantics 
of the e-learning process to meet the demands of the e-
learner. This ontological model has been developed based on 
a detailed survey of e-learning models and artefacts. This 
ontological model can not be covered here in detail due to 
space limitation and hence will be covered elsewhere. 
Mainly, it consists of the following eight main constructs: (i) 
eActor: models roles, which interact with the software system 
for certain purposes, (ii) e-Learning Facilitating Tool: 
models the wide range of software tools (e.g., wiki, e-mail, 
etc.) used in e-learning context to facilitate and support e-
learners, (iii) Pedagogy: models different pedagogical 
strands/classification of various e-learning processes, (iv) 
Learning Process: involves activities which are performed by 
stakeholders to achieve specific goals, (v) eActivity: models 
actions done by a specific actor (e.g., e-learner) using a 
facilitating tool or combination of them to achieve a goal, 
(vi) eContext: models information that characterises the 
situation 
of 
an 
entity 
(e.g., 
location 
of 
learning, 
environmental attributes, etc.), (vii) eContent: models subject 
domain contents available for e-learners and (viii) 
Presentation: models the way chosen by a specific actor 
(e.g., instructional designer) to deliver contents. 
For the above ontological model, a large number of 
classes, properties and relations have been designed and 
developed. Using the above details, the generalised e-
learning process can be adapted for a specific e-learner 
behavioural model, which includes his/her skill, knowledge, 
preferences, etc. Second, the e-learner initiates his/her e-
learning process and performs the specified activities. This 
includes various variations based on the captured contextual 
information, as explained above. Third, an assessment step is 
needed either by quick quiz, project or other formative 
assessment tools in order to assess the e-learner’s 
understanding for the presented topic and update his/her 
model accordingly. Four, a decision needs to be made 
whether the goal of the early-initiated e-learning process has 
been met or not. If so, the process will be terminated, 
otherwise the goal or other process elements (e.g., learning 
contents) need to be further refined to achieve the overall 
goal of the e-learning process.  
As explained in the above discussion, significant 
variations of the generalised e-learning process can be 
achieved through out the conditions and gateways available 
in the BPMN model. One variation could be pure 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

behavioural e-learning process, where the e-learner role 
remains at the minimum level (i.e., knowledge recipient). 
Another variation could be self-regulated or problem-based 
learning process, which allows further participation. A 
combination of various elements from both types (i.e., a 
hybrid e-learning process) is possible, as well. This reflects 
the dynamic nature of the e-learning process. One additional 
note here is the different interpretations of e-learning 
activities. For instance, self-regulation and self-monitoring 
processes might be used interchangeably by some of the e-
learners, while they are not, because the latter represents only 
one phase of the former. To resolve this issue, we have 
broken them into more obvious sub-tasks (e.g., identifying 
management strategies and refining goals) to make the e-
learning process more traceable and achievable. Finally, it is 
worth mentioning the scope of the above-developed 
generalised e-learning process since it only reflects fine-
grained learning-oriented processes that occur as part of a 
module. Coarse-grained processes that can cover module or 
programme scale or non-learning-oriented processes are not 
covered in this research and will remain for future work.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The proposed generalisation approach is a bottom-up 
approach, where various e-learning processes have been 
reviewed from the literature and underpinning theories. The 
proposed approach to develop a generalised business process 
from a set of related business processes comprises practice 
(i.e., how the work is done) and theory (i.e., models/theories 
underpinning business logic). In this case, the generalised e-
learning business process model can be described as driven 
by pedagogy and is informed by various e-learning practice 
models. This is based on the lessons learnt from the 
educational domain where e-learners rarely follow one 
learning theory/approach to achieve their learning objectives 
[30]. They usually combine elements from different e-
learning processes which can be achieved by the proposed 
hybrid and generic e-learning process model.  
Incorporating pedagogy in various stages of developing 
the generalisation approach is essential since pedagogy 
explains the added value of using technology in education. 
For instance, wiki can be used for various purposes, but 
proper use of pedagogy (i.e., careful consideration for: (i) 
planning for learning process including the e-learner goals, 
preferences, knowledge, etc., (ii) the goal of the e-learning 
process, (iii) the overall settings of the organisation, etc.) can 
make the use of wiki educationally effective. The adopted 
classifications of the nine e-learning process models 
according to their pedagogical strands illuminates further 
reflections on understanding how different e-learning 
processes are driven and how they can be assessed against 
the attainment of their final goals. It also shows the role that 
Business Process Modelling Notation can play in 
documenting such rich and dynamic processes and to what 
extent these technologies can capture the semantics of the e-
learning domain. Additional feedback on the modelled e-
learning processes is expected to be gained from domain 
experts and other stakeholders (e.g., instructors, e-learners, 
institutions, etc.) because modelling processes in BPMN 
allows them to be understood by non-technical audience, and 
therefore pave the ground for process improvement.  
Various evaluation methodologies have been used to 
evaluate similar artefacts, such as: dataset-driven evaluation, 
user studies and real life testing or case studies. Dataset-
driven or offline experiment evaluation approaches are 
widely used in evaluating e-learning artefacts [31]. Datasets 
used in such experiments can be: (i) extracted from a real 
system interaction history or (ii) artificially constructed to 
test the validity of the proposed approach [32]. Real case 
studies are challenging to adopt due to: (i) the 
comprehensiveness of information required about pedagogy, 
learning style, learner knowledge, etc. which means that 
current 
e-learning 
systems 
do 
not 
have 
such 
a 
comprehensive set of data, (ii) time restrictions, (iii) the need 
for a mature system instead of a prototype, and so on. 
Therefore, the early-proposed generalisation approach has 
been evaluated bottom-up by designing a hypothetical case 
study to test its effectiveness. In this case study, 
representative and sufficient enough cases have been devised 
which are based on certain assumptions to check whether the 
generalised e-learning business process can adapt different 
e-learning processes/paths. In other words, it tests whether it 
is possible for a certain e-learner to receive a tailored e-
learning business process based on his/her learning profile? 
To realise the above-mentioned data-driven approach, 
the following experimental setup is used: (i) PC with MS 
Windows 7, service pack 1, 64 bit OS, 4.00 GB RAM, (ii) 
Eclipse Java EE IDE for web developer version: MARS.1, 
release 4.5.1, (iii) BPMN 2.0, (iv) Protégé Ontology Editor 
to develop the e-learning ontological model, specify and 
instantiate it using Web Ontology Language (OWL 2.0), (v) 
Pellet Reasoner and (vi) SWRL (Semantic Web Rule 
Language). For testing, a set of comprehensive test 
cases/scenarios, acceptance criteria have been derived from 
the generic e-learning framework requirements [1] and 
details are covered elsewhere due to space limitations. As a 
result, the proposed approach demonstrates its ability to 
deliver behavioural, cognitive or situated e-learning 
processes based on the e-learner’s contextual information. It 
also confirms its ability to construct a hybrid e-learning 
approach via combining elements from different categories 
(e.g., self-regulated e-learning and game-based e-learning 
processes) based on the e-learner information. Therefore, the 
proposed e-learning process model is pedagogically 
independent because various pedagogical models can be 
equally represented. In addition, it is computationally 
independent because a standard-based approach has been 
used for modelling purposes. 
This work paves the ground for developing a more 
mature prototype, where real case study and real users are 
involved to test the validity of this approach in meeting 
various e-learners’ demands through a flexible process-based 
approach. Enacted business processes will be orchestrated 
over cloud or SOA-enabled environment so that stakeholders 
or e-learners’ demands can be met through a set of software 
services. Also, the proposed approach and the generalised e-
learning business process model is technology independent 
and have no restrictions if compared to other solutions, such 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

as IMS Learning Design. It is also more detailed in terms of 
covering several e-learning scenarios that could be applied in 
different disciplines. Additionally, it handles the e-learning 
processes in a more comprehensive approach than other 
approaches used in various Adaptive e-Learning Systems or 
Recommender Systems. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
This paper proposed a novel approach to developing 
generalised e-learning business processes model from a set of 
related e-learning business processes sharing the same goals 
and objectives. It has been applied in the e-learning domain, 
which demonstrates its ability to derive business processes 
based on surveying the existing models of learning taking 
into consideration pedagogical models underpinning current 
e-learning 
models 
and 
technology-enhanced 
learning 
artefacts. The proposed hybrid and generalised e-learning 
business process model is flexible and capable to respond to 
the dynamic nature of the e-learning processes. Additionally, 
it has been evaluated to prove its effectiveness. Two further 
research directions are being accomplished; first is the 
development of a comprehensive ontological model to 
effectively contextualise the proposed process models, and 
hence resolve semantic e-learning heterogeneities. Second, is 
the enactment of these process models and orchestration of 
their activities over an SOA-enabled environment. 
  
REFERENCES 
[1]   R. Hammad, M. Odeh, and Z. Khan, “Towards a generic requirements 
model for hybrid and cloud-based e-learning systems” in The IEEE 
5th International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and 
Science (CloudCom), Bristol, UK, Dec. 2013, pp. 106-111. 
[2]   R. D. Boyd and J. W. Apps. “Redefining the Discipline of Adult 
Education,” San Francisco, Jossey-Bass, June1980. 
[3]   M. A. Ould, “Business Processes: Modelling and Analysis for Re-
Engineering and Improvement” Bath, Wiley, June 1995. 
[4]    R. Hammad, M. Odeh and Z. Khan, "eLearner experience model," in 
The 17th International Arab Conference on Information Technology 
(ACIT), Morocco, 2016, pp. 20-28. 
[5]  D. A. Wiley, Connecting learning objects to instructional design 
theory: A definition, a metaphor, and a taxonomy In Wiley, D.A. 
(Ed.), “The Instructional Use of Learning Objects,” Agency for 
Instructional 
Technology, 
Jan 
2002. 
Available: 
http://186.113.12.12/discoext/collections/0309/0001/02740001.pdf. 
[6]  N. Friesen, “Three objections to learning objects and e-learning 
standards,” In R. McGreal, (Ed.) “Online Education using Learning 
Objects,” Routledge, London, Dec. 2004, pp. 59-70. 
[7]  R. Koper and J. Manderveld. “Educational modelling language: 
modelling reusable, interoperable, rich and personalised units of 
learning,” British Journal of Educational Technology, 35(5), pp. 537-
551. Dec 2004, doi:10.1111/j.0007-1013.2004.00412.x. 
[8]  M. Rodriguez-Artacho, “PALO language overview,” Universidad 
Nacional de Education a Distancia. Madrid. Jan 2002, Available: 
http://sensei.lsi.uned.es/palo/PALO-TR.pdf. 
[9]   A. Rawlings, P. Van Rosmalen, R. Koper, M. Rodriguez-Artacho,  
and P. Lefrere, “Survey of educational modelling languages 
(EMLs),” Version 1,” CEN/ISSS WS/LT Learning Technologies 
Workshop, Netherland, September 2002. 
[10] C. M. Stracke, "Interoperability and quality development in e-
learning: overview and reference model for e-learning standards," in 
the proceedings of the Asia-Europe E-Learning Colloquy (E-ASEM), 
Seoul, Jan. 2006, pp. 2-26. 
[11] M. Derntl, S. Neumann, D. Griffiths, and P. Oberhuemer. “The 
conceptual structure of IMS learning design does not impede its use 
for authoring,” IEEE Transaction on Learning Technologies 5(1), 
August 2011, pp. 74-86, doi: dx.doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2011.25.  
[12] J. Torres, J. M. Dodero, I. Aedo, and P. Diaz, “Designing the 
execution of learning activities in complex learning processes using 
LPCEL,” Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on 
Advanced Learning Technologies, Netherland, July 2006, pp. 415-
419. 
[13] S. Neumann, M. et al, “Report of the results of an IMS learning 
design expert workshop,” International Journal of Emerging 
Technologies (iJET) 5(1), Nov. 2009, pp. 58-72.  
[14] D. Burgos, “What is wrong with the IMS learning design 
specification? constraints and recommendations,” Proceedings of 
Lernen Wissen Adaption (LWA) Conference, Germany, Oct. 2010, 
pp. 281-288. 
[15] J. Yong, “Workflow-based e-learning platform,” Proceedings of the 
9th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work in Design, May 2005, pp. 1002-1007. 
[16] R. Gagné Mills., “The conditions of learning,” New York: Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, April 1965. 
[17] D. H. Schunk, “Learning theories: an educational perspective,” 6th 
edition, Massachusetts USA: Pearson, Oct. 2012. 
[18]  J. Greeno, A. Collins, and L. Resnick, “Cognition and learning,” in D. 
Berliner and R. Calfee (Eds.) “Handbook of Educational 
Psychology”, NY: Simon & Schuster Macmillan, June 1996, pp. 189-
198. 
[19] J. B. Watson, “Psychology as the behaviourist views it,” Psychological 
Review, vol. 20, pp. 158-177, 1913.  
[20] E. Wenger and B. Wenger, “Learning in landscapes of practice: a 
framework,” in E. Wenger, M. Fenton-O'Creevy, S. Hutchinson, C. 
Kubiak, and B. Wenger (Eds.) Learning in Landscape of Practice: 
boundaries, identity, and knowledgeability in practice-based learning, 
Routledge, Oxon, pp. 13-29, May 2015.  
[21]  S. Downes, “Places to go: Connectivism & connective knowledge,” 
Innovate: Journal of Online Education, vol. 5(1), Oct. 2008, pp. 11-
18.  
[22]  M. A. Ould, “Business Process Management: A Rigorous Approach,” 
UK: BCS, The Chartered Institute, Meghan-Kiffer Press, Jan. 2005. 
[23]  W. Ma, O. O. Adesope, J. C. Nesbit, and Q. Liu, “Intelligent tutoring 
systems and learning outcomes: A meta-analysis,” Journal of 
Educational Psychology, vol. 106, June 2014, pp. 901-918, doi: 
dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037123. 
[24]  S. Narciss, “Feedback strategies for interactive learning tasks,” in ed., 
J. M. Spector, D. M. Merrill, J. v Merrienboer, and M. Driscoll P. 
(Eds.), Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and 
Technology , 3rd edition, New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 
Feb. 2008, pp. 125-143. 
[25] V. Jurković (Ed), “Guide to problem-based learning,” Slovene 
Association of LSP Teachers, UK, August 2005. 
[26] M. S. Knowles, “Self-Directed Learning,” New York, Association 
Press, Jan. 1975. 
[27] F. Karin, A. Nussbaumer, and D. Albert. “A psycho-pedagogical 
framework for self-regulated learning in a responsive open learning 
environment,” Proceedings of the International Conference eLearning 
Baltics Science (eLBa Science 2010). July 2010, pp. 14-23. 
[28] J. Lu, D. Wu, M. Mao, W. Wang, and G. Zhang, “Recommender 
system application developments: A survey,” Decision Support 
System, 
vol. 
74, 
June 
2015, 
pp. 
12-32, 
doi: 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2015.03.008. 
[29] M. Gil-Ortega and L. Falconer, “Learning spaces in virtual worlds: 
bringing our distance students home,” Journal of Applied Research in 
Higher 
Education, 
vol. 
7(1), 
Jan. 
2015 
pp. 
83-98, 
doi: 
dx.doi.org/10.1108/JARHE-02-2014-0026. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

[30] T. Mayes and S. De Freitas, “Review of e-learning theories, 
frameworks and models,” Joint Information Systems Committee, 
London, 
UK. 
July 
2004, 
[retrieved: 
Dec, 
2016] 
https://curve.coventry.ac.uk/open/file/8ff033fc-e97d-4cb8-aed3-
29be7915e6b0/1/Review%20of%20e-learning%20theories.pdf. 
[31]  K. Verbert, H. Drachsler, N. Manouselis, M. Wolpers, R. Vuorikari, 
and E. Duval, “Dataset-driven research for improving recommender 
systems for learning,” Proceedings of the 1st International Conference 
on Learning Analytics and Knowledge, Feb. 2011, pp. 44-53. 
[32] M. Erdt, A. Fernandez, and C. Rensing, “Evaluating recommender 
systems for technology enhanced learning: A quantitative survey,” 
IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, vol. 8(4), June 2015, 
pp. 326-344. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

