Strategic Agility of an Incumbent Firm and Chief Digital Officer in the Face of 
Digital Innovation: A Microfoundation Approach 
 
Éric Blanchet 
ESG UQAM 
Verosoft Design (VSD) 
Montreal, Canada  
email: blanchet.eric@courrier.uqam.ca  
Pierre Hadaya 
Dept. of Analytics, Operations and IT 
ESG UQAM 
Montreal, Canada 
email: hadaya.pierre@uqam.ca 
Marie-Noëlle Forget 
Dept. of Analytics, Operations and IT 
ESG UQAM 
Montreal, Canada 
email: forget.marie-noelle@uqam.ca  
 
 
Abstract—In today’s business environment, strategic agility is 
critical for large firms, as it enables continuous adjustment of 
the firm’s strategic direction, promoting value creation. In this 
context, some firms have decided to immerse employees in 
external startups to accelerate their digital initiatives. The 
greater flexibility of this startup thus enables it to imagine 
innovative digital products and services. This paper proposes 
that the skills/competencies of the parent firm’s Chief Digital 
Officer (CDO) – the executive who oversees the startup’s 
digital initiatives – positively influence the firm’s strategic 
agility. Drawing on the dynamic capabilities approach and 
microeconomic foundations, the model aims to provide a new 
perspective on the CDO’s contribution when large companies 
create external startups to meet the digital transformation 
challenges. 
Keywords-strategic agility; microfoundations; Chief Digital 
Officer (CDO); startup; digital innovation and transformation. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In today’s competitive, volatile, and uncertain business 
environments, digital transformation has become a crucial 
strategic priority for large firms [1]. Digital technologies, 
such as multi-sided platforms, mobile applications, big data 
analytics, Internet of Things (IoT), and artificial intelligence 
are generating fundamentally new business opportunities, 
fostering digital innovations with distinctive characteristics 
[2][3], with the potential to disrupt traditional businesses [1]. 
To meet the digital transformation challenges and 
accelerate their digitalization via continuous and sustainable 
innovation [4], large firms have built innovation capabilities 
in digital technologies by connecting with startup ecosystems 
[5]. These global firms have adopted a variety of strategies: 
intrapreneurship, setting up startup incubators/accelerators, 
open innovation, investments and equity ownership, and 
startup acquisitions [6]. Recently, a new innovation strategy, 
called excubation, has been adopted by these firms in the 
face of startups, which aims to have some employees work 
outside the company in an accelerator, to explore innovation 
ideas in a limited time frame [7][8]. Startup excubation aims 
to create a new entity, independent from the parent company, 
in the form of a startup focused on digital innovations [7] 
and is considered as a powerful growth driver [8]. 
The steering of digital innovation initiatives led by this 
startup is generally entrusted to an executive and member of 
the firm’s Top Management Team (TMT). In large firms, the 
choice of this executive is dictated by the nature and scope of 
the digital innovation strategy, its relationship to corporate 
strategy [9], and the value and skills/competencies that this 
manager brings [10][11]. The management of the startup’s 
innovations can be entrusted to one of the firm’s executives, 
whose choice may depend on the firm’s digital strategy. If 
the strategy is focused on technology, this executive could be 
the Chief Information Officer (CIO) or the Chief Technology 
Officer (CTO) ; if the digital strategy is focused on data 
management, it could be the Chief Data Officer (CDO) ; if 
the focus is on company-wide innovation, it could be the 
Chief Innovation Officer (CINO) or the CDO, who oversees 
the firm’s digital innovation and transformation. Typically, 
the CDO leads the excubated startup, while the startup’s 
ability to successfully develop and bring digital innovations 
to market reflects the incumbent firm’s strategic agility [12]. 
In these large firms, the CDO is involved in the digital 
innovation management process [13][14]. Since the position 
emerged in the 2000s, practitioners and IS researchers have 
studied the CDO phenomenon [13][14]. Prior studies have 
identified the impacts of CDO skills and competencies on the 
digital transformation of traditional firms [15][16] by 
studying different types of CDO roles [13]-[16], desirable 
skills [17], the nature of digital leadership [18], and 
dimensions of CDO leadership [14]. The firm expects the 
CDO, through their distinctive skills, to positively influence 
the startup’s ability to successfully commercialize digital 
innovations, reflecting a form of strategic agility of the firm. 
Strategic agility has been identified as a key success 
factor for companies [19][20]. Strategic agility represents the 
company’s ability to constantly adjust its strategic axes to 
changing and uncertain environments to deploy innovative 
methods of value creation [19]. Through a combination of 
dynamic capabilities (strategic sensitivity, resource fluidity 
and collective commitment) [19][20], strategic agility refers 
to the ability to act quickly to anticipate change and seize 
opportunities. It is critical for traditional firms driving their 
digital transformation, due to the rapid and unpredictable 
disruptions associated with digital technologies [21]. 
Yet, despite the useful results of these studies, it remains 
unclear why it is relevant to focus on the impact of CDO 
skills and competencies when it comes to the successful 
commercialization of digital innovations carried by large 
firms. One reason is that these studies provide a fragmented 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-051-3
BUSTECH 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

picture of the CDO, with the impact of the CDO being 
studied only through a few aspects, such as types of roles 
[15]-[17], the personal, professional, business, and technical 
competencies targeted [18], or the organizational design of 
the CDO role [14]. Moreover, few studies have focussed on 
how 
or 
under 
what 
conditions 
individual 
factors 
(microfoundations) contribute to or support the go-to-market 
routines of digital innovations that, in turn, lead to strategic 
agility for firms that have created an excubated startup to 
address the challenges of their digital transformation [22]. 
This contrasts with large companies that have chosen more 
traditional ways of managing innovation. For example, the 
CDO who drives innovation in the excubated startup must 
enrich their skills/competencies to succeed in this mission, as 
strategic agility is more necessary in this context than when 
the firm has adopted traditional innovation management. 
Drawing on the microfoundations perspective [23][24] 
and the dynamic capabilities approach [25][26], we seek to 
investigate the individual microfoundations of the CDO 
responsible for digital innovation of an excubated startup of 
a large firm and the relationship with the strategic agility of 
that firm. Our objective is to offer a theoretical perspective to 
better understand the microfoundations of strategic agility of 
pre-digital firms. The research question addressed is: How do 
the skills of the CDO (individual microfoundations) influence 
the strategic agility of an incumbent firm, when it has chosen 
to create an excubated startup to successfully introduce 
digital innovations to the market? 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, we discuss the theories that are mobilized by conducting a 
literature review to develop our model. In Section III, we 
present the model and proposals. In Section IV, we discuss 
the contributions and implications for theory and practice, 
identify limitations and avenues for future research. 
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
In this section, we review the literature upon which our 
conceptual model relies, i.e., literature on the creation of 
excubated startups by incumbent firms, on the CDO’s roles 
and distinctive skills in large companies, as well as on 
strategic agility through the microfoundation approach. 
A. Creation of Excubated Startups by Incumbent Firms 
In order to seize the business opportunities brought about 
by digital transformation, several large firms whose success 
was built during the pre-digital economy [1], have decided to 
create external startups focused on digital innovations, in 
order to compete with the leaders in their industry [7][8]. 
This excubation strategy aims to create a new entity, 
autonomous and independent from the parent company, in 
the form of a startup dedicated to the development and 
commercialization of digital innovations [8]. According to 
Géméto et al. [8], excubation “consists in immersing the 
employees of 
large 
companies 
in external 
startup 
accelerators in order to explore new business opportunities. 
Situated between intrapreneurship and open innovation, 
excubation offers rich lessons on the conditions necessary 
for large companies to succeed in their innovations but also 
to transform themselves into more agile organizations”. It 
aims to offer a more effective alternative to traditional 
approaches to innovation management [7][8], such as the 
development of internal innovation capabilities with 
intrapreneurship; cooperation with open innovation models 
[27] or partnership programs via incubators or accelerators, 
external or internal labs; minority investments in startups, 
partnerships or via investment funds; and the acquisition of 
majority stakes, the buyout, or the acquisition of startups [7]. 
However, these approaches have several limitations [28]. 
First, intrapreneurial projects do not always succeed, due to 
the lack of managers’ entrepreneurial mindset designated by 
the large firm and turned intrapreneurs, limited by the 
internal constraints and the organizational culture of the 
company that deprive them of agility. The use of external 
entrepreneurs recruited to lead these intrapreneurial projects 
is not much more successful than with internal managers, for 
the same reasons, they find it difficult to adapt to the 
constraints of large firms and suffer from a lack of support 
from the TMT [4]. Second, collaborative approaches based 
on open innovation and partnerships between large firms and 
startups are limited by divergent or hardly compatible 
strategies, goals, interests, and cultures. Several studies have 
examined startups that view such collaboration as mere 
window dressing, allowing large firms to communicate their 
ability to innovate and their agility, rather than leveraging 
cooperation and making it a powerful engine of growth 
[5][6]. Moreover, incubators, accelerators, labs/fablabs, may 
suffer from a lack of critical size and real resources to ensure 
their development [6]. Furthermore, the “corporate ventures” 
investment approach [5][6] is difficult to implement, as it 
requires investing large sums of money to obtain a 15% to 
20% stake in startups without having control over them, 
which limits their growth potential. Finally, the process of 
buying or acquiring successful startups requires significant 
investments, even more so for technology startups, as well 
the integration of the startup’s managers and teams into the 
company’s structure and culture remains problematic [5]. 
As a result, excubation, allows employees of a large firm 
to work outside the firm in an external startup accelerator to 
explore an innovation opportunity [7]. Excubation aims to 
address the limitations of usual approaches by combining the 
strength of the large company with the organizational agility 
of the startup [8]. For large corporations that have adopted 
excubation, the benefits are numerous [8]. Examples include 
better alignment between the firm innovation goals and the 
startup’s ability to develop and commercialize innovations, 
the startup’s vocation to act as a growth engine for the parent 
company [5], the operational speed made possible by a team 
mastering rapid development methods, while freeing itself 
from the constraints and administrative procedures of the 
parent company, in order to grow faster [29]. 
More specifically, the excubation of startups has at least 
two benefits for a large firm. The first is that the firm’s CDO, 
whose additional mission is to oversee the startup’s digital 
innovation projects, should have a positive influence on the 
success of the projects, especially because of their skills [30]. 
The second benefit is the company’s increased strategic 
agility, not only because of the startup’s flexible structure, 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-051-3
BUSTECH 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

but above all, because of the startup’s superior ability to 
develop and commercialize digital innovations [12]. 
B. CDO’s Roles and Distinctive Skills in Large Companies 
In order to drive digital transformation, large firms have 
created a dedicated role within their TMT and appointed a 
Chief Digital Officer [13][32]. Since the mid-2000s, the 
widespread presence and growing influence of the CDO role 
has been an interesting phenomenon studied by researchers 
and practitioners alike [13]-[16][31][32]. These studies 
suggest that the decision to create a CDO position stems 
from the strategic nature of digital transformation, the 
urgency to drive it, and the need for coordination with other 
functions to define and deploy a digital strategy [21][31]. 
A review of the CDO literature (e.g., [13][14]) shows 
that the presence of the CDO in the strategy and operations 
of large firms can be explained in particular by the CDO’s 
impact on firm performance [18]. This impact can take many 
forms: it can be positive tactical and operational outcomes 
related to maintaining or increasing the firm’s innovation 
capabilities, improving customer engagement via big data 
analytics, or recognizing the strategic nature of the CDO role 
beyond expected responsibilities [16][31]. In contrast, other 
work suggests that the CDO role may be temporary ([14], p. 
16), because it could disappear or merge with other roles. 
This focus on the CDO emphasizes the importance of 
identifying and developing the skills/competencies expected 
of the role. Several recent studies have proposed such skills 
and competencies, which have subsequently allowed for the 
elaboration of CDO role typologies and the characterization 
of the requirements and limitations of each type of CDO role 
[13][14]. This article also aims to explain the conditions for 
the emergence or antecedents of the presence of the CDO 
role, and the skills required to meet digital challenges [15]. 
The following are some examples of prior studies. Haffke 
et al. [13] identified four CDO roles: the digital innovator, 
who innovates on strategies and customer experience; the 
digitization coordinator, who manages transformation and 
monitors change initiatives; the digital advocate, who 
communicates change across business functions to facilitate 
cooperation; and the digital evangelist, who promotes the 
need for and benefits of digital transformation. In the same 
vein, Singh and Hess [14] identify three roles (entrepreneur, 
digital evangelist, coordinator) and five competencies (IT 
competency, change management skills, inspiration skills, 
digital pioneering skills, resilience). Tumbas et al [15][16] 
identify digital capabilities of successful CDOs, which are 
combinations of skills (digital innovation, data analytics, 
customer engagement) and three profiles of CDOs: digital 
accelerator, digital marketer, and digital harmonizer, each 
profile focusing on one of the digital capabilities. Finally, 
Tahvanainen and Luoma [17] identify four categories and 28 
competencies (personal, professional, business, and technical 
competencies) and compare them to those of IT leaders. This 
study identified the CDO as also a business developer and 
change agent. 
C. Strategic Agility through the Microfoundation Approach 
Strategic agility is the ability of a firm to continuously 
adapt to changing contexts [19][20]. Work on strategic 
agility has been done in various streams of research [24], 
such as strategy, management, IS, innovation management, 
digital entrepreneurship, and among practitioners. 
On the other hand, the dynamic capabilities perspective 
[23] [24] emphasizes how firms dynamically reconfigure 
their resources to generate new capabilities and respond to 
unpredictable changes in their environment. Teece [33] 
defines three dynamic capabilities: sensing capability, which 
aims to identify opportunities and threats; seizing capability, 
which aims to seize opportunities; reconfiguring capability, 
which aims to maintain competitiveness by enhancing, 
combining, and reconfiguring firm assets. Prior studies have 
used dynamic capabilities to inform the notion of agility, 
explaining the extent and speed with which firms perform 
reconfiguration of their resources [33][34]. Strategic agility 
is considered a meta-capability, a combination of capabilities 
[19][20][22]. Doz and Kosonen [19][20] posited that 
strategic agility is formed by three dimensions: strategic 
sensitivity, resource fluidity, and collective commitment. 
However, despite the usefulness of these studies, the 
mechanisms at individual level by which a firm’s strategic 
agility manifests itself have yet to be clarified. In particular, 
studies on innovation management, digital entrepreneurship, 
and startup creation by pre-digital firms [5]-[8] show that 
microfoundations emanating from the behaviors and skills of 
key individuals in startups are not well understood, because 
their contributions are aggregated to the organizational level 
of analysis and thus invisible [23]. It is therefore not possible 
to identify individual contributions. Microfoundations reflect 
individual actions that shape strategy and organization [24]. 
Teece [33] defines “the microfoundations of dynamic 
capabilities – the distinct skills, processes, procedures, 
organizational structures, decision rules, and disciplines – 
which undergird enterprise-level sensing, seizing, and 
reconfiguring capacities are difficult to develop and deploy” 
([33], p. 1319). By focusing on microfoundations, we believe 
that the firm strategic agility lies on individuals, processes, 
and interactions, as well as context and structures to function 
[34]. As a result, studying agility beyond the organizational 
level of analysis should improve our understanding. In their 
review of the agility literature, Tallon et al [35] state that 
early conceptualizations of agility focused on the adaptation 
of the organization to the environment, meaning that the 
evolution of the organization depends on its ability to adapt 
to changes in its environment. The authors note that previous 
work on agility has focused on the organization as a unit of 
analysis, and little on individual factors, which would 
explain the challenge of identifying individual contribution. 
III. 
THEORY DEVELOPMENT AND PROPOSITIONS 
We mobilize the microfoundations perspective with the 
aim of advancing research on the strategic agility of large 
traditional firms. Our position is that the microfoundations 
allow us to extend our understanding of corporate strategic 
agility (macro-level phenomenon) with mechanisms that 
operate at a micro-level (individual microfoundations). More 
precisely, we mobilize Coleman’s framework [36] to study 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-051-3
BUSTECH 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

the microfoundations of strategic agility. Indeed, Coleman 
suggested that a macro-level phenomenon (here, the strategic 
agility of large firms) can be explained by the aggregation of 
the actions of an individual actor (the firm’s CDO). These 
actions, in turn, are determined by specific conditions related 
to the individual and are only slightly influenced by macro-
level variables [36]. 
In what follows, we posit that these individual action 
conditions are represented by the CDO’s skills. In line with 
Coleman’s framework (“boat”) [36], these conditions act as 
determinants of the microfoundations of strategic agility. Our 
model considers the actors of the startup’s ecosystem, who 
interact through the CDO’s skills (microfoundations), thus 
stimulating the firm’s strategic agility [31][32]. Fig. 1 gives 
an overview of our model which we describe in this section. 
A. CDO’s Skills/Competencies and Strategic Agility 
We theorize the relationship of the CDO, who drives the 
digital innovations of the excubated startup, through their 
skills/competencies, with the firm’s strategic agility, which is 
represented by the startup’s excubation. As mentioned in our 
literature review, the common thread of these studies lies in 
the distinctiveness of the CDO’s skill/competencies. When 
large firms drive their digital transformation in a changing 
environment, the key skills of the CDO most decisive for 
success are those that contribute to the achievement of the 
role’s main objectives [21][30][32], which can be broken 
down into three categories. 
The first objective of the CDO is to develop and 
successfully implement the digital strategy, which may 
result from merging the firm’s business strategy with the IT 
strategy [3][21]. It should be noted that, depending on the 
digital goals set, the responsibility for driving the digital 
strategy may be assumed – in whole or in part – by a senior 
executive in the TMT other than the CDO. Indeed, the CIO 
could oversee the digital strategy if it is focused on the 
business value of technologies and their uses. It could be the 
CTO, if the focus is on IT infrastructure or platforms, the 
CINO, if the focus is on technological innovations, or the 
Chief Data Officer, if the focus is on data management. The 
Chief Marketing Officer (CMO) may also be a candidate if 
the digital strategy is focused on improving the customer 
engagement and experience [11]. Choosing the right senior 
executive to lead the company’s digital strategy depends on 
the value and skills/competencies they can bring [10][17]. 
 
Figure 1.  Proposed conceptual model. 
The second objective of the CDO touches on the design, 
development, and commercialization of the startup’s digital 
innovations, recognizing the nature of digital innovation, 
conceptualized as “the creation of (and consequent change 
in) market offerings, business processes, or models that 
result from the use of digital technology” ([3], p. 224). 
Finally, the third objective is related to the CDO’s ability 
to provide strategic leadership. The CDO’s strategic 
leadership can be defined as the ability to convince internal 
decision makers and employees of the need to digitally 
transform and to demonstrate the benefits that will come 
from that transformation [14]. The literature on CDOs, like 
that on TMT, emphasizes the bottom-up nature of the 
 
managers’ interactions with the line manager – in the case of 
the CDO, this is the CEO or COO in a large firm – and the 
top-down nature with the supervised teams – in the case of 
the CDO, these teams include the excubated startup’s digital 
innovation management team [31][32]. As such, we posit 
that the unique CDO skills/competencies that can positively 
influence strategic agility focus on digital strategy direction, 
digital innovation management, and strategic leadership. The 
preceding discussion leads us to the following proposals: 
P1a-1c: The CDO (a) digital strategy, (b) digital 
innovation, and (c) strategic leadership skills are positively 
associated with the firm’s strategic agility. 
B. The Moderating Effect of the Innovation Ecosystem 
We theorize the relationship between the actors of the 
startup’s business and innovation ecosystem and the CDO. 
To succeed, the CDO must maintain a close relationship with 
the ecosystem’s actors in which the startup is immersed. The 
concept of business ecosystems was introduced in the 1990s 
by Moore [27][29] and refers to business networks that are 
formed beyond territorial limits, since cooperation between 
firms is on an international scale. The ecosystem refers to 
actors (organizations, firms, startups, universities, investors, 
resources, etc.) that interact to promote innovation. 
Consequently, the CDO’s responsibility is broadened: 
drawing on the CDO skills in digital strategy, digital 
innovation, and strategic leadership, they are led to play a 
role as facilitator between the firm, the excubated startup, 
and its ecosystem [7][8]. This relationship is essential, as the 
startup’s ability to successfully design, prototype, develop, 
and commercialize digital innovations depends on the quality 
of its interactions with its ecosystem [27]. To the extent that 
the CDO plays a facilitating role with the ecosystem actors, 
it follows that the ecosystem exerts a positive influence on 
the relationship between the CDO represented by the three 
core skills/competencies and the firm strategic agility. The 
preceding discussion leads us to the following proposals: 
P2a-2c: The ecosystem in which the startup is immersed 
has a positive moderating effect on the relationship between 
(a) the CDO digital strategy skills and strategic agility; (b) 
the CDO digital innovation skills and strategic agility; and 
(c) the CDO strategic leadership skills and strategic agility. 
C. Strategic Agility and Digital Innovation Success 
We theorize the relationship between the firm’s strategic 
agility and the digital innovation go-to-market success. Like 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-051-3
BUSTECH 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Doz and Kosonen [19][20], we conceptualize strategic 
agility along three dimensions (strategic sensitivity, resource 
fluidity, and collective commitment) and show that each 
dimension promotes innovation market success. 
First, strategic sensitivity allows the firm to obtain useful 
information from its environment, detect opportunities and 
internal constraints according to strategic priorities, market, 
and competitive conditions [19]. Via strategic sensitivity, the 
firm is aware of capabilities, technologies, and processes 
useful for designing, developing, and launching innovations. 
By increasing its strategic sensitivity, the firm will identify 
unmet market needs and changes in its environment, which 
generates favorable conditions for developing and launching 
innovations [19][20]. Thus, we posit that strategic sensitivity 
exerts a positive impact on the successful commercialization 
of the excubated startup’s innovations. 
Second, resource fluidity, another dimension of strategic 
agility, supports effective management of the innovation 
portfolio. The ability to allocate and reallocate resources is 
critical to the development of innovations. When resource 
fluidity increases, internal processes become more flexible 
and easily modified [19]. As resources (financial, human, 
technological, etc.) become more mobile within the firm, 
greater flexibility is achieved, allowing for reorganization or 
redeployment of resources, and supporting strategic goals, 
such as driving digital transformation or managing a 
portfolio of innovations. Resource fluidity plays a key role in 
facilitating the process by which the group reassesses its 
innovation portfolio. Resource (re)allocation leads the firm 
to revise its cost and revenue structure, including that of the 
innovation portfolio, to reflect changing priorities [20]. Thus, 
we posit that resource fluidity exerts a positive influence on 
the market success of innovations managed by the startup. 
Finally, collective commitment, refers to the managerial 
commitment of the company, which fosters organizational 
adaptation in the face of rapid and unexpected changes in the 
environment. Studies on dynamic capabilities suggest that 
when a new opportunity is perceived, management decisions 
must be made quickly to take advantage of that opportunity 
[19]. These collective management decisions are essential for 
internal changes aimed at innovation management processes 
[19]. Obtaining a collective commitment from the TMT, and 
in particular from the CDO, plays a central role in resolving 
conflicts and allows delicate situations to be resolved. As a 
result, we posit that collective commitment positively 
influences the success of bringing innovations managed by 
the startup to market. This leads us to the following proposal: 
P3: Strategic agility (i.e., strategic sensitivity, resource 
fluidity, collective commitment) is positively associated with 
the success of digital innovations managed by the startup 
excubated by a large incumbent firm. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
Digital transformation is causing radical changes in the 
way large firms do business. To stay in the race, some of 
them decide to excubate a startup, i.e., to create an external 
startup, involving its ecosystem and allocating resources to 
build a portfolio of innovations to bring them successfully to 
market. The CDO, who oversees the digital innovations of 
the excubated startup, plays a key role as his/her distinctive 
skills positively influence the firm strategic agility. 
We propose a model of this phenomenon in which three 
types of CDO skills/competencies (in digital strategy, digital 
innovation, and strategic leadership) are microfoundations of 
strategic agility (strategic sensitivity, resource fluidity, and 
collective commitment). As well, strategic agility mediates 
the relationship between the CDO skills and the innovation 
go-to-market success. And we postulate that the ecosystem, 
which is critical to the growth of the startup, moderates the 
relationship between CDO skills and strategic agility. 
We believe that this paper makes four contributions. 
First, we contribute to the study of microfoundations by 
conceptualizing the impact of the CDO skills (individual 
microfoundations) responsible for the digital innovations of 
an excubated startup on the strategic agility of a large firm 
leading a digital transformation. This contribution adds to the 
literature on the microfoundations of strategic agility [34], of 
large firms in the context of digital transformation. Second, 
by positing that the ecosystem in which the excubated startup 
is embedded plays moderating roles along microfoundations 
and dimensions of strategic agility, we emphasize the place 
of the ecosystem in the growth of startups. Third, we add 
insights to digital transformation research, in particular, on 
the relationship between dynamic capabilities and digital 
transformation [21]. We study the phenomenon from the 
perspective of CDOs involved in digital innovation. Prior 
studies have taken this approach to explain other digital 
transformation outcomes, such as the determinants of CDO 
performance [32] but neglecting strategic agility. Fourth, 
from a practical perspective, our model should be of interest 
to CDOs managing an innovation portfolio, as it highlights a 
new contribution of CDOs to innovation management. 
We are aware that our model has limitations. First, it has 
only scratched the surface of the relation between strategic 
agility and microfoundations. A growing body of work 
focuses on the microfoundations of strategy [34], suggesting 
that researchers are looking at individual factors to explain 
phenomena at a more micro level. Second, we only included 
the skills/competencies of CDOs that reflect the goals of the 
role. More specific work needs to be done to identify a more 
general set of expected CDO skills in digital innovation. 
Furthermore, our model provides a partial understanding 
of the CDO’s role regarding digital innovation. Therefore, 
our model did not explore other themes related to the skills 
of the CDO, such as digital culture, strategic use of IT, firm’s 
dynamic capabilities during a digital transformation, etc. We 
encourage future research into these relationships, which will 
provide more specific explanations of the role of the CDO. 
In addition, we chose the excubation approach, as it 
represents a strong trend among large firms [7]. Finally, as 
our objective was exclusively to develop a conceptual model, 
we chose not to test the model. The model could be tested by 
operationalizing the CDO’s skills/competencies [17] through 
interviews with CDOs from different industries, following 
for example the approach taken by [14][15], who conducted 
semi-structured and exploratory interviews. We encourage 
future research to test and extend this model to clarify the 
impact of the CDO’s role on digital innovation. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-051-3
BUSTECH 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

REFERENCES 
[1] C. Klos, P. Spieth, T. Clauss, and C. Klusmann, “Digital 
transformation of incumbent firms: A business model 
innovation perspective,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering 
Management, vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 2017-2033, 2023. 
[2] R. G. Fichman, B. L. Dos Santos, and Z. Zheng, “Digital 
innovation as a fundamental and powerful concept in the 
information systems curriculum,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 38, no. 
2, pp. 329–A15, 2014. 
[3] S. Nambisan, K. Lyytinen, A. Majchrzak, and M. Song, 
“Digital innovation management,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 41, 
no. 1, pp. 223-238, 2017. 
[4] A. Braganza, Y. Awazu, and K. C. Desouza, “Sustaining 
innovation 
is 
challenge 
for 
incumbents,” 
Research-
Technology Management, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 46-56, 2009. 
[5] A. Skala, Digital startups in transition economies. Challenges 
for management, entrepreneurship, and education. Cham, 
Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan/Springer Nature, 2019. 
[6] H. 
Zaheer, 
Y. 
Breyer, 
and 
J. 
Dumay, 
“Digital 
entrepreneurship: An interdisciplinary structured literature 
review and research agenda,” Technological Forecasting and 
Social Change, vol. 148, 119735, pp. 1-20, 2019. 
[7] M. Géméto, D. Chabaud, and I. Barth, “Excuber pour 
innover : une nouvelle voie pour les grandes entreprises ?” 
Entreprendre & Innover, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 30-41, 2020. 
[8] M. Géméto and I. Barth, “L’excubation : vers une nouvelle 
gouvernance de l’innovation,” in La gouvernance dans tous 
ses états, M. Dufour et al., Eds. Paris: EMS Éditions, pp. 
322-342, 2021. 
[9] F. Svahn, L. Mathiassen, and R. Lindgren, “Embracing 
digital innovation in incumbent firms: How Volvo Cars 
managed competing concerns,” MIS Quarterly, vol 41, no. 1, 
pp. 239-254, 2017. 
[10] A. Buchwald and F. Lorenz, “Who is in charge of digital 
transformation? The birth and rise of the Chief Digital 
Officer,” Academy of Management Proceedings, no. 1, 
14317, pp. 1-33, 2020. 
[11] J. Taylor and J. Vithayathil, “Who delivers the bigger bang 
for the buck: CMO or CIO?” The Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 207-220, 2018. 
[12] N. Islam, P. Buxman, and N. Eling, “Why should incumbent 
firms jump on the start-up bandwagon in the digital era? A 
qualitative study,” Proc. der 13. Internationalen Tagung W. 
(WI 2017) St. Gallen, Switzerland, 2017, pp. 1378-1392. 
[13] I. Haffke, B. Kalgovas, and A. Benlian, “The role of the CIO 
and the CDO in an organization’s digital transformation,” 
Proc. of the 37th International Conference on Information 
Systems (ICIS 2016), Dublin, Ireland, 2016, pp. 1-20. 
[14] A. Singh and T. Hess, “How Chief Digital Officers promote 
the digital transformation of their companies,” MIS 
Quarterly Executive, vol 16, no. 1, pp. 1-17, 2017. 
[15] S. Tumbas, N. Berente, and J. Brocke, “Three types of CDOs 
and the reasons organizations adopt the role,” MIS Quarterly 
Executive, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 121-134, 2017. 
[16] S. Tumbas, N. Berente, and J. vom Brocke, “Digital 
innovation and institutional entrepreneurship: Chief Digital 
Officer perspectives of their emerging role,” Journal of 
Information Technology, vol. 33, pp. 188-202, 2018. 
[17] S. Tahvanainen and E. Luoma, “Examining the competencies 
of the CDO,” Proc. of 24th Americas Conference on 
Information Systems (ACIS 2018), 2018, pp. 1-10. 
[18] J. A. Porfírio, T. Carrilho, J. A. Felício, and J. Jardim, 
“Leadership characteristics and digital transformation,” 
Journal of Business Research, vol. 124, pp. 610-619, 2021. 
[19] Y. Doz and M. Kosonen, Fast strategy: How strategic agility 
will help you stay ahead of the game. Harlow, GB: Wharton 
School Publishing/Pearson Education, 2008. 
[20] Y. Doz, “Fostering strategic agility: How individual 
executives and human resource practices contribute,” Human 
Resource Management Review, vol. 30, pp. 1-14, 2020. 
[21] G. Vial, “Understanding digital transformation: A review and 
a research agenda,” The Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 118-144, 2019. 
[22] S. Bresciani, A. Ferraris, M. Romano, and G. Santoro, 
“Agility for successful digital transformation,” in Digital 
transformation management for agile organizations: A 
compass to sail the digital world, S. Bresciani et al., Eds. 
Emerald Publishing Limited, pp. 167-187, 2021. 
[23] P. Abell, T. Felin, and N. Foss, “Building micro‐foundations 
for the routines, capabilities, and performance links,” 
Managerial and Decision Economics, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 489-
502, 2008. 
[24] T. Felin and N. Foss, “Strategic organization: A field in 
search of micro-foundations,” Strategic Organization, vol. 3, 
no. 4, pp. 441-455, 2005. 
[25] R. Adner and C. E. Helfat, “Corporate effects and dynamic 
managerial capabilities,” Strategic Management Journal, vol. 
24, no. 10, pp. 1011-1025, 2003. 
[26] C. E. Helfat and M. A. Peteraf, “Managerial cognitive 
capabilities 
and 
the 
microfoundations 
of 
dynamic 
capabilities,” Strategic Management Journal, vol. 36, no. 6, 
pp. 831-850, 2015. 
[27] H. W. Chesbrough, Open innovation. The new imperative for 
creating and profiting from technology. Boston, MA: 
Harvard Business School Press, 2003. 
[28] W. R. Carter and G. A. Jackson, “Clockspeed, competition, 
and cooperation: incumbent motives and the market for 
ideas,” Journal of Small Business & Entrepreneurship, vol. 
32, no. 3, pp. 241-264, 2020. 
[29] E. Ries, The lean startup: How today’s entrepreneurs use 
continuous innovation to create radically successful 
businesses. New York, NY: Crown Business, 2011. 
[30] J. Berbel-Vera, M. B. Palanca, and M. B. Gonzalez-Sanchez, 
“Key CDO functions for successful digital transformation: 
Insights from a Delphi study,” Technological Forecasting 
and Social Change, vol. 181, 121773, pp. 1-16, 2022. 
[31] S. Firk, A. Hanelt, J. Oehmichen, and M. Wolff, “CDOs: An 
analysis 
of 
the 
presence 
of 
a 
centralized 
digital 
transformation role”, Journal of Management Studies, vol. 
58, no. 7, pp. 1800-1831, 2021. 
[32] S. Kunisch, M. Menz, and R. Langan, “CDOs: an 
exploratory analysis of their emergence, nature, and 
determinants,” Long Range Planning, vol. 55, pp. 1-18, 
2022. 
[33] D. J. Teece, “Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature 
and 
microfoundations 
of 
(sustainable) 
enterprise 
performance,” Strategic Management Journal, vol. 28, no. 
13, pp. 1319-1350, 2007. 
[34] N. Foss, “Microfoundations in strategy: Content, current 
status and future prospects,” in Strategic management: State 
of the field and its future, M. Duhaime et al., Eds. Oxford 
University Press, pp. 559-577, 2021. 
[35] P. P. Tallon, M. Queiroz, T. Coltman, and R. Sharma, 
“Information technology and the search for organizational 
agility: 
A 
systematic 
review 
with 
future 
research 
possibilities,” The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 
vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 218-237, 2019. 
[36] C. 
Crick 
and 
E. 
K 
Chew, 
“Microfoundations 
of 
organizational 
agility: 
a 
socio-technical 
perspective,” 
Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems, vol. 46, paper 12, pp. 273-295, 2020. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-051-3
BUSTECH 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

