Assessing the Environmental Impact: A Case of 
Business Process Analysis in the Automotive 
Industry  
 
Olga Levina, Marcus Behrend  
Department of Systems Analysis and IT Technische Universität Berlin  
Berlin, Germany  
{Olga.levina.1, mbehrend}@tu-berlin.de 
 
 
Abstract— Sustainability management is has been in the focus 
of the enterprises for several years now. Communal and 
private organizations are interested in sustainable solutions 
and practices for their operations. Software systems and their 
underlying business processes are ubiquitous and fundamental 
for most of the organizations of our industrial society. Hence, 
sustainability aspects must be integrated into the information 
systems architecture and into the business process life cycle. 
Using the action research approach for the environmentally 
focused business analysis of an automotive supplier we provide 
insights on how measuring the environmental effect of a 
business process can affect its optimization. We also show how 
a more process aware software can generate enhance 
environmental indicators beyond its own resource use 
optimization. By including environmental indicators into the 
classic process performance measuring this approach allows 
researchers and practitioners integrating environmental 
performance goals into the processes and their analysis. 
Keywords- 
Measuring 
environmental 
impact; 
action 
research; business process management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The increasing awareness of customers and the general 
public for sustainability and environmental impact on the one 
hand and legislative requirements on the other hand motivate 
more and more organizations to keep track on their 
environmental impact [1]. Public and private organizations 
are interested in finding and using sustainable solutions and 
practices. Thus, sustainability needs to be considered on all 
organizational 
levels. 
To 
support 
the 
transition 
to 
sustainability, the organisation need to integrate aspects into 
the business processes and their management. Past research 
has indicated that, in order to become green, organizations 
need to embed sustainability-related targets at all levels of 
business, starting from the strategy level [2]. Consequently, 
business analysis needs to accommodate sustainability-
related factors to be able to measure and control them. This 
step not only allows for controlling the accomplishment of 
sustainability-related targets, but also creates transparency 
and awareness [3]. 
Building on this reasoning, the research question here is: 
What insights can process analysis provide on sustainability-
related optimization aspects? Being a research-in-progress, 
we focus on the environmental aspects of the general set of 
problems of sustainability. Furthermore, the effects of the 
derived management actions changed the environmental 
impact of the enterprise will be addressed in future studies. 
In this paper we consider the environmental perspective 
of a business process and its contributions to achieving the 
environmental goals of an enterprise. Therefore, we define 
environmentally relevant process characteristics based on an 
online survey among environmental officers as well as on the 
literature review. Furthermore, we develop a list of indicators 
that includes the “classic” key performance indicators (KPI) 
as well as KPIs that measure the environmental impact of a 
business process. Using these indicators we assess a real-life 
processes from the automotive industry in regard to their 
environmental impact. Additionally, we suggest process 
optimization measures. Here, we use action research (AR) 
paradigm to provide insights on the environmental process 
assessment. The researchers are “participant observers” as 
required by Baskerville and Myers [4]. This paper presents 
the first two stages of the AR in Information Systems (IS) as 
described by [4]. We define the research problem and 
position our research in the domain of business analysis with 
theoretical background of design and action [5], here the soft 
system methodology [6]. As the second stage, an action 
needs to result from the research activities. The results of the 
analysed enterprise and business process were presented to 
the process owners and sustainability officer inducing the 
process re-engineering actions but also the social reasoning 
on the action and its results for the theoretical domain it was 
initiate from introducing stages three and four of AR. The 
pragmatic approach of AR provides the researcher with the 
method that helps explain why things work [4] and thus 
provides a valuable feedback to the theory the research 
question is grounded in. 
This 
research 
contributes 
to 
a 
process-focused 
discussions between business and IT managers to enable a 
common understanding of processes and the resulting 
opportunities to make these processes and thus the 
organization more sustainable [7]. We focus on the process-
oriented techniques, as this view allows leveraging the power 
of information systems for a transition to a more 
environmentally friendly process and organization [7]. The 
defined indicators can be applied by business process 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-467-1
BUSTECH 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

managers, sustainability officers, business process analysts 
as well as researchers in the area of green IS. 
To present our research findings we review related work 
on assessment of environmental process indicators in section 
two. The research method is describe in section three, while 
section four describes the studies process and indicator 
structure followed by the process assessment results and the 
implications for change. The paper finishes with the 
discussion of the gained insights and outlook on our future 
work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The information 
systems 
(IS) 
domain 
addresses 
sustainability under the aspects of information technology 
(IT), software and business processes. Also, the notion of the 
Key environmental indicators (KEI) is gaining popularity in 
the domain of performance management. Reiter et al. [8] 
introduce a combined approach of IT and BPM for efficient 
energy use in a process. Cleven et al. [9] discuss the 
capabilities required to measure and manage sustainability 
performance on a process level by providing a capability 
maturity model (CMM) for green process performance 
management capabilities. Goldkuhl and Lind [10] address 
the process design phase by presenting an extended process 
modelling approach for capturing and documenting the 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions produced during the 
execution of a business process as well as an accordant 
analysis method. The calculation methods for the carbon 
footprint of a process already being explored by e.g. [11]–
[15]. Betz [16] describes an approach for a sustainability 
aware business process management using XML-nets. 
Among these works, two general measurement approaches 
can be distinguished: Cooper and Fava (2006) suggest a 
bottom-up approach from the process analysis perspective, 
while Pan and Kraines (2001) describe a top-down 
perspective incorporated in the environmental input-output 
analysis. Heijungs and Suh (2006) combine the two 
approaches. Nowak et al. [17] present a methodology and 
architecture for green BPR, providing a starting point for 
green process analysis and re-design. Further methods for 
process analysis towards environmental potentials are 
presented in [18]. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
Following Baskerville et al. [4] our research is based on 
the pragmatism premise. Thus, we first establish the purpose 
of the action research and its theoretical background. Given 
our research question of how and to what level to assess 
environmental effect of a business process, the theoretical 
background here is the soft systems methodology [6]. To 
assure that the problem setting includes practical action [4] 
we identified business units that are producing the highest 
environmental effect by distributing an online survey among 
environmental officers of the enterprises. The survey was 
sent to 87 enterprises and was designed to answer the 
question about which business division in the enterprise 
depending on the amount of greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions. A follow up question was, what business area the 
sustainability responsible considers to have the highest 
potential to reduce its environmental impact in future as 
required by German legislation on GHG emissions for 
enterprises. The final set consisted of 74 answered surveys. 
To compose the evaluation system for environmental and 
business performance, the environmental indicators where 
collected from Eco-Management and Audit Scheme [19], an 
environmental management scheme based on EU-Regulation 
1221/2009, as well as from German environmental 
legislation. They were filtered towards redundancy as well as 
the relevance and feasibility of process performance 
evaluation.  
To assess the environmental effects, a real-life company, 
a testing company as automotive supplier, was contacted. 
The testing division, i.e. quality assurance unit, was chosen 
as an object analysis. For process identification and 
documentation interviews with process actors and owners 
were led. The process was modelled using BPMN and is 
shown in Fig. 1. The results of the process analysis where 
communicated back to the process owners and actors as well 
as the environmental officer. The discussion concerning their 
realization was initiated with the middle and upper 
management. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The results of the online survey concerning the definition 
of the environmentally relevant business divisions resulted in 
64% of the respondents identifying the manufacturing 
division as the business unit with the highest GHG emissions 
as well as the business area that will be affected by the 
legislation for emission reduction the most, according to 
70% of the respondents. Facility management (11%) as well 
as logistics (10%) are seen as the business units with high 
environmental impact. Although, quality assurance was 
named as one of the emission intensive areas by only 8% of 
the respondents, 11% considered it to have a reduction 
potential concerning the future emissions. 
A. 
Environmental Indicators 
Based on literature review of sustainability indicators as 
well as on the environmental standard of EMAS III we 
identified environmental indicators that can be collected on 
the process level. Categories included into this KPI structure 
are listed in Table 1 as: biodiversity, mobility and employee 
information as well as classic indicators of process 
performance. 
TABLE I.  
KPI STRUCTURE INCLUDING ENVIRONMENTAL 
INDICATORS 
Category  
Indicator (Example) 
Energy efficiency 
Total energy consumption p.a. in MWh 
Total energy consumption of renewable energy 
Percentage of renewable energy consumption on total 
energy consumption 
Resource 
efficiency 
p.a./ without energy and water in t 
Water usage 
p.a. in m3 
Biodiversity 
Usage of built-up area in m3 
Waste 
p.a.in t 
toxic waste p.a. in t 
Emission 
Of Green House Gas (GHG) in tCO2 equivalent p.a. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-467-1
BUSTECH 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Mobility 
p.a. in km: transport, business fleet, business travel 
per person in flight/train, fuel consumption, parking 
space for cars/bikes per employee 
Employee 
information  
Number of sustainability workshops; number of 
suggested 
and 
realized 
sustainability 
related 
improvements 
Realization of the 
Environmental 
Management 
System (EMS) 
Number of EMS related workshops, number of days 
and costs related to EMS maintenance 
Time 
Response, processing, cycle time, set-up time 
Cost 
Failure, overall. Resources 
Quality 
Usability, accuracy, life expectancy, reliability 
Capacity  
Bottle-necks, machine efficiency, throughput 
Flexibility 
Temporal, structural, volume 
Integration 
Degree of automation, information flow, information: 
transparency, granularity, accessibility 
Complexity 
Degree of: standardization, structure; organizational 
and process interfaces 
B. Studied Process 
The process chosen for the environmental analysis is 
situated in the quality assurance domain. The considered 
enterprise is a service provider for testing of automotive 
products. Thus, the analysed testing process is a core process 
for the service provider and is modelled in Fig. 1. The 
company is situated in several locations, thus for some of the 
tests the tested object needs to be transported between 
different locations. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Testing process 
The testing process is initiated by the customer. The 
customer describes the product and the characteristics that 
need to be tested. According to these requirements, testing 
scenario/s are chosen and specified in a testing plan by an 
engineer. The testing team performs the tests using the 
support of a specific software. Testing engineer and testing 
manager supervise the tests and communicate with the 
customer who can change the technical requirements 
according to the test results. For the process analysis we 
consider the sub- processes, i.e. the tests: Static/Dynamic 
Performance Tests (SPT, DPT), the most frequently executed 
test, Powered Thermal Cycle (PTC), the most energy 
intensive test, and Running Noise (RN). The testing process 
is coordination intensive as it implies several decisions being 
made by different parties. Some of the tests might also 
require transportation between the locations of the service 
provider or in case of external testing between a third-party 
service provider.  
C. Process Assessment Results 
We used the integrated analysis approach for assessing 
process productivity and environmental effects. Several of 
the suggested KPIs such as mobility could not be measured 
in our setting on the process level. Others, indicate possible 
improvements that can be realized on the process level or 
location-wide. Table 2 shows an excerpt from the process 
analysis results. 
TABLE II.  
RESULTS OF PROCESS PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
Indicator/Process 
SPT 
DPT 
PTC 
RN 
Power Consumption 
(in MWh) 
0.3 
0.43 
10.09 
0.31 
Percentage of energy 
from 
renewable 
sources 
24 
24 
24 
24 
Emissions (p.a. in 
tCO2) 
0.17 
0.24 
5.75 
0.16 
Built-up area 
105 
105 
175 
250 
Handling time 
(in 
min) 
62 
62 
140 
80 
Processing time (in 
min) 
62 
62 
14675 
80 
Idle time (in min) 
0 
0 
14535 
0 
Set-up time (in min) 
17 
17 
60 
30 
 
Representing the quality assurance domain, the main 
resources used during the execution of the tests are energy 
and space. The PTC test uses the highest amount of energy 
(10.09 kWh per cycle) that is mostly needed for the heating 
of the testing room, while the RN-test process requires the 
highest space usage (250m3). The three testing processes 
generated 6.32 tons of CO2 per year due to their execution. 
The exact mobility patterns related to the tests were hard to 
deduce during the analysis. Also the water usage as well as 
employee information indicators could not be sufficiently 
assessed during the process analysis. 
D. Implications for Change 
Being a measurement process, the tests mostly involve 
the usage of energy and space. Besides using the energy for 
the IT support of the process the PTC process involves 
working with high temperatures. Thus, a closer look at the 
performance number of the PTC process provides 
optimization potentials. Beside the idle period as well as the 
set-up time of the testing appliances that can be reduced 
using a scheduling software that is provided with the exact 
process description including cycle times and device usage, 
further potential for change lies in the heterogeneous 
expertise of the testing team. Since the testing knowledge is 
not symmetric within the team, tests are scheduled according 
to their feasibility and not according to the optimal resource 
usage. Homogenous knowledge level would also result in 
reduced error rates, leading to less test re-runs requiring 
resource usage. 
Collected environmental indicators imply that changes 
towards more sustainability will induce changes on the 
enterprise level or at least location level. Most efficient 
changes can be achieved by changing the energy provider to 
enhance the energy mix from currently 24% being from 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-467-1
BUSTECH 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

renewable energy sources to a higher percentage. An 
alternative for a more sustainable energy acquisition can be a 
construction of an on-site energy generator such as 
photovoltaic facility that could, e.g. cover the parking lot or 
is located on the roof of the building to provide a renewable 
energy source for heating. These alternatives would result in 
a reduction of GHG emissions as well as provide other 
advantages in terms of employee satisfaction and benefits for 
facility management. Another large scale action would be the 
enforcement of commuting of employees by train between 
locations rather than by cars. A back-of-the-envelope 
calculation on the change in transportation for the location 
and testing team in question showed a difference of GHG 
emission of 18t per year. 
Potential for process enhancement bears the focus on test 
specific equipment. The PTC test uses a climate chamber 
that needs to be pre-heated for three hours before the test. 
Thus, the heater runs during the night, resulting in about nine 
hours of excrescent heating. Furthermore, the heater 
generates rejected heat that stimulates the air conditioning 
(AC) to balancing the temperature. A solution would be to 
position the AC machines in a separate room, making the 
room temperature gradually adjustable as well as reducing 
the noise in the testing room. A more efficient planning 
software would also contribute to a higher energy efficiency 
by providing the exact times for the optimal room tempering 
for the tests and automated heater management. These 
actions would result in a higher energy efficiency and GHG 
emission reduction of 2.8t per year given the averaged 
historical data on process execution. 
Hence, our assessment of the environmental process 
performance revealed sustainability potentials on all of the 
three levels: Enterprise-wide such as the change of the 
energy provider; location-wide such as instalment of a 
photovoltaic facility; process-wide such as re-assessing the 
software features towards planning and facility automation 
and re-thinking the process tools usage. While the enterprise-
wide changes might be difficult to realize due to the complex 
decision structure, location and process-wide changes can be 
targeted for short-time realization. Thus, we suggest that the 
company launches processes to support the environmental 
officer in realization of location- and process-wide programs 
to support the environmental thinking and realize the 
otherwise lost potentials as well as to encourage employees 
in their awareness of environmentally effective process 
improvements. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK 
In this paper we presented insights gained from an action 
research based approach to sustainability assessment on 
process level by including environmental indicators within 
the classic process performance measures. The chosen 
research paradigm of action research allowed us to observe 
the reactions on the topic of environmental problems in 
general within the enterprise on different organizational 
levels as well as the reaction on the suggested optimization 
measures in particular. 
Since 
the 
considered 
enterprise 
does 
have 
an 
environmental officer, there have already been actions taken 
to provide more sustainable operations. These have mostly 
concerned the facility management domain, e.g. automatic 
light sensors, routine maintenance of the heating, etc. for 
efficient energy use. These actions are consistent with other 
research findings of the effects and toeholds of enterprise-
wide sustainability initiatives [20].  
The performed process analysis revealed a close 
connection between classic process optimization and 
enhancement of environmental indicators. Focusing on 
sustainability additionally allows the process analysis to look 
deeper not only into the workflows but also into 
surroundings in which the process is situated. Hence, the 
results suggest a need for a process analysis framework that 
includes environmental aspects. The potential effects will be 
continuous process improvement (CPI) that result in a more 
efficient technology use and work schedules. Hence, the 
suggested improvement of the testing software would not 
only result in a more efficient workflow but would also 
positively affect the energy use and employee satisfaction. 
Similar to the classic CPI approach, process owners or 
managers should encourage process actors to pay attention to 
more efficient resource usage as well as the exploration of 
occurring 
synergies. 
While 
big 
changes 
towards 
sustainability can be realized on the enterprise level, gradual 
improvement as well as personal awareness needs to take 
place on the process-level in the enterprise. To achieve this 
goal, enterprises need to invest into supporting education of 
the workers not only on the CPI techniques but also in 
environmental topics. 
Our future work will focus on development of the 
sustainable performance management framework that that 
includes the structuring of enterprise wide aspects, locally 
changeable issues as well as process wide issues. 
Furthermore, a process analysis method based on the KPIs 
described above will be developed to include the potential 
interdependencies of the performance and environmental 
indicators. Furthermore, the KPI structure presented here 
needs to include further indicators of sustainability that go 
beyond environmental concern. We intend to provide 
sustainability managers with an evaluated tool that 
encourages change, incorporates suggestions from process 
actions and shows the results of their implementation. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Bonini and S. Görner, “The business of sustainability: 
McKinsey Global Survey results,” McKinsey, 2011. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/energy_resources_materia
ls/the_business_of_sustainability_mckinsey_global_survey_re
sults. Accessed Feb. 22nd 2016 
[2] S. Seidel, J. Recker, C. Pimmer, and J. vom Brocke, 
“Enablers and Barriers to the Organizational Adoption of 
Sustainable Business Practices,” in 16th Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, 2010, Online proceedings. 
[3] Seidel, J. vom Brocke, and J. Recker, “Call for Action: 
Investigating the Role of Business Process Management in 
Green IS,” Proc. SIGGreen Work., vol. 11, no. 4, 2011. 
[4] R. Baskerville and M. D. Myers, “Special Issue On Action 
Research In Information Systems: Making IS Research 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-467-1
BUSTECH 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Relevant To Practice—Foreword,” MIS Q., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 
329–335, 2004. 
[5] S. Gregor, “A Theory of Theories in Information Systems,” in 
Information Systems Foundations: Building the Theoretical 
Base, 2002, pp. 1–20. 
[6] P. B. Checkland, Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd, 1998. 
[7] S. Seidel, J. Recker, and J. vom Brocke, “Green Business 
Process 
Management,” 
in 
Green 
Business 
Process 
Management: Towards the Sustainable Enterprise, J. vom 
Brocke, S. Seidel, and J. Recker, Eds. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 3– 13. 
[8] M. Reiter, P. Fettke, and P. Loos, “Towards Green Business 
Process Management: Concept and Implementation of an 
Artifact to Reduce the Energy Consumption of Business 
Processes,” 2014 47th Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci., pp. 885–
894, Jan. 2014. 
[9] A. Cleven, R. Winter, and F. Wortmann, “Managing Process 
Performance to Enable Corporate Sustainability: A Capability 
Maturity Model,” in Green Business Process Management 
Towards the Sustainable Enterprise, 2012, pp. 111– 129. 
[10] G. Goldkuhl and M. Lind, “A multi-grounded design research 
process,” in DESRIST’10 Proceedings of the 5th international 
conference on Global Perspectives on Design Science 
Research, 2010, vol. 6105, pp. 45–60. 
[11] J. Recker, M. Rosemann, and E. R. Gohar, “Measuring the 
carbon footprint of business processes,” Bus. Process Manag. 
Work., vol. January, pp. 511–520, 2011. 
[12] D. Grimm, K. Erek, and R. Zarnekow, “Carbon Footprint of 
IT-Services – A comparative Study of energy consumption 
for Offline and Online Storage Usage,” AMCIS 2013 
Proceedings. 2013. 
[13] X. Pan and S. Kraines, “Environmental input–output models 
for life-cycle analysis,” Environ. Resour. Econ., vol. 20, no. 1, 
pp. 61–72, 2001. 
[14] R. Heijungs and S. Suh, “Reformulation of matrix-based LCI: 
From product balance to process balance,” J. Clean. Prod., 
vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 47–51, 2006. 
[15] J. S. Cooper and J. A. Fava, “Life-cycle assessment 
practitioner survey: Summary of results,” J. Ind. Ecol., vol. 
10, no. 4, pp. 12–14, 2006. 
[16] S. Betz, “Sustainability Aware Process Management using 
XML-Nets,” in Proceedings of the 28th EnviroInfo 2014 
Conference, 2014, Online proceeding 
[17] A. Nowak, F. Leymann, D. Schumm, and B. Wetzstein, “An 
Architecture and Methodology for a Four-Phased Approach to 
Green Business Process Reengineering An Architecture and 
Methodology for a Four-Phased Approach to Green Business 
Process Reengineering,” 2011. 
[18] K. Hoesch-Klohe and A. Ghose, “Environmentally Aware 
Business Process Improvement in the Enterprise Context,” in 
Harnessing Green IT: Principles and Practices, Wiley, 2012, 
pp. 265– 282. 
[19] EMAS, “Eco-Management and Audit Scheme,” 2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.emas.de/meta/english-
summary/ Accessed Feb. 22nd 2016. 
[20] O. Levina, “Exploring The Role Of Business Process 
Management In Sustainability Initiatives,” in MCIS 2015, 
2015, Online proceeding 
 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-467-1
BUSTECH 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

