Using Text Mining for Automated Customer Inquiry Classiﬁcation
Raoul Praful Jetley and Jinendra K. Gugaliya
ABB Corporate Research
Software Research Group
Bangalore, India
Email: {raoul.jetley, jinendra.gugaliya}@in.abb.com
Sana Javed
International Institute of Information Technology
Department of Computer Science
Bangalore, India
Email: sanaiiitb@gmail.com
Abstract—Understanding the customer’s needs and issues is
central to business survival and growth. Typically, customer
inquiries are captured by a dedicated customer service center
using unstructured narrative text. The number of such customer
inquiries can vary from several thousands to millions depending
on the business size and customer penetration. Analyzing such
a huge number of customer inquiries manually is cumbersome,
prone to errors and costly. More importantly, it is not possible
to identify broad signals and trends among this data. In this
paper, we describe an automated approach to analyze customer
inquiries, and show how this approach can help classify customer
inquiries. We illustrate the application of this approach through
an example related to a leading multinational automation com-
pany.
Keywords—text mining; information retrival; intention analysis;
query classiﬁfcation; service center.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Customers are the biggest asset for any business organiza-
tion. It becomes imperative, therefore, for an organization to
ensure that its customer opinions are heard and their feedback
and concerns addressed appropriately. In most organizations,
this function is performed through a dedicated customer ser-
vice center. For a typical organization, the customer support
center is responsible for:
-
receiving and addressing inquiries related to different
products and services offered by the organization,
-
providing a sounding board for customer questions
and complaints, and directing these to the appropriate
business unit, and
-
interfacing with the customers to gather feedback for
speciﬁc products.
A typical large organization could receive hundreds of
thousands or even millions of customer inquiries every year,
originating from different parts of the world. It is the re-
sponsibility of the customer service representative (CSR) to
identify and channel these to the concerned person within the
organization who can respond to the inquiry.
Traditionally, this has been done manually, with the CSR
reviewing individual inquiries and addressing them accord-
ingly. This approach, however, becomes infeasible as the
number of inquiries increase and data becomes too large to
analyze manually. What is needed is a method to automate
the process of classifying customer inquiries. The automated
classiﬁcation can aid the CSR by reducing the effort required
to manually scan each inquiry. Moreover, it ensures that a uni-
form classiﬁcation scheme is used for classifying all inquiries
and the CSR doesn’t need to rely on personal expertise and
judgment to make these decisions.
In this paper, we describe one such automated approach
to identify and classify customer inquiries. The approach is
based on text retrieval and data analytics techniques, which are
used for identifying the intent of the inquiry and classifying
these based on the narrative text contained within the customer
inquiries.
We use this approach to classify customer inquiries for
a large multinational automation engineering company. This
classiﬁcation helps the customer service center direct the
inquiries to appropriate (teams and) business units. In addi-
tion, the classiﬁcation also helps in identifying trends in the
inquiries received.
As an example, consider a scenario where many complaints
are received regarding licensing of a certain product. Inquiry
classiﬁcation helps isolate inquiries related to the product.
Intention analysis isolates sales/procurement/licensing related
queries within these. Finally, sentiment based ﬁltering can be
used to identify complaints among these inquiries - indicating
that users are unhappy with the licensing scheme. This can
then be raised as a signal by the analysis tool which is used
by the analyst to take appropriate action (in this case notify
the related product’s sales team to review licensing policy).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II lists
existing research related to this study. Section III describes
the approach used for analysis. Section IV lists the results
of the analysis. Finally, Section V summarizes the paper and
discusses future directions.
II.
RELATED WORK
Traditional analysis of customer service data has been
limited to pure data and statistical analysis. Shen and Huang
describe an approach for analyzing this data using singular
value decomposition (SVD) [8]. Brown et. al. present several
statistical techniques for analyzing data collected at a tele-
phone call center [1]. These include forecasting based on a
Poisson distribution and estimation of the mean function in a
nonparametric regression.
In the context of using text analytics for custom service
centers, IBM has implemented a text analysis and knowledge
mining (TAKMI) tool at its own customer service centers to
ease the task of the CSR. They have used this to demonstrate
inquiry classiﬁcation on the Statistical Package for the Social
Sciences (SPSS) platform [4]. The focus of the tool is on
analyzing survey forms to identify the frequency at which
types or patterns exist. Moreover, the tool relies on experts
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

to feed in a comprehensive listing of product types, and does
not glean this information from existing data, as proposed in
our approach.
A study by Carlos et. al. [2] uses a nave Bayesian classiﬁer
to identify common patterns across customer service reports
and categorize them into different buckets. The work analyzes
the intentions in customer inquiries without considering which
service or product is being referred. Weiss et. al. [9] on the
other hand, provide a generic approach for text mining and
handling unstructured information.
In our study, we demonstrate how text analytics based on
information retrieval techniques can be used for performing
a combination of intention analysis and data classiﬁcation
analysis using customer service reports.
III.
APPROACH
Figure 1 shows an overview of the workﬂow used for text
analysis of inquiries received by the custmomer service center.
As shown in the ﬁgure, the text mining workﬂow employed
comprises of four main processes. The ﬁrst of these is index-
ing, which is used to extract text data from source documents
and store them in a well-deﬁned index. The Indexing process
constitutes of tokenization, text pre-processing and attribute
deﬁnition. Tokenization involves parsing of the text data and
identifying individual terms that need to be stored in the
index. The parsed tokens are then subject to pre-processing to
clean the data and remove superﬂuous elements. Attributes or
ﬁelds are identiﬁed for classifying the individual tokens before
storing them as a record, or document in the index.
The next step, Information Retrieval, deﬁnes means and
methods for extracting relevant information stored in the index.
This is done by deﬁning a search mechanism to query the
index and retrieve relevant records that match the query. The
results from the information retrieval process are then used to
perform detailed analysis to identify signals and trends within
the data. The analyses employed in this study include inquiry
classiﬁcation and intention analysis. The analysis algorithms
can be applied individually or in tandem. Finally, results of
the different analyses are displayed to the user in an interactive
manner through generalized visualization schemes.
A. Indexing the Customer Inquiries
The process of indexing customer service inquiries entails
parsing individual customer inquiries to identify the terms used
therein. These terms are then stored in an index (essentially
an inverse lookup table) [6]. The terms identiﬁed within the
individual inquiries are added to the index generated from the
data. Each token identiﬁed is added as a term in the index, and
is annotated based on the corresponding ﬁeld for the document.
Tokenization and Text Pre-processing: Once the tokens
within each document are identiﬁed, they are added to the
index, with the corresponding link to the document and asso-
ciated term frequencies. However, simply adding all identiﬁed
tokens to the index can introduce a number of inefﬁciencies,
owing primarily to the commonly used terms (like articles,
prepositions, conjunctions, etc.), which not only clutters up
the index, but can also adversely affect the search/retrieval
results. To avoid this, a common strategy is to clean the tokens
to eliminate unwanted words before populating the index.
Another pre-processing strategy that is commonly employed
is to group together similar words (based on their meanings)
to provide a semantic search capability and improve the hit
rate when searching for related terms.
Commonly employed text pre-processing methods include
stop word removal, stemming and lemmatization. Stop word
removal entails ﬁltering the tokens identiﬁed in the data
to identify and remove commonly used words. Such words
could be articles (‘a’, ‘an’, ‘the’), prepositions, conjunctions
or numeric literals, pronouns among others. Additional stop
words may be deﬁned by the analyst based on the speciﬁc
corpus of documents being indexed.
Stemming is another commonly employed method of text
pre-processing. Stemming attempts to reduce a word to its stem
or root form. Thus, the key terms of a query or document
are represented by stems rather than by the original words.
This not only means that different variants of a term can be
conﬂated to a single representative form - it also reduces the
dictionary size, that is, the number of distinct terms needed
for representing a set of documents. A smaller dictionary size
results in a saving of storage space and processing time.
An associated pre-processing method, called lemmatization
is usually used to remove inﬂectional endings and to return
the base or dictionary form of a word, known as the lemma.
If confronted with the token saw, stemming might return just
s, whereas lemmatization would attempt to return either see or
saw depending on whether the use of the token was as a verb
or a noun.
In our study, we evaluated all three text pre-processing
techniques, and found stop word removal as the most effective.
For the rest of the paper, we present results of our analysis
when using only stop word removal during indexing.
Handling Multi-lingual Data:
A special consideration
needed to be made for the customer inquiry data, as it is
collected from feedback received from across the globe. Con-
sequently, the (text) data is in multiple languages, reﬂecting the
region that the record originated from. In order to adequately
process text in these multiple languages, special care is needed
to translate this text to a common language before storing it
in the index.
During Index Generation, the textual (narrative text) data
is extracted from the multi-lingual repository a single record
at a time. Each record corresponds to a user inquiry in a
speciﬁc language. The record may thus consist of various
ﬁelds, including a narrative text ﬁeld containing the natural
language user input. In a customer inquiry scenario, this could
correspond to customer feedback, questions regarding speciﬁc
products, request for quotations, general advertising related
data, etc.
A statistical language detection algorithm is used to detect
the language used within the record. The statistical detection
method maintains a database for commonly used words in var-
ious languages (for each of the handled languages). When the
narrative text from a particular record is parsed, the individual
words in the record are matched against the commonly used
words database. The matches are ranked in order of relevance.
Some of these may match common words for more than one
language. In such cases, the primary language and secondary
languages are identiﬁed and scored accordingly. Customized
heuristics are used to determine number of tokens to match to
identify the language.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Text data
Indexing
Tokenization
Pre-processing
Retrieval
Attribute Definition
Data Analysis
Visualization
Intention Analysis
Inquiry Classification
Fig. 1. Overview of the Text Mining Process for analyzing Customer Inquiries
If the narrative text data is in a language other than base
language (English in our case), it is translated to generate a
version of the textual data in the common language. We use an
open source API, based on the Google translation service [5] to
perform the translation. The translation here does not need to
be perfect; simply identifying and translating key words in the
text should sufﬁce. The indexer is not so much concerned with
grammar here, but simply aggregates words from transliterated
text. The translated tokens are stored in a separate ﬁeld. Text
in English, is parsed normally (without any translation) and
stored as it would be in the general case.
When searching against the index, the search string is
provided in the common language. It is then searched against
the translated text ﬁeld for any matches. The results of the
search/information retrieval thus include matches for docu-
ments in English as well as those in other languages.
B. Information Retrieval
Information Retrieval (IR) is the process of obtaining
information resources relevant to an information need from
a corpus of available data (the index of customer inquiries).
The IR process begins with the user entering a query into
the system. The query is then evaluated against the index
based on the speciﬁc syntax and semantics of the query
description language. Results of the query are returned as a
set or list of matches, ordered according to their relevance
score. The relevance score is computed using a product of
term frequencies and inverse document frequencies (TF-IDF)
for the given index [3]. The results obtained are then used to
perform additional analysis on the data set, either manually or
automatically.
It is important not only to take into account the actual
words in the query, but also the meaning of the words
searched for, the order of words in the query, related terms and
synonyms and perform automated spell checking and diacritics
restoration. The key goal of IR is to retrieve all the items
that are relevant to a user query, while retrieving as few non-
relevant items as possible. In order to maximize the relevance
of the search results, sophisticated ranking algorithms and
querying methods are used.
A number of different query methods are used to extract
information from the customer inquiry index. The most trivial
search method is a nave keyword based search, where individ-
ual keywords are matched against the terms contained within
the index. The terms can be matched against speciﬁc ﬁelds in
the index, by specifying which ﬁeld they should be searched
against. An extension of simple keyword search is querying
using wildcards. Wildcards (such as ‘?’ and ‘*’) can be used
to match for variations of a term or multiple words at once.
For example, the query ‘te?t*’ will match the terms text, test,
tester and tested.
A Boolean query is a simple method to combine results
of two queries or add a modiﬁer to existing queries. Most IR
engines support the AND, OR and NOT operators for Boolean
queries and searches. An example of a Boolean query would
be “text: python OR text: boa AND class: reptile”, indicating
that the searcher should look for the terms python or boa in
the ﬁeld labeled text, while the (structured) ﬁeld class is given
as reptile.
Fuzzy queries are used to search for terms similar to the
given word. The fuzziness factor is based on the Levenshtein
Distance, or Edit Distance algorithm [7], and is used to match
words that sound similar (or are spelled similarly) to the given
query term. For example, when searching for a term similar
in spelling to “roam” the fuzzy search algorithm will ﬁnd
terms like “foam” and “roams”. Fuzzy searches are useful
when searching for terms that may often be misspelled or have
slight variations in spelling in different regions (for example,
“analyze” vs. “analyse”).
Proximity searches are used to search for words in a given
document that are used within a speciﬁed distance of each
other. For example, one may search for the words “voltage”
and “meter” occurring within 10 words of each other in a
document. Proximity searches are a useful tool when looking
for correlations between terms.
Finally, Range queries allow one to match documents
whose ﬁeld(s) values are between the lower and upper bound
speciﬁed by the Range Query. Range Queries can be inclu-
sive or exclusive of the upper and lower bounds. Sorting
is done lexicographically. A range query can be speciﬁed
for numeric ﬁelds, text ﬁelds or date ﬁelds (for example,
“mod date:[20020101 to 20030101]”, indicates the range of
all dates from January 1st 2002 to January 1st 2003).
C. Intention Analysis for Customer Inquiry Data
Once the data is retrieved from the index, various analyses
can be performed to discover knowledge that can aid in making
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

business decisions. The analysis techniques we have employed
include Intention Analysis and Inquiry Classiﬁcation.
Intention analysis was carried out to identify the intention
of the customer from the text of the inquiry. The intention
could be to purchase, to sell, to complain, to accuse, to inquire,
etc. Manual analysis of sample data from the customer inquiry
data indicated that there are four major classes in which the
inquiry can be classiﬁed. These classes are summarized in
TABLE I. Intention analysis was used to detect the basic four
intentions and their various combinations, i.e., a total of 16
intentions. The documents for which intentions could not be
found out were put under the “Unclassiﬁed” class.
TABLE I. INTENTION CLASSES FOR CUSTOMER INQUIRY DATA
Intention
Explanation
Need
Sales
To purchase or inquire (price and
availability) of some product or
service
To detect customer needs for
products
Service
To ask for some help or assistance
on some product or service
To detect customer common
problems
Career
Training
To seek training on some courses,
job intention (job/internship)
To ﬁnd suitable candidates for
some job position
Complaint
To complain about some product or
service
To detect customer pain points
Unclassiﬁed
Motives that cannot be classiﬁed
-
A manual analysis of data was carried out to ﬁnd cus-
tomers’ common writing pattern. A list of intentions was
created from this list. For every word of a document in the
corpus, the word was matched with the intentions. If a match
was found, the corresponding intention was assigned a point.
The intention with the maximum weight was assigned as the
class for the document. Fuzzy search was used to take care
of misspelled words. The algorithm used for fuzzy searching
is outlined in Figure 2. TABLE II gives sample results of
intention analysis performed on the customer inquiry data.
START
Counter = 1
Counter <= Length(inquiry
Document)
STOP
Term found
Run Scoring
Algorithm
Output Category
Intention
Dictionary
True
False
True
False
STOP
Fig. 2. Workﬂow for Intention Analysis
In order to check the accuracy of the algorithm, 150 ran-
domly selected queries were taken which were also manually
classiﬁed by the Contact Center (CC) executive. The result
of the manual classiﬁcation vs algorithm classiﬁcation are
summarized in TABLE III. This comparison indicates that free-
ﬂow text messages can be properly classiﬁed based on the
TABLE II. SAMPLE RESULTS OF INTENTION ANALYSIS
Inquiry Details
Intention Class
Please quote us your best price lead time as below
controller vfd for fdf motor 440v 55kw 101a 60hz rpm
891rev min
Sales
I have a technical question in regards to a frequency
drive model XV550. We have a problem with the drive
where parameter maximum speed tends to change on
its own. The drive is programmed to a max speed of
3510 rpm and on one occasion, the parameter changed
to 1740 rpm. No other parameter changed. This could be
a one-time occurrence. However, I’m just wondering if
there is something that could be causing that to happen;
perhaps another parameter as a result of an alarm. Your
help would be appreciated
Service
Dear sir, I’d like to know about any job opportunity for
business development proﬁle. I have 6 years’ experience
in ac drives ﬁeld and ERP arena. Due to loss in my
business venture I’m looking for a suitable job in gulf
countries for my drives proﬁle
Career Training
We purchased a 150 hp 960 rpm foot mounting motor
from your dealer. Now we are ﬁnding huge ampere
variation. We lodged verbal complaint with the dealer
who in turn forwarded the complaint to your service
center. Subsequently, we were promised that a service
engineer will be sent to check the motor. In spite of
all our efforts and promises made, no one has visited
us as yet. The amp variation is causing huge increase
in electricity cost and we are unable to run our plant
causing huge ﬁnancial losses. We need your instant
resolution of the problem
Complaint
No communication
Unclassiﬁed
intention of the message. Sometimes, the classiﬁcation can be
even improved over manual classiﬁcation.
TABLE III. COMPARISON OF MANUAL CLASSIFICATION VS.
ALGORITHM CLASSIFICATION
Analysis Conducted by
CC Executive
Algorithm
Correct Classiﬁcation
109
124
Incorrect Classiﬁcation
39
18
Multiple Classiﬁcation
-
6
Undetermined
2
2
% Accuracy (Approx.)
73%
83%
D. Inquiry Classiﬁcation
The objective of inquiry classiﬁcation is proper organi-
zation of datasets, so that data can be handled with much
efﬁciency and ease. In this study, customer inquiry data was
categorized by mapping it to speciﬁc product categories.
Proximity search was performed for individual products to
ﬁnd patterns (like commonly used speciﬁcations, name of the
product, etc.), and a list of product offerings created based
on the product’s name and speciﬁcations. The list was sorted
based on term frequency.
For example, proximity search was performed for the
product “breakers” on the customer inquiry data. As result of
the search, a list was generated that included the terms “circuit
breaker”, “generator breaker”, “sf6”, “air circuit breaker”,
“vacuum circuit breaker”, “sace”, “voltage breaker”.
A search for the product and its associated terms was
then carried out for all documents in the corpus and the
matching documents were associated with the product. A
similar approach was used on other products to build dictionary
of words corresponding to those products.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

An example of product classiﬁcation on various product
inquiries is summarized in TABLE IV. TABLE V shows how
the inquiry has been categorized. The last column in the table
indicates which product category the inquiry pertains to.
Though this study develops library of key words for
a few popular products, a comprehensive library could be
built for each and every product within the organization. A
comprehensive listing of the products and services offered by
the organization would need to be generated for this purpose.
The list could be generated using the proximity search based
approach as described above.
TABLE IV. PROXIMITY SEARCH FOR THE WORD “BREAKERS”
Term
Frequency
circuit
1575
generator
149
part
135
sf6
124
model
121
vacuum
114
air
108
sace
100
pole
90
manufacture
82
breaker
67
voltage
55
kv
49
case
49
TABLE V. PRODUCT CLASSIFICATION EXAMPLES
Inquiry Details
Product
Dear sir, we are looking for distribution transformer type
250kva. We need offer price
250kva distribution
transformer
Please send your quote for 3 units current transformer
5 kva. Thank you.
5kva current trans-
former
We immediately need to order the following transformer
pl advice with techno commercial details type distribu-
tion transformer 315kva
315kva distribution
transformer
We want information on distributed control systems.
Need contact name, phone number
DCS
We are in Hawaii. Can we purchase a box cooling fan
for a vfd drive?
Variable
frequency
drive (vfd)
Looking for some help on the XS350 setup
XS350
Sir, I need a sf6 breaker up to 15 kv. Immediately so
can you send me speciﬁcation of this breaker?
sf6 breaker
Kindly quote us the item below 1 circuit breaker
100amps 400volts
circuit breaker
IV.
RESULTS
As described above, intention analysis is used to classify
the customer’s intention and inquiry classiﬁcation is performed
to identify which product is being mentioned in the customer
inquiry. Combining the results from these two analyses can
provide further insight into the types and trends within the
available data. For instance, combining results from the two
analyses can provide information for the number of sales or
service queries related to a certain product. Some of these
results are presented in this section.
Figure 3 shows the distribution of customer inquiries across
different types of drives. Based on the data, it can be inferred
that the maximum number of sales requests are for AC system
(ACS) drives. However, these drives also have the largest
number of service and training related inquiries, hinting that
these drives have a large number of unresolved issues, and that
Fig. 3. Inquiries Related to Drives
customers feel the need for additional training in order to use
them effectively.
Figure 4 drills down to speciﬁc products within ACS drives.
The data indicates that ACS 800 and ACS 550 are the two
most popular series of ACS drives, based on the number
of sales inquiries. The data also shows a disproportionately
large percentage of service inquiries for the drives ACS 355
and ACS 600. This could indicate that the drives have some
inherent design defect that needs to be addressed. Further
analysis of the speciﬁc service inquiries for these products
will help identify the nature of the problem.
Fig. 4. Inquiries for the ACS Drives Product Series
Similarly, Figure 5 shows some data from analysis per-
formed on transformers. The results indicate that the only
service related inquiries for the transformers device class
relates to power transformers. There are no service inquiries
related to other transformers. This implies that customers are
generally happy with the service provided for transformers.
Figure 6 indicates that the number of inquiries related to
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Fig. 5. Inquiries for different types of Transformers
training are signiﬁcantly higher for Supervisory Control and
Data Acquisition (SCADA) products as opposed to Distributed
Control System (DCS) products. This implies that the SCADA
products are comparatively more complex to conﬁgure and
maintain. Thus engineers may need to focus on the usability
aspects for these products.
Fig. 6. Inquiries for types of Control Systems
Finally, a comparison between the circuit breakers sace and
sf6 in Figure 7 shows that despite having a higher volume
of sales inquiries, the sace breakers received fewer service
requests and no training inquiries. This indicates that sace
breakers perform better and are generally preferred by the
customers when compared to sf6 breakers.
The examples above cite just a few examples of how text
based analysis of customer inquiries could help organizations
infer signals and trends within the data collected by its
customer service center. Other such analysis can be performed
at various levels of granularity to uncover additional signals
and provide critical business intelligence. Further, once a signal
is detected, it can be directed to the appropriate personnel for
follow-up leading to reduction in manual efforts and errors and
Fig. 7. Queries for different types of Breakers
improved response time.
V.
SUMMARY
This paper has illustrated the use of customer inquiry
classiﬁcation and intention analysis on customer inquiries,
primarily in the form of unstructured multi-lingual text data.
The paper has demonstrated an automated way of such analysis
resulting in signiﬁcant savings of manual efforts, without
compromising on accuracy of analysis. In fact, in some cases
the automated analysis has proved better than manual analysis.
The automated analysis provides insights into the customer
inquiries not readily available to the customer service repre-
sentative by simply browsing through the textual reports. The
signals and trends identiﬁed through these analyses can be used
to support more informed business decisions.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Brown, N. Gans, A. Mandelbaum, A. Sakov, H. Shen, S. Zeltyn, and
L. Zhao, “Statistical Analysis of a Telephone Call Center: A Queueing-
Science Perspective”. Published in Journal of the American Statistical
Association, Volume 100, Issue 469, 2005, Pages 36-50.
[2]
C. S. Carlos and M. Yalamanchi. “Intention Analysis for Sales, Marketing
and Customer Service”. Published in the Proceedings of COLING 2012:
Demonstration Papers, December 2012, pages 3340, Mumbai.
[3]
T. E. Doszkocs. “From Research to Application: The CITE Natural
Language Information Retrieval System”, in Research and Development
in Information Retrieval, Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1982, pp. 251-62.
[4]
A. Field. “Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics”. Sage, 2013.
[5]
The
Google
Translate
API.
Available
from
https://code.google.com/p/gtranslate-api-php/
[6]
E. Oren, R. Delbru, M. Catasta, R. Cyganiak, H. Stenzhorn, and
G. Tummarello. “Sindice.com: A document-oriented lookup index for
open linked data”. Published in the International Journal of Metadata,
Semantics and Ontologies, Volume 3, Issue 1, 2008, Pages 37-52.
[7]
V. Levenshtein. “Binary Codes Capable of Correcting Deletions, In-
sertions, and Reversals”. Published in Soviet Physics-Doklady,1966,
10(8):707710.
[8]
H. Shen and J. Z. Huang. “Analysis of call centre arrival data using
singular value decomposition”. Published in Applied Stochastic Models
in Business and Industry, , May/June 2005, Volume 21, Issue 3, pages
251263.
[9]
S. M. Weiss, I. N. Zhang, and F. Damerau. “Text Mining: Predictive
methods for analyzing unstructured information”, Springer 2010.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

