Information Systems: From Innovations to Innovation Generators 
 
 
Philippe Marchildon and Pierre Hadaya 
Department of Management and Technology 
ESG UQAM 
Montréal, Canada 
e-mail: marchildon.philippe@uqam.ca 
hadaya.pierre@uqam.ca 
 
 
Abstract—The objective of this study is thus to investigate how 
IS can enable organizational capabilities that may lead to 
organizational innovativeness. (i.e., an organization’s potency to 
generate innovations). To do so, we review the innovation and 
IS literatures and use structuration theory to propose a research 
model, its related hypotheses and methodological aspects tied to 
its validation. Finally, the proposed model’s anticipated 
contributions are discussed. 
Keywords-innovation; 
organizational 
innovativeness; 
structuration theory; product lifecylce management systems; radio 
frequency identification devices. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In today’s complex technological era, organizational 
innovativeness – defined as an organization’s potency to 
develop and introduce innovations in various forms (e.g., 
product, service, process, system, business structure, business 
model) [1][2] – is increasingly viewed as a multidisciplinary 
activity [3][4] based on a few key organizational capabilities: 
functional and integrative capabilities [5]. As such, and 
because evidence from the IS literature suggests that 
functional and integrative capabilities could potentially 
benefit from the support of IS [6][7][8] [9], it seems 
primordial that the IS literature acknowledges the double 
nature of IS by studying them not only as innovation per se 
but also as innovation generators.  
Based on this premise, the present study aims to answer 
the following research question: “What is the role of IS in the 
creation of organizational innovations?” Accordingly, the 
objective of this study is to investigate the impact of IS on 
functional and integrative organizational capabilities and, 
indirectly, on organizational innovativeness. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, in 
Section 2, the literature on innovations is reviewed to identify 
the potential antecedents of organizational innovativeness 
while structuration theory is examined to resolve the apparent 
conflict between the “push” and “pull” perspectives within the 
innovation literature. Third, in Section 3, anchored on this 
resolution and thus the now established duality of innovations, 
a set of hypotheses linking key organizational capabilities to 
organizational innovativeness is proposed. Fourth, in Section 
4, we investigate the IS literature and more specifically studies 
that discuss Product Life-cycle Management (PLM) systems 
and Closed-loop PLM systems to propose a second set of 
hypotheses that establish the enabling role of IS in the creation 
of certain organizational capabilities which may lead to 
organizational innovativeness. Fifth, in Section 5, the key 
methodological aspects tied to the empirical validation of this 
study’s hypotheses are discussed. Finally, this research’s 
anticipated 
theoretical 
contributions 
and 
practical 
implications are discussed in Section 6. 
II. 
THEORETICAL DEVELOPMENT 
A. Novelty: the Key Characteristic of Innovations 
Novelty – defined as the extent to which a product, service, 
process, system, organizational structure, or business model 
departs from what already exist – is the key criterion that an 
organizational component must have to meet to be considered 
an innovation. Aware of the importance of novelty in the 
making of innovations, researchers generally identify 
innovations as either radical or incremental [10]. Radical 
innovations are those that produce fundamental changes in the 
activities of an organization or an industry and represent clear 
departures from existing practices [11]. On the other hand, 
incremental innovations merely call for marginal departure 
from existing practices [11].  
Another important aspect of innovations is that they are 
externally determined. That is, the concept of innovation can 
only make sense when an innovation is compared to a specific 
external referent. For example, cell phones can only be 
considered innovations when they are compared to regular 
house phones and not when they are compared to more 
evolved smart phones. Thus, to innovate an organization has 
to create a product, service, process, system, organizational 
structure, or business model that departs from what already 
exists in its specific frame of reference. As such, an 
organization in the manufacturing industry, relying on supply 
chain logistics and transportation systems might be considered 
innovative whereas a firm relying on these same systems in 
the transportation industry will only be considered attuned to 
what already exists. Therefore, organizational innovativeness 
not only depends on what an organization does but also on 
what is done by other external stakeholders within the same 
environment. 
This dual nature of organizational innovativeness is 
epitomized in the innovation literature by the presence of two 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

overarching rival perspectives which see innovation 
generation as either a “push” or a “pull” phenomenon [12]. 
More precisely, there seems to be a polarization on innovation 
antecedents where the characteristics of the organization (i.e., 
“push” perspective) and the characteristics of its environment 
(i.e., “pull” perspective) are viewed as rival predictors of a 
firm innovativeness. Partisans of the “push” perspective have 
shown, for example, that a firm’s structure, culture, 
management practices and strategies significantly influence 
organizational innovativeness while, on the other hand, adepts 
of the “pull” perspective have identified that an organization’s 
industry, region, government policies, and technological 
environment significantly impact its innovativeness [12].  
However, doubtful of the apparent conflict between 
“push” and “pull” adherents, some authors have argued, based 
on evidence from practice, that the process of innovation 
generation might be better conceptualized as an evolutionary, 
non-linear, iterative process between the firm and its 
environment [3][4]. In other words, this third and new 
perspective suggests reconciling previous research findings 
by defining organizational innovativeness as a duality where 
an organization is at the same time influencing and influenced 
by its environment rather than as a dualism where both types 
of innovation antecedents are considered orthogonal. 
Nevertheless, 
in 
spite 
of 
these 
authors’ 
insightful 
observations, little theoretical let alone empirical work has 
been undertaken in the innovation research field to account for 
this duality. As such, the best rationale on the duality of 
innovations doesn’t come from innovation studies but rather 
from the field of sociology and more precisely from Giddens’ 
[13] answer to the debate between “functionalist/determinist” 
and “voluntarist” sociologists. 
B. Duality of Innovations: an Explanation Anchored on 
Giddens’ Structuration Theory 
Giddens [13], analogous to authors of innovation research 
doubtful of the “push” and “pull” orthodoxy, acknowledged 
that the debate between Functionalist/determinist” – defined 
as sociologists entrenched in the orthodox consensus who saw 
agents’ actions as a result of environmental forces and 
demands [14] – and “voluntarist” – defined as sociologists 
who argue that agents reflectively act without restraint and 
have the power to tailor their surrounding environment to their 
needs [15] – could in fact be resolved by acknowledging the 
duality of agents’ behaviors. More precisely, noticing 
common grounds between these protagonists and the mutual 
influence between an agent and its environment (i.e., the 
duality of structure), Giddens [13] redefined the agency 
concept and then developed the structuration theory to provide 
a sound explanation to this duality. Indeed, recognizing that 
previous conceptualizations, which defined agency in terms of 
intention, failed to account for the duality of structure, 
Giddens [13] proposed to redefine agency in terms of 
transformative capacity. Thus, according to Giddens [13], 
agents are characterized by their ability to take action, to 
deploy a range of causal powers, including that of influencing 
those deployed by others [13]. Furthermore, similar to 
Bachrach and Baratz [16], Giddens [13] also recognized that 
agents’ actions and thus their transformative capacity are to 
some extent limited, due to the rules and resources agents use 
when taking action. In other words, the rules and resources 
drawn upon by agents when taking action are simultaneously 
constraining and enabling agents’ actions, creating the duality 
of structure.  Thus, the concept of agency, which defines 
agents in terms of transformative capacity and entails the 
enabling and constraining role of rules and resources, is at the 
essence of the duality identified in the sociology and 
innovation literatures. As such, by instantiating the concept of 
agency to the particular context of society construction, 
Giddens [13] was able to demonstrate that social structures are 
not fixed but rather exhibit structural properties since social 
structures emerge from agents’ constant reproduction of 
already existing rules and resources. 
By instantiating the concept of agency in the context of 
innovation generation, one can realize that its basic 
assumptions still hold: agents, by taking action, still draw on 
rules and resources that simultaneously constrain and enable. 
However, instead of simply reproducing them, agents, 
because of the novelty criteria, also need to significantly 
depart from them (i.e., they enact a novel behavior). 
Therefore, similar to Schumpeter [17] who depicted 
innovation activities as a process of recombining and/or 
reconfiguring existing pieces of knowledge in some novel 
way [17][18], this view of innovations establishes that 
organizational innovativeness rests on the transformative 
capacity of organizations. In other words, an organization’s 
innovativeness rests on its ability to draw from existing rules 
and resources while significantly departing from them by 
creating new knowledge. 
III. 
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
Based on the theoretical background presented above, the 
premise of this article is that IS usage improves an 
organization’s capacity to innovate. This section exposes the 
nine hypotheses tied to our research model shown in Figure 1. 
The first four hypotheses of our model explain how 
organizational capabilities (functional and integrative) lead to 
organizational innovativeness while the last five hypotheses 
explain how two types of IS (PLM and Closed-Loop PLM 
systems) may provide a platform to support and improve 
these key organizational capabilities. 
A. The Positive Impact of Functional and Integrative 
Capabilities on Organizational Innovativeness 
Having established, through structuration theory, that 
organizational innovativeness rests on an organization’s 
ability to draw from existing rules and resources and to create 
knowledge, it is now essential to go back to the innovation 
literature and more precisely to the work of Verona [5] to 
define these key capabilities. Verona [5], who also anchored 
his research efforts on the premise that an organization’s 
capacity for action resides in its capabilities [19], identified a 
set of capabilities that, similar to the ones suggested in 
structuration theory, are linked to the duality of organizational 
innovativeness. More precisely, the author identified two 
types of capabilities, functional and integrative [20], that 
enable the creation of knowledge. Functional capabilities refer 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

to capabilities that allow an organization to develop new 
knowledge while integrative capabilities are defined as 
capabilities that allow an organization to integrate knowledge 
from different sources [20]. Recognizing that sources of 
knowledge can be located within and outside organizational 
boundaries, Verona [5] sub-divided integrative capabilities 
into internal integrative capabilities and external integrative 
capabilities (i.e., those that integrate knowledge from sources 
within the organization’s boundaries and those that integrate 
knowledge 
from 
sources 
outside 
the 
organization’s 
boundaries). As such, Verona [5] and Giddens [13], although 
guided by different research objectives, both posited 
capabilities as a core property of agents and defined 
capabilities tied to organizational innovativeness as an ability 
to draw from existing sources of knowledge to create new 
knowledge. Accordingly, organizations aiming to maximize 
their innovativeness must develop functional capabilities as 
well as internal and external integrative capabilities. Based on 
this premise, the following three hypotheses are formulated: 
 
Hypothesis #1: An organization’s functional capabilities 
positively influence its innovativeness. 
 
Hypothesis #2: An 
organization’s 
internal 
integrative 
capabilities 
positively 
influence 
its 
innovativeness. 
 
Hypothesis #3: An 
organization’s 
external 
integrative 
capabilities 
positively 
influence 
its 
innovativeness. 
 
Furthermore, because the duality of organizational 
innovativeness implies that sources of knowledge both enable 
and constrain the creation of innovations, an additive 
interaction between functional and integrative organizational 
capabilities is also expected. Based on this premise, the 
following hypothesis is formulated: 
 
Hypothesis #4: The 
interaction 
between 
the 
three 
organizational capabilities will have a 
positive 
influence 
on 
organizational 
innovativeness.  
 
B. The Positivie Impact of IS Usage on Functional and 
Integrative Capabilities 
Recognizing 
the 
importance 
of 
organizational 
innovativeness to develop and maintain a competitive 
advantage, organizations have adopted various practices and 
IS to support their initiatives [9]. Amongst these, PLM 
practices and PLM systems seem the more promising since 
there is an increased awareness that they may represent the 
foundation upon which the key organizational capabilities that 
lead to organizational innovativeness may be developed [9]. 
For instance, Pratt & Whitney used the PLM system 
developed by Siemens (i.e., the Tecnomatix solution) to limit 
the development of its engines to within 3 years, which was 
considered competitive at the time [21]. Furthermore, by 
using this system, Pratt & Whitney was able to design 
innovative engines that minimize downtimes by making 
maintenance operations as simple as possible [21]. 
PLM can be defined as a strategic approach that aims to 
provide more product-related information to the organization 
during the whole product lifecycle. Building on and extending 
the ideas of product data management (PDM) [22], this 
approach emerged from the necessity to move beyond simple 
engineering concerns of products and to provide a shared 
platform for creation, organization, and dissemination of 
product related knowledge [23][24]. PLM systems consisting 
of information processing systems or a set of information 
technology (IT) systems were conceived in order to support 
these considerations by forming an organization’s product 
information backbone [25]. These systems, rooted in 
computer-aided design (CAD) and PDM systems, establish a 
set of tools and technologies that provide a shared platform for 
collaboration among product stakeholders and streamline the 
flow of information along all the stages of the product 
lifecycle [22][26]. However, although these systems were 
originally intended to support every phase of a product 
lifecycle (i.e., beginning of life (BOL), middle of life (MOL) 
and end of life (EOL)), most PLM systems currently fail to 
support products once they are sold, that is during their MOL 
and EOL phases [27]. More precisely, PLM systems, because 
of business and technological constraints, cease to collect 
product information once the product leaves the control of the 
organizations or its boundaries [23][24][27]. As such, by (1) 
integrating 
people, 
processes, 
business 
systems 
and 
information throughout the whole product lifecycle, (2) 
fostering horizontal connection between an organization’s 
silos, (3) enhancing information sharing, (3) facilitating 
change management, and (4) enticing use of past knowledge 
[23][24], current PLM systems only support functional and 
internal integrative organizational capabilities and leave 
external integrative capabilities unsupported. Based on this 
premise, the following two hypotheses are formulated: 
 
Hypothesis #5: The use of PLM systems positively influences 
an organization’s functional capabilities. 
 
Hypothesis #6: The use of PLM systems positively influences 
an 
organization’s 
internal 
integrative 
capabilities. 
 
Even though traditional PLM systems fail to address 
external integrative capabilities, recent advances in product 
identification technologies (PIED), such as radio frequency 
identification (RFID) and Auto-ID now enable organizations 
to collect product information beyond their organizational 
boundaries [23][24][27]. These new systems that comprise 
previous functionality of PLM systems while also including 
the new functionalities provided by PEID are referred to as 
Closed-loop PLM systems [28]. These new systems, by 
automatically capturing data outside the boundary of the firm, 
alleviate both the business and technological constraints of 
traditional PLM systems and give organizations the potential 
to also support external integrative capabilities. Based on this 
premise, the following hypotheses are formulated: 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
 
Figure 1.  Research Model. 
 
Hypothesis #7: The use of Closed-loop PLM systems 
positively 
influences 
an 
organization’s 
functional capabilities. 
 
Hypothesis #8: The use of Closed-loop PLM systems 
positively 
influences 
an 
organization’s 
internal integrative capabilities. 
 
Hypothesis #9: The use of Closed-loop PLM systems 
positively 
influences 
an 
organization’s 
external integrative capabilities. 
 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
As our research is still in progress, this section explains the 
methodological framework we have devised, but not yet used, 
to test our research model. More precisely, we present our 
intended research setting, data collection procedures, survey 
instrument and data analyses procedures. 
A. Research Setting 
The up-to-date list of all Canadian manufacturing firms 
maintained by Statistics Canada (a Canadian government 
agency) will constitute this study’s sample frame. More 
precisely, the sample frame will be limited to Canadian 
manufacturing firms active in the transportation equipment 
manufacturing industry (NAICS 336) (e.g., motor vehicle, 
aerospace, shipbuilding and other transportation equipment 
manufacturing). Three reasons justify the selection of this 
specific frame: First, manufacturing firms are often the middle 
men in the supply chain to which they pertain enabling them 
to influence and be influenced by both upstream and 
downstream partners and thus to the full range of the duality 
of innovativeness. Second, organizational innovativeness is 
already recognized as a key driver of success in this specific 
industry and thus is a salient topic to potential respondents. 
Third, manufacturing firms, especially in this particular 
industry, are amongst the very few organizations that have 
adopted to varying degrees PLM and Closed-Loop PLM 
systems, making this a rare setting where their influence on 
organizational capabilities is likely to be observed [29][30]. 
B. Data Collection 
Data will be collected by the means of a field survey. More 
precisely, business managers will be asked via e-mail to fill 
the first-half of an online survey (available through a first 
hyperlink) and to ask their engineering counterparts to fill the 
second-half of the online survey (available through a second 
hyperlink). Business managers will answer questions 
regarding their organization’s innovativeness (i.e., criterion 
variable). Considering the fact that innovation may be of 
various forms and taking into account this study’s research 
setting, business managers will be asked to evaluate the 
innovativeness of their organization in regards to two forms 
of innovation: product and process innovations. On the other 
hand, engineering managers will answer questions regarding 
the organization’s functional and integrative capabilities as 
well as the use of PLM and Closed-Loop PLM systems within 
their organizations (i.e., predictor variables). Seeking 
responses from respondents from two different organizational 
sub-units should alleviate some potential sources of common 
method bias. In addition, to maximize this study’s response 
rate, a Tailored Design Method (TDM) will be used. 
Specifically, this procedure comprises four essential elements: 
(1) a respondent-friendly questionnaire; (2) a five-contact 
strategy (in the form of five different e-mails to be sent to 
business managers); (3) a personalized correspondence; and 
(4) incentives in the form of a privileged access to the research 
findings (e.g., a tailored benchmark report) and a chance to 
win an electronic gift card of a 500$ value on Amazon (i.e. 
one gift card for each type of respondent). 
C. Survey Instrument 
The electronic survey will comprise measures adapted 
from the literature. The measures tied to the organizational 
capabilities will be adapted from [5][31][32]. Measures tied to 
Interaction between functional, 
internal integrative and external 
integrative capabilities
PLM system 
usage
Closed-loop 
PLM system 
usage 
External 
integrative 
capabilities
Functional 
capabilities
Internal 
integrative 
capabilities
Organizational 
innovativeness
H3
H1
H2
H5
H6
H7
x
x
H4
H9
H8
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

PLM and Closed-PLM systems use will be adapted from 
[17][18][27][33][34][35]. Finally, measures of organizational 
innovativeness will be adapted from [1][2][36]. A pre-test of 
the questionnaire will also be conducted with several business 
and engineering managers in order to test the reliability and 
validity of the questionnaire as well as to identify potential 
upgrades prior to the full-scale inquiry. 
D. Data Analyses 
Structural equation modeling (SEM) based on LISREL 
covariance software package will be used to test this study’s 
research model. LISREL is chosen over PLS and traditional 
regression methods as it better supports the study of 
interactions amongst research variables [37], a key 
particularity of this study. Furthermore, because most of this 
study’s measures were previously used and tested, this 
research is more confirmatory rather than exploratory in 
regards to its measures. As such, it is more appropriate to use 
LISREL, which is more stringent then PLS [37]. Also, since 
using the SEM approach allows for the evaluation of both the 
quality 
of 
the 
measurement 
and 
the 
construct 
interrelationships, this approach will be used to first test the 
measurement model and then to test the structural model. To 
test the measurement model, a confirmatory factor model (i.e., 
the measurement model) will be used to measure the fit 
between the theorized model and observed variables. Then, to 
test the structural model, results of the measurement model 
will be used to create a path-analytic model to investigate the 
relationships hypothesized in this study [38]. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Recognizing the potential of IS as innovation generators, 
the present study aimed to answer the following research 
question: “What is the role of IS in the creation of 
organizational innovations?” Based on the theoretical and 
conceptual background put forth in this study, we assess that 
IS play an enabling role in the creation of organizational 
innovations. Specifically, IS provide a platform to support and 
improve the key organizational capabilities (functional and 
integrative) that lead to organizational innovativeness. If 
validated, our understanding of the role of IS in the creation 
of organizational innovations is likely to yield important 
theoretical contributions and practical implications. 
A. Theoretical Contibutions 
From a theoretical perspective, by identifying novelty as a 
key criterion of innovations and by instantiating the concept 
of agency in the context of innovations, this research 
significantly improves our understanding of the creation of 
organizational innovations. Also, the sound conceptual 
framework developed in this study allows for the 
reconciliation of conflicting views on innovation generation 
and sets the groundwork for further research on this important 
topic. 
Furthermore, 
by 
highlighting 
the 
duality 
of 
organizational innovativeness, this study theoretically 
justifies the necessity of functional and integrative capabilities 
as well as the additive interaction stemming from their mutual 
influence. In doing so, this research also establishes the 
importance of IS in the innovation generation process, by 
revealing their positive impact on functional and integrative 
organizational capabilities. Accordingly, the present research 
also explains how IS can support the creation of 
organizational innovations. 
B. Practical Implications 
From a practical standpoint, the present research 
anticipated results should allow managers to improve the 
innovation capabilities of their organizations by identifying 
the key role of functional and integrative capabilities as well 
as their additive mutual influence. Furthermore, by being 
amongst the first study to highlight the role of IS in the 
generation of innovations, this study should enable 
organizations to not only improve their innovativeness but 
also to reap greater benefits from their current IS. 
Furthermore, by highlighting the key characteristics of PLM 
and Closed-Loop PLM systems, this research should also 
provide sound arguments for why firms that aim to innovate 
should use Closed-loop PLM systems that incorporate PEID 
and not limit their use to PLM systems. 
C. Limits and Future Research Avenues 
The theoretical and methodological contents presented 
above suggest a few limits and related future research 
avenues. First, our study sample only comprises Canadian 
organizations involved in specific industries. To address this 
limit, future research could aim to replicate our research 
efforts with a different sample frame. For example, it could be 
interesting to replicate our research efforts with organizations 
from service industries and/or from different countries. 
Second, although we use the concept of duality at the heart of 
structuration 
theory 
to 
show 
that 
organizational 
innovativeness rests on an organization’s ability to draw from 
existing rules and resources and to create knowledge, our 
research model does incorporate all the tenets of structuration 
theory. In the future, we hope to extend our research model in 
order to take into account more tenets of the theory. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Azedegan and K. J. Dooley, “Supplier Innovativeness, 
Organizational 
Learning 
Styles 
and 
Manufacturer 
Performance: an Empirical Assessment,” Journal of Operation 
Management, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 488-505, 2010. 
[2] T. M. Hult, R. F. Hurley and G. A. Knight, “Innovativeness: its 
Antecedents and Impact on Business Performance,” Industrial 
Marketing Management, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 429–438, 2004. 
[3] D. Leonard-Barton, “Develper-User Interaction and User 
Satisfactionin Internal Technology Tranfer,” Academy of 
Management Journal, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 1125-1139, 1993. 
[4] R. Subroto, K. Sivakumar and I. F. Wilkinson, “Innovation 
Generation in Supply Chain Relationships : a Conceptual 
Model and Research Propositions,” Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 61-79, 2004. 
[5] G. 
Verona, 
“A 
Resources-Based 
View 
of 
Product 
Development,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 24, no. 
1, pp. 132-141, 1999. 
[6] E. K. Clemons and M. C. Row, “Sustaining IT Advantage: the 
Role of Structural Differences,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 15, no. 3, 
pp. 275-292, 1991. 
[7] E. K. Clemons and M. C. Row, “Information Technology and 
Industrial 
Cooperation: 
the 
Changing 
Economics 
of 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Coordination and Ownership,” Journal of Management 
Information Systems vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 9-28, 1992. 
[8] K. D. Joshi, L. Chi, A. Datta, and H. Shu, “Changing the 
Competitive Landscape: Continuous Innovation through IT-
Enabled Knowledge Capabilities,” Information System 
Research, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 472-495, 2010. 
[9] Y.-M. Tai, “Effects of Product Lifecycle Management Systems 
on New Product Development Performance,” Journal of 
Engineering and Technology Management, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 
67-83, 2017. 
[10] J. E. Ettlie, W. P. Bridges, and R. D. O' Keefe “Organization 
Strategies and Structural Differences for Radical versus 
Incremental Innovation,” Management Science, vol. 30, no. 6, 
pp. 682-695, 1984. 
[11] S. Gopalakrishnan, and F. Damanpour, “A Review of 
Innovation Research in Economics, Sociology and Technology 
Management,” Omega, International Journal of Management 
Science, vol., 25, no. 1, pp. 15-28, 1997. 
[12] N. Becheikh, R. Landry and N. Aamara, “Lessons from 
Innovation Empirical Studies in the Manufacturing Sector: a 
Systematic Review of the Literature from 1993-2000,” 
Technovation, vol. 26, no. 5-6 , pp. 644-664, 2006  
[13] A. Giddens, “Elements of the Theory of Structuration”, The 
Constitution of Society, University of California Press, 1984.  
[14] L. Winner, “Engines of Changes,” Autonomous Technology: 
Technics out of Control as a Theme in Political Thought, MIT 
Press, Boston, MA, 1977. 
[15] J. R. Galbraith,  “Designing Complex Organization,” Addison-
Wesley, Reading, MA, 1973. 
[16] P. Bachrach and M.S. Baratz, “The Two Faces of Power,” 
American Political Science Review, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 947-952, 
1962. 
[17] J. Schumpeter, “The Theory of Economic Development,” 
Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1934. 
[18] S. 
Paruchuri, 
“Intraorganizational 
Networks, 
Interorganizational Networks, and the Impact of Central 
Inventors : a Longitudinal Study of Pharmaceutical Firms,” 
Organization Science, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 63-80, 2010. 
[19] M. Iansiti and  K. B. Clark,  “Integration and Dynamic 
Capability: 
Evidence 
from 
Product 
Development 
in 
Automobiles and Mainframe Computers,” Industrial and 
Corporate Change, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 557-605, 1994. 
[20] B. Lawson and D. Samson, “Developing Innovation Capability 
in Organizations: a Dynamic Capabilities Approach,” 
International Journal of Innovation Management, vol. 5, no. 3, 
pp. 377-400, 2001. 
[21] S. G. Lee, Y.-S. Ma, G. L. Thimm, and J. Verstraeten “Product 
Lifecycle Management in Aviation Maintenance, Repair and 
Overhaul,” Computers in Industry, vol. 59, no. 2-3, pp. 296–
303, 2008. 
[22] F. Ameri, and D. Dutta, “Product Lifecycle Management: 
Closing the Knowledge Loops,” Computer-Aided Design and 
Applications, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 577-590, 2005. 
[23] H.-B, Jun, J.-H. Shin, D. Kiritsis and P. Xirouchakis, “System 
Architecture for Closed-Loop PLM,” International Journal of 
Computer Integrated Manaufacturing, vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 684-
698, 2007. 
[24] H.-B, Jun, D. Kiritsis and P. Xirouchakis, “Research Issues on 
Closed-Loop PLM,” Computer in industry, vol. 58, no. 8-9, pp. 
855-868, 2007 
[25] A. Sääksvuori and A. Immonen, “Product Lifecycle 
Management,” 2nd edition. Springer, London, 2002. 
[26] J. Stark “Product Lifecycle Management: Volume 1 - 21st 
Century Paradigm for Product Realisation,” 3rd edition, 
Springer, London, 2015. 
[27] S. Talbot, E. Lefebvre and L.-A. Lefebvre, “Closed-Loop 
Supply 
Chain 
Activities 
and 
Derived 
Benefits 
in 
Manufacturing SMEs,” Journal of Manufacturing Technology 
Management, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 627-658, 2007. 
[28] P. Hadaya and P. Marchildon, “Understanding Product 
Lifecycle Management and Supporting Systems,” Industrial 
Management and Data Systems, vol. 112, no. 4, pp. 559-583, 
2012. 
[29] M. Abramovici and O. C. Sieg, “Status and development trends 
of product lifecycle management systems,” The conference on 
Integrated Products and Product Development (IPPD-2002) 
Feb., 2002. 
[30] L. Zhekun, R. Gadh and B. S.Prabhu, “Applications of RFID 
Technology and Smart Parts in Manufacturing," The confrence 
on Design Engineering Technical Confernces (DETC-2004) 
ASME, Sept. 2004, 
[31] A. Malhotra, S. Gosain and O. El Sawy, “Absortive Capacity 
Configurations in Supply Chains : Gearing for Partner-Enabled 
Market Knowledge Creation,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 29, no. 1, 
pp. 145-187, 2004. 
[32] S. A. Zahra and G. Georges, “Absorptive Capacity, a Review, 
Reconceptualization, 
and 
Extension,” 
Academy 
of 
Management Review, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 185-203, 2002. 
[33] T. Chiang and A. J. C. Trappey, “Development of Value Chain 
Collaborative Model for Product Lifecycle Management and 
its LCD Industry Adoption,” International Journal of 
Production Economics, vol. 109, no. 1-2, pp. 90-104, 2007. 
[34] D. Kiritsis, “Closed-Loop PLM for Intelligent Products in the 
Era of the Internet of Things,” Computer-Aided Design, vol. 
43, no. 5, pp. 479-501, 2011. 
[35] S. Lee, “Business Use of Internet-Based Information Systems: 
the Case of Korea,” European Journal of Information Systems 
vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 168-181, 2003. 
[36] J. P. Jansen, F. A. J. Van Den Bosch, and H. W. Volberda, 
“Exploratory 
Innovation, 
Exploitative 
Innovation, 
and 
Performance: Effects of Organizational Antecedents and 
Environmental Moderators,” Management Science, vol. 52, 
no.11, pp. 1661-1674, 2006 
[37] D. Gefen, D. W. Straub and M. C. Boudreau, “Structural 
Equation Modeling and Regression: Guidelines for Research 
and Practice,” Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1-77, 2000. 
[38] G. S. Kearns and A. L. Lederer, “A Resource-Based View of 
Strategic IT Alignment: How Knowledge Sharing Creates 
Competitive Advantage,” Decision Sciences, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 
1-29, 2003. 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

