A Framework of Warranty Risk Management
Ahmed Aljazea
Kent Business School
University of Kent
Canterbury, Kent CT2 9FS, UK
Email: ama65@kent.ac.uk
Shaomin Wu
Kent Business School
University of Kent
Canterbury, Kent CT2 9FS, UK
Email: s.m.wu@kent.ac.uk
Abstract—Warranty is a useful tool for a manufacturer to
reﬂect its product quality and combat competition. It, however,
introduces various risks that may have a direct impact on
the proﬁtability and reputation of the manufacturer. Although
managing such risks is crucial in reducing the number of
warranty incidents and warranty related cost, little research has
systematically investigated warranty risk management (WaRM).
As such, this paper aims to (1) analyse the existing literature on
warranty-related risks; (2) develop a generic WaRM framework;
(3) investigate the existing WaRM techniques and methods
by surveying the warranty decision makers in the automotive
industry in the UK, and then (4) propose a warranty hazard
identiﬁcation tool through utilising social media data.
Keywords–warranty risk management; social media; automotive
industry
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, manufacturers may offer a competitive warranty
policy to their customers to maintain or increase their market
shares. However, offering warranty may introduce various
risks that can have a signiﬁcant impact on the manufacturer’s
proﬁt and reputation. For instance, General Motors (GM) spent
$2billion to recall 13.1 million vehicles in 2014 due to its
ignition switch issue, which may cause safety problems for
drivers and passengers.
In the literature, WaRM is not often discussed and only
mentioned as a side topic in some papers. For example, [1]
investigates the problem of efﬁciency in warranty programme.
[2] adapts a method, or a Quality Function Deployment (QFD)
method, to prioritise warranty-related activities that may affect
customers’ satisfaction. [3] proposes a warranty management
framework that outlines the main issues in achieving the goal
of a warranty programme and meet customers’ satisfaction. [4]
identiﬁes the top contributors to warranty incidents and costs
and then proposes a warranty hazard taxonomy.
This research therefore seeks answers to the following ques-
tions: How should a manufacturer plan its WaRM? What tools
should be used to identify warranty hazards, assess warranty
risks, and mitigate warranty risks, respectively? Accordingly,
the novelty of this research includes: (1) It is the ﬁrst research
paper that systematically analyses WaRM and develops a
generic WaRM framework; and (2) it is the ﬁrst research paper
that applies social media data to identify warranty hazards.
In this paper, Section II discusses WaRM tools; Section III
designs a questionnaire and analysis it. Section IV develops a
WaRM framework; Section V identiﬁes warranty hazards from
social media data; and Section VI concludes the paper.
II.
WARRANTY RISK MANAGEMENT TOOLS
Risk is deﬁned as ”the effect of uncertainty on objectives” [5].
The effect can be a positive or negative deviation from what
was planned. [5] deﬁnes risk management as a set of activities
and methods employed to direct and control an organisation
risks that can affect the ability to achieve its objectives.
These activities have ﬁve stages: (1) risk planning; (2) hazards
identiﬁcation; (3) risk assessment; (4) risk evaluation, and (5)
risk controlling and monitoring. Analogously, the deﬁnition of
risk management, or Warranty Risk Management (WaRM), can
be deﬁned as the process that identiﬁes and assesses warranty
hazards, and then manages the associated risks that occur
during warranty period, as elaborated below.
Warranty risk planning involves assigning roles and liabilities
in order to avoid contrary decisions in respect of emerging
risks and allocating the necessary budget, efforts and resources.
Additionally, aligning the procedures of the managerial works
(e.g., reporting and passing risk-related information to the
interested departments) is necessary in developing a war-
ranty risk plan. Techniques such as project network diagrams
[6], precedence diagram method [7] and generalised activ-
ity networks [8] can be adapted. As the risk management
programme is a continuous process during the warranty pro-
gramme, warranty cost analysis needs reviewing periodically.
The thresholds that determine the level of an acceptable risk is
signiﬁcantly important as it will be used as a reference point.
Warranty hazard identiﬁcation answers the question of what
could go wrong during the warranty period. To answer this
question, an in-depth analysis of the product, during the pre-
launched and post-launched stages, is required. To this end,
general tools such as SWOT (Strength, Weakness, Opportu-
nities and Threats) analysis and the analogy approach can be
adapted to obtain a board view of potential warranty hazard.
To obtain a detailed identiﬁcation, one may use tools, such
as Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA), interviewing
experts, assumption analysis, documents reviews, Delphi tech-
nique, and brainstorming, among others. The identiﬁcation
of warranty hazards is a challenge due to its interacts with
other departments, such as design, manufacturing, marketing,
logistics departments. Data collected from those departments
are important in identifying warranty hazards in addition to
warranty data which is collected from the warranty service
providers [9]. With the development of data warehousing and
Big Data techniques, it is possible to collect a huge amount
of data from different sources. Warranty-related data can also
be collected from structured datasets (e.g., CRM, ERP, etc.)
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-710-8
BUSTECH 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

or unstructured datasets (e.g., social networks, specialized
forums, blogs, etc.). Analysing both types through the Big Data
analytics tools can provide useful information that is difﬁcult to
acquire with traditional tools of data analysis. The application
of such techniques may detect warranty hazards at the early
stage of the product lifecycle.
Warranty risk assessment may be based on qualitative or/and
quantitative analysis. Qualitative analysis may aim to look
for repetitive events and then decide any required actions,
whereas quantitative analysis aims to assess the probabilities
and consequences of warranty risk. The probability of warranty
risk is the likelihood of occurrence of a hazard during the
warranty period, and the consequences is the expected loss
of the hazard, which can be determined by experts or by
the comparison with similar events occurred in the past. In
order to quantitatively measure warranty risk, one may use
methods, such as sensitivity analysis, FMEA and Failure Mode
Effect and Criticality Analysis (FMECA), fault tree analysis
and event tree analysis [10], and sensitivity analysis variable
[11].
Warranty risk evaluation is concerned with the ranking of
warranty risks. Such risks are evaluated to determine the mag-
nitude of each risk based on its impact severity and likelihood.
The impact may have different criteria, such as warranty cost,
manufacturers’ reputation, human safety and environmental
damage. To this end, methods such as decision tree analysis
[11], portfolio management [12] and Multi-Criteria Decision-
Making methods (MCDM), may be applied.
Warranty risk mitigation is concerned with the application of
pre-speciﬁed mitigation plans in response to emerged warranty
risks. Such plans aims to avoid the occurrence of risk, mitigate
the impact of risk, transfer risk or retain risk. Some factors
are essential to be considered to opt the appropriate plan: for
example, (1) the severity of a consequence, (2) cost needed to
deal with the risk, (3) required time, (4) warranty programme
context, and (5) the impact of a consequence.
Warranty risk monitoring and review is essential in controlling
the identiﬁed warranty risks. Consequently, such risks are
periodically evaluated to understand whether or not they are
within the controlled regions or need further actions.
III.
QUESTIONNAIRE ANALYSIS
In order to better understand WaRM tools used in practice,
we surveyed warranty decision makers. A questionnaire, in-
cluding 9 questions, was designed and then distributed to
organisations of three types: suppliers, OEMs and dealers, in
the automotive industry in the UK. These questions include
two main sections, (1) respondents and their organisations’ in-
formation, and (2) the existing WaRM tools used in their ﬁrms.
Out of 70 questionnaires that were distributed by Qualtrics
(https://www.qualtrics.com), 40 respondents were collected.
The survey results are analysed in this section.
A. Organisations and the Respondents’ Information
This subsection tries to understand the ﬁrms and the experience
of the respondents.
Figure 1 shows the revenue distribution of the organisations
that the respondents were working for: Most (i.e., 32%) of
the respondents were from ﬁrms with revenue less than $100
million. Figure 2 shows their current management levels: the
majority (60%) of respondents are in the middle-level man-
agement. Their experiences are grouped into four categories,
and the large portion (51%) is the group of over-10-years’
experience (see Figure 3). It is important in this research to
survey those people who have a long period of experience as
the hazard identiﬁcation process relies heavily on the decision
makers’ experiences.
Figure 1. Organisations sizes.
Figure 2. The management level of respondent.
B. Tools for hazard identiﬁcation and risk assessment
To gain a better understanding of the existing WaRM in the
automotive industry in the UK, this subsection aims to survey
tools used in identifying warranty hazards and assessing their
associated risks. Hence, the respondents were asked “Which
tools are used by your organisation to identify warranty
hazards?” Figure 4 shows that the most common tool (16%)
used by their organisations is the root cause analysis technique,
followed by both techniques, checklist analysis (15%) and
information gathering (15%), respectively. The effectiveness
of such tools in identifying warranty hazards relies on the
accessibility to the required data at the proper time. For
example, root cause analysis requires time to identify product
failure causes and ﬁnd the solutions accordingly 04 March
2019. Such a technique requires detailed information from
the warranty services provider (dealer in this research) about
product failures (e.g., failure symptoms, usage status, etc.).
Unfortunately, collaboration among the organisations of the
three types are often insufﬁcient. Additionally, it takes time
for the OEMs to aggregate the required information and then
pass it to other parties (e.g., suppliers).
With regard to warranty risk assessment, the respondents were
asked about the existing tool(s) used to assess warranty risk.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-710-8
BUSTECH 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Figure 3. The respondents’ experiences.
Figure 4. The existing hazards identiﬁcation tools.
Figure 5 shows that the most common (40%) technique used
to assess warranty risk is FMECA, followed by FMEA (29%).
The respondents were also asked “What are the limitations
of the existing tool(s) used to assess warranty risk?” in order
to determine the weaknesses. They listed different limitations,
and mainly focused on the importance of updating the existing
tools by taking the advanced technology into consideration.
Additionally, the time issue required to process and access
such tools is a challenge, these tools are unable to detect
warranty hazards at the early stage of the product’s lifecycle.
For example, some of their answers regarding the limitations
of such tools are: “Require human interaction” and “risks tend
not to be known until an incident has happened on a recurring
basis, and the tools do not always identify this as a risk”.
These responses imply that such tools need to be improved to
identify hazards systematically, though some said: “there are
no limitations”.
Once a warranty incident has occurred, its impacts can be
analysed based on different criteria. Therefore, the respondents
were requested to answer this question “Once a warranty
incident has occurred, what are the top criteria that can be
severely inﬂuenced?” and they were asked to choose the
impact severity level from “None” to “Catastrophic” for each
criterion. From Figure 6, it can be seen that warranty risks
have a medium to a severe impact on warranty costs and
the manufacturer’s reputation. On the other hand, the impact
of such risks on human safety and environment ranges from
minor to medium. The respondents were also asked about their
warranty risk mitigation plans. Generally, they use different
techniques, which can be grouped into (1) mitigation plans,
such as recall, insurance, manufacturer support, and problem
Figure 5. Warranty risk assessment tools.
Figure 6. Criteria inﬂuenced by warranty risk.
diagnosis; (2) software, such as CRM (customer relationship
management); and (3) methods, such as Delphi, historical data
collection and experience.
IV.
A WARM FRAMEWORK
The ISO 31000 risk management framework [13] can be
adopted in the development of a WaRM framework. As a
result, a WaRM framework, as shown in Figure 7, is developed
and interpreted in the following.
1) Determining the internal and external stakeholders who
should be communicated or consulted with to gain inputs
for each step of the framework. The engineering, marketing,
ﬁnance, legal and accounting departments are examples
of internal stakeholders, whereas suppliers, dealers, and
distributors are examples of external stakeholders who may
affect the decision of managing warranty risk. The commu-
nication and consultation is a continuous process through
all the WaRM steps. It is important to understand the
objectives of the stakeholders. Accordingly, such objectives
can then be considered in setting a warranty risk plan.
2) Setting a warranty risk plan by determining warranty
programme objectives and the factors that inﬂuence the
achievement of such objectives. It is also important to
determine the mitigation plans for each potential hazard
by consulting experts or learning from the similar cases
occurred at competitors.
3) Collecting hazard-related data from different sources. This
step is the cornerstone in this framework as the warranty
programme involves a high level of uncertainty, due to
the complexity of products and the long warranty period,
which makes it difﬁcult to be planned at the previous
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-710-8
BUSTECH 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

steps. Additionally, since warranty management relates
many parts of the manufacturer, identiﬁcation of warranty
hazards becomes more challenging. As such, this step is
divided into four phases.
•
Data collection: Data should be collected from all
stakeholders, including the internal and external
stakeholders. Due to difﬁculties in obtaining real-
time data from these stakeholders, other sources of
data such as customers’ comments posted on the so-
cial media can be a good source. Combining infor-
mation of both sources can improve the efﬁciency
of the process of warranty hazard identiﬁcation.
•
Data cleansing: The collected data may include
noisy data that are incompatible with the manufac-
turer database system, so one needs to pre-process
and cleanse the data for further processing.
•
Data analysis: The acquired information needs
analysing to identify warranty hazards.
•
Classiﬁcation: The classiﬁcation of the identiﬁed
hazards is then used to facilitate the rest steps of
WaRM. For example, the hazards can be broadly
classiﬁed warranty hazard design related, manufac-
turing related, warranty-servicing related, customers
related or information related hazards.
4) Assessing warranty risk associated with the identiﬁed haz-
ards based on their likelihood (frequency rate) and their
consequences severity of the risks based on some criteria.
At this stage, the identiﬁed hazards will be assessed to
ﬁnd the associated risks. As such, the probability of each
hazard will be assessed according to its frequency. Then,
its impact on different criteria will be assessed based on the
decision makers’ experiences. Some tools can be adapted
such FMECA, FMEA and others. Based on the result
of questionnaire data analysis, it is found that the most
common tools used to assess warranty risk is FMECA.
5) Evaluating the risks, which includes prioritising and rank-
ing the risks based on their severity in terms of the given
criteria. The warranty decision makers can then evaluate
the risks and decide the acceptable and unacceptable ones.
MCDM methods may be adapted to identify the local
priority of such risks and the overall priority, which is used
to determine and rank the risk among others. The analytic
hierarchy process (AHP), for example, is one of the most
commonly used MCDM tools and its application is vast in
risk assessment and evaluation.
6) Mitigating the risks based on the outcomes of the above
Steps 3) & 4) and based on the mitigation plans set in
Step 2). Once the probability and impact of each risk are
determined, they can be visualised. There are some tools
can be used to perform this task, such as the risk matrix. It
is important to monitor warranty risk on a real-time basis
in order to detect failures at the early stage of products’
lifecycle.
7) Visualising risks to gain a better understanding of the mon-
itoring process and the warranty risk plan. The monitoring
and review step is a continuous process with the all WaRM
steps. For example, a warranty risk plan including proce-
dures liabilities documentation and others need updating
in response to the new changes. Likewise, the approaches
used to identify, assess, evaluate and mitigate warranty risk
should be updated, if necessary, according to such changes.
Figure 7. WaRM framework.
V.
IDENTIFYING HAZARDS FROM SOCIAL MEDIA
Nowadays, a huge volume of information has been generated
over the Internet. Many people share their unique interests and
opinions through different platforms on the Internet, such as
Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, YouTube, among others. Such
information can reﬂect their experiences or complaints towards
products, services and so forth. Therefore, such information is
highly important and useful to different stakeholders, includ-
ing manufacturers or warranty services providers. As such,
analysing those data can provide useful insights and aids in
developing products and improving organisations’ strategies.
Conventionally, manufacturers rely on warranty data to analyse
the abnormal events and then make decisions accordingly. This
process, however, may take a long period (up to 2 months [14],
say), which may lead to undesired consequences. As such,
social media data can be used to obtain real-time informa-
tion about product performance, which can help in detecting
warranty hazards (e.g., product failure, service quality, etc.) at
the early stage of product’s lifecycle. Here, in the following,
Twitter data will be used as an example of an early warning
tool to identify warranty hazards. Twitter is a micro-blogging
service which allows users to publicly and promptly write a
tweet.
A. Illustration of the WaRM Framework
In this section, the proposed WaRM is validated through
Twitter data following the process mentioned above.
Warranty risk planning, there exist several methods such as
project network diagrams, design structure matrices (DSM)
and others can be adapted to set a warranty risk plan. Warranty
hazard identiﬁcation is processed through four phases:
1) identifying the source of data and collecting data;
2) cleansing and analysing the collected datasets to obtain
useful information in relation to warranty hazards;
3) analysing the cleansed data to ﬁnd the characteristics of
hazards;
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-710-8
BUSTECH 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

4) classifying
warranty
hazards
into
design-related,
manufacturing-related,
logistics-related,
warranty-
servicing-related,
customer-related
and
information-
related hazards.
To apply the phases mentioned above, we collect data in
relation to Ford Fiesta issues from Twitter. Ford Fiesta is
one of the most commonly used cars that were sold globally
in 2016. Some of its users complained product failures on
Twitter. As mentioned before, while the proposed framework
should be validated on the basis of real-world data/cases, more
than 100 thousand tweets have been collected from Twitter
based on some keywords. These keywords were determined
based on analysing 300 comments posted by customers on
different forums indicating vehicles’ issues. After analysing
such comments, the common keywords are failure, fault, fail,
failed, break down, breakdown, service, warranty and problem
among others. The collected tweets was then cleansed, includ-
ing replacing blank spaces, removing punctuations, removing
links, removing tabs and removing blank spaces.
It is also important to point out that there are duplicated data
in the collected dataset, which results from the retweets, made
by different users, and which are not deemed as duplicated
tweets. As such, during the process of cleansing, they were
kept as the main part of this dataset because they may reﬂect
the concerns of other twitterers. As a result of the data pre-
processing stage, around 44 thousand tweets are kept, from
which tweets 23 thousand tweets are related to the research
question.
Although this dataset gives information about the different
warranty hazards relating to Ford Fiesta 2016, we list the four
most frequently complained hazards in the following.
1) Transmission failure: The word frequency indicating this
issue is 7129, which forms the highest complaint about
the Ford Fiesta 2016. Customers have commented on
this issue in many tweets, for example, “I experienced
a problem with transmission Ford Fiesta 2016, it is
lurching”. In this dataset, alternative terms were used to
describe this issue. For example, some tweeters have used
“gearbox” where others used “gear” instead.
2) Acceleration failure: This is the second most complained
issue in Ford Fiesta 2016. They complained, for example,
that “♯Ford Fiesta 16, I faced the problem of acceleration
twice last week, it was slow”. The term “acceleration”
has appeared in this dataset for 3627 times, which may
need the interventions from the manufacturer.
3) Intermission failure: Some customers also complained
about this issue during the taking off. They claimed that
in their tweets “♯Ford Fiesta 2016 performance is not as
we expected, there is an intermittent shudder when taking
off”. The intermittent term has been mentioned for 2941
times, all of which indicate this problem.
4) Rear door failure: Also, some customers have complained
that the rear door might have a safety problem. They
claimed that “Rear door of ♯Ford Fiesta may cause a
higher risk of injury”. As this term “rear door” has been
mentioned 2850 times in this dataset, it needs paying
attention.
It is important to note that there are other potential warranty
hazards in this dataset but they showed less importance based
on the words frequency. In order to assess the risks associated
with the identiﬁed warranty hazards, the probability of each
hazard will be multiplied with the expected consequences on
the relevant overall of the four mentioned criteria (warranty
cost, time, customer’s satisfaction and ﬁrm’s reputation), re-
spectively. Consequently, those risks can be prioritised and
ranked.
The severity of the risk in the identiﬁed warranty hazards
varies from one manufacturer to another. Additionally, in
terms of the aforementioned criteria, they may be different
as well. Therefore, it is difﬁcult to estimate the impact of such
consequences unless domain experts in one ﬁrm are consulted
in order to obtain their opinions regarding the impact of each
hazard on each criterion.
To sum up, through the analysis of the dataset, a number of
the identiﬁed warranty hazards have been observed. Mainly,
customers complained about Transmission, Acceleration, In-
termission and Rear Door. The frequency of such problems
was 7929, 3627, 2941 and 2850, respectively, as shown in
Table I.
TABLE I. THE PROBABILITY OF THE RISK ASSOCIATED WITH
WARRANTY HAZARD
Values
Probability
Transmission
7929
46%
Acceleration
3627
21%
Intermission
2941
17%
Rear door
2850
16%
Sum
17347
100%
From Table I, it can be seen that the four identiﬁed risks are
related to the manufacturing risks which often raise warranty
costs and lead to customers’ dissatisfaction. Among the four
hazards, the transmission in Ford Fiesta 2016 accounts for
46%. As a result, such a risk requires immediate intervention
by providing the required spare parts, scheduling of mainte-
nance and allocating the required fund and efforts, for example.
The rest of the identiﬁed hazards should also be carefully
checked although their probabilities are not so large as that of
the transmission. That is, they should be controlled to ensure
that the risks are under their acceptable levels.
In order to prioritise and rank the identiﬁed warranty risk, some
tools may be used to visualise the magnitude of the identiﬁed
risk, such as word cloud and link graph, as shown in Figures
8 and 9, for example.
Figure 8. Word cloud for the Ford Fiesta 2016 related Twitter data.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-710-8
BUSTECH 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Figure 9. Link graph for the Ford Fiesta 2016 related Twitter data.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
Managing warranty risk is crucial to protect manufacturers
from a huge warranty cost. This paper has analysed the
literature and surveyed some decision makers in the automotive
industry in the UK to obtain an in-depth understanding of
the WaRM in practice. A generic WaRM framework was then
developed.
The main ﬁndings are that the root cause analysis is the
most widely used tool in identifying warranty hazards, and
the FMECA technique is the most commonly used tool for
assessing warranty risk in the automotive industry in the UK.
In addition, warranty cost and the manufacturer’s reputation
are the most susceptible criteria to warranty risk.
To demonstrate the utility of social media data in identifying
warranty hazard, we collected and then analysed Twitter data
as an example of a real-time warranty identiﬁcation tool and
analysed the collected data.
REFERENCES
[1]
V. G. D´ıaz, F. P´er`es, and A. C. M´arquez, “On the risks and costs
methodologies applied for the improvement of the warranty manage-
ment,” Journal of Service Science and Management, vol. 4, no. 02, p.
191, 2011.
[2]
F. Costantino, M. De Minicis, V. Gonz´alez-Prida, and A. Crespo, “On
the use of quality function deployment (qfd) for the identiﬁcation of
risks associated to warranty programs,” in ESREL Conference, Helsinki,
2012, pp. 4440–4449.
[3]
V. Gonz´alez-Prida and A. C. M´arquez, “A framework for warranty
management in industrial assets,” Computers in Industry, vol. 63, no. 9,
pp. 960–971, 2012.
[4]
A. Aljazea and S. Wu, “Managing risk for auto warranties.” Inter-
national Journal of Quality & Reliability Management, 2019, doi:
/10.1108/IJQRM-08-2018-0221. (in press).
[5]
G. Purdy, “Iso 31000: 2009—setting a new standard for risk manage-
ment,” Risk Analysis: An International Journal, vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 881–
886, 2010.
[6]
L. V. Tavares, “A review of the contribution of operational research to
project management,” European Journal of Operational Research, vol.
136, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2002.
[7]
A. B. Badiru, Project management in manufacturing and high technol-
ogy operations.
John Wiley & Sons, 1996.
[8]
R. J. Dawson and C. W. Dawson, “Practical proposals for managing
uncertainty and risk in project planning,” International Journal of
Project Management, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 299–310, 1998.
[9]
S. Wu, “Warranty data analysis: a review,” Quality and Reliability
Engineering International, vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 795–805, 2012.
[10]
F. Wang, P. Zheng, J. Dai, H. Wang, and R. Wang, “Fault tree
analysis of the causes of urban smog events associated with vehicle
exhaust emissions: A case study in jinan, china,” Science of The Total
Environment, 2019.
[11]
T. J. VanderWeele and P. Ding, “Sensitivity analysis in observational
research: introducing the e-value,” Annals of internal medicine, vol.
167, no. 4, pp. 268–274, 2017.
[12]
M. Dickinson, A. Thornton, and S. Graves, “Technology portfolio
management: Optimizing interdependent projects over multiple time
periods,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, vol. 48,
no. 4, pp. 518–527, 2001.
[13]
ISO. Risk management. [Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/iso-
31000-risk-management.html
[14]
BearingPoint.
Global
automotive
war-
ranty
survey
report.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.bearingpoint.com/ﬁles/AutoWarrantyReport ﬁnal web.pdf
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-710-8
BUSTECH 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

