Automated Analysis of Patient Experience Text Mining using a Design Science 
Research (DSR) Approach 
Mohammed Bahja 
IRAC Group 
School of Computer Science and Technology 
University of Bedfordshire 
Luton, United Kingdom 
Email: mohammed.bahja@beds.ac.uk   
Manzoor Razaak 
WMN Group 
Kingston University 
London, United Kingdom 
Email: manzoor.razaak@kingston.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Online forums of hospitals are a common method of 
collecting patient feedback on the healthcare received. The 
feedback data obtained are often free text and large which may 
make a manual analysis of the data difficult and time-
consuming. An approach to automatically analyse patient 
experience data would be beneficial for the hospital staff in 
several ways. In this paper, a Design Science Research (DSR) 
paradigm based framework is proposed that is used for our 
ongoing research in developing solutions with an aim for an 
automated approach to analyse patient experience data using 
natural languages processing techniques such as Sentiment 
Analysis, Topic Modelling, and Dependency Parsing. The 
framework design proposed provides a three-stage iterative 
process wherein at each iteration the patient feedback is deeply 
analysed based on the outcomes obtained from the preceding 
ones. This iterative approach facilitates the development of a 
strong, effective patient feedback analysis system. 
Keywords-patient 
experience; 
sentiment 
analysis; 
text 
mining; topic modelling; DSR 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Understanding patient experience enables hospitals to 
identify their weaknesses in providing healthcare. It provides 
opportunities for them to reflect on their functioning and 
thus, make efforts towards addressing the limitations in 
relation to the service provided. Further, understanding the 
patient experience can also contribute towards making the 
hospital processes more efficient, which in turn will lead 
towards better utilisation of resources and the addressing of 
patient concerns. 
The National Health Service (NHS) provides health care 
within England, Scotland and Wales and is a public health 
service established shortly after the Second World War and 
caters for all residents of the UK. The NHS describes patient 
experience as a core dimension of good quality care [1]. It is 
an imperative task for the NHS to measure patient 
experience in order to monitor and improve health care 
performance, enhance strategic decision making and record 
progress for health care organisations [2]. 
An effective method of collecting a patients’ feedback is 
to provide an online forum, where they can anonymously 
provide their views on the health care service they have 
received on a website feedback form at their own 
convenience. In 2008, the NHS created a website called NHS 
Choices that invites patients to leave their feedback about 
their experience with the healthcare providers of the hospital, 
which they can do using two approaches. One method is to 
provide ratings to a given hospital on different metrics on a 
scale of 1 to 5 stars. Moreover, in addition to rating their visit 
on different metrics, they can also leave feedback in the form 
of comments in the comments section of the website. Thus, 
the NHS has a large database of patient feedback covering 
most hospitals across the United Kingdom (UK). The 
number of comments and feedback across the database runs 
into the hundreds of thousands.  
The process of collecting patient feedback via website 
source provides the healthcare professionals easy and 
convenient access to patient feedback data that can be used 
for analysis purposes. The hospital administration and 
researchers can use the feedback database to identify the 
strengths and weaknesses of their healthcare service and 
further employ them to address the identified issues. 
Online reviews are generally written as free text and do 
not adhere to any structure or format. This makes analysing 
and understanding the patient experience more challenging 
than when dealing with closed questions, as the possibilities 
regarding the feedback content are endless. Techniques, such 
as keyword searching can help in searching for topics in 
patient feedback; however, this does not recognise positive 
and negative feedback. To address the challenge of analysing 
a large patient feedback database, automated methods would 
enable the analysis process to be more sustainable and time 
effective. The recent advancements in information analysis 
technologies, such as text mining and natural language 
processing, has resulted in them being widely applied to 
analyse the user experience of products by various 
companies.  
In the last few years, studies have applied sentiment 
analysis approaches for analysis of patient experience data. 
Studies such as [6] and [7] applied SVM, decision trees, and 
Naive Bayes approaches of Sentiment Analysis and were 
able to classify patient comments into complaints/praise 
attributed to specific staff as well as feedback about other 
aspects, such as access, wait time, privacy, facilities, etc. In 
[8], the authors analysed the patient experience data provided 
by US hospitals on Twitter. They assessed tweeted reviews 
for over 2,000 US hospitals and identified those related to 
patient experience. Their preliminary results showed that the 
patient experience present on the tweets did not match that 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

regarding the Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare 
Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) ratings. However, there 
are limited studies that have explored how such language 
processing methods could be utilised to analyse patient 
experience. 
In this paper, the ongoing research on applying natural 
language processing to provide a framework with an aim for 
automated analysis of a patient experience is introduced. The 
methodology that is being used in the ongoing research is 
explained in detail in Section II. Section III describes our 
developed framework for the research followed by 
conclusion in Section IV. 
II. 
THE DESIGN SCIENCE RESEARCH (DSR) PARADIGM 
 The Design Science Research (DSR) methodology is 
currently being used for our research. The DSR paradigm is 
a widely popular research approach in Information Systems 
(IS) research. It is referred to as a problem-solving paradigm 
because it aims at building “artefacts” that are aimed at 
addressing a problem. The artefacts address the problems or 
enhance existing solutions and are important tools for 
arriving at research outcomes and reviewing them to decide 
how the artefact adopted can be further utilised [3]. The DSR 
process follows a systematic procedure in which the artefacts 
are developed with systematic creation, capturing, and 
communication of knowledge from the design process. DSR 
uses an iterative process, whereby the artefacts are 
reconstructed at each iteration and thus, can be described as a 
continuous learning process that enhances the artefacts 
quality incrementally [4]. 
Vaishnavi & Kuechler developed a methodology for 
DSR as shown in Figure 1 [5]. The model puts more 
emphasis on the process of contributing to knowledge. The 
DSR process here is based on the knowledge built and 
comprises five main stages:  Awareness of Problem, 
Suggestion, Development, Evaluation, and Conclusion. 
The awareness of problem aims at understanding the 
problem in the context of the application using various 
resources available. The outcome of this process leads to the 
development of the suggestion of the research project. In the 
suggestion phase, various insights into the application 
domain are obtained during this phase and the specifications 
for the solutions are acquired which leads to the development 
of a tentative design. In the development stage, the first 
artefact is developed. The evaluation phase focuses on 
evaluating the performance of the developed artefact, the 
outcomes of which may be used to further improve the 
artefact design and performance. 
In our research, the aim is to develop an automated 
analysis of patient feedback to identify their sentiment and 
opinions 
about 
the 
healthcare 
service. 
The 
DSR 
methodology is well suited for us to achieve this, as DSR is 
an iterative process and our artefact developed will be a three 
stage iterative process wherein at each iteration the patient 
feedback is deeply analysed based on the outcomes obtained 
from the preceding ones. This iterative approach facilitates 
the development of a strong, effective automated patient 
feedback analysis system. In the following section, the DSR 
methodology based framework of our research is presented. 
III. 
A DSR BASED FRAMEWORK FOR AUTOMATED 
PATIENT EXPERIENCE ANALYSIS  
To develop a patient feedback analysis system that can 
potentially automate the process, the five-phase design 
process steps mentioned in Figure 1 is adapted and used as 
the DSR approach for the study. The study will be carried 
out in three iterations and the adapted DSR approach 
enables the identification of the problem in each iteration, 
finds a solution, develops and evaluates the performance of 
the solution methodically and hence, is suitable for the 
research goals.  The DSR methodology of our study is 
illustrated in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 1. Design Science Research Phases (Kuechler, Park and Vaishnavi, 2007)
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
Figure 2: The proposed DSR based framework for automated analysis of patient experience data 
 
A. 
Iteration One: Sentiment Analysis of Patient 
Feedback Data 
The first iteration of our ongoing research is to apply 
Sentiment Analysis (SA) approaches to the NHS Choices 
patient feedback database. The aim of this iteration is to 
find the sentiment of the patient feedback in their 
comments provided on NHS hospitals on the NHS 
website. The sentiment identification is performed by the 
application of Sentiment Analysis approaches that analyse 
and classify a comment into positive or negative sentiment 
based on its contents. 
It can be seen that the problem is the need to identify 
the patient sentiment from the comments obtained for each 
NHS hospital from the NHS Choices website. The 
suggestion is to develop an artefact that can automatically 
or semi-automatically identify the patient feedback or 
sentiment in the comment as positive or negative. To 
develop this artefact, there are several sub-steps. The first 
is to identify suitable Sentiment Analysis (SA) models 
from the literature research that can identify the sentiment 
in the comment. The next sub-step is to design the 
experiment settings where the SA models are implemented 
on the feedback database. This involves identifying the 
processes for cleaning and preparing the database for the 
analysis, tools and technology required to implement the 
SA models. 
The next step is to evaluate the outcomes of the SA 
model implementation. The evaluation is an analytical 
approach in this iteration, whereby it is focused on the 
accuracy of the SA model in identifying the correct 
sentiment in the patient feedback. If the sentiment 
identified by the SA model matches the ground truth 
sentiment, then the SA model is said to be accurate. The 
outcomes of this iteration will be used for the second 
iteration of the study. 
B. 
Iteration Two: Topic Identification from 
Patient Feedback 
The next iteration of the study is to identify topics in 
the given patient feedback. The aim is to understand what 
specific area of the healthcare service the patient has 
discussed in their feedback, such as the maternity 
department, parking facilities or the waiting period in the 
hospital. In Figure 2, it can be observed that the DSR 
framework for iteration two is more or less similar to the 
iteration one approach. The problem in this iteration is to 
identify the topic being discussed by the patient in their 
feedback about the hospital on the NHS website. 
Therefore, in line with the problem, the artefact aimed at 
providing a model that can potentially automatically 
identify the topics or themes being discussed by the patient 
in a given comment. 
To develop the artefact, the Latent Dirichlet Allocation 
(LDA) Topic Modelling (TM) approach will be used. 
After the TM approach is implemented, and then the topics 
and themes for each patient comment are automatically 
identified. This reveals which topics are being discussed in 
the patient feedback. The next step is to identify the 
sentiment for each topic identified in the patient comment. 
To achieve this, the sentiment identified for each comment 
from the SA models from iteration one is used i.e. for each 
comment, the identified sentiment is mapped to the 
relevant topics to obtain a sentiment score for that topic 
across the patient feedback database. A difference in 
iteration two when compared to iteration one during the 
development stage is that the iteration two study requires 
the outcomes of the SA model obtained from the first 
iteration, i.e. second iteration of the study is dependent on 
the previous iteration. 
The evaluation of the topics identified in iteration two 
involves both analytical and observational evaluation. The 
former refers to when the sentiment score for each topic is 
computed based on the sentiment scores found from the 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

iteration one. The observational part of the evaluation 
pertains to when the topics are identified by the TM 
method. The topics are bags of words that are likely to 
belong to a particular theme and they need to be manually 
analysed in order to assign a label to each of them. This is 
achieved by involving NHS experts to observe each 
topic’s elements and provide a label for each category.  
The outcomes of iteration two will be disseminated by 
representing the topics identified using data visualisation 
approaches in the R programming environment to make 
them accessible to hospital staff. Finally, the topics 
identified by the TM approach in iteration two will be used 
for further study and analysis in iteration three for the 
Dependency Parsing investigation aimed at identifying the 
rationale behind the patient sentiment. 
C. 
Iteration Three: Rationale Identification of 
Patient Sentiment 
In the third iteration, the aim is to identify the rationale 
behind a particular sentiment of the patient in a given 
comment or review. In other words, the purpose is to find 
out why the patient is happy or unhappy about a particular 
topic in a given comment. The problem being addressed in 
this iteration of the study is to find the possible reason 
behind a patients’ sentiment for a particular topic in a 
given comment. To achieve this, the artefact developed 
will implement a Natural Language Processing method 
called Dependency Parsing. This identifies the keywords 
in a given comment that could potentially summarise the 
patient feedback for a given topic in the comment. 
Specifically, this is achieved by extracting a “noun-
adjective” pair for each topic in a given comment and this 
pair are expected to provide the keywords in the comment 
that indicate the reason behind the patients’ happiness or 
unhappiness about the healthcare service provided. 
Similar to the previous two iterations, once the suitable 
Dependency Parsing methods are identified and the 
implementation environments are finalised, the experiment 
settings are created and implemented.  For this iteration, 
the R programming environment will be utilised and the 
openNLP and coreNLP methods available in the literature 
will be adopted. Further, similar to how iteration two was 
dependent on the outcomes of the iteration one, iteration 
three is also dependent on those from the two preceding 
iterations. This is because the “noun-adjective” pair that is 
extracted to summarise the patient comment is performed 
on a per topic basis. In other words, for each topic, the 
reason behind the patient sentiment is identified. In 
particular, the unigram topics identified from the TM 
method are used for Dependency Parsing in this study.  
The evaluation of the topics identified in iteration three 
is both analytical and descriptive. The analytical 
evaluation refers to when the Dependency Parsing 
methods implemented automatically analyse the feedback 
data and identify a noun-adjective pair from the comments. 
The descriptive part of the evaluation pertains to the noun-
adjective pair identified providing a summary of the 
patient comment on a given topic. Thus, it potentially 
describes the patient comment by a pair of words. 
Similar to iteration two, the outcomes of iteration three 
will be disseminated via visualisation techniques. In this 
visualisation, the users will be able to list all the comments 
for a chosen topic and then for each comment, they will be 
able to visualise the most salient noun-adjective pair that 
potentially summarises the comment for the given topic, 
either negatively or positively. 
Thus, it can be noted that the DSR approach is deemed 
suitable to design a framework for our study as it provides 
a systematic approach to formulating the problem, 
identifying potential solutions, implementing and testing 
the solutions and finally, evaluating and disseminating the 
outcomes. The iterative approach is a strong aspect of the 
DSR method and is particularly suitable for the current 
study as each part of the study is dependent on the 
outcomes of its predecessor study. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The DSR method is an iterative process that enables 
the development of an artefact for solving a problem. It is 
suitable for our research, as the main goal is developing an 
artefact for analysing patient experience automatically. 
Our artefact will be developed in three iterations and each 
successive iteration study is dependent on the outcomes of 
the previous iteration. This approach would enable us to 
develop an effective framework to analyse the patient 
experience data and can be beneficial to hospitals to assess 
their performance in achieving high patient satisfaction. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. LaVela and A. Gallan, “Evaluation and measurement 
of patient experience,” Patient Experience Journal, vol.1, no. 1, 
pp. 28-36, 2014.  
[2] A. Coulter, L. Locock, Z. S. and J. Calabrese, “Collecting 
data on patient experience is not enough: they must be used to 
improve care,” BMJ: British Medical Journal, p. 348, 2014.  
[3] K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, C. Gengler, M. Rossi, W. Hui, 
V. Virtanen and J. Bragge, “ The design science research process: 
a model for producing and presenting information systems 
research,” In Proceedings of the first international conference on 
design science research in information systems and technology , 
2006.  
[4] S. Gregor and A. Hevner, “Positioning and presenting 
design science research for maximum impact,” MIS quarterly, 
vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 337-355, 2013. 
[5] V. Vaishnavi and W. Kuechler, Design Science Research 
methods 
and 
Patterns: 
Innovating 
Information 
and 
Communication Technology, New York: 1st edn. Taylor & 
Francis Group., 2007. 
[6] F. Alemi, M. Torii, L. Clementz, L. and D.C. Aron, 
'Feasibility of real-time satisfaction surveys through automated 
analysis of patients' unstructured comments and sentiments', 
Quality Management in Healthcare, 21(1), pp. 9-19, 2012. 
[7] F. Greaves, D. Ramirez-Cano, C. Millett, A. Darzi, and L. 
Donaldson, 'Machine learning and sentiment analysis of 
unstructured free-text information about patient experience 
online', The Lancet, 380, pp. S10, 2013. 
[8] C. Lees, 'Measuring the patient experience', Nurse 
researcher, 19(1), pp. 25-28, 2011. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

