 
A Business Intelligence Infrastructure Supporting Respiratory Health Analysis 
 
R. Dinis, A. Ribeiro, Maribel Y. Santos 
Centro Algoritmi, Universidade do Minho 
Guimarães, Portugal 
{pg15527, pg15287}@alunos.uminho.pt, 
maribel@dsi.uminho.pt 
Jorge Cruz*, A. Teles de Araújo** 
*Faculdade de Medicina de Lisboa 
**Fundação Portuguesa do Pulmão 
Lisboa, Portugal 
costacruzjorge@gmail.com, artur@telesdearaujo.com 
 
 
Abstract—Business Intelligence Systems are being designed 
and implemented to support data analysis tasks that help 
organizations in the achievement of their goals. These tasks are 
accomplished using several technologies aimed to store and 
analyze data. This paper presents the particular case of the 
design and implementation of a business intelligence system to 
support 
health 
care 
specialists 
in 
the 
analysis 
and 
characterization of symptoms related with the chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. For this specific application 
domain, a data mart model is proposed, implemented and 
loaded, allowing the analysis of the available data using on-line 
analytical processing technology and a spatial data mining 
algorithm. The results obtained so far are promising, 
demonstrating the usefulness of the proposed business 
intelligence approach to characterize the key factors in the 
comprehension of the disease under analysis. 
Keywords-business 
intelligence; 
data 
mining; 
on-line 
analytical processing; chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
The collection and storage of huge amounts of data is 
increasing as organizations need to analyze these data and 
identify useful patterns, trends or models that support the 
decision making process. Independently of the application 
domain, this is the reality of nowadays organizations. This 
paper addresses the particular reality of a non-profit 
organization, the Portuguese Lung Foundation (Fundação 
Portuguesa do Pulmão - FPP), that carry out several 
activities to collect, store and analyze data related with 
several diseases. The obtained results are used to 
characterize the actual reality and to set up campaigns 
aiming to improve the citizens’ quality of life. 
In particular, this paper is focused on the Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) for which Business 
Intelligence concepts and technologies are used to store and 
analyze the related data. The COPD is an airflow limitation 
that is not fully reversible and that affects up to one quarter 
of the adults with 40 or more years [1]. This disease is 
characterized by some of the following symptoms: chronic 
cough, sputum production and dyspnea. It can be confirmed 
in a clinical exam called spirometry, if the obtained values 
are 80% below of the Forced Expiratory Volume in 1 second 
(FEV1) and the ratio FEV1/FVC (Forced Vital Capacity) is 
lower than 0,7 [2]. The risk factors usually include:  
masculine gender, tobacco smoke, exposure to dusts and 
chemicals, air pollution, asthma, and genetic factors as a rare 
hereditary deficiency of α1-antitrypsin [2]. This disease can 
be classified in four stages, according to the degree of 
severity. The first stage, or Mild COPD, is characterized by a 
FEV1 value above or equal to 80% and the presence, or not, 
of chronic cough and sputum production. COPD is not 
usually detected at this first stage. The second stage, or 
Moderated COPD, is characterized by a value of the FEV1 
between 50% and 79%, shortness of breath during exertion, 
chronic cough and sputum production. The third stage, or 
Severe COPD, is characterized by a value of the FEV1 
between 30% and 49%, greater shortness of breath, reduced 
exercise capacity and fatigue. The fourth stage, or Very 
Severe COPD, is characterized by a value of FEV1 below 
30% and the presence of chronic respiratory failure [1] [2]. 
The analysis of the incidence of COPD and its 
geographical characterization is needed in order to provide 
health specialists with decision support indicators. To 
accomplish this goal, this paper presents the analysis of a 
data set made available by the FPP with data collected during 
2007. The objective of this work is to design and implement 
a business intelligence system, analyze the data using On-
Line Analytical Processing (OLAP) technology, and apply a 
spatial data mining algorithm for the identification of the 
spatial incidence and distribution of COPD. For the 
identified patterns, a characterization of them will be carried 
out in order to better understand, treat and prevent this 
disease. With the proposal of this business intelligence 
system, an integrated environment for the collection, storage 
and analysis of data is made available to the FPP. To the best 
of our knowledge, no similar system has been proposed and 
implemented. This business intelligence system includes a 
data mart model that enhances the data analysis tasks. 
The advantage of applying business intelligence systems 
on real cases is associated to the delivery of innovative 
structures aimed to solve real world problems, giving a 
contribution to the theory of the area. This kind of approach 
has already been applied. We can find examples in the study 
of  the toxic vigilance in France [3] and the study of sharing 
adverse drug event data [4]. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a 
brief overview on the available data and the transformations 
carried out to clean and put the data in the proper format for 
analysis. Section III describes the architecture of the 
proposed business intelligence system and the data mart 
13
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

model used to store the data. Section IV presents the results 
obtained analyzing the data with OLAP technology. Section 
V describes the clustering approach and the SNN (Shared 
Nearest Neighbor) algorithm used to spatially characterize 
the incidence of COPD. Section VI concludes with some 
remarks and guidelines for future work. 
II. 
AVAILABLE DATA 
The data set available for this study was collected by the 
FPP in initiatives undertaken in Portugal in 2007. These 
initiatives are open to everyone who wants to participate. In 
them, the participants are asked to answer a questionnaire 
that integrates questions related to the symptoms and the risk 
factors of the COPD. The questionnaire also includes 
information about the geographical location where patients 
live (in a qualitative form), and their gender, age, height and 
weight. The result of the spirometry exam is also recorded.  
The collected data, 1880 records, were made available in 
an Excel file. After an extensible analysis of the data, 
missing data fields and errors in data were identified. 
Some of the tasks needed to clean (or to prepare) the data 
set include: i) the labeling of records without geographical 
localization (these records cannot be used in the spatial data 
mining task); ii) the replacing of null values on the height 
and weight with the mode of each one of these attributes; 
and, iii) the filling of the do not know stamp in all categorical 
attributes containing null values. 
After the data cleaning process, a transformation phase 
took place. It was necessary to add the coordinates (x, y) of 
the geographical locations to each record. This will allow the 
use of the spatial data mining algorithm taking into 
consideration the geographical positions of the patients (the 
places where they live). 
In the OLAP analysis presented afterwards, a subset of 
the available data is used. Only those records (275) related to 
patients with a FEV1 value lower than 80% are considered. 
This allows the characterization of the symptoms of 
individuals with COPD. For the spatial data mining task two 
different approaches are used. In the first, the whole data set 
is used, providing an overall characterization of the available 
data. After that, the subset with the 275 records, as in the 
OLAP analysis, is used. 
For confidentiality reasons, no details about the available 
data are provided. Only aggregated results, resulting from 
OLAP analysis and the data mining process, are provided in 
Sections IV and V. 
III. 
BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE SYSTEM 
Business Intelligence systems are defined as analytical 
tools that aim the analysis of organizational data to provide 
further 
information to managers, improving the 
decision  
making process [8]. The Business Intelligence (BI) concept 
emerged as an evolution of the Decision Support Systems 
(DSS) [9]. This new concept replaced the data-oriented DSS 
because many approaches developed to assist the decision 
making 
process 
include 
OLAP and 
Data 
Mining 
technologies. OLAP arises to overcome some of the 
difficulties in the analysis of data stored in Operational 
Databases (ODB), which are exposed to continuous updates. 
The analytical process should access another database, 
specifically designed to support these analyses, the Data 
Warehouse (DW). It is on the data stored in this repository 
that OLAP and Data Mining technologies are usually applied 
in a BI context. 
In this study, a BI system was designed and implemented 
to store and analyze the data collected by the FPP. The ETL 
(Extract, Transform and Load) process will take as input the 
data available in a spreadsheet and will run the appropriate 
mechanisms to clean, transform and load the data into the 
proposed data mart. This data mart will support the OLAP 
technology and the data mining algorithms.  
To support forthcoming initiatives of the FPP, a web 
application 
dedicated to 
data 
collection 
tasks 
was 
implemented. The data collected through this web 
application is stored in an ODB enhancing the ETL process 
and improving the quality of the collected data. 
The architecture of the BI system envisaged for the FPP 
is illustrated in Figure 1.  
 
Spread sheets
Web Application
Extract
Clean
Transform
Load
Refresh
ETL
OLAP
Data Mining
Data Mart
ODB
Data Source 
Environment
Data Warehouse
Environment
Business Analytics 
Environment
 
Figure 1.  
BI System Architecture 
Related to implementation, the web application was 
developed using client/server pages (.ASP) and the 
programming languages HTML and Java Script. The ODB, 
the ETL process and the OLAP cubes were implemented 
using SQL Server 2008© technology.  The Spatial Data 
Mining component makes use of a clustering algorithm 
implemented in Visual Basic© (more details can be found in 
Section V). 
The Data Mart model was defined with the decision 
process in mind. This data model integrates one vector of 
analysis, represented by the fact table FactFPP. The star 
schema is shown in Figure 2. The FactFPP fact table allows 
the storage of the relevant information collected with the 
questionnaire. This fact table is linked to a set of dimension 
tables allowing the analysis of the available data in different 
perspectives. If we look to the data mart model, we can see 
that this table is linked to the Time, Location, Profession, Patient, 
Smoke 
Characterization, 
Allergy 
Characterization, 
Cough 
Characterization, Fatigue Characterization and Pulmonary Diseases 
Characterization dimension tables, meaning that the FVC, FEV1, 
FEF 25-75 (Forced Expiratory Flow 25%–75%), three values 
obtained during the spirometry exam that characterize 
COPD, and  the Severity Stage, can be analyzed by when, 
where the COPD is verified, who (with the information of 
the associated individuals such as age, gender, weight, 
among other attributes) and  how (with the several questions 
of the questionnaire grouped in five distinct dimensions). 
The fact Patient is an event counter used to quantify the 
14
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

number 
of 
individuals 
with 
specific 
symptoms 
or 
characteristics.  It should be noted that the dimension 
Profession and the attributes marked with * in Figure 2 
(attributes present in other dimensions or even in the fact 
table) will not be used in this first analysis (both OLAP and 
data mining) because these data are not present in the 
available data set (they will be included in future analysis 
when the web application is used for data collection). 
 
DimTime
IDTime
Day
Month
Year
DimPulmonaryDiseasesCharacterization
IDPulmonaryDiseasesCharacterization
BronchialAsthma
AsthmaMedicationDaily
AsthmaMedicationCrisis
COPD
COPDEmphysemaChronicBronchitisMedication*
FluMoreThanTwiceYear
Pneumonia
PulmonaryTuberculosis
TuberculosisAge
MedicalComplaintRespiratoryDiseaseLastYear*
HowManyTimesMCRDLY*
BCGVaccine
FluVaccineUsually
PneumoniaVaccine
OtherVaccinesPreventionRespiratoryInfections
DimFatigueCharacterization
IDFatigueCharacterization
MoreFatigueThanPeopleSameAge
ShortnessBreath
ChestTightnessShortnessBreathCrisis*
DimSmokeCharacterization
IDSmokeCharacterization
Smoker
ExSmoker
SmokeExposition*
FactoryLiveWork*
DimCoughCharacterization
IDCoughCharacterization
DryCough
CoughALot
DailyExpectoration
Wheezing
WheezingTwelveMonths
WheezingFlu
DimProfession*
IDProfession
Profession
ParentProfession
DimPatient
IDPatient
Gender
Age
AgeClass
Weight
WeightClass
Height
HeightClass
BMI
BMIClass
DimAllergyCharacterization
IDAllergyCharacterization
NoseSneeze
LacrimationItch
Allergies
Rhinitis
DimLocation
IDLocation
Locality
ZipCode*
Parish*
Municipality*
District*
FactFPP
IDPatient
IDTime
IDLocation
IDProfession*
IDSmokeCharacterization
IDAllergyCharacterization
IDCoughCharacterization
IDFatigueCharacterization
IDPulmonaryDiseasesCharacterization
Patient
FVC*
FEV1
FEF2575
SeverityStage
 
Figure 2.  
The Data Mart model 
The presented data mart was designed in such a way that 
the star schema can evolve to a constellation schema as new 
fact tables are added. At this moment, two additional fact 
tables are envisaged: one for the study of pneumonia and the 
other for the study of lung cancer. As the constellation 
grows, more symptoms and data about the individuals can be 
related in the study of one or more diseases. 
IV. 
DATA ANALYSIS WITH OLAP 
After the presentation of the proposed BI system and the 
data model that stores all these data, this section presents the 
results obtained from the analysis of the available data using 
the OLAP technology. This technology is used to analyze the 
fact table along different perspectives. 
The first analysis verifies the COPD severity stage of the 
individuals. Figure 3 shows that almost all the patients, 254 
(92.7%), are at the 2nd COPD severity stage (Moderate). 
Only 18 patients are at the 3rd COPD severity stage (Severe) 
and 3 patients are at the 4th COPD severity stage (Very 
Severe).  
 
Figure 3.  
Severity Stages 
After analyzing the COPD severity stages of the patients, 
the next analyses are focused on the answers given by the 
patients to the questions that allow their characterization. As 
already mentioned, all these individuals have a diagnosis of 
COPD after the spirometry exam. The characterization 
obtained to the group of questions related to Smoke can be 
seen in Figure 4. The results show that despite the tobacco is 
one of the most obvious risk factors for this disease, on the 
analyzed data, 168 patients (61.1%) with a diagnosis of 
COPD revealed that they never smoked.  
 
 
Figure 4.  
Smoke Characterization 
Concerning the characterization of the group of questions 
Fatigue, the results are presented in Figure 5. Although it is 
clear that most of the patients, 187 (68.0%), feel more 
fatigue than people who have the same age (MFTPSA) and/or 
have shortness of breath (SB), and 118 of them (42.9%) even 
feel both symptoms, there are 88 individuals (32.0%) who 
have COPD that do not present any of these two symptoms. 
 
 
Figure 5.  
Fatigue Characterization 
15
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

Analyzing the answers obtained to the group of questions 
Cough (Figure 6), and more precisely the two symptoms of 
COPD present in this group of questions, cough (Dry Cough) 
and expectoration (Daily Expectoration – DE), we can verify that 
171 (62.2%) individuals with COPD have dry cough and 
daily expectoration. These two symptoms seem to be related. 
Indeed, when the individuals do not have dry cough, only 
17.3% of them have daily expectoration. However, when the 
individuals have dry cough, the percentage of them who also 
have daily expectoration increases considerably (reaching 
42.7%).   
 
 
Figure 6.  
Cough Characterization 
Concerning the Pulmonary Diseases group (TABLE I), we 
analyzed the three pulmonary diseases characterized in this 
group of questions, which could have any relation with 
COPD. These diseases are the following: bronchial asthma (a 
COPD risk factor), pneumonia and pulmonary tuberculosis 
(Pulm Tuber). 
Analyzing the cube at TABLE I, none of the individuals 
suffered from all these three diseases (there are cases of dk – 
do not know – that are not considered in this observation). 
Another observation that can be pointed from TABLE I is 
that only a low percentage of these patients who have COPD 
suffered from at least one of these three diseases. Indeed, 65 
(23.6%) individuals have or had bronchial asthma, 57 
(20.7%) individuals suffer or suffered from pneumonia and 
17 (6.2%) from pulmonary tuberculosis. As bronchial asthma 
is a risk factor of COPD, it could be expected that the 
percentage of incidence of this disease was significantly 
higher in patients who have COPD. 
TABLE I.  
PULMONARY DISEASES CHARACTERIZATION 
 
Regarding the answers obtained to the group of questions 
Allergy, the results are presented in Figure 7. We analyzed the 
incidence of three characteristics from this group of 
questions: the eyes lacrimation and itch (LI), runny nose and 
sneeze (NS), and rhinitis. The results showed that 202 
(73.5%) individuals with COPD also have runny nose and 
sneeze when they are not with flu. This fact can reveal a link 
between these symptoms and COPD. However, there is 
almost the same number of patients, 201 (73.1%), who 
claims that they do not suffer from rhinitis. Another fact 
observed in this group of questions was that from the 73 
patients with COPD who do not have runny nose and sneeze, 
10 (13.7%) have eyes lacrimation and itch. From the 202 
patients with COPD who have runny nose and sneeze, 128 
(63.4%) have eyes lacrimation and itch.  
 
 
Figure 7.  
Allergy Characterization 
This last data analysis with OLAP has as objective to 
show the importance of the initiatives and campaigns made 
in favor of this respiratory disease and the need to participate 
in them. TABLE II shows the obtained results. Patients were 
subdivided by Gender and by Age Class. The COPD attribute 
indicates if the patient already knew that he/she suffers from 
COPD before the spirometry exam.  We can say, based on 
these data, that 229 patients (83.3%) with COPD did not 
know that they had this disease before participating in these 
initiatives promoted by the FPP. This cube also shows age as 
a risk factor for COPD. Indeed, 204 individuals (74.2%) with 
more than 41 years old have this disease. It was also noted 
that only 7 (2.5%) individuals, between 0 and 17 years old, 
have COPD. 
TABLE II.  
IDENTIFICATION OF COPD AT THE FPP’S INITIAVIVES 
 
16
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

V. 
DATA ANALYSIS WITH SPATIAL DATA MINING 
This section presents the analysis of the available data 
using a data mining algorithm, given particular attention to 
the spatial component of the data. Firstly, it will be presented 
the data mining algorithm that will be used and then the 
obtained results. 
A. The Shared Nearest Neighbor (SNN) Algorithm 
The SNN algorithm was first presented by Levent Ertöz, 
Michael Steinbach and Vipin Kumar in 2003 on the “SIAM 
International Conference on Data Mining”. This algorithm 
can find clusters with different sizes, shapes and densities, 
and automatically identifies the number of clusters in the 
data set [10]. Usually, this algorithm has three input 
parameters, k – the size of the list of neighbors, Eps – the 
density threshold, and the MinPts – the threshold value used 
to classify the core points [10] (Figure 8). 
 
Core
Border
Noise
 
Figure 8.  
SNN: an example 
The implementation used in this paper was coded from 
scratch in Visual Basic. It requires only an input parameter: 
k. Eps and MinPts are calculated based on k as follows: Eps 
= 3k/10 and MinPts = 7k/10 [11] and includes the following 
steps [11]: 
1. 
Identify the “k” nearest neighbors for each point (using a 
distance function to calculate similarity); 
2. 
Calculate the SNN similarity between pairs of points as 
the number of nearest neighbors that the two points share; 
3. 
Calculate the SNN density of each point; 
4. 
Detect the core points; 
5. 
Form the clusters from the core points; 
6. 
Identify the noise points; 
7. 
Assign the remainder points to the cluster that contains 
the most similar core point. 
In the work presented in this paper were used two 
different distance functions: one for all the available data and 
another for records with FEV1<80%. This way it is possible 
to mine the available data and find spatial distributions 
taking into consideration the whole data set, patients with or 
without COPD, and also those records that are exclusively 
associated with patients that suffer from COPD. For this last 
data set, it is possible to group patients not only by their 
geographical proximity but also by their incidence of COPD. 
The equations to the distance functions are the following 
(adapted from [6]): 
 
2
2
2
2
1
1
2
1
)
(
)
(
)
,
(
y
x
y
x
p
DistFunction p
−
+
−
=
       
     (1) 
 






−
 +







−
+
−
=
mFEV
s
s
w
mDist
y
x
y
x
w
p
DistFunction p
|
* |
)
(
)
(
*
)
,
(
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
1
   (2) 
 
 In equation 2, w1 and w2 represent the weights assigned 
to the position and to the FEV1 parameters. Through these 
weights it is possible to verify the impact of the position and 
the FEV1 value on the clustering result. Also, in equation 2, 
mDist and mFEV are the maximum difference values 
between any two points (for the distance and for the FEV1, 
respectively). They are used to normalize the distance 
function value.  
In order to identify the appropriate values for w1 and w2, 
some simulations were made with the data set. The obtained 
results are presented in Figure 9.  
 
 
Figure 9.  
W1 and W2 analysis 
After analyzing the obtained results, the weights w1=95% 
and w2=5% seem to be more appropriate as they allow the 
identification of more clusters, with different shapes and 
sizes. The other weights classify a large number of records as 
noise. These weights already showed to be appropriate in 
other contexts [6]. 
B. Obtained Results 
As mentioned in Section II, we are using two different 
approaches. In the first, all the records available in the data 
set are used. After several simulations to identify a proper 
value for k, we decided to adopt a k value of 15, which 
returned 41 clusters, with the spatial distribution shown in 
Figure 10. In this figure each cluster is represented by a 
different color. As the coordinates were added at the Parish 
level, and not at a lower level of detail, a small agitation of 
the points coordinates was carried out in order to avoid 
points overlapping in the clusters visualization. 
From the presented results it is possible to verify that the 
majority of the points are associated to the huge metropolitan 
areas of Oporto and Lisbon, despite the big clusters (in area) 
spread at the interior, central coast and south of the country. 
These results can have two main explanations: the fact that 
these two regions are the most populated in Portugal or a 
non-balanced data set with a higher incidence of individuals 
from these two metropolitan areas. This last case was the 
verified in the data set under analysis. 
17
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

 
Figure 10.  
Clusters for the first approach to the data analysis 
Associated with the presented results, we proceed 
verifying the risk factors associated to the patients of this 
first approach. One of the risk factors is easy to see just by 
looking at the graphical distribution of the points, the air 
pollution, because the majority of the clusters are located in 
the more populated regions of the country and where the 
incidence of factories, cars and other pollutants is higher. To 
analyze the other risk factors, the answers to the 
questionnaire were verified (Figure 11). Analyzing the risk 
factors we verify that 44% of the patients that are grouped in 
the several clusters are or were smokers, 45% are male, 17% 
are older than 65 years old, and 15% suffers from asthma. 
 
 
Figure 11.  
% total of risk factors (first set of results) 
The other approach followed only uses the records that 
have a FEV1 value below 80%. In this second approach the 
equation of the distance function used is the equation 2 and 
after some simulations the best value found for k is 7. The 
obtained results are presented in Figure 12 where colors are 
associated to clusters (each cluster has a different color). 
Comparing Figure 12 with Figure 10 it is possible to 
verify that the clusters in Figure 12 are more concentrated in 
one region which is the region of Lisbon and surroundings. 
The other cluster appears at North, grouping individuals 
from several districts. Obviously, more data is needed to 
obtain a deeper understating on the spatial distribution of 
COPD. 
 
Figure 12.  
Clusters for the second approach to the data analysis 
In a more detailed analysis to this second set of results is 
possible to see that, as in the first set of results, the more 
prominent risk factors are being male, smoking or advanced 
age (Figure 13), with exception of: cluster 2 where the 
asthma has more incidence than smoking; and, cluster 4 with 
asthma having the same incidence as male, smoking and 
advanced age. 
 
 
Figure 13.  
% Risk factors per cluster and total 
Looking at the symptoms (Figure 14), the two symptoms 
that appear with more incidence are the fatigue and the 
shortness of breath, exception made to the first cluster where 
the chronic cough is the symptom that appear in first place. 
This incidence of fatigue and shortness of breath has huge 
impact on the quality of life of the patients. The fact that 
these patients are from the more populated regions in 
Portugal, and consequently with more pollution, and nearly 
40% of those are smokers or ex-smokers, could help to 
explain why these two symptoms have the higher 
percentages. Since the answers to the questionnaire do not 
tell us if patients have chronic respiratory failure and the 
values of FEV1 are all above 50%, the stage of COPD in 
which the patients are is the stage 2 or moderate COPD 
(TABLE III). All the patients with the FEV1 below 50% 
were considered as noise by the clustering algorithm because 
they are only a few records, and the distribution of the points 
in terms of geographic locations and the FEV1 values do not 
18
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

have sufficient similarities to group them in one or more 
clusters. 
 
 
Figure 14.  
% Symptoms per cluster and total 
TABLE III.  
COPD STAGES PER CLUSTER 
Stages COPD 
Cluster 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Stage 2 
8 
10 
12 
8 
7 
9 
10 
6 
Stage 3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Stage 4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total 
8 
10 
12 
8 
7 
9 
10 
6 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presented a business intelligence system for 
the analysis of data collected by the Portuguese Lung 
Foundation (FPP – Fundação Portuguesa do Pulmão). The 
objectives set to this work were to design and implement a 
business intelligence system, analyze the data using OLAP, 
and apply a spatial data mining algorithm for the 
identification of the spatial incidence and distribution of 
COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease). The 
implemented system integrated a data mart for the storage of 
data and OLAP and spatial data mining technologies for data 
analysis. 
Data from 1880 patients were available from the FPP´s 
data set. Each patient answered a questionnaire and made a 
clinical exam called spirometry. The several analyses in 
terms of OLAP reinforced essentially the idea that this 
disease is very difficult to diagnose without the spirometry 
exam. That happens because despite we have confirmed 
some risk factors related to COPD and identified some 
patterns of this disease, there seems to be a kind of 
contradiction with their symptoms. This happens, for 
instance, with the characterization of the responses obtained 
in the question groups Fatigue and Cough. Many patients do 
not have any symptoms from these two groups of questions 
that are typical of this respiratory disease. Therefore, the 
difficulty in diagnosing the disease also reinforce the 
conclusion that a good prevention of COPD, making a 
spirometric exam periodically, is essential for people who 
fall within the risk factors of this disease. 
In terms of spatial analysis we have two main 
conclusions. First, when comparing the data between the two 
set of results, the distribution of the clusters is similar and the 
percentages of the risk factors are also similar. The second 
conclusion is that the main symptoms that the patients 
mention to have are shortness of breath and fatigue, and all 
the patients grouped in the clusters are in the stage 2 of 
COPD. 
The proposed BI system showed to be useful in the 
analysis of the available data, allowing the characterization 
of the key factors that are associated to COPD. 
Related to future work, it is envisaged to perform the 
analysis with more data, to automate the ETL process 
between the operational database of the web application and 
the data mart, to incorporate a temporal variable tagging 
each patient in order to be possible a spatio-temporal 
analysis, and to perform analysis with other spatial cluster 
algorithms besides the SNN used in this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] GOLD, Global Strategy for Diagnosis, Management, and 
Prevention of COPD, Tecnical Report, Global Initiative for 
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease, 2010. 
[2] R. A. Pauwels, A. S. Buist, P. M. A. Calverley, C. R. Jenkins, 
and S. S. Hurd, “Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, 
Management, and Prevention of Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease,” American Journal of Respiratory and 
Critical Care Medicine, vol. 163, pp. 1256-1276, 2001. 
[3] G. Guyodo, I. Blanc, J. L. Boulben, Lefevre B, F. De Bels, 
and R. Garnier, “The French Toxic Exposure Surveillance 
System: Adaptation of a Business Intelligence System for 
Toxicovigilance,” Clinical Toxicology, vol. 48, no. 3, 2010. 
[4] M. Horvath, H. Cozart, A. Ahmad, M. K. Langman, and J. 
Ferranti, “Sharing Adverse Drug Event Data Using Business 
Intelligence Technology,” Journal of Patient Safety, vol. 5, 
no. 1, pp. 35-41, 2009. 
[5] S. Brooker, S. Clarke, J. K. Njagi, S. Polack, B. Mugo, B. 
Estambale, E. Muchiri, P. Magnussen, and J. Cox, “Spatial 
Clustering of Malaria and Associated Risk Factors During an 
Epidemic in a Highland Area of Western Kenya,” Tropical 
Medicine & International Health, vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 757-766, 
2004. 
[6] A. Moreira, M. Y. Santos, M. Wachowicz, and D. Orellana, 
"The Impact of Data Quality in the Context of Pedestrian 
Movement Analysis," In M. Painho, M. Y. Santos and H. 
Pundt (Eds.), Geospatial Thinking, Lecture Notes in 
Geoinformation and Cartography: Springer, 2010. 
[7] G. R. Jordan, N. Loveridge, K. L. Bell, J. Power, N. Rushton, 
and J. Reeve, “Spatial clustering of remodeling osteons in the 
femoral neck cortex: a cause of weakness in hip fracture?,” 
BONE, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 305-313, 2000. 
[8] W. F. Cody, J. T. Kreulen, V. Krishna, and W. S. Spangle, 
“The integration of business intelligence and knowledge 
management,” IBM Systems Journal vol. 41, pp. 697-713, 
2002. 
[9] S. Alter, Information Systems: A Management Perspective: 
Addison Wesley Longman, 1999. 
[10] L. Ertöz, M. Steinbach, and V. Kumar, "Finding Clusters of 
Different Sizes, Shapes, and Densities in Noisy, High 
Dimensional Data", Proceedings of the Second SIAM 
International Conference on Data Mining, San Francisco, pp. 
47-58, 2003. 
[11] A. Moreira, M. Y. Santos, and S. Carneiro, "Density-based 
clustering algorithms – DBSCAN and SNN (Implementation 
Documentation)," http://ubicomp.algoritmi.uminho.pt/local/,  
Date of access: February, 2011. 
19
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

