Critical Success Factors of Corporate Performance Management (CPM)  
Literature Study and Empirical Findings 
 
Friedrich Hervé Lien Mbep 
University of Applied Sciences of Neu-
Ulm (HNU) 
Neu-Ulm, Germany 
Friedrich.lien-mbep@hs-neu-ulm.de 
Olaf Jacob 
University of Applied Sciences of 
Neu-Ulm (HNU) 
Neu-Ulm, Germany 
Olaf.jacob@hs-neu-ulm.de 
Louis Fourie 
Cape Peninsula University of 
Technology 
Cape Town, South Africa 
fouriel@cput.ac.za 
 
 
Abstract— While many studies put emphasis on the linkage 
between Business Intelligence (BI) and Corporate Performance 
Management (CPM), few analyze directly the critical success 
factors that characterize CPM. The aim of this study is 
twofold: First, the study investigates common practices 
regarding the factors that characterize CPM. Second, the study 
develops a reference process model for CPM which describes 
key processes for the design and implementation of BI and BI-
related capabilities. Following this, we conducted a theoretical 
analysis using the current literature available and an empirical 
analysis by means of a survey. The objectives of this theoretical 
and empirical analysis are to assess to what extent privately 
listed organizations in Germany are aware of the existence of 
CPM factors. Using the principal factor analysis method with 
Promax as oblique rotation, the results delivered a consistent 
number of factor items for CPM, which were grouped into six 
main factors. 
Keywords: Corporate Performance Management; Business 
Intelligence; Critical Success Factors. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Due to the phenomenon of globalization, organizations 
today are facing the problem of high dynamic and very 
complex business environments. Thus, executives, managers 
and other decision makers have been looking for systems 
that are appropriate to support the execution of corporate 
strategy by monitoring and managing the performance of 
management and business processes [1]. 
Besides several other popular decision support systems 
that have been developed over several decades to support 
this goal, e.g., Decision Support Systems (DSS), Executive 
Information Systems (EIS), Data Warehouses (DW), or 
Business Intelligence systems (BI), Corporate Performance 
Management (CPM) has evolved as a new concept that 
describes a series of business processes designed to optimize 
both the development and execution of business strategy [2]. 
Despite several definitions, CPM is coined as “an 
umbrella term that describes the methodologies, metrics, 
processes and systems used to monitor and manage the 
business performance of an enterprise” [3]. 
However, both the development and execution of 
business strategy, and the monitoring and management of the 
organization´s 
performance 
require 
accurate, 
timely, 
consistent and reliable data [4]. Thus, organizations should 
look at other technological systems such as Business 
Intelligence (BI) that can consolidate and leverage the vast 
masses of data to improve decision-making of management 
[5]. BI is coined by several academics as a broad category of 
applications that extract and transform data from source 
systems, facilitate data visualization and allow users to view 
subsets of data according to different dimensions [6]. 
Intelligence refers to the information that is valuable for an 
organization to manage a business. BI provides the 
infrastructure and technologies that help integrate business 
data, process data into actionable information to support 
meaningful decision making [7], and enable the organization 
to quickly adapt to their changing environment. BI is 
considered as a technological means to support and improve 
CPM at all levels of management, e.g., strategic or operative 
management. It provides executives, managers and other 
decision makers with actionable information when needed 
[8].  
Following this, there is a link between CPM and BI. 
Building a strong link between CPM and BI has been 
highlighted by several academics, e.g., Melchert et al. [9]. 
This link is based upon business metrics and key 
performance indicators (KPIs) following a top-down 
approach [10], [11].  
Before identifying the metrics and KPIs that define the 
link between CPM and BI, it is worthwhile to assess the 
factors that are critical to CPM. Unfortunately, there is a 
paucity of studies and little academic contributions that 
examine the success factors of CPM. To address this above-
mentioned gap, the authors first completed a thorough 
literature review and conducted an empirical analysis of 
CPM factors using statistical factor analysis based on a 
sample of German companies. 
The study is structured into eight sections including this 
introduction section. The second section briefly summarizes 
the meaning and role of CPM by reviewing and selecting 
appropriate literature. The third section describes in details 
the holistic reference process model developed for CPM. 
Section IV explains the research methodology conducted in 
this study, which is followed by the data collection in 
Section V. The sixth section summarizes the research results 
and the discussion of the results is provided in section VII. 
Finally, the last section includes the implications of the study 
for theory and practice, the research limitation and avenues 
for future research. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

II. 
THE MEANING AND ROLE OF CORPORATE 
PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT 
CPM is a synonym for several management and business 
concepts 
that 
systematically 
drive 
the 
strategy 
of 
organizations by leveraging their processes, methodologies 
and metrics. CPM is a holistic management approach that 
combines business strategy and technological infrastructure 
[9] and provides a common frame of closed-loop reference 
processes [12]. CPM consists of business strategy, planning, 
forecasting, and financial management. It also includes 
monitoring processes with several control or feedback loops 
[3]. The feedback loops in CPM facilitate communication 
between 
top 
and 
operational 
management. 
The 
communication directs the entire organization towards 
accomplishing common organizational objectives. CPM can 
be comprehended as a methodic approach that enables or-
ganizations 
to 
define, 
measure 
and 
manage 
their 
performance, guide organizations towards their strategic 
goals, and support management functions [12]. 
The current academic literature and the literature 
provided by BI vendors use different terms to describe the 
concept CPM [3], [12]. While some academics such as  [2], 
refers to it as Enterprise Performance Management (EPM), 
others such as Baltaxe and Van Decker [13] and Brunner 
and Dinter [14] rather use the term Business Performance 
Management (BPM). Besides this, we observed that each BI 
vendor makes creative use of language and vocabulary, and 
uses its own unique vocabulary and associated definitions of 
the terms and acronyms. As such, BI vendors freely invent 
esoteric new acronyms, and stretch and bend commonly 
used terms to mean new or identical things. 
SAP, for example, uses the term “Enterprise Information 
Management” (EIM) as an umbrella term to describe their 
BI products and other related applications, including SAP 
financial performance applications. Oracle, again, uses the 
term “Enterprise Performance Management” (EPM) as an 
umbrella term for a fairly comprehensive BI product line 
that features the Hyperion Performance Applications. IBM, 
the other major BI vendor prefers the simpler term 
“Performance Management” (PM) in a more contracted 
way. Consequently, the term CPM is actually confusing for 
decision makers when trying to understand and compare the 
options that best support the strategy for collecting, 
organizing, managing, analyzing and visualizing the 
massive amount of data that daily passes through the 
organization.  
In an effort to provide clarity to the industry, the BPM 
Standard Group [15] defined BPM as a methodology 
focused on the optimization of the execution of business 
strategy. BPM consists of “a set of integrated, closed-loop, 
analytical processes that are supported by technology and 
address both financial as well as operational needs. The 
core financial and operational processes of BPM include 
planning, consolidation, reporting, analysis and the 
deployment of linked key performance indicators (KPIs) 
throughout an organization”. Biere [3] defines CPM as “a 
set of processes that assist organizations to optimize their 
business performance by providing a framework for orga-
nizing, automating, and analyzing business technologies, 
processes, and systems that drive business performance”. 
As CPM, EIM, EPM and BPM nearly shape the same 
discipline, e.g., strategy management, planning, budgeting 
and forecasting, financial management, consolidation and 
reporting, the acronyms can be used interchangeably and be 
considered synonyms. However, the authors avoid the use 
of the acronym BPM as it causes confusion with “Business 
Process Management”.   
The role of CPM has been considerably described by a 
large number of academics. Aho [10] and Marx et al. [16] 
have underlined that CPM represents the strategic 
deployment of BI solutions. Miranda [17] and Olszak and 
Ziemba [18] have suggested the necessity to develop an 
integrated approach of CPM in order to build, implement 
and use Business Intelligence solutions effectively. The 
integrated approach, which consists of four basic 
dimensions: 
business, 
function, 
technology 
and 
organization, establishes a set of processes or several areas 
of action where BI systems can be deployed.  
Biere [3] and Simmers [19] conclude that CPM is the 
biggest growth area in Business Intelligence Analysis. CPM 
is a strategic concept which tends to focus on the 
performance capabilities and functions of the C-suite, e.g., 
CEO, CFO etc. In addition, CPM refers to the basic 
operations of an organization and how they impact the 
bottom line towards the achievement of business strategy 
and strategic objectives. As such CPM helps organizations 
to find bottlenecks and efficiencies at the strategic, tactical 
and operational level. IT aligns Business Intelligence with 
strategic, business and functional processes. CPM relates to 
the implementation and evaluation of an organization´s 
vision, 
mission 
and 
strategic 
objectives 
by 
using 
Performance Indicators (Key Performance Indicators, 
metrics or variables). 
III. 
THE HOLISTIC CPM REFERENCE PROCESS 
MODEL 
Over the past years, only a few academics and industrial 
experts have attempted to develop reference process models 
for CPM, e.g., Ariyachandra [2], Melchert et al. [9], Oehler 
[12], Jetter [20], Becker et al. [21], Klaus [22], 
PriceWaterHouseCooper [23], van Roekel [24], and Rausch 
[25]. However, we assume that these reference process 
models were not proven to be standard for all organizations 
as they do not describe how an ideal and typical system for 
CPM should look like.  
Based on the necessity suggested by [17] and [18] 
towards developing an integrated approach of CPM, the first 
efforts of this research primarily consist in developing a 
holistic reference process model for CPM that is generic 
enough and suitable to apply in any kind of organization. 
The holistic reference model supports to build, implement 
and use Business Intelligence Solutions directly in a 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

particular CPM related business process, e.g., the strategy 
planning process or financial management process. 
The CPM reference process model in Figure 1 was 
developed from relevant literature and from observations 
and experience of the authors. It can serve as a usefully 
broad tool and provides an overview of the major CPM 
processes within the organizations upon which BI can be 
designed and implemented successfully.  
 
 
The reference process model is in the form of several 
structural hierarchical levels describing the sociotechnical 
system, and depicts a complete picture of the CPM-related 
processes of an organization. Each level is closely linked to 
the next and completed with a closed loop or feedback loop 
to ensure a continual monitoring of the process performance 
[12]. Few processes of the model have already been covered 
by existing related approaches, e.g., Ariyachandra [2], 
Melchert et al. [9], Oehler [12], Jetter [20].  
 
The CPM reference process model in Figure 1 integrates 
strategic planning at the top level of management with the 
process execution at the level of the value chain, and can be 
described by three different architectonic connotations: 
First, the holistic reference process model is balanced, i.e. it 
puts in relationship several separate processes which can be 
independently supported by BI technology and related BI-
resources. Second, it is arranged vertically by process areas 
and horizontally by business units, business departments 
and profit or cost centers. The reference process model is 
strictly hierarchical presenting five distinct closed-loops  
 
regarding the levels of aggregation: the corporate 
environment level at the top, followed by the strategy 
development level, the performance planning level, the 
operative planning level and the value chain management 
level which constitutes the bottom line or basic operational 
processes, e.g., the procurement or distribution processes. 
A. The corporate environment level 
This level refers to the level at which executives, 
managers and other decision makers formulate the corporate 
strategy, e.g., the vision and mission of the organization 
while analyzing the internal and external forces that can 
Process Monitoring
Process (Re)design
Process Execution
Corporate 
Environment
Strategy
Development
Strategic and
Performance 
Planning
Operative
Planning / Budget 
control
Value Chain 
Management / 
Operational 
processes
Corporate 
Environment 
Reporting 
Strategic
Reporting
Performance
Monitoring
MIS
Transactional
Reporting
Strategic Business 
Units, Regions, 
Departments…
Strategic Business 
Units, Regions, 
Departments…
Strategic Business 
Units, Regions, 
Departments…
Strategic Planning
of Profit Center, 
Cost Center …
Operative 
Planning or
/Workflows
Corporate vision
and mission
Analyzing the int. 
and ext. Corporate 
environment
Mission statement
Scenario Modeling
Strategy Evaluation
Scenario Analysis 
and Simulation
Strategy
Development
Variance Analysis
Identification of
CSFs and KPIs
Strategic Initiatives 
and Implementation
Budget Control
Operative Planning
and Budgeting
Forecasting
Stakeholder reporting and communication
 
Figure 1.  The holistic Reference Process Model of CPM 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

impact the success of the organization, e.g., the changing 
market conditions. To analyze the entire organization´s 
environment, top executives and the board of directors can 
use the business methodology known as STEP analysis. 
STEP is an acronym for Sociological changes, Technological 
changes, Economical changes and Political changes. The 
output of the analysis is a list of strategic objectives and 
organizational critical success factors (CSFs). 
B. The strategy development level 
This level is the most significant level in the CPM 
reference process model. It includes sub-processes such as 
scenario modelling, scenario analysis and simulation, and 
strategy evaluation. The organization´s strategy, which 
constitutes the output of this level, must be distinctive 
enough to ensure long-term profitability and a competitive 
advantage. The organization´s strategy must be depicted in 
the form of a strategy map as suggested by Kaplan and 
Norton in the Balanced Scorecard (BSC) methodology which 
structures different perspectives, (e.g., customer perspective, 
financial 
perspective, 
employee 
perspective, 
process 
perspective) in a cause-effect-relationship. All subsequent 
analysis and decision making are based upon the quality of 
the relationship values. 
C. The performance planning level 
This is the level where a strategy plan should be 
transformed in one or many action plans in order to 
implement the corporate and business strategy. Moreover, 
appropriate performance indicators, (e.g., of quantity, 
quality, cost effectiveness, or timeliness) must be assigned to 
each strategic objective or goal where applicable and to each 
functional area which achieves the strategic business 
objectives. The performance planning does not only refer to 
the planning of employee responsibility and accountability. 
Other critical performance planning elements include 
performance 
resources, 
e.g., 
processes, 
Information 
Technology Infrastructures and applications. The output of 
the performance planning process includes performance 
metrics and key performance indicators (KPIs), as well as 
defined initiatives. Metrics and KPIs are used to measure the 
effectiveness of the strategic objectives and initiatives [12]. 
D. The operative planning level 
This level consists of planning several business or 
functional areas, e.g., profit centers or cost centers, 
identifying their respective performance indicators capable 
of determining their position towards the strategic objectives, 
and calculating their performance. The operative planning 
level encompasses sub-processes like forecasting, budgeting 
and budget controlling. This level assures the compatibility 
of performance indicators used in all functional areas, as well 
as their consistency with strategic objectives. Operative 
planning uses the performance measurement system to 
identify competitive position, locate problem areas, assist the 
firm in updating strategic objectives and making tactical 
decisions to achieve these objectives, and supply feedback 
after the decisions have been implemented. 
E. The value chain management level 
This level constitutes the lowest hierarchy level in the 
CPM reference process model with sub-processes like 
process 
(re)design, 
process 
execution 
and 
process 
monitoring. Communication and value reporting accompany 
each loop in the holistic reference process model. 
Although the term CPM is popular amongst IT 
consultants, practitioners and BI Software providers, there 
are little academic studies examining the factors that are 
critical for the value of CPM. Thus, Ayo [10] stresses the 
necessity to provide a deeper understanding of what CPM 
means and highlights its potential value to the organization. 
IV. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
This section explains the research methodology used in 
this study. Before testing the factors empirically by adopting 
the survey methodology, we first considered the extensive 
literature as basis of the research to obtain meaningful 
factors for CPM. 
A. Research Method 
By conducting a literature review according to the well 
established methodology by [26], we pursued two major 
objectives: First, an exploration of the research landscape of 
CPM and second, the localization of the terra incognita for 
further research. In order to conceptualize the topic and to 
identify relevant search terms for literature selection, an 
explorative search with common literature databases 
(Google Scholar, ScienceDirect, ACM Digital Library, MS 
Academic search, Computer science bibliography etc.) led 
to a first collection of several CPM related terms, such as 
“Enterprise 
Performance 
Management”, 
“Business 
Performance 
Management”, 
“Advanced 
Performance 
Management”. Unfortunately, no results were found while 
using diverse combinations of CPM and “Critical Success 
Factors for CPM”, “Drivers for CPM”, or “Determinants” of 
CPM”. Intentionally, we omitted the keyword “Strategic 
Management” as it refers to the entire scope of strategic-
decision making activity in an organization. The keywords 
have been iteratively refined and extended during the 
literature analysis process. We selected highly ranked and/or 
domain specific journals and leading conferences of the last 
ten years (2004–2014): 
a) Journals of the AIS Senior Scholars` Basket of 
Journals, i.e. European Journal of Information Systems 
(EJIS), Information Systems Journal (ISJ), Information 
Systems Research (ISR), Journal of AIS (JAIS), Journal of 
MIS (JMIS), and MIS Quarterly (MISQ) 
b) BI and social media specific journals: Decision 
Support Systems (DSS), International Journal of Business 
Intelligence Research (IJBIR), and Business Intelligence 
Journal for the BI domain and suitable ACM and IEEE 
journals  
c) Leading conferences: International Conference on 
Information Systems (ICIS), Americas Conference on 
Information Systems (AMCIS), European Conference on 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Information 
Systems 
(ECIS), 
Hawaii 
International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), Conference on 
Information 
Systems 
and 
Technology 
(CIST), 
and 
Workshop on Information Technologies and Systems 
(WITS) 
d) TDWI´s Business Intelligence Journal 
Whereas the basket and CPM specific journals include a 
manageable amount of issues and articles that enables a 
complete scan of titles and abstracts as suggested by [26], we 
had to preselect conference papers by tracks related to CPM 
and BI. For ACM and IEEE journals, we conducted a 
keyword search on the whole digital library as no journals 
focus in particular on the CPM-related domain. We scanned 
for the hits (resulting from keyword searches) titles, 
abstracts, and keywords to assess the suitability of an article. 
Since we could identify only few articles by this method, we 
subsequently conducted a keyword search on literature 
databases 
(EBSCOhost, 
Scholar, 
ProQuest 
and  
ScienceDirect) by using the aforementioned search terms. 
We completed the literature pool via a backward search. 
B. Analysis of the results 
The literature review resulted in 17 adequate articles 
which analyze the Critical Success Factors for CPM. Due to 
the rather young research topic, this relatively small amount 
of articles is not surprising. Also, in most articles that 
appeared in conference proceedings and domain specific 
journals, only a very small number discussed Critical 
Success Factors that describe CPM. Most studies focused on 
the Critical Success Factors for the implementation of CPM, 
e.g., champion, management support or management 
resistance [27].  We consider the wider interest in BI and the 
stronger focus on the efficient implementation of CPM as 
reasons for the underrepresentation of such Critical Success 
Factors within our literature data pool. 
Overall, we identified fewer articles than expected that 
explicitly address the Critical Success Factors of CPM.  
A thorough analysis of the Critical Success Factors of 
CPM in the available literature, only 28 were found relevant 
to our study.  The relevant Critical Success Factors for CPM 
and the corresponding references are listed in Table 1.  
TABLE I.  
IDENTIFIED CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS OF CPM 
Factors items 
Related stu-
dies 
Operationalization of business strategy across all 
business functions 
 
[2], [10], 
[27] 
Operationalization of business strategy across all 
business units 
 
[10], [28] 
Overall Process synchronization   
[2], [28] 
Process harmonization 
 
[10], [29] 
Aligning operational processes with strategy planning
 
 
[30], [31], 
[32], [33] 
Strategy-conformed process alignment 
 
[2], [29], 
[30], 33], 
[34] 
Alignment of strategic planning over all business 
units and all business functions (horizontal 
alignment)  
[30], [32], 
[34], [35] 
Corporate environment feedback loop 
 
[10] 
Strategy development feedback loop 
 
[28] 
Strategic planning feedback loop  
[36] 
Operational planning feedback loop 
 
[1], [34], 
[37] 
Process monitoring 
 
[1], [10], 
[28], [37] 
Data integration  
 
[2], [10], 
[34] 
Method integration 
 
[2], [10] 
Process flexibility and dynamic availability  
[35], [38] 
Common process standards for data changes  
[10], [39] 
No arbitrary data changes 
 
[10], [40] 
Data consistency 
 
[2], [10], 
[36] 
Data completeness 
 
[10], [36], 
[41] 
Data relevance 
[10], [41] 
Data currency 
 
[28], [29], 
[41] 
Process documentation 
 
[10], [28] 
Process transparency  
[10], [28], 
[36] [42] 
Communication of processes throughout the 
organization 
 
[10], [28], 
[32], [43], 
44] 
Continual process deployment 
 
[10] 
Process traceability 
 
[45] 
Standardized rules and Terminologies 
 
[27], 34] 
External process compliance 
 
[2], 32] 
 
In the second stage, a questionnaire was developed. 
Based on the assumption that CPM is the strategic 
deployment of the BI resources [10], and considering that 
CPM and BI are two existing heterogeneous management 
approaches (based on the factors which address CPM 
illustrated in Table 1), it was considered necessary to 
statistically test those factors. Thus, the questionnaire was to 
be exclusively completed by business senior executives and 
managers. 
V. 
DATA COLLECTION 
In order to obtain the information needed, a purposive 
stratified 
sample 
comprising 
of 
well-known 
firms 
throughout Germany was selected. The enterprises selected 
for the survey all have a BI infrastructure deployment in at 
least one business unit. Accordingly, Business Senior 
Executive Group Members comprising the Vice President, 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

C-suite members (CEO, CFO), and Managing Directors 
were asked to filled out 36 questions. The CIOs were not 
considered. With the aid of an external database, a total of 
156 members were reached. Only fully completed 
questionnaires were included, resulting in a total of 86 
usable cases. 
An analysis of respondent demographics shows an unex-
pected high frequency of responses from Business Senior 
Executives, as well as a high frequency of responses from 
manufacturing companies. Fewer responses were obtained 
from the transport sector. From this analysis, it can be assu-
med that the findings may to some extent be affected by the 
overrepresentation of the industrial sector, although it may 
also indicate that CPM is more widely implemented in the 
manufacturing sector. 
The basic structure of the questionnaire was that each 
identified item was measured through a number of questions 
to be answered by checking the appropriate value on a 7-
point Likert scale. Questions like “Our company uses 
measurable indicators (Key Performance Indicators and 
metrics) based on Business Strategy” or “All process/data 
changes in our corporate performance management are 
traceable” were asked. To operationalize CPM and to ensure 
the correct understanding of the CPM concept, a definition 
of the term was given.  
VI. 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
Two different statistical analysis methods were applied 
to analyze the data sets. These were Principal Components 
Analysis (PCA) and Principal Factor Analysis (PFA). The 
analysis was performed upon a combination of different 
oblique 
rotations 
techniques 
for 
the 
data 
set 
as 
recommended by Kaiser and Rice [46] and Ford et al. [47]. 
Both the PCA and the PFA were used on different basic 
types of analytical rotations including Promax, Quartimax, 
Equamax and Oblimin. Such a combination of different 
methods is useful because no single technique has been 
shown to be highly accurate over a wide range of conditions 
in pinpointing the number of factors [46], [47]. Based on 
numerous tests and evidence, the factor analysis method 
finally used in this study is the principal factor analysis with 
Promax as oblique rotation. 
The result of this research demonstrates that CPM can be 
described by distinct factors that correlate with those factors 
identified previously in the literature review. The six factors 
for CPM in Table 2 explain 74,975 % of the variance. The 
factors are based on intrinsic value (eigenvalue), sometimes 
with a value which exceeds 1. The eigenvalues explains the 
variances of the factors [46]. Accordingly, the number of 
factors of the completed questionnaires for CPM was 
reduced on the basis of explorative factor analysis (EFA) 
[48]. Different measures were used to identify the appropri-
ateness of the statistical results. First, a Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin 
(KMO) measure was performed as a formal test to check 
whether the variables selected have enough in common 
overall to warrant a PCA and PFA analysis.  
In addition, the Bartlett Test of Homogeneity of vari-
ances and the Anti-Image-Covariance Matrices were 
conducted. The findings for the CPM questionnaire were 
positive. The overall KMO value was 0,860. According to 
Kaiser and Rice [46], values above 0.6 are high enough to 
warrant a PCA or PFA analysis.  
The results of the Bartlett Test of Homogeneity of 
variances showed that all the variables are highly correlated. 
According to the statistical analysis, the value of the Anti-
Image-Covariance-Matrices was under 25%. This means 
that the data set was appropriate for further statistical 
analysis [49].  
TABLE II.  
RESULTS OF THE FACTORS ANALYSIS 
Factors and related items 
Load 
Factor 1: Process Knowledge  
Communication of processes throughout the organization 
,968 
Process documentation 
,945 
Process transparency 
,891 
Methods integration 
,519 
Factor 2: Data and Method Integration 
Data integration 
,920 
Automatic seamless exchange of data 
,773 
Data consistency 
,749 
Data maintenance effort 
,638 
Process traceability 
,618 
Common process standards for data changes 
,542 
Data completeness 
,525 
Factor 3: Data Usefulness 
 
Data relevance 
,966 
Data currency 
,939 
Operational planning feedback loop 
,591 
Factor 4: Organizational Alignment 
 
Alignment of strategic planning across all business units. 
,938 
Alignment of strategic planning across all business functions 
,716 
Aligning between operational processes and strategy planning 
,658 
Factor 5: Business Strategy Operationalization 
 
Operationalization of business strategy across all business 
units 
1,008 
Operationalization of business strategy across all business 
functions 
,871 
Factor 6: Feedback Loop Based Process Management 
Strategy development feedback loop 
,759 
Corporate environment feedback loop 
,730 
Strategic planning feedback loop 
,574 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
Table II represents the factors describing CPM. Those 
factor items have been grouped in six different factors: 
process knowledge, data and method integration, data 
usefulness, organizational alignment, business strategy 
operationalization, and feedback loop based process 
management. 
VII. DISCUSSION 
As illustrated in Table 2, 22 factor items have been vali-
dated as describing CPM.  
The CPM factor “Process Knowledge” emphasizes the 
important role documentation and transparency play in 
communicating CPM processes throughout the organization.  
The CPM factor “Data and Method Integration” shows 
that the integration of management methods such as the 
Balanced Scorecard is based upon the integration and 
consistency of data.  
The CPM factor “Data Usefulness” stresses that to be 
actionable for decision making, data must be relevant and 
current.  
The CPM factor “Organizational Alignment” illustrates 
the importance of a strategic linkage between different 
organizational units or business functions.  
The CPM factor “Business Strategy Operationalization” 
refers to the task of executives and other decision makers to 
identify meaningful KPI´s that are appropriate to evaluate 
whether or not a business strategy has been successfully 
implemented.  
The CPM factor “Feedback Loop Based Process 
Management” shows that CPM is a continuous flow of 
processes that must be revised and any required change 
must be communicated throughout the organization.  
Most of the CPM factors encompass 3 to 4 factor items, 
except the factor “Data and Method Integration” which 
consists of seven items. This indicates the importance of this 
factor for CPM. With a loading of up to ,920 data 
integration is an important criterium for CPM. Data 
integration enables not only the integration and exchange of 
data between disparate BI tools but also the integration of 
management methods such as the Balanced Scorecard and 
decision support processes like budgeting and forecasting.  
We observed that factor items like overall process syn-
chronization, process harmonization, strategy-conformed 
process alignment, process monitoring, process flexibility 
and dynamic availability, no arbitrary data changes, external 
process compliance (,499) and standardized rules and 
terminologies (,477) have a loading level less than 0,5. 
Although they were part of the literature review, they were 
not validated by the empirical study and statistics. 
 
VIII. IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSION 
The results delivered an extended reference process 
model for CPM and a consistent number of factor items 
which were grouped into 6 main factors describing CPM. 
The benefit of the presented study for academic and the 
industrial landscapes is that both the holistic reference 
process model and the identified and empirically tested 
CPM factors provide a deeper and clear understanding of 
the meaning of the concept of CPM.  
However, the study was focused only on the empirical 
analysis of the  critical success factors for CPM. Hence, an 
empirical validation whether or not these collected factors 
contribute to success has not yet been performed. Further 
studies are needed to establish the missing relationship of 
the collected factors with the reference process model. 
Especially, each collected factor needs to be linked with any 
process in the CPM reference model, e.g., the factor “Data 
and Method Integration” with the processes “Forecasting” 
or “Budgeting”. The objective of  the linkage is to see 
whether a factor is useful to the interrelated process, or not.  
In 
addition, 
further 
studies 
are 
needed 
which 
operationalize the reference process model for CPM, e.g., 
by assessing efficient and less efficient processes. 
Accordingly, such studies could analyze the impact that BI 
and BI-related capabilities can have regarding the 
optimization of the CPM processes. By doing this, a 
maturity model of CPM processes and meaningful metrics 
or Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) need to be designed. 
Especially, metrics and KPIs can be used as tool to measure 
the efficiency of each process or key area in the holistic 
reference process model, and assess the impact of BI and 
BI-related capabilities within the organization.   
The operationalization of both the reference process 
model for CPM and the identified factors using metrics or 
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) will help establish their 
influence on success.  
CPM processes so become the subject of performance 
management itself, as they support the management of 
corporate performance within organizations. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] B. Marr, Strategic Performance Management, Leveraging and 
measuring your intangible value drivers, Elsevier Linacre 
House, Jordan Hill, Oxford, 2006.  
[2] M. N. Frolick and T. R. Ariyachandra, “Business Perfor-
mance Management: One Truth”, Information Systems 
Management, Vol. 23 Issue I/ 2006, pp. 41-48. 
[3] M. Biere, The New Era of Enterprise Business Intelligence: 
Using Analytics to Achieve a Global Competitive Advantage, 
Boston, Massachusetts, 2011. 
[4] S. Negash, “Business Intelligence”, Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems, 13(1), Organization, 
San Jose, CA, 2004, pp. 177-195. 
[5] J. Clayton,  “Ask the Expert.” Retrieved 13/08/2014 from 
www.CIO.com. 
[6] H. Chen and V. C. Storey, “Business Intelligence and 
Analytics: From Big data to Big Impact”, 36(4), 2012, pp. 
1165-1188. 
[7] Z. Jourdan, K. Rainer, and T. E. Marshall, “Business 
intelligence: An analysis of the literature”, Information 
Systems Management, 25(2), Spring 2008, pp. 121-131. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

[8] Z. Cui, E. Damiani, and M. Leida, "Benefits of Ontologies in 
Real 
Time 
Data 
Access", 
Digital 
Ecosystems 
and 
Technologies Conference, 2007, DEST '07, pp. 392-397. 
[9] F. Melchert, R. Winter, and M. Klesse, “Aligning Process 
Automation and Business Intelligence to Support Corporate 
Performance Management”, proceedings of the Tenth 
Americas Conference on Information Systems, New York, 
August 2004, pp. 4053-4063. 
[10] M. Aho, “A Capability Maturity Model for Corporate 
Performance Management, an Empirical Study in Large 
Finnish Manufacturing Companies”, proceedings from the 
eBRF - A Research Forum to Understand Business in 
Knowledge Society in Jyväskylä, Finland, September 2009, 
pp. 1-20. 
[11] C. M. Olszak, “Business Performance Management for 
Competitive Advantage in the Information Eco¬nomy”, 
Journal of Internet Banking and Commerce, 15(3), 2010, pp. 
1-10. 
[12] K. Oehler, Corporate Performance Management mit Business 
Intelligence Werkzeugen, Hanser Fachbuchverlag, München, 
2006.  
[13] D. Baltaxe and J. Van Decker, “The BPM Transfor-mation: 
Where it is Today, Where it's Going Tomorrow”, Business 
Performance Management, November 2003. 
[14] J. Brunner and B. Dinter, Vom Data Warehouse zum Business 
Performance 
Management 
- 
Anforderungen 
an 
das 
Metadatenmanagement, von E. Maur, R. Winter, (Eds.) Data 
Warehouse Management: Das St. Galler Konzept zur 
ganzheitlichen Gestaltung der Informationslogistik, Springer, 
Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 291-311. 
[15] BPM – Business Performance Management Standard Group, 
Industry Framework Document, 2005. Retrieved 5/10/2014 
from 
http://www.bpmpartners.com/documents/BPMIndustryFrame
work-V5.pdf 
[16] F. Marx, J. Mayer, and R. Winter, “Six Principles for 
Redesigning Executive Information Systems - Findings of a 
Survey and Evaluation of a Prototype”, ACM Transactions on 
Management Information Systems, 2(4), 2011, pp. 1-19. 
[17] S. Miranda, “Beyond BI: Benefiting from Corporate 
Performance Management Solutions. Financial Executive, 
20(2), 2004 pp. 58-61. 
[18] C. M. Olszak and E. Ziemba, “Business Intelligence as a key 
to Management of an Enterprise”, proceedings of Information 
Science and IT Education Conference, 2003, pp. 855-863. 
[19] C. A. Simmers, “A Stakeholder Model of Business 
Intelligence”, proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, 2004, pp. 1-9. 
[20] W. Jetter, Performance Management, Schäffer-Poeschel, 
Stuttgart, 2004 
[21] J. Becker, D. Maßing, and C. Janiesch, “Ein evolutionäres 
Vorgehensmodell zur Einführung von Corporate Performance 
Management Systemen”, in Proceedings of the Data 
Warehouse-Integration, Informationslogistik und Architektur, 
2006, pp. 247-262 
[22] M. B. Klaus, “A performance Management Framework”, 
2008,http://www.mbknowledge.com/articles/MBK_Performa
nce_Management_Framework.pdf (Retrieved 07/11/2014) 
[23] Pricewaterhouce: “Corporate Performance Management – 
Wie effektiv 
ist 
Ihre 
Unternehmenssteuerung“ 
2009. 
Retrieved 04/09/2014 from    
http://www.pwc.ch/user_content/editor/files/publ_adv/pwc_c
pm.pdf. 
[24] H. van Roekel, J. Linders, K. Raja, T. Reboullet, and G. 
Ommerborn, “The BI Framework: How´to Turn Information 
into a Competitive Asset”, 2009, Published by Logica. 
[25] P. Rausch, A. F. Sheta, and A. Ayesh (Eds.), “Business 
Intelligence and Performance Management: Theory, Systems, 
and Industrial Applications”, Springer Verlag U.K., 2013. 
[26] J. Webster and R. T. Watson, “Analyzing the past to prepare 
for the future: Writing a literature review”, in: MIS Quarterly, 
2002, 26(2). Guest Editorial, pp. xiii-xxiii. 
[27] T. R. Ariyachandra and M. N. Frolick, “Critical Success 
Factors in Business Performance Management - Striving for 
Success”. Information Systems Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, 
2008, pp. 113-120. 
[28] D. Limburg, “The Impact of Enterprise Performance 
Management on Management Control”, UK Academy for 
Information Systems Conference Proceedings 2010, Paper 32, 
pp. 1-24. 
[29] A. D. Neely, B. Yaghi, and N. Youell, “Enterprise per-
formance management: The global state of the art”, Oracle 
and Cranfield School of Management publication, Cranfield, 
London, 2009.  
[30] M. Biehl, “Success Factors for Implementing Global 
Information Systems” Communications of the ACM, 50(1), 
2007, pp. 52-58. 
[31] U. Bititci, A. Carrie, and T. Turner, “Integrated Performance 
Measurement Systems: Structure and Dynamics”, A. Neely, 
(ed.): Business Performance Measurement. Theory and 
Practice, Cambridge University Press, 2006, pp. 176-177. 
[32] B. Paladino, Five Key Principles of Corporate Performance 
Management, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New 
Jersey, 2007 
[33] Performance Measurement and Management Literature 
Review, Centre for Business Performance, Cranfield School 
of Management. 
[34] M. Bourne, M. Franco, and J. Wilkes, “Corporate 
Performance Management”, Measuring Business Excellence, 
3(3), 2003, pp. 15-21. 
[35] P. Garengo, S. Biazzo, and U. S. Bititci, “Performance 
measurement systems in SMEs”, International Journal of 
Management Reviews, Vol. 7 Issue , 2005, pp. 25-47. 
[36] H. Dresner, The performance management revolution: 
Business results through insight and action, John Wiley & 
Sons Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008. 
[37] R. N. Anthony and V. Govindarajan, “Management Control 
Systems,” McGraw-Hill, New York, 2004. 
[38] T. H. Davenport, J. G. Harris, and R. Morison, Analytics at 
work: Smarter decisions, better results, MA: Harvard 
Business School Press, Boston 2010. 
[39] K. Vince, “Business Performance Measurement: At the 
Crossroads of Strategy, Decision-making, Learning and 
Information Visualization”, 2003. Retrieved 4/10/2014 from  
www.performance measurement/assets/b/uewolf/article-0502. 
[40] D. Kifer, B-D. Shai, and J. Gehrke, “Detecting Change in 
Data Streams”, proceeding of the 30th VLDB Conference, 
Toronto, Canada, 2004, pp. 180-191. 
[41] N. Marinova, “Decision Support Systems Development and 
Benefits of Business Intelligence Usage”, Management of 
innovations, УДК [005.53:004]:338.22, № 4 (22), 2010, pp. 
214-218. 
[42] M. Alles, G. Brennan, A. Kogan, and M. A. Vasarhelyi, 
“Continuous monitoring of business process controls: A pilot 
implementation of a continuous auditing system at Siemens”, 
International Journal of Accounting Information Systems, 
Vol. 7, 2006, pp. 137-161. 
[43] Dipak K. Bhattacharyya, Performance management Systems 
and Strategies, Dorling Kindersly, New Dehli, 2011. 
[44] W. 
Eckerson, 
Performance 
dashboards: 
Measuring, 
monitoring, and managing your business, New Jersey: John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc, 2006. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

[45] Chin-H. Chee, W. Yeoh, and S. Gao, “Enhancing business 
intelligence traceability through an integrated metadata frame-
work”, proceedings of the 22nd Australasian Conference on 
Infor¬mation Systems: Identifying the Information Systems 
Discipline, ACIS 2011, Sydney, pp. 1-11. 
[46] H. F. Kaiser and J. Rice, “Little Jiffy, Mark IV”, Educational 
and Psychological Measurement, 34(1), 1974, pp. 111-117. 
[47] J. K. Ford, R.C. MacCallum, and M. Tait, “The application of 
explanatory factor analysis in applied psychology a critical 
review and analysis”, Personnel Psychology, 39(2), 2006, pp. 
291-314. 
[48] L. R. Fabrigar, D. T. Wegener, R. C. MacCallum, and E. J. 
Strahan, “Evaluating the use of exploratory factor analysis in 
psychological research”, Psychological Methods 4(3), 1999, 
pp. 272-299.  
[49] K. Backhaus, B. Erichson, W. Plinke, and R. Weiber,  
Multivariate Analysemethoden – Eine anwendungsorientierte 
Einführung, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

