The Moderating Role of Interorganizational Information Systems in Maximizing 
the Operational Performance of Dyadic Business Relationships: a Conceptual 
Model 
 
Pierre Hadaya and Philippe Marchildon 
Department of Management and Technology 
ESG UQAM 
Montréal, Canada 
e-mail: marchildon.philippe@courrier.uqam.ca 
hadaya.pierre@uqam.ca 
 
 
Abstract—The objective of this study is twofold: first, to 
examine how the structure of a buyer-supplier relationship 
impacts the operational performance of the supplier involved 
in the dyadic relationship and second, to test the moderating 
impact of interorganizational information systems (IOS) usage 
(assessed through the dimensions of volume, diversity and 
depth) on the relationship between the structure of a buyer-
supplier relationship and the operational performance of the 
supplier involved in the dyadic relationship. To do so, the 
marketing and IOS literatures are reviewed to propose a 
model and seven research hypotheses. Then, the methodology 
we intend to use to test our conceptual framework is explained. 
Lastly, the anticipated theoretical contributions and practical 
implications of the study are discussed. 
Keywords-dyadic business relationship strucutre; inter-
organizational information systems; operational performance. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Within the field of marketing, the structure of dyadic 
business relationships and its impact on the performance of 
each partnering firms is a key concern for practitioners and 
academics alike [1][2]. The structure of a dyadic business 
relationship can be defined as the patterned or regularized 
aspects of exchange between two business counterparts [3]. 
To date, most studies on this specific concern have focused 
on the political impact (i.e., cooperation, satisfaction, trust 
and commitment) while neglecting the economic impact 
(i.e., cost, speed, quality and reliability) of dyadic business 
relationship structures [4]. Among the few researchers that 
have empirically investigated the economic impact of the 
structure of buyer-supplier relationships, Bonner and 
Calantone [5] have shown that certain structures provide 
economic value to buyers. To date, however, no study has 
yet to investigate whether certain dyadic business 
relationships structures also provide economic value to 
suppliers. To partially address this gap in the marketing 
literature, the first objective of this study is to complement 
Bonner and Calantone [5] pioneering work by examining 
how the structure of a buyer-supplier relationship impacts the 
operational performance of the supplier involved in the 
dyadic relationship. 
Within the field of information systems (IS), numerous 
authors 
have 
demonstrated 
that 
interorganizational 
information systems (IOS) – defined as computer networks 
that support information exchanges across organizational 
boundaries [6] – can add economic value to business 
relationships. For example, Saeed et al. [7] demonstrated that 
IOS can provide either sourcing leverage or process 
efficiency, depending on IOS functionalities used. In 
addition, other IS researchers have discussed the possible 
symbiosis between IOS usage and the structure of business 
relationships [2][6][8][9][10]. For example, Malone et al. [9] 
relied on the transaction cost paradigm in their prediction 
that the evolution of computer-aided buying and selling 
would disrupt conventional marketing and distribution 
patterns. 
According 
to 
these 
authors, 
by 
reducing 
coordination costs, IOS would increase organizations’ 
reliance on markets rather than hierarchies. A couple of years 
later, Clemons et al. [8] refuted Malone et al.’s [9] theory by 
demonstrating that the transaction economies of scale, 
learning curve effects, and other factors related to IOS use 
favor a move toward long-term relationships with a smaller 
set of suppliers (i.e., the “move to the middle” hypothesis). 
Yet, while conceptually very convincing, no study has 
empirically validated these propositions. To partially address 
this gap in the IS literature, the second objective of this study 
is to complement previous IOS studies by testing the 
moderating impact IOS usage on the relationship between 
the structure of a buyer-supplier relationship and the 
operational performance of the supplier involved in the 
dyadic relationship. 
The rest of this article is organized as follows. First, in 
Section 2, the literatures on the structure of business 
relationships and IOS usage are reviewed. Based on these 
theoretical underpinnings we then present our research 
model and related hypotheses in Section 3. This is followed, 
in Section 4, by a discussion of the methodology that will be 
used to validate our research model. Lastly, Section 5 
concludes the article by presenting the anticipated theoretical 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

contributions and practical implications of the study, as well 
as its limits and future research avenues. 
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
Taking into account the objective of this study, this 
section reviews the literatures on the structure of business 
relationships and IOS usage to propose a sound theoretical 
background. 
A. Structure of a Business Relationship 
Traditionally, conceptualizations of the structure of a 
business relationship have been anchored on two different 
approaches: an economic approach and a behavioral 
approach [10]. By applying microeconomic theory and 
industrial organization analysis, the economic approach is 
essentially 
“efficiency” 
oriented, 
focusing 
on 
costs, 
functional 
differentiation 
and 
channel 
design 
[10]. 
Williamson [11] is a key contributor to this approach. He 
asserted that firms organize their exchanges in order to 
minimize transaction costs and that the ensuing transaction 
forms may vary according to the degree to which exchange 
partners maintain decision-making autonomy. Discrete 
transactions are located at one extreme while highly 
centralized hierarchical transactions are at the other. Hybrid 
transactions, such as joint ventures and alliances, are located 
in between. His pioneering work was among many studies 
that rely on microeconomic factors to explain the structure of 
business relationships. On the other hand, the behavioral 
approach, which is anchored in social psychology and 
organization theory, is essentially “socially” oriented, and 
focuses on power and conflict phenomena [10]. Macneil [12] 
is a key contributor to this approach. Based on a set of 
contracting norms, he defined the concept of relational 
exchange on a continuum ranging from discrete to relational. 
Subsequently, Kaufmann and Stern [13] made an initial 
attempt to comprehensively operationalize contracting 
norms, which led the way to more empirical investigations to 
assess the structure of business relationships according to 
such norms.  
More recently, several authors have combined the 
economic and behavioral approaches to examine the 
structure of business relationships, its antecedents and its 
outcomes [1][10][14][15]. These authors argue that both 
approaches should be used simultaneously, as interaction 
effects between economic and behavioral elements may 
influence the outcome of the exchange [14]. Stern and 
Reve [10] were the first to adopt this combined approach to 
study the structure of business relationships. Later on, 
Boyle et al. [1] proposed a framework anchored on both 
economic and behavioral elements to demonstrate that 
communication strategies, captured through communication 
frequency and content, differ significantly from one channel 
configuration to the next. 
Out of the numerous studies that used the economic 
approach, the behavioral approach or a combination of the 
two, three dominant paradigms have emerged to characterize 
the structure of business relationships: transaction cost, 
relational marketing and political economy [16]. Of these 
three paradigms only the latter (political economy) integrates 
aspects from both the economic and behavioral approaches, 
making it the most suitable to study the complex business 
relationship structures present in today’s economy [1][14]. 
Accordingly, numerous authors have adopted the Political 
Economy 
Paradigm 
(PEP) 
to 
study 
business 
relationships [1][10][14]. Amongst these authors, it is 
certainly Robicheaux and Coleman [16] who have proposed 
the most comprehensive framework to characterize and asses 
the structure of business relationships. Within their 
framework, the structure of a business relationship is 
assessed along two continuous axes: decision-making 
structure and operational integration. The former represents 
the degree to which the decision-making structure is clannish 
or bureaucratic (i.e., the polity structure), while the latter 
represents the degree to which the exchange relationship 
within a channel dyad is discrete or integrated (i.e., the 
economy structure). Four measures, namely centralization, 
formalization, participation and shared paradigm, are 
proposed to assess the decision-making structure (polity) 
while the level of operational integration (economy) can be 
captured through four other variables: joint actions, 
assistances, monitoring and information exchange. To 
complement 
their 
major 
contribution 
to 
the 
field, 
Robicheaux and Coleman [16] also proposed sets of 
antecedents and outcomes related to the structure of business 
relationships. 
B. Conceptualization of IOS usage 
Early studies on IOS usage, such as Venkatraman and 
Zaheer’s [17] empirical work, relied on a single dichotomous 
variable to assess IOS usage. However, the appropriateness 
of such a measure was rapidly challenged since the issue 
from a management’s perspective is typically not one of use 
or non-use, but rather one of how and how much use [18]. 
To address this issue, researchers rapidly arrived to the 
conclusion that they needed continuous (rather than 
dichotomous) variables to assess IOS usage. 
Later, two distinct approaches were adopted to develop 
continuous IOS use variables. The first relied on 
unidimensional measures to assess IOS usage. Among the 
numerous authors promoting this approach, we note 
Wang et al. [19], who conceptualized IOS usage along the 
dimension of virtual integration, defined as the extent to 
which trading partners use IT to support the processes related 
to collaborative operation execution and collaborative 
process planning and control. The second approach relied on 
multidimensional measures to assess IOS usage. Authors 
who favored this approach include Keen [20], who proposed 
a framework describing the usage of IOS along two 
dimensions: reach and range. According to this author, reach 
determines the locations that the system can access and to 
which it can link, while range is defined as the kind of 
information that can be seamlessly and automatically shared 
across the system and services.  
More recently, some researchers have combined 
IT implementation models [21] and the diffusion of 
innovation theory [22] to propose unidimensional measures 
to assess IOS usage at different phases of the technology 
assimilation process. For example, Zhu et al. [23] used a 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

three-stage approach to assess firms’ e-business assimilation. 
The first stage, e-business initiation, was measured by an 
aggregated index capturing whether the firm had used the 
Internet for each of the seven value chain activities proposed. 
The second stage, e-business adoption, was assessed by 
aggregating the seven adoption items. Finally, e-business 
routinization was measured by the extent of organizational 
use of e-business to support value chain activities. 
To conclude this section, it is important to note that most 
of the conceptualizations of IOS use proposed to date, 
whether unidimensional or multidimensional, were inspired 
by Massetti and Zmud’s [24] approach to EDI measurement, 
which comprised four facets: (1) volume, which assesses the 
extent to which a firm’s document exchanges are handled 
through EDI connections; (2) diversity, which captures the 
extent to which different types of documents are handled 
though EDI connections; (3) breadth, which assesses the 
extent to which a firm has developed EDI connections with 
each of its trading partners; and (4) depth, which captures the 
extent to which a firm’s business processes are intertwined 
with those of its trading partners through EDI connections. 
Depending on the context of the research, one or more 
dimensions of this scheme have been used to assess firms’ 
usage of different types of IOS, including EDI [25], SCM 
systems [26] and IOS in general [27]. 
III. 
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
Taking into account that this research focuses on the 
economic aspects of dyadic business relationships, we build 
on the theoretical background presented above to propose a 
research model that first considers the direct impact of the 
structure of a buyer-supplier relationship on the operational 
performance of the supplier involved in the dyadic 
relationship (Figure 1). Operational integration, which is one 
of the two axes proposed by Robicheaux and Coleman to 
assess the structure of a business relationship, represents the 
degree to which an exchange relationship within a business 
dyad is discrete or integrated [16]. In a discrete relationship, 
the exchange pursues self-interest vigorously without any 
consideration of future exchange [28], whereas in an 
integrated relationship, the distinct and interdependent 
organizational components of the partners involved in the 
channel dyad constitute a unified whole [29]. The four 
variables proposed by Robicheaux and Coleman [16], 
namely 
joint 
actions, 
assistances, 
monitoring 
and 
information exchange, are used to measure the level of 
operational integration between the partners (i.e., buyer and 
supplier) involved in a dyadic relationship. Joint actions 
capture the extent to which the partners are involved in each 
other’s operations [30]. The assistance assesses the position 
taken by the supplier toward assisting the buyer [31]. 
Monitoring captures the ex-ante and ex post control or 
supervisory actions taken by the buyer over the supplier [32]. 
Finally, 
information 
exchange 
assesses 
the 
bilateral 
expectation that the partners will proactively provide 
information to each other [33].  
A multidimensional view is also adopted to test the 
moderating effect of three IOS usage variables, namely 
volume, diversity and depth, on the relationship between the 
predictor and criterion variables. The fourth facet from 
Massetti and Zmud’s [24] conceptualization of IOS usage, 
breadth, is not considered, as this research focuses on dyadic 
relationships. Volume of IOS usage assesses the extent to 
which the supplier’s activities with the buyer are supported 
by IOS use. Diversity of IOS usage assesses the number of 
e-business functionalities adopted by the supplier to support 
its activities with the buyer [34]. Depth of IOS usage 
assesses the extent to which the supplier’s processes are 
intertwined with those of its buyer through IOS use [30]. 
A. The Impact of the Strucuture of a Buyer-Supplier 
Relationship on Operational Performance of the 
Supplier Involved in the Dyadic Relationship 
Several studies have highlighted or demonstrated the 
positive impact that an integrated exchange relationship can 
have on the operational performance of the partners 
involved. Indeed, integration between supply chain partners 
can improve manufacturing productivity [35], generate 
economies of scale and scope [11], reduce shipment 
discrepancy levels [36] and speed up product development, 
delivery and payment [29]. Furthermore, operational 
integration between partners, as assessed through assistances, 
monitoring, information exchange, continuity expectations 
and flexibility, decreases purchasing costs [30].  
In regards to the particular facets of operational 
integration proposed by Robicheaux and Coleman [16], 
numerous researchers have demonstrated that joint actions 
between a buyer and a seller can improve the performance of 
the parties involved [36]. For example, Cannon et al. [36] 
confirmed the importance of joint actions to improve 
relationship performance under both low and high levels of 
environmental uncertainty. Based on this premise, we posit 
our first hypothesis (H1): Joint actions between the partners 
involved in a dyadic relationship will positively impact the 
operational performance of the supplier involved in the 
relationship. 
Several authors have demonstrated that when a 
seller/buyer offers assistance to a buyer/seller, the 
buyer/seller is likely to interpret such actions as a 
manifestation of commitment by its business counterpart, 
which may be the basis of trust [5][37]. And, given that trust 
and commitment have been found to directly and indirectly 
influence 
exchange 
performance 
or 
organizational 
performance [38], it is likely that supplier’s assistance to the 
buyer will positively impact the supplier’s operational 
performance. Based on this premise, we posit our second 
hypothesis (H2): Supplier’s assistance to the buyer will 
positively impact the supplier’s operational performance. 
The buyer’s monitoring of the performance of the 
supplier is also an important means of assessing the health of 
a relationship. Indeed, in addition to showing that buyer’s 
monitoring of the supplier positively impacts the buyer’s 
performance [39], the literature also shows that buyer’s 
monitoring of the supplier also positively impact the 
supplier’s performance by enticing him to improve its 
activities and processes [40]. Based on this premise, we posit 
our third hypothesis (H3): Buyer’s monitoring of the supplier 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

will 
positively 
influence 
the 
supplier’s 
economic 
performance. 
Finally, past marketing and supply chain management 
studies have shown that effective interorganizational 
information sharing can enhance the performance of a supply 
relationship [41][42]. For example, as stated by Paulraj et al. 
[41, p. 49], when “buyers and suppliers share important 
information relating to materials procurement and product 
design issues, they are more likely to (1) improve the quality 
of their products, (2) reduce customer response time, (3) 
reduce the costs of protecting against opportunistic behavior, 
and (4) increase cost savings through greater product design 
and operational efficiencies”. Based on this premise, we 
posit our fourth hypothesis (H4): Information exchange 
between the partners involved in a dyadic relationship will 
positively impact the operational performance of the supplier 
involved in the relationship. 
B. The Moderating Impact of IOS Usage 
Various 
mechanisms 
facilitating 
the 
operational 
integration among supply chain partners have been identified 
in the management literature [42]. As noted by Barki and 
Pinsonneault [29], these mechanisms include standardizing 
work, standardizing output, standardizing skills and 
knowledge, 
standardizing 
norms, 
direct 
supervision, 
planning, and mutual adjustment. It has also been 
demonstrated that the introduction and usage of an IOS eases 
the implementation of these mechanisms, which, in turn, 
facilitates the operational integration between supply chain 
partners [26]. 
In regards to the particular facets of IOS usage proposed 
by Massetti and Zmud’s [24], various authors have 
demonstrated that unless IOS volume reaches a sufficient 
level, it is unlikely that the reengineering of associated 
business processes will provide significant benefits [24]. 
Indeed, a high volume of IOS usage will allow a firm to fully 
exploit 
the 
key 
mechanisms 
facilitating 
operational 
integration that were initially implemented through the 
adoption of the IOS. Based on this premise, we posit our 
fifth hypothesis (H5): The impact of (a) joint actions between 
the partners, (b) supplier’s assistance to the buyer, (c) 
buyer’s monitoring of the supplier and (d) information 
exchange between the supplier on the supplier’s operational 
performance will be greater when the volume of IOS usage is 
high than when the volume of IOS usage is low. 
 
Volume of 
IOS usage
Diversity of 
IOS usage
Information 
exchange
Assistance
Monitoring
Economic 
performance
H3
H1
H2
H4
Joint actions
Depth of 
IOS usage
H5a
H5b
H5c
H5d
H6a
H6b
H6c
H6d
H7d
H7a
H7b
H7c
 
Figure 1.  Research Model. 
Also, the greater the variety or diversity of documents 
exchanged 
through 
IOS, 
the 
more 
automated 
and 
standardized the document’s generation, transmission and 
reception processes become [24]. By automating and 
standardizing document exchange, IOS diversity also 
optimizes other mechanisms that facilitate operational 
integration such as mutual adjustments and planning [27]. 
Thus, high diversity of IOS usage will allow a firm to 
implement a wide range of mechanisms facilitating 
operational integration. Based on this premise, we posit our 
sixth hypothesis (H6): The impact of (a) joint actions 
between the partners, (b) supplier’s assistance to the buyer, 
(c) buyer’s monitoring of the supplier and (d) information 
exchange between the supplier on the supplier’s operational 
performance will be greater when the diversity of IOS usage 
is high than when the diversity of IOS usage is low. 
Lastly, establishing integrated IOS links (or greater 
depth) through the redesign of business processes and the 
establishment of unique information exchange routines 
increases procedural specificity between the partners 
involved [7]. Furthermore, IOS depth automates and shortens 
the time required to exchange information [25], which in turn 
may allow for the implementation of other mechanisms that 
facilitate operational integration such as direct supervision 
planning and mutual adjustment. Thus, greater depth of IOS 
usage will allow a firm to implement a wide range of 
mechanisms facilitating operational integration. Based on 
this premise, we posit our seventh hypothesis (H7): The 
impact of (a) joint actions between the partners, (b) 
supplier’s assistance to the buyer, (c) buyer’s monitoring of 
the supplier and (d) information exchange between the 
supplier on the supplier’s operational performance will be 
greater when the depth of IOS usage is high than when the 
depth of IOS usage is low. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
As our research is still in progress, this Section explains 
the methodological framework we have devised, but not yet 
used, to test our research model. More precisely, we present 
our unit of analysis as well as our intended research setting, 
data collection procedures, survey instrument and data 
analyses procedures. 
A. Research Setting 
This study explores the structure of business relationships 
from the perspective of the supplier. Hence, the unit of 
analysis of this research is the supplier’s relationship with a 
particular buyer. The up-to-date list of manufacturing firms 
from the greater Montréal area maintained by a local 
government agency (CRIQ) will constitute this study’s 
sample frame. In addition, the sample frame will be limited 
to manufacturing firms active in four industrial sectors: (1) 
machinery manufacturing (NAICS 333); (2) computer and 
electronic product manufacturing (NAICS 334); (3) 
electrical 
equipment, 
appliance 
and 
component 
manufacturing (NAICS 335); and (4) transportation 
equipment manufacturing (NAICS 336). Two reasons 
justified this choice. First, the adoption level of IOS in these 
four sectors is among the highest (Forester Research 2011). 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Second, previous studies have demonstrated the validity of 
these sectors in the study of business relationships [15][30]. 
B. Data Collection 
Data will be collected by the mean of an online survey. 
We will follow the key informant approach and collect data 
from one sales professional at each supplier because 
specialists in this boundary role are most likely to be 
knowledgeable about study constructs [35]. Prior to 
answering the online survey, respondents will be asked to 
focus on an important buyer relationship for a major product 
manufactured by their company. To maximize this study’s 
response rate, the diffusion of the survey will be based on 
four key elements: (1) a respondent-friendly questionnaire; 
(2) a five-contact strategy (in the form of five different 
e-mails to be sent to sales professionals); (3) a personalized 
correspondence; and (4) two incentives (i.e., a tailored 
benchmark report and a chance to win an electronic gift card 
of a 500$ value on Amazon). To ensure the anonymity of our 
respondents all collected data will be anonymized. 
C. Survey Instrument 
The survey instrument will comprise measures adapted 
from the literature. Measures tied to the structure of the 
dyadic business relationship (Joint actions [43], Assistance 
[38], Monitoring [32], and Information exchange [33]) will 
be adapted from marketing studies while those related to IOS 
usage (volume of IOS usage [34], diversity of IOS usage 
[44] and depth of IOS usage [24] will be adapted from IS 
studies. In addition, the measure to assess the operational (or 
economic) performance of the supplier will be adapted from 
the work of [26]. All measures are available upon request to 
the authors. 
D. Data Analyses 
The analysis of our data comprises four steps: 
(1) assessing the unidimensionality and convergent validity 
of the constructs; (2) assessing the internal consistency of the 
constructs; (3) assessing the discriminant validity of the 
constructs; and (4) testing our research hypotheses via a 
hierarchical regression model. For the last step, consistent 
with standard practice for analyzing models with interaction 
effects [45], variables will be entered in blocks in the 
hierarchical regression model. First, we will include the 
variables of joint actions, assistances, monitoring and 
information exchange into the model and assess their impact 
of operational performance. Then, we will enter the IOS 
usage variables into the model and asses their impact on 
operational performance. Finally, we will enter the 
interaction variables into the model and asses their impact on 
economic performance. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The objective of this study was twofold. First, to examine 
how the structure of a buyer-supplier relationship impacts the 
operational performance of the supplier involved in the 
dyadic relationship. Second, to test the moderating impact of 
IOS usage on the relationship between the structure of a 
buyer-supplier relationship and the operational performance 
of the supplier involved in the dyadic relationship. 
Accordingly, this research is likely to yield important 
theoretical contributions and practical implications despites 
certain limitations.  
A. Theoretical Contributions 
This study should make two important theoretical 
contributions to the marketing and IS literatures. First, this 
research will be the first to empirically test a key sub-set of 
Robicheaux and Coleman’s [16] framework to characterize 
and assess the structure of business relationships. Second, 
this study will link past findings from marketing and IOS 
studies and show that IOS can help maximize the economic 
value of supplier involved in buyer-supplier business 
relationships. 
B. Practical Implications 
From a practical standpoint, the present research 
anticipated results should allow managers to identify the key 
marketing activities (i.e., joint actions, assistance, monitoring 
and information exchange) that foster economic value in 
dyadic business relationships. Also, this study should help 
managers maximize the economic value they derive from 
their dyadic business relationships by revealing the key role 
that IOS play in this context. 
C. Limits and Future Research Avenues 
There are two main limitations to this study. First, the 
research model will be tested with data collected from a 
small sample, which evidently limits the scope and 
generalizability of our results. To alleviate this issue, future 
researches could test our research model with manufacturing 
firms pertaining to other industries and/or localized in other 
regions of the world. Second, we did not investigate the 
impact of IOS ownership in the context of dyadic business 
relationships. Future research should focus on this important 
variable since several studies have shown that benefits tied to 
IOS usage are often skewed in favor of the IOS owner [7]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Boyle, F. R. Dwyer, R. A. Robicheaux, and J.T. Simpson, 
“Influence strategy in marketing channels: Measures and use 
in different relationship structures,” J. Marketing Res., vol. 
29, pp. 462–473, November 1992. 
[2] B. Chae, H. R. Yen, and C. Sheu, “Information Technology 
and Supply Chain Collaboration: Moderating Effects of 
Existing Relationships Between Partners,” IEEE Trans. Eng. 
Manag., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 440-448, 2005. 
[3] I. Geyskens, J.-B. E. M. Steenkamp, and N. Kumar, “A meta-
analysis of satisfaction in marketing channel relationships,” J. 
Marketing Res., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 223-238, May 1999. 
[4] J. P. Cannon and C. Homburg, “Buyer-supplier relationships 
and customer firm costs,” Journal of Marketing, vol. 65, no. 1, 
pp. 29-43, 2001. 
[5] J. M. Bonner and R. J. Calantone, “Buyer attentiveness in 
buyer-supplier relationships,” Ind. Market. Manage., vol. 34, 
no. 1, pp. 53-61, 2005. 
[6] V. Choudhury, “Strategic choices in the development of 
interorganizational information systems,” Inf. Syst. Res., vol. 
8, no. 1, pp. 1-24, 1997. 
[7] K. A. Saeed, M. K. Malhotra, and V. Grover, “Examining the 
impact of interorganizational systems on process efficiency 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

and sourcing leverage in buyer-supplier dyads,” Decis. Sci., 
vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 365-396, 2005. 
[8] E. K. Clemons, S. Reddi, and M. C. Row, “The impact of 
information technology on the organization of economic 
activity: The ‘move to the middle’ hypothesis,” J. Manage. 
Inf. Syst., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 9-35, 1993. 
[9] T. W. Malone, J. Yates, and R. I Benjamin, “Electronic 
markets and electronic hierarchies,” Commun. ACM, vol. 30, 
no. 6, pp. 484-497, 1987. 
[10] W. L. Stern and T. Reve, “Distribution channels as political 
economies: A framework for comparative analysis,” J. 
Marketing, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 52-64, 1980. 
[11] O. Williamson, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, 
New York: Free Press, 1985. 
[12] I. R. Macneil, The New Social Contract: An Inquiry into 
Modern Contractual Relations, New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1980. 
[13] P. J. Kaufmann and L. W. Stern, “Relational exchange norms, 
perceptions of unfairness, and retained hostility in commercial 
litigation,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 
534-552, 1988. 
[14] J. J. Mohr and J. R. Nevin, “Communication strategies in 
marketing channels: A theoretical perspective,” J. Marketing, 
vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 36-51, 1990. 
[15] J. B. Heide and G. John, “Alliances in industrial purchasing: 
The 
determinants 
of 
joint 
action 
in 
buyer-supplier 
relationships,” J. Marketing Res., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 24-36, 
1990. 
[16] R. A. Robicheaux and J. E. Coleman, “The structure of 
marketing channel relationships,” J. Acad. Market. Sci., vol. 
22, no. 1, pp. 38-51, 1994. 
[17] N. Venkatraman and A. Zaheer, “Electronic integration and 
strategic advantage: A quasi experimental study in the 
insurance industry,” Inf. Syst. Res., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 377-393, 
December 1990. 
[18] G. E. Truman, “A discrepancy-based measurement approach 
for data integration,” working paper IS-95-24, Stern School of 
Business, New York University, 1995. 
[19] E. T. G. Wang, J. C. F. Tai, and H. L. Wei, “A virtual 
integration theory of improved supply chain performance,” J. 
Manage. Inf. Syst., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 41-64, 2006. 
[20] P. G. W. Keen, Shaping the Future: Business Design through 
Information Technology, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business 
Press, 1991.  
[21] T. H. Kwon and R. W. Zmud, “Unifying the fragmented 
models of information systems implementation,” in Critical 
Issues in Information Systems Research, R. Boland and R. 
Hirscheim, Eds., Chichester, UK: Wiley, 1987, pp. 88-97. 
[22] E. M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations, New York: Free 
Press, 1985. 
[23] K. Zhu, K. L. Kraemer, and S. Xu, “The process of innovation 
assimilation by firms in different countries: A technology 
diffusion perspective,” Manage. Sci., vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 1557 
1576, 2006. 
[24] B. Massetti and W. R. Zmud, “Measuring the extent of EDI 
usage in complex organizations: Strategies and illustrative 
examples,” MIS Quart., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 331-345, 1996. 
[25] P. Hart and C. Saunders, “Emerging electronic partnerships: 
Antecedents and dimensions of EDI use from the supplier’s 
perspective,” J. Manage. Inf. Syst., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 87-112, 
1998. 
[26] M. Subramani, “How do suppliers benefit from information 
technology use in supply chain relationships?,” MIS Quart., 
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 45-73, 2004. 
[27] L. Chi, C. Holsapple, and C. Srinivasan, “Competitive 
dynamics in electronic networks: A model and the case of 
interorganizational 
systems,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Electronic Commerce, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 7-49, Spring 2007. 
[28] J. B. Heide, “Interorganizational governance in marketing 
channels,” J. Marketing, vol. 58, pp. 71-85, April 1994. 
[29] H. Barki and A. Pinsonneault, “A model of organizational 
integration, implementation effort, and performance,” Org. 
Sci., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 165–179, March–April 2005. 
[30] A. W. Joshi and R. L. Stump, “The contingent effect of 
specific asset investments on joint action in manufacturer-
supplier relationships: An empirical test of the moderating 
role of reciprocal asset investments, uncertainty, and trust,” J. 
Acad. Market. Sci., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 291 305, 1999. 
[31] T. G. Noordewier, G. John, and J. R. Nevin, “Performance 
outcomes of purchasing arrangements in industrial buyer-
vendor relationships,” J. Marketing, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 80-93, 
1990. 
[32] R. L. Stump and J. B. Heide, “Controlling supplier 
opportunism in industrial relationships,” J. Marketing Res., 
vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 431-441, 1996. 
[33] J. B. Heide and A. S. Miner, “The shadow of the future: 
Effects of anticipated interaction and frequency of contact on 
buyer-seller cooperation,” Acad. Manage. J., vol. 35, no. 2, 
pp. 265-291, 1992. 
[34] P. Hadaya, “Benchmarking firms’ operational performance 
according to their use of Internet based interorganizational 
systems,” Benchmarking, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 621-639, 2009. 
[35] J. E. Ettlie and E. M. Reza, “Organizational integration and 
process innovation,” Acad. Manage. J., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 
795-827, 2001. 
[36] J. P. Cannon, R. S. Achrol, and G. T. Gundlach, “Contracts, 
norms, and plural form governance,” J. Acad. Market. Sci., 
vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 180-194, 2000. 
[37] J. H. Dyer and W. Chu, “The Determinants of Trust in 
Supplier-Automaker Relationships in the U.S., Japan, and 
Korea,” Journal of international business studies, vol. 31, no. 
2, pp. 259-285, 2000. 
[38] J. A. Siguaw, P. M. Simpson, and T. L. Baker, “Effects of 
supplier market orientation on distributor market orientation 
and the channel relationship: The distributor perspective,” J. 
Marketing, vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 99-111, 1998. 
[39] P. D. Cousin, B. Lawson, and B. Squire, “Performance 
measurement in strategic buyer-supplier relationships: The 
mediating role of socialization mechanisms,” Int.  J. Oper. 
Prod. Manag., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 238-258, 2008. 
[40] P. K. Dey, A. Bhattacharya, and W. Ho, “Strategic supplier 
performance evaluation: A case-based action research of a 
UK manufacturing organization,” Int. J. Prod. Econ., vol. 166, 
pp. 192-214, 2015. 
[41] A. Paulraj, A. A. Lado, and I. J. Chen, “Inter-organizational 
communication as a relational competency: Antecedents and 
performance outcomes in collaborative buyer–supplier 
relationships,” J. Oper. Manage., vol. 26, pp. 45-64, 2008. 
[42] S. Glouberman and H. Mintzberg, “Managing the care of 
health and the cure of disease – Part II: Integration,” Health 
Care Management Review, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 70-84, 2001. 
[43] M. Bensaou and N. Venkatraman, “Configurations of 
interorganizational relationships: A comparison between U.S. 
and Japanese automakers,” Manage. Sci., vol. 41, pp. 1471 
1492, 1995. 
[44] M. T. Frohlich and R. Westbrook, “Demand chain 
management in manufacturing and services: Web-based 
integration, drivers and performance,” J. Oper. Manage., vol. 
20, no. 6, pp. 729 745, 2002. 
[45] L. Aiken and S. West, Multiple Regression: Testing and 
Interpreting Interactions, Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1991. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

