Revenue Optimization of Telecom Marketing Campaigns for Prepaid Customers
Maurus Riedweg
Consulteer AG, Switzerland
Email: maurus.riedweg@consulteer.com
Pavol Svaba and Gwendolin Wilke
Lucerne School of Information Technology, Switzerland
Email: {gwendolin.wilke, pavol.svaba}@hslu.ch
Abstract—The design and optimization of marketing campaigns
today usually still includes a high level of manual expert in-
volvement. This applies particularly to the prepaid mobile phone
sector of the highly competitive telecommunication industry.
Since prepaid telecom customers are characterized by highly
volatile and sparse usage data their future behavior is hard
to predict, and marketers often rely mainly on experience and
gut feeling when designing marketing campaigns, using only
simple data analysis tools. The project developed a methodology
and software prototype that helps marketers in this area to
exploit the full potential of real-time big data-driven analytics for
microtargeting, allowing them to make fact-based and informed
decisions. Speciﬁcally, it provides an interactive solution for the
semi-automated visual support of the design and optimization
of single-channel marketing campaigns. The developed solutions
bring a huge step towards the automation of the whole process
of optimizing marketing campaigns in the telecommunication
business, keeping the possibility of interactive interventions of
marketers to implement strategic management decisions or use
their expert knowledge. The system provides enough information
for marketer to comprehend the reasons for the decision and
by retracing it provides precious insights for the design of new
campaigns. The solution uses machine learning closed loop and
intuitive visualization based on nomograms and was prototypi-
cally implemented on Apache Spark big data stack and evaluated
on sample data from two real-world prepaid telecom use cases.
Keywords–telecom; churn prediction; predictive analytics; Na¨ıve
Bayes; Nomogram
I.
INTRODUCTION
Classical data mining for marketing campaigns is usually
a time consuming task. Despite the availability and use of
automated analytics algorithms, the overall process of design-
ing, adapting, executing and evaluating a marketing campaign
still includes a high level of expert involvement and manual
decision-making. In the age of big data, the increased volume
and velocity of available data allows for added business
insights and helps companies to stay competitive. At the same
time, it becomes increasingly difﬁcult to ﬁne-tune the de-
sign and management of analytics-based marketing campaigns
manually. Therefore, to fully tap the potential of real-time
big data marketing analytics, a high degree of automation is
needed.
The success rate of a marketing campaign depends on tar-
geting the right customer needs and preferences. Consequently,
there is an increased need for highly targeted marketing cam-
paigns that are tailored to the needs and preferences of speciﬁc,
possibly small customer groups (micro-segmentation) or even
individuals (direct marketing campaigns). This requires highly
agile marketing campaign management facilitating fast reac-
tion times to customer or market events despite continuously
increasing data volumes. Additionally, structural adaptations
that allow for reacting to changes in the market structure as a
whole must be accounted for. There is a trend in marketing to-
wards building long-lasting relationships with customers. Since
the cost for customer acquisition is much greater than the cost
of customer retention [1], marketers have become increasingly
interested in the latter [2]. Customer retention models aim at
furthering customer loyalty and preventing active customers
from changing to other providers (churning) via marketing
campaigns. To achieve this, tools that support the development,
management and application of customer retention models and
the corresponding marketing campaigns are required and are
essential Business Intelligence (BI) applications. In telecom
business, the customer churn term refers to the customer
turnover, i.e., loss of a service subscriber. The common reasons
for churn are dissatisfaction with an existing provider, the lure
of a lower price for equivalent service or better service for the
same price from a different provider. Churn rate, the proportion
of churned clients during a given time period, is one of the key
business metrics and an indicator for customer dissatisfaction.
Churn prediction modeling techniques attempt to under-
stand the precise customer behaviors and attributes, which
signal the risk of customer churn. In predictive analytics, the
typical approach to data-driven churn prediction is to use
a sufﬁciently large historical data set of customer records,
containing churning and non-churning customers. The records
contain customer attributes such as age, gender, tariff, average
call frequency, etc., together with the information if a customer
has churned at some point in time or not. The data set is used
as training set for supervised learning to construct a classiﬁer,
i.e., a predictive model that classiﬁes a customer as a potential
churner or non-churner based on the knowledge of the other
attribute values (the predictor variables). In an actual prediction
task, the model is applied to a new data record, where the
values of the customers predictor variables are observed while
the possible churn event lies in the future, so that value of
the class variable churn is unknown. The classiﬁcation done
by the model is used as a prediction of churn or non-churn
of the customer segment that corresponds to the respective
predictor attribute valuations (the feature vector). In case the
system has predicted a customer segment of likely churners,
a suitable marketing action can be launched to prevent these
customers from churning. To select such an appropriate action
the underlying reasons for their churning must be analyzable,
i.e., a proper insight on the reasons for churning is essential
in order to design effective retention methods.
Predictive analytics models traditionally used for data-
driven customer churn prediction are Decision Trees [3]–[8]
and Regression analysis [9] and [10], which have been com-
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

plemented with Na¨ıve Bayes classiﬁers and Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks [11]–[13] in recent years [14] and [15]. In Na¨ıve
Bayes classiﬁer (NBC) models, the attributes of a domain are
interpreted as random variables and are represented as vertices
in a probabilistic graphical model. Direct inﬂuences of the
observed predictor variables on an unobservable target variable
are represented as directed edges in the graph. The result is
a simple tree graph structure. The strength of inﬂuence of
input variables on the target variable is given by conditional
probability tables, which are learned from historic data. In a
prediction task, Bayes Rule [16] is used to infer from values
of the observed variables the probability of possible values
of the unobserved target variable. NBCs are thus map based
classiﬁcations with the additional assumption of conditional
independence of input variables. Examples of applications
using NBCs for churn prediction are Nath and Behara [17] and
and Kirui et. al. [18] or Shaaban et. al. [13]. Other predictive
models that have been used for churn prediction are, e.g., rule
based classiﬁers (Ripper, PART), Nearest Neighbor (KNN),
Self Organizing Maps [19], Genetic Algorithms [20], Linear
Discriminant Analysis [21], Support Vector Machines [13],
Sequential Pattern Mining and Market Basket Analysis [22]
or Rough Sets [23].
As a reaction to the increasing data volumes in the telecom-
munication sector, approaches towards churn prediction on
massive data sets have been investigated. For example, Kamal-
raj and Malathi [24] discuss the use of data mining techniques
on big data clusters in the telecommunication industry. Balle
et. al. [25] describe a prototype for churn prediction using
stream mining methods, which offer the additional promise
of detecting new patterns of churn in real-time streams of
high-speed data, and adapting quickly to a changing reality.
Different scalable algorithms have been developed and imple-
mented, e.g., Apaches open source libraries Mahout and MLlib
include, besides scalable regression models, decision trees and
customer segmentation models, also Na¨ıve Bayes Classiﬁer
learning.
The research presented in this paper was funded by the
Swiss Commission for Technology and Innovation CTI and is
part of the project done together with two expert partners, one
software developer with extended history in telecommunica-
tion business, and one large telecom service provider located
in Switzerland.
The paper is organized as follows. After short introduction
we describe the problem and its requirements in Section II.
In Section III, we address the conceptual model. Section IV
brings the insights of development of the predictive analytics
and visualization core based on data analysis done in statistical
environment R. Section IV shortly describes the implemented
big data solution. Section V summarizes the project results and
Section VI concludes its achievements.
II.
PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
The mission of this project is to develop a methodology and
a software prototype for semi-automated predictive marketing
analytics and campaign management. It will automate the
life cycle of the data mining and the campaign management
process as a whole, including feature selection, model learn-
ing, prediction and decision making; iterative dynamic model
adaptation over time will allow for closing the analytics loop.
In particular, our goal was to optimize campaign targeting
in prepaid segment of a large Swiss telecom company. We
aim on customer retention campaigns in general, or on churn
prevention in a special case. The existing system, and its
data, puts some critical constraints we have to deal with.
For example, the provided historical data are aggregated and
contain time series from the narrow time slots before and after
the campaign offer. Within a campaign, the existing system
chooses a ﬁxed number of customers each day and offers them
a particular bonus. The offer is valid for couple of days, and
expires afterwards. Some particular campaigns with a bonus
credit have been chosen as a proof of concept. The campaigns
run for a deﬁned period of days, their results are reported on
a daily basis, and summarized at the end of the campaign.
The designed solution must possess the following properties:
(1.) Big data-driven knowledge discovery allows for detection
of hidden patterns in the growing numbers of data records
and customer attributes available;
(2.) A high degree of automation in analytics, prediction,
decision-making and campaign execution allows for
timely reaction to events, and allows to cope with big
data sets;
(3.) Self-adaptability accounts for changes in the data sets and
the domain structure, as well as for lessons learned of past
campaigns, embedding them in a closed feedback loop for
autonomous campaign optimization;
(4.) Scalability of the algorithms to a distributed big data
processing environment provides the necessary computing
power to analyze the increasing amount and velocity of
(big) data sets in time;
(5.) A high degree of model accuracy allows for detailed or
even personalized marketing decisions;
(6.) A high degree of interpretability (comprehensibility) of
the domain model and derived predictions, decisions
and automatic campaign executions ensure acceptance by
marketers.
In the marketing ﬁeld, acceptance is of pivotal importance.
Campaign managers must be able to explore inﬂuence factors
and variable dependencies in order to design appropriate
marketing instruments (such as special offerings for young
adults with high sms-frequency). They also need to understand
the rationale for an automatically triggered marketing action
in order to be able to justify it to potential business customers
and to top management, e.g., by pinpointing relevant inﬂuence
factors. Even though the high degree of automatization is
desired, the choice of contents of a marketing campaign is
usually not entirely reducible to structured information and
often includes highly emotional contextual information (such
as the choice of a protagonist in a TV spot), therefore the
possibility of manual intervention of marketing campaign must
be guaranteed by any decision support system in the marketing
area. Particularly, it must allow the campaign manager to
integrate his experience and real-world background knowledge,
as well as to implement strategic managerial requirements.
The whole marketing effort serves the purpose of sustain-
able increase (or of interrupting decrease) of the usage of the
provider’s service, in extreme case, of preventing clients churn.
In contrast to postpaid segment, ultimately fewer resources
are used in prepaid segment on maintaining contacts with
customers and marketing analytic activities in general. This
lack of interest in prepaid segment is caused by its low market
share in Switzerland. As a consequence, we rely here purely
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

on data induced by the service usage. Further, due to its
nature, the service usage by prepaid customers is usually
not as homogeneous as by postpaid clients. Thus, the data
available on prepaid users are much more inadequate. This
adds to the complexity of modeling and causes a decrease
in the model accuracy. The existing marketing solution rates
the success of the campaign based on the acceptance ratio.
This clearly does not bring the desired effect. Customers,
which exploit the offered bonus but do not change their
usage habit, are counted as proﬁtable, whereby in real they
generate a loss. Additional requirements have been set on
the designed system and its models, such as simplicity and
easy interpretability, possibility of intervention, capability of
effective and manageable visualization, scalability, ease of use.
III.
CONCEPTUAL MODEL
Two use cases have been speciﬁed based on obtained
campaign data:
(1.) the semi-automatic support of optimized campaign tem-
plate instantiation for increased acceptance ratio, and
(2.) the semi-automatic support of campaign template design
for increased revenue creation.
Speciﬁcations included existing situation, description, use case
properties (actors, stakeholders, levels, triggers, frequency,
preconditions, post-conditions), data characteristics (names,
accessibility, type, volume, temporal resolution, heterogeneity,
inconsistency, constraints, analysis needs) and possible use
case extensions. They are the result of workshops with the
telecom partner prepaid marketing team and a number of
project internal workshops (HSLU-I and Consulteer AG).
The conceptual solution addresses the following issues:
(a.) automatization of the whole marketing process (from data
mining to decision making);
Closed loop architecture with constantly trained and up-
dated model has been speciﬁed and build for the de-
veloped prototype, containing modules for feature pre-
selection, prediction, evaluation and adaptation. This was
done in two stages. First, methods for modules have
been speciﬁed and veriﬁed with small data in statistical
environment and programming language R. Second, the
modules have been ported to big data stack (see Section
IV) and the loop has been closed. The automatization
of the whole marketing process remains a challenge, the
reasons are twofold: (a.) technical – the built prototype
has to be incorporated and veriﬁed within the live system;
(b.) non-technical – the existing marketing processes have
to be rebuild towards the high level of automatization and
utilizing the implemented solution.
(b.) allow interactive intervention of marketers (e.g., to imple-
ment strategic management decisions or experience based
knowledge);
The selected approach heads towards micro-segmentation
by categorization, i.e., ﬁltering out clients with particular
combination of input feature values, which evidence the
potential of revenue gain if those clients are presented
with the bonus. The decision making is presented to
marketer in a form of recommendation to select particular
small set of clients for the campaign (microtargeting). The
implemented solution utilizes the intuitive visualization
based on nomogram paradigm (see Section IV). It allows
marketer to manually override the automatically chosen
(optimal) feature combinations with preferred values and
presents the gain/risk predictions for the selected choice.
(c.) provide interpretability of the automatically determined
customer segments needed to support campaign design;
The solution based on NBC and nomogram visualization
satisﬁes stringent conditions set on the designed system,
such as scalability, easy interpretability, possibility of
intervention, etc. As opposed to black box models such
as neural networks (NN) or random forests, the Na¨ıve
Bayes Model provides enough necessary information for
marketer to comprehend the reasons for the selection of a
client for a campaign. By retracing the decision up to the
input features, and identifying those mainly responsible
for the classiﬁers choice, it provides precious insights
for the design of new campaigns and allows marketing
managers to justify and explain the algorithm’s results
to their management. This is in contrast to black-box
approaches such as deep NN. These have demonstrated
strong potential on ﬁnding hidden patterns in big data
collections, but do not comply with the requirement of
interpretability by marketing managers.
(d.) prediction algorithm needs to be able to deal with volatile
and sparse prepaid data;
Based on data analysis done with provided campaign data
and consistent with the campaign management restric-
tions, the methods have been chosen for data cleaning and
transformation, and feature selection, as well as suitable
prediction algorithm.
(e.) usage of behavior change instead of acceptance rate as
a success measure.
Through redesigning the metric for campaign success
towards more reliable and long-term change indicator (see
Section IV).
The prediction model comprises six parts:
(i.) data transformation methods;
(ii.) input feature construction method (based on data explo-
ration results);
(iii.) feature pre-selection method with dynamic binning;
(iv.) method for target variable construction (implementing a
new campaign success measure for behavior change);
(v.) Na¨ıve Bayes prediction (classiﬁcation);
(vi.) automated customer selection according to class predic-
tions.
Closed loop learning enables a predictive analytics solution
to automatically adapt to changing conditions. To achieve this,
feedback loops must be integrated in the model architecture.
For the given use cases, four levels of feedback have been
identiﬁed: (1.) Data Level Feedback, (2.) Campaign Level
Feedback, (3.) Causal Loops, and (4.) Model Level Feedback.
Two of the four feedback levels have been selected for imple-
mentation (Data Level and Campaign Level Feedback).
IV.
DATA ANALYTICS
In telecommunications, the usage data typically consists
of time series for different variables such as number of calls,
number of SMS sent, date of credit charge and charged value,
revenue, etc. The provided data contain for each customer and
each variable (called here accumulator) aggregated data for at
least three months before and one month after the offer. In
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

the Figure 1, we show single accumulator data of two chosen
customers. The UserX accepts the offer (at time denoted by
dashed line A) but does not change its behavior remarkably
(offer causes a small boost in his usage but it continues to
sink which is observable by the slope of the blue line); the
UserY shows the evident change of the behavior and generates
notable growth in the revenue compared to the predicted values
(green triangles). It is also possible that we witness the churn
prevention in the case of UserY.
G
G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
0
1
2
3
4
time
avg. revenue p.D.
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
A
UserX
G
G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGG
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
0
1
2
3
time
avg. revenue p.D.
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
A
UserY
GGGGGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GGGGGGG
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
Figure 1. Customer Data Examples
The goal of the campaign is to motivate customers to
increase their usage of the service. This is even the weaker
condition on the selection of customers and a more general
case as the churn prevention. For this purpose, it is important
to classify which of the possible customers are likely to
generate more usage and thus more proﬁt for the company.
Blind assignment of the offers can lead to considerable money
loss. E.g., in the case, when a customer accepts the offer
but does not change its usage habit (e.g., only exploits the
bonus credit). Further, in the opposite case, which also has
to be taken into account, the customer feels harassed by the
offers he is not interested in, may even decide to churn. We
utilize the classical data-driven machine learning pipeline with
preprocessing phase (data cleaning and transformation), model
building phase (feature extraction, model training and testing
loop) and deployment phase. The trained classiﬁer chooses the
client for a campaign when it assumes that by doing so, he
will increase his usage of the service and thus revenue of the
company.
The current solution uses acceptance ratio as measure for
the campaign success. We propose conversion shift towards
more reliable and long-term behavior change indicator. We
regress predictions of the accumulator values after the offer
(green triangles, see Figure 1) and train the classiﬁer with the
new target variable set as the difference between predicted and
real (measured) value. The predictors are variables extracted
from the different accumulators, such as average number of
national calls, average revenue, etc. The correlation coefﬁcient
is used to ﬁlter-out the predictors with non-signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on the target. In order to provide the “possibility of interven-
tion”, “capability of visualization”, as well as the high degree
of “comprehensibility and interpretability” that is needed for
acceptance of an automated solution in the marketing daily
business, the Na¨ıve Bayes approach has been chosen.
NBC is simple and effective technique based on the
Bayesian theorem. Even though, the Na¨ıve Bayes is not
the preferred classiﬁcation method, its performance is often
underestimated. It is fast and space effective, not sensitive to
irrelevant features, and can handle streaming data well. For
more information, the reader is referred to [26] and [27]. In
particular, the binary NBC, where the target class can take
only two possible outcomes, allows very elegant visualization
with Nomograms [28]. (In case of multi-class classiﬁcation
problem, we create nomogram for one particular outcome
class and the union of remaining outcomes represent the
complement class.) The NBC nomogram provides a way to
visualize the strength of inﬂuence of each input feature to a
Na¨ıve Bayes classiﬁcation result, depending on its value or
category. It assigns point scores to every predictor variable
depending on the chosen feature value. The higher the range
of the feature score is, the higher is its inﬂuence to the classi-
ﬁcation result. It thus provides marketers with the possibility
to graphically explore how the choice of different feature
values (i.e., attributes of a customer) inﬂuence the overall class
probability (e.g., the probability of accepting a marketing offer
or probability of revenue increase). The point scores of all
features are easily summed up together and translated into
the resulting overall probability. By ﬁxing some attributes to
particular values, we effectively ﬁlter the target population to
microtargets. This allows us to optimize the target with respect
to its resulting class probability and size.
−Inf − −0.1
−0.1 −  0.0
 0.0 −  0.1
 0.1 −  0.2
 0.2 −  0.5
 0.5 −  Inf
arpuDf
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
 −Inf − −10.5
−10.5 −  −5.2
 −5.2 −  −2.9
 −2.9 −  −1.2
 −1.2 −   0.0
  0.0 −   Inf
arpuS
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
−Inf − −5.0
−5.0 − −2.0
−2.0 − −0.8
−0.8 − −0.1
−0.1 −  0.4
 0.4 −  Inf
callNreS
−0.15
−0.10
−0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
−Inf − −0.3
−0.3 −  0.0
 0.0 −  0.2
 0.2 −  0.3
 0.3 −  0.5
 0.5 −  Inf
relCoS
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Figure 2. NBC Nomogram with 4 accumulator attributes.
As an underlying infrastructure, big data technology stack
has been built based on the Apache SPARK framework for
cluster computing. The main components used are: MLlib with
Elasticsearch has been used to implement the Na¨ıve Bayes
prediction module, Cassandra for scalable storage and high
performance data access in closed loop learning, Kafka for
real-time streaming capability, and Kibana as a visualization
component.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

V.
RESULTS
A conceptual model of a semi-automated visual campaign
design support module has been developed (based on nomo-
grams) that directly shows predicted economic gain/loss in
dependency of the selected input variables. More precisely,
the model is capable of (1.) visualizing the inﬂuence of indi-
vidual buckets and features on predicted economic gain/loss
(2.) visualizing the impact of manual bucket/feature choices
interactively, (3.) recommending optimal buckets for a given
feature set, and (4.) recommending optimal features for a
given campaign. The presumed adaptiveness provided by the
closed loop learning module could not be evaluated, since no
appropriate data has been provided.
The prediction module has been developed and evaluated
on small data using software environment and programming
language R (because of data availability). Yet, the used algo-
rithms are scalable and have been also implemented with the
equivalent Spark algorithms to provide a proof of concept (1.)
of the implemented big data stack itself (see Section IV) and
(2.) to validate the R test results for Spark.
The evaluation results of the developed approach show
that (1.) the accuracy of the developed prediction module
exceeds the accuracy of the two benchmark models used
(telecom expert decisions and classiﬁcation by a decision tree)
and (2.) intuitively and understandability of Visualization and
Decision Model are satisfactory and have been accepted by the
telecom company. Based on the NBC nomogram visualization
paradigm, a decision model and an interactive GUI prototype
has been developed that allow for semi-automated campaign
design support. While the prediction module provides rec-
ommendations for customer segmentation w.r.t. an existing
campaign, the design of a new campaign (or the optimization
of an existing one) additionally requires interpretability of
these recommendations in terms of strength of causal inﬂuence
of input variables and their multidimensional interaction. The
NBC nomogram paradigm provides this interpretability in
an intuitive way. With the GUI, the marketer is provided
with the opportunity (1.) to set manual constraints for an
automated optimizer (e.g., to comply with given management
strategies), (2.) to choose these constraints based on intuitive
multidimensional visualization of feature nomograms, and (3.)
to graphically inspect the predicted (simulated) effects of his
decisions in terms of expected revenue change.
Even though the performance of the utilized prediction
model is not astonishing, it meets the stringent requirements
speciﬁed on the designed system and still achieves satisfying
results if compared with the existing solution. We measured
the average gain per person for customers chosen by the
trained model and compare it with the existing campaign
results. The decreased performance of the prediction model
is caused by the low quality of provided data and lower
stability of service usage in prepaid segment in general as
mentioned in Section II. In Figure 3, we show veriﬁcation
results of 100 rounds performed by the trained classiﬁer. The
left three boxplots show the statistic of the data from the
chosen marketing campaign if present targeting approach is
used. The targeted users have been split into three groups:
those which accepted the marketing offer, those which did
not accept it (expire) and the control group (baseline). The
red boxplot shows average arpu per person and day if micro-
targeting with NBC model is used, the blue box on the right
summarizes the advantage of the new approach compared to
the actual targeting method.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
arpu [pPpD]
baseline
expire
accept
prediction
0
50
100
150
200
Growth [%]
Figure 3. Testing results of 100 rounds.
A relatively new insight in telecom marketing has been
gained, that the customer response rate of a digital marketing
campaign usually does not appropriately reﬂect the business
value generated by the campaign, and therefore is not an
appropriate marketing success measure. More speciﬁcally, cus-
tomer response measures the short-term campaign success, but
disregards long term effects on return on investment induced
by the campaign. Based on the data-driven marketing paradigm
of customer retention beats customer poaching, a new model
for measuring the marketing success of digital campaigns
for volatile and sparse prepaid telecom data was developed.
The metric is a function of the campaign-induced long-term
behavior change of customers in the targeted segment and
returns an assessment of the overall revenue increase or decline
n months after the offer has been accepted. It is applicable to
different intended behavior modiﬁcations, e.g., churn preven-
tion, usage increase per channel, and can handle low quality,
highly volatile and sparse input data.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
The goal of this research is twofold. To develop a method-
ology and a software prototype for semi-automated predic-
tive analytics and campaign management, and as a proof of
concept, to verify the designed system on a chosen use case
provided by a large telecom company in Switzerland.
The implemented prototype shows that machine learning
can be used to support decision makers in the telecommu-
nication business to optimize marketing campaigns through
microtargeting. Moreover, it shows that Na¨ıve Bayes is suitable
model if full control need to be granted over the decision
support system. A nomogram based decision module has been
developed that optimizes the size of micro segments w.r.t. pre-
dicted long-term revenue increase caused by stimulus-induced
behavior change. The use of long-term revenue increase as a
campaign success measure is in contrast to commonly used
customer response success measures, which do not take long
term effects into account and often disregard the intended
effect on return on investment. Besides fully automated op-
timization over all input features, the decision module also
allows the marketer to manually set constraints to the opti-
mizer, e.g., to implement higher-order management strategies
or to explore the customer structure in terms of effects on
revenue in a simulation run. In order to permit the decision
model to adapt to changing customer structures, a closed-loop
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

learning approach has been used that continuously updates
the underlying prediction model and corresponding nomogram
values. The solution has been prototypically implemented
based on an Apache big data stack and tested on two real-
world use cases with prepaid customer data sets provided by
the telecom project partner. The prediction accuracy of the
Na¨ıve Bayes approach has shown to exceed a decision trees
approach as well as the currently used benchmark with mostly
manual and experience-based campaign deﬁnition.
The detailed description of the prototype developed in
this research is omitted in order to honor the non-disclose
agreement with the involved industry partners.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research presented in this paper was funded by the
Swiss Commission for Technology and Innovation CTI under
grand number 18714.1PFES-ES.
REFERENCES
[1]
CIM,
“The
cost
of
customer
acquisition
versus
customer
re-
tention.”
2010,
URL:
http://www.camfoundation.com/PDF/Cost-of-
customer-acquisition-vs-customer-retention.pdf [retrieved: April, 2016].
[2]
K. N. Lemon, T. B. White, and R. Winer, “Dynamic customer relation-
ship management: incorporating future considerations into the service
retention decision,” Journal of Marketing, vol. 66, 2002, pp. 1–14.
[3]
J. R. Quinlan, C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning.
San Francisco,
CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1993.
[4]
M. Mehta, R. Agrawal, and J. Rissanen, “Sliq: A fast scalable classiﬁer
for data mining,” in Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Extending Database Technology: Advances in Database Technology,
ser. EDBT ’96, 1996, pp. 18–32.
[5]
J. C. Shafer, R. Agrawal, and M. Mehta, “Sprint: A scalable parallel
classiﬁer for data mining,” in Proc. 22nd Intl. Conf. on Very Large Data
Bases.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1996, pp. 544–555.
[6]
J. Gehrke, R. Ramakrishnan, and V. Ganti, “Rainforest - a framework
for fast decision tree construction of large datasets,” in Proc. 24th Intl.
Conf. on Very Large Data Bases.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.,
1998, pp. 416–427.
[7]
R. Rastogi and K. Shim, “Public: A decision tree classiﬁer that
integrates building and pruning,” in Proc. 24th Intl. Conf. on Very Large
Data Bases.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1998, pp. 404–415.
[8]
J. Gehrke, V. Ganti, R. Ramakrishnan, and W.-Y. Loh, “Boat – opti-
mistic decision tree construction,” in Proc. 1999 ACM SIGMOD Intl.
Conf. on Management of Data.
ACM, 1999, pp. 169–180.
[9]
G. Kraljevi´c and S. Gotovac, “Modeling data mining applications
for prediction of prepaid churn in telecommunication services,” Au-
tomatika, vol. 51, no. 3, 2010, pp. 275–283.
[10]
T. Simsek Gursoy, “Customer churn analysis in telecommunication
sector,” Istanbul University Journal of The School of Business Admin-
istration, vol. 39, no. 1, 2010, pp. 35–49.
[11]
C.-P. Wei and I.-T. Chiu, “Turning telecommunications call details
to churn prediction: A data mining approach,” Expert Systems with
Applications, vol. 23, no. 2, 2002, pp. 103–112.
[12]
J. Hadden, A. Tiwari, R. Roy, and D. Ruta, “Churn Prediction: Does
Technology Matter?” Int. J. Intell. Technol., vol. 1, no. 2, 2006, pp.
104–110.
[13]
E. Shaaban, Y. Helmy, A. Khedr, and M. Nasr, “A proposed churn
prediction model,” J. Eng. Res. Appl., vol. 2, no. 4, 2012, pp. 694–697.
[14]
J. Hadden, A. Tiwari, R. Roy, and D. Ruta, “Computer Assisted
Customer Churn Management: State-of-the-art and Future Trends,”
Comput. Oper. Res., vol. 34, no. 10, 2007, pp. 2902–2917.
[15]
N. Kamalraj and A. Malathi, “A survey on churn prediction techniques
in communication sector,” International Journal of Computer Applica-
tions, vol. 64, 2013, pp. 39–42.
[16]
S. J. Russell and P. Norvig, Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern Approach,
2nd ed.
Pearson Education, 2003.
[17]
S. V Nath, D. Ravi, and R. Behara, “Customer churn analysis
in the wireless industry: A data mining approach,” 2003, URL:
http://download.oracle.com/owsf 2003/40332.pdf
[retrieved:
April,
2016].
[18]
C. K. Kirui, L. Hong, W. K. Cheruiyot, and H. Kirui, “Predicting cus-
tomer churn in mobile telephony industry using probabilistic classiﬁers
in data mining,” in Int. J. Comput. Sci. Iss. (IJCSI), vol. 10, no. 2, 2013,
pp. 165–172.
[19]
A. Ultsch, “Data mining and knowledge discovery with emergent self-
organizing feature maps for multivariate time series,” in Kohonen Maps.
Elsevier, 1999, pp. 33–46.
[20]
W.-H. Au, K. C. Chan, and X. Yao, “A novel evolutionary data mining
algorithm with applications to churn prediction,” Trans. Evol. Comp,
vol. 7, no. 6, 2003, pp. 532–545.
[21]
Y. Xie and X. Li, “Churn prediction with linear discriminant boosting
algorithm,” in Proc. 7th Intl. Conf. on Machine Learning and Cyber-
netics, ICMLC, vol. 1, 2008, pp. 228–233.
[22]
H. Farquad, R. Vadlamani, and R. Bapi, “Churn Prediction using Com-
prehensible Support Vector Machine: an Analytical CRM Application,”
Applied Soft Computing, vol. 19, 2014, pp. 31–40.
[23]
A. Amin, S. Shehzad, C. Khan, I. Ali, and S. Anwar, “Churn prediction
in telecommunication industry using rough set approach,” Studies in
Computational Intelligence, vol. 572, 2015, pp. 83–95.
[24]
N. Kamalraj and A. Malathi, “A survey on churn prediction techniques
in communication sector,” in Int. J. Comput. App. (IJCA), vol. 64, no. 5,
2013, pp. 39–42.
[25]
B. Balle, B. Casas, A. Catarineu, R. Gavald`a, and D. Manzano-
Macho,
“The
architecture
of
a
churn
prediction
system
based
on
stream
mining,”
in
Frontiers
in
Artiﬁcial
Intelligence
and
Applications,
vol.
256,
2013,
pp.
157–166,
URL:
http://www.lsi.upc.edu/ gavalda/papers/ccia2013Churn.pdf [retrieved:
November, 2017].
[26]
C. M. Bishop, Ed., Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning.
Springer, 2006.
[27]
T. M. Mitchell, Machine Learning.
WCB McGraw-Hill, 1997.
[28]
M. Moˇzina, J. Demˇsar, M. Kattan, and B. Zupan, “Nomograms for
Visualization of Naive Bayesian Classiﬁer,” in Proc. PKDD 8th Eur.
Conf. Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases,
2004, pp. 337–348.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

