 
Detecting Adverse Events in an Active Theater of War Using Data Mining 
Techniques 
 
 
Jozef Zurada 
University of Louisville 
USA 
WSB Gdansk 
Poland 
jozef.zurada@louisville.edu 
 
Donghui Shi 
Anhui Jianzhu University 
China 
sdonghui@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Waldemar Karwowski 
University of Central Florida 
USA 
wkar@ucf.edu 
 
Jian Guan 
University of Louisville 
USA 
jeff.guan@louisville.edu 
 
Erman Cakit 
Aksaray University 
Turkey 
ermancakit@aksaray.edu.tr
Abstract – This study investigates the effectiveness of data 
mining techniques in detecting adverse events based on 
infrastructure development spending, the number of project 
types, and other variables in an active theater of war in 
Afghanistan using data sets provided by the Human Social 
Culture Behavior program management (2002-2010) of the 
U.S. Department of Defense. The study first applies feature 
reduction techniques to identify significant variables, then uses 
five cost-sensitive classification methods and reports the 
resulting classification accuracy rates and areas under the 
receiver operating characteristics charts for adverse events for 
each method for the entire country and its seven regions. The 
results show that when analysis is performed for the entire 
country, there is little correlation between adverse events and 
project types and the number of projects. However, the same 
type of analysis performed for each of its seven regions shows a 
connection between adverse events and the infrastructure 
budget and the number of projects allocated for the specific 
regions and time periods. Among the five classifiers, the C4.5 
decision tree and k-nearest neighbor provided the best global 
performance. 
 
Keywords: active war theater; data mining; adverse events; 
prediction; classification 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) uses the 
following definition for irregular warfare: "a violent struggle 
among state and non-state actors for legitimacy and 
influence over the relevant population(s)." Irregular warfare 
is a non-conventional warfare which includes non-
proportional force to subdue and coerce the civilian 
population in the regions in which opposite forces are not 
large and effective. The success of irregular warfare 
operations depends heavily on protecting the civilian 
population by the military as the civilian population is the 
primary target of irregular warfare [1]. Recognizing the 
challenges of the dynamic of irregular warfare among 
various actors, the U.S. military has made some changes and 
accommodations to its force structure. Also, the DoD 
initiated and developed the Human Social Culture Behavior 
(HSCB) modeling program. The main goal of the program 
was to guide and help the U.S. military in understanding 
different cultures while operating in overseas countries and 
to better organize and control the human terrain during 
irregular warfare. The military uses HSCB models to 
understand the behavior and structure of organizational units 
at the macro level (i.e., health, politics, energy, economics, 
security, water and sanitation, and social and cultural aspects) 
and at the micro level (i.e., terrorist networks, tribes, customs, 
and military units). These HSCB models are important and 
attract a great deal of attention with regard to current and 
future operational military and non-military requirements. 
These models are also very complex as they exhibit non-
linear and fuzzy behavior and are often ill-defined with 
respect to their socio-economic-cultural factors. 
 
II. 
PREVIOUS WORK 
 
Several studies have attempted to develop models of 
human behavior from patterns identified in the data in order 
to predict the effects of actions aimed at disrupting terrorist 
networks [2]. Since terrorist attacks are not random in space 
and time, it is possible to discover representative patterns and 
trends in adverse activity or behavior over time and space by 
analyzing the geospatial intelligence on reported incidents. 
The studies concluded that these patterns and trends could be 
used for prediction future attacks and that they might help 
decision-makers to allocate more resources and personnel to 
the places which are more likely to be attacked and also to 
try reduce the number of such attacks. These studies used 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
fuzzy inference systems (FIS), adaptive neuro-fuzzy 
inference system (ANFIS) and wavelet neural networks to 
analyze terrorist attacks time series.  
Other studies built models based on the input variables 
such as infrastructure development spending projects, the 
number of projects, and population density. The models 
applied multiple linear regression, data mining and soft 
computing techniques such as neural networks, ANFIS, and 
FIS as well as fuzzy C-means and subtractive clustering for 
predicting four categories of adverse events, i.e., the number 
of killed, the number of wounded, the number of hijacked, 
and the number of events at month t in an active theater of 
war in Afghanistan [3]. These four categories of events are 
collectively called "adverse events". The studies performed 
analysis for the entire country and its seven regions and used 
variable reduction techniques to eliminate redundant 
attributes as well as implemented sensitivity analysis for the 
neural network to determine the cause and effect relationship 
between the input and output variables. However, due to the 
sparse nature of the input and output data (between 87% and 
98% of values for the four adverse events are 0ʹs, with a 0 
representing lack of events), the prediction errors generated 
by the models for the four adverse events were significantly 
high. Thus due to the unbalanced nature of the data precise 
prediction of the number of four adverse events was an 
extremely challenging and difficult task. 
 
III. 
DATA SETS 
 
The data sets for the five mentioned studies and this study 
were provided by the HSCB program management of the 
U.S. DoD. The time-dependent data were collected over the 
years 2002 through 2010 and represent more than 30,000 
records and over 100 variables. Among other variables, the 
data sets included the following input variables: the budgeted 
amount [$US] for 14 categories of infrastructure investments 
in the areas such as Agriculture and Health, the number of 
14 project types at years t-2, t-1, and t, as well as the 
mentioned four categories of adverse events at month t-1, 
seven regions, and the male and female urban and rural 
population densities. The output variables included the 
mentioned four categories of adverse events at month t. 
 
IV. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE STUDY AND 
RESULTS 
  
This study investigates the effectiveness of data mining 
techniques in detecting/classifying adverse events based on 
the infrastructure development spending in 14 project 
categories, the number of project types, and other variables 
in an active theater of war in Afghanistan using the same data 
sets that were used in the five mentioned studies. First, the 
study recodes the four output variables (the number of killed, 
wounded, hijacked, and events) representing adverse events 
into the binary representation, i.e. two classes. For example, 
killed (Yes or 1) or not killed (No or 0) or an event happened 
(Yes or 1) or did not happen (No or 0). Then it applies feature 
reduction techniques to identify significant variables. Next 
to compensate for class imbalances, the study uses five cost-
sensitive classifiers such as neural networks (NN), k-nearest 
neighbors (k-NN), C4.5 decision trees (DT), support vector 
machines (SVM), and random forest (RF) to detect adverse 
events. Finally, the study reports the resulting classification 
accuracy rates and areas under the receiver operating 
characteristics (AUROC) charts for the four adverse events 
for each classifier for the entire country and its seven 
regions. The AUROC values, which testify to the global 
performance of the classifiers, are measured on the [0.5, 1] 
scale, where 0.5 and 1 indicates a bad classifier and a good 
classifier, respectively. For example, the AUROC values for 
the entire country for the four adverse events were within the 
[.688, .805] range. The results show that the AUROC values 
for events are generally higher than the AUROC values for 
dead, wounded and hijacked; and that the AUROC values for 
hijacked are generally lower than the AUROC values for 
dead, wounded and events. The hijacked category was the 
most highly underrepresented in the data sets. 
The results show that when analysis is performed for the 
entire country, there is little correlation between adverse 
events and project types and the number of projects. 
However, the same type of analysis performed for each of its 
seven regions shows a connection between adverse events 
and the infrastructure budget and the number of projects 
types allocated for the specific regions and time periods. For 
example, for region Eastern the following variables (project 
categories) 
were 
identified 
as 
significant: 
Energy, 
Governance, Emergency Assistance, and Gender, as well as 
urban male and female population densities, rural female 
population density, killed at month t-1, and number of events 
at month t-1. Among the five classifiers, the DT and k-NN 
generated the best rates in terms of global performance. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
 
The models presented in this study could support 
decision makers who analyze historical economic data on 
how regional funds allocation can best help minimize 
adverse events. Though the models used Afghanistan data, 
they may be applicable for other countries that are looking 
to build infrastructure while the threat of terrorist and 
military activities are present. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]. J. Clancy, and C. Crossett. "Measuring effectiveness in 
irregular warfare", Parameters, 37(2), 88-100, 2007. 
[2]. D. Schmorrow, and D. Nicholson. Advances in Cross-cultural 
Decision Making. Boca Raton: CRC Press, Chapter 38, 374-384, 
2011. 
[3]. E. Çakıt, and W. Karwowski. "Predicting the occurrence of 
adverse events using an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system 
(ANFIS) 
approach 
with 
the 
help 
of 
ANFIS 
input 
selection". Artificial Intelligence Review, 48(2), 139-155, 2017. 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-614-9
BUSTECH 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

