 
Cultural Intelligence Decision Support System for Business Activities 
 
Zhao Xin Wu, Roger Nkambou  
Computer Science Department, University of Quebec in 
Montreal, Case postale 8888, Succursale Centre-ville 
Montreal, QC, H3C 3P8, Canada  
wu.zhao_xin@courrier.uqam.ca 
nkambou.roger@uqam.ca 
 
Jacqueline Bourdeau  
LICEF, TÉLÉ-UNIVERSITÉ, 100 Sherbrooke, O. 
Montreal, QC, H3C 3P8, Canada 
Jacqueline.bourdeau@licef.ca 
 
 
Abstract— With the rapid growth of globalization, cross-
cultural business activities are on the rise. These activities are 
of increasing importance for individuals and organizations. As 
a result, culture has become a decisive factor in the success of 
cross-cultural business. In today’s global marketplace, 
individuals and organizations must be culturally intelligent. 
The concept of cultural intelligence has been introduced in the 
literature on global management. Researches on cultural 
intelligence have provided a new perspective, and, hence, have 
presented a new way to alleviate cross-cultural business 
challenges. However, these researches mainly rely on 
questionnaires to find solutions to the problems of cultural 
intelligence in cross-cultural business. To date, no research on 
cultural intelligence has been empirically computerized. This 
study aims first to create a new cultural intelligence 
computational model in order to process the soft data in cross-
cultural business activities. This will enable individuals and 
organizations to make better decisions in cross-cultural 
business activities. Second, this study will implement the 
model in a system called the CIDSS through the use of 
artificial intelligence techniques. The purpose of the CIDSS is 
to allow individuals and organizations to make intelligent 
decisions in culturally diverse business activities and to solve 
the intercultural adaptation problems faced in a variety of 
authentic cross-cultural situations. 
Keywords - Cross-Cultural; Cultural Intelligence; Business 
Intelligence; Decision Making; Soft-Computing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The globalization of productive forces is rapidly 
increasing. In order to face this new reality, individuals and 
organizations must form global strategic alliances to deal 
with worldwide competitors, suppliers and customers. 
When confronted with cultural diversity, some individuals 
and organizations are able to adapt successfully to the new 
cultural business environment [1], while others are not. 
What is the decisive factor for these opposing responses? 
How can good decisions be made in culturally diverse 
business environments? What skills can be improved to 
enable cultural adaptation? [2]  
In recent years, researchers have shown great interest in 
globalization and intercultural management. Cultural 
intelligence has, therefore, been presented as a new 
phenomenon as a means to answer the above questions [3]. 
Organizational 
psychology 
and 
human 
resource 
management have paid a great deal of attention to cultural 
intelligence since its introduction. These fields of study 
have yielded valuable results that apply to the real business 
world.  
However, since Earley and Ang put forward the concept 
of cultural intelligence in 2003, there has been no research 
model on cultural intelligence with business intelligence 
technology, and most current studies pertaining to cultural 
intelligence do not integrate any artificial intelligence 
computational aspect [4]. In addition, traditional business 
intelligence has encountered two challenges: the first 
involves determining the means of adapting to cultural 
diversity; the second pertains to the measures required to 
treat soft data for decision making. Our claim is that when 
cultural intelligence is applied to individuals and 
organizations in the fields of business, it should be 
computationally modeled. 
This research attempts to offer effective solutions to the 
aforementioned problems. It is the first attempt to create a 
new 
computational 
model 
of 
cultural 
intelligence 
implemented in an intelligent system called the CIDSS 
(Cultural Intelligence Decision Support System), to resolve 
cross-cultural business problems. The main reason to create 
such a system is that, in the real business world, there are 
not enough qualified cultural experts to help users make 
better business decisions, and these experts may lose some 
of their effectiveness after long consecutive hours of work. 
Moreover, the sphere of application has been confined to 
cultural experts and researchers. From a user’s point of 
view, the system appears as if an efficient team of top 
cultural experts is always working together with  him/her. 
This system has the potential to achieve better performance 
results than human experts.  
There are three goals behind such a system, when 
helping individuals and organizations to cooperate more 
effectively 
with 
people 
from 
different 
cultural 
backgrounds: 1) to assist individuals and organizations in 
their business decision-making processes involving cultural 
affairs; 2) to assist people in improving their use of a 
specific form of intelligence based on their capacity to 
understand, to reason correctly, and to adapt to culturally 
diversified situations [5]; and 3) to facilitate the work of 
researchers and to equip them with more effective tools in 
their studies on cultural intelligence.  
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
This paper consists of six sections. In Section I, we state 
the research question and research objectives. In Section II, 
we briefly discuss the concept of cultural intelligence and 
its dimensions. In Section III, we introduce the relationship 
between business and cultural intelligence. In Section IV, 
we present an overview of the system’s architecture, we 
identify the main modules in the architecture, and we 
explain how these modules work. In Section V, we discuss 
the fundamental cultural intelligence soft-computing model 
inference techniques that are applied in the architecture. 
Finally, in Section VI, we present the contributions of this 
research. 
II. 
CULTURAL INTELLIGENCE AND ITS 
DIMENSIONS 
In the research literature, researchers have different 
opinions regarding the concept of cultural intelligence. 
Earley and Ang presented cultural intelligence as a 
reflection of people’s ability to collect and process 
information, to form judgments, and to implement effective 
measures in order to adapt to a new cultural context [6]. 
They also indicate that cultural intelligence should predict 
performance and adjustment outcomes in multicultural 
situations, when an individual is faced with diversity. 
Earley and Mosakowski redefined cultural intelligence as 
the ability of managers to deal effectively with different 
cultures [7]. They suggested that cultural intelligence is a 
complementary form of intelligence, which may explain the 
capacity to adapt to cultural diversity, as well as to operate 
in a new cultural setting. Peterson interpreted cultural 
intelligence in terms of its operation [8]. He believes that 
the concept of cultural intelligence is compatible with the 
cultural values of Hofstede and their five main dimensions, 
i.e., individualism versus collectivism, masculinity versus 
femininity, power distance, uncertainty avoidance, and 
short- and long-term orientation [9]. Brisling et al. defined 
cultural intelligence as the level of success people obtain 
when adapting to another culture [10]. Thomas explained 
cultural intelligence as the ability to interact efficiently with 
people who are culturally diverse [11] [12]. Ng and Earley 
presented cultural intelligence as the ability to be effective 
in all cultures [13]. Johnson et al. defined cultural 
intelligence as the ability of an individual to integrate a set 
of knowledge, skills and personal qualities so as to work 
successfully with people from different cultures and 
countries, both at home and abroad [14]. 
Researchers in the field of culture also use different 
dimensional structures to measure cultural intelligence. 
Each of these researches is associated with conceptual 
models. These structures seek first to explain the attributes 
that enable people to develop their abilities in various 
cultural contexts, and then to determine how people can 
improve these capabilities. Earley and Ang presented the 
first structure of cultural intelligence, which integrates the 
following three dimensions: cognition, motivation and 
behaviour [5]. While Thomas agrees with Earley and Ang 
that there are three dimensions to cultural intelligence [12], 
he does not share their point of view regarding what these 
three dimensions should be. He therefore advocated another 
tridimensional structure. His belief is founded on the theory 
of Ting-Toomey, which states that the structure of cultural 
intelligence should be based on the skills required for 
intercultural communication, that is to say, knowledge, 
vigilance and behaviour [15]. Vigilance acts as a bridge 
connecting knowledge and behaviour, which is the key to 
cultural intelligence. Tan believes that cultural intelligence 
has three main components: 1) strategic thinking about 
culture; 2) dynamics and persistence; and 3) specific 
behaviours [1]. Tan stressed the importance of behavior as 
being essential to cultural intelligence. If the first two parts 
are not converted into action, cultural intelligence is 
meaningless. 
Ang and Van Dyne [5] suggested a four-dimensional 
cultural intelligence structure. This structure is based on the 
general intelligence structure of Robert and Douglas [16]. 
Ang and Van Dyne used the framework of Robert and 
Douglas, 
which 
divides 
cultural 
intelligence 
into 
metacognitive cultural intelligence, cognitive cultural 
intelligence, 
motivational 
cultural 
intelligence 
and 
behavioral cultural intelligence. This structure has been 
widely used in the following cultural researches and 
studies.  
III. 
BUSINESS AND CULTURAL INTELLIGENCE 
We believe that cultural differences have a greater 
impact on business efficiency than previously thought. 
Cultural backgrounds influence how people think, act and 
interpret information during business activities. Business is 
becoming increasingly globalized, and partnerships are a 
means to gain a competitive advantage. Thus, the potential 
for success or failure depends on the ability of 
organizations and leaders to make appropriate decisions 
within a framework of cultural diversity. Businesses and 
leaders must understand and become proficient in 
intercultural communication. In this regard, cultural 
intelligence offers strategies to improve cultural perception 
in order to understand the culturally motivated behavior of 
individuals and organizations. Many articles address the 
importance of cultural intelligence [17] [18] [19] and 
culture in the context of international business [20] [21] 
[22]. Huber indicated that the performance of an 
international business, in terms of efficiency and 
effectiveness, is determined by the quality of its 
organizational intelligence [23]. Ang and Andrew [24] 
specified that organizational intelligence is the cultural 
intelligence of businesses. Cultural intelligence in business 
is based on the research on psychology concerning the 
cultural intelligence of individuals, as well as on the views 
of 
the 
organizations. 
Cultural 
intelligence 
permits 
businesses to collect a set of resources and to develop their 
capabilities. Ang and Andrew suggest that, when 
organizations venture into foreign territories, cultural 
intelligence is a necessary predictor of organizational 
performance. The involvement in international trade offers 
significant advantages and challenges to the business 
development of a company. A business may be successful 
at home because of its cultural sensitivity. However, this 
does not guarantee that it will be able to attract 
international suppliers, partners and customers. If the 
business does not learn to adapt to cultural differences, it 
risks losing and missing business opportunities. A business 
approach that is culturally inappropriate may be detrimental 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
when doing business abroad. Knowledge and sensitivity 
toward other cultures result in increased business success. 
Consequently, cultural intelligence is of the utmost 
importance when engaging in business practices. 
IV. 
CIDSS COGNITIVE ARCHTECTURE 
Sternberg and Detterman [16] determined that general 
intelligence has four dimensions, i.e., metacognition, 
cognition, motivation and behaviour. Cultural intelligence 
should also include these four dimensions. We believe that 
the diverse structures of cultural intelligence should be 
considered collectively in order to integrate the elements 
required to respond to the cultural knowledge acquired. 
Therefore, we built the cultural intelligence architecture of 
the CIDSS based on the specific four-dimensional cultural 
intelligence structure of Ang and Van Dyne [5]. It 
represents a comprehensive overview of the multi-aspects 
of the researches on cultural intelligence. 
The architecture of the CIDSS uses both the symbolic 
and the connectionist approaches of artificial intelligence. 
The CIDSS respects the cognitive concepts of Ang and Van 
Dyne [1] regarding the theories of global cultural 
intelligence, as well as other important aspects, such as the 
Hofstede’s theory of the five dimensions of culture [9]. The 
CIDSS also relies on engineering concepts in its solutions 
when designing and implementing software. It offers 
learning mechanisms which emulate human intelligence. 
The CIDSS is a distributed and modular architecture. It 
relies on the functional “consciousness” mechanism for 
much of its operation [25]. Its modules communicate and 
offer information to each other. 
The CIDSS can be considered as a cognitive agent with 
an eleven-step cognitive process. This agent recognizes 
business-related information in natural language from its 
environment. By using its cognitive cycle, the agent 
influences its environment by offering a recommendation to 
the users. The following describes these steps, which 
correspond to the numbers inside the rectangles in Fig. 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Architecture of CIDSS 
Step 1: The business information is in natural language and 
expresses a problem, a question or a requirement of the 
user. It is input through the user interface. The information 
enters the Identify module, which identifies the information 
used to determine what the user requires. 
Step 2: The business information goes to the Filter and 
Classifier module. In this module, the information is 
classified.  Useful information is filtered from non-useful 
information. The useful information is culturally analyzed 
in the following steps.  
Step 3: To perform this classification, the module is 
associated with the Cultural Intelligence Database Center. 
This center has the necessary data required by the system, 
such as countries, religions, languages and laws.  
Step 4: The classified business cultural data are ready to be 
sent to the Temporary Memory module. This module keeps 
the data temporarily and, at the same time, interacts with 
the other modules.  
Step5: Modules 5a-Metacognitive, 5b-Congnitive 5c-
Motiviational and 5d-Behavioral collect the business 
cultural data belonging to them in the Temporary Memory.  
Step 6: Each module depends on the consultation of its 
own Permanent Memory. These permanent memory 
modules are 6a for metacognition, 6b for cognition, 6c for 
motivation and 6d for behaviour. Each permanent memory 
represents a complete and specific cultural database that is 
used by its associated module to analyze the business 
cultural information stored in the Temporary Memory.  
Step 7: 7a, 7b, 7c and 7d analyze the business cultural 
information. If data are missing, Permanent Memory 
modules go to the Cultural Intelligence Database Center to 
assist in the cultural analysis of the respective modules. 
Step 8: After the analysis has been completed in each 
module, the four modules interact with each other to adjust 
their respective cultural decisions. This interaction enables 
each module to make a complete and effective decision 
before continuing to the next step. 
Step 9: Following the interaction among the modules of the 
different dimensions of cultural intelligence, the four 
modules in steps 9a, 9b, 9c and 9d send their final cultural 
decisions to the Cultural Intelligence Result module. In this 
module, the decisions of these four modules are generalized 
and offer significant information to the user.  
Step 10: The Explanation module justifies and explains in 
detail using natural language understandable to the user 
why these decisions were presented.  
Step 11: The explanations are sent to the User Interface.  
V. 
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING THE 
CIDSS 
A. The Cultural Intelligence Model 
Business intelligence generally has two types of data:  
the first type consists of traditional crisp values, or 
numbers; the second type is uncertain, incomplete and 
imprecise. This information is presented in a manner that 
reflects human thinking and is called "soft data." When we 
introduce the cultural concept to cross-cultural business 
activities, we usually use soft information represented by 
words rather than traditional crisp numbers. The traditional 
computational technique, known as "hard" computing, is 
based on Boolean logic and cannot treat business cultural 
soft data. In order to enable computers to emulate a way of 
thinking that resembles that of humans, we used a neuro-
fuzzy technique to design the CIDSS. This soft-computing 
technique is capable of operating with uncertain, imprecise 
and incomplete information. It attempts to model a human-
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
like understanding of words in decision-making processes. 
This hybrid neuro-fuzzy technique makes use of the 
advantages and power of fuzzy logic and of the artificial 
neural network. Fuzzy logic and the artificial neural 
network are complementary paradigms. 1) The Fuzzy Logic 
technique is used for three reasons. First, the cultural 
intelligence concepts are described in natural language 
containing ambiguous and imprecise linguistic variables, 
such as "this person has low motivation" and "that project 
is highly risky because of this religion." Second, fuzzy 
logic is well-suited to modeling human decision-making 
processes when dealing with "soft criteria." These 
processes are based on common sense and may contain 
vague and ambiguous terms [26]. Third, fuzzy logic 
provides a wide range of business cultural expressions that 
can be understood by computers. 2) The Artificial Neural 
Network: Although the fuzzy logic technique has the ability 
and the means to understand natural language, it offers no 
mechanism for automatic rule acquisition and adjustment. 
The artificial neural network presents a viable solution for 
processing incomplete and imprecise business cultural 
information. The artificial neural network can manage the 
new business cultural data input and the generalization of 
acquired knowledge. The hybrid neuro-fuzzy technique 
represents the essence of our soft- computing model. 
In Fig. 2, we explain the neuro-fuzzy inference model, 
which is part of the Main Cycle in the CIDSS architecture, 
as shown in Fig. 1. Essentially, the hybrid neuro-fuzzy 
technique is a neural network with fuzzy inference model 
capabilities. The network can be trained to develop IF-
THEN business cultural fuzzy rules and determine 
membership functions for input and output variables. The 
model is represented with a neural network composed of 
five layers in the CIDSS. It has four inputs: metacognition 
(MC), cognition (C), motivation (M) and behaviour (BEH), 
and one output:  Cultural Intelligence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Soft-Computing Model of Cultural Intelligence 
 
Layer 1 - Input: No calculation is made at this layer. Each 
neuron corresponds to an input cultural variable. These 
input values are transmitted directly to the next layer.  
Layer 2 - Fuzzification: Each neuron corresponds to a 
business cultural linguistic label (e.g., high, medium and 
low) associated with one of the input cultural variables in 
Layer 1. In other words, the connection of the output, 
which represents the inclusion value, specifies the degree to 
which the four input cultural values belong to the neuron’s 
fuzzy set. The connection is computed at this layer.  
Layer 3 - Fuzzy Rule: The output of a neuron at Layer 3 is 
the cultural fuzzy rules. Each neuron corresponds to one 
cultural fuzzy rule. The cultural fuzzy rule neurons receive 
inputs from Layer 2 (fuzzification neurons), which 
represent cultural fuzzy sets. For example, neuron R1 
represents cultural Rule 1 (Rule 1: IF metacognition is high 
AND cognition is high AND motivation is high AND 
behavior is high THEN Cultural Intelligence is high). 
Neuron R1 receives input from the neurons MC1 
(Metacognition High) and C1 (Cognition High). The 
weights (WR1 to WR20) between layers 3 and 4 are the 
normalized degree of confidence of the corresponding 
cultural fuzzy rules. These weights are adjusted when the 
system is trained.  
Layer 4 - Rule Unions (or consequence): This neuron has 
two main tasks: 1) to combine the new precedent of cultural 
rules, and 2) to determine the output level (High, Medium 
and Low). The output level belongs to the cultural 
linguistic variables. For example, μR1, μR5 are the inputs 
of Cultural Intelligence High, and 
 is the output of the 
neuron Cultural Intelligence High.  
Layer 5 - Combination and Defuzzification: This neuron 
combines all the consequential rules and computes the crisp 
output after defuzzification. The composition method 
"sum-product" [27] is used. It computes the outputs of the 
membership functions defined by the weighted average of 
their centroids. We apply, in this case, the triangle 
calculation in our neuro-fuzzy system, which is the simplest 
calculation of the fuzzy set as shown in Fig. 3. The 
calculation formula (see (1)) of the weighted average of the 
centroids of the clipped fuzzy sets Cultural Intelligence 
3(Low), 2(Medium) and 1(High) are calculated. 
 
Figure 3.  General Cultural Intelligence Fuzzy Sets 

where a2 is the center and a3 is the end of the triangle. b1, b2 
and b3 are the widths of fuzzy sets which correspond to 
Cultural Intelligence 3, 2 and 1. 
B. Implementing CIDSS as an Expert System for Cultural 
Recommendations   
We would like the CIDSS to be capable of acquiring, 
extracting and analyzing the new knowledge of the cultural 
(1) 
 
µCQ1 
 
yM
C 
yM
yM
C 
µCQ-BEH1 
 
MC1(High) 
MC2(Medium) 
CQ-MC3 (Low) 
Layer1 
   Inputs 
Layer2 
Fuzzification 
 
  Layer3 
Fuzzy rules 
 
Layer 4 
Rules union 
 
MC 
CQ-C3 (Low) 
 
CQ-M1(High) 
C-M2(Middle) 
IC-M3(Low) 
yM 
yM 
yM 
R5 
R6 
R20 
M 
 
CQ-C1(High) 
yC 
yC 
R1 
R2 
C 
R4 
R3 
CQ-C2(Middle) 
yC 
CQ-BEH1(High) 
IC-COMP2(Middle) 
IC-COMP3 (Low) 
yBEH 
BEH 
: 
: 
Layer 5 
Combination 
and 
Defuzzificati
on 
∑ 
yBEH 
yBEH 
µCQ-M1 
µR1 
µR3 
µCQ-MC1 
µCQ-C1 
CQ1(High) 
CQ2(Middle) 
CQ3 (Low) 
CQ 
µR6
µR5 
µR4 
µR2 
µR20 
µCQ-MC2 
µCQ-MC3 
µCQ-C2 
µCQ-C3 
µCQ-M2 
µIC-M3 
µCQ-BEH2 
µCQ-BEH3 
µCQ2
µCQ3 
WR1 
WR2 
WR3 
WR5 
WR6 
WR4 
WR2
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
experts. First, it should be able to: 1) express knowledge in 
a form that is easily understood by users, and 2) deal with 
simple requests in natural language rather than a 
programming language. Second, the CIDSS should act as 
would an efficient team of cultural experts who are able to 
make decisions and provide explanations in the decision-
making process in culturally diverse settings. Hence, we 
integrated the model into an expert system. Fig. 4 illustrates 
the architecture of the CIDSS. 
 
 
Training 
Data 
New Data 
Cultural Intelligence  Model: 

Metacognition 

Cognition 

Motivation 

Behavior 
 
Cultural 
Intelligence 
data base 
center 
Inference Engine 
Explanation 
User Interface: 

Business Activities 

Expatriates 

Business Projects Evaluation 
User 
 
 
Cultural Intelligence rules 
 
Figure  4.  Deployment Structure of CIDSS 
The CIDSS has three application domains (Business 
Activities, Expatriates Assignment and Business Projects 
Evaluation). The Cultural Intelligence Model in this 
structure is represented by a trained neural network. This 
structure includes four main modules:  
1) 
The Cultural Intelligence Model contains cultural 
intelligence knowledge that is useful for solving business 
cultural problems. The soft-computing technique used in 
this model enables the system to reason and learn in an 
uncertain, incomplete and imprecise business cultural 
setting. It supports all the cultural decision-making steps in 
the system. This module connects with three different units: 
New Data, Training Data and the Cultural Intelligence 
Database Center. New data include users’ requests for 
solving a given problem that involves cultural business 
affairs. Training Data are a set of training examples. They 
are used for training the neuro-fuzzy network during the 
learning phase. The Cultural Intelligence Database Center 
predominantly contributes to the knowledge gathered from 
the data about different cultural aspects which have been 
collected from different countries. 
2) 
The Cultural Intelligence Rules examines the 
cultural intelligence neural knowledge base and produces 
neuronal rules which are implicitly “buried” in the CIDSS 
network.  
3) 
The Inference Engine is the core of the CIDSS. It 
controls the flow of business cultural information in the 
system and initiates inference reasoning from the 
knowledge base in the Cultural Intelligence model. It also 
concludes when the system has reached a decision.  
4) 
The Explanation clarifies to the user why and how 
the CIDSS has achieved the specific business cultural 
results. These explanations include analyses, advice, 
conclusions and other facts required for deep reasoning.  
The CIDSS possesses generic cultural intelligence and 
is not specific to a particular culture (such as the United 
States or China). The system shows great capabilities of 
cultural adaptation by modeling the human decision-
making process in situations characterized by cultural 
diversity. Furthermore, due to its elaborate cultural schemas 
and analytical abilities, the system can help users identify 
and understand key issues in cultural judgment and 
decision making. It also gives them the corresponding 
explanations.  
Fig. 5, Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 present an example of three 
outputs of the Expatriate Assignment application domain of 
how the CIDSS can help a user make decisions by taking 
into consideration his/her inputted request. The CIDSS 
prototype system follows the decision-making cycle 
process shown in Fig. 1. The input data are specific 
business questions in natural language from the users. The 
system provides two outputs as answers to the question. 
Output 1 (Fig. 5) gives a general decision to answer the 
question put by the user.  
 
 
 





 
Figure  5.  Example of CIDSS Prototype System (Output 1) 
Output 2 (Fig. 6) gives more detail explanations which 
clarify to the user why the system reached this decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  6.  Example of CIDSS (Output 2) 
 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
Output 3 (Fig. 7) gives useful suggestions for self-
improvement to the user whenever cultural intelligence is 
required. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Example of CIDSS (Output 3) 
Three cultural experts have validated our computational 
cultural intelligence model, as well as the CIDSS prototype 
system. This validation ultimately reflects the consistency 
between the real world and the artificial CIDSS system. 
The CIDSS prototype system was also tested with two 
hundred people. Based on the results of the validation, the 
cultural experts compared the CIDSS results with their 
own. These experts concluded that the cross-cultural 
business decisions recommended by CIDSS are similar to 
the ones suggested by a human expert.  
VI. CONCLUSION 
Cultural intelligence is the human ability to capture and 
reason properly in culturally diverse settings. Cultural 
intelligence can be measured with four dimensions. Thus, 
we build a cultural intelligence model based on a soft- 
computing technique so as to integrate these dimensions 
and to embody an expert system called the CIDSS. The 
CIDSS acts as an intelligent expert assistant which helps 
users  make better decisions in cross-culture business 
activities; it also enables users to solve cultural problems 
that would otherwise have to be solved by cultural experts. 
This paper shows how the CIDSS can be used as a 
"culturally aware" system which assists both individuals 
and organizations in the decision-making process. It 
enables users to be more efficient and "intelligent" as they 
develop their cultural skills. The contribution of our 
research is, first, to fill that gap between cultural 
intelligence and artificial intelligence. Second, it improves 
the application of cultural intelligence theories in the field 
of cognition. The research focuses on modeling four 
cultural intelligence dimensions that are an interdependent 
and integrated body. As a result, the theories are more 
complete, more efficient, and more precise in their 
applications. Third, we added to the field of artificial 
intelligence by computerizing cultural intelligence. As a 
result, new research topics and directions relevant to this 
research have arisen, and the range of computational 
intelligence possibilities, such as soft-computing in 
business decisions, training and expatriates assignments, 
has been expanded. Fourth, our research is groundbreaking 
as it simplifies the work of the researchers by freeing them 
from heavy, complex, repetitive tasks, which were 
normally carried out manually in cultural intelligence 
studies. The algorithms and techniques used in this research 
may offer some enlightenment as to how they can be 
applied to other branches of business intelligence in order 
to improve model design and system performance.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J.S. Tan, “Cultural intelligence and the global economy,” 
Leadership in Action, 24,  pp.19–21, 2004 
[2] G. Zhong Hua and L. Chao Ping, “Research on Cultural 
Intelligence: 
Review 
and 
Prospect,” 
Advances 
in 
Psychological Science, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp.180–188, 2009 
[3] M. Janssens and J. M. Brett, “Cultural intelligence in global 
teams: A fusion model of collaboration,” Group and 
Organization  Management, 31, pp.124–153, 2006 
[4] W. Zhao Xin, N. Roger, and B. Jacqueline, “The Application 
of AI to Cultural Intelligence, ” The 2012 World Congress in 
Computer Science Computer Engineering and Applied 
Computing-ICAI 2012, The International Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, Las Vegas, U.S.A. 2012 
[5] S. Ang and L. Van Dyne, “Handbook of Cultural 
Intelligence,” 1st ed. M.E. Sharpe. Armonk . 2008, 2010 
[6] P.C. Earler and S. Ang, “Cultural intelligence: Individual 
interactions across cultures,” Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press, 2003 
[7] P.C. Earley and E. Mosakowski, “Cultural intelligence”. 
Harvard Business Review, 82, pp.139–146,  2004 
[8] B. Peterson, “Cultural intelligence: A guide to working with 
people from other cultures,” Yarmouth. ME: Intercultural 
Press, 2004 
[9] G. Hofstede, “ Cultures and Organizations: Software of the 
Mind,”  McGraw-Hill, New York, 1991 
[10] R. Brisling, R. Worthley, and B. MacNab, “Cultural 
intelligence: understanding behaviors that serve people’s 
goals,” Group and Organization Management, 2006 
[11] D. C. Thomas and K. Inkson, “Cultural Intelligence People 
Skills for a Global Workforce,” Consulting to Management, 
16 (1). pp. 5-9, March, 2005 
[12] D. C. Thomas, “Domain and development of cultural 
intelligence: The importance of mindfulness,” Group and 
Organization Management, 31, pp.78–99,  2006 
[13] K.Y. Ng and P. C. Earley, “Culture + intelligence: Old 
constructs, 
new 
frontiers,” 
Group 
and 
Organization 
Management, 31, pp. 4–19, 2006 
[14] J. P. Johnson, T. Lenartowicz, and S. Apud, “Cross-cultural 
competence in international business: Toward a definition 
and a model,” Journal of International Business Studies, 37, 
pp. 525–543, 2006 
[15] S.Ting-Toomey, 
“Communicating 
across 
cultures,” 
NewYork. Guilford, 1999 
[16] J.S. Robert and K.D. Douglas, “What is Intelligence?,” 
Contemporary Viewpoints on Its nature and definition, Ablex 
publishing corporation, 355 Chestnut Street, Norwood, 
NewJersey 07648, 1986 
[17] S. Ang, L. Van Dyne, C.K.S. Koh, K. Y. Ng, K. J. Templer, 
C. Tay, and N. A. Chandrasekar, “Cultural Intelligence: Its 
Measurement and Effects on Cultural Judgment and Decision 
Making, Cultural Adaptation, and Task Performance,” 
Management and Organization Review 3 335–371, 2007 
[18] L. Ottavi, “Cultural Intelligence in the Globalized Work 
Environment, ” December 1, 2009 
[19] G. Hofstede, “The cultural relativity of organizational 
practices and theories,” Journal of International Business 
Studies, 1983 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
[20] F. Trompenaars and C. Hampden-Turner,  “Riding the waves 
of culture: Understanding cultural diversity in business,” 
London: Nicholas Brealey Publishing, 1997 
[21] T. Kern and L.P. Willcocks, “Exploring information 
technology outsourcing relationships: Theory and practice,” 
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 2000 
[22] S. Ang, L. Van Dyne, C. Koh, and K.Y. Ng, “The 
Measurement of Cultural Intelligence,” Paper presented at 
the 2004 Academy of Management Meetings Symposium on 
Cultural Intelligence in the 21st Century, New Orleans, L.A. 
2004 
[23] G. Huber, “A theory of the effects of advanced information 
technologies on organizational design, intelligence, and 
decision-making, ” Academy of Management Review, 1990 
[24] S. Ang and C. I. Andrew, “Cultural Intelligence and Offshore 
Outsourcing 
Success: 
A 
Framework 
of 
Firm-Level 
Intercultural Capability,” Journal compilation, Decision 
Sciences Institute, Decision Sciences Volume 39, Number 3, 
2008 
[25] D. Dubois,  “Réalisation d’un agent doté d’une conscience 
artificielle: application à un système tutoriel intellgent,” 
Montreal, University of Quebec in Montreal, 2007 
[26] M. Negnevitsky, “Artificial Intelligence: A Guide to 
Intelligent Systems,” ISBN 0-321-20466-2, British Library 
Cataloguing-in-Publication Data, 2nd Edition, 2005 
[27] J.S.R. Jang, C.T. Sun, E. Mizutani, “Neuro-Fuzzy and Soft 
Computing: A Computational Approach to Learning and 
Machine Intelligence,” Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ 
1997  
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

