Twitter Search Methods using Retweet Information 
 
Jaeyoung Chang 
Department of Computer Engineering 
Hansung University 
Seoul, Korea 
jychang@hansung.ac.kr 
Han-joon Kim 
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of Seoul 
Seoul, Korea 
khj@uos.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract— Recently, as social network services such as Twitter 
and FaceBook are becoming more popular, a large number of 
researches have been carried out with various approaches. 
However, since social network services have been launched 
recently, its related search methods are still at an early stage of 
practical service. Thus, most of current web search sites 
provide a simple search service for social network service 
posting articles in the order of their upload time. In this paper, 
we present a novel way of searching informative posting data 
in Twitter. The proposed method uses both the frequency of 
retweets and the number of users’ followers as major factors of 
ranking function in order to evaluate the quality of postings. 
Keywords-Twitter; social network service; ranking; search 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, Web 2.0 provides a variety of advanced 
services such as information sharing, information generation 
and user-friendly service. One of the popular Web 2.0 
services is the social network service such as Twitter and 
FaceBook. Especially, the Twitter service begun in 2006, and 
the number of its members increases exponentially and is 
now over 200 millions. 
The posting articles of Twitter are different from the 
general Web contents in two aspects. First, the posting 
articles (shortly, tweet) are limited to be 140 bytes in length; 
thus, the Twitter users should compose their thoughts and 
information concisely and clearly. Secondly, the tweets can 
be disseminated extremely fast due to the retweet and 
mention; the mention allows Twitter users to deliver their 
opinions for each tweet in a question/answer form. The 
retweet is to automatically transmit the tweets to users’ 
followers, and thus it allows users to share significant tweets 
with the followers. As a result, twitter users can read their 
followers’ tweets in nearly real time. 
However, in order to obtain new and valuable 
information in Twitter, users have only to depend upon their 
followers, even though more than 200 million tweets in 
every single day are spread out in Twitter social network [1]. 
Thus, twitter users come to expect some effective search 
methods in tweets as in Web document search. Of course, 
many of Twitter web pages provide a sort of search service, 
but they show only the tweets containing given search 
keywords in the order of posting time. By contrast, the 
current Web search engines can find out Web documents 
relevant to given keywords by using geometric (or semantic) 
similarity functions and analyzing hyperlink structures, and 
they show the search results in the order of similarity values.  
The approach to searching tweets is very different from 
the one to searching Web documents. Since tweets are very 
short, it is not easy to evaluate the relevance of the articles 
only with search keywords. In addition, many of tweets 
contain users’ sentiments or opinions, and so such subjective 
articles (or sentences) should be excluded for search service. 
With considering these characteristics, one better solution to 
searching tweets is to use their meta-information rather than 
their contents; the meta-information includes the number of a 
user’s followers, the frequency of retweets, the frequency of 
mentions, link information, and so on. 
This paper proposes a novel way of searching tweets 
utilizing the retweet meta-information. Recent research work 
in [2-4] tackled the search problem for tweets, and however 
it is still at an early stage of practical service. Particular 
tweets to be retweeted are informative ones that users have 
judged to be worthy of dissemination. Thus the retweet 
frequency is very useful for evaluating the importance of 
initial tweets. The proposed method considers not only the 
number of followers but also the retweet frequency. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, we review several related research work on analyzing 
social network data. In Section III, we describe interesting 
and useful patterns for the number of followers and retweet 
frequency. In Section IV, we present three search ranking 
functions based on the observed patterns. In the last section, 
we summarize our work and introduce future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The conventional TF-IDF (Term Frequency–Inverse 
Document Frequency) based search methods are not suitable 
for search methods of tweets [5-6]. It is because the TF-IDF 
weighing scheme is effective for the case that the term 
frequency is a good indicator for the importance of 
documents. Since a tweet normally does not have more than 
two significant words, it is very hard for TF and IDF to be  
metrics suitable for tweets. 
Until now, several Twitter search methods have been 
proposed, which are usually based on the meta-information. 
A. Sarma, At. Sarma, S. Gollapudi, and R. Panigrahy [3] 
proposed a ranking method that exploits users’ feedback 
information, and its ranking function was implemented by 
analyzing the users’ feedback score data. However, this 
method is dependent all upon users’ feedback, and thus it is  
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
(a) Posting articles about ‘the death of Jungil Kim’ 
 
 
(b) Posting articles about ‘the service shut down of a Korean broadcaster’ 
 
Figure 1 The frequency of retweet operations 
 
impractical to search tweets. H. W. Lauw, A. Ntoulas, and K. 
Kenthapadi [4] proposed another search method that actively 
uses meta-information such as the retweet frequency, the 
number of followers, and the posting time interval. This 
method is more or less similar to our proposed method. 
However because it estimates the retweet frequency only 
with the number of followers, the estimated retweet 
frequency can be incorrect in many cases. Our proposed 
method tries to use the precise retweet frequency. Also, R. 
Nagmoti and M. D. Cock [2] proposed a ranking method that 
uses the number of tweets, the number of followers, and the 
length of tweets.  
Actually, most of studies on Twitter have focused upon 
searching influencing users instead of searching interested 
tweets [7-11]; for example, in [10], the Google’s PageRank 
method was applied to the Twitter service in order to 
evaluate users’ effect for each other. However, we believe 
that future systems will require their sophisticated search 
methods for social network data. 
As mentioned before, some previous studies consider the 
retweet frequency and the number of followers to evaluate 
the quality of tweets [2][4], which are also used as major 
factors in our work. We show that the factors are highly 
important in evaluating the quality of tweets in this paper. 
Moreover, we consider the retweet step for original tweets, 
which is useful for ranking the tweets to be retrieved. 
 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF RETWEET SERVICE 
In our work, we have conducted an interesting 
experiment to analyze the characteristics of retweet service.  
 
(a) The average number of users’ followers 
 
 
(b) The average number of posting articles 
 
Figure 2 The average number of users’ followers and posting articles 
 
For the experiment, we have collected a large number of 
articles related to the current two hot issues:  one is relevant 
to the death of Jungil Kim (who was a previous director of 
North Korea) with being collected for 36 hours from 2 PM, 
17 Dec. 2011, and the other is relevant to an event of service 
shut down of a Korean major broadcaster with being 
collected for 36 hours from 9 AM, 17 Jan. 2012. People were 
much more interested in the former articles. 
Figure 1 shows the frequency of retweet operations for 
tweets of the two hot issues. In this figure, level-0 means the 
initial posting articles, and level-i means the i-th retweeted 
posting articles; that is, level-i means the frequency of 
retweet operations from level-(i-1). As seen in the figure, the 
articles about ‘the death of Jungil Kim’ were retweeted at six 
steps, and the ones about ‘the service shut down of a Korean 
broadcaster’ at three steps. This implies that the articles 
related to hotter issues have more retweet operations.  
Figure 2 shows the average number of a user’s followers 
to perform retweet operations, and the average number of 
tweets posted by retweet users nearly at the retweet time. 
Figure 2(a) shows that both of the tweet sets are not 
obviously different in terms of the number of followers and 
the number of retweet steps. However, Figure 2(b) shows 
that the average number of tweets posted by users who have 
retweeted the articles related to “the service shut down of a  
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
(a) The ratio of tweets to be retweeted 
 
 
 
(b) The average number of users’ followers for retweeted posting articles 
 
Figure 3 The ratio of tweets and the average number of followers for 
retweeted posting articles  
 
Korean broadcaster” is larger than the ones posted by users 
who have retweeted the articles related to “the death of 
Jungil Kim”. This implies that the power users of Twitter are 
interested in various issues. 
Figure 3(a) shows the ratio of the articles to be retweeted 
more than once to the articles not to be retweeted, in which 
RT and notRT mean the articles to be retweeted and not to 
be retweeted, respectively. In this figure, we have found that 
the 10~20% tweets among all the tweet articles are to be 
retweeted; of course, the ratio can change according to the 
degree of importance of articles. Figure 3(b) shows the 
average number of followers only for retweeted articles. As 
expected, we find that the average number of the followers 
of the user who has posted retweeted articles is larger than 
that of the user who has posted the articles not to be 
retweeted. 
 
IV. 
THE SEARCH METHOD USING RETWEET INFORMATION 
With considering the experimental patterns of Twitter 
data mentioned in Section III, we suggest the following 
assumptions, which are applied to our search function. 
 
 The retweet operation is a way of dissemination for 
informative tweets worthy of sharing. 
 As the number of a tweet user’s followers increases, 
his/her articles are more likely to be retweeted. 
Consequently, the tweet user who has a lot of 
followers plays a great role in disseminating some 
valuable information. 
 The tweets that have drawn great attention are more 
likely to be retweeted. 
 
With the above assumptions, we propose a way of search 
method over tweets. Basically, searching tweets is to find out 
those having given query words. As in the Web search 
engines, it is necessary for Twitter search to rank the related 
articles in the order of some appropriate criteria such as their 
information values. As mentioned before, some tweet articles 
have very informative whereas others have very subjective 
or non-informative. Thus it is necessary to isolate highly 
informative articles by evaluating the frequency of retweets. 
Let 
q
D be the set of articles that include the search 
keyword q. 
q
D  includes not only the initial articles but also 
their retweeted articles; that is, let 
0
q
D and 
i
q
D be the initial 
articles and the i-th retweeted articles, respectively, then 
i
q
i
q
D
D
∞
=
=
U 0
. 
Under this assumption, a feasible way of evaluating the 
value of tweet articles is to the retweet frequency irrespective 
of the steps of retweets.  
As a result, among the articles collected for t time, a set 
of the initial articles 
0
q
d  including the search keyword q can 
be given the following impact value. 
 
∑
=
=
)
(
1
0 )
,
(
t
%
i
i
q
q
d
t
impact d
                         (1) 
 
where 
i
q
d  denotes a set of articles retweeted at the i-th step 
from 
0
q
d  , %(t) the number of retweet for t time and 
i
q
d  the 
number of articles in 
i
q
d . This idea has been applied to 
several search systems over Twitter data. For example, 
Korean twitter service such as Joinmsn help users to show 
the interested articles that has been retweeted the most 
frequently for some time [12-13]. 
The alternative way is to integrate the factor of retweet 
steps into Equation 1. Successive re-sending (i.e., retweet-
ing) retweeted articles means that such articles are valuable 
so as to share with each other. This idea can be realized as 
the following equation by giving weight values at each 
retweet step.  
 
∑
=
=
)
(
1
0
, )
(
t
%
i
i
q
i
q
d
t
impact d
α
      (2) 
 
where 
i
α is the weight value at i-th retweet step. Therefore, 
this equation means that as 
i
α is given a larger value, the 
articles that have been successively retweeted can be 
assigned greater priorities for searching. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Furthermore, we cannot help considering the number of 
followers in evaluating the tweets. In general, some people 
who have a strong influence on others (i.e., have a large 
number of their followers) tend to be circumspect in retweet-
ing tweet articles. Each of them is a sort of information hub 
in disseminating posting articles. Considering such an issue, 
we devise the following final equation for searching. 
 
∑ ∑ ∑
=
∈
∈
×
=
)
(
1
( )
10
0
( ) |)
log (|
, )
(
t
%
i
d d
u pu d
i
q
i
q
followers u
t
impact d
α
(3) 
where pu(d) denotes the user who has posted the tweet d, and 
followers(u) denotes the set of followers of the user u. In 
comparison with Equation 2, Equation 3 is considering the 
influencing power of a user who performs the retweet 
operation. Normally, there are wide variations in the number 
of followers. Thus, we use logarithm in Equation 3 to avoid 
undesirable fluctuation by too big (or small) values in 
computing the value of Equation 3 
 
V. 
EMPRICAL RESULTS 
We have performed a number of experiments in order to 
evaluate the proposed tweet search method. As for test data, 
we have prepared two kinds of tweets collections: one is a 
collection of more than 100,000 tweets about ‘the death of 
Jungil Kim’ and the other is a collection of more than 3,500 
tweets about ‘the service shut down of a Korean broadcaster’. 
With the test data, we have estimated the accuracy of ranking 
results by using Equations 1, 2, and 3. To evaluate the 
accuracy of ranking results, it is necessary to have correctly 
ranked lists for tweets. For this, we have made about 30 
humans evaluate the quality of top 100 articles to be the most 
frequently retweeted.  
As a measure of accuracy, we have used nDCG 
(Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain) [14], which is 
commonly used to evaluate the effectiveness of Web search 
algorithms. Basically, this measure is to compare the current 
query results with perfect ranking results for different types 
of queries, which is defined for the query q as follows. 
 
( )
1
(2
1) log(1
)
K
rel i
q
q
i
nDCG
M
i
=
=
−
+
∑
       (4) 
 
where rel(i) is the graded relevance of the query result at the 
position i, and it is evaluated with four discrete values, i.e., 0, 
1, 2, 3. As the relatively upper part of query results are 
evaluated as higher values for rel(i), the nDCG values come 
to be higher. And, Mq is a normalized constant. Consequently, 
the nDCG value ranges from 0 and 1, and it has the value 1 
when we obtain the best result. 
Figure 4 shows the effect of the proposed methods in 
terms of nDCG measure, where impact1, impact2, and 
impact3 denote the ranking methods by Equations 1, 2, and 3, 
respectively. In Equations 2 and 3, 
i
α  which is the weight 
value at i-th retweet is set to 
i2 as retweet step increases. As  
 
 
Figure 4 Accuracy of the ranking results in terms of nDCG 
 
 
 
Figure 5 The changes of ranking accuracy from varying 
i
α  
 
shown in the figure, the ranking method based on Equation 3 
give the best results for both of the test collections. This 
means that the retweet frequency and the number of 
followers play an important role in evaluating tweets. 
Specifically, the impact3 method outperforms the impact1 
method by 1.7% and 2.2% for the test collections about ‘the 
death of Jungil Kim’, and ‘the service shut down of a Korean 
broadcaster’, respectively. This is because the tweets related 
to the issue about ‘the death of Jungil Kim’ are mostly users’ 
opinions rather than facts, and moreover some of them are 
the articles retweeted by followers. 
Figure 5 shows the changes of ranking accuracy from 
varying 
i
α when using Equation 3. The value of 
i
α  is 
allowed to increase by 1, 2i, 
i2 , 
i4 according to the retweet 
step. As shown in this figure, the proposed method based on 
Equation 3 gives higher accuracy at the positions 2i, and 
i2  
over the test collection about ‘the service shut down of a 
Korean broadcaster’. However, the method does not give any 
significant change from varying 
i
α over the test collection 
about ‘the death of Jungil Kim’. This is also because most of 
the tweets related to the issue about ‘the death of Jungil Kim’ 
are users’ opinions or retweeted articles. From the empirical 
results, we have found that retweet steps could not play a 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

great role in evaluating the quality of tweets. We can expect 
that the proposed methods show relatively higher accuracy if 
the test collections contains more larger amount of 
informative news based on new ‘facts’. 
 
VI. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
Recently, several studies on searching the Twitter data 
has been carried out as the social network services become 
very popular and influential. However, a lot of research 
issues need to be tackled since the Twitter data is extremely 
different from general Web documents.  
In this paper, we proposed a novel method of searching 
Twitter data. The method considers two main factors: 
retweet and the number of users’ followers. Now, we plan to 
apply machine learning algorithms to the currently proposed 
method; this is because for more accurate search, it is 
necessary to automatically adjust the weight value 
i
α  . 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by Basic Science Research 
Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea 
(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and 
Technology (grant number: NRF-2011-0022445) and was 
also supported by Basic Science Research Program through 
the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by 
the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (grant 
number: NRF-2011-0025212) . 
REFERENCES 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] TwitterEngineering, 
“200 
million 
tweet 
per 
day”, 
http://blog.twitter.com/2011/06/200-million-tweets-per-
day.html, [retrieved: Jan., 2012].  
[2] R. Nagmoti and M. D. Cock, “Ranking Approach for 
Microblog Search”, Proc. of WI-IAT conference, pp. 153-157, 
2010. 
[3] A. Sarma, At. Sarma, S. Gollapudi, and R. Panigrahy, 
“Ranking Mechanisms in Twitter-like Forums”, Proc. of 
WSDM conference, pp. 21-30,  Feb. 2010. 
[4] H. W. Lauw, A. Ntoulas, and K. Kenthapadi, “Estimating the 
Quality of Postings in the Real-time Web”, Proc. of SSM 
conference, pp. 102-115, 2010. 
[5] R. Baeza-Yates and B. Ribeiro-Neto, Modern Information 
Retrieval: The Concepts and Technology behind Search (2nd 
Edition), ACM, 2011. 
[6] http://lucene.apache.org/nutch/,  [retrieved: Dec., 2011]. 
[7] J. Teevan, D. Ramage, and M. R. Morris, “#TwitterSearch: A 
Comparison of Microblog Search and Web Search”, Proc. of 
WSDM conference. pp. 35-44, 2011. 
[8] M. Char, H. Haddadi, F. Benevenuto, and K. Gummadi, 
“Measuring User Influence in Twitter: The Million Follower 
Fallacy”, Proc. of International AAAI conference on Weblogs 
and Social Media, pp. 17-18, 2010. 
[9] H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon, “Finding Influentials 
Based on Temporal Order of Information adoption in Twitter”, 
Proc. of WWW conference, pp. 1137-1138.  2010. 
[10] TunkRank, http://tunkrank.com, [ retrieved: May, 2011]. 
[11] J. Weng and Q. He, “TwitterRank: Finding Topic-sensitive 
Influential Twitterers”, Proc. of WSDM conference, pp. 261-
270, 2010. 
[12] http://www.joinsmsn.com/, [retrieved: Jan., 2012]. 
[13] http://koreantweeters.com/, [ retrieved: Jan., 2012]. 
[14] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discounted_cumulative_gain/, 
[retrieved: Mar., 2012]. 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

