Non-formal Education Architecture Modeling  
Malgorzata Pankowska 
Department of Informatics 
University of Economics in Katowice 
Katowice, Poland 
email: pank@ue.katowice.pl 
 
 
Abstract—Nowadays, professional life, education and leisure 
time are characterized by increasing change and diversity. 
People with different skills, knowledge, cultural background, 
cognitive and psychological abilities prefer learning in an 
unique 
way, 
because 
Information 
Communication 
Technology (ICT) environment provides new opportunities 
for them. The paper covers discussion on formal, informal 
and non-formal education forms, which are the lifelong 
learning notions as well as ideas of the learning society. The 
main goal of the paper is to explain the non-formal learning 
concept and its system architecture model as an additional 
educational option at university level.   
Keywords-enterprise architecture; non-formal education; 
ArchiMate; university learning; system modeling. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION   
The lifelong learning approach focuses on fostering 
interchange of knowledge among educational institutions 
and on constant modernization of institutional solutions in 
the areas of management and financing higher education. 
The approach supports innovativeness of education and 
reinforces 
social 
cohesion 
of 
different 
university 
governance systems in different countries. It is oriented 
towards openness, peering, sharing and acting globally. 
Openness of education is associated with transparency, 
flexibility, 
expensiveness, 
engagement 
and 
free 
accessibility. Peering means that people are involved in the 
process of self-development. They are self-organizing to 
learn, design goods and services, create knowledge and 
produce shared experiences [18]. The peer activities rely 
entirely on self-support, egalitarian communities of 
individuals, who come together voluntarily to produce a 
shared outcome. Traditionally, people argue that when 
they are acting globally, they should control and protect 
proprietary resources and innovations through patents, 
copyright and trade marks [8]. However, digital products 
are easy to share, mix and replicate, therefore, new models 
of intellectual property governance are needed [6]. Internet 
permits acting globally to monitor e-learning opportunities 
offered by different institutions and it enables tapping into 
global knowledge resources [15]. The paper covers 
analysis of non-formal education. Although the most 
common way is formal education supported by Web 2.0 
education, in this paper formal, non-formal and informal 
education forms are considered as complementary one to 
another [19]. The paper is not oriented towards 
comparison of these forms, although they all are provided 
and managed by university staff. The next part of the paper 
covers discussion on andragogy, heutagogy, formal, 
informal and non-formal education. To present the non-
formal education system architecture model, the third part 
includes a short presentation of the enterprise architecture 
definition and standard. The last part of the paper contains 
an architectural model of non-formal education. The 
model is visualized in ArchiMate 4.0 beta version  
language.  
II. 
FORMAL, INFORMAL AND NON-FORMAL 
EDUCATION 
In 
the 
learning 
process, 
participants 
obtain 
recommendations for learning goals from the system in 
three ways:  
 formal learning, where learning goals are generated 
from the domain knowledge,  
 informal learning, where the recommendations are 
provided by the Web 2.0 community of learners,   
 non-formal education including random suggestions on 
learning goals, loosely related to formal education 
goals, but enabling the knowledge development. 
 
The distinction among that three forms is not only an 
administrative point of view. Formal education is linked 
with schools and training institutions, non-formal with 
community groups and other organizations, and informal 
covers interaction with friends and work colleagues. All 
these forms accompany human beings from birth to death; 
however, the perception of their value is changing. 
Particularly important in this paper, adult learners are 
coming in the educational process with concrete and 
immediate goals, e.g., professional, social and  personal 
development. Learners have specific expectations from the 
learning process and when this process meets their 
expectations, then their motivation for learning increases. 
They have a wide spectrum of prior knowledge and 
specific life experiences, so they prefer the educational 
institutions to be related to these experiences.  In the 
context of informal and non-formal education for adults, 
the heutagogy development seems to be useful. According 
to Blaschke [2], heutagogy is defined as self-determined 
learning rooted in andragogy. In that approach, learners 
are highly autonomous and self-organized. There is a focus 
on development of student capacity and capability with the 
goal of teaching students who are well-prepared to work in 
a complex knowledge environment. The heutagogical 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

approach is considered as a theoretical background to be 
applied to emergent technologies in distance education and 
for steering distance education practice. Heutagogy is 
characterized by learner control and self-responsibility in 
learning, so students are defining their objectives of 
learning, they have intrinsic motivation, and they are able 
to incorporate their experiences.  
In formal learning processes, in European Union (EU) 
countries, schools and universities are required to respect 
the Bologna Process requirements concerning the 
university education. Therefore, each university ought to 
implement European Credit Transfer System (ECTS), 
European Qualification Framework (EQF) and National 
Qualifications Framework (NQF). NQF is an instrument 
for the classification of qualifications according to a set of 
criteria for specified levels of learning. The Bologna 
Process requirements were implemented to improve the 
transparency, access, progress and quality of qualification 
in relation to the demand on the labor market [7]. The 
basic concept in formal education, i.e., competence is 
defined as knowledge, skills and attitudes. In the context 
of EQF, competence should be described in terms of 
responsibility and autonomy. In the Bologna Process 
learning environment, the student learning outcomes 
(SLOs) are also the important drivers of the educational 
process and as such they require evidence. The SLOs 
describe what a student is expected to learn as a result of 
participating in academic activities [4]. Beyond SLOs, 
student progress outcomes (SPOs) are implemented to 
reflect student progress in course sequence and in degree 
programs.  
In contrast to formal learning, informal learning is 
organized by students. It has no objectives in terms of 
learning outcomes or acquisition of any competences. It 
includes 
socialization, 
support, 
gathering 
opinions, 
consultancy, and self-directed learning. In contrast with 
the traditional view of teacher-centered learning via 
knowledge acquisition, informal learning is peer-to-peer 
learning. So, students read self-selected books and e-
books, participate in self-study programs, watch YouTube 
videos, navigate Internet support materials, seeking 
advices from peers, participate in virtual communities of 
practice. Informal learning occurs in community, even if 
participants only observe, play or take part in social 
events. In informal learning process, students do not 
receive grades nor certificates of completion. There are 
other important opportunities, i.e., opportunity to listen the 
lectures provided by a famous professor or expert. 
Informal learning is a way to globalization of education, 
because of the open access to the same course materials 
and e-books in all the world.  
Non-formal learning at university covers various less-
structured learning events, such as night university 
visiting, 
open 
lectures, 
community 
sport 
events, 
conferences, seminars, summer schools, and company 
visits. That forms of education do not have curricula, 
accreditation or certification as it is in formal learning, but 
they are more structured than informal learning 
approaches. Non-formal learning is a method of 
communicating with people, of motivating them to 
participate, and of helping them to acquire the necessary 
skills. In non-formal education process, knowledge is 
developed by practice rather than by lecturing. It is 
strongly based on volunteer works and voluntary 
participation. It is costly, but the costs can be considered 
as promotion and marketing costs, funded by sponsors.  
The non-formal education covers seminars for 
vocational and technical skills development, individual 
and group instruction in functional literacy, community 
assemblies, forums, work conferences, for example on 
taxation, fire prevention, drug abuse prevention, or on 
security. That education focuses on propagation  of 
desirable values, customs, and traditions. The goals of 
non-formal education is to increase formal education 
participation rate, exchange of views and experiences, 
using alternative learning schemes, like street schools, 
involving street children in the education process.  
The Danish non-formal education system is one of the 
oldest in Europe, because it is known since the 19th 
century. It is based on the concept of "Folkeoplysning" 
introduced by the Danish educational philosopher, N.F.S. 
Grundtvig. The concept means sociocultural activities, 
youth and adult learning, and folk education.  Another 
challenge for non-formal education was the use of the new 
technologies in group work. The ICT provided many 
opportunities for individual learning, as well as for group 
work. The Open University in the United Kingdom, the 
Centre National d'Enseignement a Distance in France and 
the Universidad Nacional de Educacion a Distancia in 
Spain produce a large quantity of multimedia educational 
material. Video conferencing and video seminars on the 
Internet are examples of the new technologies applied in 
non-formal 
education. 
The 
new 
methods 
of 
communication 
allow 
organizations 
from 
different 
countries to establish closer contacts with the aim of 
exchanging ideas and materials.  
Non-formal education includes activities developed 
under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), which refers 
to business practices involving initiatives that benefit 
society [14]. Therefore, an organization's internal practices 
can influence their employees, customers, partners and 
environment in a positive manner. Business organizations 
can take that approach to deliver better education services 
and in this way they improve their positive image among 
customers and for society. For example, University Social 
Responsibility (USR) can increase graduate involvement 
in university problem solving. The USR is to enable access 
to joint event funding opportunities, to enhance the 
university influence in the industry and in the community, 
and to differentiate the university from its competitors, i.e., 
other universities.  
III. 
ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE OF NON-FORMAL 
EDUCATION 
The term "enterprise" can be considered as an overall 
concept to identify a company, business organization, 
university or governmental institution [10]. An enterprise 
is defined as a social entity, which is going to achieve a 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

certain goal [12]. For an enterprise, architectural 
framework as a conceptual structure related to a certain 
system type consists of areas of concern and a necessary 
and sufficient set of design domains.  
The ISO/IEC 42010:2007 shows that architecture is the 
fundamental organization of a system, embodied in its 
components, their relationships to each other and the 
environment, and the principles governing its design and 
evolution [12]. The goal of enterprise architecture (EA) is 
to create a unified ICT environment across the firm or all 
of the firm's business units with links to the business side 
of the organization, to promote alignment, standardization, 
reuse of existing ICT assets, and the sharing of common 
methods 
for 
project 
management 
and 
software 
development across the organization [17]. The EA 
provides a holistic expression of the enterprise's strategies 
and their impact on business functions and processes, 
taking the firm's sourcing goals into explicit consideration 
[9].  The EA  gives the user an opportunity of faster 
delivery of new functionalities and modifications of 
applications, as well as it enables an easier access to higher 
quality, more consistent and more reliable information 
[16]. The EA identifies opportunities for integration and 
reuse of IT resources and prevents the development of 
inconsistent processes and information [11]. Especially 
important to users is the capability of integrating the 
information 
among 
applications 
and 
across 
data 
warehouses and data marts [13].   
As it was mentioned at the beginning, the goal of the 
paper is to visualize the non-formal education architecture. 
According to Dumitrescu, non-formal education is a 
partner in the lifelong learning process [5]. It is strongly 
based on external sponsoring by the local, national and 
international institutions. The non-formal education 
activities can be  realized outside, as well as inside the 
formal education institutions. In the last case, the 
educational activities are governed by the school 
managers. The non-formal education can be also carried 
out within companies, by professional associations, or by 
self-motivated individuals.  In the architecture model 
presented in Figure 1, non-formal education is assumed to 
be realized within university  organization, so university 
staff and students are involved in the educational processes 
as organizers as well as a beneficiary of the educational 
process results. Presented in the paper, non-formal 
education model is visualized in ArchiMate 4.0 beta 
version language, therefore some additional explanations 
must be added. The non-formal education is assumed to be 
realized as a system of projects and the project 
management methods can be applied for them. The 
ArchiMate language allows only for a very general outline 
of business processes, therefore, the non-formal education 
business process model is visualized in BPMN language 
Bizagi tool (see Fig. 2). The ArchiMate language is an 
open, independent, and general modeling language for 
enterprise architecture. The primary focus of ArchiMate 
language is to support stakeholders to address concerns 
regarding their business and the ICT systems. The 
ArchiMate metamodel consists of three layers: the 
Business layer, the Application layer and the Technology 
layer. According to the EA model, the technology supports 
usage of applications, which in turn support the business. 
In this model, non-formal education is considered as a 
system of events, which are realized for local community. 
The system of events covers seminars, workshops, 
performance, 
exhibitions, 
excursions, 
conferences, 
meetings, community assemblies, forums, demonstration 
classes, and sport competitions.  The audience of the event 
is selected according to the event project goals. Some 
events are organized for children, other for older people or 
for teenagers. The events are organized by university staff 
and students, who are working as volunteers. If it is 
necessary, the events are financially supported by external 
institutions. Anyway, for each event the coordinator is 
selected and responsible for the event tasks realization for 
the final success. Each event can be managed as a project, 
therefore the canvas model can be specified for the non-
formal education events (see Fig. 1).  
                                 
Key Partnerships 
Sponsors; 
ICT solution 
providers; 
Web service 
developers; 
Event facilitators;  
Academic & 
Administrative Staff; 
Web portal 
administration;  
Key Activities 
Event management; 
Web portal requirement engineering;  
Event realization, control & 
evaluation; Event scheduling   
Value 
Propositions 
Values in public 
services process; 
Life style changes;  
Long-life learning 
habits;  Learner 
satisfaction; Non-
formal education 
acceptance, 
efficiency & 
effectiveness  
Customer 
Relationships 
Analytics of educational 
services; Relations among 
learners & academic staff 
Customer 
Segments 
Learners; University 
Academic Staff; 
Students;  Learner 
associations & 
assemblies; Political 
parties; Governmental 
institutions;  
Channels 
Non-formal education 
promotion portal; Chat room, 
forums & blogs; Websites of 
mentors & associations; 
Printing publicity & emailing; 
Key Resources 
Software & hardware; Donation 
support; Non-formal education event 
documentation archives; 
Cost Structure 
Web portal development, implementation, administration, 
& maintenance; Catering, transport & hotel costs; Event 
promotion costs;  
Revenue Streams 
Learning time reduction; Learning process simplification; Participant satisfaction; 
Social relation development; Life status improvement; lower effort & lower costs of 
formal education; University Social Responsibility development; University  - 
Business Alignment; 
Figure 1.  Business Canvas Model for Non-Formal Education  Development. 
In general, the business canvas model can be the first step 
in the discussion on non-formal education strategy 
development as well as on the management of educational 
events. There are many different ways of categorizing or 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

grouping events, including by size, form and content [3]. 
The events may have characteristics similar to project 
dimensions. i.e., learning objectives, time, financial and 
human resources, location, risk, benefits, long-term 
impact, audience, publicity, promoting. The event 
management process is modelled in Figure 2. Similarly, as 
for projects, the event life cycle consists of the following 
activities: organizing, analysis, identification, evaluation, 
design, promotion, realization, shutdown. 
 
Figure 2.   University Non-Formal Education  Process Model. 
In the proposed EA model, the exceptional role of 
learning facilitator is specified. The role covers:  
 Giving information and opinions.  
 Seeking information and opinions.  
 Proposing goals and suggesting ways of initiating 
actions. 
 Giving directions and developing plans on how to 
proceed.  
 Summarizing related ideas, suggestions and major 
points discussing.  
 Linking ideas and activities by relating them to 
each other. 
 Examining the feasibility and workability of ideas, 
evaluation of alternative solutions, and applying 
them to real situations to see how they will work.  
 Encouraging everyone to participate, and helping in 
communication among event team members. 
 Monitoring 
and 
supporting 
the 
non-formal 
education process by which the group is working.  
 Helping the team members be aware of standards 
and goals of non-formal education. 
 Building trust, reducing the risk aversion, and 
encouraging individuality.  
 Persuading and supporting people to reconcile 
disagreements. 
 
 In the communication processes, facilitators are not 
oriented towards argumentation, but rather on creation of 
mutual understanding. However, for successful event 
realization the coordinator is needed. That role is similar to 
the role of project manager [1].  
Beyond the process model in Figue 2 , in Figure 3 the 
non-formal education architecture model is available. The 
ArchiMate model covers the following layers: 
 BUSINESS containing the following elements: 
o 
Business 
actor 
(i.e., 
Participant, 
Event 
Coordinator). 
o 
Business role (i.e., Patron of Plans & 
Programs of Events). 
o 
Business service (i.e., Program & Events 
Planning, Event Cost Management, Non-
formal 
Education 
Management, 
Events' 
Collecting in Programs, SLOs Specification 
for Event, SLOs Specification for Programs, 
Participant Enrolment Controlling, Event 
Outcomes Controlling,  Event Management 
Support Service). 
o 
Business object (i.e., Student Evaluation 
Protocols, Event Description Card, Library 
Report, Event Evaluation).  
 APPLICATION including the following elements: 
o 
Application components: University Event 
Politics 
and 
Regulations, 
Participant 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Enrolment System, Participant Evaluation's 
Registration System, SLOs Event Registration 
System, Event Controlling System, Student's 
Portfolio Registration System, Information 
Technology Support, Library Management 
System.  
 TECHNOLOGY covering as follows: 
o 
Node (i.e., Application Server, Data Server).  
o 
System Software: Participant Enrollment and 
Event Base, University Library, Learning 
Event Base, Student Management System, 
Learning 
Course 
Controlling 
System, 
Information Technology (IT) Management 
System.  
 MOTIVATION including the elements:  
o 
Stakeholder (i.e., Event Participant, Sponsor, 
Facilitator, Innovator, Employer). 
o 
Driver (i.e., Event Participation, Knowledge 
Management and Dissemination). 
o 
Principle (i.e., Guides for Event Organizers).  
o 
Assessment (i.e., University Accreditation 
Commission Assessment). 
o 
Requirement (i.e., Programs, Plans and Event 
Proposals).  
o 
Constraint (i.e., Competition among events, 
National Legal Acts). 
o 
Goals 
(i.e., 
Participant 
Satisfaction, 
Appropriate Competencies for the market 
position).  
o 
Deliverable (i.e., Event Guidelines and 
Description, Student Portfolio,  Participant 
Enrollment Report).  
Taking into account the above specification, some 
comments should be added. Student Learning Outcomes 
(SLOs) in non-formal education concern mostly social 
competencies. Students participating as volunteers in 
events receive certificates as evidence of the engagement. 
The general non-formal education process includes a 
sequence of  sub-processes (see Fig. 2). All the sub-
processes are realized to ensure satisfaction of participants 
of the events. The non-formal education model in Fig. 3 
includes a general vision of the ICT systems for the 
education management support. The model permits on a 
holistic view of problems and it can be utilized in an 
iterative approach for non-formal education improvement. 
The model can be useful to emphasize the alignment 
issues among the non-formal education staff requirements 
and the ICT providers' solutions. For making the good 
investments, the EA developers can use the model to 
discover opportunities, identify options and compare 
solutions of non-formal education organization. They can 
identify, which research works will be the best support the 
non-formal education services.  
 
Figure 3.  Non-formal Education Architecture Model 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
Generally, the non-formal education events should be 
helpful to tackle problems associated with Europe's ageing 
population. They allow to reject the opinions that separate 
strategies of knowledge creation and sharing should be 
developed for students and for adults, although university 
is promoted as open for all generations of people. Finally, 
the following conclusions can be specified:  
 Formal, informal and non-formal education forms 
can 
be 
developed 
simultaneously 
by 
one 
educational organization, e.g., university.  
 They 
are 
not 
competitive, 
but 
rather 
complementary to one another. 
 They all are supported by ICT, however, their 
development depends on the university priorities: 
o Basic formal education relies on the Bologna 
Process principles, which are considered as 
mandatory for university boards.  
o Social networking on the Internet is developed as 
informal learning. 
o University Social Responsibility is supported by 
non-formal education.  
 Non-formal education is financially supported by 
third parties and can be considered as a set of 
events.  
 Non-formal education process modelling and its 
system architecture development can be useful for 
the events management and auditing. 
 Analysis of activities included in the non-formal 
process model allows for the formalization of that 
activities 
 Non-formal education architecture modelling is to 
increase a successful repeatability of that events. 
  
The future works will focus on the following topics:  
 Profiling of events of non-formal education. 
 Planning non-formal education events offline and 
online.  
 Management of events by ICT support.  
 Event 
management 
methodological 
approach 
analysis and improvement opportunities.   
REFERENCES 
[1] 
I. F. Alexander, "A Taxonomy of Stakeholders: 
Human Roles," in: System Development End-User 
Computing: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools and 
Applications, 
S. 
Clarke, 
Ed. 
 
Hershey, 
PA: 
Information Science Reference, pp. 317-350,  2008.  
[2] 
L. M. Blaschke, "Heutagogy and Lifelong Learning: A 
Review of Heutagogical Practice and Self-Determined 
Learning," The International Review of Research in 
Open and Distance Learning, Oldenburg University 
and University of Maryland University College, vol. 
13, no.1, 56-71, 2012. 
[3] 
G. Bowdin, J. Allen, W. O'Toole, R. Harris, and I. 
McDonnell, 
Events 
Management, 
Amsterdam: 
Elsevier, 2006.  
[4] 
H. Czarnecki, "KASH - Knowledge, Attitude, Skills & 
Habits, Auburn Works. Auburn Technical Assistance 
Center (ATAC), March 2013. [Online]. Available 
from:  http://virtual.auburnworks.org/ profiles/blogs/ 
kash-knowledge-attitude-skills-habits. 2013.12.20    
[5] 
C. Dumitrescu, "Non-formal education" 15 Dec 1999. 
[Online]. Available from:    http://www.assembly. 
coe.int/nw/xml/XRef/X2H-Xref-ViewHTML.asp? 
FileID=8807&lang=en. 2013.12.20    
[6] 
G. Elia and A. Poce, "Future Trends for "i-Learning" 
Experiences," in Open Networked "i-Learning", 
Models and Cases of "Next-Gen" Learning, G. Elia 
and A. Poce, Eds. New York: Springer, pp. 133-176, 
2010. 
[7] 
First Glossary, Knowledge Skills And Attitudes (Ksa) 
Effects, 2010. [Online]. Available from:     http:// 
www.firstebtn.eu/files/FIRST_Glossary.pdf.  
2010.01.02  
[8] 
D. L. Gardner, Supply Chain Vector-Methods for 
Linking the Execution of Global Business Models 
with Financial Performance, Boca Raton: J.Ross 
Publishing Inc. 2004. 
[9] 
J. 
Holt 
and 
S. 
Perry, 
Modelling 
Enterprise 
Architectures. London: The Institution of Engineering 
and Technology,  2010. 
[10] 
J. A. P. Hoogervorst, Enterprise Governance and 
Enterprise Engineering, Berlin: Springer, 2009.  
[11] 
J. Horkoff and E. Yu, "Evaluating Goal Achievement 
in Enterprise Modeling - An Interactive Procedure and 
Experiences," in The Practice of Enterprise Modeling, 
A. Persson and J. Stirna, Eds. Laxenburg: Springer, 
pp. 145-160, 2009.  
[12] 
ISO/IEC 
42010, 
2011. 
System 
and 
software 
engineering - Architecture description. International 
Standard, Geneva.  
[13] 
R. F. van der Lans, Data Virtualization for Business 
Intelligence Systems, Revolutionizing Data Integration 
for Data Warehouses, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2012.  
[14] 
J. D. Martin, J. W. Petty, and J. S. Wallace, Value-
Based 
Management 
with 
Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2009. 
[15] 
T. Pfeffer, Virtualization of Universities, Digital 
Media and the Organization of Higher Education 
Institutions, New York: Springer, 2012. 
[16] 
Ch. Reynolds, Introduction to Business Architecture 
Boston: Course Technology, 2010. 
[17] 
J. W. Ross, P. Weill,  and D. C. Robertson, Enterprise 
Architecture as strategy. Creating a foundation for 
business execution. Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press, 2006. 
[18] 
M. J. Thannhuber, The Intelligent Enterprise, 
Theoretical Concepts and Practical Implications. 
Heidelberg: Physica-Verlag, A Springer Company, 
2005.  
[19] 
J. 
Winterton, 
F. 
Delamare-Le 
Deist, 
and 
E.  
Stringfellow, Typology of knowledge, skills and 
competences: clarification of the concept and 
prototype. Office for Official Publications of the 
European Communities, CEDEFOP, Luxembourg. 
2013. [Online]. Available from:   http://europa.eu/.  
2015.12.22  
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-536-4
BUSTECH 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

