Reusable Decision Models Supporting
Organizational Design in Business Process
Management
Olga Levina, Oliver Holschke
Berlin Institute of Technology
Department of Systems Analysis and IT
10587 Berlin, Germany
{olga.levina; oliver.holschke}@sysedv.tu-berlin.de
Abstract—Transition towards a business process oriented en-
terprise is explored in research from different perspectives. One
of the most popular approaches is Business Process Management.
Its activities include process deﬁnition, execution, monitoring
and analysis. Its implementation was studied in research and
practice from the process and application related points of
view. The organizational changes are often out of scope or only
marginally regarded in these implementation strategies. This
paper summarizes recurring and thus reusable organizational
decisions that appear in the course of the implementation process
and provides the accordant organizational design. This design
can be applied throughout the industries for enterprises that
are about to start a business process management initiative.
Thus, this approach supports a rather inter-enterprise than intra-
enterprise reuse paradigms.
Keywords-organizational patterns; business process manage-
ment; design model reuse.
I. INTRODUCTION
There are numerous Business Process Management (BPM)
implementation strategies, mainly provided by large consul-
tancy ﬁrms or business application software developers that
individually emphasize different aspects such as general im-
plementation strategies as well as choosing and implementing
a business process modeling tool. Among these, the orga-
nizational changes are very important as the organization
commits to implementing business process management activ-
ities [25][29][22]. The organizational structure is an essential
attribute of the design of an enterprise, especially when in a
situation of change (e.g., BPM implementation). It deﬁnes the
relationships between employees to support specialization and
coordination of work. Modern enterprises have a variety of
relationships between organizational units in order to operate
more efﬁciently and responsively [20]. In case of an enterprise
orienting towards a process-centric views and BPM the allo-
cation of activities to positions and establishing new commu-
nications structures between them is a challenge in itself – this
being decided often before thought is given to what detailed
activities will be executed and what exact IT will support this.
Therefore, managers need to be able to develop robust models
of their organizations regarding the BPM-related changes,
and then provide them so the information can be effectively
reused and shared by many people and systems involved in
the BPM project. Although organizational changes are usually
determined early in the process of emerging BPM commitment
– particularly when BPM should pervade several divisions
or even the whole enterprise – actionable artifacts that may
support the manager in allocating actions and responsibilities
to organizational entities are scarce.
Artifacts of today do not meet the requirements of decision
makers that need to be guided in the organizational design
of BPM implementation projects. However, the availability
of such a decision supporting artifact and its reuse across
different BPM initiatives may greatly beneﬁt organizations that
have adopted business process-centric views. These beneﬁts
can be found in a guided and faster way of identifying and
making organizational BPM decisions and reduced risk of
failing to specify organizational-critical parameters which may
have led to uncalled-for costs [28]. Reusing such knowledge
on organizational BPM decision making within a globally
operating enterprise and its distributed business units would
also be a prerequisite for future innovative behavior [12].
Acknowledging that different organizations display a wide
range of characteristics which will require individual strategies
contingent upon the company’s composites and its environ-
ment, we argue that recurring decision topics in organiza-
tional design do exist and that they may be consolidated and
“packaged” for later reuse in similar problem settings [13].
We therefore explore the possibility of creating a generalized
conceptual decision model that consolidates recurring decision
topics concerning organizational design in BPM initiatives.
This decision model is intended as an actionable item and for
later reuse by decision makers or managers in BPM projects.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
II we review the state of the art of decision support methods
regarding organizational design for BPM and highlight the lack
of an artifact at the adequate level. Section III collects recur-
ring decision topics in organizational BPM design and explains
their range of implementations alternatives. In Section IV we
consolidate our ﬁndings and propose the developed conceptual
decision model. In Section V we apply our decision model
to a simpliﬁed real-world BPM implementation scenario and
demonstrate the instantiation. Section VI discusses brieﬂy the
limitations of the decision model and its possible extensions.
45
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

II. STATE OF THE ART
BPM includes methods, techniques, and tools to support the
activities of design, enactment, management, and analysis of
operational business processes [26]. These main activities and
the scope of BPM are often summarized in a BPM life-cycle
[23][17][30]. Over the last three decades research in BPM has
generated a large body of artifacts addressing organizational,
managerial, information systems and technology, and socio-
economic topics. Works on BPM implementation often focus
on the areas of business process automation or product imple-
mentation, e.g., [25][11][16]. The human aspect is considered
in the focus of change management or software requirements
in some of these works [25][5]. As we concentrate on the
organizational design for BPM, implementation strategies re-
garding technology selection and process modeling as well
as modelling-related topics are out of our scope. These areas
are already covered by existing approaches. In the area of
tool selection ISO [8] offers a standard process for software
evaluation, other frameworks exist in research and practice
e.g., [2][4][27]. Zucchi and Edwards [29] as well as numerous
researchers such as [1] identify critical success factors for
BPM implementation. In e.g. [27][9], a general process for
BPM implementation and integration is shown and described.
Armistead and Machin [1] propose a decision support method
for selecting the adequate BPM implementation project type.
Four possible BPM implementation project scenarios are
suggested that are contingent upon a) the commitment of
the responsible business manager and b) the resulting impact
on the organization. By determining these contingencies the
ﬁtting project type can be identiﬁed. The project types are
further characterized by six features, of which two address
distinct organizational attributes, i.e.: 1) the number of em-
ployees impacted by the BPM activities, and 2) the type/size of
organizational unit concerned (e.g., department – business unit
– organization-wide). While the decision matrix can support
the broad selection of an initial BPM approach, the level of
analysis remains rather high considering that organizational
change for BPM will involve more operational decisions. No-
tably, concepts that capture coordination- as well as strategy-
realted topics are not provided.
Organizational aspects of BPM, i.e., the reporting and
steering department for BPM, were investigated by Gartner
in multiple case studies [18][3][19]. On the alignment of
the BPM Gartner states that the optimum implementation
is often a blended model in which IT and the business
drive BPM projects. Thus, it is suitable to align BPM ini-
tiatives and expert knowledge at the IT and gradually hand
it over to the business. But ﬁrst of all the common ground
should be established that indicates what is the purpose and
goal of BPM implementation and what results are expected.
Communication and transparency on these objectives need
to be provided by the higher executive levels. The lack
of suitable communication structures between top executives
and the business units represents another signiﬁcant risk.
It should be clear that the existing, often function-oriented,
organizational structure will be changed towards a process-
oriented organization form. These changes and their effects
need to be communicated using the techniques known from the
change management domain. Snabe [24] provide an extensive
roadmap for enterprises to enhance their business process
management performance. Nevertheless, it does not consider
the assignment of responsibilities to roles involved in business
process management initiation and support. Additionally, no
description on governance structures for BPM are given, thus,
the focus is on the processes. The considered strategy aspects
focus on enterprise with a level of BPM implementation that is
comparable to the CMM level 2, instead of considering level
1 that includes the decision and introduction of a governance
structure. For implications of strategy deﬁnition, the extensive
work by Mintzberg [15] is referred to.
One of the important BPM implementation tools is the
establishment of a central expertise institution for BPM. Je-
ston and Nelis [9] and Olding and Hill [19] provide some
approaches concerning design and implementation of such
a central institution. This institution is often referred to as:
“competency center” [3] or “center of excellence” [6]. Es-
tablishing such an organ requires signiﬁcant organizational
changes such as its alignment, its internal organization, its
target group and its main tasks. Zucchi and Edwards [29]
describe these institutions as “business process ofﬁces” and
indicates their establishment as one of the critical success
factors for BPM. Remarkably, most of the publications con-
cerned with this topic are often case-speciﬁc or derive from
consultancy practice and do not address the organizational
design in their demonstrations.
III. RECURRING DECISIONS IN BPM ORGANIZATIONAL
DESIGN
In BPM literature and in practice several implementation
relevant aspects regarding organizational design exist. Here
they are called organizational decision topics. We deﬁne
organizational decision topic as a focus area including multiple
potential outcomes related to an element of the organization,
i.e., a managerial position, in terms of responsibility and
control. Thus, a decision topic directly relates to a concrete
role and scope of responsibilities in the area of interest. Each
decision topic has different entities or action alternatives.
Decision on the choice between these elements is assigned
to the responsible that is associated to the decision topic.
We deﬁne organizational decision as a choice of one of the
alternative entities within the decision topic. Therefore, it is a
reaction to an identiﬁed problem within a decision topic, which
solution provides an added value to an organizational stake-
holder. We emphasize that the organizational decisions dis-
cussed here are all executive decisions following the taxonomy
of Kruchten [10], i.e., they do not address requirements for
technology instantiations or for their properties (cf. executive,
ban and property decisions in [10]). Zimmermann et al. [28]
provide three stages of the decision making in the context of
decision modeling with reuse: decision identiﬁcation, decision
making and decision enforcement. In this paper we focus on
the ﬁrst two steps in the context of organizational decisions
for BPM implementation. Recurring and thus reusable organi-
zational decision topics in the context of BPM were identiﬁed
46
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

within BPM implementation literature and in interviews lead
with BPM experts and managers that were concerned with
the implementation of a BPM initiative. These topics were
also veriﬁed in workshops. The interview analysis revealed
organization-related content clusters that occurred in the most
of the interviews. These clusters were identiﬁed as decision
relevant topics. The results were then presented to a group
of BPM experts including the interviewees. In the upcoming
discussion, the topics were rounded up and commented. As
a result of this workshop the organizational decision topics
presented in ﬁgure 1 were deﬁned. For a better representation
the recurring decision topics are summarized here as questions
that can occur in different order and inﬂuence one another
during the implementation process. Therefore, ﬁgure 1 shows
the questions that are to be considered for BPM organizational
design as a cycle and not as a process model.
Figure 1.
Reusable decisions Topics in BPM Organizational Design
BPM is a holistic management approach aiming to align an
organization with the interests of its stakeholders, customers
and employees while eventually raising a company‘s agility
and operational performance. BPM fosters and supports busi-
ness effectiveness and efﬁciency, adopts a cross-departmental
approach and examines the impact of all relevant applica-
tions, users and stakeholders. As BPM strives for innovation,
ﬂexibility and integration with technology through continuous
process improvement and the visualization of formerly non-
transparent process structures, BPM is claimed to be able to
increase efﬁciency, to reduce costs and improve the quality
of products and services [9]. These arguments can serve as
possible answers to the question “why” that is often present
when a new technology, management approach or product
program are introduced or their implementation is described.
Thus, the motivation for BPM implementation can be extrinsic,
i.e., enforced by law or market, or strategic. Often the question
“why” BPM is to be implemented answered by general BPM
strategic beneﬁts, e.g.: increasing customer satisfaction, in-
creasing competitiveness or more agile business process [14].
Once the BPM implementation has been decided the mode
of its introduction and integration into the enterprise archi-
tecture, i.e., “how”, has to be deﬁned. Coordination and gov-
ernance aspects need to be considered within the enterprise.
Governance aspects include decisions that can range from self-
government to strict control. Furthermore, reporting structures
need to be taken into account. Here two major modes can
be identiﬁed: centralized implementation and administration
or creation of local entities that are responsible for BPM
implementation and expertise. A centralized BPM institution
has the advantage of concentrated expertise and serving as an
information point but it also requires the ability to address
distributed requests. If BPM is to be introduced as a central
corporate issue, it should be steered either by a central
committee or a center of excellence. This central organ can
be organized in different structures which are described in the
following:
• Line organization,
• Staff organization,
• Matrix organization or
• Pure project organization
Which style the institution is to be organized in, is determined
by the structure of the existing organization, the size, the sig-
niﬁcance and the length of the project, problem relevance and
availability of material and human resources. The line organi-
zation uses the existing functional organizational departments
and draws the project team members from existent business
units. Therefore, one major advantage of this organization
form is that the existing organization structure can be used
and that team members can also work part-time for the project
not hindering their normal work. On the other hand, there
is the staff organization form which also uses member of a
higher management level who coordinates the work of the sub
project departments. In contrast, a pure project organization is
most suitable if very important and huge projects are to be
conducted which are not time crucial and whose budget is
not too limited. This type creates a kind of organization unit
just for project purposes provided with its own material and
personal resources.
Finally, a project can be organized in a matrix style which
follows the idea that each project member remains in his or her
job position but is now subordinated to the (external) project
manager who has the functional authority. In some way,
the matrix organization comprises the line- and the project
organization. Still, this form makes it reasonably difﬁcult
to coordinate the competency interfaces. In a hierarchical
organization structure, the entities responsible for the BPM im-
plementation may be the corporation, a division, a department,
a group or a team. In addition, it may be a committee, a task
force, a project management organization or any other form of
a sub-team. Thus, “how” addresses distribution of authority. As
modern organizations may not be conﬁned to a strict hierarchy
for chains of authority, different chains of authority may be
deﬁned for different purposes. BPM is supported by the IT
(through business process execution software tools or tools for
process modeling support), but it is also used in the day-to-day
work by the business while IT is often needed to implement
some of the BPM activities.
So the question arises, “where” BPM should be situated
within the organization and what reporting structure will be
appropriate. BPM responsibilities can either be situated in the
IT or the business sector. Often, BPM executives report to the
IT department since BPM highly depends on methodologies,
leads to thorough process analysis and is supported by tech-
nologies such as modeling tools [19]. Despite the strengths
47
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

of IT to provide methodologies, tools and technologies, this
approach leads to a lack of alignment with business objectives.
Hence, reporting to the business sector is usually the better
solution to ensure proper alignment with the core strategy and
the company‘s objectives, allowing the business to better direct
and manage the activities connected with economic issues
[19]. When determining the relevance of the two company
sectors the BPM strategy must be considered. The alignment to
the IT or business sector should be determined according to the
BPM strategy and employed instruments. If BPM is heading
towards process automation or a BPM software tool is applied,
IT must be included to some extent but should not assume the
majority of BPM in the long term. Thus, “where” addresses the
type and scope of organizational units involved. Reporting and
communication relationships need to be established between
the participating organizational entities. “Where” may occur
to be the most extensive organizational decision topics, as
it contains different aspects such as reporting structure, re-
sponsibility and the scope of the action. The choice depends
here on multiple aspects such as the alignment of BPM
stakeholders, budget responsibilities, organization structure or
the dominance of the one of the two enterprise departments
(business vs. IT) within the organization structure.
Main BPM activities are summarized in the so called BPM
life-cycle. In literature numerous variations of the BPM life-
cycle exist, its main activities can be summarized as being:
Modeling, analysis, simulation, implementation, monitoring
and improvement of business processes [26][30][5]. These are
also the potential answers to the question, “what” should be
implemented as BPM main activities within the given enter-
prise. Process understanding is crucial for process management
that is why the most BPM projects start with introduction
of a modeling tool. Process implementation is often realized
using workﬂow management systems. Process analysis can
be supported by software tools like decision support systems
or business intelligence tools but it still requires signiﬁcant
human involvement. Establishing a process monitoring strat-
egy is gaining more and more attention from practitioners and
research. The need for a central and holistic implementation
of BPM can therefore originate from the use or need to
perform at least one of these activities in a business unit.
Successful implementation of one of the aspects can lead to
the initialization of an enterprise-wide BPM-implementation
discussion, i.e., inﬂuencing the question “why”.
“What” also implicitly addresses the organizational posi-
tions, i.e. extending the term of a “role”, and assignments. Peo-
ple are linked to positions through assignments. The possible
positions of interest here arise from the typical BPM activities
such as designing, enacting, etc. [26][30]. These activities
are often very closely related with the process execution and
are often supervised and executed by the accordant business
worker who is involved into the process. Though, the addressee
of the results might be on the other organizational level.
IV. CONCEPTUAL DECISION MODEL
an organization has to face in the context of a BPM
implementation project is the ﬁrst step towards adaptation of
the organizational structures. The questions presented above
are the identiﬁed as recurring decision topics during a BPM
implementation initiative and are now grouped. Once the
decision topics are identiﬁed, one of the alternative decision
entities has to be chosen, i.e., a decision needs to be made.
Figure 2 aligns decision makers with their organizational level
and the decision topics presented above. Thus, the choice
between the decision entities is to be made on the assigned
organizational level. BPM is a topic that is relevant for the
entire enterprise and is supposed to support strategic goals of
the enterprise. That is why the decision on its potential beneﬁts
and implementation scope is to be supported by and taken on
the upper organizational level, i.e., the so called C-level.
The “why” can also be initiated on the operational level,
as the need for process modeling or monitoring can originate
closer to the process execution. Decisions made on this level
have a rather long-term time horizon for their realization, being
mostly abstract in their declarations. The more it comes to
the actual implementation and operationalization of BPM, the
nearer the decision making level is to the speciﬁc business
processes. The implementation of BPM expertise in the or-
ganizational structure, as well as its resulting governance and
reporting structures are deﬁned on the tactical, i.e., mid-term,
level. It is often also the task of the middle-management to ﬁnd
a respective structure for BPM implementation. A centralized
institution such as a center of excellence for BPM can often
be a valid solution for big and middle enterprises. Hence,
the strategy and internal organization structure need to be
developed before the implementation project. Often, members
of such a center are assigned to their duties despite their daily
job using the staff or line organization. This structure might
hinder the development of the center or the fulﬁllment of
its tasks as the members get less identiﬁed with BPM being
responsible for the daily as well as for the BPM related tasks.
Furthermore, the question of whether the BPM- related topics
and projects are initiated and governed, by the IT or by the
business, needs to be deﬁned on the middle-management level.
What BPM activities are needed for the actual processes
performance in the enterprise can be decided or at least initi-
ated on the operational level. That is, where the requirements
are made on the process task level and the changes can be
directly monitored and controlled. Additionally, tactical level
can initiate the choice by requiring certain process- related
quality standards or metrics. Therefore, the addressees of the
BPM activity results are the operational, directly process-
related workers, as well as the middle-management.
Figure 2.
Conceptual Decision Model for organizational design for BPM
48
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

The decision structure presented in ﬁgure 2 identiﬁes possi-
ble and reusable decisions and the accordant decision makers.
This structure does not prescribe the timely sequence of the
decision making. Moreover, often the decision occurrence
depends on the organizational and process structure as well
as culture within the enterprise. The need and beneﬁts of
BPM or some of its areas of activity are detected on the
tactical or operational level. So the “what” decision often
drives the “why”. Was the need for BPM detected or more
important supported in the IT-division, it is very likely that
the BPM competences and governance structure will be tied
to the IT. While the recurring decisions can inﬂuence one
another in their outcomes, it is important that the roles that are
responsible for their making are assigned and communicated.
Addressing the main BPM topics and a general organizational
structure, the decision model shown in ﬁgure 2 is not limited
in use within one enterprise. Small, middle and big enterprises
independent from their industrial sector can beneﬁt from this
decision structure. The reuse focus lies here on using the
model for different (kinds) of enterprises in the same context:
initiating or implementing business process management in
their business and organizational structure.
V. APPLICATION OF THE DECISION MODEL
A short illustrative example of the application of the pre-
sented decision model was conducted in a large organization
that was about to develop a common BPM strategy as some
BPM initiatives were already emerging developing their own
approaches and tools. The strongly simpliﬁed example is used
here to introduce a possible scenatio for when and where the
descirbed BPM decisions can be applied including not only
the business, staretgic but also the governance aspects of such
an initiative.
The need for BPM in the observed company came from
the operations, i.e., from the business side, decision sequence
running from the bottom to the top. The enterprise has a rather
ﬂat organizational structure. The names were simpliﬁed here,
as the case study is only used for demonstration purposes.
Mr. A is the CEO of the considered enterprise; Mrs. B is head
of the business department, while Mr. C is head of the IT
department. Table 1 shows the organizational decision topics,
the chosen decision outcome, decision implementation and the
(made anonymous) decision maker.
Thus, the company decided to implement BPM as previous
experience in business process modeling and formulization in
the departments already existed. Some of the departments were
already using BPM modeling tools or process management
approaches. Another motivation was that BPM goals are in this
case accordant with the most of the enterprise’s strategic goals,
i.e., design of ﬂexible processes, short time-to-market and
increasing customer satisfaction. What strategic goals can be
supported by BPM implementation and how was described and
operationalized in a strategy paper. The BPM implementation
was decided to be central, i.e., realized by a central institution,
here referred to as business process ofﬁce (BPO). Matrix style
organization form was chosen for the BPO, i.e., employees in
the BPO still had their tasks in the departments but the tasks
were limited in favor of tasks related to the BPO. Head of the
BPO is Mrs. B, i.e., the business side. Tasks of the BPO were
deﬁned as: harmonization of already existing BPM initiatives,
development of a general BPM strategy, IT and consulting
support in BPM related ﬁelds, monitoring and control of BPM
implementation.
Organizational
Decision Topic
Decision
Person
Decision
Implementation
Why
Support
strategic goals
Mr. A
Strategy paper
How
Central
Mrs. B
Business
Process Ofﬁce
Mrs. B
Matrix
Where
Business and
IT
Mrs. B and
Mr. C
Business and
IT
What
Monitoring,
Modeling,
Automation,
Tool Support
Mrs. B and
Mr. C
Monitoring
strategy,
common
modeling
notation,
company-wide
tool support
Table I
APPLICATION OF THE DECISION MODEL
Though the initiative for BPM came from the business side,
one important step for its realization was the acquisition of
BPM tools, like business process modeling and simulation
tools. Thus, the responsibility and therefore the budget were
assigned to the IT department. Within the BPO the governance
is therefore being shared by both the IT and business; IT-
department being responsible for the budget and tool support
while business department suggests the strategy and provides
BPM expertise. Reporting on the success of BPM-related
activities and projects includes the business side, i.e., Mrs. B
as the head of BPO and Mr. C as head of the IT department.
Once the organizational backbone has been established, the
BPO took up its projects. The ﬁnished BPO activities in
the company by now include: company-wide tool support,
deﬁnition of a common business process modeling notation
as well as developing a business process monitoring strategy.
Decision on these strategies were made by Mrs. B and Mr. C
based on BPM knowledge and experience as well as on the
survey among the employees concerned with the topic of BPM
or already having experience with BPM activities respectively.
Thus, the reusable model was helpful in this example by
deﬁning the governance aspects of the BPM initiative in
the observed enterprise. A central institution for BPM was
established, tasks and organizational aspects of the institution
as well as the reporting structures were deﬁned. The appli-
cation of the reusable model enabled an efﬁcient proceeding
in deﬁning, deciding and establishing the BPM supporting
structures in the enterprise. Though it is too early to deﬁne the
improvements of the company’s process management originat-
ing in the proposed structure, the company is being observed
and interviews with the BPO members are held regularly for
further analysis. Additionally, the exemplary case study only
illustrates the situation in one given enterprise and marks the
effectiveness of the reuse model comparing to the former
status quo in the company, that is multiple, scattered BPM
49
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

initiatives. Nevertheless, further informal interviews were lead
with different enterprises that lead to the conclusion that the
topics addressed in the reusable model are the areas that
require coordination and managerial effort. These aspects will
be the focus of our future research.
VI. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
In this paper we addressed the fact that in the context of the
implementation of business process management or process-
orientation several organizational decisions have to be made.
We argued that there are speciﬁc related and reusable content
clusters in the area of the organizational structure that reoccur
independently from industries or enterprise size during such
projects. These organizational decision topics are rarely the
center of attention during BPM implementation and are often
being solved intuitively accordant to the ad-hoc situation. This
treatment might lead to conﬂict situation or lack of decision
power in the future. According to practical experience and
literature research we provided a structured overview of these
recurring and reusable decision topics as well as their entities
and developed a model for organizational decision making
aligning organizational decision topics with organizational
roles. This approach is similar to the existing approaches in
the domains of strategy deﬁnition and strategic management
(as in e.g., [15]). Being focused on initial and organizational
aspects of BPM implementation in the enterprise, other BPM-
related aspects that occur in later stages like process modeling
techniques and notations (see e.g., [21]) as well as model
ontologies (see e.g., [7]) are not considered in this paper.
Literature research as well as informal interviews with
business process management consultants indicated the pos-
sibility as well as supported the assumption that there are
topics that recur in the scenarios of business process man-
agement initiation. These topics were summarized here to a
reusable framework that can be applied in organizations that
are about to introduce the BPM approach. This framework
can be applied and therefore reused for decision making
independently from the target industry or enterprise type in
the context of BPM implementation. Next steps can include
development of a method framework for decision support as
well as deeper exploration of the different entities of the
identiﬁed organizational decision topics.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Armistead and S. Machin. Implications of business process manage-
ment for operations management. International Journal of Operations
and Production Management,, 17(9):886–898, 1997.
[2] J. Becker, M. Kugeler, and M. Rosemann. Process management: a guide
for the design of business processes, volume ISBN-10: 9783540434993.
Springer, 2003.
[3] Cognos.
Building
a
business
intelligence
competency
cen-
ter.
Cognos
Incorporated,
Burlington,
USA,
http://www.super-
info.com.cn/innovationcenter/pdfs,(June, 2011), 2008.
[4] B. Curtis, M.I. Kellner, and J. Over. Process modeling. Communication
of ACM, 35:75–90, 1992.
[5] D. J. Elzinga, T. Horak, C.-Y. Lee, and C. Bruner. Business process man-
agement: Survey and methodology. IEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management, 42(2):119 – 128, 1995.
[6] Gartner.
Gartner’s
top
10
strategic
technologies
for
2008.
http://www.gartner.de/fokus/07104210.pdf, (May, 2010), 2007.
[7] Oren E. Haller, A. and P. Kotinurmi.
An ontology for internal and
external business processes. In Proceedings of the 15th international
conference on World Wide Web, pages 1055–1056, 2006.
[8] ISO. Iso/iec 14598-5. software engineering - product evaluation. page
http://www.iso.org/iso, 1998.
[9] J. Jeston and J. Nelis. Business Process Management. Elsevier Linacre
House, Jordan Hill, Oxford, 2nd edition, 2008.
[10] Ph. Kruchten, P. Lago, and H. Van Vliet.
Quality of Software Ar-
chitectures, volume 4214, chapter Building Up and Reasoning About
Architectural Knowledge, pages 43 – 58. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2006.
[11] N. Leeming.
Business process management implementation.
The
Journal of Enterprise Architecture, 1:69–91, 2005.
[12] A. Majchrzak, L.P. Cooper, and O.E. Neece.
Knowledge reuse for
innovation. Management Science, 50(2):174–188, 2004.
[13] M. L. Markus. Toward a theory of knowledge reuse: Types of knowledge
reuse situations and factors in reuse success. Joutnal of Management of
Information Systems, 18(1):57–93, 2001.
[14] K. McCormack and W. Johnson. Business Process Orientation: Gaining
the E-Business Competitive Advantage. St Lucie Press, Delray Beach,
FL, 2000.
[15] H. Mintzberg.
Patterns in strategy formation.
Management Science,
24(9):934–948, 1978.
[16] Bumiller J. Mutschler, B. Towards an evaluation framework for business
process integration and management. In 2nd International Workshop on
Interoperability Research for Networked Enterprise Applications and
Software, EDOC, Enschede, Netherlands, 2005. IEEE.
[17] Reijers
H.A.
van
der
Aast
W.M.P.
Netjes,
M.
Supporting
the
bpm
life-cycle
with
ﬁlenet.
http://www.is.win.tue.nl/
wv-
daalst/publications/p328.pdf, 2006.
[18] E. Olding.
Starting up the business process comptency center.
http://www.gartner.com, 2007.
[19] E. Olding and J Hill.
Role deﬁnition and organizational structure:
Business process improvement. Gartner, 2008.
[20] OMG.
Organization
structure
metamodel
(osm).
http://www.omg.org/techprocess/meetings/schedule, 2006.
[21] J. Recker. Opportunities and constraints: the current struggle with bpmn.
Business Process Management Journal, 16(1):181–201, 2010.
[22] H.A. Reijers. Implementing bpm systems: The role of process orienta-
tion. BPM Journal, 12(4):389–409, 2006.
[23] M. Rosemann.
Application of a holistic model for determin-
ing
bpm
maturity.
BPTrends,
Feb.:http://bpm–training.com/wp–
content/uploads/2010/04/applicationholistic.pdf, 2005.
[24] J.H. Snabe, A. Rosenberg, C. Mˇzller, and M. Scavillo. Business process
management: the SAP roadmap. Galileo Press, 2008.
[25] P. Trkman. The critical success factors of business process management.
International Journal of Information Management, 30:125–134, 2010.
[26] W. van der Aalst, M. ter Hofstede, A., and M. Weske. Business process
management: A survey, 2003.
[27] M. Weske.
Business Process Management: Concepts, Languages,
Architectures, volume ISBN-10: 3540735216. Springer, 2007.
[28] O. Zimmermann, Th. Geschwind, J. Kuester, F. Leymann, and N. Schus-
ter. Reusable architectural decision models for enterprise application
development. In S. Overhage, C. Szyperski, R. Reussner, and J. Stafford,
editors, Software Architectures, Components, and Applications, volume
4880 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 15–32. Springer,
2007.
[29] F. Zucchi and J. S. Edwards. Human resource management aspects of
business process reengineering: a survey. Business Process Management
Journal, 5(4):325 – 344, 1999.
[30] Rosemann M. zur Muehlen, M. Multi-paradigm process management.
In M. Kirikova J. Grundspenkis, editor, Proceedings of CAiSE’04
Workshops - 5th Workshop on Business Process Modeling, Development
and Support (BPMDS 2004), pages 169–175, Riga, Latvia, 2004.
50
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

