Challenges for Workflows Technology to Support Crowd-sourcing Activities 
Maria E. Orlowska 
Polish-Japanese Institute of Information Technology 
Warsaw, Poland 
e-mail: omaria@pjwstk.edu.pl 
 
Abstract - Workflow systems deliver remarkable results in 
many domains of business. Deployment of workflows on a 
large scale set the standard of rigorous execution of complex 
business processes controlled by multiple constraints and often 
completed by physically distributed agents. The emerging 
trends of paid and volunteer crowd work offer potential 
opportunity for improving productivity and expanding 
creativity in performed tasks. Crowd-sourced components of a 
traditional organizational process can not be supported 
uniformly by current workflows management technology.  
This paper frames the major challenges that stand in the way 
to effectively incorporate crowd-sourcing into existing business 
environment to construct a new form of cooperation. We lay 
out research challenges in most important areas: the process 
design and verification, design of typical patterns to support 
business 
segments 
completed 
by 
asynchronous 
crowd 
involvement through unidentified partners, enhancement of 
workflows management system functionality to accommodate 
crowd-sourcing activities.     
Keywords - crowd-sourcing; workflow systems 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
There has been an essential transformation in the way 
the enterprise information technology is perceived by the 
business in current times. The period when business process 
management was just concerned with a strict scheduling of 
predefined tasks is over. With the expansion of mobile 
technology, social media and crowd sourcing, the 
expectation from the enterprise has grown-up. The nature of 
social media and crowd–sourced activities challenge the 
industry to facilitate a business process that can interact 
with individuals and assist them with their requests and 
contributions they make. Furthermore, from the workforce 
perspective, in the connected world, many activities usually 
performed by employees of a company or social 
organization may benefit from some assistance from the 
outside. Since, the concept of cooperating parties became 
common and effective, the form of outsourcing as 
the contracting out of a business process or function to a 
third-party became a strategy in many domains of business 
[10][18][25]. 
The concept of outsourcing is also used to exemplify the 
practice of delegating fragments of the overall activity on ad 
hoc bases to the third party without any obligation of 
persistence of such relationship. Typically, outsourcing is 
not limited to a single country; it includes both foreign and 
domestic 
contracting, and, 
recently, 
often 
includes 
relocation of a business function to another country. In all 
such cases, the main service provider is aware of the 
subcontracting party, its competences and reputation, 
expected quality of work and associated costs. In 
outsourcing 
arrangements, 
the 
relationship 
between 
involved parties is covered by formal agreements. Often, 
the economic considerations are the driving force for such 
business strategy, but not always. 
The concept of crowd-sourcing is one significant step 
further. It is the process of obtaining required services, 
ideas, or content by soliciting contributions from a large 
group of unidentified people, and especially from an online 
community, rather than from conventional employees or 
suppliers. It combines the efforts of many self-
identified volunteers or part-time personnel, 
where 
each 
contributor of their own initiative adds a portion to the final 
result. Let us note that often many contributors perform the 
same task not knowing about each other. Consequently, 
selection of acceptable results is additional obligation of the 
owner of such out contracted process. The most natural way 
to differentiate crowd-sourcing from outsourcing is the fact 
that the completion of an individual task comes from an 
undefined public rather than being accomplished by a 
specific, named and restricted by initial agreements 
individual. 
The most frequently used example of a crowd-sourced 
work is Wikipedia [4][17][26]. Other examples, but 
different in nature can be associated with a design and 
content evaluation [8][11]- [14][17][28], images labeling 
[1][7], extensive testing of publically accessible e-service 
functionality or a contest for general design of a physical 
entity [5][6]. The educational domain forms another group 
of applications with already well recognized impact [3][31]. 
In this paper, we look at the technology that could assist 
with 
effective 
and 
well-formed 
crowd-sourcing 
contributions to a larger business process. Established 
organizations have developed expertise in deployment of 
workflow technology for their core activities. The 
assignment of task to partners/workers, the methods and 
correctness of the process design, data flow, and time 
constraints for conventional workflows is extensively 
studied for a number of years [19]-[23]. Work on 
international standards constitutes the base for most 
products in the class of workflows allowing their 
cooperation and effective integrations [33]. However, there 
is no systemic support to incorporating publicly performed 
activities as a part of workflows supported processes. As 
initial exploitation of such mix of partners became an 
appealing and interesting option for some types of work, 
there is a well justified need for efforts towards 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

technological solutions.  It is clear, that the concept of 
business workflows partially executed by public input must 
be appropriately supported with a new workflow capability 
[33]. The call for workflow services to accommodate 
crowd-sourced activities with an acceptable quality is a new 
concept requiring further research. The purpose of this 
paper is to identify the scope of required extensions of the 
existing workflows technology to become a new generation 
of business process enhancement tools. 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we look 
at the impact on the process design generated by required 
extensions, followed by the discussion in Section III where 
we specify the scope of necessary modifications to the 
standard management systems to accommodate both groups 
of partners. Finally, in Section IV we summarize the 
discussion and outline future research work.   
II. 
PROCESS DESIGN 
 
Designing a business process and its partition into 
separate but meaningful tasks, that later are allocated to 
dedicated staff members, is a complex preparation phase 
prior to any technological solution deployment [20][21]. 
Clearly, not each task is suitable for crowd work. The 
crowd work can be seen as an element of a partnership 
between task provider, and, by contrast to typical business 
workflow, undefined workforce. Thus, when designing a 
process with crowd work participation, it is important to 
develop tools to support not only the work itself, and those 
performing the work, but also enhance the technology to 
enforce its processing according to the design decisions. 
It is characteristic that in a standard business organization, 
completion of successfully terminated tasks is not evaluated 
for the final acceptance. The complete responsibility of the 
correctness and the quality of the execution is assigned to 
the experienced and trained worker discharging the activity.   
This observation shows the major difference in the 
subsequent steps of workflow structure when crowd 
workers are involved. 
       Each crowd-sourced activity can then be executed by 
many players, with different background, different skills 
and ability to complete specified assignment, and, with not 
necessarily converging intentions of the task provider. This 
is the main reason, why the subsequent verification step, 
following the collection of submissions, must be performed 
by the professional and dedicated staff. The quality 
confirmation and the final selection of submitted work, as a 
part of our business process, are necessary. Since we 
consider the general case of the crowd-sourcing, where 
activities can be performed by unidentified individuals, we 
must have a mechanism to evaluate the submitted outputs. 
This observation impacts directly on the design phase of the 
process. Below we identify and briefly discuss major 
challenges in the design process of such a workflow. 
      The question of a direct replacement of an existing 
activity within the process by a crowd sourced action is not 
a trivial one. The traditional business workflows have a pre-
defined order of carrying out all pre-specified activities. 
This restriction impacts on the overall duration of the 
process execution and it is tightly coupled with the temporal 
constraints spanning segments of the process [19][22]. 
Allowing for a flexible engagement of the crowd-workers 
may force some relaxation of time constraints, due to 
inability to schedule such activities. Moreover, it is not easy 
to predict the number of the involved parties (players), but 
this in return, restricts corresponding definitions and the 
duration 
estimation 
of 
the 
evaluation 
procedures. 
Additionally, cross-checking the available data reflecting on 
the reputation of involved players complicates this segment 
of the process [29]. 
      It is important to note, that if the crowd activity is not a 
stand-alone, but incorporated in the rigorous well defined 
process with obligation to deal with a large scale operation, 
the process design is a new phenomenon to be addressed.  
       A subsequent part of the design process is the 
consideration dedicated to the data flow between activities 
[21]. Typically, each task has its input and output data that 
must be maintained in complete integrity. The impact of 
deployment of the crowd force, to deal with the data flow 
cross the process, must be also carefully investigated. 
An additional question relates to the fundamental workflow 
component – the work list. The traditional business systems 
supported by a workflows technology use sophisticated 
methods of allocating tasks to the individual and dedicated 
staff members. Typically, it is a small group of well trained 
and competent people. This condition can not be applied to 
the cases with unidentified partners. 
Moreover, workflow patterns [9] could be examined 
again, at this time, for the case of a crowd-sourced 
execution. It seems to be rational to attempt construction of 
new workflow patterns to deal with these specially designed 
components, such as: multiple execution of a task, 
evaluation of task completion, concurrently performing 
checks of reputation [30] and reliability of a partner, the 
credibility of work completed, and, generation of potential 
rewards structure. The effectiveness of loading all those 
listed components into existing methodology of process 
design needs to be carefully examined. Another appealing 
option points toward keeping them rather separate, but with 
well-formed method of the integration into current 
workflows systems. Further fundamental issues are 
associated with workflow engine – the heart of the 
workflows management process [33]. Those are open 
questions at the current stage of the research work. 
 
III. 
WORKFLOWS MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
A standard workflow management system allows the 
user to define multiple processes, often for different types 
of business activities or, recently, for scientific computation 
procedures [32]. At each stage of the process, one 
individual or a well identified group is fully responsible for 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

a specific task. Once the task is completed, the workflow 
software ensures that the individuals responsible for the 
next activity are promptly notified and they receive all the 
data required to execute a subsequent stage of the process 
[26]. Often, workflows can be spanned by more complex 
dependencies between process components. For example, if 
a document is to be translated into several languages, the 
translation manager could select required languages, and 
then each selection would be activated as a scheduled work 
for the translation, ready to be taken by the specific 
contracted translators. Only, when all the translators have 
completed their respective tasks, the next segment of the 
process could be scheduled. The above example might be 
considered as a suitable activity for the crowd sourcing. Let 
us look at the differences in that case by contrast to the 
standard workflow execution. Here, the system will not 
schedule those activities to interpreters. Instead, it shall 
advertise the required translation job by some form of an 
electronic communication to attract participation. Naturally, 
we can’t predict how many translators will undertake the 
work, and, how many for each language, as well as when 
precisely they will deliver their work. Therefore, we can’t 
expect completion of this activity within a particular 
identified time. To some extent, it depends from the 
translators interest in the call for this activity, the conditions 
presented etc. Finally, the quality of the submitted work 
also needs attention. We shouldn’t automatically include the 
submitted documents into production instead, verification 
checks are necessary. Even if it is perceived as a two steps 
activity, direct deployment of a standard workflow system 
to manage such crowd-sourcing will not be possible. An 
additional and important question is related to the overall 
economic viable of such an approach. Here, one can attempt 
some reasonable estimation from the hand driven 
experimentations.   
 
 
Figure 1. States transitions for a process instances 
 
According to the Workflow Reference Model [33], the 
internal conditions defining the status of a process instance 
at a particular point in time, is maintained by the workflows 
system, following the transitions allowed by the defined 
finite state machine shown on Figure 1. 
 At the level of the individual process instance, the status of 
an activity, at a given point in time, executed by a given 
worker is represented by the other finite state machine as 
depicted in Figure 2 below.  
This discussion already demonstrates that we must 
specify a number of novel concepts and necessary 
modifications to complement those already well established, 
to be able to address crowd sourcing incorporation into an 
existing process definition executed by the standard 
workflows technology. In summary, no direct allocation of 
activities indicates a necessary extension to the concept of 
work list handler, to release it from the organizational 
constraints, where competences are stored for all 
individuals capable to execute a given task. Further on, 
there should be no restrictions on the number of workers 
performing the job. Typical workflow systems do not allow 
undertaking of an activity instance for the concurrent 
execution by several workers. Furthermore, activations of 
multiple instances of the automata in Figure 1 and Figure 2 
destroy the overall concept of rigid control over the process 
progress. This observation indicates definite loss of one of 
the most expected benefits of workflows deployment: a 
precise monitoring of the individual instances, availability 
of the progress development reporting, and setup alarms of 
any departure of the execution from the design parameters.  
It is envisaged that even while not all jobs are being 
crowd executable, there are portions of almost any job that 
can be performed outside the organization. 
 
 
Figure 2. States transitions of activity instances 
 
The question how we can move towards future of crowd 
work, that is more attractive for both requester and workers, 
must be addressed while building the next generation of 
cooperation support systems.  Consideration of the 
worthiness of reconstruction of the current solutions versus 
building new from scratch to accommodate these new 
requirements is fundamental. This is another open question. 
Furthermore, it is vital to stress here that both styles of 
work, including the allocation of work segments relaxed 
from current constraints, should be offered and enforced by 
one pieces of technology.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The crowd-sourcing can take place on many different 
levels and across a range of industries. This concept touches 
crosswise many social and business interactions. It can 
change the way we work, employ, do research and 
marketing. 
Leveraging 
collaborative 
practices 
and 
providing the tools may lead to significant business 
repercussion and probable restructuring. 
However, crowd workflows are still quite undeveloped, 
and they are most successful with highly targeted single 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

tasks. Conversely, great potential hidden in the crowd 
abilities and wisdom should be better explored [28]. 
Unlocking this potential may improve productivity and 
creativity of the way the work is completed [16].  
This paper lists only selected aspects of research to be 
undertaken to get to the next stage of a generic support for 
this type of crowd involvement. We pointed out that the 
current technology, build with overall intension of business 
process enforcement within a group of trusted partners, is 
not suitable for a simple extension.  
The most promising research plan should include 
attempts to relax some of the constraints imposed on the 
standard concept of an activity. The minimum requirements 
for effective construction of a predefined process patterns 
should include crowd work progress reports, followed by a 
selection of the reputable partners and finally evaluation by 
the process owner. The new process segments should be 
easily customizable for the different types of activities. 
Further modification to the work list handler and the strict 
execution schema ordered by the steady finite state 
machines allows believing that perhaps “light” workflows 
solution is needed. Such a complete segment (including all 
the steps required to accommodate crowd work) could be 
perceived as a single activity of a standard workflow 
process.  
All the considerations on the synthetic data have been 
promising and indicate sensibility of this approach.  
To move ahead, through an iterative approach, we shall 
build essential components to accommodate all the crowd 
involvement requirements. An extensive experimentation is 
vital for the final usability assessment of the introduced 
ideas. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] L. Von Ahn and L. Dabbish, ” Labeling images with 
computer game”. Proceedings of the SIGC conference on 
Human factors in computing systems, ACM , 2004,  pp. 319-
326. 
[2]  A. Anagnostopoulos,  L. Becchetti, C. C. Castillo, A. Gionis 
and S. Leonardi, “Online team formation in social 
networks”. Proceedings of the 21st international conference 
on World Wide Web, ACM, 2012, pp. 839-848. 
[3] M. Anderson, “Crowdsourcing Higher Education: A Design 
Proposal for Distributed Learning”. MERLOT Journal of 
Online Learning and Teaching 7, 4, 2011, pp. 576-590. 
[4] S. L. Bryant, A. Forte and A. Bruckman, “Becoming 
Wikipedian: 
transformation 
of 
participation 
in 
a 
collaborative online encyclopedia”. GROUP ’05, ACM 
Press, 2005, pp. 1-10. 
[5] N. Archak and A. Sundararajan,  “Optimal Design of 
Crowdsourcing Contests”. ICIS 2009 Proceedings, 2009,  
pp. 1-16. 
[6] J. J. Chen, N. J. Menezes and A. D. Bradley, “Opportunities 
for Crowdsourcing Research on Amazon Mechanical Turk”. 
Interfaces 5, 2011,  pp. 1-3. 
[7] O. Dekel  and O. Shamir, “Vox populi: Collecting high-
quality labels from a crowd”. Proc. 22nd   Annual 
Conference on Learning Theory, 2009,  pp. 377-386. 
[8] J. Chevalier and D. Mayzlin, “The effect of word of mouth 
on sales: Online book reviews”. Journal of Marketing 
Research, 43(3). 2006,  pp. 345-354. 
[9] W. M. Van Der Aalst, A. H. Ter Hofstede, B. Kiepuszewski 
and A. P. Barros,  “Workflow patterns”. Distributed and 
parallel databases 14, 1 2003,  pp. 5-51. 
[10] C. Dellarocas,“Strategic Manipulation of Internet Opinion 
Forums: 
Implications 
for 
Consumers 
and 
Firms”. 
Management Science, 52(10), 2006,  pp. 1577-1593. 
[11] M. Franklin, D. Kossmann, T.  Kraska, S. Ramesh and R. 
Xin, “CrowdDB: answering queries with crowdsourcing”. 
Proc. SIGMOD ’11, 2011,  pp. 61-72. 
[12] K. Heimerl, B.  Gawalt, K. Chen, T. S. Parikh and B. 
Hartmann, “Communitysourcing: Engaging Local Crowds to 
Perform Expert Work Via Physical Kiosks”. Proc. CHI ’12, 
2012,  pp.1539-1548. 
[13] A. Kittur, B.  Smus, S. Khamkar and R. E. Kraut, 
“Crowdforge: Crowdsourcing complex work”. Proceedings 
of the 24th annual ACM symposium on User interface 
software and technology, 2011, pp. 43-52. 
[14] M. I. Melnik and J.Alm, „Does a seller's ecommerce 
reputation matter? evidence from ebay auctions”. Journal of 
Industrial Economics, 50(3). 2002, pp. 337-349. 
[15] A, Kittur, B. Suh and E. H. Chi, “Can you ever trust a wiki?: 
impacting 
perceived 
trustworthiness 
in 
Wikipedia”. 
Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work, 2008, pp. 477-480. 
[16] A. Kittur, “Crowdsourcing, collaboration and creativity”. 
XRDS 17, 2, 2010, pp. 22-26. 
[17] M. J. Metzger, “Making sense of credibility on the web: 
Models 
for 
evaluating 
online 
information 
and 
recommendations for future research”. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. 
Technol. (58), 2007, pp. 2078-2091. 
[18] P. Resnick, R. J. Zeckhauser, J. Swanson and K. Lockwood, 
“The value of reputation on ebay: A controlled experiment”. 
Experimental Economics, 9(2), 2006, pp. 1-47. 
[19] S. W. Sadiq, O. Marjanovic and M. E. Orlowska,   
“Managing change and time in dynamic workflow 
processes”. International Journal of Cooperative Information 
Systems, 2000, pp. 93-116.  
[20] S. W. Sadiq, M. E. Orłowska and W. Sadiq, “Specification 
and 
validation 
of 
process 
constraints 
for 
flexible 
workflows”. Information Systems , 30, 2005, pp. 349-378.  
[21] S. W. Sadiq, M. E. Orlowska, W.  Sadiq and C.   Foulger,  
”Data flow and validation in workflow modeling.” 
Proceedings of the 15th Australasian database conference-
Volume 27, 2004, pp. 207-214. 
[22] S. W. Sadiq, W. Sadiq and M. E. Orlowska, “Pockets of 
flexibility in workflow specification”.Conceptual Modeling-
ER, 2001, pp. 513-526. 
[23] W. Sadiq and M. E. Orłowska, “Analyzing Process Models 
using Graph Reduction Techniques”. Information Systems 
(25), 2000, pp. 117-134. 
[24] J. Schroer and G. Hertel,  “Voluntary Engagement in an 
Open Web-Based Encyclopedia: Wikipedians and Why 
They Do It” Media Psychology 12, 1, 2009,  pp. 96-120. 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

[25] S. Senecal and J. Nantel,  “The influence of online product 
recommendations on consumers' online choices”. Journal of 
Retailing, 80(2), 2004, pp. 159-169.  
[26] M. Shen, G. H.  Tzeng  and D. R. Liu, “Multi-criteria task 
assignment in workflow management systems”.System 
Sciences, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
36th 
Annual 
Hawaii 
International Conference on Social Sciences, 2003. 
[27] J. Surowiecki, “The wisdom of crowds: why the many are 
smarter than the few and how collective wisdom shapes 
business, economies, societies and nations”. Boston, MA: 
Little, Brown, 2004. 
[28] Y. Tanaka and K. Yamamoto, “Enhancing credibility 
judgment of web search results”. CHI'11. New York: ACM . 
2011, pp. 1235-1244. 
[29] N. Thompson, “More companies pay heed to their "word of 
mouse" reputation”. New York Times, 2003. 
[30] D. Wilson and R. Kreps, “Reputation and imperfect 
information”. Journal of Economic Theory (27), 1982, pp. 
253-279.  
[31] D. S. Weld, E. Adar, L. Chilton, R. Hoffmann and E. 
Horvitz, “Personalized Online Education—A Crowdsourcing 
Challenge”. 
Workshops at 
the 
Twenty-Sixth 
AAAI 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2012. 
[32] J. Yu and R. Buyya, “A taxonomy of scientific workflow 
systems for grid computing”. ACM Sigmod Record 34, 3, 
2005, pp. 44-49. 
[33] The Workflows Reference Model, Workflows Management 
Coalition, http://www.wfmc.org/standards/docs/tc003v11.p 
[retrieved: January, 2015] 
 
 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

