 
Critical Success Factors in the Implementation of ERP Systems in Public Sector 
Organizations in African Developing Countries 
 
Marie-Douce Primeau 
Management and Technology Department 
École des Sciences de la Gestion (ESG), UQAM 
Montréal, Canada 
Email : primeau.marie-douce@uqam.ca
Abstract—In the wake of budget restriction and increased 
pressure for transparency and accountability, more and more 
Public Sector Organizations (PSO) have opted to implement 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems. PSO of 
developing countries have also followed this trend, pressured 
not only by the demands of accountability and efficiency from 
their own citizens but also from the multinational and 
binational development agencies that fund a majority of the 
development projects and programs that they deliver. ERP is 
also seen as a way to foster organizational transformation, 
though best practices adoption and process harmonization. 
Yet, success rate of ERP systems implementation, adoption, as 
well as their perceived results are less then optimal. This paper 
aims to explore the Critical Success Factors (CSF) in the 
implementation of an ERP system in PSO in African 
developing countries, in hope to give practitioners and 
decision-makers tools to increase the chances of success of 
these initiatives. 
Keywords-Enterprise Resource Planning – ERP; public 
sector organizations; Critical Success Factors – CSF; developing 
countries. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
An increasing number of Public Sector Organizations 
(PSO) has opted to implement Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP) systems. This trend is also followed by developing 
countries, pressured not only by the same demands from 
their own citizens but also from the multinational and 
binational funding development agencies.   
ERP system implementation is still in its early stages in 
developing countries, with Asia-Pacific and Latin America 
accounting for most of its expansion, and Africa trailing 
behind [1]. Yet, today it is estimated that developing 
countries account for 10% of all ERP sales [2]. In North 
America and Europe, the private sector is the main client of 
ERP systems. In developing countries, ERP are mainly 
deployed in large organizations, rather than in SMEs. The 
public sector being the largest employer in developing 
countries [3], the main proportion of ERP systems is 
implemented in PSO. This specificity adds an additional 
level of complexity to an already complex project, since 
funding usually comes in part from external single or 
multiple donors, with their own interests in the project, and 
their own procurement, management and monitoring 
processes. Success rate of ERP systems implementation, 
adoption, as well as their perceived results in PSO in 
developing countries are less then optimal. Yet, little 
research has been undertaken to understand the specific 
Critical Success Factors (CSF) of the implementation 
process of ERP in PSO in developing countries. 
Based on secondary data analysis of CSF collected 
through four professional workshops with key stakeholders, 
this paper aims to explore this gap. Section 2 presents a state 
of the art on ERP systems. Section 3 presents the 
Methodology of this paper, while section 4 presents the main 
Results. Section 5 reviews the Conclusion and before the 
discussion in section 6.  
II. 
CONTEXT  
In this section, we will define the main terms used in this 
paper such as ERP, PSO and developped/developping 
countries; describe the reasons why PSO would implement 
ERP systems; and explore main CSF in ERP systems 
implementation, both in general and specific to PSO in 
developping countries. 
A. What is an ERP? 
 An ERP system is an “adaptable and evolutive software 
system that supports real-time and integrated management of 
a majority – if not all – processes of an organization” [4, p. 
70]. ERP systems are an integrated, modular, customizable 
and uniform (database, management and interface) software 
[5][6].  
 
Figure 1.  Conceptual model for Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), 
Marnewick and Labuschagne [24]. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-710-8
BUSTECH 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

ERP systems are highly complex [24]. Marnewick and 
Labuschagne [24] postulate that ERP systems can be 
conceptualize as a combination of four main components: 
Software (Product), Process Flow (Performance), Change 
Management (Process) and Consumer Mindset (People; 
Figure 1 below). All four components are implemented 
through a Methodology, which underlines each ERP life-
cycle phases (pre-implementation, implementation and post-
implementation phases [7]).  
Conceptual 
model 
components: 
The 
Software 
component refers to the ERP product itself, such as its main 
features, choice of interface, and other technical aspects, as 
well as its development, testing and troubleshooting. The 
Process flow component refers to the way the different ERP 
modules flow within and between them. This includes both 
the processes themselves and the data they store and 
process. The Consumer mindset component refers to the 
need for stakeholder management at the user, team and 
organizational levels. Lastly, the change management 
component covers all factors pertaining to the planning, 
managing and controlling of changes. Change management 
is divided in four subcomponents, namely: user attitudes 
changes, project changes, business process changes, and 
system changes. Methodology refers to the “systematic 
approach to implement an ERP system” [24, p.153]. All 
together, these components help better approach ERP 
system’s complexity. 
B. Why would PSO want to implement an ERP system?  
PSO consists of “governments and all publicly 
controlled or publicly funded agencies, enterprises, and 
other entities that deliver public programs, goods, or 
services”, and exists at any level – international, 
national/federal, regional or local) [3].  
Public and private sectors have “different goals and 
motives and are governed by somewhat different principles, 
with 
unique 
groups 
overseeing 
their 
actions 
and 
procedures”.  Organizations in the private sector have “more 
freedom to operate, while public organizations are governed 
by laws, rules, traditions, and structural bureaucratic checks 
and balances”[8].  
Although very different, benefits sought during ERP 
system implementation seem consistent among public- and 
private-sector organizations [9]. These benefits include 
improvements in: 
Financial performance: improves financial management; 
creates value; maximizes investments; and reduces costs; 
Functional performance: increases productivity, quality of 
services, and functional efficiency; improves management 
of resources; enables automation of operational procedures; 
eliminates redundant data and operations; and reduces cycle 
times; 
Organizational performance: increases organizational 
performance; enables the centralization and delocalization 
of maintenance services; increases adaptability; facilitates 
harmonization around best practices; enhances support to 
organizational activities; and changes nature of work in 
various units and departments; 
Communication management: centralises and harmonizes 
information; improves management and organization of 
internal and external information flux, and improves 
security and information access management;  
Internal audit, monitoring and control: improves controls 
and institutional accountability; enhances organizations 
regulatory compliance; achieves accuracy in management 
information system; enables real-time access to performance 
information, which in turn fosters better strategic analysis 
and decision [5][10][11].  
Furthermore, a study on the impact of ERP systems in 
small and midsized PSO suggests that implementing an ERP 
system helped PSO improve services to customers and 
suppliers; enhance knowledge of primary users and increase 
shareholders confidence in organization [11]. With all those 
potential benefits, we have to ask ourselves: why are not all 
PSO implementing ERP systems? 
C. Is ERP implementation in PSO successful?  
As discussed below, ERP system implementation can 
have important benefits for PSO. Nevertheless, ERP system 
implementation can be cost and time consuming [12]. As 
example, the cost of ERP implementation in UN 
organizations is estimated at 712 millions United States 
Dollar (USD). This does not include recurring maintenance 
costs (at least 66 millions USD per year), nor the off-budget 
associated costs (between 86 and 110 millions USD per 
year).  
Furthermore, failure rate, both in private and public 
organization, is high. The 2016 ERP Report [13] states that 
less that 10% of all ERP projects sampled in 2015 were 
implemented on time, within budget and in respect to the 
planned scope. More than a third (35%) was stopped or 
(indefinitely) differed. The remaining 55% were completed 
with an average of 178% cost and 230% schedule overruns. 
In fact, ERP implementation projects lasted 1 to 3 years, 
with an average of 21 months, while most projects had been 
planned around an 8-14 months timetable. 
Although data on the subject is scarce, ERP systems 
implementation failure rate in PSO in developing countries 
is believes to be even higher. In his study of ERP 
implementation in Egyptian organizations, Abdelghaffar 
[14] argued that 75% of ERP implementation attempts can 
be classified as failures. Another study found schedule 
overruns in 67% and cost overruns in 33% of all ERP 
implementation projects in United Nations organizations 
[10]. Reasons frequently mentioned to explain these 
schedule overruns were: changes in project scope; delays in 
personalization of software; users resistance to change, 
delays in data conversion, changes in initial project strategy, 
and redefinition of operating procedures. As for cost 
overruns, they were attributable mainly to unplanned 
personalization costs; inadequate definition of functional 
needs; unforeseen delays in the implementation process, and 
unrealistic cost estimation planning. No data was found on 
ERP implementation success in African developing 
countries, even if failure rates are though to be higher than 
in developed countries [5]. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-710-8
BUSTECH 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

D. Are all PSO the same? or How do PSO from developing 
countries differ from PSO from African developed 
countries?  
United Nations divides countries into two categories: 
developed and developing countries. This classification is 
mainly based on economic indicators and indices such as 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), Gross National Product 
(GNP), 
per 
capita 
income, 
unemployment 
rates, 
industrialization and standard of living [15]. The developing 
countries categories include both developing and least 
developed countries, most of which are in Africa.  
Contrary to developed countries, most PSO in African 
developing countries are funded (partly of entirely) by 
external funding. These funds usually come from 
multidonors/multilateral 
aid 
agencies, 
and 
with 
an 
obligation to prove the results of PSO’s initiatives (result-
based management). ERP implementation projects are often 
imposed by the donor agencies as a way to increase 
transparency and guarantee accountability of PSO. 
Considering the important costs – both financial, social 
and political – associated to ERP implementation failures in 
PSO in African developing countries, it is important to 
understand the CSF that could hinder or facilitation this 
process.  
E. What are the CSF in ERP systems implementation in 
PSO in African developing countries? 
In order to support organizations in their implementation 
efforts, practitioners and researchers have come up with 
CSF that facilitate or hinder implementation. CSF are 
defined as "factors needed to ensure a successful ERP 
project" [16]. This includes both factors that facilitate and 
hinders the implementation of an ERP system. These factors 
vary depending of the nature and environment of the 
organization [17]. Yet most research on ERP success factors 
have been done in developing countries, in the context of 
private-sector organizations.  
Through their literature review of CSF in ten different 
countries/regions, Ngai, Law and Wat identified 18 CSF, 
with more than 80 subfactors for the successful 
implementation of an ERP. The CSF are: appropriate 
business 
and 
IT 
legacy 
system; 
business 
plan/vision/goals/justification; 
business 
process 
reengineering; change management, communication; data 
accuracy; ERP strategy and implementation; ERP project 
team; ERP vendor; monitoring and evaluation performance; 
organizational characteristics; project champion; project 
management; 
software 
development, 
testing, 
and 
troubleshooting; top management support; fit between ERP 
and business/process; national culture; and country-related 
functional requirements [17]. This typology has been used 
by many other scholars to guide their analysis of the 
influence of CSF in phases of an ERP implementation 
process. 
In the last years, a few studies have tried to identify CSF 
specific to ERP implementation in PSO of developing 
countries.  
In its assessment of ERP implementation projects in its 
organizations, the United Nations identified 11 CSF, 
namely: 
project 
planning 
and 
software 
selection; 
governance of the project, risk management, change 
management, project team, end users training and 
assistance; ERP system hosting and infrastructure; data 
conversion and systems integration, ERP upgrade, and 
project audit [10].  
Another study from the World Bank identified eight CSF 
from its experience implementing ERP systems, namely: 
capacity building and training, close supervision and control 
from the donor agency, favorable political context and 
leadership; pre-existing favorable environment (IT, HR, 
Accounting); adequate preparation and clear conception; 
good project management and coordination, and external 
environment factors [18]. It also identified main failure 
factors, which were: inappropriate training/education of 
project 
teams; 
institutional/organizational 
resistance; 
inadequate project preparation and planning; complex 
conception/high number of procurements; organizational 
structure adapted to integration efforts; inadequate IT 
infrastructure; absence of leadership/engagement and 
ambiguous 
attitude 
of 
authorities, 
regarding 
implementation; 
inappropriate 
technology; 
inadequate 
project coordination; and external factors (political troubles, 
natural disasters). These failure factors are consistent with 
other studies on ERP implement issues in developing 
countries [5][12]. 
These studies offer some insight on perceived CSF in 
ERP implementation from the point of view of donor 
agencies. Yet, these highlight the need to further explore the 
Critical Success Factors (CSF) in the implementation of an 
ERP system in PSO in African developing countries, in 
hope to give practitioners and decision-makers tools to 
increase the chances of success of these initiatives. This 
paper will try to address this gap. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
This work uses secondary data collected through 
professional workshops with key stakeholders that have 
direct experience either in the planning, managing or 
implementing of an ERP in PSO in developing countries. A 
description of the initial data collection process and 
methods, as well as a overview ot the data analysis 
techniques and conceptual model used for secondary data 
analysis follows. 
A. Data collection – primary data 
Primary data was collected through four 1 ½- 2 hours 
professional workshops. In total, 140 participants took part in 
the workshops. The workshops took place in Abidjan (Ivory 
Coast), Rabat (Morocco) and Marrakech (Morocco). The 
following subsection offers an overview of the composition 
of each of the workshop groups. 
 Workshop no1: 15 participants from a multilateral 
development bank institution working as Task team 
Leaders, Procurement and Monitoring and Evaluation 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-710-8
BUSTECH 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Specialists, and Managers. Languages: English and 
French. 
 Workshop no2: 85 participants from public and 
parapublic organizations. Participants worked as 
directors, project or program managers, procurement or 
monitoring and evaluation sectors on single or 
multidonors initiatives. Two came from the academia. 
Language: French. 
 Workshop 
no3: 
26 
participants 
from 
public 
organization sector or project and programs funded 
through single or multidonors development aid. 
Languages: French and Arabic. 
 Workshop no4: 14 participants from West Africa 
working as either project or program managers or 
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialists on single donor 
or multidonors projects or programs. Language: French. 
The diverse composition of the different groups was one 
of the main difficulties facing the workshop facilitators 
(english/french/arabic languages, professional status, type of 
organizations, and number of participants per session). To 
increase 
participation 
and 
create 
cohesion 
between 
participants of the workshops, facilitators used World Café 
as a data collection method.  
World café is a collaborative approach that aims to “to 
engage [participants] in constructive dialogue around critical 
questions, to build personal relationships, and to foster 
collaborative learning [21, p.28]”, helping creative new ways 
to address problems emerge from the initiative. Simple and 
flexible, the approach can be used both in small and large 
heterogeneous groups to foster open dialogue and 
collaboration [22].  
World café follows seven integrated design principles, 
namely:  
 Set the context; 
 Create a hospitable space; 
 Explore questions that matter; 
 Encourage everyone’s contribution; 
 Connect diverse perspectives; 
 Listen together for patterns and insights; 
 Share collective discoveries [22]. 
At the end of each of the workshops, participants drafted 
a list of factors that facilitated and hindered the 
implementation of an ERP. All entries of the four lists were 
then combined by the facilitators. This final compilation 
was sent to all workshop participants in the conference 
proceedings by the event organizers. These conference 
proceedings are the basis of our analysis. 
B. Data analysis 
To facilitate understanding, subthemes were then 
organized using a modified version of Marnewick and 
Labuschagne [24]’s ERP Conceptual Model. This modified 
version includes all four main components (Software, 
Process Flow, Change Management, Consumer Mindset), 
Methodology, and adds a last component - external 
environment. This component was added to take into 
account the influence of national culture [17] and other 
macroeconomic factors, on the implementation of ERP 
systems in African developing countries. The ERP project 
financing will also fall under this category, as it has a major 
impact on ERP implementation in developing countries 
[10]. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The following section presents our results, namely the 
CSF identified and categorized, using the adapted 
conceptual model. In total, forty CSF were identified 
through this process. To facilitate understanding, results are 
presented per components, namely: Software, Process flow, 
Consumer mindset, Change management, Methodology, and 
External environment. 
A. Software 
In total, five CSF were identified by participants for the 
Software component, namely: software development, testing 
and troubleshooting; ERP vendors/suppliers relationships; 
country-related functional requirements; local infrastructure; 
ERP infrastructure and hosting; and IP maturity of 
organizations. 
Software development, testing and troubleshooting: 
participants underlined the importance of the choices made 
through theses phases, and the need for user participation in 
the process to facilitate adoption.   
ERP 
vendors/suppliers 
relationships: 
Participants 
highlighted 
that 
the 
lack 
of 
local 
vendors 
gives 
disproportionate power of international vendors, and hinders 
optimal selection of ERP systems by PSO.  
Country-related functional requirements: Participants 
also discussed the fact that ERP often didn’t meet their 
specific PSO requirements, e.g., integration of performance 
indicators at the result level, reporting formats that do not fit 
the donor requirements, etc. 
Local 
infrastructure: 
Access 
to 
electricity, 
telecommunications and Internet remain problematic, 
especially when outside urban agglomerations, though 
significant improvements have been made in recent years. 
This has a major impact not only on ERP implementation 
but adoption by users. 
ERP infrastructure and hosting: More and more ERP 
systems are cloud-based. Because of the lack of access to 
basic amenities in many parts of African countries, many 
ERP options are not feasible. ERP hosting is also a problem, 
not only because of security but also because of access to 
electricity. 
IT 
maturity 
of 
organizations: 
Participants 
also 
underlined the low IT maturity in most African PSO, which 
hinders their ability to facilitate ERP implementation.   
B. Process flow 
The 
Process 
flow 
component 
includes 
two 
subcategories: Process and Data. In total, seven CSF were 
identified by participants for the Process flow component. 
1) Process 
In total, three CSF were identified by participants for the 
Process subcomponent, namely: Fit between ERP and an 
organization’s 
procedures; 
Harmonized 
practices, 
procedures and processes; and Communication. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-710-8
BUSTECH 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Fit between ERP and an organization’s procedures: 
PSO in developing countries, because of their funding and 
organizational structure, have specific procedures (e.g., 
burdensome administrative and procurement procedures, 
strict monitoring and evaluation requirements, etc.). ERP 
systems are created around private-sector (occidental) best 
practices. Therefore, the product offered is often than not 
difficult to adapt to African PSO’s needs 
Harmonized practices, procedures and processes: ERP 
systems aims to limit the possibility or errors by limiting the 
number of times a same information has to be entered in the 
system. Yet, because of the lack of harmonized procedures, 
users still have the obligation to enter information on 
multiple software. 
Communication: participants highlighted the need for 
communication and information, sharing management plan, 
in order to maximize the probability of successful 
implementation. 
2) Data 
In total, four CSF were identified by participants for the 
Data subcomponent, namely: data quality control, data 
collection (aka presence of a Monitoring and Evaluation 
System), data management (including Security, Access, 
Traceability), and data conversion. 
C. Change management 
The Change management component can be divided into 
four subcomponents, namely: User attitude, Business 
process change, project change and System change 
management. In total, nine CSF were identified by 
participants in the Change management component. 
1) User attitude management 
Participants identified three CSF pertaining to user 
attitude management, namely: Need for communication, 
Need for training and education, and User active 
participation in ERP implementation. 
2) Business processes change management 
Participants identified two CSF pertaining to Business 
process change management, namely: Need for real-time 
information; Need for harmonization of practices and 
processes.  
3) System change management 
Participants identified three CSF pertaining to System 
change management, namely: Management and Corporate 
culture 
change, 
management 
of 
Interests, 
and 
Communication. 
4) Project change management 
Participants identified one CSF pertaining to Project 
change management, namely : Need for effective change 
control management processes and procedures.  
D. Consumer mindset 
The Consumer mindset component includes three 
subcategories, namely: User mindset, Team mindset, and 
Organizational mindset. In total, fifteen CSF were identified 
by participants for the Consumer mindset component. 
1) User mindset 
In total, five CSF were identified for the User mindset 
subcomponent, namely: User attitudes/Resistance to change, 
Technical level of competencies and knowledge of users; 
Qualified personnel; Stability of teams (attrition rate), and 
Access to training.  
2) Team mindset 
In total, four CSF were identified for the Team mindset 
subcomponent, namely: Team composition (status/treatment, 
multidiscipline, 
and 
employment), 
Collaboration, 
Leadership, and Competencies.  
3) Organization mindset 
In total, six CSF were identified for the Organization 
mindset subcomponent, namely: Prior experience in ERP 
implementation, 
Change 
management 
competences, 
Organizational commitment, Presence of a champion, Shared 
Vision, mission and organizational goals, Ownership of 
project by stakeholhers. 
E. Methodology 
In total, two CSF were identified by participants for the 
Methodology 
component, 
namely: 
Clear 
ERP 
implementation strategy, and Good project management. 
Project 
management: 
Participants 
stressed 
the 
importance 
of 
good 
project 
management 
in 
ERP 
implementation, namely the need for clear planning, project 
division in multiple steps; realistic performance demands 
and deadlines, and collecting of lessons learned; planning of 
implementation costs and maintenance. 
Clear 
ERP 
implementation 
strategy, 
and 
its 
communication to stakeholders, were also seen prerequisite 
for success. 
F. External environment 
In total, two CSF were identified by participants in the 
External environment component, namely: National culture 
and Donor-Recipient relations 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Our results highlight the specific nature of ERP systems 
implementation in PSO in African countries. Certain CSF 
seem to be only found in this context, e.g., External 
environment CSF, such as national culture and donor-
recipient relationships, ERP vendors/suppliers relationships; 
country-related functional requirements; local infrastructure; 
ERP infrastructure and hosting). But even when general 
categories of CSF were observed in both PSO in African 
countries and in developed countries (e.g., Change 
management, Consumer mindset), the way the materialize 
and that they influence the process differed. For instance, 
Team 
composition, 
collaboration, 
leadership 
and 
competencies were found to be CSF in both contexts. Yet, 
ERP project teams in developing countries are a 
combination of consultants, who are often lent by the PSO 
themselves (not always for their competencies), and that are 
paid in a day what the rest of the teammates will do in a 
month. This hinders the collaboration and leadership of the 
team leaders. Another example of CSF’s specificity is the 
Organisational commitment, as in African PSO, high 
management is often the one who benefits from the lack of 
transparency and accountability, and therefore are the main 
opponents of these type of initiatives.  
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-710-8
BUSTECH 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

VI. 
DISCUSSION 
ERP implementation projects are often 
wrongly 
considered IT projects, when in fact they are major 
organizational transformation initiatives [22] that will 
significantly change the processes, structure, even the culture 
of an organization [10]. In line with current research [12], the 
need for training and education, top management support and 
multilevel change management were most cited CSF by 
participants.  
Our results also highlights that CSF’ influence vary 
depending of many factors, such as organizational and 
national culture, type of implementation process chosen (one 
time or gradual implementation), etc. This converge with 
Zouagui and Laghouag’s findings [17]. Yet, these 
specificities are rarely taken into account in ERP 
implementation in PSC in African developing countries 
projects. Still, further research is needed to better understand 
and conceptualize the CSF in ERP implementation in PSO in 
the African developing countries.  
REFERENCES 
[1] GVR, ERP Software Market Analysis by Deployment and 
End-Users, and Forecasts to 2022, 120p, 2017. 
[2] A. Hawari   and R.   Heeks,    “Explaining  ERP  Failure  in  
A  Developing Country: A Jordanian Case Study”, Journal of 
Enterprise Information  Management, vol.23, pp. 135-160, 
doi: 10.1108/17410391011019741, 2010. 
[3] S. Dube and D. Damescu, “Supplemental Guidance: Public 
Sector Definition”, The Institute of Internal Auditors. 
December 2011, [Online] from https://na.theiia.org/standards-
guidance/Public%20Documents/Public%20Sector%20Definiti
on.pdf [retrieved: April 12th, 2019] 
[4] S. Uwizeyemungu, “Evaluation of integrated software on 
organixational 
performance : 
process 
methodology 
development”, 353 p, 2008. 
[5] P. M.. Kengue, “ERP and integrated information system 
contribution in ONU driven development projects”, 297p. 
[6] K. Debbabi, “Cognitive and emotional determinants of 
information 
and 
communication 
new 
technologies 
acceptability: integrated management cases”, 248p. 
[7] S. I. Chang, G. Gable, E. Smythe, and G.Timbrell, “A Delphi 
examination of public sector ERP implementation issues. In 
Proceedings 21st International Conference on Information 
Systems, pages pp. 494-500, Brisbane,Qld., 2000. Available 
from:  http://eprints.qut.edu.au/archive/00004746 [retrieved: 
April 10th, 2019] 
[8] San Francisco University, “5 Key Differences Between 
Organizations from the Public and Private Sectors”, [Online] 
from 
https://onlinempadegree.usfca.edu/news-
resources/news/5-key-differences-between-organizations-in-
the-public-and-private-sectors/ [retrieved: April 12th, 2019] 
[9] J. L. Harrison, “Motivations for Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP) System Implementation in Public versus Private Sector 
Organization”, 2004, Electronic Theses and Dissertations 31, 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://stars.library.ucf.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1030
&context=etd, [retrieved: April 10th, 2019] 
[10] United Nations Group, “Study of management software 
integrated in United Nations organisations”, [Online] 
Available 
from http://undocs.org/fr/A/68/344. 
2012 
[retrieved: April 12th, 2019] 
[11] A. R. Singla, “Impact of ERP Systems on Small and Mid 
Sized Public Sector Enterprises”, Journal of Theoretical and 
Applied Information Technology, pp.119-131, 2008. 
[12] A.Tobie Manga, R.Atsa Etoundi, and J. Zoa, “A Literature 
Review of ERP Implementation in African Countries”, 
Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing 
Countried vol.7, pp.1-20, 2016. 
[13] Panorama Consulting Solution Group, “2016 Report on ERP 
Systems and Enterprise Software”, [Online] Available from: 
https://www.panorama-consulting.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/07/2016-ERP-Report-2.pdf [retrieved: 
April 12th, 2019] 
[14] H. Abdelghaffar, “Success Factors for ERP Implementation in 
Large Organizations: The Case of Egypt”, The Electronic 
Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries, 
vol.52, 4, pp. 1-13, December 2012, doi: 10.1002/j.1681-
4835.2012.tb00369.x  
[15] United Nations Group, “Working Together: integration, 
institutions, and the Sustainable Development Goals: World 
Public Sector Report 2018”, UN Division  for  Public  
Administration 
 
and 
 
Development 
 
Management,  
Department of Economics and Social Affairs (DPADM), New 
York, 
April 
2018 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Documents/UNPAN
98152.pdf, [retrieved: April 12th, 2019] 
[16] D. Allen, T. Kern, and M. Havenhand, M. “ERP Critical 
Success Factors: an Exploration of the Contextual Factors in 
Public Sectors Institutions”. in Proceedings of the Annual 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 
Waikoloa, Hawaii, 2002. 
[17] E. W. T. Ngai, C. C. H.Law, and F. K. T. Wat, Examining the 
critical success factors in the adoption of entreprise resource 
planning”, Computers in Industry Journal, vol.59, pp. 548-
564, August 2008, doi: 10.1016/j.compind.2007.12.001 
[18] C. Dener, J.A. Watkins, and W.L. Dorotinsky, “Financial 
management information systems : 25 years experience in 
World Bank on what’s working, and what’s not”, Washington 
DC : World Bank, doi : 10.1596/878-0-8213-8750-4, 2011. 
[19] Z, Huang,  Z. and P. Palvia,  “ERP Implementation  Issues  in  
Advanced  and Developing   Countries”, Business  Process 
Management Journal, vol.7 (3), pp. 276-284, 2001.doi: 
10.1108/14637150110392773. 
[20] A. Asemi and M. D. Jazi,  “A Comparative   Study   of   
Critical   Success Factors  (Csfs)  in  Implementation  of  ERP  
in Developed and Developing Countries”, International     
Journal     of Advancement in Computing Technology, vol. 2, 
pp. 99-110. December 2010. Doi: 10.4156/ijact.vol2.issue5.11 
[21] C. Fouché and G. Light. “An invitation to Dialogue: ‘The 
World Café’ in Social Research Work”, Qualitative Social 
Work, 
vol.10, 
pp. 
28-48, 
March 
2011, 
doi 
10.1177/1473325010376016. 
[22] J. Brown and D. Isaacs, World Café Community, M. J. 
Wheatley, and P. Senge, “The World Café Book: Shaping our 
Futures Through Conversations that Matter”, CA: Berrett-
Koehler Publishers, 2005.  
[23] R. Boyatzis, “Transforming qualitative information: Thematic 
analysis and code development”. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 
1998. 
[24] C. Marnewick and L. Labuschagne, “Conceptual model for 
enterprise 
resource 
planning 
(ERP)”, 
in 
Information 
Management & Computer Security, vol. 13(2), pp. 144-155, 
April 2005,doi: 10.1108/09685220510589325. 
[25] P. Kraemmerand, C.. Moller, and H. Boer, “ERP 
Implementation: an Integrated Process of Radical Change and 
Continuous Learning”, Production Planning and Control vol. 
14, pp. 338-348,  2003.  
[26] A. L. Zouaghi, “ Aligning Key Success Factors to ERP 
Implementation Strategy: Learning from Case Study”. 
International Journal of Buiciness Information Systems 
vol.22, 
January 
2016, 
pp.100-115, 
doi: 
10.1504/IJBIS.2016.07572
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-710-8
BUSTECH 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

