Blockchain for Optimized Digital Identity (DIDOs) 
Abdessamad El akroudi 
Paragraph research Lab, University of Paris VIII  
Paris, France 
e-mail: abdessamad.el-akroudi@etud.univ-paris8.fr 
Rakia Jaziri 
Paragraph research Lab, University of Paris VIII  
Paris, France 
e-mail: Rjaziri@univ-paris8.fr
 
 
Abstract—The blockchain is a new and emerging technology 
that gives us the opportunity to explore a new type of 
application, and a new class of problem solving. Blockchain has 
acquired massive popularity over the past few years. It has 
changed the way of thinking about data and trust, and the 
relation between them. This work is a part of our publication’s 
series aiming to build a data trust on top of a decentralized 
identity (DID) which we name Data Trust Protocol. In this 
article, we focus on the DID. We propose an implementation of 
a DID based on W3C specification, as well as our vision about 
the future of data trust on top of a DID. We will answer some 
questions related to this implementation. 
Keywords -  Decentralized Identity; Issuer; Holder; Verifier; 
MicroServices; DID Document; BlockChain; Data Registry;  
I. INTRODUCTION 
In the last decade, with the exploding number of 
applications that we use on a daily basis, we mostly use an 
email or a username or a key provided by organizations or 
services as our identifiers. Those providers become a single 
point of failure between users and every action they made 
which needs authentication. Google and Apple control two of 
the biggest federated login systems with “Login width” 
button. Users expose their identity details in a centralized 
manner with a major risk of identity theft, identity usurpation. 
The problem has become more apparent and centralized. The 
need for a new way to identify people and objects becomes 
more urgent with the development of the Internet of Things 
(IoT). IoT is defined as “An infrastructure of interconnected 
objects, people, systems and information resources together 
with intelligent services to allow them to process information 
of the physical and the virtual world and react” [1]. Every day 
we add a new connected object to our life starting from our 
new vision to define the place where we live: smart cities, 
parking management, energy management, personal health, 
and safety, remotely checking patient health. We even define 
agriculture, using connected and geolocated tractors and 
machines to optimize the energy spent and to improve the 
daily routine. The increasing growth of population and IoT 
infrastructure raises concerns about the feasibility of 
accommodating and managing interconnected objects and 
people effectively. Therefore, the W3 thinks about a new 
paradigm for identifying subjects, named the Decentralized 
Identity (DID) [4]. 
• 
Such a system is owned by the participants which 
means a total elimination of a single point of 
failure. 
• 
Each entity should claim an attribute relation to 
the identity (themselves) and get trusted by an 
authority or an attested and verified one. 
• 
The participants implement a system to agree on 
a common state. 
• 
No single company controls the sensitive part of 
the system. 
• 
Decentralizing the identity eliminates the risk of 
stealing a database storing millions of identifiers. 
• 
The credentials should be stored in the same 
place as the owner (identity). 
 
People can take back the ownership of their identity. With 
DID, you can manage the identity by yourself using a private 
key stored on a wallet; a very common example is social 
media. We can imagine our network in a special social 
network moved with our identity to another network, on the 
other side, so there is no need for companies to build a new 
social graph from scratch for any new social media. The 
ability to consent to the type of data you provide to a third 
party is the key in a DID system. This technique is achieved 
by Zero Knowledge proof which “are an elegant technique to 
limit the amount of information transferred from a prover A 
to a verifier B in a cryptographic protocol” [2]. As defined in 
the original GMR paper “a buyer A can assert to a seller B that 
his or her age is more than 18, which allows him or her to buy 
some specific product, without revealing the birth date” [3]. 
This paper proposes an implementation of a DID, which 
will allow an entity to transact in a seamless way with a 
decentralized ecosystem. A DID can be seen as a global 
unique identifier. In section 2, we present several DID projects 
that are relevant to our decentralized system under 
development. Moving on to section 3, we introduce the syntax 
specific to our system and provide an overview of the current 
architecture. Section 4 focuses on the DID Document and its 
role in addressing the challenge of public key rotation. In 
section 5, we showcase our architecture and propose the 
incorporation of a new layer to address the scalability issue. 
 
II.  RELATED WORK  
DID systems have gained traction as an alternative to 
centralized identity management, ensuring security and 
privacy has emerged as a major challenge. Sybil attacks, 
secure key management, and privacy risks are just some of the 
issues that need to be addressed. In recent years, several 
studies have proposed solutions that leverage decentralized 
authentication mechanisms, consensus protocols, layered key 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-051-3
BUSTECH 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

management 
approaches, 
and 
privacy-enhancing 
technologies.  
The article "Self-Sovereign Identity Systems Evaluation 
Framework" [5] proposes a framework to evaluate self-
sovereign identity (SSI) systems based on four dimensions: 
technical, functional, non-functional, and organizational. The 
technical dimension assesses the system's architecture, 
security, privacy, and interoperability. The functional 
dimension evaluates the system's features and capabilities, 
such as identity issuance, management, and verification. The 
non-functional dimension assesses the system's performance, 
usability, accessibility, and user’s experience. Finally, the 
organizational dimension evaluates the system's governance, 
legal compliance, and economic sustainability. The proposed 
framework provides a comprehensive  and structured 
approach to evaluating SSI systems, enabling a systematic 
comparison of different SSI solutions, and facilitating their 
adoption and implementation. 
The DID solutions are often built on existing blockchains 
, such as Ethereum, Bitcoin, and others. While this approach 
provides a high degree of decentralization and security, it can 
also lead to scalability issues due to the limited processing 
capacity of these blockchains. 
A. 
uPort 
uPort [6] is built on the Ethereum blockchain and is 
available as open-source software. The primary goal of uPort 
is to provide DID services for all users. To create an identity, 
a user can use the dedicated mobile application provided by 
uPort, which stores all their identity data, including private 
keys for signing and sharing claims. 
Once an identity has been created, two smart contracts 
named "controller" and "proxy" are automatically deployed 
onto the Ethereum blockchain. These contracts serve as the 
backbone for managing and controlling the user's identity and 
provide a secure and decentralized way of verifying identity 
and sharing data.  
The uPort project has divided into Serto and Veramo, both 
dedicated to decentralizing the internet and restoring data 
control to individuals. 
B. 
Sovrin 
Sovrin [7] is a DID network built on Hyperledger Indy, 
which uses a "trust anchor" model and a modified Practical 
Byzantine Fault Tolerance consensus algorithm to establish 
the authenticity of verifiable credentials. Sovrin offers an 
SDK and APIs for easy integration and has a transparent 
governance model overseen by the Sovrin Foundation. 
 
C. 
EverID 
EverID [8] focuses on meeting the identity and the needs 
of developing countries for data management .The platform 
leverages blockchain technology, biometrics, and mobile 
devices to create a secure and verifiable identity for 
individuals in underserved communities. With a biometric 
verification system and mobile wallet feature, EverID aims 
to provide individuals with access to essential services and 
participation in the global economy. Built on the Komodo 
platform, EverID is highly scalable and provides fast and 
secure transactions through its hybrid consensus mechanism. 
 
III. DID INFRASTRUCTURE OR DID PUBLIC KEY 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
We need to introduce some definitions for the coming few 
sections, so let's gather the various definitions we need into 
one place: 
• 
DID is a unique identifier; in our implementation it is 
generated from the public key generated by the DID 
issuer. 
• 
The DID issuer generates the DID, writes the 
mapping of DID and DID Doc to Data registry. The 
DID issuer digitally signs any data and gives 
credential or VC to the Holder. 
• 
Data Registry is the storage of the mapping of DID, 
and DID Doc, in our case, is a Blockchain. 
• 
DID Doc is the DID documents which contain 
information associated with a DID. They typically 
express 
verification 
methods, 
for 
instance 
cryptographic public keys [9]. 
• 
DID Resolver resolves the DID-to-DID Doc from the 
Data Registry. 
• 
A VC is a verifiable credential like a passport which 
serves to attest specific information about an entity 
associated with a specific DID. VCs can be created by 
any entity of the system and issued to the holder of 
the VC. 
During a decentralized transaction, a VC Holder presents 
their VC to another entity, the verifier which is an entity, or 
an individual can verify the data of the VC as presented by the 
holder (Fig. 1). 
The verifier can cryptographically check if the VC is 
connected with the Issuer and the Holder. 
 
 
Figure 1.  DID Architecture. 
In the next section, we will discuss the DID Document and 
its role in addressing one of the major challenges associated 
with key rotation. 
IV. DID DOCUMENT AND KEY ROTATION ISSUE 
DID document is a type of metadata that contains 
information about a specific DID. This includes the public 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-051-3
BUSTECH 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

keys that are associated with the DID. The DID document is 
often stored on a decentralized ledger called a Verifiable Data 
Registry (Fig. 1) or in a distributed file system and it is used 
to enable secure and decentralized identity management. 
In order to maintain the security of a DID, it is often 
necessary to rotate its public key(s) periodically. This can be 
necessary in cases of compromise or to comply with best 
practices. When a public key is rotated, it is important to 
update the DID document to reflect the new key(s) associated 
with the DID.  
To update the DID document with new public key(s), the 
DID owner can create and sign a new version of the document 
with their private key. This new version of the DID document 
can then be published to the decentralized ledger or distributed 
file system where the previous version was stored (Figure  2). 
This process allows the new public key(s) associated with the 
DID to be made available for use.  
 
 
Figure 2. Multiple Version Chained of DID Document. 
It is important to note that the process of public key 
rotation may vary depending on the specific DID system and 
implementation being used. Nevertheless, maintaining the 
security of DIDs is critical for ensuring the integrity of 
decentralized systems and their ability to support secure and 
DID management. 
 
V. OUR CONTRIBUTIONS  
      Using a custom-built blockchain solution and the 
Substrate framework, our DID architecture addresses 
scalability challenges, ensuring a robust and high-performing 
ecosystem. 
A. 
Implementation Using Substrate Framework  
Our DID architecture utilizes a custom-built blockchain 
solution to overcome scalability issues present in existing 
blockchain platforms like Ethereum. We have chosen to 
employ the highly flexible and modular Substrate framework 
to enable tailoring of our DID implementation to our specific 
use case requirements. This approach offers the necessary 
scalability [10] and performance characteristics to facilitate a 
robust and reliable DID ecosystem. Substrate  “enables 
developers to quickly and easily build future proof 
blockchains optimized for any use case” [11]. 
We will build our DID system on top of this framework 
because “Substrate takes the hard work out of blockchain 
development without imposing limits often found in other 
frameworks, it allows development teams to quickly build 
blockchains based on academically-researched and field-
tested code that have proven their worth on many live 
networks worth billions of dollars” [12]. 
In this paper, we will show you how to create a custom 
pallet which is the key concept of substrate Framework. It will 
contain the logic code for our blockchain application. These 
Pallets are built with libraries called Frame, as well as the Rust 
programming language. Frame includes functions that make it 
very simple to build our application logic. 
We need three components to build our DID system; the 
first is the DID pallet. The second is the VCS pallet, and the 
last one is the attestation pallet. The DID pallet is responsible 
for the DID creation and its storage on the blockchain. 
The DID pallet is a critical component of our decentralized 
systems. It enables the creation, management, and control of 
Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs). Specifically, the DID pallet 
provides three core operations: create, update, and revoke, that 
allow DID owners to manage their identities within the 
blockchain system. By leveraging blockchain technology, 
DIDs are stored in a decentralized and tamper-proof manner, 
ensuring their immutability and high level of security. 
In addition to the DID itself, the DID pallet also stores 
metadata related to the identifier. While some of this metadata 
is stored directly on the blockchain, other types of metadata 
will be stored on external databases to optimize storage 
requirements. For example, entity-related information, like 
the name and the logo of the DID owner may be stored on 
external databases. 
This hybrid approach to DID management enables users 
to leverage the benefits of both blockchain and external 
databases to store and manage their identity-related metadata. 
It also provides a scalable solution regarding the performance 
issue. 
The DID pallet at this level contains DID creation function 
called DID_create (1) and one struct named Details which 
store the details about DID on the blockchain. 
 
(1) pub fn did_create(origin: OriginFor<T>, 
signing_key: T::SigningKey, boxing_key: 
T::BoxingKey, did_doc_ref: Option<Vec<u8>>) -> 
DispatchResult {} 
 
The VCS pallet is responsible for the creation of Verifiable 
Credentials and revoke. The VCS is hashed and stored on the 
blockchain with the vcs_create function (2). 
 
(2) pub fn vcs_create(origin: OriginFor<T>, 
hash:T::Hash) -> DispatchResult {} 
 
Finally, the attestation pallet, which is responsible for the 
VCS trust (3), in this step is a trusted entity. For example, like 
a university will trust any data like a certification or a license, 
or any type of data regarding the DID and a certain claim.  
 
(3) pub fn attestation_create(origin: OriginFor<T>, 
claim_vcs:T::Hash,vcs_hash:T::Hash) -> 
DispatchResult {} 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-051-3
BUSTECH 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

B. 
Distributed Real Time Layer 
Our DID architecture includes a distributed microservices 
layer (Figure 3) to manage DID metadata, for example VCS 
metadata, DID metadata, and Issuer metadata. This layer 
enables instant DID document resolution without requiring 
blockchain requests. Any changes to the Public Key 
Infrastructure are immediately reported to this layer via an 
Event System, ensuring that all metadata remains up-to-date 
and accurate. 
Every subject {ISSUER,HOLDER,VERIFIER} in our 
scenario will receive a DID (decentralized identifier) that 
conforms to a particular format according to the W3C 
standard [4]. 
As an illustration, consider Alice's decentralized 
identifier, which can be constructed using her public key in 
the following manner:  
did:dido: 
{Subkey(5GrwvaEF5zXb26Fz9rcQpDWS57CtERHpNehXC
PcNoHGKutQY)}  
 
Here, the "Subkey" function generates a public key 
derived from the Root public key. 
 
 
Figure 3. New Architecture Adding a Real Time Layer. 
In our system architecture, a trusted entity, such as a 
university will possess a VC that they can use to sign and 
distribute to a particular HOLDER. This cryptographic proof 
will be recorded on our blockchain as an attestation. 
The HOLDER will provide evidence to a VERIFIER, for 
example by displaying a QR code. 
The VERIFIER will verify the evidence provided by 
querying our decentralized microservices layer. 
 
VI. CONCLUSION 
The issuer, holder, and verifier are key components of a 
DID system. Our work aims to create a DID system that 
enables secure and privacy-preserving interactions between 
issuers, holders, and verifiers by connecting the pallets 
responsible for managing the different components of the 
system, as shown in Figure 3. By establishing clear and well-
defined links between the pallets, the system can work 
together efficiently and securely. The linking of pallets is 
crucial for ensuring the reliable exchange of identity 
information and creating a robust and privacy-preserving SSI 
ecosystem that can be trusted by all parties involved. 
We are incorporating an additional microservices layer to 
manage the scalability issues that arises from using blockchain 
technology. Our blockchain serves as a secure ledger, while 
the microservices layer serves as a cache.  
At this stage, we conduct tests using multiple approaches, 
extending the runtime level, client level, and off-chain level. 
We also attempt to request changes in the blockchain core 
when they arise. 
This approach will enable us to develop a truly 
decentralized identity system that can handle a large volume 
of requests. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] ISO/IEC JTC 1. (2014). Internet of things: A review of 
frameworks, standards and action plans.  
[2] Oscar Avellaneda, et al. “Decentralized Identity: Where Did It 
Come From and Where Is It Going?”. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOMSTD.2019.9031542 
December, 2019 
[3] U. Feige, A. Fiat,  and A Shamir “Zero-Knowledge Proofs of 
Identity”, in Journal of Cryptology. [Online]. Available from:  
https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/BF02351717.pd
f 
[4] M. Sporny, D.  Longley, M. Sabadello, D. Reed, O. Steele, C. 
Allen "Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) v1.0 Core architecture, 
data model, and representations".[Online]. Available from : 
https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/  
[5] A. Satybaldy and M.  Nowostawski "Self-Sovereign Identity 
Systems: Evaluation Framework".[Online]. Available from:  
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/339836401_Self-
Sovereign_Identity_Systems_Evaluation_Framework March 
2020  
[6] O. Dib and K. Toumi, "Decentralized Identity Systems: 
Architecture, 
Challenges, 
Solutions 
and 
Future 
Directions".".[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3785452 
March 2021 
[7] L. Stockburger, G. Kokosioulis, A Mukkamala, R. R. 
Mukkamala, and  M Avital, "Blockchain-enabled decentralized 
identity management: The case of self-sovereign identity in 
public 
transportation".".[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S20967209
21000099 June 2021 
[8] B. Reid and B. Witteman, "EverID WHITEPAPER" 
https://neironix.io/documents/whitepaper/6176/EverID_White
paper_v1.0.2_July2018.pdf. ".[Online]. Available from : 
https://neironix.io/documents/whitepaper/6176/EverID_White
paper_v1.0.2_July2018.pdf July 2018 
[9] W3C Recommendation, Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) v1.0 
Core architecture, data model, and representations W3C 
Recommendation, https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#dfn-did-
documents  
[10] A. I. Sanka and R. C. C. Cheung, "A systematic review of 
blockchain scalability: Issues, solutions, analysis and future 
research".[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S10848
04521002307 December 2021 
[11] Gavin 
Wood, 
et 
al. 
"Substrate 
Framework"  
https://docs.substrate.io/ June 2023 
[12] A. 
El 
akroudi, 
" 
Data 
Trust 
Protocol"     
https://github.com/lsroudi/DataTrustProtocol/ June 2023
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-051-3
BUSTECH 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

