A BSC-Based Method for the Supervision of Business Processes  
 
Hanane Ouaar 
Department of computer science 
Mohamed Khider University, 
Biskra, Algeria 
hanane.ouaar@gmail.com 
 
Mahmoud Boufaida  
LIRE laboratory 
Constantine 2 - Abdelhamid Mehri University  
Constantine, Algeria 
mboufaida@umc.edu.dz 
Abstract— Today, companies must be able to supervise the 
execution of their business processes in real time, what gives a 
quick adaptation and arising problems or deviations. Thus, it 
is possible to obtain a current overview over their processes, 
and subsequently their business performances. One of the 
difficulties of the supervision is related to the frameworks for 
building systems enabling a performance analysis of the 
adequacy of the strategic objectives of the organization. In this 
paper, we propose a new method for building a Business 
Supervision System (BSS) covering the three phases: analysis, 
design and implementation. First, Balanced ScoreCard (BSC) 
has been extended by adding a public process as a new 
perspective. The goal of this extension is to provide for the 
modern companies, a way to consider in their strategy the state 
of their external business processes, not only on the state of 
internal business processes. Second, we use Unified Modeling 
Language (UML) activity diagrams describing the dynamic 
aspects of the system, such as interaction of private (internal) 
and public (external) business processes. Third, Business 
Process Execution Language for Web Services (BPEL4WS) is 
used for assembling a set of discrete business processes as a set 
of interactions between web services. The objective is to 
provide to decision makers a method ensuring the agility 
property. This property is the ability to change and refine 
easily a concept of a method without involving their other 
concepts.  
Keywords-agility; supervision; business process; BSC; 
BPEL4WS 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Companies use many business processes to ensure their 
proper functioning. A business process consists of a set of 
activities that are coordinated in an organizational and 
technical environment. These activities realize jointly a 
business goal. Each business process is enacted by a single 
organization. But, it may interact with other business 
processes performed by other organizations [1]. The 
orchestration and control of all the resources that are 
involved in a process to achieve a business objective is 
therefore an important issue. 
Successive cycles of development, implementation and 
monitoring of business processes bring to the organization a 
way to integrate structural and environmental changes. 
Supervision of business processes is a measurement, a 
verification and an analysis activity of observed differences 
between the expected values and the measured values. Any 
deviation is sanctioned by conducting corrective actions on 
business processes [2]. Therefore, the supervision of 
business processes requires a technical infrastructure 
implementing the ability to react automatically to some 
events triggered directly from the instances or its execution 
environment. Also, supervision permits an interaction with 
all the key players in the company through the taken 
decisions: redefinition of a process or a part of activity, 
interruption of the execution of a running process or 
improvement of the goals and strategic objectives [3].  
Quality and certification management system standards 
are often inflected concepts in present business practice. The 
certification to ISO standards is a prerequisite for 
competitiveness in many sectors of business. These 
international standards constitute a normative base of 
Quality Management System (QMS). They create and keep 
mechanisms that are able of prevent undesirable behavior 
through internal audits [21]. Indeed, they are able to provide 
a supervised procedure. These standards are closely 
connected to Business Process Management (BPM) [17]. 
BPM is a disciplined approach to identify, design, execute, 
document, measure, monitor, and control both automated 
and non-automated business processes to achieve consistent 
and targeted results that are aligned with the organization’s 
strategic goals. BPM creates an add-value, and enables an 
organization to meet its business objectives with more 
agility. It enables an enterprise to align its business 
processes to its strategy, leading to effective overall 
company performance through improvements of specific 
work activities either within a specific department, across 
the enterprise, or between organizations. Weske [18] states 
that BPM includes concepts, methods, and techniques to 
support 
the 
design, 
administration, 
configuration, 
enactment, and analysis of business processes. Indeed, our 
work is included in the BPM field.    
Balanced ScoreCard (BSC) [4] is a performance 
measurement method that includes not only traditional 
financial measures but also such qualitative measures as 
employee satisfaction, corporate mission and customer 
loyalty. It gives a way to translate a vision into a clear set of 
goals that are then translated into a powerful measurement 
system, which effectively defines the whole strategic 
objectives of an organization [5]. In addition, BSC creates a 
reporting system that allows the progress against the 
strategy to be supervised and corrective actions to be taken 
as required. BSC also serves as a link between the 
operations control process and the learning and control 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-467-1
BUSTECH 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

process for managing strategy [4]. Therefore, BSC is 
adopted in our solution because it is among the few methods 
available for widespread monitoring process. It goes beyond 
translating strategic objectives into operational plans, to 
check the alignment of business processes and to provide 
support to the company's strategy [2].  
 Web Services (WS) [6] are considered as a dominant 
standard for distributed application communication over the 
Internet. Consumer applications can locate and invoke 
complex functionality, through widespread XML-based 
protocols, without any concern about technological 
decisions or implementation details on the side of the 
service provider. The Business Process Execution Language 
for Web Services (BPEL4WS) [7] allows designers to 
orchestrate individual services so as to construct higher 
level business processes. The specification of the 
orchestration is expressed in XML-based language and it is 
deployed in a BPEL execution engine, making thus 
available for invocation by consumers. 
In order to enjoy the utility of these concepts, we 
propose a method that aims to ensure the agility property. 
This method permits the development of a BSS during the 
three phases of its development: analysis, design and 
implementation. In the analysis phase, the objective is to 
study the environment and to determine the company’s 
strategy. We use the UML activity diagram in order to 
describe the dynamic aspects of the system. In our case, we 
represent the interaction model of internal and external 
supervised business processes. After that, we use BPEL4WS 
as a standard executable language for specifying actions 
within business processes with WS. In the design phase, our 
contribution extends the BSC method to “Public Process” as 
a new perspective because the contemporary enterprises and 
their business processes are becoming more dynamic, 
distributed and complex. Thus, even a simple process may 
cause business transactions across boundaries of numerous 
business units and trigger interactions of multiple actor sand 
software applications [20]. Consequently, enterprises need 
to add also in their strategy the state of the collaborative or 
external business processes, not only the state of internal 
ones. Finally, in the implementation phase, we import both 
the BPEL4WS specification as XML file and the BSC 
extended strategic as structured table towards the BSS 
reference.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, we describe a synthesis of some research works in 
relation to our proposition. Section III is devoted to the 
definition of the concepts used in our solution. Section IV 
describes the proposed method description. Section V 
provides a case study to validate our framework related to 
the Algeria Gulf Bank (AGB). Section VI is reserved to a 
conclusion demonstrates the conformity of our solution with 
the agility property and proposes some prospects. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The combination of BSC [4] and BPEL4WS [7] is of 
interest for BPM research and few works combining these 
two concepts have been found. Derrick et al. [8] addresses  
 
Figure 1.  Integrating web services with competitive strategies [8]. 
the issue of deploying Web services strategically using the 
concept of a widely accepted management tool, BSC (see 
Fig. 1). It presents potential benefits of Web services with 
corporate BSC perspectives. Indeed, this work argues that 
the strategic benefits of implementing Web services can 
only be realized if the Web services initiatives are planned 
and implemented within the framework of an IT strategy 
that is designed to support the business strategy of a firm.  
BSCs have also been used in several companies. Wang 
et al.  [9] defines the major indicators of social sustainability 
for 
development 
of 
Sustainable 
Design-centered 
Manufacturing (SDM). These indicators permit to evaluate 
the weighting factors among the three pillars and the 
indicators used to assess each pillar. Lina et al. [10] 
provides  valuable  support  for  successful  decision  
making  in  network  hierarchical  structures they adopt  the  
traditional  BSC  framework  that  considers  importance  
weights, performance  weights  and  norm  values. Lin et al. 
[11] investigate the current status of BSC application and its 
impact on hospital performance in China. In this work, the 
BSC application contributes to the improvement of 
organizational 
and 
personal 
performances. 
Such 
a 
contributing effect increases with the extension (level) of 
BSC application. Antonsen [12] shows  that  using  the  
BSC  to  strengthen  formal control,  combined  with  
advisors  commitment  to  serve  their customers,  seems  to  
contribute  to  high  financial  results  for the  bank.  
However,  this  study  reveals  shortcomings  of  using the  
BSC  in  promoting  critically  reflective  work  behavior  
and commitment  among  line  managers  and  employees. 
Wu et al. [13] propose a research model to examine the 
relationships between a stage-based diffusion structure and 
the four BSC indicators. 
Therefore, the objective of this study is to propose a 
method building a BSS: first, to present the benefits of BSC 
by adding for the original structure a new perspective that 
supports the study of external business processes; second, to 
elaborate an UML activity diagram describing the 
interaction of internal and external business processes to 
supervise; third, to specify the link of these business 
processes using BPEL4WS. Finally, we will prove that this 
study ensures the agility property. 
III. 
 BACKGROUND 
In this section, we briefly provide the basic concepts that 
are adopted in our framework. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-467-1
BUSTECH 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

A. Balanced Scorecard 
BSC is a method to measure the company’s activities 
[5]. It provides a more global steering with defining a 
rigorous framework for developing the strategy and 
methodology for the decline in operational terms [2]. It has 
evolved in three main generations. However, the third 
generation refines the others in order to give more relevance 
and functionality to strategic objectives. Other key 
components are strategic objectives, strategic linkage model 
and perspectives, measures and initiatives [16]. In our work, 
we adopt this last generation whose structure is represented 
in Fig. 2, respecting the balance in the following four 
perspectives: 
 
Financial perspective: the financial performance of 
an organization is based on its ability to create values 
by efficiently using capital.  
 
Customer Perspective: it illustrates the choice of the 
company in market segmentation, in which it makes 
sales and generates revenue.  
 
Internal business processes perspective: it identifies 
the business processes involved directly in the 
objectives. 
 
Learning and Growth perspective: the last of the four 
perspectives is the sharing and communication of 
knowledge in the organization leading to the 
achievement of individual goals. This perspective is 
closely linked to information from the human 
resources department.  
For each perspective of the BSC, four parameters are 
controlled: the main objectives such as increasing 
profitability; the indicators such as observable parameters, 
which will be used to measure progress towards the 
objectives to achieve; the targets taking specific targets 
values to be achieved by measures; the initiatives that are 
projects or programs launched to meet the objective [3]. The 
important word in BSC is “balanced” because it equilibrates 
between short and medium or long-term goals, it 
equilibrates between financial indicators and non-financial, 
it equilibrates measuring indicators of past performance and 
indicators “forward” and it equilibrates between the external 
perception and conducted internal performances [2].  
Thus, BSC presents a new way to monitor the 
performance of a company measured by the past success 
and set goals for the future [14]. In our method, we extend 
the original structure of the BSC, in order to accomplish the 
distributed and the dynamic companies’ requirements. Our 
proposed contribution adds a new perspective with "Public 
Process". Then, it is possible to allow a company to think so 
in its strategy on the status of their public and private 
business processes. 
B. BPEL4WS 
BPEL4WS [7] has been designed to model business 
processes that are fairly stable, and thus it involves the 
invocation of WS that are known beforehand. Therefore, the 
BPEL scenario designer specifies, at the time when the 
scenario is crafted, the exact services to be invoked for the 
realization of the business process. 
 
Figure 2.  Original structure of BSC [3]. 
 UML [15] UML is the most used specification and the 
way the world models not only application structure, 
behavior, and architecture, but also business process and 
data structure.  UML is used in this method because it helps 
to specify, visualize, and document models of software 
systems, including their structure and design. 
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) [19] is a 
standard that will provide businesses with the capability of 
understanding their internal business procedures in a 
graphical notation and will give organizations the ability to 
communicate these procedures in a standard manner. Thus, 
BPMN will allow for an easier and quicker move from 
theory to practice. In our method, and for ease of use, we 
elaborate an UML activity diagram for modeling the 
internal and external business processes interaction. 
According to this diagram, the cooperative behavior that 
links this supervised business processes as set of WS is 
specified with BPEL4WS. 
IV. 
THE PROPOSED METHOD 
We recall that our work has as objective the proposition 
of a new method for building a BSS (Fig. 3), with ensuring 
the agility property. This method exploits: BSC extended 
with Public Processes as a new perspective; UML modeling 
of public and private business processes interaction; and 
BPEL4WS specification to link this interaction. In this 
context, our method follows the three phases: analysis, 
design and implementation: 
A. Analysis Phase 
This phase provides two activities:  
 Identification of the business strategy: the Board of 
Directors meets to target a business strategy that 
repents potential of the company in a definite period. 
In this phase, we also define the format of requested 
reporting, curves, graphs and statistics, respecting the 
hierarchical recipients. At this stage, we must also fix 
the degree of possible alerts, notifications and the 
causes triggering. 
 Analysis of 
internal and external interaction 
scenarios of all the business processes to be 
supervised. For this, we will need to: i) Identify 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-467-1
BUSTECH 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

company internal business processes (private) to 
supervise; ii) Identify company’s external business 
processes (public) to supervise; iii) Select their 
supervised WS, and identify their use contract. 
B. Design Phase 
This phase provides four activities:  
 Elaborate the dynamic behavior of business process 
modeling of all the interacted internal and external 
processes, using UML activity diagrams. The 
resulted representation shows the interaction from a 
start point to a finish point, detailing the many 
decision paths that exist in the progression of events 
contained in the activity. Activity diagrams are 
useful for business modeling where they are used for 
detailing the processes involved 
in business 
activities.  
 Define the BPEL4WS specification that allows the 
link between WS of supervised business processes 
(public and private), according to the UML activity 
diagram. 
 Extend the BSC structure, which consists of adding 
a fifth perspective in the original structure of BSC is 
that of "Public Process". This new perspective 
allows the company to consider its strategy on the 
status of their collaborative or external business 
processes, not only on the state of internal ones. As 
a matter of fact, currently companies publish some 
services to the outside. 
 Build the new BSC, in order to identify the overall 
objectives of the company according to five 
dimensions: financial, customer, internal process, 
external process, learning and growth. For each 
objective, we should specify performance measures, 
targets and initiatives to develop. 
C. Implementation phase 
By using the most appropriate software tool, this 
implements the basic components of our BSS. These 
components provide 
the 
import 
of 
BPEL4WS 
specification as an XML file, and import also the new 
structure of BSC as a strategy table toward a reference. 
This system improves business efficiency (via the 
strategy respect); it reduces a response time to the 
operations of these internal or external business 
processes (via BPEL specification); and it allows 
accesses to real-time process performance indicators 
(via BSC measures against targets). 
V. 
CASE STUDY: AGB BANK 
In order to establish the exploitation of our method, we 
choose to validate it with a case study in relation with a 
banking company, named AGB (Algeria Gulf Bank). This 
choice is made because the banking domain provides the 
most convenient environment to prove all the aspects of this 
new method. Our objective is to implement in a company 
bank a BSS of the various transactions of internal and 
external business processes. Thus, the company provides the 
following public services (external) (see Fig. 4): e-Banking  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Overview of the proposed method. 
system (website), notification system (Fax, SMS and e-
mail), Automatic Teller Machines (ATM) via a Card Inter 
Bank (CIB) and e-Payment through Electronic Payment 
Terminal (EPT) also via the CIB. The following section 
gives the application of the proposed method: 
A. Analysis phase 
 Identification of the business strategy: the AGB 
strategy was defined the first time in early 2009 aims 
to achieve its mission while being faithful to the 
values and principles that are hers. Now, this strategy 
focuses on six areas:  to increase profits, to increase 
the number of clients, to reduce credit risk, to insure 
qualified employees, to acquire robust equipments 
and platforms and finally to provide services outside 
the bank's headquarters boundaries (through the net). 
 Analysis of the internal and external interaction: 
- Internal company business processes (private) to 
supervise: Human resources management; Development of 
balance sheets and reports (monthly, yearly); Customer 
Service Management. 
- External company business processes contain in WS to 
supervise is: E-Banking (Website); Notification (Fax, SMS, 
email); E-Payment (EPT) and ATM (CIB). Their user 
contract or service interface are: 
a) 
The WS e-Banking System: the user contract is the 
Personnel Identifier Number (PIN) code and the Password. 
b) 
The WS Notification system: the user contract is the 
Fax number/E-mail address/mobile number and the content 
of the notification. 
c) 
The WS E-Payment System: the user contract is the 
PIN code, the Amount to be paid and the CIB. 
d) 
The WS ATM: the user contract is the PIN code, the 
Amount to retire and the CIB. 
B.  Design phase 
 According to the AGB environment, Fig. 5 shows a part 
of UML activity diagram that displays the interaction of 
these internal and external business processes. 
 
 
Import  
 
Identify the business  
strategy        
Build extended BSC 
Business Supervision System (BSS) 
Specify the definition of 
interaction by BPEL4WS 
Elaborate the UML 
interaction model 
Analyze internal and 
external interaction 
Analysis Phase 
Design Phase 
Extend BSC structure  
Import 
Implementation Phase 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-467-1
BUSTECH 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  AGB Public Services. 
In order to build a BEPL4WS specification that links all 
the supervised business processes, we choose to present in 
Fig. 6 the invocation syntax of Notification WS. According 
to the study of the AGB strategy and the definition of a new 
structure of BSC, Table 1 shows a part of our overall 
extended BSC, when the entire line of the new perspective 
is colored in blue. 
In order to implement the BSS, we import the 
BPEL4WS definition as an XML file and the new BSC 
structure. This system checks in each supervision cycle the 
adequacy of data specified in the BSC (measures taking 
against targets) with the authorized interactions described in 
the XML file. This system aims to trigger alerts, sends 
notifications and provides requested reporting. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  
 In this paper, we have proposed a new method for 
developing a BSS, which covers three phases: analysis, 
design and implementation. The presented method combines 
the use of strategic BSC, which “Public Process” as a new 
perspective, the representation with UML activity diagrams 
for modeling the interaction of supervised private and public 
business processes and the specification BPEL4WS to 
define links of these business processes. The provided 
solution is validated, by applying it to an example related to 
the supervision of business processes in AGB banking 
company. Finally, we ensure that this method guarantees the 
agility property, which gives an added-value to this method. 
Agility is the ability of easy changes. Thus, we ensure the 
agility property because of the flexibility to manipulate in 
BSC objective properties, targets and measures for each 
dimension dashboard financial, customer, process and 
learning and growth independently of the other. Agility 
emerges also in an easy graphic modeling of ULM 
diagrams, which are flexible to handle and easy to refine. 
Agility exists also in BPEL4WS abstraction, when the 
interface is the only visible part of these components. 
Consequently, we present a new agile solution when it is 
easy to refine a concept without involving the others. In a 
future work, we will investigate to find a standard structure 
for the extended BSC. We also want to develop a global 
architecture resulting from the proposed method and 
implementation of all the components depending on the 
presented case study. 
 
Figure 5.  Activity diagram. 
TABLE I.  AGB EXTENDED BSC.  
 
 
    Perspec 
-tives 
Strategy 
Map 
Balanced Scorecard (BSC) 
 Action Plan 
 
Objectives 
Measures 
Targets 
Actions / 
Initiatives 
     Financial 
Increase 
 in revenues 
 
- Own capital 
-Total revenues 
- Charges 
-Tax 
- Social capital>   
 20% en 2022 
-ROA +3% 
-ROE  +2% 
-Increase 
sponsoring 
- Analyze 
 reports 
     Customer 
Evolve in 
customer 
wallet 
 
-Number of 
customers 
-Deposits 
 from  
customers 
-Total accounts
+5% 
-Credit total ±3%
-Total 
assets+0,1% 
-Own Fond+1%
-Align claims 
with the 
 trade  
- Provide  
available and 
easily services 
accessible 
     Private 
     processes 
 Mark as a 
reference 
bank in 
terms of 
technology 
and 
innovation  
   -Critical     
   processes 
-Process  
failed 
 
-Critical 
processes = 
0.001% 
-Process failed 
=<0,00 5% 
-Apply 
information 
technology 
-Improve 
capacity of 
information 
systems 
   Public 
     processes 
Optimize 
 the use  
 of 
published  
web 
services 
 
 -SW  
Successfully     
  invoked 
 -SW invoked 
with  failure 
- Rate Failure 
< 0,00001% 
 
- Reinforce 
 the security 
conditions 
 
   Learning 
and 
Growth 
Improve the   
  performance
of current 
   and future   
  collaborators
-Training 
Organized 
-Trained  
employee 
-Employee 
productivity 
- Rate human   
  failures = 0.5%
-80% Employee  
  trained in 2020
-Master  
The existing 
and 
new business
in the 
      banking 
      industry 
 
Banking enterprise 
Public services 
 
Notification system:  
E-mail, SMS, Faxe  
E-Banking 
ATM 
E-Payment: EPT
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-467-1
BUSTECH 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Notification BEPL4WS syntax. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Weske, “Business process management: Concepts, Languages, 
Architectures”, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 3-23, 
doi :10.1007/978-3-642-28616-2 1. 
[2] P. Briol, “ Engineering of business processes, from design to 
operation “, pp. 2-40, 2008. 
[3] R. S Kaplan and D. P Norton, “Having trouble with your strategy  
then map”, Harvard Business Review, (78) 5, 2000, pp. 167-176. 
[4] R. S Kaplan and D. P Norton, “The strategy-focused  organization:  
how  balanced bcorecard  company  thrive  in  the  new  business  
environment”,  Harvard  Business School  Press. Vol. 23, No. 1 (3 
parts) Part 1, Order # 23-01, January 2001, pp. 1-8. 
[5] R. S Kaplan and D. P Norton, “The balanced scorecard: Translating 
strategy into action”, Harvard business Press. Cambridge (Mass), 
1996. 
[6] Electronic Publication: OASIS WSBPEL TC, WS-BPEL 2.0, 
http://docs.oasis-open.org/wsbpel/2.0/OS/wsbpel-v2.0-OS.html. 
[7] M. P Papazoglou, P. Traverso, and F. Leymann, “Service-oriented 
computing: State of the art and research challenges”, IEEE Comput. 
40 (11), 2007, pp. 38–45. 
[8] H. C. Derrick and Q. Hu, “Integrating web services with competitive 
strategies: the balanced scorecard approach”, Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems (Volume 13), ISSN: 1529-3181 
2004, pp. 57-80.    
[9]  S. H Wang, S. P Chang, P. Williams, B. Koo, and Y. R Qu, “Using 
balanced scorecard for sustainable design centered manufacturing”, 
43rd Proceedings of the North American Manufacturing Research 
volume 1, 2015, pp. 181–192, doi: 10.1016/j.promfg.2015.09.084. 
[10] Y. H. Lina, C. C Chena, C. F .M Tsaib, and M. L Tseng, “Balanced  
scorecard performance evaluation in a closed-loop hierarchical model 
under uncertainty”, Applied Soft Computing 24, 2014, pp. 1022–
1032, doi:10.1016/j.asoc.2014.08.029. 
[11] Z. Lin, Z. Yu, and L. Zhan, “Performance outcomes of balanced 
scorecard application in hospital administration in China”, China 
Economic 
Review 
Review 
30, 
2014, 
pp 
1-15, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.chieco.2014.05.003. 
[12] Y. Antonsen, “ The  downside  of  the  Balanced  Scorecard: A  case  
study  from  Norway “.Scandinavian  Journal  of  Management, 30, 
2014,  pp. 40-50, doi :10.1016/j.scaman.2013.08.001. 
[13] I. L Wu and J. L Chen,  “A stage based diffusion of IT innovation and 
the BSC performance impact: A moderator of technology 
organization environment”, Technological Forecasting & Social 
Change 88, 2014, pp. 76-90, doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2014.06.015. 
[14] P. Gupta, “Six sigma business scorecard”, the McGraw-Hill 
companies, pp. 14, 2007. ISBN : 978-0-07-147943-1 
[15] The 
Object 
Management 
Group 
web 
sit, 
http://www.omg.org/gettingstarted/what_is_uml.htm, 2015.  
[16] G. Lawrie and I. Cobbold, "3rd generation balanced scorecard: 
Evolution of an effective strategic control tool". International Journal 
of Productivity and Performance Management 53 (7), 2009, pp. 611–
623.  
[17] Electronic 
Publication: 
The 
BPM 
Profession: 
http://www.abpmp.org/?page=BPM_Profession, 
visited 
 january  
2016. 
[18] M.  Weske,  “Business process management-concepts, languages, 
architectures”, New York: Springer Berlin Heidelgerg, 2007. 
[19] The Object Management Group web sit, Business Process Model and 
Notation,  http://www.bpmn.org, 2016. 
[20] J. Barjis, U. Ultes-Nitsche, and J. C. Augusto, “Towards more 
adequate EIS”, int Journal of the Science of Computer Programming, 
Vol. 65, No.1 , 2007, pp. 1–3. 
[21] D.  Tuček    and  R.  Bobák,  Výrobní  systémy.  2.  vyd.  Zlín:  
Univerzita Tomáše bati ve Zlíně, 2006.   
<invoke  partnerLink= " link " 
portType="port" 
operation="Notification " 
inputVariable="Fax number/Adress e_mail/Mobile number, 
 Notification "? 
outputVariable="code_notification, nbr_notification, date" ? > 
<!-- adding guard --> 
<catch  faultName=" Declined_notification " 
faultVariable=" Fax number/adress e_mail/mobile number " ? 
activity 
</catch> 
</catchALL>? 
activity 
</catchALL> 
<!-- compensation mechanisms in case  
of cancellation of a transaction --> 
<compensationHandler>? 
activity 
</compensationHandler> 
</invoke> 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-467-1
BUSTECH 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

