Facilitating Business Process Discovery using Email Analysis 
Matin Mavaddat 
University of the West of England 
Computer Science and Creative Technologies 
Bristol, UK 
Matin.Mavaddat@live.uwe.ac.uk 
Ian Beeson 
University of the West of England 
Computer Science and Creative Technologies 
Bristol, UK 
Ian.Beeson@uwe.ac.uk 
Stewart Green 
University of the West of England 
Computer Science and Creative Technologies 
Bristol, UK 
Stewart.Green@uwe.ac.uk 
Jin Sa 
University of the West of England 
Computer Science and Creative Technologies 
Bristol, UK 
Jin.Sa@uwe.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract— 
Extracting 
business 
process 
models 
from 
stakeholders in large organizations is a very difficult, if not 
impossible, task. Many obstacles such as tacit knowledge, 
inaccurate descriptions of processes and miscommunication 
prevent process engineers from ascertaining what the business 
processes actually are. Data sources that represent the 
communications can be a good candidate for facilitating the 
identification of the business processes. The proposed 
approach in this research is to find business process related 
emails, identify email message threads, and finally, tag them 
using conversation for action theory. The outcome of this 
method will be process fragment enactment models that can 
help process engineers both to validate their findings about the 
business processes, and also to understand better the vague 
and unclear parts of the processes. 
Keywords-Business Processes; Email Analysis; Process 
Mining; Semantic Similarity. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
“The reality is often very different from what is modelled 
or what people think. The world is not a Petri Net.” Van der 
Aalst [1]. The researcher’s experience confirms this, while 
working on two requirement extraction and business process 
analysis projects for Saint John Ambulance and Intellect 
Publishing Ltd. during the past three years. He has always 
spent an extensive amount of time with the clients and tried 
to use conventional tools and techniques, as well as best 
practices, for business process modelling and analysis, but 
there are always many obstacles in the way in order to find 
the actual business processes that are being followed in an 
organization. These are almost the same as challenges that 
we face in knowledge acquisition: for example, limited 
memory, information processing biases, representativeness, 
communication problems and different perceptions [8]. In 
this research, we are trying to find out if by using the data in 
the email corpus of an organization in conjunction with the 
conversation for action and speech act theory we can create 
fragments of business process enactments to help process 
engineers understand organizational processes better. Due to 
privacy issues, one of the challenges in analysing an email 
corpus is to have access to one. For this research the 
researcher has access to Intellect Publishing’s email corpus. 
Another challenge is to what extent the business processes 
are being carried out using email messages. The models that 
are created using the proposed approach are called process 
instance “fragment” models and based on the amount of 
“fragmentation” these models can be very useful or of little 
use. This fragmentation is directly related to the number of 
business processes that are being carried out using the email 
system either fully or partially. Intellect Publishing, like 
many other organisations [3], uses emails as its main means 
of communication. Therefore, a good portion of its journal 
production processes is carried out using email messages. 
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, the main differences of the proposed approach and the 
existing ones will be discussed. In Section III, the solution 
approach will be introduced, and finally, in Section IV, we 
will put forward our conclusions and future work. 
 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
 To date only a small amount of work has been done in 
this field, such as the works of Van der Aalst et al. [2] and 
Cohen et al. [16].  In all of these proposed works and 
methods some assumptions have been made that make using 
these techniques almost impractical. Assumptions like: Spam 
free mailboxes (Here spam means all the emails that are 
unrelated to the business processes) and finding the email 
threads only from email meta-data or by analysing email 
subjects or by manually created tags. In the proposed 
solution in this research, none of these assumptions have 
been made. Email messages are automatically filtered using 
text categorisation techniques and analysing emails’ content 
semantics is added to the subject and meta-data analysis in 
order to overcome the shortcomings of previously introduced 
40
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

methods. In addition to the aforementioned points, none of 
the previous methods have used the conversation for action 
and speech act theory to justify the soundness of this idea 
that email analysis might be a good method for facilitating 
the business process identification. 
 
III. 
SOLUTION APPROACH 
The final goal of this research is to create a method both 
to extract business process related emails from an email 
corpus, and to create a model from them that shows the 
interaction between different role instances involved in the 
business process. This method may help the process 
engineers validate or better understand the processes that are 
elicited by other means.  The method has three main stages: 
email categorisation, conversation network finding, and 
conversation network tagging. 
 
A. Email categorization 
The first process, which feeds directly from the email 
corpus, is the email categorization process. In email 
categorization, text classification techniques are used. Text 
classification is assigning automatically a text document to a 
predefined class [8]. Obviously each email corpus contains 
several different types of emails such as business-rule related 
emails and personal emails which might not contain any 
business process related information. So it is necessary that 
the email corpus be divided (classified) into two different 
classes: business process related and non-business process 
related. 
 
Many different methods and techniques have been 
introduced to solve this type of problem such as Naïve Bayes 
[7] and Support Vector Machines [5]. The main challenge in 
solving this problem is to find the features that help to 
classify textual documents (emails) into business process 
related and non-business process related. 
 
In order to use automatic categorization techniques and 
also in order to choose the best categorization algorithm, a 
number of email messages should be classified manually to 
create a training set and a test set. A text-mining tool named 
WEKA [13] can be used to test different text mining 
algorithms. The training set can be fed to the WEKA tool, 
which automatically trains itself using different text mining 
training algorithms, including the ones that were mentioned 
before. WEKA automatically extracts classifying features 
that distinguish business process related emails from non-
business process related emails using different algorithms, 
then, using the test set and feeding it to the tool, the 
algorithm that best matches the human classification of the 
emails can be identified. 
  
B. Conversation network finder 
After classifying the emails and finding the business 
process related emails, the next step involves finding email 
threads inside the business process related emails. Email 
threads, or email trees, are related email conversations that 
have occurred about a similar topic, ordered by time. Email 
threads that are created from the classified set of emails can 
be a representation of a network of “conversation for action” 
introduced by Winograd [12]. Winograd put forth the 
conversation for action theory based on Searl’s [10] speech 
act theory. He argues that business processes are networks of 
conversations that are happening inside and outside the 
organization about the organizational goals. They introduce 
the conversation for action diagram and believe that almost 
every network of conversation for action happens according 
to the pattern introduced in that diagram. He believes 
“speech acts are not individual unrelated events, but 
participate in large conversational structure.” [13] 
 
For example, one conversation for action network might 
start with a request, and a request is understood by the 
participant as having certain conditions of satisfaction, which 
shows how the hearer might react to the speaker’s request. 
Finding these networks of conversation for action” should 
help us realize organization’s business processes. 
41
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

 
Figure 1.  Conversation for Action diagram
 
One approach to find these networks of conversation is to 
use semantic similarity and some other heuristics [15]. By 
applying this process, the business process related set of 
emails turns into different threads, each representing one 
conversation network that is initiated by a role instance and 
has been continued until a mutual agreement.  
 
One problem here is that if all the conversions have not 
happened via email, then it cannot be realized. This is the 
problem of incompleteness in process mining. This means 
we may not be able to model the whole process. This is why 
it is called a process instance (enactment) “fragment” 
extraction. 
 
A Java application has been developed for this purpose 
and a function within this application is created to measure 
the semantic similarity of two email messages in order to 
realize if they are related. This is used in email thread 
finding. It is assumed that if an email is sent by a recipient of 
an original email after the date of the original email, and it is 
semantically similar to the original email, then it is part of 
the thread that is initiated by the original email. 
 
A refined version of Vector Space Model algorithm [7] is 
used in this function. It means that each email is translated 
into a vector implemented in sparse matrix and the semantic 
similarity is measured using the multiplication of vectors. 
 
The following refinements have been made to the 
original vector space model: first, the vectors are not two-
dimensional but n-dimensional. The synonyms are added to 
the vector as the higher dimensions using WordNet [4]. It is 
possible in future to just add the context-related synonyms  
 
(by interpreting and using the WordNet as a lexical ontology 
and comparing it with the existing ontologies in the 
organisation); and second, Checking the words’ spellings 
before adding them to the vector using spell checking 
algorithms.  
 
The output of this function will be something like the 
following table for the simplified scenario below: 
1. Matin sends an email to Stewart to request for a meeting 
and specifies his availability. 
2. Stewart selects a date and time and sends an email to Jin 
to ask if she can make it too. 
3. Jin sends an email to Stewart and accepts the date and 
time.  
4. Stewart sends an email to Ian to see if he can make it at 
that date and time. 
5. Ian responds that he can make it. 
6. Stewart sends an email to Matin telling him the date and 
time of the meeting. 
TABLE I. CONVESATION NETWORK FINDER 
OUTPUT TABLE 
 
# Sender 
Recipient 
Timestam
p 
Em
ail 
ID 
1 matin 
@uwe.ac.uk 
Stewart@uwe.ac.uk 
15-Jun-
2010 
14:00:00 
132 
2 Stewart 
@uwe.ac.uk 
Jin@uwe.ac.uk 
15-Jun-
2010 
139 
42
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

14:40:23 
3 Jin 
@uwe.ac.uk 
Stewart@uwe.ac.uk 
15-Jun-
2010 
15:39:30 
150 
4 Stewart 
@uwe.ac.uk 
Ian@uwe.ac.uk 
16-Jun-
2010 
09:30:30 
180 
5 Ian 
@uwe.ac.uk 
Stewart@uwe.ac.uk 
16-Jun-
2010 
12:30:12 
200 
6 Stewart 
@uwe.ac.uk 
Matin@uwe.ac.uk 
 
16-Jun-
201015:30 
250 
 
 
The results created by this application were quite 
satisfactory when they were analyzed manually. The 
extracted threads were quite reasonable and close to the 
actual threads that were created manually.  
 
 
 
 
C. Conversation network tagging 
Up to this stage, the relation between role instances have 
been extracted; this shows the interaction between different 
roles instances to achieve a goal (mutual satisfaction), but the 
interactions are not labelled. This labelling can be done using 
the speech act theory [11] as this theory tries to define what 
the speaker intends to do by using words. 
 
Searle [10] has set up the following classification of 
illocutionary speech acts: assertives, directives, commissives, 
expressives, and declarations. 
 
By finding the illocutionary acts and the propositional 
content related to each email (or email paragraph if needed), 
we can label each interaction. For example, the result of this 
step is expressed by the following RAD-like diagram [9]: 
 
 
Figure 2. Conversation networks. 
 
 
Fig. 2 shows the interactions between different roles 
instances and the interactions are tagged by the extracted 
illocutionary act of the relevant paragraph or email and also a 
link to the actual paragraph or email for manual reference 
and further analysis. 
 
This model is an interaction fragment instance. By 
analysing these models and finding the similar patterns, we 
should be able to create business process fragment instance 
models. For instance, by analysing the interaction fragment 
instance models of different meeting scheduling occurrences 
and finding the patterns, we should be able to create meeting 
scheduling business process fragment models.  These models 
may help business engineers to validate their understanding 
of the business processes, and also might clarify some vague 
fragments of the manually identified processes. Interpreting 
these models should not be difficult for the process 
engineers. RAD diagram notations are being used, the 
interactions are tagged by illocutionary acts that are quite 
43
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

self-explanatory and each interaction is directly linked to the 
actual paragraph or email for further analysis if something is 
not clear enough. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper proposed an approach to facilitate the 
identification of business processes of an organization Fig. 3. 
For the first sub process a database is created from the emails 
metadata and content, for analysis with WEKA for email 
categorization and for the second sub-process an application 
has been developed that identifies the threads using a 
modified version of the Vector Space Model algorithm. The 
third sub-process needs more research involving both 
tagging identified conversations using the “speech act 
theory”, and using the “conversation for action” idea to find 
similar patterns and to create the fragments of business 
process instances from the interaction fragment instances.  
 
Figure 3. Solution Approach
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Aalst, W. M. P., 2003. Challenges in business process 
analysis. Bulletin of the EATCS, 80, pp. 174-198. 
[2] Aalst, W. M. P. and Nikolov, A., 2008. Mining e-mail 
messages: uncovering interaction patterns and processes using 
e-mail logs. International Journal of Intelligent Information 
Technologies, 4 (3), pp. 27-45. 
[3] Ellis, C. A., 2000. An evaluation framework for collaborative 
systems, University of Colorado at Boulder, USA. 
[4] Fellbaum, C. 1998. WordNet: An electronic lexical database 
(Language, Speech and Communication), MIT Press. 
[5] Joachims, T. , 1998. Lecture Notes in Computer Science-Text 
categorization with Support Vector Machines: Learning with 
many relevant features, Springer, pp. 137-142. 
[6] Liu, B., Lee, W. S., Yu, P. S., and Li, X., 2002. Partially 
supervised classification of text documents. ed.  19th  
International Conference on Machine Learning. Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers Inc., pp. 387 – 394. 
[7] Manning, C. D., Raghavan P., and Schutz H., 2008. An 
introduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge University 
Press. 
[8] Mcgraw, K. L. and Harbison-Briggs, K., 1989. Knowledge 
acquisition principles and guidelines, Prentice- Hall. 
[9] Ould, M., 2005. Business Process Management: A Rigorous 
Approach, BCS. 
[10] Searle, J. R., 1975. A Taxonomy of Illocutionary Acts, in: 
Günderson, K. (ed.), Language, Mind, and Knowledge, 
Minneapolis, vol. 7, pp. 1-29. 
[11] Searle , J. R., 1969. Speach Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy 
of Language Cambridge University Press. 
[12] Winograd T. and Flores, F. , 1986. Understanding computers 
and cognition, Addison-Wesley. 
[13] Winograd, T. , 1987. A language/action perspective on the 
design of cooperative work. Human-Computer Interaction, 3 
(1), pp.  3-30. 
[14] Witten, H. I. and Frank, E. , 2005. Data mining: practical 
machine learning tools and techniques. Morgan Kaufmann 
publishing. 
[15] Yeh, J. and Harnly, A, “Email thread reassembly using 
similarity matching.” Proc. Third Conference on Email and 
Anti-Spam (CEAS), 2006. 
[16]  Cohen, W., Carvalho, V., and Mitchell, T., 2004. Learning to 
classify 
email 
into 
"Speech 
Acts.". 
Association 
for 
Computational 
Linguistics,4(11), 
pp. 
309-316, 
doi: 
10.1002/asi.20427.
 
44
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

