Big Data: Opportunities and Challenges  
 
Omar Al-Hujran, Rana Wadi,  Reema Dahbour, 
Mohammad Al-Doughmi 
Department of Management Information Systems  
Princess Sumaya University for Technology  
Amman, Jordan  
Emails: o.hujran@psut.edu.jo; rwadi.91@gmail.com; 
dahbour.reema@gmail.com; hashem_m_doughmi@live.com   
Mutaz M. Al-Debei  
Department of Management Information Systems  
The University of Jordan  
Amman, Jordan  
Email: m.aldebei@ju.edu.jo  
 
Abstract—The concept of Big Data has become a reality due to 
our capability to create and collect digital data at an 
extraordinary rate. Despite its significance, the concept of Big 
Data is still largely overlooked and underestimated. Drawing 
on seven case studies of service providers and customers from 
different countries, this study contributes to the existing body 
of knowledge by comprehensively addressing the opportunities 
and challenges of Big Data.  
Keywords-Big Data; Innovations; Technology; Challenges 
and Opportunities; Jordan. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The rapid emergence, prevalence and potential impact of 
Big Data has sparkled a significant amount of interest 
amongst Information Systems/Information Technology 
(IS/IT) industry and research. The concept of Big Data has 
come true due to the inescapable significance of our 
capability to create and collect digital data at an 
extraordinary scale. Big Data has been around since 2005, 
when the term Big Data has been adopted from O’Reilly 
media.  The increasing number of people, devices, and 
sensors that are now connected by digital networks (i.e., 
Internet of Things) has generated a vast amount of data. 
Data is generated from online transactions, social 
networking interactions, emails, clickstream, logs, search 
queries, sensors, global positioning satellites, roads and 
bridges, and mobile phones [16]. The amount of data that is 
produced each day already exceeds 2.5 Exabyte [11]. In 
addition, the bidirectional telecommunications capacity is 
growing by almost 30% per year and the globally stored 
information is increasing by more than about 20% per year 
[7][27]. Accordingly, the great potential of Big Data for 
both academics and practitioners has become clear. In the 
business world, companies are leveraging Big Data 
technologies for effective decision making, efficient 
business operations, and maximum business impact 
[10][26]. For example, business could use Big Data to 
improve their offers, mange risks, and know their customers 
better [5]. According to McKinsey report [10], government 
administration in developed economies could save more 
than $149 billion in operational efficiency improvements 
alone by using Big Data. In short, Big Data solutions 
provide managers with the ability to make informed 
decisions that are based on evidences rather than making 
arbitrary decisions which are largely dependent on their 
intuitions and subjective judgments. 
Although there is currently no single universally 
accepted definition of the term, Manyika et al. [10] define 
Big Data as “datasets whose size is beyond the ability of 
typical database software tools to capture, store, manage, 
and analyze data”. In other words, Big Data is an advanced 
information technology that allows users to capture, 
communicate, aggregate, store and analyze massive 
amounts of data. However, the value of Big Data largely 
depends on what types of software tools are available, what 
sizes of datasets are common in a particular industry, and 
their use in general (i.e., the way one is using it along with 
purposes).  
Despite the rapid emergence of Big Data technologies, 
empirical research in this domain is still quite limited [1]. In 
addition, many organizations are still not aware about Big 
Data analytics along with their capabilities, benefits, and 
also challenges. An empirical research conducted by 
Russom [15] showed that only 28% of respondents 
understand the concept of Big Data and have name it, most 
of them (around 85%) being from developed countries. 
Moreover, despite the numerous advantages of Big Data, its 
implementation and adoption in developing economies is 
still very limited and surrounded by a variety of challenges. 
Therefore, the main objective of this research is to examine 
and shed light on the current state and the future prospects 
of Big Data in developing countries. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section 
two, we provide a comprehensive theoretical background 
and literature review of the Big Data concept. Thereafter in 
section three, the research methodology including data 
collection and analysis methods are discussed. In section 
four, the results of the study are presented and discussed. 
Finally in section five, the research conclusions are 
presented and recommendations for theory and practice are 
offered. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
There has not been a commonly accepted definition in 
regards to Big Data. However, as mentioned earlier, the 
literature usually reports that Big Data should include 
datasets with sizes beyond the ability of commonly used 
software tools to capture, manage, and process the data 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

within a tolerable elapsed time. Many researchers have 
defined Big Data via its three main characteristics and 
aspects that go beyond the capability of the current database 
management systems. These characteristics are Volume, 
Velocity and Variety, also known as 3Vs [4][9][11][15]. 
Volume refers to the size of the data such as terabytes (TB), 
petabytes (PB), and zettabytes (ZB), Velocity means how 
frequently the data is generated, and Variety represents the 
different types of data sources; for example, data could be 
unstructured social networking data, web logs data, sensor 
readings, streamed video and audio, or mobile generated 
data [11]. Recently, Kaisler et al. [8] added “Value” as a 
fourth characteristic of Big Data. Value measures the 
usefulness of Big Data in decisions-making [2]. 
 Although Big Data was a serious problem just a few 
years ago, now it is considered as business opportunity. 
Using Big Data gives organizations a competitive advantage 
to differentiate themselves from others, and this can help 
them uncover people’s hidden behavioral patterns and even 
emphasis on their intentions [15]. It can also eliminate the 
gap between what people want to do and what they actually 
do in addition to how they interact with others and their 
environment, which helps directly in decision-making. 
Previous research also showed that data-driven decision 
making is associated with higher productivity, profitability 
and market value. Indeed, companies that use data-driven 
decision making may enjoy 4% higher productivity, 6% 
greater profitability, and 50% higher market value [20]. In 
addition, Big Data analytics can positively impact product 
development, market development, operational efficiency, 
customer experience, and market demand predictions 
[3][15].  With the rapid explosion of data, governments can 
also benefit from Big Data by creating a system that collects 
and analyzes vast amount of data coming from different 
sources to help them in tracking criminals, preventing 
money laundering as well as improving homeland security 
[1]. McKinsey Global Institute [10] argued that five new 
kinds of value might come from Big Data:  
1- Creating transparency in organizational activities that 
can be used to increase efficiency. 
2- Enabling more experimentation to discover needs, 
expose variability, and improve performance. 
3- Segmenting populations in order to customize actions. 
4- Replacing/supporting human decision making with 
automated algorithms. 
5- Innovating new business models, products, and services.  
However, while Big Data can yield extremely useful 
information, it also presents new challenges with respect to 
how much data to store, how much this will cost, whether 
the data will be secure, and how long it must be maintained. 
Big data also presents new ethical concerns. In fact, one of 
the major challenges of Big Data is preserving individual 
privacy [12][16]. In their study, Agrawal et al. [1] also 
identified many technical challenges associated with Big 
Data. These technical challenges include scalability (i.e., 
data volume is scaling faster than compute resources), 
heterogeneity (i.e., data comes from different sources), lack 
of structure (i.e., data must be carefully structured as a first 
step in -or prior to- data analysis), error-handling (i.e., data 
cleansing and error correction), timeliness (i.e., the larger 
the data set to be processed, the longer it will take to 
analyze), and visualization (i.e., present results in powerful 
visualizations that assist interpretation). Big Data adoption 
is also facing several other managerial and organizational 
challenges. These managerial and organizational challenges 
include inadequate staffing skills, lack of business support 
[15], organization culture, and resistance to change [11]. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The present section explains the methodology used in 
collecting and analyzing data for the purpose of achieving 
the objectives of the current study. Given the scarcity of 
empirical research in the area of Big Data adoption and the 
need to obtain rich data, the study was considered 
exploratory in nature, and therefore, a case study approach 
was considered appropriate [17]. Case studies are useful for 
exploring areas where existing knowledge is limited [6] and 
are also valuable in generating an understanding of a 
particular situation [17]. Our research method involves 
seven case studies representing Big Data solution providers 
(i.e., Informatica, Huawei, Rabaie Analytics Group) and Big 
Data potential customers (i.e., EMP, A leading e-commerce 
startup company in Jordan, Aramex, E-Arabia) (see Table 
1). The decision to use the perspectives of these two 
different groups was based on the belief that service 
providers could offer a better understanding of the benefits 
and challenges of adopting Big Data based on their own 
interaction with, and feedback from their clients, while 
customers that had adopted Big Data solutions could 
provide us with information regarding benefits and 
challenges they experienced. Interviewees were senior 
decision-makers with adequate experience in assessing Big 
Data solutions.  
TABLE I. A LIST OF INTERVIEWEES 
Interviewee  
Position and institution   
Time  
Interviewee 1 
Senior Software Developer at Informatica     
45 min 
Interviewee 2   
Chief Marketing Officer (CMO) of Huawei 
Technologies   
45 min 
Interviewee 3     
  
Manager at Data Aurora Rebai Analytics 
Group   
  
30 min 
Interviewee 4   
Senior Consultant at E-Arabia 
   
45 min 
Interviewee 5   
Computer Engineer at warehousing 
department in Aramex   
40 min 
Interviewee 6   
Engineering Program Director a leading 
startup e-commerce company located in 
Jordan.  
  
50 min 
Interviewee 7   
CIO at Emerging Market 
Payments (EMP).   
  
35 min 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

A. Case Studies Description  
 
Big Data Solution Providers 
Informatica: Located in the heart of Silicon Valley, 
Informatica provides data integration software and services 
that enable organizations to gain a competitive advantage in 
today's global information economy by empowering them 
with timely, relevant and trustworthy data for their top 
business imperatives. We interviewed a senior software 
developer at Informatica to provide us with insights about 
the uses of Big Data in developed countries as well as the 
opportunities and challenges facing the implementation of 
that technology in the region.  
Huawei Technologies: Huawei is a leading global 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology 
(ICT) 
solutions provider. Through its dedication to customer-
centric innovation and strong partnerships, it has established 
end-to-end capabilities and strengths across the carrier 
networks, enterprise, consumer, and cloud computing fields. 
They are committed to creating maximum value for telecom 
carriers, 
enterprises 
and 
consumers 
by 
providing 
competitive ICT solutions and services. Its products and 
solutions have been deployed in over 170 countries and 
regions, serving more than one third of the world's 
population.  
Rabaie Analytics Group: Rebaie Analytics group is a 
boutique "data" consultancy organization which provides a 
range of services for vendors, companies, civil society 
organization, governments and citizens to make their "data" 
an aurora of innovation, competition and productivity. They 
help vendors on their product and marketing direction and 
messaging and they help clients in vendor-neutral selection 
of Big Data technologies and advise on Big Data strategy 
and architecture. They also build data auroras that focus on 
data 
visualization, 
analysis, 
crowdsourcing, 
and 
collaboration. Data auroras aid organizations in harnessing 
various information streams in real time, analyzing their 
data seamlessly and their sharing their story to the world.  
 
 
Big Data Solution Customers 
Emerging Market Payments (EMP): EMP Middle 
East, previously Visa Jordan Card Services, was founded in 
1991 by Visa and a group of Jordanian banks to ensure high 
quality Visa acceptance and processing in the country. 
Based in Amman, Jordan, EMP Middle East is run by a 
highly experienced management team and more than 70 
employees. The company serves more than 20 banks and 
18,000 merchants in Jordan and the surrounding region. 
EMP Middle East also operates Jordan’s national ATM 
switch, JoNET, and a state-of-the-art card personalization 
facility.  
A leading e-commerce startup company: The 
Company was established by experts at leading firms in the 
fashion and e-commerce industry. Seasoned shoppers and 
experienced ecommerce engineers joined forces to bring 
their passion, expertise and the latest offerings to fashion 
lovers in the Middle East. The Jordan based company 
claims to use the most advanced technologies in the industry 
to offer their customers a comfortable, enjoyable and secure 
shopping experience anyplace/anytime. Their back office 
harnesses the latest innovations in the industry, allowing 
them to customize and personalize their offers to best suit 
the needs of their customers.  
Aramex: Aramex is a leading global provider of 
comprehensive logistics and transportation solutions. 
Established in 1982 as an express operator, the company 
rapidly evolved into a global brand recognized for its 
customized services and innovative multiproduct offering. 
In January 1997, Aramex became the first Arab-based 
international company to trade its shares on the NASDAQ 
stock exchange. After five years of successful trading, 
Aramex returned to private ownership in February 2002 and 
continued to expand and excel as a privately owned 
company, establishing global alliances and gaining stronger 
brand recognition. In June 2005, Aramex went public on the 
Dubai Financial Market (DFM) as Arab International 
Logistics (Aramex) with its shares traded under ARMX. 
Today, Aramex employs more than 13,900 people in over 
354 locations across 60 countries, and has a strong alliance 
network providing worldwide presence. The range of 
services offered by Aramex includes international and 
domestic express delivery, freight forwarding, logistics and 
warehousing, 
records 
and 
information 
Management 
solutions, e-business solutions, and online shopping 
services.   
 E-Arabia: E-Arabia is a startup e-commerce company. 
It is a platform that helps start-up e-commerce companies in 
hosting their e-commerce solutions as well as integrating 
their solutions with online payment companies, and 
logistical companies (e.g., Aramex, DHL, FedEx).     
B. Data Collection and Analysis  
Data collection took place between April 2014 and June 
2014 and was primarily personal face-to-face semi-
structured interviews, a technique well suited to exploratory 
research. This is because it allows expansive discussions to 
illuminate factors of importance [17]. Seven direct face-to-
face semi-structured interviews have been conducted. Face-
to-face interviewing may be appropriate where depth of 
meaning is important and where a research is primarily 
focused on gaining insight and understanding. A set of 
research questions were formulated in an attempt to meet 
the main objectives of this research. Questions were 
compiled from validated instruments in the literature to 
represent each construct and wording was modified to fit the 
Big Data context. Major questions directed to interviewees 
were related to the concept and role of Big Data and its 
impacts on businesses. The interviews were recorded, 
transcribed, edited and qualitatively analyzed. Data were 
consolidated through brainstorming sessions, informal 
conversations, discussions and field notes of daily 
observations. Accordingly, a picture of the current situation 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

concerning the opportunities and challenges of Big Data can 
be formed.  
The length of each interview was approximately 45 
minutes. Participants were freely expressing their opinions, 
seeking answers and suggesting solutions. On the other 
hand, other sources of secondary data such as brainstorming 
sessions, informal conversations, and reports have been also 
combined altogether to supplement data. The compelling 
reason for using an interview as the main methodology was 
completely based on the qualitative nature of the theories 
and their complexity related to represent a suitable research 
analysis. The interview questions count to 25 questions as a 
net total count. The 25 questions were distributed in a 
maneuver that accommodates for covering almost all the 
ideas concerning the study’s main objectives. Having all 
interviews in hands, the transcribed data of the seven 
interviews went through preparation and editing processes 
to make it ready for the analysis. The resulted textual data 
was then aggregated with the hand notes of the researchers 
and the combined content was qualitatively analyzed. The 
analysis procedure has been performed using NVIVO 10.0 
software. NVIVO is a computer assisted qualitative data 
analysis package, settled by QSR International [21]. This 
software offers a set of functions that support the coding and 
recovery of text. Another remarkable privilege is that it 
assists researches to write down memos during the analysis 
process [22]. In an attempt to conquer reliable and 
informative knowledge out of the interviews, each single 
interview has skilfully created a transcript that was saved in 
a distinct word processor document. This has enabled 
sustaining fertility of the interviews data. Afterwards, all 
documents were imported in NVIVO for reading, analysis 
and coding. The main objective of the analysis was to 
transform data into findings, but more importantly was to 
make a sense out of it. During the analysis, recurring ideas, 
patterns of beliefs, and salient themes were extracted with 
relevant quotations that demonstrated support for these 
themes. The emerging themes were then examined based on 
their intensity, depth, and specificity with the phenomenon 
of interest, with additional emphasis given to comments that 
were frequently repeated or refuted by the interviewees [23]. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Big opportunities can be considered as an essential 
factor in influencing the decision of adopting Big Data 
[3][5]. In recent years, Big Data has become a major topic in 
the field of ICT. Novel digital technologies such as Big Data 
are transforming the ICT industry and the way companies 
can operate. It is evident that Big Data generates business 
opportunities. By analyzing Big Data, organizations can 
capture new facts about their customers, partners, products, 
services, and operations and then use that information for 
business advantage [15]. For example, businesses can use 
such information to develop new products and services, 
improve decision making, optimize operations, and reduce 
costs [10]. However, businesses and policy makers need to 
address considerable issues in order to realize the full potential 
of Big Data. This section covers the extracted themes that 
were derived from the analyses of data; each theme 
converses an issue related to Big Data adoption. 
A. Underestimating the Value of Big Data  
Over the past two decades, Big Data analytics and 
technologies have become increasingly important in both 
the academic and the business communities [24]. Findings 
of this study revealed that Big Data and business analytics 
exploitations by Jordanian companies are still at the very 
infancy stage. According to the interviewees, both start-up 
and leading enterprises are not fully aware of Big Data and 
business analytics technologies along with their benefits and 
outcomes.  Despite their general lack of awareness, we have 
observed 
that 
some 
organizations 
in 
Jordan 
have 
implemented some sort of business analytics including 
Database Management Systems (DBMS) and Google 
analytics. The value that can be derived from Big Data 
analytics differs from what traditional data analytics can 
offer. Some of the leading Jordanian companies are using 
traditional data analytics. According to the interviewee 4, 
“We are currently using Google analytics, because it is 
familiar and gets the job done.” While interviewee 5 stated, 
“we use Structured Query Language (SQL) server analysis 
services to build statistical and analytical reports and 
dashboards for the business owners in order to help them in 
the management process”. Accordingly, it seems that most 
of Jordanian companies do underestimate the value derive 
from unstructured data.  
What can be established from our interviews with well-
established enterprises as well as startup companies based 
here in Jordan that there are no serious steps or plans for 
fully utilizing Big Data technologies in the near future. Most 
of 
Jordanian 
companies 
are 
still 
using 
traditional 
technologies mainly for automating business processes. 
Generally speaking, we have realized that there is a lack of 
interest in implementing business analytics in general and 
Big Data in particular. Interviewee 6 stated that “there is no 
need to implement Big Data to start-up enterprises since 
most of the data we use is structured and we barely use 
unstructured data”. The aforementioned statement by 
Interviewee 6 also indicates that they are some sort of 
misunderstanding and misconception about big data 
technologies. 
 
B.  Misconception About Big Data and its Actual Size 
In an IBM study [15], it has been discovered that over 
half of all defendants contemplate their datasets that are 
between one terabyte and one petabyte to be Big Data. This 
includes more than three-quarters of midsize companies. 
However, it has been established that size alone does not 
matter; Big Data is also about an extraordinary diversity of 
data types, delivered at various speeds and frequencies [15]. 
Big Data is defined as “any dataset that cannot be managed 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

by traditional processes and tools, any line that outlines 
“big” and “small” data is arbitrary because the key 
characteristic is that the data has a greater volume than the 
current data ecosystem can manage” [13]. This theme has a 
wide misapprehension, the Jordanian interviewees believed 
that “Big Data” refers to having “large datasets” and almost 
all argued that “they do not have large amounts of 
information nor they deal with large amounts of 
unstructured data”. Interviewee 2 further commented that 
Big Data refers to “Any company with lots of information 
and questions.” Interviewee 1 referred to it as “Applications 
that require data analysis with large volumes on continuous 
stream of data.”  Indeed, the aforementioned statements 
clearly highlight the misunderstanding concerning the size 
of data required for Big Data. On the other hand, 
interviewee 3 who clearly illustrates the issue of size in Big 
Data stated that, “when it comes to size of the data, we often 
tell our clients that it is not about the size of data you have, 
rather it is about the value that can be extracted from your 
data. Even with few megabytes, organizations now mash-up 
datasets and tell interesting stories with data. Some clients 
have terabytes of data and others have megabytes. You can 
start small and start playing with the tools and move on”.  
C. Corporate Culture is Critical  
Novel technologies (e.g., social media, cloud computing, 
mobile computing and Big Data) are transforming the ICT 
industry and the way companies across all markets and 
industries can operate (European Commission, 2013). 
Previous research on IS/IT indicated that culture is one of 
the critical factors for implementing new innovations 
[1][14][25]. This research also finds that corporate culture is 
a significant organizational factor that impacts the adoption 
and implementation of Big Data. This issue has been 
explicitly expressed by the majority of interviewees. For 
example, interviewee 2 argued that “corporate culture 
influences are significant! The industry expression is “we 
don’t know what we don’t know” is all too true. Many, 
marketing professionals in particular, see Big Data as a 
“Harry-Potter like” magic solution. However, at an average 
cost of $10m USD, the CEO and board expect to see a 
return.” Interviewee 1 also explained that, “The corporate 
culture has huge influence not only on Big Data adoption 
but also on any novel IT initiatives. Chances are 
significantly higher to succeed in adopting Big Data in a 
given company if it enjoys a culture that supports 
technological innovations”. Similarly, interviewee 7 stated 
that, “the technology is there and available and many 
leading organizations have the capabilities to impersonate 
all these new technologies. To me the big challenge comes 
in the people and culture. So we humans became major 
players in the data-driven plan”. 
D. Security, Privacy and Ethical Concerns  
Security has been emphasized as one of the main issues 
in Big Data adoption literature [16][19]. What can be 
derived from all the interviews is that security is the number 
one concern when implementing Big Data. Privacy is 
another huge concern, and one that increases in the context 
of Big Data [1]. Another literature perspective adds, “We, 
however, face many challenges, such as legal, privacy, and 
technical issues regarding scalable data collection and 
storage and scalable analytics platforms for security” [19]. 
Thus, securing both data and communication is really vital 
for Big Data providers and consumer. Our investigation 
exposed that there are huge concerns about data privacy and 
security risks. This presents many challenges for widespread 
adoption of Big Data in Jordan and in developed countries. 
There are many remarks in respects to this theme came from 
our interviewees. For example, interviewee 3 clarified that, 
“Big questions to be asked when it comes to Big Data 
revolve around privacy and security. Do you know how 
your data is being used? Do you trade-off your data in order 
to get a better experience and have more fun?”. Interviewee 
1 also explained that “security and privacy are the main 
priorities”, interviewee 1 agreed with interviewee 3 by 
saying “Security and privacy are part of the main challenges 
when implementing Big Data”. 
Policy makers have long struggled to draw the line for 
ethical data use, the discussion has historically revolved 
around the definition of “sensitive data.” Yet, any attempt to 
exhaustively define categories of sensitivity typically failed, 
given the highly contextual nature of personal information 
[16]. With the rise of Big Data technologies, business 
innovators are thrilled about the prospective benefits they 
are able to generate from the design and development of a 
wide range of new products and services based on the size, 
variety, and velocity of information available raises new 
questions [18]. Some of those questions are about the 
implications of the acquisition, storage, and use of large 
quantities of data about people’s attributes, behavior, 
preferences, relationships, and locations [18]. Ethical 
concern is the most sensitive topic, when we discussed with 
interviewee 2 about his thoughts about the risk of 
unauthorized use of data by Big Data providers, he 
commented, “It is a big risk…providers may sell your data 
to advertisers. This may result in an unwanted intrusion to 
your life by others; a one big reason I advocate “permission-
based 
marketing.” 
Interviewee 
3 
commented, 
“Unfortunately, there are no clear ethical standards in the 
world of Big Data although this is much needed now.” 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
A. Conclusions 
Around the world today, there is an overwhelming 
demand for tools that could help organizations in accessing, 
analyzing, governing, and sharing information. This study is 
concentrating on understanding the current state of Big Data 
in developing countries, particularly Jordan in comparison to 
developed world. Drawing on seven case studies of service 
providers and customers from different countries around the 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

globe, this study contributed to the existing Big Data 
literature by addressing the complex and multidimensional 
nature of innovation adoption. Findings of this study 
indicated that there are many promised benefits of Big Data 
technologies such as better decisions making and hence 
improve every aspect of businesses, for example those 
related to cost reduction, sales improvement, gaining 
competitive edge, and ultimately improving business profit 
margins. However, many technical, organizational and 
environmental challenges described in this study must be 
addressed before this potential can be fully realized. These 
challenges include security, privacy and ethical concerns, 
lack of awareness and misconceptions about Big Data 
amongst Jordanian leading enterprises, lack of experts in the 
field, corporate culture, resistance to change, and other 
technological issues, such as complexity in data modeling 
and integration approaches.   
B.  Recommendations and Implications 
 
Awareness and Literacy  
The lack of awareness about Big Data in Jordan exposed 
an important need for extensive workshops and conferences 
to fulfil this significant gap as well as to emphasize on the 
benefits and the importance of riding the Big Data wave as 
it is the way to future. Furthermore, the need to stress on the 
importance of pursuing the study of data sciences and 
analytics amongst high school students and undergraduates 
considering continuing their education since data scientists 
are huge assets to any developing country as well as the 
need to include Big Data courses in business and ICT 
majors in Jordanian universities to ensure the planting of 
seeds to a fruitful future of Big Data in Jordan.  
 
Integration  
There is a deep need for an intermediary to facilitate and 
assist in the implementation of Big Data in organizations 
and integrating Big Data with the rest of the business 
processes and technologies. There should be more 
motivation for Big Data startups to be established to help in 
this aspect so more companies would adopt Big Data.  
 
Security, Privacy and Ethical issues  
Big Data environment should be aligned with 
organizational security and privacy requirements. Security 
measures need to be implemented so as to ensure the 
privacy of information.  
 
Customer 
Alignment in Strategic Plans of 
Jordanian Companies 
The lack of focus on the customer needs and desires in 
Jordanian companies has been noticeable where the use of 
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) tools were 
limited and performance was mainly measured strictly by 
revenue figures, whereas the core of successful Big Data 
implementation is always keeping the customer in mind and 
always caring for what is best for the customer. The need 
for the customer alignment with business models and 
strategic plans is crucial to the success of Big Data in 
companies.  
 
Need For More Data-Driven Decision Making in 
Jordanian Companies.  
For IT experts, data is a valuable currency or resource 
like gold or money that will open opportunities that no one 
has ever thought of, due to the fact that the insight you can 
get from your market through data are immeasurable. The 
stress of the need for more data-driven decision-making 
cannot be stated enough as it will revolutionize the direction 
and future of companies.   
Our future plan is to conduct further studies supported 
with more interviews and surveys in the area of Big Data so 
we can keep up to date with the latest improvement 
regarding Big Data technologies. In addition, with the help 
of our MIS department, we are planning to organize the first 
Big Data workshop or conference that will gather 
professionals from the Jordanian market with IT specialists 
from around the world to help us in raising awareness about 
Big Data in the Jordanian market.  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Agrawal, P. Bernstein, E. Bertino, S. Davidson,  U. Dayal, 
M. Franklin and J. Widom, “Challenges and opportunities 
with big data”, 2012, CRA white paper, available on: 
https://hpcforge.cineca.it/files/CoursesDev/public/2014/Tools
_Techniques_Data_Analysis/papers/p2032-labrinidis.pdf 
[2] A.T. Chatfield and O. Al-Hujran,  E-government evaluation: a 
user-centric perspective for public value proposition, 
International 
Conference 
on 
E-Learning, 
E-Business, 
Enterprise Information Systems, and E-Government, EEE 
2007, pp. 53-59. 
[3] J. Bughin, M. Chui and J.  Manyika, “Clouds, big data, and 
smart 
assets: 
Ten 
tech-enabled 
business 
trends 
to 
watch”. McKinsey Quarterly, 56(1), 2010, pp. 75-86. 
[4] J. Chen, Y. Chen, X. Du, C. Li, J. Lu, S. Zhao and X. Zhou, 
Big data challenge: a data management perspective. Frontiers 
of Computer Science, 7(2), 2013, pp. 157-164. 
[5] S. Dutta and B. Bilbao-Osorio, “The Global information 
technology report 2012: Living in a hyperconnected world”. 
World Economic Forum, 2012. 
[6] K.M. Eisenhardt, “Building Theories from Case Study 
Research”. Academy of Management Review, 14(4), 1989, pp. 
532-550. 
[7] M. Hilbert and P. López, “The world’s technological capacity 
to 
store, 
communicate, 
and 
compute 
information. Science’. 332(6025), 2011, pp. 60-65. 
[8] S. Kaisler, F. Armour, J. A. Espinosa and W. Money, Big 
data: Issues and challenges moving forward. In System 
Sciences 
(HICSS), 
2013 
46th 
Hawaii 
International 
Conference on (pp. 995-1004), 2013, IEEE. 
[9] D. Laney, 3D data management: Controlling data volume, 
velocity and variety. META Group Research Note, 6, 2001. 
[10] J. Manyika, M. Chui, B. Brown, J. Bughin, R. Dobbs, C. 
Roxburgh and A.H. Byers, Big data: The next frontier for 
innovation, competition, and productivity, 2011. 
[11] A. McAfee, E. Brynjolfsson, T.H. Davenport, D.J. Patil and 
D. Barton, “Big Data. The Management Revolution”. 
Harvard Bus Rev, 90(10), 2012, pp. 61-67. 
[12] K. Michael and K.W. Miller, Big data: New opportunities and 
new challenges [guest editors' introduction]. Computer, 46(6), 
2013, pp. 22-24. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

[13] S. Miele and R. Shockley, Analytics: A blueprint for value in 
midmarket organizations: Converting big data and analytics 
insights into results. IBM Institute for Business Value. IBM 
Global Business Services Strategy and Analytics, 2012. 
[14] L. Morgan and K. Conboy, “Factors Affecting the Adoption 
of Cloud Computing: An Exploratory Study’, proceeding of 
21st European Conference on Information Systems, 2013, 
Utrecht, Netherlands. 
[15] P. Russom, Big data analytics. TDWI Best Practices Report, 
Fourth Quarter, 2011. 
[16] O. Tene and J. Polonetsky, Big data for all: Privacy and user 
control in the age of analytics, Northwestern Journal of 
Technology and Intellectual Property, 11(5), 2013, pp. 239-
247.  
[17] R. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods, London, 
Sage, 2003. 
[18] K. Davis, Ethics of Big Data: Balancing Risk and Innovation, 
CA, O'Reilly Media, Inc, 2012. 
[19] P.K. 
Manadhata, 
Big 
data for 
security: 
challenges, 
opportunities, and examples. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM 
Workshop on Building analysis datasets and gathering 
experience returns for security , 2012, (pp. 3-4). ACM. 
[20] E. Brynjolfsson, L.M. Hitt and H.H. Kim, Strength in 
Numbers: How Does Data-Driven Decisionmaking Affect 
Firm 
Performance?, 
2011, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1819486. 
[21] P. Bazeley and L. Richards, The Nvivo Qualitative Project 
Book, Sage Publications, London, 2000. 
[22] G. Gibbs (2002) Qualitative Data Analysis: Explorations with 
Nvivo, Open University Press, London. 
[23] C. Marshall and G. Rossman, Designing Qualitative 
Research, Sage, London, 1999. 
[24] H. Chen, R.H. Chiang and V.C. Storey, Business Intelligence 
and Analytics: From Big Data to Big Impact. MIS 
quarterly, 36(4), 2012, pp. 1165-1188. 
[25] M. Al-Debei and E. Al-Lozi, Explaining and predicting the 
adoption intention of mobile data services: A value-based 
approach. Computers in Human Behaviour, 35(2014), 2014, 
pp. 326-338. 
[26] M. Al-Debei, Data Warehouse as a Backbone for Business 
Intelligence: Issues and Challenges. European Journal of 
Economics, Finance and Administrative Sciences, 33, 2011, 
pp. 153-166. 
[27] M. Al-Debei, R. El-Haddadeh and D. Avison, Towards a 
business model for cellular networks and telecommunication 
operators: a theoretical framework. In Proceedings of the 13th 
Conference of the UK Academy for Information Systems 
UKAIS’08, Bournemouth, UK, 2008, pp 1–15. 
 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

