Business Continuity Opportunities in the Cloud 
A Small to Medium Business Perspective 
 
Donald Zullick and Cihan Varol 
Department of Computer Science 
Sam Houston State University 
{dhz001@shsu.edu, cxv007@shsu.edu} 
 
 
Abstract—This research paper begins with a look at current 
work in business continuity as it relates to the cloud and Small 
to Medium Business (SMB). While cloud services are an 
emerging paradigm that is quickly making an impact on 
business, there has been no substantive research applied to 
SMB in disaster recovery efforts. Seeing this lapse, we have 
taken a fusion of continuity and cloud research with 
application to the SMB market. It is an initial reflection with 
base 
framework 
guidelines 
as 
a 
starting 
point 
for 
implementation. In this approach, our research ties together 
existing work and fills the gap with an SMB outlook. 
Keywords-business continuity; cloud services; medium size 
business; risk assessment; small business. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cloud services and related technologies are providing 
options to a proprietary, location based model that has 
dominated the industry for decades [1]. This has always 
been a challenging aspect for the Small to Medium Business 
(SMB) market. While this group is often one of the most 
important drivers in business activity, staffing is generally 
limited to operational functional units, most often this 
means a lack of dedicated technology personnel [2]. While 
this is by no means debilitating to normal operations as the 
SMB will hire staff for core functions as necessary, the 
situation has a distinct tendency to reflect limited or 
restricted technology resources. 
The primary reason that cloud services can be a powerful 
differentiator for SMB’s would be the “pay-as-you-go” 
model and only budgeting for the services you require [3]. 
Enterprise organizations are generally going to have complex 
infrastructure, staffing and potentially even continuity costs, 
which will fundamentally reduce the benefits of cloud 
services. In addition, the needs at the enterprise level will be 
greater along with associated costs. At the SMB level, it will 
generate additional costs but often will be a la carte so 
planning can be done, contracts put in place, and Service 
Level Agreements (SLA) signed which will assist in 
continuity preparedness. The primary reason this research is 
important and why it stands out is due to conventional 
wisdom dictating that enterprise solutions are applicable for 
all organizations, simply scaling down the implementation 
for the SMB. This is an erroneous assumption and dangerous 
to SMB technical operations and continuity planning.  
This research took a look at conventional and enterprise 
level business continuity work that had been done previously 
[4][5]. After getting an understanding at that level, personal 
understanding of the SMB market has been utilized to 
interpret this information into a micro framework with 
flexibility to conform to the unique needs of the target 
organizations. While the result is not formally distinctive, 
which is the ultimate point of this work, the SMB businesses 
require a distinct overarching set of guidelines that can be 
applied to specific operational needs. The final output of this 
work is such a set of steps that can be used in a flexible 
manner yet have an open source aspect that can be 
customized to self-determined needs.  
Rest of the paper is organized as follows: The second 
section will provide information about the cloud services and 
its usage. The third section provides background work on 
application of cloud services in disaster recovery / business 
continuity efforts. This is followed by the interpretation of 
how cloud computing takes a place in the SMB market. In 
Section 5, we will present a business continuity framework 
that can be used in SMB and the paper is finalized with a 
conclusion section. 
II. 
ABOUT CLOUD SYSTEMS 
A. Cloud Services 
As covered by National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) (2009) [6], there are 4 types of cloud 
system consisting of public, private, hybrid and community 
as shown in Figure 1. The most popular and common one is 
the public cloud, though there are other alternatives as noted 
here if there are specific needs of an organization that 
cannot be met by a public option. This may come about 
from system needs or perhaps even from specific security 
needs. The primary scope of this research will center on the 
public cloud and the related potential offered by providers in 
this space. 
Marston et al. [7] stated that accessing to a system 
independent of device and location represent a major shift in 
computing compared to all other previous techniques. There 
are some associated key advantages of this technology from 
lower cost to immediate access to hardware resources, while 
cloud resources potentially increase innovation with 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

availability for enterprises to scale their operations along 
with others [7]. 
 
Figure 1. Types of Cloud Computing [3] 
Some of the final elements of coverage on Cloud 
computing is the classification of services and applications. 
According to Lin and Chen [8], cloud services delivery 
models can be broadly categorized into four:  
 
Software as a Service (SaaS), in which 
applications are exposed as a service running 
on a cloud infrastructure. 
 
Platform as a Service (PaaS), programming 
platforms and tools (such as java [9], python 
[10], or .NET [11]) and/or building blocks and 
APIs for building cloud-based applications and 
services are made exposed as a capability. 
 
Network as a Service (NaaS) includes the 
provision of a virtual network service by the 
owners of the network infrastructure to a third 
party, and, 
 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) resources 
(compute, storage, and network) are exposed as 
a capability.   
Overall, cloud computing is the result of evolution and 
adoption of existing technologies and paradigms. So far, the 
descriptive information and the associated cost figures build 
up the fairly easily discernible benefits related to the cloud 
and stands out as a good potential structure to be used as 
IaaS in business continuity. That being said there are also 
security considerations to be assessed. 
B. Challenges in the Cloud 
There are challenges related to utilizing a framework that 
is so publicly available. A big part of the risk comes from 
having to access proprietary resources across a public 
WAN. While there will be established and implemented 
security protocols in place, with the escalating nefarious 
cyber activity, any additional exposure can be an increased 
risk. 
Cloud computing inherently is affected by common and 
well-known Internet-based threats like Denial of Service 
(DoS) and SQL injections. Some of the security issues 
specifically related to Cloud computing [4] are: 
 
XML Signature Element Wrapping, renowned 
attack to web services 
 
Browser Security 
 
Cloud Malware Injection Attack, which tries to 
damage a spiteful service, application or virtual 
machine. 
 
Flooding Attacks, where the cloud is brazenly 
attacked 
 
Data protection 
 
Incomplete Data Deletion 
 
Locks in, affecting portability 
C. Vulnerabilities 
There are many potential vulnerabilities for cloud-based 
technologies and services, but they can be mitigated with an 
understanding of what types and categories are included. A 
place to start is the core cloud technologies, such as web 
based services, virtualized infrastructure as a service, and 
cryptography. Next essential characteristics are like services 
that are on demand, network access from anywhere, 
resource pooling and an elastic demand needs to be 
assessed. Within those areas is a further defined exploration 
of vulnerabilities along with security controls that can be 
implemented to provide mitigation [12]. The movement 
from proprietary infrastructures and technology provides a 
challenge in vulnerability assessment as it is difficult to 
define boundaries and responsibilities. This is where a solid 
review of the SLA comes in the picture. 
It is not enough to be aware of options, risks and then just 
forge ahead hoping for the best. Even a small or medium 
sized business needs to stay viable, especially in a time of 
continuity threats. As the enterprise grows, being reliable 
and available can be some of the best tools in attaining and 
more importantly, retaining customer base goodwill.  
Data and applications that are controlled and serviced 
internally can be readily assessed according to organizational 
protocols and security measures. Much like our customers 
trust us to be vigorous in protecting their data, housing assets 
in the Cloud implies an SLA. When it comes to the Cloud 
“the enterprise data is stored outside the enterprise in the 
most of Cloud Computing service model. Therefore, the 
Cloud Computing vendor is usually suggested to adopt 
additional security checks to prevent breaches [13].” The 
Cloud model implies a comprehensive enterprise model of 
availability and security. In order to rely on this model at a 
time of greatest need such as a continuity situation, there 
must be well established assurances. Ultimately, while the 
Cloud has revolutionized the computing environment there 
are a number of threats from the network to applications that 
need to be controlled. This will take effort from the 
enterprise utilizing the services through audits and to ensure 
that Cloud service providers are adhering to their SLA’s 
[14]. In order to successfully leverage the cost and 
availability for a Small to Medium Enterprise, the security 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

concerns will need to be explored and accounted for prior to 
establishing Cloud services as a continuity option. 
III. 
LITERATURE REVIEW: CLOUD SERVICES IN DISASTER 
RECOVERY 
Although cloud-based business process has been 
discussed widely and adopted by several companies, there is 
only a few study reflect the usability of cloud services for 
business continuity purposes. 
Wood et al. [4] discussed about applicability of cloud in 
disaster recovery effort. Overall, the authors showed that 
warm backup sites can take the most advantage of the 
cloud’s pay-as-you-go pricing model, since a hot backup site 
will be costlier. Their research also showed that cloud 
services can offer customers up to 85% cost reductions 
compared to company-owned equipment in business 
continuity. 
According to Creeger [5], cloud services reduces the 
cost significantly. By enabling virtual machines to be sent to 
the cloud for access only when needed, virtualization 
becomes a cost-effective disaster recovery mechanism. 
Typical business continuity effort costs are twice the cost of 
the infrastructure. With a cloud-based model, true disaster 
recovery is available for an approximate of 5 percent extra 
cost for the company, a significant savings. Additionally, 
because external cloud service providers replicate their data, 
even the loss of one or two data centers will not result in 
lost data. Although the cost benefit is obvious, the authors 
stated most SMBs make no investment in disaster recovery 
via cloud. 
As mentioned earlier, security within the cloud has been 
an issue because the business is giving up control of their 
data to an external entity. This issue is compounded by the 
fact that the data can be located in multiple locations 
making it very difficult to track. However, Alhazmi and 
Malaiya [15] suggested that there is some evidence with 
proper security protocols and policies that these issues can 
be addressed even if cloud is used for business continuity 
purposes. They also stated that with public cloud vendors, a 
higher security level can be achieved because they can 
employ more security personal that can monitor access of 
the data and if there is a breach, it has higher probability of 
being reported and stopped faster than a private cloud 
system. 
As reflected from above, the work on cloud systems in 
disaster recovery efforts are limited and also the built 
frameworks are not considering the size of the company. 
Therefore, this work in using cloud services in business 
continuity from small size to medium size business will be 
unique in terms of what it proposes. 
IV. 
SMB BUSINESS CONTINUITY AND THE CLOUD 
A. SMB Market and Services 
The challenge has always been greater for technology and 
related implementations in an SMB beyond even just plain 
economics. Staff levels are going to be limited to the levels 
of primary functional ability. There is not a scenario where 
there can be specific, targeted teams for assessment, testing 
or ultimately deployment on demand. Even though the SMB 
market is recognized to be a powerful driver of business 
activity on a macroeconomic level, anything other than 
enterprise organizations have often been overlooked. It is an 
exponential degree of greater difficulty to provide external 
services and consulting for the SMB market. 
This exploration is specifically in the area of business 
continuity planning, but the challenges inherent to the scale 
of business for the SMB market are apparent in all level of 
functional aspects. As a whole, the potential market and 
revenue generation is rival to enterprise businesses, but the 
value has to be extracted in a dispersed and relatively scaled 
per business microeconomic manner. No million dollar 
consulting engagements to be had in this group. 
There are services that have become available to the SMB 
market in recent times along the lines of the most readily 
apparent cloud services, but there are also innovative 
companies in industry that provide greatly needed and 
appropriately targeted consulting, such as HourlyNerd [16]. 
Taking advantage of an obvious business need and the 
glaring lack of services provided in this arena, HourlyNerd 
meets a need by providing affordably priced MBA guidance 
recruited from top business schools such as Harvard and 
Northwestern. Some of the obvious advantages of 
HourlyNerd are that the members are all from top 20 
universities in the United States or elite international 
institutions, they have had their backgrounds thoroughly 
checked during the admissions process and have the 
requisite networks, resources and solutions. 
B. Business Continuity 
In the business continuity process, the SMB will not have 
the same resources to apply for planning, testing or 
ultimately application in time of need. Often there will be 
few, if any, specific technology resources available for any 
stage of the process. This is where an organization needs to 
be creative within the expanding boundaries of technology 
services that in practice actually have a greater impact on 
the bottom line for an SMB than for an enterprise scale 
business. 
Cloud 
technologies 
can 
provide 
a 
solid 
infrastructure and specific applications such as readily 
available Google Docs [17], technology can be leveraged in 
an extremely economical and flexible manner. The greatest 
hurdles would come from simple adoption arising from lack 
of understanding of available options. Accordingly, this is 
the point of the process where previously mentioned 
HourlyNerd could be instrumental in relatively priced 
enterprise scale planning and services at the SMB level. 
C. Power of the Cloud 
Some 
specific 
cloud-based 
and 
cloud-related 
technologies that can be powerful enablers for the SMB are 
not only the clearly defined cloud based services, but 
another organizational paradigm that can tie in to this 
movement and be leveraged for business continuity is Bring 
Your Own Device (BYOD). As the business stalwart PC 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

sales continue to experience a precipitous fall, as consumers 
opt for the tablet and smartphone options, this trend is one 
that is favorable to the SMB market. In a continuity 
situation, communications are fundamental to any situation. 
Ready adoption of employee driven trends of BYOD and 
integration into operations can be a differentiator for smaller 
organizations without a dedicated technology budget or 
staff.  
By having a policy that supports the adoption of mobile 
devices along with company-based reimbursement, an SMB 
could support adoption of business continuity ready devices 
and technologies without the requisite corporate investment 
or commitment of resources. Employees that embrace this 
trend are more likely to be self-trained and have a reliable 
and useful level of home based connectivity. Encouraging 
the adoption by providing company support, the investment 
can be compounded in potential benefit in times of need. 
This can help increasing the likelihood of employees having 
an understanding at least, and a level of comfort at best with 
the cloud based services that can make or break a continuity 
process at a SMB. 
D. Security Concerns 
Concerns are the same at this level as it is at any level 
and that is related to security, more specifically to cyber 
security. Cybercrimes and attacks are a very prevalent threat 
to business and government continuity. Verizon recently, 
released a report showcasing some disconcerting facts and 
figures on how small businesses are the easiest prey for 
cybercriminals [18]. “Of the 621 confirmed data breach 
incidents Verizon recorded in 2012, close to half occurred at 
companies with fewer than 1,000 employees, including 193 
incidents at entities with fewer than 100 workers. A separate 
report from cyber security firm Symantec confirmed that 
trend [19]. It found cyber-attacks on small businesses with 
fewer than 250 employees increased 31% in 2012, after 
growing by 18% in the prior year.” It is an ongoing 
continuity situation for the SMB market, building on 
previously mentioned factors such as lack of dedicated 
technology staff and funding. These elements need to be a 
part of the business continuity planning as it constitutes a 
threat to the organization 
V. 
SOLUTION 
Now, that we have explored the situational factors, 
concerns and how cloud services with related technologies 
can be solution facilitators, we need to look at a formalized 
exploration of a framework.  
Three risk management methods EBIOS [20], NIST 800-
39 [21], and IT-Grundschutz [22] are well-known and widely 
adopted techniques. Although these methods have been 
widely recognized, these methods fit for large scale 
businesses [23]. While implementation of the methods to 
smaller organizations is possible, it will introduce greater 
cost and a potential of information redundancy if viewed 
from “information-as-needed” point of view. By studying 
these methods, we derived that their processes are widely 
different and the quantity of sub-process/sub-steps may vary 
which adds to the complexity and cost to perform these steps 
for smaller organizations. Also, we observed that some of 
them possess useful processes that can be useful for smaller 
businesses or organizations while they may also lack in other 
parts of processes. For example, while EBIOS does not 
possess 
the 
concrete 
post-implementation 
monitoring 
strategy and evaluation, as showcased by NIST 800-39, it 
does, however, do initial study of existing security measures, 
which is not included in NIST 800-39.  
Based on the analysis, as shown in Figure 2, a 
combination methods of Context Study from EBIOS, 
Knowledge catalogue concept from IT Grundchutz, and 
Continuous Risk monitoring and evaluation from NIST-800-
39 can be combined to be used in Risk Management in 
Cloud computing for SMB business. 
 
Set the General Context to Limit Scope
Identify Critical Asset
Context Definition
Analyze Possible Threat to the Critical Asset as Input
Knowledge Catalogue Will Suggest Vulnerabilities,Associated Risks, 
and Recommended Security Resolution
Risk Analysis
Modification/input to the knowledge catalogue if there is no match 
to the new input
Review and selection of suggested security resolution
Security Implementation
Security Implementation
Implementation Report Generation
Continuous Evaluation
 Figure 2. Proposed Risk Management Method Process 
 
 
Context Definition: First stage is the context 
definition. In this stage the person/team will define 
the context of the recovery plan to limit the scope.  
The other main activity will be the identification of 
critical assets of the business. 
 
Risk Analysis: Once the context definition is done, 
analysis of any possible threats to cloud that can 
affect the critical assets need to be listed as a list of 
inputs. These inputs are then compared to the 
knowledge catalogue to see if there are any existing 
similar threats from which can be derived its 
vulnerabilities, associated risks, and recommended 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

security resolution/controls. If there are no matches 
of the inputs in the knowledge catalogue, further 
risk 
assessment 
will 
be 
done 
to 
define 
vulnerabilities, associated risks, and recommended 
security resolution/controls. This can become a 
basis for future risk analysis. 
 
Security Implementation: From the risk analysis, 
the risk assessment report will provide the list of 
risks 
and 
recommended 
security 
resolutions/controls in cloud. With the Cloud 
Controls Matrix (CCM) guideline available from 
Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) that is specifically 
designed to offer fundamental security principles in 
cloud [24], the stakeholder (usually business owner) 
can then decide which controls they want to be 
implemented and a report documenting the 
implementation along with the list of any risks that 
are not controlled due to acceptance from the 
stakeholder need to be generated. 
 
Continuous Evaluation: The cloud environment is 
one of ongoing change and to properly address a 
plan or potential implementation, there should be 
periodic assessments and monitoring on a regular 
basis. As understanding grows along with adoption 
of cloud based business practices and the associated 
risk assessment, an organization needs to treat this 
as a living process and revisit the framework, 
applying modifications as deemed necessary. 
 
As shown in Figure 3, BYOD tied in to cloud services 
can provide communications, data, and applications 
capabilities. Besides cost advantages to the companies, 
BYOD can improve the agility and productivity of work 
practices amongst employees in an enterprise [25]. 
Prohibiting personal devices in a business recovery effort is 
risky, since employees may be forced to use their own 
devices because of lack of secured devices after a disaster. 
With the introduction of BYOD, the devices are owned by 
the individuals not by the companies. The device may be 
managed both by the company and the user as well. 
Accountability is not something that goes away for a user 
just because they personally own the device. At the end, the 
data belongs to the company. 
The suitable defense in securing BYODs begins with the 
same requirements that are applied to devices that are 
already owned by the business. These security measures 
include: 
 
Enforcing strong passcodes on all devices. By 
password 
protecting 
the 
devices, 
a 
user 
acknowledges accountability and responsibility for 
protecting their data. 
 
Antivirus protection and data loss prevention (DLP) 
 
Full-disk encryption capability for cloud storage 
 
Mobile device management (MDM) to wipe 
important data when devices are lost or stolen 
 
Application control. The device should be able to 
perform other daily needed jobs when not in use for 
recovery efforts. 
 
 
Figure 3. Framework for Business Continuity in Small Business 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
There is great potential for the SMB market when it 
comes to cloud services. The challenge does not change but 
the impact of the solutions, and the related value of those 
solutions is much greater. A Small to Medium Business can 
have an as needed infrastructure that can be leveraged on an 
ongoing, day to day basis but beyond that can have an 
accessible infrastructure able to scale up or out in a time of 
distress. For this type of implementation, the costs of 
compliance often have a greater impact due to the smaller 
economies of scale, yet at the counterpoint cloud services 
offer a greater positive impact due to the scalable 
implementation and usage based pricing and services. 
With some planning and a reasonable investment, an 
SMB can now achieve a level of risk assessment with 
associated mitigation by making the most of emerging 
offerings, such as the cloud, BYOD and companies like 
HourlyNerd. The current business environment is very 
challenging for everyone, at times debilitating to smaller 
enterprises and the ability to take advantage of these 
powerful, differentiating services and paradigms can give a 
SMB a good toolbox to build a future. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Mell and T. Grance, "The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing,” 
NIST Special Publication 800-145 (September 2011). National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of 
Commerce, http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-145/SP800-
145.pdf [retrieved: March, 2014] 
[2] D. Greenberg, B. Barringer, and G. Macy, "A qualitative study of 
managerial challenges facing small business geographic expansion," 
Journal of Business Venturing, vol. 11, issue 4, July 1996, pp. 233-
256. 
[3] M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Griffith, A. D. Joseph, R. Katz, A. 
Konwinski, G. Lee, D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, and M. 
Zaharia, "A view of cloud computing," Communication of the ACM, 
vol. 53, 
issue 4, 
April 
2010, 
pp. 
50–58, 
doi:10.1145/1721654.1721672 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

[4] T. Wood, E Cecchet, K. K. Ramakrishnan, P. Shenoy, J. Van der 
Merwe, and A. Venkataramani, “Disaster recovery as a cloud service: 
economic benefits & deployment challenges”, Proc. 2nd USENIX 
conference on Hot topics in cloud computing (HotCloud'10), June 22-
25, 2010, Berkeley, CA, USA, pp. 8-8.  
[5] M. Creeger, “Cloud Computing: An Overview,” Queue – Distributed 
Computing, vol. 7, issue 5, June 2009, pp. 1-5. 
[6] S. Qaisar and K. F. Khawaja, “Cloud Computing: Network/Security 
Threats 
and 
Countermeasures,” 
Interdisciplinary 
Journal 
of 
Contemporary Research in Business, vol. 3, issue 9, January 2012, 
pp. 1323-1329. 
[7] S. Marston, Z. Li, S. Bandyopadhyay, J. Zhang and A. Ghalsasi, 
“Cloud computing – The business perspective,” Decision Support 
Systems, December 2010, pp. 176-189. 
[8] A. Lin and N. Chen, “Cloud computing as an innovation: Perception, 
attitude, and adoption,” International Journal of Information 
Management, April 2012, pp. 533-540. 
[9] Java, http://www.java.com/en/, [retrieved: November, 2013] 
[10] Welcome 
to 
Python.org, 
https://www.python.org/, 
[retrieved: 
November, 2013] 
[11] Microsoft .Net, http://www.microsoft.com/net, [retrieved: November, 
2013] 
[12] B. Grobauer, T. Walloschek and E. Stocker, “Understanding Cloud 
Computing Vulnerabilities,” IEEE Security & Privacy. March-April, 
2011, pp. 50-57. 
[13] C. Ku Fan and T. Chen, “The Risk Management Strategy of Applying 
Cloud Computing,” International Journal of Advanced Computer 
Science and Applications, vol. 3, no. 9, 2012, pp. 181-191. 
[14] R. Bhadauria and S. Sanyal, “Survey on Security Issues in Cloud 
Computing and Associated Mitigation Techniques,” [Online] 
Available: 
http://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1204/1204.0764.pdf 
[retrieved: November, 2013] 
[15] O. H. Alhazmi and Y. K. Malaiya, “Evaluating Disaster Recovery 
Plans Using the Cloud,” in Reliability and Maintainability 
Symposium, Orlando, FL, 2013, pp. 1-6. 
[16] L. Lavelle, MBA’s: Why Hire When You Could Rent by the Hour? 
[Online] Available:  http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-04-
11/mbas-why-hire-when-you-can-rent-by-the-hour 
[retrieved: 
November, 2013] 
[17] Google 
Docs 
(Drive), 
[Online] 
Available: 
http://drive.google.com/?utm_medium=et&utm_source=about&utm_
campaign=et-about [retrieved: November, 2013] 
[18] P. Kavilanz, “Cybercrime’s easiest prey: Small businesses”, [Online] 
Available: 
http://money.cnn.com/2013/04/22/smallbusiness/small-
business-cybercrime/index.html?iid=Lead 
[retrieved: 
November, 
2013] 
[19] Symantec, www.symantec.com [retrieved: November, 2013] 
[20] ANSSI, "Expression of Needs and Identification of Security 
Objectives: EBIOS Method of RIsk Management," ANSSI: Paris, 
France, 
http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/en/the-anssi/publications-
109/methods-to-achieve-iss/ebios-2010-expression-of-needs-and-
identification-of-security-objectives.html 
[retrieved: 
November, 
2013] 
[21] N.Hunstad, "The Application of NIST Special Publication 800-39 for 
Small Businesses and Organizations" ,M.Sc. Thesis, UMN, MA, 
2011, 
http://www.nathanhunstad.com/docs/NathanHunstadCapstone800-
39Public.pdf [retrieved: November, 2013] 
[22] IT Grundschutz Methodology, BSI - Standard 100-2:200. [retrieved: 
March, 2014] 
[23] S. Antolík, “Risk Analysis in Information Security and Tools Used 
for Risk Analysis,” ARSA 2012, Proceedings in Advanced Research 
in Scientific Areas, The 1 st Virtual International Conference, EDIS – 
publishing institution of the University of Zilina, December 3-7, 
2012, pp.1906-1911. 
[24] E. de Souza, S. Cordero, and T. Kenyon, “Cloud Controls Matrix 
(CCM)”, 
 
[Online] 
Available: 
https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/research/ccm/ 
[retrieved: 
March, 
2014] 
[25] W. Keith, J. V. Miller, and G. F. Hurlburt, "BYOD: Security and 
Privacy Considerations," IT Professional, vol. 14, issue 5, September-
October 2012, pp. 53-55, doi:10.1109/MITP.2012.93 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

