 
 
Aligning Riva-based Business Process Architectures with Business Goals Using the 
i* Framework 
Yousra Odeh, Mohammed Odeh and Stewart Green 
Software Engineering Research Group, Faculty of Environment and Technology 
University of the West of England (UWE), Frenchay Campus 
Bristol, United Kingdom 
Yousra.Odeh@uwe.ac.uk, Mohammed.Odeh@uwe.ac.uk, Stewart.Green@uwe.ac.uk 
 
Abstract— The i* framework has been widely used to derive 
business process models as an attempt to fulfill business 
strategies in the business/IT environment. However, in a 
dynamic environment the derivation methods do not easily 
adapt to radical changes required either in goals or process 
models due to the absence of a business process architecture 
that permits business processes improvement. The current 
approaches for business process architecture modelling, and 
particularly the Riva-based method, lack the integration of 
business goals for both deriving the process of business process 
architecture development and/or aligning business goals to a 
pre-existing business process architecture model. In this paper, 
we propose a novel approach that is i*-based to align a Riva 
business process architecture with business goals, and vice 
versa, with full traceability in both directions to tackle the 
above shortcomings. This approach has been initially 
evaluated using the Cancer Detection pilot study in the Cancer 
Care and Registration process in Jordan. This goal-driven 
alignment has demonstrated a systematic bridging of the gap 
between goal-oriented and business process models in a 
dynamic 
environment. 
Moreover, 
the 
business 
goals 
integration 
has 
improved 
the 
Riva 
business 
process 
architecture 
development 
process 
and 
produced 
new 
knowledge for the as-is Riva process architecture and its 
associated business process models, where many are run as 
software services. 
Keywords-Goal;Riva; Business Process Architecture; i* 
Framework; Business Process Model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The business/IT alignment discipline has attracted many 
researchers in the last two decades [14][15]. Their 
contribution aims to increase the competitiveness of 
enterprises where software systems are developed to meet 
the continual changes in business needs in terms of plans, 
objectives and processes. The current approaches to Business 
Process Architecture (BPA) [10] modelling, and particularly 
the Riva-based method, contributed to the business/IT 
alignment and in fact to the Requirements Engineering (RE) 
processes by deriving candidate software services along with 
associated capabilities in [14]. 
The Riva BPA [10] method aims to blueprint the current 
overall chunking of core Business Processes (BP) that stem 
from the business an organisation is in [10]. Ould has 
asserted the existence of invariant process architectures for 
organisations that are in the same business [10]. However, 
the Riva-based method lacks the integration of business 
goals for deriving the process of BPA development, and/or 
aligning business goals to a pre-existing BPA model. This 
shortcoming has resulted in an inability to determine some 
core elements that initiate Riva-BPA development and/or to 
assist in redesigning an as-is BPA to adapt to organisational 
business changes. This shortcoming and its consequence 
have weakened the generation of an optimal BPA design 
and/or have obstructed further improvements. And according 
to Ould’s previous assertion [10], they might in turn diminish 
the competitiveness in the long term due to many enterprises 
that are in the same business with different business goals 
that might generate different BPA models.  
In this paper, we develop a novel approach that is i*-
based [6] to align business goals to a Riva-based BPA, and 
vice versa, with full traceability in both directions. This 
complement is anticipated to improve the BPA development 
process and hence to generate new knowledge to BPA and 
associated BPs where many are executed by software 
systems. The Cancer Detection (CD) process pilot study, as a 
part of the Cancer Care Registration (CCR) process in 
Jordan’s health care sector, validates this work.  
 The paper is structured as follows, Section II presents 
the required background. Section III applies the current Riva 
method using the CD pilot study. In Section IV, we propose 
using an i*-based approach for aligning Riva-based BPAs 
with business goals using the CD study. A discussion is 
carried out to assess the alignment approach in Section V. 
And finally, Section VI concludes the work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
This section starts with a brief description of the pilot 
study that is the Cancer Detection process. Then it presents 
the related background, with regard to the i* framework and 
the Riva-based BPA and associated BP models respectively, 
with a brief analysis afterwards.  
A. Cancer Detection Process: A Pilot Case Study 
 In this paper, the Cancer Detection (CD) process, which 
is a sub process of the CCR, is employed as a pilot study in 
order to compare the proposed approach with the Riva 
approach [9][10].  The CD process was designed to address 
two main objectives that are considered as sub goals of the 
parent goal “improve administration of cancer treatment”. 
The first goal is diagnosing patients and the second is 
determining their cancer type and site. Five roles are 
involved in this process to fulfil the aforementioned 
objectives: Patient, Receptionist, Doctor, Lab and the 
Imaging Department. A detailed BP workflow model has 
been illustrated using RAD and BPMN in [9][16][14]. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
 
However, a corresponding goal-oriented model that 
represents the strategic view has not been addressed yet [17]. 
Due to the detailed representation of the CD process, the 
paper validates the alignment using a partial and simple 
comparison of the goal and BPA models. 
B. Business Goals and the i* Framework  
Business objectives or goals have been defined in various 
ways either from the business or system perspective in [2] 
[3][6][4][13]. However, the authors agreed to adopt what 
they judged to be the most comprehensive and related 
definition for this paper. So business goals are precisely 
defined as “the high level objectives of business, 
organisation or system that capture the reason why a system 
is needed and guide decisions at various levels within 
enterprise” [1]. In this context, goals have to be addressed 
not solely with respect to technological needs, but also with 
respect to organisational ones in social style of cooperation. 
Therefore, business goals are anticipated to guide BPA 
design decisions for an enterprise.  
The i* framework is classified under the problem-
oriented RE school that aims to understand and highlight 
associated problems within business structure, processes 
and systems [3][5][12]. Other goal-oriented approaches join 
this school with the i* framework (e.g., NFR framework 
[13] and [3][5]). 
In particular, the i* framework aims to understand early 
on during the requirements phase the current situation of a 
business organisation in the form of a network of 
dependencies among actors [6][3]. It is based on two types 
of strategic models. The first is the Strategic Dependency 
(SD) model, which illustrates a network of dependencies in 
external relationships between actors where the depender 
depends on a dependee to achieve a dependum, whether it is 
a goal, soft goal, task or resource [6]. Actors are active 
entities that could be humans (e.g., physician) or non-
humans (e.g., e-learning system). They either hold 
intentions to attain dependums and/or abilities to achieve 
them. The second model in the i* framework is the Strategic 
Rationale (SR) model, which elaborates the abstracted SD 
for 
a 
better 
understanding 
by 
modelling 
internal 
relationships within actors using means-end and task 
decomposition links. In reality, the aforementioned steps are 
carried out in parallel. While re-engineering a BP, this has 
produced better design alternatives in delivering the actors’ 
interests. 
The authors have adopted the i* framework as an agent- 
and goal-oriented approach due to its ease of adaptability and 
its richness of business-oriented concepts that may motivate 
an early integration with other business models with full 
traceability. The i* framework has been widely applied in re-
engineering the detailed workflow of BPs [11]. However, the 
i* framework lacks the ability to derive and/or re-engineer a 
BPA that manifests how BP fragments are interacting and 
steers their improvement. This inability has been revealed 
because of the absence of an adaptable and viable BPA 
modelling approach that is compatible with the i* 
framework. 
C. The Riva-based Business Process Architecture and 
associated Business Process Models 
The Object Management Group defines a business 
architecture as “a blueprint of the enterprise that provides a 
common understanding of the organisation and is used to 
align strategic objectives and tactical demands” [17]. They 
agreed that a business architecture must encompass five key 
views that are: business strategy view, business capability 
view, business process view, business knowledge view and 
organizational view [17]. Ould proposed the Riva 
methodology to create a BPA and associated core BPs as a 
blueprint that aims to address the second and the third views 
stemming from the business an organisation is in [10]. This 
methodology is required in an enterprise in order to manifest 
the BP’s collaboration where many of them are run as 
software services. Thus, it assists in their improvement and 
development.    
The Riva-based BPA is based on brainstorming the 
Essential Business Entities (EBEs) that are the subject matter 
of the business an organisation is in [10]. This BPA is 
generated after applying the following steps [10]: 1- 
brainstorm for EBEs that characterize the business an 
organisation is in. An EBE could be either physical (e.g., 
book) or abstract (e.g., module). 2- filter the previous EBEs 
to ones that have a lifetime that an organisation is interested 
in and call them Units of Work (UoWs). 3- link UoWs to one 
another via dynamic relationships, namely “generates” to 
make up the UoW diagram. A one-to-one or a one-to-many 
cardinality must be associated with each dynamic 
relationship. 4- the UoW diagram must follow some rules to 
generate the 1st cut BPA that consists of a set of interrelated 
Case Processes (CPs) that each corresponds to a UoW. 
Therefore, a UoW diagram is useful to predict the BPA 
model.  A CP generates one or more instances that are 
managed through a corresponding Case Management 
Process (CMP) if needed. 5- the 1st-cut BPA is reduced after 
applying a set of heuristics to generate the 2nd-cut process 
architecture namely, the Riva BPA [10]. Each process in the 
Riva BPA is designed using a role-oriented business process 
modelling approach. The BPMN and RAD are two well 
know notations to describe a role-oriented BP [16][10].  
The Riva method appears to be a good candidate for the 
desired alignment as it is easy to comprehend and it 
encompasses all the required business-oriented concepts that 
are needed to integrate goal models with full traceability. 
However, the Riva method does not guide the architect in 
how to meet/respond to new organisational objectives. This 
is mainly because it develops a BPA from the business an 
organisation is in rather than the rationales that stimulate this 
business. This is likely to end with gaps in the BPA due to 
missing but required Riva elements and/or identified but 
unrequired ones (e.g., BPs). This limitation may require the 
Riva method to integrate the strategic view as an attempt to 
fulfill business goals in its as-is BPA model via a systematic 
alignment approach. 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
 
III. 
DERIVING CANCER DETECTION PROCESS RIVA-
BASED BPA 
This section applies the current Riva approach presented 
in Section II on the CD study. The Riva BPA has been 
already established with its core elements (e.g., EBEs and 
UoWs) and evaluated in [14].  
The current Riva approach that designed this BPA 
stemmed from the business rather than from the 
aforementioned goals. This has resulted in 24 EBEs and 3 
UoWs where each UoW corresponds a business process. 
Figure 1 illustrates the resulting non-goal-based UoW 
diagram that is used to predict the BPA. The authors agreed 
to compare it with the goal-based UoW diagram rather than 
using the 2nd-cut architecture for comparison. In Figure 1, the 
cancer detection UoW generates the other two UoWs. 
Limitations of this approach have been already presented at 
the end of Section II.       
IV. 
ALIGNING THE RIVA-BASED BPA WITH BUSINESS 
GOALS USING THE CANCER DETECTION EXAMPLE 
This section presents the proposed alignment approach 
that aims to re-engineer and/or improve the already 
established Riva BPA model using the i* framework along 
with CD study. The re-engineered BPA model is produced 
from a set of designed activities that constitute the alignment 
process as depicted in a coarse grain manner in Figure 2. The 
proposed alignment process inputs the as-is Riva BPA and 
associated role-oriented Goal-based Business Processes 
(GBPs) to generate i* models that will in turn be aligned to 
output a goal-based BPA.  The five-core activities of the 
alignment process are overlapped and iterated as shown in 
Figure 2 as to be discussed in detail in the next sub sections. 
The second and third core activities generate associated goal-
oriented dependency models where a depender depends on a 
dependee to achieve a goal dependum. In both activities, 
setting a goal and assigning it to an associated depender and 
dependee will be carried out in a parallel manner. However, 
three extra activities constantly overlap with the core ones to 
adjust the alignment: (1) reusing role-oriented GBPs, (2) 
reusing as-is BPA and (3) building the actors’ hierarchy. 
Feedback is required between all the above activities, as an 
overlapping activity will assist in performing the overlapped 
activities if needed. For example, the design SD model 
activity (C) assists in performing the design SR model 
activity (D), as depicted in Figure 2. As Figure 2 shows, the 
alignment process starts either to immediately design the 
Business Strategy (BS) model, or not immediately by reusing 
role-oriented GBPs to deduce the Highest Business Goals 
(HBGs) to then design the BS model. 
A. Designing the Business Strategy (BS) Model for CCR   
In this first stage, the boundary of an individual 
organisation and its associated Highest-Business Goals 
(HBGs) are agreed using the canonical list of goal types 
provided in [7]. A business organisation could be an 
enterprise, a department, a main process in a business sector 
or even a group of individuals that are collaborating to 
accomplish at least one HBG, which refers to an ultimate 
main business goal. The modelling notation is inspired from 
the use case modelling in the software engineering discipline 
due to its flexibility in initiating early and easy 
communication between stakeholders [8]. 
With regard to the CD study, Figure 3 depicts this model 
where the business organisation, which appears on the left, 
aims to achieve its HBG, that is to improve the CCR 
business process, which is denoted by the top ellipse on the 
right side. This HBG is deduced from lower goals that are 
inferred from the main objective statement of CCR, that is:  
Cancer 
Detection 
Lab Test 
Imaging Test 
Generate 1:m 
Generate 1:m 
Figure 1. The Cancer Detection Non Goal-based UoW Diagram. 
Figure 3. The BS Model for an Individual Organisation in the Kingdom 
of Jordan 
A. Design 
business 
strategy 
model 
B. Design 
high strategic 
dependency 
model 
C. Design 
strategic 
dependency 
model 
D. Design 
strategic 
rationale 
model  
As-is 
Riva 
BPA 
Role-oriented 
goal-based 
business 
processes 
E. Design 
Goal-based 
Riva BPA 
Figure 2. The Alignment Process Designed Activities for 
Integrating Business Goals to as-is Riva BPA.   
Two possible 
start points 
Goal-based 
Riva BPA 
Outputs 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
 
“to improve the Administration of cancer treatment” and to 
improve “collection of information about cancer cases”[9]. 
Using the canonical list of goals and these two [7], the 
authors conclude that the HBG is improving the cancer care 
registration business process. The BS model is not 
immediately generated as the authors started the alignment 
process from reusing role-oriented GBPs. This work 
complements the work done on bridging the gap between 
business process models and system models in the semi-
formal automation of generating use-case models from 
business process models without consideration of business 
goals [8]. 
B. Designing the High Strategic Dependency (HSD) Model 
This phase elaborates each HBG into associated sub 
goals namely, Immediate Highest sub Goals (IH-G). The IH-
G set is a new term derived from the previous phase to 
generate a first goal-oriented dependency model. The HBG 
is decomposed using a decomposition relation to be satisfied 
by a number of achieved IH-Gs as shown in Figure 4. As 
from the HBG perspective, the IH-G set is defined as the set 
of immediate decomposed goals that make up the HBG 
parent. And from a Goal-based Business Process (GBP) 
perspective, the IH-G is defined as the main objective for a 
number of collaborating GBPs that aim to meet the IH-G 
parent. The HSD is similar to the SD model in the i* 
framework but with actors that are either a key (e.g., Patient) 
or set of roles (e.g., Cancer Care Team). It is required as it 
derives the i* strategic models.  
In the study, the generated IH-Gs dependums (e.g., 
administration improvement of cancer treatment) must have 
dependers (e.g., patient) and dependees (e.g., cancer care 
team) that are linked via dependency relations to make up a 
goal-oriented dependency model as depicted in Figure 5. The 
CD process is embedded in the bottom dependency in Figure 
5 as will be shown in the next activity. The two dependums 
are sub goals of the HBG in Figure 4. Very few EBEs have 
been detected using the as-is Riva (e.g., patient) due to the 
high abstraction of the HSD model. 
C. Designing the Strategic Dependency Model 
In this stage, the i* framework gradually starts to emerge 
by elaborating prior goal-oriented models. However, this 
requires further refinements as we have denoted the 
parallelism in defining goals and actors. 
1) Discovering the Corresponding Goal-based Business 
Processes 
This sub phase aims to look for interrelated GBPs that 
fulfill a corresponding IH-G parent implying that it is a 
business process itself with associated goals in order to 
adjust the aimed alignment. Therefore, each IH-G parent will 
be decomposed, using decomposition links, into a set of 
GBPs that are collaborating with each other to fulfill the 
corresponding IH-G parent. Figure 4 depicts the cancer 
detection as a GBP that collaborate with its three siblings to 
fulfill their parent. In the next sub section, for each role-
oriented GBP there will be a corresponding SD model. 
2) Deriving the SD Model from the Corresponding GBP 
The SD diagram models a corresponding GBP in [6] 
followed by a one-to-one relation between the GBP and the 
SD model.  The GBP is fulfilled by a consequent 
decomposition of goals, as shown in Figure 4, that are 
depicted in the form of dependencies with their associated 
dependers and dependees to design the SD model. The goal 
dependencies will be only illustrated in the SD model as the 
rest of lower business-oriented concepts will emerge later in 
the form of operationalizations (e.g., tasks and resources) in 
the corresponding SR-model as below [13].  
Finally, the as-is EBE list from the pre-existing Riva 
BPA will assist to detect EBEs that exist in this phase rather 
than brainstorming them to adjust the alignment. Also, the 
SD model might generate a few new EBEs that are likely to 
be the goal dependums. This phase will iterate for each 
corresponding GBP. 
Consequently, the CD GBP corresponding SD model is 
depicted in Figure 6 where its goal dependencies and 
associated actors are extracted from the CD GBP’s goals and 
roles [9]. For example, a patient depends on a doctor for a 
cancer-diagnosed goal where the patient and doctor are 
 Figure 4. The Hierarchal Network of Goals 
Figure 5. Partial HSD Model for the CCR Process 
Figure 6. The SD Model for Cancer Detection.  
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
 
detected as pre-existing EBEs. Figure 4 illustrates how the 
cancer detection is decomposed into these two sub goals 
using two decomposition links. These two sub goals turn out 
to be two EBEs that do not exist in the as-is EBE list. 
Therefore, they are derived rather than being detected from 
the as-is EBE list. In Figure 6 the investigation-performed 
goal dependency appears later on while designing the 
corresponding SR model.   
D. Designing the Strategic Rationale Model 
The SD goal dependencies will be achieved from an actor 
point of view. Therefore, the corresponding SR model 
fullfills the SD goal dependums by designing the internal 
structure of an actor’s abilities in the form of tasks and 
resources that are lower than goals in their abstraction [13]. 
The internal structure of an actor is designed using two 
relationships: (1) means-end and (2) decomposition links. 
The SD goal dependum in the goal dependency is elaborated 
into sub goals, tasks, or resources to be satisfied as discussed 
in |Section II. The first relationship aims to make the means 
satisfy the end and hence to model alternatives. The second 
aims to decompose a goal, resource or task into sub parts as 
discussed in Section II. 
In fact, the actual alignment emerges here with a higher 
number of detected EBEs using again the as-is EBE list and 
this demonstrates the overlap between designing the SR 
model activity and reusing the as-is BPA. An EBE could be 
an actor, sub actor, goal, task, or a resource in the SR model. 
Moreover, 
the 
means-end 
and 
the 
decomposition 
relationships will assist in delivering the alignment between 
goal models and a corresponding Riva- based BPA with 
traceability. If it appears somewhere in the SR model that an 
actor will depend on another to achieve either a task or 
resource, then it must be embodied in a goal dependency to 
be part of the previous corresponding SD-model. 
With regard to the CD study, its SR-model elaborates the 
previous SD-model and detects more EBEs from the as-is 
EBE list. Figure 7 partially depicts how a doctor achieves the 
cancer being diagnosed SD goal for a patient through a set of 
decomposed tasks and resources. However, somewhere the 
doctor will depend on a new actor, the investigation team, for 
investigations to be performed as a new goal to assist in 
achieving the cancer being diagnosed goal. Hence, this 
demonstrates the overlap in reusing its as-is BPA, designing 
its SR and designing its SD models in the proposed 
alignment process. Finally, this denotes that the goal 
dependencies in the SD model are not conclusive as new SD-
goal(s) will have the opportunity to emerge somewhere 
while modelling its SR model as shown in Figure 7. 
E. Optimising the As-Is Riva BPA 
In the previous activities, and particularly while 
designing the SD and associated SR models, EBEs have 
been detected and matched using the as-is EBE list. This 
detection activity is required to address the alignment rather 
than brainstorming for EBEs. However, a few new EBEs are 
likely to emerge which did not exist in the as-is EBE list. 
These new EBEs (e.g., some SD goals such as patient is 
diagnosed) will join the as-is EBE list to alert for a required 
re-engineering process for the as-is BPA with the respect to 
the new EBEs. The as-is BPA will be refined to design a 
model with full traceability namely, goal-based BPA. 
Finally, the as-is BPA of the CD is now improved after 
integrating the three new strategic EBEs that are cancer 
patient diagnoses, cancer type and site determination, and 
investigations performed. Based on the Riva method 
heuristics, only the first and the second EBEs turns into 
UoWs as they posses a lifetime the CCR is interested in. The 
output of this approach appears in Figure 8. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
This section discusses the proposed approach benefits 
and limitations through comparing two cancer detection 
UoW diagrams as qualitative results. The first UoW 
diagram, which appears in Figure 1, was established using 
the Riva method in [10]. The second diagram is generated 
after re-engineering the first using the alignment process as 
shown in Figure 8. EBEs have been manually detected in the 
alignment approach by matching the goal-oriented entities 
with the as-is EBE list. 
The reader should note the increased number of EBEs, 
from 24 to 27, and UoWs from, 3 to 5. As a qualitative 
evaluation, this new partial UoW diagram adheres to our 
business strategies and presents new important knowledge 
because it has been learned from Section II, a new UoW 
corresponds a new BP. Therefore; the two new UoWs have 
generated two new BPs in the goal-based BPA. 
 With regard to addressing the OMG views, the new 
UoW diagram addresses the first three views instead of two 
because it is established using the process’s rationales. This 
is anticipated to benefit the requirement engineers in eliciting 
highly 
complete, 
consistent 
and 
correct 
functional 
requirements. With regard to the BPM, the approach 
attempted to deliver well-defined BPs in the BPA that stem 
from business goals and consequently an elegant BPM 
lifecycle that is well-designed and configured. 
The authors asserted the alignment strategy of Riva BPA 
with goals against the derivation strategy of BPA from goals. 
This desired order does not establish the BPA from scratch 
using goals yet it reengineers it to accommodate with rapid 
business goal changes. Hence, a reengineering process reuses 
the as-is models in order to accomplish an improvement 
where required with minimal architecting effort. 
Integrating the dynamical Riva, with the goal-oriented 
approach has given the latter an opportunity to engage in a 
Figure 7. Partial SR Model for Cancer Detection Process  
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
 
dynamic environment.  Thus, the i* framework is likely to be 
compatible with the rapid changes of business goals and 
process. The complexity of the alignment process reveals the 
overlap between the activities, as one will call another when 
required. However, these consequent overlaps merit the 
accommodation with changes that might emerge either in 
goals or EBEs. Finally, the proposed approach is limited to 
individual organisations rather than interrelated ones. The 
non-functional requirements in the aforementioned models 
are not aligned yet (e.g., security).   
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have proposed a systematic novel 
approach for aligning a non goal-based, already established 
Riva BPA, which is a pre-existing BPA, with business goals 
using model-based goal-driven approach. This work is 
proposed as an attempt to answer the shortcoming of the 
Riva BPA method in addressing business process and 
organisational strategic goals. The work was evaluated using 
the cancer detection pilot study [9]. The UoW diagram has 
been assessed and has generated new BPs that stem from the 
related goal models. Any difference that appears in the UoW 
diagram must immediately modify the required cost and 
effort to meet the new design requirements. Also, any further 
manipulation on goals will immediately encourage and alert 
the business architect and the requirements engineer to align 
the as-is BPA with these goals. Hence, this enhances 
systematically the requirements elicitation activity ahead 
with advanced analysis and traceability mechanisms to detect 
any gaps in satisfying goals.   
Furthermore, a significant corollary of this alignment is 
demonstrating the adaptability of the Riva-BPA method to 
bridge the gap between goal-oriented and business process 
modelling approaches with the ease of managing the 
concepts mapping challenge between the two paradigms.  
Finally, the authors tend to evaluate the work with more 
examples to verify its validity. In our next stage work, we 
will be addressing soft goals by marrying this approach to an 
NFR framework [13]. Another further work is the necessity 
for developing a tool to automatically detect EBEs while 
generating the goal models. It is likely this will attain a faster 
alignment process execution. Finally, we plan to enrich this 
approach with a semantic representation using OWL-DL as a 
further evolution of [14]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Anton, W. McCracken and C. Potts, “Goal Decomposition 
and Scenario Analysis in Business Process Reengineering,” 
Proc. 6th Conference on Advanced Information Systems 
Engineering (CAISE ’94), Springer ,Jun. 1994, pp. 94-104, 
doi: 10.1007/3-540-58113-8_164. 
[2] J P. Clements and L. Bass, “The Business Goals Viewpoint,” 
IEEE 
Software, 
vol.27, 
Dec. 
2010, 
pp.38-45, 
doi: 
10.1109/MS.2010.116. 
[3] E. Kavakli and P. Loucopoulos, “Goal Modelling in 
Requirements Engineering: Analysis and Critique of Current 
Methods,” 
Information 
Modeling 
Methods 
and 
Methodologies: Advanced Topics in Database Research, Idea 
Group Publishing (IGP), 2005, pp.102-124, doi: 10.4018/978-
1-59140-375-3.ch006. 
[4] J P. Loucopoulos and V. Karakostas, System Requirements 
Engineering. McGraw Hill, London, 1995. 
[5] S. Green, “Goal-driven Approaches to Requirements 
Engineering,” Technical report, Imperial College, University 
of London, 1994. 
[6] E. Yu, P. Giorgini, N. Maiden and J. Mylopoulos, Social 
Modeling for Requirements Engineering, MIT Press, London, 
2010. 
[7] P. Clements and L. Bass, “Using Business Goals to Inform 
Software Architecture,” Proc. 18th IEEE International 
Requirements Engineering Conference, IEEE, Sep–Oct. 2010, 
pp. 69-78, doi:10.1109/RE.2010.18. 
[8] M.Odeh and R. Kamm, “Bridging the Gap between Business 
Process Models and Systems”, Information and Software 
Technology, Special Edition on Modeling Organisational 
Processes, 
vol.45, 
Dec. 
2003, 
pp. 
1053-1060, 
doi:10.1016/S0950-5849(03)00133-2. 
[9] F. Abu Rub, M. Odeh and I. Beeson, “Modelling Non-
Functional Requirements of Business Processes,” Journal of 
Information and Software Technology, vol. 49, Nov. 2007, 
pp. 1073-1172, doi: 10.1016/j.infsof.2006.12.002. 
[10] M. Ould,  Business Process  Management A Rigorous 
Approach. The British Computer Society, Swindon, 2006. 
[11] G. Grau, X. Franch and N.A.M Maiden, “PRiM: An i*-based 
Process Reengineering Method for Information Systems 
Specification,” 
Information 
and 
Software 
Technology 
Journal, 
vol.50, 
Oct.2007, 
pp.76-100, 
doi:10.1016/j.infosof.2007.10.006. 
[12] R. Wieringa, “Requirements Researchers: are we really doing 
research?,” Requirements Engineering, vol.10, Aug. 2005, 
pp.304-306,  doi:10.1007/s00766-005-0013-6. 
[13] L. Chung, B. Nixon and J. Mylopoulos, Non-Functional 
Requirements in Software Engineering. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, London, 2000. 
[14] R. Yousef, M. Odeh, D.  Coward and A. Sharieh,  
“BPAOntoSOA: Generic Framework to derive Software 
Service 
Oriented 
Models 
from 
Business 
Process 
Architectures,” Proc. the Second International Conference on 
the 
Applications 
of 
Digital 
Information 
and 
Web 
Technologies (ICADIWT’09), IEEE Computing, Aug. 2009, 
pp.50-55, doi:  10.1109/ICADIWT.2009.5273939. 
[15] L. Aversano, C. Grasso and M. Tortorella, “A Literature 
Review of Business/IT Alignment Strategies,” Proc. 4th 
Conference of ENTERprise Information Systems – aligning 
technology, organizations and people (CENTERIS 2012), 
Procedia 
Technology, 
vol.5, 
2012, 
pp.462-474, 
doi:10.1016/j.protcy.2012.09.051. 
[16] S.A.White and P.Miers, The BPMN Modeling and Reference 
Guide. Future Strategies Inc, USA, 2008. 
[17] OMG, http://www.omgwiki.org/bawg/doku.php. [Retrieved: 
Mar 2013]
 
Figure 8. The UoW Diagram After Integrating Business Goals 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

