Mobile Operators as Identity Brokers 
 
 
Ajit Raghavan 
Technology & System Management, BUSS R&D  
Ericsson India Global Services 
Gurgaon, India 
ajit.r.raghavan@ericsson.com 
Kirti Girdhar 
Technology & System Management, BUSS R&D  
Ericsson India Global Services 
Gurgaon, India 
kirti.girdhar@ericsson.com
 
 
Abstract — In this paper, we discuss how a mobile 
communication service provider (Mobile Operator) can act as 
an intermediary between the end user and the digital service 
providers. This enables a more trustful relationship between 
the end user and service provider, and brings out compelling 
value. In addition to being a trusted broker, a mobile operator 
can also provide various value-added services to the end users 
and service providers. 
Keywords - Telecommunication; Digital Services Over the 
Top; Online Services; Identity Management; Identity Federation; 
Digital Identity Profile; Ease of Use; Security; Circle of Trust; E-
commerce; M2M 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In a connected society, where a significant number of 
applications and services are available over the Internet, a 
user is faced with daunting challenges of maintaining 
multiple identities for various services. Usually, every 
application or service requires some authentication and 
establishing the identity of the appropriate user. It is done 
with an identity coupled with a password. 
A user needs to maintain identities for each of the 
applications. However, there is a drawback in this approach. 
The end users tend to reuse the same identity and password 
across all services, which make them vulnerable to risks of 
identity thefts or identity pilferage. 
In future, it is expected that the number of the services is 
going to grow exponentially [1]. It will be difficult for an end 
user to manage identities across all the services. In addition, 
the increasing number of devices associated with the user 
(for example, connected cars or home security systems) is 
also going to magnify these identity management problems. 
Digital services like online banking or trading, require a 
secure identity establishment. However, digital services like 
e-mail 
or 
social 
networking 
need 
basic 
identity 
establishment. 
For all the digital service providers, it is a big challenge 
to maintain and establish the identities of their users. 
In this paper, we discuss how the mobile operator can act 
as an intermediary between the user and the service provider. 
It enables a more trustful relationship between the end user 
and the service provider. For example, it would be great for 
an end user to use single identity across mobile networks, 
Wi-Fi hot spots, broadband, utility, or cable TV. If mobile 
operators are able to provide an identity brokerage service 
between the end user and their service providers, it will help 
them monetize the brokerage services as well as increase the 
loyalty of their end users. 
There are some initiatives ([2][3][4]), where mobile 
operators are playing a global identity provider role. This 
paper leverages on these initiatives, and presents how mobile 
operators can provide more compelling value to end users 
and service providers. 
This paper talks about: 
 
The previous work done on identity management. 
 
The future requirements and actors in value chain. 
 
How mobile operator can provide identity broker 
services and other value added service.  
 
The challenges mobile operator’s may have. 
 
How end users can be subscribed to the services 
provided by a mobile operator. 
 
The solution framework and its components. 
 
The case studies and the conclusion. 
 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Many service providers allow subscriber authentication 
using popular service provider identities, for example, 
Facebook, LinkedIn, or Google account. This concept is 
known as Identity Federation. It enables end users to reuse 
their existing identities without registering to every service 
provider. There is a lot of work done towards standardization 
of the identity federation with protocols, such as, Security 
Assertion Markup Language (SAML) [5], Liberty Alliances 
[6], OAuth [7] gaining significance. Organizations like 
GSMA [8] are involved in driving these standardizations. 
There are few success stories around this concept; 
however, they still need to achieve a mass adaptation. Also, 
mobile operators perceive this a potential revenue stream. 
III. 
THE FUTURE NEED 
The future need indicates that number of services is 
going to grow exponentially [1]. However, it also indicates 
the following points: 
 
It is a pain for end users to register and maintain 
their identities (including identities related to their 
devices) across multitudes of services. It also acts as 
a deterrent for the end users from trying out new 
services unless there is a need. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
It is a pain for various service providers to maintain 
end users identity, authentication, and comply with 
local regulations. 
Service providers have a strong requirement to 
differentiate between a genuine end user and a fraudulent 
end user. 
An Identity Broker is required in the connected world, 
which can provide validated information of end users and 
service providers. 
A secure identity establishment and identity exchange 
enables innovative use cases. For example: 
 
Digital voting 
 
Seamless access to connected devices 
 
Secured access to corporate Intranet or government 
portals 
IV. 
ACTORS IN THE VALUE CHAIN 
In the identity establishment and exchange flow, the 
following actors play an important role: 
 
End User: The subscriber of mobile operator and a 
digital service provider, whose identity is established 
before giving access to a service. 
 
Mobile Operator: The connectivity provider having 
the 
infrastructure 
available 
for 
securing 
the 
communication channel and also have detailed 
information about the end user. 
 
Digital Service Provider: The digital service provider 
to the end user over the Internet. It uses the 
connectivity provided by mobile operator to offer 
services. 
Digital service providers need to partner with mobile 
operator to leverage on the assets which the operators have. 
Operator's partners can be, for example, Over-the-Top 
(OTT) service providers, Wi-Fi hot spot providers, or 
Broadband providers. 
V. 
OPERATORS AS A TRUSTED IDENTITY 
BROKERS AND MORE 
The operators have unique position in a connected 
society. The operators have following capabilities: 
 
Verify customer information as per the local 
regulations. 
 
Contact/Billing addresses of the end user. 
 
Support for multiple communication interfaces like 
Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD) 
[12], Short Message Service (SMS) [13], E-mail, 
and Voice. 
 
Self-care/Customer care 
 
Fraud management 
 
Established relationship with the end user. 
 
Charging and Billing infrastructure 
 
Extensive reach to the customers and dealer/agent 
network. 
 
Marketing infrastructure to enable service providers 
to get more end users. 
The operator can leverage these capabilities: 
 
To act as an identity broker. 
 
To provide value added services to end users and 
service providers. 
 
To enable a low entry barrier for new service 
providers for offering their services to the end users. 
It is not the identity brokerage service which is provided, 
but a complete bouquet of services made available to service 
providers enabling them to focus on best quality service 
delivery aspects. 
The end users can enjoy a seamless and secure access to 
all the trusted partner services. 
VI. 
THE CHALLENGES 
The mobile operators have the following challenges: 
 
SIM-based Security: It is built in as part of the SIM 
[15] card or device, which has its pros and cons. 
There should be authentication mechanism for 
following scenarios: 
Multiple devices per end user (including devices without 
SIM, for example, tablets, home security systems) 
Shared family devices or accounts 
 
SIM tied to the operator: Here an end user might 
have multiple SIM cards from multiple operators. 
The challenge is how the identity brokering work is 
done when we have other services like Wi-Fi, fixed 
line, or broadband. 
 
Access Dependence: Connected devices may not be 
using operator’s access network. For example, 
power line communications for a smart meter, home 
security solution over fixed Broadband, or Wi-Fi 
access over SIM less devices. 
The proposal on how these challenges can be mitigated is 
discussed in the Proposed Solution Framework Section. 
VII. GET END USERS SUBSCRIBED TO THE SERVICE 
It is essential to get maximum number of end users 
subscribed to the service to enable mobile operator 
successfully monetize the identity brokerage service. 
However, there should be sufficient leverages for the end 
users to subscribe to the services. It will be difficult for the 
end users to subscribe to the services if there is no significant 
benefit for them. 
The possible benefits which the mobile operator can 
provide to the end users are: 
 
Increased Security: No need to share personal 
information to multiple online services (about whom 
end users do not have sufficient trust level 
information). It protects the user from identity 
proliferation issues and associated threats. 
 
Partner Risk Score Information: Operator verifying 
the partner and providing a trust level score to the 
end user enables the end user to take good decision 
about the services. 
 
User Profile Sharing based on Partner’s Risk Score 
and User Preferences: Risk scoring done by operator 
and recommending end user what to share and what 
not to share. User can use the trust level score and 
recommendations to decide his preferences for the 
service provider. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
Special Tariffs and Quality of Services for Partners: 
Offer end users special tariffs (for example, no 
charge, quota usage, or higher speeds) for specific 
service providers, based on the mobile operator’s 
agreement with the service provider. For example, 
online retail sites, giving higher speed and priority 
with discounted data tariffs. 
 
Allowing end user seamless access to various partner 
services. This is a unique selling point. 
 
Offering a digital signature to the end user, which 
can be used across critical services of service 
provider (for example, digitally signed financial 
transactions). 
 
Provide a generic loyalty point service for all partner 
service providers, which offers end user to use the 
loyalty points across service providers. 
 
A simplified mechanism allowing end user to opt-in 
and opt-out for this service anywhere and anytime is 
essential. For example, at a click of few buttons on 
the self-care App, end user should be able to register 
and create different digital identities and set 
preferences. 
 
The solution should be intelligent to understand the 
end user usage pattern, and quickly map various 
existing identities of the user to the centralized 
identity. For example, an end user of the service 
trying to log in to a partner’s site (for example, 
Yahoo) should be offered an option of mapping his 
local identity (yahoo id) to his centralized identity 
with operator. 
 
Agreeing with service provider to allow end users 
subscription with their operator maintained identity. 
Since the end user's access request is coming from a 
trusted partner (through the mobile operator’s 
network), the service provider can identify the end 
user using the security token inserted by the operator 
as part of the access request header. For example, an 
end user accessing a partner bank’s URL on his 
smart phone is automatically identified by the bank. 
 
Mobile operator can also act as a seamless payment 
gateway. Service provider sites can provide an 
option to end user to pay via the mobile operator. 
Mobile operator may provide a wallet service to the 
end users. Another offer can be payment through 
prepaid account or a postpaid bill by the mobile 
operator. 
VIII. REQUIRED TECHNICAL CAPABILITIES 
The required technical capabilities for this solution are 
described below: 
 
Secure token exchange for seamless identity 
exchange with service provider. Using intelligent 
URL inspection, service provider site identification, 
and exchanging the end user profile information in 
secure manner as part of the security token 
embedded in the HTTP header. For example, 
scenario of an end user accessing a bank’s URL on 
his smart phone. Mobile operator identifies this 
service from a trusted source, and then embeds the 
configured security token in the request header. The 
secure token also includes the required end user 
profile as agreed by the end user and the bank. The 
bank's online service will check the presence of this 
token, parse and verify the token with the mobile 
operator’s secure verification services and then allow 
the end user access to the bank’s service. 
Advanced identity federation and security platform 
is required to maintain the end user’s digital identity 
profiles to authenticate and authorize, and to share 
the required user profile towards service provider. 
IX. 
THE PROPOSED SOLUTION FRAMEWORK 
A mobile operator needs a collaboration platform, which 
enables effective collaboration between digital service 
providers and operators. 
 
 
Figure 1: Enabling monetization via effective collaboration 
 
Figure 2: Collaboration Platform Functional Architecture 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Collaboration platform hosts capabilities for any digital 
service provider to self-register at the mobile operator’s site 
and use of the mobile operator’s assets and available 
capabilities.   
The functional architecture of the collaboration platform 
is shown in Figure 2. The components of the architecture are 
described below: 
 
Partner Storefront: It enables digital service 
providers quickly register as partners. The partner 
lifecycle management including agreements is 
handled within this storefront. 
 
Consumer Storefront: It enables consumers quickly 
browse through available products from a mobile 
operator or a service provider. 
 
Identity Federation and Security: It enables the 
mobile operators act as a secure and trusted identity 
broker and federates the identities between end user 
and digital service providers. It enables secure 
exchange of customer information such as profile, 
preferences, and segmentation with the service 
provider. 
 
Service Detection: It is an intelligent service 
detection based on URL, packet intercept, and 
partner 
identification. 
Based 
on 
the 
partner 
identification, a secure channel can be established 
where the customer profile information can be 
shared with the digital service provider. The profile 
information exchange happens using a secure token 
to ensure that critical customer information is not 
compromised. 
 
Asset Exposure: It is a platform for exposing the 
mobile 
operator’s 
assets 
(for 
example, 
authentication, location, or charging) in a secure 
manner as REST-based API's. This can be leveraged 
by service providers to build innovative services for 
the end users. 
 
Charging, Billing and Quality of Service Control: It 
enables differentiated charging and special Quality 
of Service (QoS) for the service provider’s service 
usage session. A specialized charging &amp; billing 
platform is required which in runtime can change the 
QoS parameters for the data session. 
 
Partner Settlement: It enables billing the service 
provider for a value added service session and 
exchanging settlement files/invoices with the service 
providers. 
 
Remote Device Configuration: It enables digital 
service providers and mobile operators to configure 
the end user devices (for example, mobile phones or 
any M2M device) to install a digital certificate or 
application. 
 
Reporting and Auditing: It enables analysis and 
reporting of Key Performance Indicators (KPI) for 
service providers. It allows mobile operators to 
determine their profitable service providers and 
provide more incentive to them. 
X. 
CASE STUDY 
Authentication services Mobile-ID are implemented in 
Estonia [2]. The Mobile-ID service is built and launched by 
mobile operator EMT [14], which in 2009 made its platform 
available to the other operators (Elisa and Tele2). This was 
recognized as key to driving scale among users and 
encouraging service providers to join the service. Mobile-ID 
service allows a client to use a mobile phone as a secure 
electronic ID. Just like an ID card, it can be used for 
accessing secure e-services and digitally signing documents. 
The private keys are stored on the SIM card with a small 
application for authentication and signing. 
Turkcell’s Mobillmza mobile signature solution was 
launched in 2007 in Turkey [3]. 
XI. 
CONCLUSION 
There have been initiatives by the mobile operators 
across the world to offer Identity Provider Services to service 
providers and application developers. However, the success 
stories around it are still limited. If the operators have to 
achieve success from their Identity Brokerage Service, they 
need to provide more compelling value to service providers 
and their end users. With current assets and customer 
knowledge, operators are in a unique position to provide 
compelling values. The requirement is to build a 
collaboration platform which can package all the operator 
capabilities together and provide as services to the service 
providers and end users. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank Dr. Piyush Maheshwari and 
Rajeev Kumar Tiwari at Ericsson India for their valuable 
feedback and support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Prediction 
from 
CISCO 
http://www.businessinsider.com/cisco-
predicts-mobile-2013-5?IR=T&tru=J8YD9#before-we-begin-cisco-
has-a-great-track-record-with-its-internet-predictions-1 
[Accessed 
May, 2014]. 
[2] Mobile-ID e-Estonia,  http://e-estonia.com/component/mobile-id/  
[Accessed April, 2014]. 
[3] Mobile 
Signature 
in 
Turkey, 
MobilImza 
service, 
http://www.gsma.com/mobileidentity/mobile-signature-in-turkey-a-
ase-study-of-turkcell-mobilimza [Accessed April, 2014]. 
[4] GSMA 
Mobile 
Identity 
project, 
http://www.gsma.com/mobileidentity/ [Accessed April, 2014]. 
[5] Security 
Assertion 
Markup 
Language, 
https://www.oasis-
open.org/committees/tc_home.php?wg_abbrev=security. 
[Accessed 
April, 2014]. 
[6] Liberty Alliances, http://www.projectliberty.org/. [Accessed May, 
2014]. 
[7] Oauth protocol, http:/oauth.net/. [Accessed May, 2014]. 
[8] GSMA, http://www.gsma.com/. [Accessed April, 2014]. 
[9] Mobile 
Identity 
UK 
Research 
Summary 
http://www.gsma.com/mobileidentity/wp-
content/uploads/2013/12/GSMA_Mobile_Identity_Research_June_20
13.pdf [Accessed May, 2014]. 
[10] Dialog 
Connect, 
http://www.gsma.com/mobileidentity/wp-
content/uploads/2013/06/GSMA-Mobile-Identity_Case-
Study_Dialog-Connect_May2013.pdf [Accessed May, 2014]. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

[11] Mobile Birth Registration in Sub-Saharan Africa:A case study of 
Orange 
Senegal 
and 
Uganda 
Telecom 
solutions 
http://www.gsma.com/mobileidentity/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Mobile-Birth-Registration-in-Sub-Saharan-
Africa.pdf  [Accessed May, 2014]. 
[12] Unstructured 
Supplementary 
Service 
Data  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unstructured_Supplementary_Service_D
ata [Accessed May, 2014]. 
[13] Short 
Message 
Service 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Short_Message_Service [Accessed May, 
2014]. 
[14] Mobile operator EMT https://www.emt.ee/en/liitu [Accessed May, 
2014]. 
[15] Subscriber 
identity 
module 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subscriber_identity_module 
[Accessed 
May, 2014]. 
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

