Business Intelligence Trends and Challenges 
Muhammad Yasir Aziz 
Information Technology, PETROFAC International Ltd. (Oil and Gas) 
Sharjah, UAE 
E-mail: m_yasir_aziz@hotmail.com  
 
 
Abstract-There are several Business Intelligence (BI) tools and 
platforms available in the market to achieve BI solutions. 
Organizations are facing different challenges during the 
implementations of such tools related to various complexities, 
performance and security. Hence, there is a need to look 
forward and improve with the modern BI technologies and 
successful implementations for solutions for data mining, 
mobile BI, cloud BI, column-based approach, in-memory 
computing, managing structured and unstructured data with 
the improved performance, This way the business leads could 
see remarkable change in performance and visualization in 
order to have access to the related business growth by 
implementing such solutions. This paper refers to current 
challenges that companies are facing in BI with traditional 
approach and changing trends in technology. It would also 
provide forward approaches to overcome those problems by 
improved solutions with use of new technologies. 
Keywords-BI; BW; ETL; OLAP; SOA; APD; NLP. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Large scale organizations are targeting advanced 
Business Intelligence (BI) systems to drive challenging 
revenue and market opportunities. 
Fully integrated set of BI technologies can help 
companies reducing business complexity, organizing and 
distributing information, leading competitive advantages and 
better decisions for an improved intelligence bottom line. 
Currently, most of BI projects and implementations are 
suffering due to the lack of right approaches and selection or 
combination of right tool and technology to meet short and 
long term BI targets with complex integrations [26].  
The article is divided into three main portions. First 
portion covers BI demands and challenges. Middle portion 
covers advanced methods and changes in BI Technology and 
modifications required in existing tools. Last and third 
portion covers approaches to adopt for successful BI projects 
and implementations, along with the conclusion. 
II. BI DEMANDS AND CHALLENGES 
A. Industry Trends and Demand 
Industry research shows increased demand for different 
types of industry sources all over the world, e.g., oil & gas 
industry is passing through significant changes and 
companies are doing mega mergers and associated 
consolidations for their deliverables and services to handle 
big projects with extreme level of collaboration in order to 
meet the industry demand.  
There is a tough competition seen allover the market and 
the companies are now looking for the ways to reduce cost of 
their deliverables and services as organizations are making 
their plans for next 10 to 15 years to compete highly volatile 
market. 
There are hundreds of inquiries to be answered by BI 
systems. For example, how to deliver cost effective 
engineering, procurement and plant construction projects? 
How to increase existing plant productivity? How to increase 
plant life for an oil & gas plant? Or, provide maintenance 
predictions by using innovative advancements in the 
technology for a large scale business. 
B. Data Consolidation Challenges 
It is time for data integration and consolidation, as 
fragments of different types of information is scattered by 
different applications and different sources including 
corporate level databases, internet and intranet data sources, 
specific social media sites and globally available services.  
BI architecture needs to consider all the business 
processes in order to achieve final results reflecting all the 
information required for business and to make data available 
for detailed information examinations and on summarized 
level inspections. 
There is a need to do data refresh from source systems 
into staging databases, and then, to transform to data targets 
in data warehouses in regular frequency of events using 
process chains and to make sure that no information is lost. It 
is also required to process original data using data 
transformation and mining tools in order to convert into 
useful information. 
ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) tools are available in the 
market for data acquisition and transformation from different 
source systems to BI data targets and to load from one data 
target to another data target with data processing and 
filtrations.  
Data warehouse platforms are available to design star 
schema and process chains and to make multi-dimensional 
cubes and data providers available for end users to do 
analysis based on facts and figures for interactive analysis. 
However, the research is going on to resolve integration 
problems between different platforms to achieve required 
collaboration. 
C. Data Security Risks  
Companies like are doing collaboration and coming up 
with shared BI application landscapes to meet extraordinary 
business demands to beat market competitions. As a result of 
change, organizations are forced to share BI applications and 
platform to delivery partners through Internet or intranet, 
which is becoming a concern to the companies for possible 
leakage of unwanted information [27]. PETROFAC 
International is one of the biggest oil and gas companies in 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

the world where we are working on multibillion dollar oil 
and gas partnership projects with other companies and are 
sharing systems landscape with partners for sharing 
analytical information and to work in collaboration.  
Object level, package level, analytical level and system 
level security privileges need to be implemented to secure BI 
system. Technology is improving providing resolutions and 
research is going on to provide high level confidence to 
business owners to provide them with secure place for 
sharing BI platforms to deliver and execute collaborative 
requirements [4]. 
D. BI Landscape challenges 
Following are few of the challenging components in BI 
solution need scalability, accessibility, stability, security and 
improved performance. 
TABLE I. BI LANDSCAPE. 
BI Landscape 
Infrastructure  
 
Required hardware and  operating systems  
 
Database environment 
 
Application and Web servers 
 
Technical security and systems performance 
 
Network and middle ware 
 
Storage and capacity planning  
 
Desktop and browsers 
Data Warehouse Environment 
 
ETL tools/methods for Data extraction, Data Transformation, 
Data Staging and Data Loading  
 
Data Modeling, Data Quality, subject oriented and integrated 
data marts as Data Management  
 
Management processes like Data Archiving and backups, Batch 
and Change management along with version control 
Front End Applications 
 
Presentation tools like reporting, Portals, Dashboards, report 
distributions and alerts 
 
OLAP Analysis, Data Mining, Predictive analysis and Web 
Analysis 
 
Business Application and MS office  Integrations, Performance 
management applications and Systems connectivity 
 
Visualization 
 
Data Discovery and exploration tools 
 
BI landscape is facing major changes with new approach 
for implementation and new innovations in technology 
coming up in the market. Business application vendors are 
also coming up with data ware housing and ready-made BI 
contents as part of their product suits, so emerging further 
needs to come up with one competitive and complete BI and 
Business Warehouse (BW) solution on single platform 
including integration capabilities with ERP and legacy 
systems in addition to the common data ware housing engine 
along with ETL and intelligence capabilities. 
E. Cost of Ownership 
Cost of ownership is different for different BI platform 
vendors. It includes total license cost, total implementation 
cost, IT administration and business administration cost. We 
also consider aspects related to integration, product quality, 
ease of use for developers, single user implementation cost 
etc. 
As BI technology is changing fast so it is important now 
to get ready with related investigations to acclimatize the 
change and to consider the value of services using BI Cloud, 
SOA 
(Service-Oriented 
Architecture), 
Column-based 
approach for performance, Mobility, etc.  
When we do cost-benefit analysis and compare cost of 
ownership with respect to the Returns on Investment (ROI), 
many other thought-provoking things are there to consider 
during analysis. 
F.  Performance Bottleneck 
Information needs to be reported, analyzed and 
distributed to a group of targeted people at the right time and 
in the right required format with the vision necessary to 
make better and faster decisions. 
There are different scientific methods available listed 
below to overcome analytical performance,  
 
Query design for optimal performance 
 
Using variables and dropdown lists in front-end 
design 
 
General guidelines for optimization 
 
OLAP (Online Analytical Processing) caching 
techniques for optimal query performance [6] 
 
Using Aggregates and data manager techniques 
 
Complex result of queries and OLAP process to 
keep in cache. 
 
Least-Recently-Used-Algorithms [28] and Caching 
techniques 
 
Use of query monitors and cache monitors 
 
Delta caching [5] 
 
Parallel 
Processing 
techniques 
during 
Query 
Execution 
 
Calculations in database layer rather than application 
layer. 
 
Settings related to query drilldown with read modes 
like read all data or read data during navigation 
trade-off for number of DB accesses 
 
Using query runtime statistics, data load statistics, 
query monitor, trace tools, etc. in order to monitor, 
analyze and improve performance 
 
BI accelerators using special hardware to achieve 
faster performance [13] 
 
In-memory analytics [11][17] 
G. 
Economic Challenges 
By changing trends, business owners are keeping an eye 
on some of the below economic challenges to achieve 
ultimate BI solution and related change management for 
cost and scope management. 
 
Unpredictable Economy (BI is dead without 
business) 
 
Pricing is a huge obstacle for BI deployments 
 
Pricing 
for 
every 
user 
licenses 
(Inside 
organizations or when extending BI to other parties 
and partners) 
 
Organizations looking for quick-win technology 
projects 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
Large strategic projects becoming failures 
 
Diverse Justifications and business benefits 
 
Change control management and associated cost 
 
Like-for-Like comparisons for initiatives 
 
III. 
BI ADVANCED METHODS 
A. Move to Data Analytics 
Many companies in the previous years have already 
adapted BI platform; it is time now for data analytics. 
In recent years, companies were targeting to historical 
data to see business performance; but, today’s Analytics is 
leading towards predictions and goes beyond insights to 
create business impact.  
Predictive models and algorithms not only allow you to 
predict the most likely outcomes but also suggests for the 
best that could happen, So, predictive analysis is going to 
help business to make decisions based on facts rather than 
judgments and interpretations as business seeks forward-
looking rather than back-ward looking. 
Approximately 30% of the companies in 2014 will align 
analytics matrices completely with business drivers [9].  
B. Data Mining Methods 
Effective 
use 
of 
some 
of 
below 
data 
mining 
methods/algorithms for analytical business solutions could 
produce brilliant profitable BI results for organizations. 
TABLE II.  DATA MINING METHODS. 
Data Mining Methods 
S No 
Category 
Mining Methods 
1 
Predictive Methods 
Decision Tree 
Regression Analysis 
2 
Informative Methods 
Clustering, Association Analysis, 
ABC 
Classification, 
Weighted 
Score Tables 
 
Different BI platforms provides tools to implement these 
methods; for example, SAP provides Analysis Process 
Designer (APD) and Data mining workbench [8] to 
implement data mining methods in order to create related 
data mining models with customization settings to control 
related security and amount of detail generated during data 
execution. 
SAP launched a new product “SAP Predictive Analysis” 
[21][23]. This tool is used to implement advanced business 
cases from data scientists, advanced business users and 
analysts to achieve data mining capabilities, statistical 
modeling & visualization. 
C. Story-Telling Predictive Analysis 
There are four types of dimensions which determine the 
type of story you are telling with available analytical data 
TABLE III. STORY TELLING DIMENSIONS. 
Story Telling Dimensions 
Type 
Description 
Time 
Time dimension is to do data analytics about past, present and 
future. Stories about past are reporting stories , stories about 
present are to involve different forms of surveys data and 
stories about future are predictions 
Focus 
This dimension is to bring important factors from analytics 
like what happened, why something happened and how to 
address the issues  
Depth 
This involve in-depth analytical search to find solution to a 
complex problem 
Method 
These are the stories based on different analytical methods 
where we try to bring correlation stories and causation stories 
to determine how relationship of variables can cause rise and 
fall to outcomes. Data mining methods mentioned in section B 
would also help to achieve the outcomes. 
 
How to condense data into a good story is an art and 
technique in BI. Instead of presenting data in tabular form to 
get predictive results for business leaders, companies are 
looking forward for the implementation of story-telling 
techniques of analytics where the information outcome is in 
demand after analyzing insight data in a descriptive form 
along with visualization. 
There are some requirements to enhance BI analysis tools 
for creating BI stories. 
TABLE IV: STORY TELLING CAPABILITIES TO ACHIEVE. 
Story Telling Capabilities 
Capability 
Description 
Visual Aid 
To draw attention on visualization data by arrows and by 
doing coloring, notating, highlighting, zooming etc. to 
support narration  
BI Story 
Templates 
BI stories would have some structure. There is a need to 
have templates with annotated dashboards. 
Reusability 
We need to have similar set of BI story templates for 
different set of data. It would be very easy in case the 
tools provide the facility to create reusable structure of 
stories. 
Interactive 
Visualization 
Shared reports need to be interactive and to be supported 
by storytelling tools by linking and brushing options 
Transition 
It is highly required to convert visualization into stories 
by some transition tools to save time and cost. 
D. Artificial Intelligence and Computational Intelligence 
There are many examples of latest Smart phones, like 
Google, with location support services; Google glass 
applications are providing information based on your 
present location. 
These projects use natural language [22] to process 
questions or requests and you do not have to talk in code 
language to get the required answers. These applications can 
learn and adapt new words in any language from the user. 
This is an example of computational intelligence which is 
same as an artificial intelligence. 
This technology would be extensively used to provide BI 
answers rather than presenting complex dashboards to the 
business owners. 
BI analysts can do research on available business data 
and are required to do brainstorm to bring prediction by 
different available data mining methods with combination of 
story-telling art and intelligence to convert the results in 
speeches to answer business leaders. Outputs can be 
converted to perform some mechanical activity to achieve 
artificial intelligence. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

E. Mobile BI 
Companies are now planning to move to mobile BI and 
stability and maturity is expected in this area in 2014 [4]. 
They want to take the full advantage of advanced 
technology to achieve insight into big data with the help of 
smart phones to get better information anytime anywhere 
and to analyze the data for faster decisions. 
Using mobile technologies, information delivery from 
corporate data is not limited to desktops. It’s time now to 
incorporate real time data available within the smart phones 
to take real time decisions. 
There are large varieties of tools like Oracle Business 
Intelligence Mobile Application Designer to create mobile 
applications and to bring analytics. Many BI vendors in the 
market that are coming up with complete solution with 
security measures.  
Exploration is still going on and improvements are 
required in Mobile BI in following areas  
 
Security 
 
Offline Support 
 
Authentication and authorization 
 
HTML5 versus Native applications 
F. Cloud BI 
Cloud computing is becoming populate now a days but 
adoption rate of cloud business intelligence is low. Business 
leaders are doing investigations in data integration and 
security on cloud. Query will be more accessible, as web 
services have given an innovative approach to marry cloud 
data with legacy application data sources, which are not 
available on cloud. 
Some BI leaders provide faster and value added solutions 
to move implementation and maintenance for BI solutions 
with administration tasks to Cloud and ability to change 
analytics on the fly [10]. Research on technology is 
providing solutions to secure enterprise data on cloud. 
However, lack of awareness on security rules or business 
practices could cause very high impact on business and 
business owners are not getting decisive confidence as a 
result to move BI on cloud. 
Enterprise Proof of Concept on different scenarios with 
pay-as-you-go [17] towards more integrated and complex 
scenario approach would provide solutions to problems and 
confidence level in BI cloud adoption. 
G. Cloud BI Architecture 
For example, SAP HANA Cloud application Platform 
[29] enables customers to initiate small BI projects for quick 
and running business solutions with massive data and 
provide continuous growth capabilities by adding new BI 
business cases with minimal IT investments. 
SAP HANA Cloud platform is one of the examples and 
provides full set of developer application services including 
social and collaboration services, analytics, portal and 
mobile services. It also provides highly scalable database, 
transaction processing, real-time advanced predictive 
analytics and text mining capabilities. 
Cloud-based implementations are now starting where 
cloud architecture is able to integrate with any technology, 
including SAP (ECC 6.0 and BW), Oracle, SQL Server and 
non-SAP systems. 
Cloud architectures are providing best services for ETL 
tools. BOBJ data services are able to do data extraction from 
source systems to BI cloud. RFC connectors are used to 
extract data from SAP ECC 6.0 or from data warehouses. 
Data Services also supports different types of connections 
for data extraction supported by other database vendors. 
H. Using BI Accelerator  
Read performance of BI queries is greatly improved by 
the query drill down. Navigation requirements of the 
customer are complex and unpredictable. We are creating 
aggregates, but it is impractical to create an aggregate for 
every possible navigation scenario. 
TABLE V. BI ACCELERATOR BENEFITS. 
BI Accelerator Benefits 
No 
Benefits 
Advantages 
 
1 
Very fast query 
response time 
Performance 
Improvement by factor 
10-100 
Increased 
end 
user satisfaction  
2 
Stable query response 
time 
Independent DB 
optimizer, aggregates 
3 
High Scalability 
One BIA instance can 
run on multiple blade 
servers 
Significant 
reduction in 
cost of 
ownership 
4 
Low maintenance 
No aggregates 
maintenance, 
minimized 
rollup/change run 
 
Tools like BI Accelerator (BIA) [13] with combination of 
special hardware are now providing business advantages to 
improve performance 
I. 
SAP HANA  
SAP HANA is a new solution and provides resolution for 
major BI problems [16]. 
TABLE VI. SAP HANA SOLUTIONS. 
SAP HANA Solutions 
S No 
Problems 
HANA Solutions 
Additional Notes 
1 
Speed (Proof 
Points) 
3600x faster analysis, 
460B data analyzed in 
less than a second. 
21% average 
increase in revenue. 
2 
Flexibility 
Real-time access to 
transactional data 
Real-time data 
replication engine, 
Calculation Engine 
3 
Scalability 
Ground breaking In-
memory Innovations, 
Live cache, BW 
Accelerator 
Solution with 
software and 
parallel procession 
of multi core CPU 
4 
Data Volume  
41.9 GB of data in traditional DB comes in 
6.6GB by data compression in HANA  
5 
Query Run-time 
comparison  
Query1: 2000 sec (6.1sec in HANA) 
Query2 1320 sec (5.1sec in HANA) 
Query3:1050 sec (3.2 sec in HANA) 
6 
Classic 
Enterprise Data 
To have corporate BI integrated with multiple 
ERP systems including SAP and non-SAP 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

warehouse 
systems with new applications on HANA 
7 
Rapid delivery 
results 
Fast Implementation methodology 
(Start, Deploy, Run) 
J. 
Hadoop Big Data and SAP HANA 
Big data raises many challenges. There are three main 
challenges which are common and are called as “Three Vs” 
 
Velocity 
 
Volume 
 
Variety 
 
Hadoop low-cost commodity servers are able to handle 
data in petabyte and in Exabyte range, which is much higher 
than 100 TB ranges of data. SAP HANA and other RDBMS 
can typically handle less than this range. On the other hand, 
Producing Analytic solutions from Hadoop are much slower 
than SAP HANA.  
We can achieve very fast analytic solutions from really 
big data by using combination of capabilities provided by 
SAP HANA and Hadoop. 
SAP HANA provides excellent OLAP, OLTP innovative 
capabilities with very fast data access and administration 
tools whereas Hadoop provides very slow data access and 
can support any data or file structure on the disk. It provides 
distributed and scalable architecture and does not provide 
OLTP and slow OLAP and few administration tools as 
compare to SAP HANA. 
SAP is now providing full integrated support for Hadoop 
with SAP HANA platform, SAP Business Object & SAP 
Data Services to achieve complete sophisticated OLAP and 
OLTP technology solutions with both structured and 
unstructured data. 
K. Cloud And Mobilily 
Secured BI clouds are opening new opportunities for 
organizations that are able to get quality services at a low 
cost where users are also able to use different applications 
and web services and are using cloud data to make it 
available on mobile for business intelligence.  
Now organizations are taking steps to bring all Business 
Objects, Web Intelligence reports and dashboards to make 
them available to mobile users with real-time data for 
operational use and business decision making. 
L. Nosql in Future 
Demand for NOSQL [24] is increasing along with the 
demand of Big Data [25] as combination of big data and 
NOSQL technology will set a new trend in 2014 in the form 
of high demand technology. Need for this technology is 
rising to improve performance for real-time analytics from 
large data sources, where traditional SQL is becoming a 
bottleneck for speed [30]. 
M. BW Capabilities 
It is a good change coming in BI market for the 
implementation of Data warehouses on products like SAP 
HANA [16]. Companies were facing big hurdle in the way of 
BW adoption. It is now a breakthrough and companies 
would be able to think for BW capabilities [16] during 2014 
to achieve the goals in an effective way and fast track. 
However, the need for BW platforms would still be required. 
N. Embedded BI and SAP Netweaver CE 
Now, people expect analytic information to be embedded 
in business processes. Embedded BI allows developer and 
business experts to embed BI components in applications 
and composites and to allow business users jump to reports, 
dashboards and BI tools within the business context and to 
make the information actionable. 
Lightweight SAP composition environment provides 
integrated/embedded BI capabilities on top of common BI 
services layer.  
SAP Net weaver Visual Composer [15] provides 
integrated key matrices from several heterogeneous systems 
into one user interface and one report without extensive and 
costly data modeling. It supports very quick Xcelsius 
dashboards style reporting [15], lightweight analytics and 
visualization.  
O. Social Media Analytics 
Social media analytics use advanced natural language 
processing engine to read, analyze, and normalize data by 
extracting customer’s perceptions from terabytes of social 
media data in real-time and conclude not only sentiments but 
deeper insights for opinions and emotions. 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) engine read each 
sentence and identify noun, verbs and adjectives and 
categorize them according to the required target opinion, 
emotions & behaviors. Later, NLP engine finally helps you 
understand what your customers feel about your product or 
service. 
By SAP social media analytics you can get access to pre-
analyzed data from social intelligence warehouses. Every 
hour these sources are updated with new entries and 
analyzed information. We can get real-time access from 
Twitter’s complete data stream with more than 250 million 
tweets per day for our customized analysis. 
By using the analysis tool, you can define filters, 
searches and produce drilldowns for analysis of customized 
categories like different products, topics, interest, feelings, 
and demographics. One can also export data and graphics 
into reports and presentations to examine individual 
comments for more detailed analysis. 
P. Strategic Analytical Platform 
To have a strategic analytical platform, you need to 
ensure that the solution we are planning should be able to 
access, integrate and process data for desired outputs taking 
from Cloud Data, Big Data, to local data and corporate data 
warehouse for all structured and unstructured data. 
Q. Drives the New Data Warehouse 
Data 
warehousing 
architectural 
design 
needs 
modifications in this current era towards more advanced state 
of art technology concepts like SOA, Big Data, social media 
analytics, mobility, Cloud, NOSQL and data visualization 
for more advanced BI solutions with advanced analytical and 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

transaction processing capabilities with improved ways of 
implementations. 
 
IV. BI PROJECTS 
BI Leaders are considering the rapid change in BI trends 
and technology and are working on to overcome related 
challenges during initiating completely new BI projects, BI 
migration and integration projects. In addition, below are few 
areas to do tradeoff in order to bring effective BI systems 
and better project management. 
 
Produce all BI business cases  
 
Determine global  integrated architecture 
 
Defining global implementation scope 
 
Prioritizing enterprise global scope 
 
Balancing top-down and bottom-up approach 
 
Follow and consider all aspects in six global 
dimensions 
 
To adjust 3-dimensions (Scope, time, cost)  
 
Project progress measurement procedure 
 
Document control & approval procedure 
 
Draw milestones for project linked with progress 
 
Monitor and control progress and risks 
 
Quality monitoring 
 
Produce global staffing plan 
 
Project Budgeting (How much and for how long) 
 
User acceptance group and UAT Plan 
 
Follow standards & steps during each phase 
including blueprinting, realization, Cutover and Go 
Live 
 
V.  BI IMPLEMENTATIONS  
Most of implementations of any BI Technology are not 
successful and are becoming problem for companies in the 
completion of BI projects. Some of important things to 
consider for successful BI implementation are mentioned 
below 
 
Strategic Vision to succeed 
 
To draw short and long term BI strategies for short 
and long term benefits 
 
Platform/Technology and tools Selection 
 
Skilled staff and sub-optimal staff utilization 
 
Business analysis or standardization 
 
Business sponsors engagement 
 
Integration with Multiple Source Systems 
 
Organizational 
Collaboration 
(Disciplines, 
Departments, Business Units, Strategic Divisions, 
Global Locations) 
 
Cross 
Organizational 
Collaboration 
(Partners, 
Contractors, Subcontractors, Vendors, Customers, 
External Parties and Market conditions) 
 
Cross organizational collaborative culture 
 
Privacy Breaches and IT Security concerns 
 
Limit productivity VS Security Lapses 
 
Manage Islands of Information Systems 
 
Disparate data sources not designed to work together 
 
Elimination of Multiple Storage Towers 
 
Consistent 
Touch 
Points 
for 
all 
end 
users/Stakeholders 
 
Real-time data access to Stakeholders 
 
End user trainings 
 
Outsource model, Vendor & SLA management 
VI. CONCLUSION 
There is a need to maximize returns on BI investments 
and to overcome difficulties. Problems and new trends 
mentioned in this article and finding solutions by 
combination of advanced tools, techniques and methods 
would help readers in BI projects and implementations.  
BI vendors are struggling and doing continuous effort to 
bring technical capabilities and to provide complete out of 
the box solution with set of tools and techniques. 
In 2014, due to rapid change in BI maturity, BI teams are 
facing tough time to have infrastructure with less skilled 
resources. Consolidation and convergence is going on, 
market is coming up with wide range of new technologies. 
Still the ground is immature and in a state of rapid evolution.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Joe McKendrick, Is BI Failing Businesses?, 
http://www.insurancenetworking.com/blogs/business-intelligence-
failing-31947-1.html, [March, 2013] 
[2] Dave Crolene and Steve Dine,  10 BI Trends And Expectations For 
2014, 
http://businessintelligence.com/bi-insights/10-bi-trends-
expectations-2014/,  [May, 2014] 
[3] Drew Robb, Top Business Intelligence Trends For 2014, 
http://www.enterpriseappstoday.com/business-intelligence/top-
business-intelligence-trends-for-2014.html  [Jan, 2014] 
[4] Cindi Howson, 5 Big Business Intelligence Trends For 2014, 
http://www.informationweek.com/software/information-
management/5-big-business-intelligence-trends-for-2014/d/d-
id/1113468 [Jan, 2014] 
[5] Marc 
C. 
Casalaina, 
Delta 
caching, 
https://www.google.com/patents/US7406514  [Jul, 2008] 
[6] Gopalakrishnan Venkatachalam, Config and Utilization of the OLAP 
Cache 
to 
Improve 
the 
Query 
Response 
Time, 
http://wenku.baidu.com/view/ca3f650df78a6529647d53cf  [March, 
2010] 
[7] Atul Chowdhury, SAP Business Objects Data Services, SQL Server 
Express 
and 
Java 
6 
- 
See 
more 
at: 
http://www.gulland.com/wp/?p=191#sthash.TH18rMS6.dpuf [April, 
2010] 
[8] Glen Leslie, Data Mining with the Analysis Process Designer in SAP 
BW 3.5, http://sapexperts.wispubs.com/bi/articles/data-mining-with-
the-analysis-process-designer-in-sap-bw-3-
5?id=a703657fe02f433fa8ebf46cf96d8677 [May, 2004] 
[9] Eliza Georgescu, Fewer Than 30% of Business Intelligence Initiatives 
Will Align Analytics Completely With Corporate Strategy by 2014 
[Jan, 2012] 
[10] David Pugh, Power BI Sites – Bringing Business Intelligence to the 
Cloud, 
http://blog.cdw.com/power-bi-sites-bringing-business-
intelligence-to-the-cloud/#.U3RR3vmSwXE [Apr 2014] 
[11] Margaret 
Rouse, 
in-memory 
analytics, 
http://searchbusinessanalytics.techtarget.com/definition/in-memory-
analytics [May, 2013] 
[12] Margaret 
Rouse, 
Cache 
algorithm, 
http://searchstorage.techtarget.com/definition/cache-algorithm 
[Jan, 
2014] 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

[13] China 
Marten, 
SAP 
Releases 
BI 
Accelerator, 
http://www.infoworld.com/t/applications/sap-releases-bi-accelerator-
437 [May, 2006] 
[14] Bhavish Sood, Daniel Yuen and Dan Sommer, Competitive 
Landscape, BI Platforms  
https://www.gartner.com/doc/2655015/competitive-landscape-bi-
platforms-asiapacific [Jan, 2014] 
[15] Jacquelyn Howard, Web AD, Xcelsius, Visual Composer, WebI, Oh 
My!, 
http://sapinsider.wispubs.com/Assets/Blogs/2010/November/Web-
AD-Xcelsius-Visual-Composer-WebI-Oh-My [Noc, 2010] 
[16] Sergi Marin, SAP BW on SAP HANA: when and why?, 
http://www.clariba.com/blog/sap-bw-on-hana-when-and-why/ [Dec, 
2013] 
[17] Bill Oliver, SAP HANA's Pay-As-You-Consume Plan, PaaS 
Introduced, 
http://www.tomsitpro.com/articles/sap-hana-paas-in-
memory-database,1-1747.html [Mar, 2014] 
[18] Business Intelligence Journal, Vol. 19, No. 1, James E. Powell, 
Editorial Director, [March, 2014] 
[19] Business Intelligence Journal, Vol. 18, No. 4, James E. Powell, 
Editorial Director, [December , 2013] 
[20] Storytelling in Visual Analytics tools for Business Intelligence, 
INTERACT 2013 - 14th IFIP TC13 Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction 8119 , 2013 
[21] Brock Douglas, Business Fortune Telling: The Power Of Predictive 
Analytics, 
http://www.smartercommerceblog.com/articles/2014/01/29/business-
fortune-telling-the-power-of-predictive-analytics [Jan, 2014] 
[22] Carole Cadwalladr, Are the robots about to rise? Google's new 
director 
of 
engineering 
thinks 
so…, 
http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/22/robots-google-
ray-kurzweil-terminator-singularity-artificial-intelligence [Feb 2014] 
[23] Henrique Pinto, Is SAP Predictive Analysis 1.0 SP11 the real game 
changer?, 
http://scn.sap.com/community/predictive-
analysis/blog/2013/06/14/is-sap-predictive-analysis-10-sp11-the-real-
game-changer [Jan, 2013] 
[24] Jonathan Allen, SQL Server 2014: NoSQL Speeds with Relational 
Capabilities, SQL Server 2014: NoSQL Speeds with Relational 
Capabilities [Mar, 2014] 
[25] Ann All, Midsize Companies Plan Big Push Into Big Data, 
http://businessintelligence.com/bi-insights/midsize-companies-plan-
big-push-big-data [April, 2014] 
[26] William McKnight, How to develop a sustainable data integration 
plan 
for 
business 
intelligence 
projects, 
http://searchbusinessanalytics.techtarget.com/podcast/How-to-
develop-a-sustainable-data-integration-plan-for-business-intelligence-
projects [July 2008] 
[27] Colin White and Claudia Imhoff, Collaborative business intelligence 
brings 
users 
together 
on 
BI, 
http://searchbusinessanalytics.techtarget.com/feature/Collaborative-
business-intelligence-brings-users-together-on-BI [July, 2012] 
[28] Predrag R. Jelenkovic and Ana Radovanovic, Least-recently-used 
caching with dependent requests, Volume 326, Issues 1–3, 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S030439750400475
X [Oct, 2004 pp 293–327] 
[29] Matthias Steiner, SAP HANA Cloud Platform - The full package, 
http://www.saphana.com/community/blogs/blog/2014/03/05/saphcp--
the-full-package [Mar, 2014] 
[30] Robert Fox, Evolution of Hybrid NoSQL to Tackle Big Data, 
http://sandhill.com/article/evolution-of-hybrid-nosql-to-tackle-big-
data/ [Jan, 2014] 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-345-2
BUSTECH 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

