Using Business Process Simulation to Assess the 
Effect of Business Rules Automation
 
Olga Levina 
Department of Systems Analysis and IT 
Berlin Institute of Technology 
Olga.levina@sysedv.tu-berlin.de 
 
 Abstract-- Application of the business rules approach is often 
argued in research and practice to result in more efficient and 
enhanced processes. As the extent of this statement has yet to 
be shown, in this paper the process simulation method is 
applied to assess the effect of business rules externalization and 
automation on business process performance. A real-world 
decision and information intensive process is used here as a 
case study. Business process simulation is applied here to 
assess process performance difference between as-is and 
enhanced to-be process. Comparison of the obtained 
simulation results of the re-engineered to-be process that 
includes automated business rules and the as-is process 
indicate an increase of process performance measured in time 
and costs while attributing this effect to the automation of 
identified business rules. 
Keywords- Business rules; business process management; 
business process simulation. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
This paper addresses the question put in [1] on how 
automation of business rules changes business process 
performance and extends its methodology by using a more 
extensive case study, multiple performance indicators and 
business process simulation.  
Business process simulation has gained a lot of attention 
in the context of business process re-engineering in 1990ies 
as a tool to support managerial decision and illustrate 
potential effects of a newly designed business process 
without significant financial effort. Business process 
simulation aims at assisting the process of modeling and 
analyzing organizational structures. Use of simulation in the 
context of business process re-engineering is based on the 
approach to computer-aided analysis expressed by Simon 
[2]. He argues that one of the most important uses of 
computers is “to model complex situations and to infer the 
consequences of alternative decisions to overcome bounded 
human rationality”. Being an operational research technique 
simulation 
has 
a 
major 
advantage 
as 
it 
allows 
experimentation with any element of a business system [3] 
being used in order to measure, understand and predict the 
metrics of process improvement and quality [4]. Thus, one of 
the major application areas for simulation is the exploration 
of effects introduced support by the information technology 
(IT) will have on the process performance (see e.g., [4]). 
In this paper, the effect of business rules automation on 
defined process performance indicators is measured using a 
case study: a real-life business process of a health fund.  
Business rules automation implies rule identification, e.g., 
from 
software 
code 
or 
expert 
knowledge, 
their 
externalization, i.e., documentation and description in 
machine-readable format, and automated execution, i.e., 
enactment within a business rules management system or 
rule engine of a workflow management system. This 
research is based on the discussion in the area of business 
process management stating that IT-supported business rules 
management enables a better process management in terms 
of maintainability [5] as well as performance and efficiency 
[5]. Thus, the research question here is: can the impact of 
business rules automation on business process performance 
be captured and if yes, is this impact positive or negative on 
pre-defined business process indicators. The research method 
applied here is a case study-based simulation of a real-life 
business process. The effect of business rules automation is 
measured by comparing metrics from the as-is and to-be 
process that integrates business rules automation. This 
research method is used for artifact evaluation purposes in 
design science research [6] and business process re-
engineering as well as hypothesis or theory testing in social 
sciences. Here it is applied in the area of assessment of 
business process automation and thus, re-engineering.  
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: first 
a short introduction into the business rules and business 
process management context is provided. In Section 3, a 
short overview of related work in business process 
management is given. Simulation experiment design as well 
as the case study process are described in Section 4. Section 
5 provides an overview and discussion of the simulation 
results. Conclusion and outlook finish the paper.  
II. 
BUSINESS RULES AND BUSINESS RULES 
MANAGEMENT  
Business rules are defined by the Business Rules Group 
as “constrains [....] that guide or limit the business” [7]. 
Business rules are specific instantiations of rules and capture 
process and enterprise specific knowledge. Business rules 
are often categorized in different types such as, e.g., 
constraints, derivations or process rules [7-10]. Constraints 
are statements concerning the enterprise or its philosophy 
that need to be always true [7, 11]. Derivation rules are 
statements that are derived from other information or given 
facts, e.g., calculations. Process rules describe the process 
logic, i.e., sequence of process steps execution, and are often 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

known as ECA (event, condition, action) rules. One of the 
main concerns in business rules management is their 
extraction and identification from the business process 
context. Here, the process by [12] is described and applied 
for business rules extraction from a business process model.  
First, the area of analysis, i.e., the scope of business rules 
extraction, needs to be defined. Here, the area is well limited 
being the self-contained business process model. Further, 
identifying the goal of analysis helps the evaluation of the 
importance of involved potential business objects that can be 
business rules’ sources or sinks. For the given experiment, 
the goal is to capture all business rules involved for efficient 
and accurate process execution using the existing business 
process model. The goal of this process can be identified as 
providing an optimal care for the patient from medical, 
financial and temporal points of view.  
Further, a mandatory business vocabulary of the terms 
used in the analyzed context needs to be established. 
Process- guiding rules can often be identified by the use of a 
gateway in a modeled process flow, which can be seen as the 
first step for business rules identification [13]. Questioning 
the implicit (or explicit) pre- and post conditions of a process 
steps realization can also provide a indication on business 
rules that are needed to achieve successful automated 
process execution. For identification of further potential 
business rules sources pre- and post-conditions for the 
process goal achievement can be helpful. Next step of the 
process 
suggests 
the 
identification 
of 
the 
process 
stakeholders. 
Possible 
restrictions 
coming 
from 
the 
stakeholders need to be specified and their impact on the 
process or analysis goal evaluated. An important structuring 
criterion for found business rules candidates is their 
affiliation to the goal of the analysis. Stakeholders’ 
restrictions can be summarized as expectation of: maximum 
transparency (including clear and comprehensible decision 
guidelines), minimal possible processing time (maximum 
possible process automation), maximum benefit (including 
clear accordance of requirements and possibilities), maximal 
possible accuracy (meaning clear decision guidelines and 
clear requirements assessment).  
Business rules are especially useful in business domains 
with high decision and policy intensiveness because they 
enable expressing, managing and updating pieces of business 
knowledge [14]. As the definition of the process type 
requires significant analysis effort, Levina and Hillmann [15] 
show a quantitative approach for business process type 
identification. In the context of business rules management, 
information and collaboration intensive processes are in the 
focus of interest as they would benefit from business rules-
oriented management approach.  
The business rules management approach [10, 16] is 
often seen as a part of business process management [17] 
and is also intended as an enabler of process improvement. 
Among the main reasons for integration of business rules 
management following business domains are cited by 
practitioners and researchers: decision automation to reduce 
process complexity and transaction costs of and decision 
errors within a process task; process flexibility due to the 
ability to update or extend the business logic using a 
business 
rules 
management 
system; 
spreading 
and 
harmonizing business policies and agreements throughout 
the enterprise [18-20]. Nevertheless, the claimed benefits of 
the business rules approach are rarely empirically 
investigated in research. The major part of business rules 
management research is focused on structural and 
operational construction of business rules for accurate 
response to changes in business environment [21] or is often 
related to complex event processing.  
In this paper, process cycle costs and time are analyzed 
aiming at the investigation of the effect of business rules 
automation on process efficiency by comparing performance 
indicator values of the as-is and to-be process. Therefore, a 
real-life business process in the as-is state as well as with 
automated business rules is simulated using a business 
process modeling and simulation software. The assumption 
here is that business rules and workflow management 
systems create an integrated environment for process 
execution.  
III. 
RELATED WORK  
Vendors of business process and business rules 
management solutions often provide case studies on the 
positive effect of business rules automation based on their 
customer’s experience (see e.g., [5]). Nevertheless, this data 
cannot be rigorously evaluated, as these case studies are 
described on an abstract level. Furthermore, data collection 
methods and analysis are neither discussed, nor presented in 
the corresponding publications. Thus, these case studies 
cannot be considered in full in this state-of-the-art review of 
current research on business rules management assessment.  
In the research area of business process management, 
business process simulation has been widely used for 
business process re-engineering [4, 22, 23] as well as 
organizational design [3] and quality assessment [24] among 
other domains. Simulation is furthermore a component of a 
business rules engine, thus, business rules can be simulated 
to provide a better robustness and validate the process and 
rule design.  
Research on business rules often focuses on business rule 
description [17], data management aspects and technical 
implementation [21, 25, 26]. Only little research has been 
done in the area of business rules capturing and extraction 
methods [12, 19, 27, 28] as well as evaluation of the business 
process 
management 
approach 
on 
business 
process 
performance. Levina et al. [1] explore the impact of business 
rules automation in the e-business domain using complex 
event processing, i.e., event-action/process business rules. 
The indicator used to show the advantage of business rules in 
[12] is process cycle time. The case study also focuses on a 
short business process that involves only few decisions.  
In this paper, a case study that requires extended process 
knowledge as well as frequent decision taking is analyzed. 
The effects of business rules automation are measured using 
process costs and time indicators. Next section describes the 
experiment design.  
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

IV. 
EXPERIMENT DESIGN 
To assess the business rules automation effect, a 
simulation of a business process from a German health fund 
has been performed. The process was elcited using 
interviews and modeled using Business Process Modeling 
Notation (BPMN) as well as enriched with detailed 
information on its organizational, temporal and financial 
structure. This proceeding provided a way to achieve an 
understanding about the current and future potential design 
of organizational processes without the risk of disruption to 
the real system itself.  
Derived information as well as the business processes 
have been modeled using Adonis® 2.01 community edition 
software. This open source tool allows BPMN modeling as 
well as process simulation. To derive the effect of business 
rules automation on the business process, the process has 
been modeled and simulated using two different scenarios. In 
the first scenario, the as-is process described in interviews 
has been represented. In the second scenario, identified 
business rules have been implemented in the model. Hereby, 
process rules as well as constrain rules have been modeled as 
automated tasks, while rule-centered information gathering 
and management have been implemented in the first scenario 
as manual tasks. Duration of the simulation was a year in 
working days with five working days per week and 8 hours 
per week per day for both scenarios. Duration of automated 
tasks has been set corresponding to the values elevated in 
interviews. Activity costs were assigned in accordance with 
process actors’ levels of expertise. Activities requiring 
deeper medical knowledge were assigned higher costs 
comparing to less knowledge intensive activities.  
A. Methodology 
A case-based research methodology was chosen with the 
aim to provide an example of practice and test the 
proposition that the supporting tools of process mapping and 
business process simulation can illustrate the effect of a rule-
based approach to change in the context of business process 
management.  
Although, a single-site study has obvious limitations with 
respect to the generalizability of the ﬁndings, the case is not 
aimed at being representative, but rather exemplary. Thus, 
the simulation results that were retrieved using the 
simulation are not exhaustively representative of all similar 
situations (same reasoning has been successfully applied in 
[29]). The study is used here to explore the potential effects 
of business rules externalization and automation on business 
process performance. Therefore, it is an explanatory example 
and an exploration study which simulation results indicate 
the effect of business rules automation. The process used 
here shows attributes of business rules-intensive processes as 
well as the potential of automation of its sub-processes (see 
[15] for business process type definition and identification).  
Thus, the approach for business process simulation 
suggested by Hlupic and Robinson [22] is adopted in the 
presented research. To derive research results following 
steps are performed:  
• 
Define modeling objectives;  
• 
 Decide on model boundaries;  
• 
 Collect and analyze data;  
• 
 Develop business process simulation model;  
• 
 Test model;  
• 
 Model experimentation;  
• 
 Analyze output;  
• 
Provide business process change recommendations.  
Hlupic and Robinson [22] suggest this proceeding for 
evaluation and decision support in the context of re-
engineering, thus the last phase is omitted here, because the 
goal 
of 
the 
research 
is 
exploratory 
rather 
than 
recommendatory. The case study roots in a business process 
analysis project where the process under consideration had to 
be defined, modeled and explored concerning its potentials 
for automation. The resulting as-is model and process 
information was used here as input for simulation design. 
Thus, the modeling objective is to document and analyze 
the as-is as well as to-be processes. The model boundaries 
have been set according to the project scope, i.e., the patient 
management process by health and medical managers. The 
as-is process model, including execution time and costs of 
the tasks as well as the designed to-be process model have 
been discussed and evaluated with process workers and 
process manager. As mentioned above, the process flows 
have been modeled and task characteristics such as their 
execution costs and times have been included to enable the 
simulation of the quantitative characteristics and thus 
performance measurement. After the short process and 
simulation set-up descriptions in the following sub-sections, 
the accordant simulation results are presented and discussed. 
B. Process Description  
The process under analysis aims at the provision of a 
suitable control of patient treatment. Process goal is to 
provide efficient and suitable treatment corresponding to the 
patient's diagnostics for the patient and the health fund. The 
challenge for the health manager at the health fund is to 
understand the diagnosis of the patient and to evaluate which 
treatment can be suitable for an efficient recovery. Thus, a 
certain amount of medical knowledge is needed to guide the 
treatment process. 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
Figure 1.  Health fund process 
The process presented in Figure 1 starts with a message 
or request about the medical case filed by the patient or 
treating facility in cases when the patient had to be delivered 
to the hospital or is already under medical treatment. This 
case is analyzed by either by the health or medical manager 
with the regard to sufficiency of the included data. If all 
needed information is given, either within the case or in the 
patient history available at the fund, the case is evaluated 
concerning its complexity. If health manager classifies the 
case as clear, he or she supervises further treatment. If he or 
she doubts whether her or his knowledge is sufficient for 
further handling the case, he or she can pass the case to a 
worker who has an indicated higher medical knowledge, i.e., 
medical manager. In this case, medical manager is 
responsible to govern the treatment. Thus, medical manager 
often acts in a consulting position for the health manager or 
reworks cases that could not be managed by the health 
manager. 
Governance of the treatment is composed of several 
steps. Diagnostics of the patient needs to be comprehensive 
and his or her nursing assessment needs to be identified. 
According to this data a general treatment proceeding can be 
planed. This proceeding is discussed with the patient. 
According to the diagnostics a specialist or a treatment 
facility, such as a hospital or a rehabilitation institution, 
needs to be chosen. The choice depends on the current list of 
partner institutions, their availability or agreements between 
the health fund and medical specialists. Furthermore, 
according to the treatment plan, costs of the treatment need 
to be reviewed and monitored along the treatment process. 
External consulting provides support upon request in cases 
where the diagnosis or treatment activities are not clear. 
Thus, we can identify following actors involved into this 
process: patient, treatment facility (that can also be a 
medicine or a hospital), external consulting, the operative 
health and medical manager from the health fund. The goal 
of this process can be identified as: provide an effective 
patient treatment. The term efficiency implies best possible 
recovery of the patient and efficient resource involvement 
(such as costs and time) on the side of the health fund.  
While in the described as-is process the information 
collection and decision making have been performed 
manually, in the course of to-be process design, business 
rules as well as process automation potentials were derived 
and implemented into the process model. The goal of the to-
be process was to reduce the process time and costs for the 
health fund while providing the right treatment, i.e., efficient 
process for the patient and health fund. This goal is 
consistent with the as-is process goal. Therefore, the work 
load of the medical manager has been reduced using a more 
effective decision making and information collection. 
Identified business rules were supposed to be externalized in 
a business rules management system to reduce process time. 
The simulation of the as-is and to-be processes is now 
applied to assess the performance difference between the two 
scenarios using process time and cost metrics. 
C.  Simulation Set- up 
Conducted interviews with process workers and 
managers were led to capture the process as well as to 
provide information on process times and indications for 
derivation and constrain business rules. Business rules that 
are relevant for process execution have been identified as 
mostly being of type constraints and process rules indicted 
by control flow gateways. Additional business rules as well 
as process rules have been derived using the business process 
model (see BPMN rule events in Figure 1) and business rules 
extraction process described above. Additionally, decision 
points within the process were identified and the accordant 
information has been gathered. Decision points indicate 
process stages or tasks that require additional data for 
decision making [30] and are thus potential sources of 
business rules enactment.  
Furthermore, the as-is process has been modeled 
including the as-is process implementation, i.e., manual 
information gathering has been represented as manual tasks. 
This as-is model has been simulated using Adonis® 2.01 
community edition software and the defined performance 
indicators such as time and estimated costs in money units 
(MU) of the process have been observed. The process has 
been simulated for a time-span of a year to gather average 
costs and frequencies of the single activities, as well as to 
take into account that a patient recovery needs to be 
accompanied for a longer period of time, that is, until he or 
she likely does not need any medical attention for the 
original diagnosis anymore. Thus, monitored frequencies and 
costs of activities represent the real process without being 
exhaustive and based on simulation rather than on the actual 
execution patterns.  
In a next step, the as-is process model has been modified 
to a to-be process to include identified and automated 
business rules. Thus, constrain rules have been treated as 
information 
collection 
points 
[30], 
i.e., 
information 
gathering, as well as constrain estimation has been 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

automated. In the actual realization of this automation e.g., a 
document management or business rules management 
system can be used. Process rules have been modeled as 
automated, by e.g., a workflow management system. 
Subsequentially, this to-be process has also been simulated 
with the focus on the described performance indicators. 
While the as-is process data on time and cost management 
have been gathered in interviews, data in the to-be process 
have been estimated and evaluated using experience and 
expert interviews. As the result, two of the manual process 
activities of the as-is process have been fully automated in 
the to-be process. 
V. 
SIMULATION RESULTS  
Simulation of the as-is process resulted in an average 
time for the case support (in working days) of 8 days and 
approx. 7 hours with estimated costs of 69.62 MU (see Table 
1). As the most frequent activities in the process “manage 
case” activity performed by the health manager as well as 
“prioritize case”, “gather information” and “manage patient” 
by the medical manager have been identified. “manage 
patient” was identified as the activity with the highest costs 
(25.2 MU) as well as with a rather high average frequency of 
execution in a process cycle (0.84).  
Simulation of the to-be process resulted in a reduced 
process time by 37.5% as well as reduced estimated costs by 
17.3%. Although, in the to-be process the number of 
activities for health manager increased, his or her workload 
is now more focused on the efficient case processing and his 
or her area of expertise. “manage case” activity is now 
performed with a lower frequency while health manager also 
performs “manage patient” activity. This fact is also 
beneficial for process efficiency as the time of the medical 
manager is more expensive comparing to the time of the 
health manager due to their different levels in medical 
knowledge. In the to-be process medical manager is less 
involved in the support of health (frequency of the “support 
case management” activity is decreased), while being 
slightly more involved in patient management.  
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION RESULTS 
Indicator 
As-is values 
To-be values 
Process time 
8d 6h 47min 
5d 7h 42min 
Process costs 
69.62 MU 
59.37 MU 
Performance 
Quotient 
(MU/min)  
0.00584 
0.00775 
Manage 
patient 
(frequency; costs) 
0.89; 25.20 
1.19; 35.55 
Gather 
information 
(frequency; costs) 
0.84; 25.20 
0.92; 18.39 
Support case management 
0.43; 6.5 
0.21; 3.15 
Priories case (frequency; 
costs) 
0.84; 8.4 
0.8; 1.6 
Pre-manage 
case 
(frequency; costs) 
0.4; 2 
0.4; 0.8 
In the to-be process activities “gather information” and 
“manage patient” are the most frequent and expensive 
activities performed by medical manager. They are “routine” 
activities for the medical manager with frequencies of 0.92 
and 1.19 respectively, as well as respectively requiring the 
costs of 18.39MU and 35.55 MU. An additional, though a 
rather obvious observation, is that the rise of frequency of 
these activities is accompanied by a nearly proportional rise 
in costs (frequency rise of 42% was accompanied by rise of 
the costs by 41.1%). Another effect of business rules 
automation can be observed on the two process tasks that 
have been automated: “priorise case” and “pre-manage 
case”. Their occurrence frequency remained nearly the same 
but their costs were reduced to a fraction of the original 
costs. Hence, the automation of the to-be process resulted, 
among other, in a higher number of activities for health 
manager as well as the supporting information system.  
Finally, to be able to compare the performance of the two 
processes, their performance quotient has been calculated. 
The performance quotient of the process has been defined 
here as the relation of the process cycle costs (in MU) and 
process cycle time (in minutes). As the result of this analysis, 
the to-be process performance increased by 24.65% 
comparing to the as-is process performance. This rise can be 
attributed to the business rules automation regarding the 
experiment design and simulation results. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK  
In this paper, simulation-based experiment and its design 
for the assessment of the effects of business rules automation 
on business process performance has been illustrated using a 
process modeling and simulation software. The focus of this 
business rules simulation was put on constrain as well as 
process rules as they provide the highest process 
enhancement potential when realized using IT-supported 
execution. Experiment results show that the process 
performance of a to-be process involving automation of the 
business rules that were identified and externalized from the 
as-is process using a systematic approach was increased. 
This performance rise is attributed here to the business rules 
externalization and automation. 
Applied research approach can be used as a basis for 
estimation of the business rules automation benefits. One 
major limitation of the presented results though, is the fact 
that the experiment design takes neither the investment, nor 
the implementation costs for business process and business 
rules automation infrastructure into account. Additionally a 
general limitation of business process simulation is that each 
modeled scenario represents only one possible outcome and 
over long periods of time these outcomes could be greatly 
different to actual performance. It is therefore essential to 
undertake a series of experiments and judge the sensitivity of 
model results to changes in input factors. This will provide 
some indication of how useful the simulation results are 
likely to be. Nevertheless, this paper assessed some of the 
claimed benefits of the business rules management approach. 
Here, its effects on process improvement or efficiency have 
been addressed.  
This paper illustrated that the performance of a (rule and 
information intensive) business process can be enhanced 
considering the indicators time and cost using business rules 
automation. Considering business rules in this process also 
resulted in a process workload and responsibilities for the 
process actors that are now more fitted to the job description. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

This fact needs to be examined in future research, as it may 
provide an indication towards a measurable effect of psycho-
social dimensions such as higher job satisfaction on process 
performance. Further research directions are to explore the 
effects of business rules management approach on process 
and data maintenance costs, compliance, update related 
efforts as well as decision accuracy. 
VII. REFERENCES 
[1] Levina, O., Kubicki, A., Holschke, O. and Rake-Revelant, J., 
Exploring the Impact of Business Rules Consideration on Processes 
in E-Business, in 2nd IEEE International Conference on Information 
Management and Engineering. 2010, IEEE: Chendgu, China. 
[2] Simon, H.A., Applying Information Technology to Organization 
Design. Public Administration Review, 1973. 33(3): pp. 268-278. 
[3] Giaglis, G., Paul, R. and Hlupic, V., Integrating simulation in 
organisational design studies. International Journal of Information 
Management, 1999. 19(3): pp. 219-236. 
[4] MacArthur, P.J., Crosslin, R.L. and Warren, J.R., A strategy for 
evaluating alternative information system designs for business 
process 
reengineering. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Information 
Management, 1994. 14(4): pp. 237-251. 
[5] Robbe, N. The Business Rules Advantage for Process Improvement. 
in BrainStorm New York. 2010. 
[6] Hevner, A.R., March, S.T., Park, J. and Ram, S. , Design Science in 
Information Systems Research. MIS Quarterly, 2004. 28(1): pp. 75-
105. 
[7] BusinessRuleGroup. The Business Rules Group. Defining Business 
Rules – What Are They Really?   [cited June, 2012]; Available from: 
http://www.businessrulesgroup.org/first_paper/br01c0.htm. 
[8] Ross, R., Principles of the Business Rule Approach. Management 
Information Systems. 2003: Addison- Wesley. 
[9] Taveter, K. and Wagner, G. Agent-Oriented Enterprise Modeling 
Based on Business Rules? in 20th Int. Conf. on Conceptual Modeling. 
2001. Yokohama, Japan: Springer. 
[10] von Halle, B., Business Rules Applied. 2002: Wiley & Sons. 
[11] Schacher, M., Grässle, Patrick, Agile Enterprises through the 
Business Rules Approach (In German). Xpert. press Series. 2006: 
Springer. 
[12] Levina, O., Holschke, O. and Rake-Revelant, J. Extracting Business 
Logic from Business Process Models. in 2nd IEEE International 
Conference on Information Management and Engineering. 2010. 
Chengdu, China: IEEE. 
[13] von Halle, B., Goldberg, L. and Zachman, J., Business Rule 
Revolution. Running Business the Right Way. 2006: Happy About. 
[14] Charfi, A., Mezini, M. Hybrid web service composition: business 
processes meet business rules. in 2nd international conference on 
Service oriented computing. 2004. New York, USA: ACM. 
[15] Levina, O. and Hillmann, R. Network-based Business Process 
Analysis in 45th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences. 2012. 
[16] Ross, J., W., Creating a Strategic IT Architecture Competency: 
Learning in Stages. MIT Sloan Working Paper 2003.. 
[17] Muehlen, M.Z., Indulska, M. and Kamp, G. . Business process and 
business rule modeling languages for compliance management: a 
representational analysis. in 26th international conference on 
Conceptual modeling. 2007. Auckland, New Zealand 
[18] Eijndhoven, T.V., Iacob, M. and Ponisio, M. L. Achieving Business 
Process Flexibility with Business Rules. in IEEE International 
Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference. 2008. 
[19] Gottesdiener, E., Harvesting Business Rules in Workshops. 
DataToKnowledge Newletter (now Business Rules Journal), 1999 
27(2). 
[20] Graml, T., Bracht, R. and Spies, M. Patterns of Business Rules to 
Enable Agile Business Processes. in 11th IEEE International 
Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference. 2007. 
[21] Resch, O., Six Views on the Business Rule Management System. e-
Journal of Practical Business Research, 2010. 11. 
[22] Hlupic, V. and Robinson, S. Business process modelling and analysis 
using discrete-event simulation. in Proceedings of the 30th 
conference on Winter simulation. 1998. Los Alamitos, CA, USA: 
IEEE Computer Society Press. 
[23] Swami, A. Building the business using process simulation. in 
Simulation Conference. 1995: IEEE. 
[24] Wong, K., Parkin, R. and Coy, J. , Integration of the Cimosa and 
high-level coloured Petri net modelling techniques with application in 
the postal process using hierarchical dispatching rules. Journal of 
Engineering Manufacture,, 2007. 221(5): pp. 775-786. 
[25] Rosenberg, F. and Dustdar, S. , Towards a Distributed Service-
Oriented Business Rules System. Web Services, European 
Conference on, 2005: pp. 14-24. 
[26] Rosenberg, F. and Dustdar, S. Design and Implementation of a 
Service-Oriented Business Rules Broker. in: Proceedings of the 
Seventh IEEE International Conference on E-Commerce Technology 
Workshops. 2005. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society. 
[27] Bajec, M. and Krisper, M., A methodology and tool support for 
managing business rules in organizations. Journal of Information 
Systems, 2005. 30(6). 
[28] Bubenko, J.A. and Wangler, B. Objectives Driven Capture of 
Business Rules and of Information Systems Requirements. in 
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 1993. Systems Engineering in the 
Service of Humans, Conference Proceedings. 
[29] Stuart, I., McCutcheon, D., Handﬁeld, R., McLachlin, R., and 
Samson, D., Effective case research in operations management: a 
process perspective. Journal of Operations Management, 2002. 20: 
pp. 419–433. 
[30] Levina, O., Design of Decision Service Using Cause-and-Effect 
Business Process Analysis. Computer Science- Scientific Journal of 
Riga Technical University, 2011. 46: pp. 19-27. 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

