Mobile Context-Aware Product Assistant
Antti Nummiaho, Timo Laakko
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland
Vuorimiehentie 5, P.O.Box 2000, FIN-02044 VTT, Finland
antti.nummiaho@vtt.ﬁ, timo.laakko@vtt.ﬁ
Abstract—In this paper we present an application that man-
ufacturers and retailers can use to provide contextual product
information for their customers. The application also provides
a direct interactive feedback channel that the customers can use
in asking questions about the products from the manufacturers
and retailers. In addition to that the application also offers
functionality for the customers to discuss about the products
amongst themselves. The application consists of a web interface
for the manufacturers and retailers and both a web interface
and a mobile Java application for the customers. We conclude
that this kind of an application has clear beneﬁts for both the
manufacturers and retailers as well as for the customers. The
customers get guidance and assistance in using the products
and the manufacturers and retailers get valuable information
that they can use in their product development. We also discuss
some potential difﬁculties that the concept might face.
Keywords-context-aware messaging; context-aware applica-
tion; mobile application; product guidance; product assistance;
mCRM; mobile customer relationship management
I. INTRODUCTION
It is all too often the case that the customer gets all sorts
of guidance when buying a product, but after the purchase is
made, getting help and assistance in using the product turns
out to be a lot more difﬁcult. To tackle this problem we have
designed and implemented a tool that enables manufacturers
and retailers to provide product information and guidance for
the customers in the situation where the customers actually
need it. The tool provides an interactive feedback channel
that the customers can utilize in communicating with the
manufacturers and retailers. This not only improves the cus-
tomers’ satisfaction but also generates valuable information
on the problems and issues that the customers have in using
the product, which can then be used in further product
development.
The importance of context-aware user guidance was ac-
knowledged already in the 1990’s. One of the ﬁrst appli-
cations in the area was Cyberguide which used tourists’
location and time to provide them information services
such as suggestions for places of interest and background
information about their current location [1]. Also, many
similar systems were developed for example for museum
visitors and exhibition tourists [2].
In our work we have implemented an application that lets
manufacturers/retailers provide contextual product informa-
tion about their products to their customers. Another impor-
tant aspect is the ability for the customers to ask questions
about the products directly from the manufacturers/retailers.
In addition to that, the customers can also discuss about the
products with other customers.
II. RELATED WORK
Mobile customer relationship management (mCRM) has
been the focus of many recent studies. In his PhD thesis [3]
Jaakko Sinisalo discusses the topic thoroughly. He concludes
that although mCRM has an inherent potential to beneﬁt
both company and customer, it has been utilized quite
cautiously to date. Reinhold et al. [4] come to the same
conclusion in their study of utilizing mobile devices in
collaborative CRM processes. They state that only if the
offered mobile services show beneﬁts in the perception of
customers they will make use of them and engage into
collaborative processes. Some ideas for the future of mCRM
are also presented by Steimer et al. [5]. They focus on
the possibilities of mCRM in the automotive industry and
tourism, and present different location based and person-
alized services that could take advantage of the enhancing
mobile infrastructure. Based on the current research, one can
therefore say that mCRM has lots of unutilized potential. To
address this, our application aims at providing practical ideas
on how mCRM could be utilized.
Other recent work has focused on recommending items
based on users’ context and preferences. Shin et al. [6]
propose a general framework for taking into account not
only user preferences, but also context information for
generating recommendations. Hong et al. [7] propose an
agent-based framework that utilizes users’ context history
for automatically predicting users’ preferences and provid-
ing personalized services and products for the users. Our
application is more focused on supporting the users with
their current products, but can also be used in recommending
new products that the users might be interested in based on
the existing products that the users have.
Our work also involves utilizing context information in
providing the most relevant information. In addition to raw
context information such as GPS coordinates, time and
accelerometer data, it is often useful to create more abstract
contexts such as ’driving’ or ’at work’. The raw context
information is utilized in deducing the more abstract contexts
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

thus creating a context hierarchy. One recent suggestion for
a general context hierarchy is presented by Reichle et al. [9].
Another aspect in our work is community-based product
information sharing as users can discuss about the products
amongst themselves. This topic has been studied before
by von Reischach et al. [10] who in their paper present a
concept called APriori that enables consumers to access and
share product recommendations using their mobile phone.
They discuss issues related to community-based product
recommendations such as how willing the users are to trust
other users’ opinions and how motivated they are in sharing
their own.
III. THE APPLICATION
In the application the manufacturers/retailers provide
product information that can be assembled from differ-
ent data types such as text, images, pdf and video. The
product information can also be tied to a context such
as location. The users can view the product information
according to their preferences and/or context. They can also
leave questions for the manufacturers/retailers to answer and
leave comments for other users related to certain product
information.
A. Web Interface
For manufacturers/retailers the application offers a web
interface and for the customers the application offers both a
web interface and a mobile Java ME application. Figure 1
shows the manufacturers/retailers’ view of the web interface.
The customers’ web interface share a similar look and feel,
but offer different functionality as manufacturers/retailers
can add, modify and delete the product information, set
contexts in which the product information is to be available
in the mobile application and answer customers’ questions
while the customers can only view the product information,
ask questions and discuss about the products with other
customers.
Figure 1.
The manufacturers/retailers’ web interface. The red numbers in
brackets in the tree menu indicate that the corresponding folders / items
have that many unanswered questions.
The product information items can be tied to a context
so that the customer can browse only the most relevant
items in the mobile application. For example, a reminder
to change to winter tyres is only relevant in October,
November and December when the temperature drops below
ﬁve degrees Celsius. Another example would be a car repair
shop providing its services in a certain location. However, it
is not necessary to deﬁne a context for a product information
item as in all cases the information may not be context
speciﬁc.
Currently, only location names (using GeoNames1), max-
imum and minimum temperature and months can be used to
deﬁne the context, but we have also deﬁned a larger context
hierarchy that we intend to support in the future. The context
hierarchy is illustrated in Figure 2. It builds on lower level
contexts that can be automatically recognized in the mobile
device (calendar information, GPS, Cell ID, accelerometer
data), and lower level contexts that can be automatically
recognized in the server (time, weather). These lower level
contexts are used in deducing higher level contexts (location,
period of time, temperature) and user level contexts (at a
hobby, at home, at work, in a car). Higher level contexts
typically have distinct values while user level contexts are
either active or inactive. Higher level contexts (location) as
well as user level contexts can also be inputted manually by
the user.
Figure 2.
A suggestion of a context hierarchy for the application.
The customers can ask questions about the products from
the manufacturers/retailers, and they can then answer the
questions using their web interface. The customers can also
discuss about the products with other customers, and the
manufacturers/retailers are only allowed to view the discus-
sion in their web interface. In the current implementation, the
questions, answers and discussions can only contain text, but
allowing more complex multimedia content could be useful
as, e.g., the customers could take a photo of some problem
in the product, which could be more informational for the
manufacturers/retailers as plain text.
B. Customer’s Mobile Application
Before the customers can start using the mobile applica-
tion, they must login using their username and password.
1http://www.geonames.org/
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

After they have logged in once, the username and password
are stored in the mobile device’s memory and they are
not required to login again unless they want to change the
user. The main screen of the application offers options for
browsing the product information, updating current location,
changing preferences, changing user and exiting the appli-
cation. The customer’s mobile application is illustrated in
Figure 3.
Figure 3.
Customer’s mobile application.
If the customers wish to restrict the information to what
is most relevant in a certain location, they must input their
location. This could be achieved automatically using GPS,
but currently we have only implemented a way to input the
information manually. The customers can input a location
name and the application searches for matching location
names from GeoNames. If matching location names are
found, they are shown to the customers in a list of which they
can choose their current location. Previously used location
names are provided in a separate list, so that customers do
not need to search for locations unless they go to a new
location.
IV. DISCUSSION
In summary, the features of the application that we have
presented are:
1) the application lets manufacturers and retailers provide
contextual product information to their customers
2) the application lets customers ask questions about the
products directly from the manufacturers and retailers
3) the application lets customers discuss about the prod-
ucts with other customers
The beneﬁts of this kind of an application are clear. The
customers get a direct interactive feedback channel to the
manufacturers/retailers that they can use to get guidance
and assistance in using the product therefore increasing
customer satisfaction. On the other hand, manufacturers and
retailers get to make their customers happier and at the
same time get valuable information that they can use in their
product development. However, there are also some possible
difﬁculties that this kind of an application can have. These
issues are discussed next.
First of all, the customers need to install and use yet
another application in their mobile device. Are the customers
willing to do that? To start with, the installation process
should be made as easy as possible. Perhaps the application
could be installed by scanning a QR (Quick Response)
code with the mobile phone’s camera or by touching a
RFID (Radio Frequency IDentiﬁcation) tag with the mobile
phone when buying the product, and the application could
then provide a link to the web interface also. This way
the application could be used without a username/password
combination. On the other hand, if every product came
with its own application, the number of applications in the
customer’s mobile device could become so big that the
customer would not bother searching for the right application
for a certain product anymore and would stop using the
application. Therefore, having an option to use the same
application for different products should also be possible. In
addition to that, it is also important to have the customer’s
web interface as typing large amounts of text using a mobile
device is often more difﬁcult than using a regular keyboard.
However, as current mobile devices are getting better and
better (keyboards, touch screens, larger displays, etc.), one
possible solution could be to only have the web interface
and just make a more mobile browser friendly version of it.
Privacy issues are also always relevant when talking about
context-aware applications. Would the customers be willing
to reveal to the manufacturers/retailers when and where they
are using the products? There should always be an option
to restrict the context information that is exposed.
All in all, even though a lot of information can be searched
from the Internet, this kind of an application with its
direct interactive feedback channel between customers and
manufacturers/retailers would provide the customers with
more extensive and trustworthy answers to their questions.
Many applications, like YouTube, Flickr, Twitter, etc. really
become interesting only after they get a substantial amount
of users. However, this kind of an application would be
beneﬁcial for the users directly after its launch as interacting
with the manufacturers/retailers is the application’s main
functionality. Only the functionality of interacting with other
customers would require a larger number of users for it
to really become useful. For the manufacturers/retailers it
would easily be worthwile to dedicate personnel for answer-
ing the questions that the customers are making using the
application as the beneﬁts of doing so would be clear.
The main focus in the future is to make better use of
context and user preferences in providing the users the most
relevant information about the products. In the current im-
plementation we have only set up some simple preferences
and basic contexts. We intend to support a more extensive
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

set of context information and user preferences, and also
to implement the automatic recognition of context for the
mobile application. Also, in the current implementation the
users can only discuss about the products with all other
users. It would be interesting to provide a possibility to
create separate user groups also. For example, users who
share the same hobby could discuss about products related
to the hobby amongst themselves. In the future we also
intend to verify the concept by running some experiments
with actual users.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper we presented an application that manufac-
turers and retailers can use to provide contextual product
information for their customers. While the application is
still in its preliminary stages, we focused on discussing
the possibilities and challenges of the concept behind it.
The main beneﬁt that we discussed was that this kind
of an application would provide guidance and assistance
to the customers and a direct feedback channel to the
manufacturers and retailers. Some of the potential difﬁculties
that we highlighted were privacy issues (what kind of context
information the customers would be willing to reveal) and
whether the application should be a stand-alone mobile
application or a web application. In the future we intend
to develop the prototype further and explore these issues
with actual users.
REFERENCES
[1] Abowd, G., Atkeson, C., Hong, J., Long, S., Kooper, R. and
Pinkerton, M.: Cyberguide: A Mobile Context-Aware Tour
Guide. In: Wireless Networks Vol. 3, No. 5, pp. 421–433.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Hingham, MA, USA (1997)
[2] Chen, G., Kotz, D.: A Survey of Context-Aware Mobile
Computing Research. Technical Report TR2000-381, Dept.
of Computer Science, Dartmouth College (2000)
[3] Sinisalo, J.: Mobile Customer Relationship Management: a
Communication Perspective. PhD Thesis. University of Oulu
(2010).
[4] Reinhold, O., Alt, R.: Enhancing Collaborative CRM with
Mobile Technologies. In: Proceedings of the 22nd Bled
eConference, pp. 97-116 (2009)
[5] Steimer, F.L., Steimer, T.: Future Mobile CRM in the Au-
tomotive and Tourist Area. In: Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE
International Conference on Digital Ecosystems and Tech-
nologies, pp. 177–180 (2009)
[6] Shin, D., Lee, J., Yeon, J., Lee, S.: Context-Aware Rec-
ommendation by Aggregating User Context. In: Proceedings
of the 2009 IEEE Conference on Commerce and Enterprise
Computing, pp. 423–430. IEEE Computer Society, Washing-
ton, DC, USA (2009)
[7] Hong, J., Suh, E-H, Kim. J., Kim, S.: Context-Aware System
for Proactive Personalized Service Based on Context History.
In: Expert Syst. Appl. Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 7448–7457. Perg-
amon Press, Inc., Tarrytown, NY, USA (2009)
[8] Han, B.-J., Rho, S., Jun, S., Hwang, E.: Music Emotion
Classiﬁcation and Context-Based Music Recommendation.
In: Multimedia Tools Appl., Vol. 47, No. 3, pp. 433–460.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Hingham, MA, USA (2010)
[9] Reichle, R., Wagner, M., Khan M. U., Geihs, K., Lorenzo,
J., Valla, M., Fra., C., Paspallis, N., Papadopoulos, G. A.: A
Comprehensive Context Modeling Framework for Pervasive
Computing Systems. In: Proceedings of the 8th IFIP WG
6.1 International Conference on Distributed Applications and
Interoperable Systems, pp. 281–295. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Heidelberg (2008)
[10] von Reischach, F., Guinard, D., Michahelles, F., Fleisch,
E.: A Mobile Product Recommendation System Interacting
with Tagged Products. In: Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE
International Conference on Pervasive Computing
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

