ValidKI: A Method for Designing Key Indicators to
Monitor the Fulﬁllment of Business Objectives
Olav Skjelkv˚ale Ligaarden∗†, Atle Refsdal∗, and Ketil Stølen∗†
∗ Department for Networked Systems and Services, SINTEF ICT, PO Box 124 Blindern, N-0314 Oslo, Norway
E-mail: {olav.ligaarden, atle.refsdal, ketil.stolen}@sintef.no
† Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, PO Box 1080 Blindern, N-0316 Oslo, Norway
Abstract—In this paper we present our method ValidKI for
designing key indicators to monitor the fulﬁllment of business
objectives. A set of key indicators is valid with respect to a
business objective if it can be used to measure the degree to
which the business or relevant part thereof complies with the
business objective. ValidKI consists of three main steps each
of which is divided into sub-steps. We demonstrate the method
on an example case focusing on the use of electronic patient
records in a hospital environment.
Keywords-key indicator, business objective, electronic patient
record
I. INTRODUCTION
Today’s companies beneﬁt greatly from ICT-supported
business processes, as well as business intelligence and
business process intelligence applications monitoring and
analyzing different aspects of a business and its processes.
The output from these applications may be key indicators
which summarize large amounts of data into single numbers.
Key indicators can be used to evaluate how successful a
company is with respect to speciﬁc business objectives. For
this to be possible it is important that the key indicators
are valid. A set of key indicators is valid with respect to a
business objective if it can be used to measure the degree
to which the business or relevant part thereof complies
with the business objective. Valid key indicators facilitate
decision making, while invalid key indicators may lead to
bad business decisions, which again may greatly harm the
company.
In today’s business environment, companies cooperate
across company borders. Such co-operations often result in
sharing or outsourcing of ICT-supported business processes.
One example is the interconnected electronic patient record
(EPR) infrastructure. The common goal for this infrastruc-
ture is the exchange of EPRs facilitating the treatment of
the same patient at more than one hospital. In such an
infrastructure, it is important to monitor the use of EPRs
in order to detect and avoid misuse. This may be achieved
through the use of key indicators. It may be challenging
to identify and compute good key indicators that are valid.
Furthermore, in an infrastructure or system stretching across
many companies we often have different degrees of visi-
bility into how the cooperating parties perform their part
of the business relationship, making the calculation of key
indicators particularly hard.
In this paper we present a new method ValidKI (Valid
Key Indicators) for designing key indicators to monitor the
fulﬁllment of business objectives. We demonstrate ValidKI
by applying it on an example case targeting the use of EPRs.
We have developed ValidKI with the aim of fulﬁlling the
following characteristics:
• Business focus: The method should facilitate the design
and assessment of key indicators for the purpose of
measuring the fulﬁllment of business objectives.
• Efﬁciency: The method should be time and resource
efﬁcient.
• Generality: The method should be able to support
design of key indicators for systems shared between
many companies or organizations.
• Heterogeneity: The method should not place restric-
tions on how key indicators are designed.
To the best of our knowledge, there exists no other method
with sole focus on design of valid key indicators to monitor
the fulﬁllment of business objectives.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: in Section
II we introduce our basic terminology and deﬁnitions. In
Section III we give an overview of ValidKI and its three
main steps. In Sections IV, V, and VI we demonstrate
our three-step method on an example case addressing the
use of EPRs in a hospital environment. In Section VII we
present related work, while in Section VIII we conclude by
characterizing our contribution and discussing the suitability
of our method.
II. BASIC TERMINOLOGY AND DEFINITIONS
Merriam-Webster deﬁnes an “indicator” as “one that
indicates” [1], while it deﬁnes “indicates” as “to be a sign,
symptom, or index of” [2]. The weather forecast is a typical
indicator since it gives an indication of what the weather
will be like the next day.
Many companies proﬁt considerably from the use of
indicators [3] resulting from business process intelligence
applications that monitor and analyze different aspects of a
business and its processes. Indicators can be used to measure
to what degree a company fulﬁlls its business objectives and
57
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

Composite 
Key Indicator
Basic Key 
Indicator
*
2..*
Relevant Part of Business
Key Indicator
1
Business Objective
1..*
Figure 1.
The artefacts addressed by ValidKI
Specification of relevant part of business
Key indicator requirements specification
Key indicator design specification
Key indicator deployment specification
Key indicator
Business objective
Relevant part of business
Artefacts
Models/Descriptions
Precise business objective
Business objective expressed using 
key indicators
Figure 2.
The models/descriptions developed by ValidKI
we then speak of key indicators. Some business objectives
may focus on business performance, while others may focus
on risk or compliance with laws and regulations.
A. The artefacts addressed by ValidKI
The UML [4] class diagram in Fig. 1 relates the main
artefacts addressed by ValidKI. The associations between
the different concepts have cardinalities that specify how
many instances of one concept that may be associated to an
instance of the other concept. The hollow diamond speciﬁes
aggregation.
As characterized by the diagram, a key indicator is either
basic or composite. By basic key indicator we mean a mea-
sure such as the number of times a speciﬁc event generated
by the ICT infrastructure has been observed within a given
time interval, the average time between each generation of
a speciﬁc event, the load on the network at a particular
point in time, or similar. A composite key indicator is the
aggregation of two or more basic key indicators. One or
more key indicators are used to measure to what extent a
business objective is fulﬁlled with respect to a relevant part
of the business.
B. The models/descriptions developed by ValidKI
As illustrated by Fig. 2, performing the steps of ValidKI
results in six different models/descriptions each of which
describes one of the artefacts of Fig. 1 from a certain
perspective.
A speciﬁcation, at a suitable level of abstraction, docu-
ments the relevant part of the business in question.
Business objectives are typically expressed at an enter-
prise level and in such a way that they can easily be
understood by for example shareholders, board members,
partners, etc. It is therefore often not completely clear what it
means to fulﬁll them. This motivates the need to capture each
business objective more precisely. The degree of fulﬁllment
of a precise business objective is measured by a set of key
indicators. To measure its degree of fulﬁllment there is a
need to express each business objective in terms of key
indicators.
For each key indicator we distinguish between three
speciﬁcations; the key indicator requirements speciﬁcation,
the key indicator design speciﬁcation, and the key indicator
deployment speciﬁcation. The ﬁrst captures the expectations
to the key indicator, the second deﬁnes how the indicator is
calculated, while the third documents how the calculation
is embedded in the business or relevant part thereof that
ValidKI is used to help monitor. In other words the deploy-
ment speciﬁcation describes how the data on which the key
indicator calculation is based is extracted and transmitted
within the business in question. We often refer to the pair
of the design speciﬁcation and the deployment speciﬁcation
as the key indicator’s realization.
C. External and internal validity
We distinguish between external and internal validity.
External validity may be understood as a relation between
a business objective and a set of key indicators.
Deﬁnition 1. External validity A set of key indicators is
externally valid with respect to a business objective if it
can be used to measure the degree to which the business
objective is fulﬁlled.
Internal validity may be understood as a relation between
the requirements speciﬁcation of a key indicator and its
realization as captured by its design and deployment speci-
ﬁcations.
Deﬁnition 2. Internal validity A key indicator is internally
valid if its realization as captured by its design and deploy-
ment speciﬁcations fulﬁlls its requirements speciﬁcation.
If each element of a set of key indicators is internally
valid we may evaluate its external validity by considering
only the requirements speciﬁcations of its elements.
III. OVERVIEW OF VALIDKI
Fig. 3 provides an overview of the ValidKI method. It
takes as input a business objective and delivers a set of
key indicators and a report arguing its external validity with
58
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

Step 1:
Establish 
target
Step 2:
External 
validation
Step 3:
Internal 
validation
INPUT:
A business objective
1.1: Express business objectives more precisely
1.2: Describe relevant part of business
2.1: Express business objectives using key indicators
2.2: Specify key indicator requirements
2.3: Evaluate external validity (assuming internal validity)
3.1: Specify key indicator designs
3.2: Specify key indicator deployments
3.3: Evaluate internal validity
OUTPUT:
A set of key indicators and a report arguing 
its external validity with respect to the 
business objective received as input
Figure 3.
Overview of ValidKI
respect to the business objective received as input1. In the
following we offer additional explanations for each of the
three main steps.
A. Establish target
The ﬁrst main step of ValidKI is all about understanding
the target, i.e. understanding exactly what the business
objective means and acquiring the necessary understanding
of the relevant part of business for which the business
objective has been formulated. In the ﬁrst sub-step we help
the client to characterize the business objective in a more
precise manner leading to a precise business objective, while
in the second sub-step we specify the relevant part of the
business.
B. External validation
The second main step of ValidKI is concerned with
establishing a set of key indicators that is externally valid
with respect to the business objective considering only their
requirements speciﬁcations.
In order to argue external validity we reformulate the
precise business objective in terms of key indicators. Fur-
thermore, we specify our requirements to each key indicator
referred to in the reformulated precise business objective.
These two sub-steps are typically conducted in parallel.
Based on this we evaluate external validity assuming internal
validity of each key indicator. If we are not able to establish
external validity the reformulated business objective and/or
requirements speciﬁcations must be changed.
1When using ValidKI in practice we will typically develop key indicators
for a set of business objectives, and not just one which we without loss of
generality restrict our attention to here.
C. Internal validation
In the third main step we do an internal validation of
each key indicator of the externally valid key indicator
set. In the ﬁrst two sub-steps we specify the design and
deployment of each key indicator. Then, we evaluate whether
this realization fulﬁlls its requirements speciﬁcation. If this
is the case we have established internal validity and thereby
external validity; if not we iterate.
IV. ESTABLISH TARGET
In the following we assume that we have been hired to
help the public hospital Client H design key indicators to
monitor their compliance with Article 8 in the European
Convention on Human Rights [5]. The article states the
following:
Article 8 – Right to respect for private and family life
1) Everyone has the right to respect for his private and
family life, his home and his correspondence.
2) There shall be no interference by a public authority
with the exercise of this right except such as is in ac-
cordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic
society in the interests of national security, public
safety or the economic well-being of the country, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection
of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
and freedoms of others.
Client H needs to comply with Article 8 since it is
a public authority. The consequence for Client H of
not complying with Article 8 may be economic loss and
damaged reputation. One example [6] of violation of Article
8 is from Finland. A Finnish woman was ﬁrst treated for
HIV at a hospital, before she later started working there
as a nurse. While working there she suspected that her
co-workers had unlawfully gained access to her medical
data. She brought the case to the European Court of Human
Rights in Strasbourg which unanimously held that the
district health authority, responsible for the hospital, had
violated Article 8 by not protecting the medical data of
the woman properly. The district health authority was held
liable to pay damages to the woman. Client H has therefore
established the following business objective:
Business objective BO-A8: Client H complies with Article
8 in the European Convention on Human Rights.
Client H wants to make use of key indicators to monitor
the degree of fulﬁllment of BO-A8, and now they have hired
us to use ValidKI for designing them. In the rest of this
section we conduct Step 1 of ValidKI on behalf of Client H
with respect to BO-A8.
59
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

A. Express business objectives more precisely (Step 1.1 of
ValidKI)
Article 8 states under which circumstances a public au-
thority can interfere with someone’s right to privacy. One of
these circumstances is “for the protection of health”, which
is what Client H wants us to focus on. In the context of
Client H this means to provide medical assistance to patients.
The ones who provide this assistance are the health-care
professionals of Client H.
The medical history of a patient is regarded as both
sensitive and private. At Client H, the medical history of
a patient is stored in an electronic patient record (EPR).
An EPR is “an electronically managed and stored collec-
tion or collocation of recorded/registered information on
a patient in connection with medical assistance” [7]. The
main purpose of an EPR is to communicate information
between health-care professionals that provide medical care
to a patient. To protect the privacy of its patients, Client H
restricts the use of EPRs. In order to comply with Article
8, Client H allows a health-care professional to interfere
with the privacy of a patient only when providing medical
assistance to this patient. Hence, the dealing with the EPRs
within the realms of Client H is essential.
For Client H it is important that every access to
information in an EPR is in accordance with Article 8.
A health-care professional can only access a patient’s
EPR if he/she provides medical assistance to that patient,
and he/she can only access information that is necessary
for the medical assistance provided to the patient. The
information accessed can not be used for any other purpose
than providing medical assistance to patients. Accesses
to information in EPRs not needed for providing medical
assistance would not be in accordance with Article 8. Also,
employees that are not health-care professionals and that
work within the jurisdiction of Client H are not allowed to
access EPRs. Based on the constraints provided by Client
H, we decide to express BO-A8 more precisely as follows:
Precise business objective PBO-A8: C1 ∧ C2 ∧ C3
• Constraint C1: Health-care professionals acting on
behalf of Client H access:
– a patient’s EPR only when providing medical as-
sistance to that patient
– only the information in a patient’s EPR that is
necessary for providing medical assistance to that
patient
• Constraint C2: Health-care professionals acting on
behalf of Client H do not use the information obtained
from a patient’s EPR for any other purpose than pro-
viding medical assistance to that patient.
• Constraint C3: Employees that are not health-care
professionals and that work within the jurisdiction of
Client H do not access EPRs.
Information on the use of EPRs
Private hospital
Blood test analysis
Public hospital 
Client H
Private hospital 
X-ray
OT
EPR system of 
X-ray
EPR system of 
Client H
EPR system of 
Blood test analysis
OT
OTR
OTR
INFO
INFO
INFO
EPR
EPR
EPR
EPR
INFO
OT
OTR
EPRs provided by some health-care institution, 
where Client H is responsible for their handling
Result from performing outsourced task
Outsourced task
Figure 4.
Speciﬁcation of relevant part of business
As indicated by PBO-A8’s deﬁnition, all three constraints
must be fulﬁlled in order for PBO-A8 to be fulﬁlled.
B. Describe relevant part of business (Step 1.2 of ValidKI)
To design key indicators to monitor BO-A8 we need to
understand the part of business that is to comply with BO-
A8 and therefore is to be monitored. Client H has outsourced
some of its medical services to two private hospitals. These
two are referred to as X-ray and Blood test analysis in Fig.
4. The ﬁrst hospital does all the X-ray work for Client H,
while the second hospital does all the blood test analyses.
Client H is not only responsible for its own handling of
EPRs, but also the outsourcing partners’ handling of EPRs,
when they act on behalf of Client H. As shown in Fig. 4,
Client H outsources tasks to the two private hospitals, and
gets in return the results from performing these tasks. All
three health-care institutions use some kind of EPR system
for handling the EPRs. An EPR system is “an electronic
system with the necessary functionality to record, retrieve,
present, communicate, edit, correct, and delete information
in electronic patient records” [7]. These systems use EPRs
provided by several different health-care institutions. As
shown in Fig. 4, these systems are only of interest when
they handle EPRs where Client H is responsible for their
handling. These systems will provide their institutions with
information on the use of EPRs. This information can later
be used in the monitoring. It should be noticed that the model
in Fig. 4 only provides a small overview of the modeling
that is performed.
V. EXTERNAL VALIDATION
In this step we establish a set of key indicators that is
externally valid with respect to the business objective BO-
60
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

A8 by only considering their requirements speciﬁcations. In
order to argue external validity we reformulate the precise
business objective PBO-A8 in terms of key indicators.
Due to lack of space, we only show how we reformulate
constraint C1.
A. Express business objectives using key indicators (Step 2.1
of ValidKI)
At the three health-care institutions, most of the medical
tasks that a health-care professional conducts during a work-
ing day are known in advance. It is known which patients
the professional will treat and what kind of information
the professional will need access to in order to treat the
different patients. When a health-care professional accesses
information in a patient’s EPR it is then possible to check
whether the professional really needs this information. Client
H and the two outsourcing partners have a list for each
health-care professional documenting which patients the
professional is treating and what kind of information the
professional needs for this purpose. These lists are updated
on a daily basis. Many of these updates are automatic. For
instance, when Client H is assigned a new patient, then this
patient is added to the lists of the health-care professionals
that will be treating this patient.
The EPR systems classify an access to information in an
EPR as authorized if the professional needs the information
to do a planned task. Otherwise, the access is classiﬁed
as unauthorized. If it is classiﬁed as unauthorized then it
is possible to check in retrospect whether the access was
necessary. In an emergency situation, for instance when a
patient is having a heart attack, a health-care professional
often needs access to information in an EPR that he/she
was not supposed to access. By checking in retrospect
whether unauthorized accesses were necessary it is possible
to classify the unauthorized accesses into two groups; one for
accesses that were necessary, and for those that were not.
The ﬁrst group is called approved unauthorized accesses,
while the second group is called not approved unauthorized
accesses. All accesses that are classiﬁed as not approved
unauthorized accesses are considered as illegal accesses.
At Client H and the two outsourcing partners, health-care
professionals use smart cards for accessing information in
EPRs. If a card is lost or stolen, the owner must report it as
missing, since missing cards may be used by other health-
care professionals to access EPRs illegally2. When the card
has been registered as missing it can no longer be used.
When reporting it as missing, the last time the card owner
used it before noticing that it was missing is recorded. All
accesses to EPRs that have occurred between this time and
the time it was registered as missing are considered as illegal
accesses.
2Missing smart cards may of course also be misused by other people
that are not health-care professionals, but in the case of constraint C1 we
only focus on health-care professionals.
It seems reasonable to monitor different types of viola-
tions of constraint C1 in order to measure its degree of
fulﬁllment. The violations of interest, for this particular
constraint, are the different types of illegal accesses that
may be performed by health-care professionals. These are
as follows:
1) Not approved unauthorized accesses to EPRs where
the owners of the EPRs are patients of the accessors
2) Not approved unauthorized accesses to EPRs where
the owners of the EPRs are not patients of the acces-
sors
3) Accesses to EPRs from missing or stolen smart cards
It should be noticed that each EPR is owned by a patient,
which is natural since the information stored in the EPR is
about the patient in question.
For each of the types 1, 2, and 3 of illegal accesses we
identify the key indicators K1, K2, and K3, respectively,
where each key indicator measures the ratio of one type of
illegal accesses to all accesses to information in EPRs. In (1)
these key indicators have been used to express C1. Ideally,
Client H would have liked all three ratios to be zero in
order for the constraint to be fulﬁlled. However, in real life
things are not perfect; EPRs may for example be accessed
by accident or a health-care professional may not have a
perfect recollection of when he/she used the smart card the
last time before losing it. After some hesitation, Client H
came up with the intervals documented in (1).
0 ≤ K1 ≤ 0.005 ∧ 0 ≤ K2 ≤ 0.001 ∧
(1)
0 ≤ K3 ≤ 0.0001
The formula in (1) expresses for what key indicator values
constraint C1 is fulﬁlled. By inserting key indicator values
into this formula we get the degree of fulﬁllment of C1. For
instance, if K1 equals 0.006 while the values of K2 and K3
are less than their upper thresholds, then C1 is close to being
fulﬁlled. On the other hand, if K1 equals 0.05 instead, then
C1 is far from being fulﬁlled.
B. Specify key indicator requirements (Step 2.2 of ValidKI)
The key indicators identiﬁed in the previous step only
provide a high-level speciﬁcation of what they should mea-
sure. In Table I a more reﬁned speciﬁcation has been given
for each key indicator. As we can see, each of the three
identiﬁed key indicators is composed of basic key indicators.
The expectation to each basic key indicator is that it is
measured every week and that it measures the total number
for all three health-care institutions. This is necessary since
Client H is responsible for the handling of EPRs not only at
its own premises but also within its two outsourcing partners
when they act on behalf of Client H. In addition, we specify
for each key indicator used in (1) the required level of trust
in the correctness of its values. Together with Client H we
61
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

Table I
KEY INDICATOR REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATIONS
The composite key indicator K1 is the ratio of
the basic key indicator KB1 = “the total number of not approved
unauthorized accesses at Client H, Blood test analysis, and X-ray,
in the period of one week, where the owners of the EPRs are
patients of the accessors”
to
the basic key indicator KB2 = “the total number of accesses to
EPRs at Client H, Blood test analysis, and X-ray in the period of
one week”.
Required level of trust in the correctness of the values of K1: 0.9
The composite key indicator K2 is the ratio of
the basic key indicator KB3 = “the total number of not approved
unauthorized accesses at Client H, Blood test analysis, and X-ray,
in the period of one week, where the owners of the EPRs are not
patients of the accessors”
to
the basic key indicator KB2.
Required level of trust in the correctness of the values of K2: 0.9
The composite key indicator K3 is the ratio of
the basic key indicator KB4 = “the total number of accesses at
Client H, Blood test analysis, and X-ray, in the period of one
week, from smart cards registered as missing”
to
the basic key indicator KB2.
Required level of trust in the correctness of the values of K3: 0.9
assign a trust level of 0.9 to each composite key indicator.
This means that for each composite key indicator we need
to believe that the probability of its values being correct is
at least 0.9, in order for the composite key indicator to be
useful.
C. Evaluate external validity (Step 2.3 of ValidKI)
To evaluate external validity we try in collaboration with
Client H to construct an argument for external validity
based on the reformulated precise business objective and
the requirements speciﬁcations of the key indicators. At this
stage we assume for each key indicator that it is possible
to come up with a realization that is internally valid. We
agree that the identiﬁed key indicators can be used to
monitor possible violations of constraint C1, but we are a
bit uncertain whether we have managed to capture all the
types of illegal accesses that are relevant when measuring
the degree of fulﬁllment of C1. After some discussion, we
conclude that there is fourth type of illegal accesses that
we should also monitor. This type of illegal access may
occur if a health-care professional forgets his/hers smart
card in a terminal used to access information in EPRs.
Other health-care professionals may then use this terminal to
access information in EPRs. An indication of the number of
Table II
ADDITIONAL KEY INDICATOR REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION
The composite key indicator K4 is the ratio of
the basic key indicator KB5 = “the total number of smart cards
at Client H, Blood test analysis, and X-ray, in the period of one
week, left in terminals used to access information EPRs and where
the terminal eventually timed out”
to
the basic key indicator KB6 = “the total number of smart cards
used at Client H, Blood test analysis, and X-ray in the period of
one week”.
Required level of trust in the correctness of the values of K4: 0.9
forgotten smart cards is the number of terminals that timed
out with a smart card inserted.
We update the models created in Step 2.1 and 2.2 in order
to include the new type of illegal accesses. The Boolean
expression in (1) is updated as shown in (2). The key
indicator K4 is the ratio of the number of forgotten smart
cards to the number of smart cards used by all health-care
professionals. The interval that Client H came up with for
K4 is documented in (2). In Table II, Client H’s expectations
to K4 has been documented.
0 ≤ K1 ≤ 0.005 ∧ 0 ≤ K2 ≤ 0.001 ∧
(2)
0 ≤ K3 ≤ 0.0001 ∧ 0 ≤ K4 ≤ 0.002
VI. INTERNAL VALIDATION
Due to lack of space, we only show how the internal
validity of the key indicator K1 is established.
A. Specify key indicator designs (Step 3.1 of ValidKI)
Together with Client H we specify the designs of the
key indicators KB1(X), KB2(X), and K1 in the form of
algorithms, as shown in Table III. KB1(X) and KB2(X)
are computed at each of the three health-care institutions.
The total sum of the three variants of KB1(X) is denoted by
KB1, while the total sum of the three variants of KB2(X) is
denoted by KB2. The algorithms for KB1(X), KB2(X) are
used by all three health-care institutions, while the algorithm
for K1 is only used by Client H. This algorithm takes the
three variants of both KB1(X) and KB2(X) as input.
B. Specify key indicator deployments (Step 3.2 of ValidKI)
Together with Client H we create deployment speciﬁ-
cations for each of the three health-care institutions. Each
speciﬁcation describes how data on which the calculation of
K1 is based is extracted and transmitted. The deployment
speciﬁcation for X-ray in Table IV speciﬁes how different
data is extracted, how often, and by whom; how the data is
transmitted internally at X-ray; and how the data is trans-
mitted to Client H, to who, by whom, and how often. The
62
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

Table III
KEY INDICATOR DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR KB1(X), KB2(X),
AND K1 IN THE FORM OF ALGORITHMS
Algorithm for KB1(X)
Input: LB1(X) = “list of all the unauthorized accesses to EPRs in
the period of one week at X, where the owners of the EPRs are patients
of the accessors”, where X ∈ {Client H, Blood test analysis, X-ray}
Step 1: At X a manual inspection of the elements in LB1(X)
is done. The list elements are partioned into two lists; one list
containing the approved unauthorized accesses and one list containing
the not approved unauthorized accesses. The employee at X partioning
LB1(X) decides whether an unauthorized access should be classiﬁed
as approved or not approved.
Step 2: KB1(X) is calculated by counting the number of list elements
in the list of not approved unauthorized accesses.
Output: KB1(X) = “number of not approved unauthorized accesses
at X in the period of one week, where the owners of the EPRs are
patients of the accessors”
Algorithm for KB2(X)
Input: LB2(X) = “list of all the accesses to EPRs in the period of
one week at X”, where X ∈ {Client H, Blood test analysis, X-ray}
Step 1: An employee at X calculates KB2(X) by counting the
number of list elements in LB2(X).
Output: KB2(X) = “number of accesses to EPRs at X in the period
of one week”
Algorithm for K1
Input: KB1(Client H), KB1(Blood test analysis), KB1(X-ray),
KB2(Client H), KB2(Blood test analysis), and KB2(X-ray)
Step 1: Calculate KB1 as follows:
KB1 = KB1(Client H) + KB1(Blood test analysis) + KB1(X-ray)
Step 2: Calculate KB2 as follows:
KB2 = KB2(Client H) + KB2(Blood test analysis) + KB2(X-ray)
Step 3: Calculate K1 as follows:
K1 = KB1
KB2
Output: K1
deployment speciﬁcation of Blood test analysis is similar,
while the deployment speciﬁcation of Client H differs from
the other two with respect to how data is transmitted. Client
H’s deployment speciﬁcation describes only internal data
transmission.
C. Evaluate internal validity (Step 3.3 of ValidKI)
To evaluate the internal validity of K1 we construct
together with Client H an argument that its design and
deployment speciﬁcations fulﬁlls its requirements speciﬁca-
tion. After consulting both the requirements speciﬁcation, in
Table I, and the realization of K1 we conclude that this is
the case. The algorithm for K1, in Table III, calculates the
composite key indicator exactly as stated in its requirements
speciﬁcation. Also, all the data needed to calculate K1 is
speciﬁed to be extracted and transmitted every week at
all three institutions. This is also in accordance with the
requirements speciﬁcation since it speciﬁes that K1 must be
computed every week and with data from all three institu-
tions. In addition, we discuss with Client H how much trust
Table IV
KEY INDICATOR DEPLOYMENT SPECIFICATION FOR X-RAY THAT
DESCRIBES THE EXTRACTION AND TRANSMISSION OF DATA USED TO
CALCULATE K1
Extraction and transmission of LB1(X-ray)
The EPR system administrator at X-ray creates the list LB1(X-ray)
every week, based on the access log of the EPR system at X-ray, which
contains information on all accesses to information in EPRs at X-ray.
The list is created by extracting all list elements in the access log that
represents an unauthorized access where the owner of the EPR is a
patient of the accessor and where the access occurred during the past
seven days. The list is sent by encrypted email to the EPR monitoring
ofﬁcer at X-ray for further processing.
Extraction and transmission of LB2(X-ray)
The EPR system administrator at X-ray creates the list LB1(X-ray)
every week, based on the access log of the EPR system at X-ray. The
list is created by extracting all list elements in the access log that
represents an access that occurred during the past seven days. The list
is sent by encrypted email to the EPR monitoring ofﬁcer at X-ray for
further processing.
Transmission of KB1(X-ray) and KB2(X-ray)
The EPR monitoring ofﬁcer at X-ray transmits KB1(X-ray) and
KB2(X-ray) every week to the EPR monitoring ofﬁcer at Client H
by the use of an encrypted email.
we can have in the correctness of the different kinds of data
used to compute K1. During this discussion, Client H tells us
that they have more trust in the correctness of the values of
KB1(X-ray) than in the values of KB1(Blood test analysis),
since they believe that the employees at X-ray are more
competent than the employees at Blood test analysis in
classifying unauthorized accesses. Also, Client H ﬁnds it
unlikely that X-ray or Blood test analysis would provide
them with manipulated data. Based on the discussion, we
assign high trust levels to the different kinds of data used
to compute K1 and we combine the individual trust levels
into a single trust level for K1. We conclude that our trust
in the correctness of the values of K1 is at least 0.9.
VII. RELATED WORK
To the best of our knowledge, there exists no other
method with sole focus on design of externally valid key
indicators to monitor the fulﬁllment of business objectives.
There is a tool framework called Mozart [8] that uses a
model driven approach to create monitoring applications that
uses key performance indicators. We do not focus on the
implementation of key indicators, but we specify what is
needed for implementing them. The work in [8] also differs
from our work by not designing indicators from scratch, but
by mining them from a data repository during the design
cycle.
An important part of our method is the assessment of
external validity of the key indicators we design. There
exist other approaches that assess the validity of indicators
in other contexts. For instance, in [9] measurement theory
is used to validate the meaningfulness of IT security risk
indicators. There are also examples of approaches that assess
63
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

the validity of speciﬁc sets of key indicators. For instance, in
[10] the validity of indicators of ﬁrm technological capability
is assessed, while the validity of indicators of patent value
is assessed in [11].
There are several approaches that focus on measuring the
achievement of goals. One example is COBIT [12], which
is a framework for IT management and IT governance. The
framework provides a IT governance model that helps in
delivering value from IT and understanding and managing
the risks associated with IT. In the governance model,
business goals are aligned with IT goals, while metrics, in
the form of leading and lagging indicators [13], and maturity
models are used to measure the achievement of the IT goals.
In our approach we do not focus on the value and risk that
the use of IT has with respect to the business objectives.
In our context, IT is relevant in the sense of providing the
infrastructure necessary for monitoring the part of business
that needs to comply with the business objectives.
Another way to measure the achievement of goals, is
by the use of the Goal-Question-Metric [14], [15] (GQM)
approach. Even though GQM originated as an approach for
measuring achievement in software development, it can also
be used in other contexts where the purpose is to measure
achievement of goals. In GQM, business goals are used to
drive the identiﬁcation of measurement goals. These goals
do not necessarily measure the fulﬁllment of the business
goals, but they should always measure something that is of
interest to the business. Each measurement goal is reﬁned
into questions, while metrics are deﬁned for answering each
question. No speciﬁc method, beyond reviews, is speciﬁed
for validating whether the correct questions and metrics
have been identiﬁed. The data provided by the metrics are
interpreted and analyzed with respect to the measurement
goal, to conclude whether it is achieved or not. One of
the main differences between our method and GQM is
that we characterize completely what it means to achieve
a goal/objective. In GQM, however, this may be a question
of interpretation.
In the literature, key indicators are mostly referred to
in the context of measuring business performance. There
exist numerous approaches for performance measurement.
Some of these are presented in [16]. Regardless of the
approach being used, the organization must translate their
business objectives/goals into a set of key performance
indicators in order to measure performance. An approach
that is widely used [17] is balanced scorecard [3]. This
approach translates the company’s vision into four ﬁnancial
and non-ﬁnancial perspectives. For each perspective a set of
business objectives (strategic goals) and their corresponding
key performance indicators are identiﬁed. However, the
implementation of a balanced scorecard is not necessarily
straight forward. In [18], Neely and Bourne identify several
reasons for the failure of measurement initiatives such as
balanced scorecards. One problem is that the identiﬁed mea-
sures do not measure fulﬁllment of the business objectives,
while another problem is that measures are identiﬁed without
putting much thought into how the data must be extracted
in order to compute the measures. The ﬁrst problem can
be addressed in the external validation step of our method,
while the second problem can be addressed in the internal
validation step.
Much research has been done in the ﬁeld of data quality.
The problem of data quality is also recognized within the
ﬁeld of key indicators [19], [20]. In [21] a survey on
how data quality initiatives are linked with organizational
key performance indicators in Australian organizations is
presented. This survey shows, amongst other things, that a
number of organizations do not have data quality initiatives
linked to their key indicators. Data quality should be taken
into account when designing key indicators, since the use
of key indicators based on poor quality data may lead to
bad business decisions, which again may greatly harm the
organization.
In [22], [23] the problem of key indicators computed from
uncertain events is investigated. The motivation for this work
is to understand the uncertainty of individual key indicators
used in business intelligence. The authors use key indicators
computed from data from multiple domains as examples. In
the papers a model for expressing uncertainty is proposed,
and a tool for visualizing the uncertain key indicators is
presented.
VIII. CONCLUSION
The contribution of this paper is the new method ValidKI
(Valid Key Indicators) for designing key indicators to moni-
tor the fulﬁllment of business objectives. ValidKI facilitates
the design of a set of key indicators that is externally
valid with respect to a business objective, i.e. measures
the degree to which the business or relevant part thereof
complies with the business objective. To the best of our
knowledge, there exists no other method with sole focus
on design of externally valid key indicators to monitor the
fulﬁllment of business objectives. The applicability of our
method has been demonstrated by applying it on an example
case addressing the use of electronic patient records in a
hospital environment.
The demonstration of our method on the example case
shows that the method facilitates the design and assessment
of key indicators for the purpose of measuring the degree
of fulﬁllment of business objectives. Even though ValidKI
has been demonstrated on a realistic example case there
is still a need to apply ValidKI in a real-world industrial
setting in order to evaluate properly to what extent it has
the characteristic mentioned above and to what extent it can
be used to design key indicators for systems shared between
many companies or organizations. By applying ValidKI in
such a setting we will also determine to some extent whether
it is time and resource efﬁcient.
64
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

ValidKI is not restrictive when it comes to designing key
indicators. The only restriction that ValidKI place on the
design of key indicators is that it should be possible to
realize them. This is a necessary restriction since a key
indicator is of no value if it cannot be realized.
In the example case we have used trust levels to specify
how much trust we need to have in the correctness of the
different key indicators in order for them to be useful. In
ValidKI it is up to the analysts to decide how to assess
whether a key indicator has the necessary trust level or
not. Thus, different approaches for reasoning about and
aggregating trust can be applied for coming up with the trust
level of a key indicator. As future work we will investigate
the use of different approaches for reasoning about and
aggregating trust in ValidKI.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research on which this paper reports has been car-
ried out within the DIGIT project (180052/S10), funded
by the Research Council of Norway, and the MASTER
and NESSoS projects, both funded from the European
Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-
2013) under grant agreements FP7-216917 and FP7-256980,
respectively.
REFERENCES
[1] Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, “Deﬁnition of Indi-
cator,” http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/indicator,
2008, Accessed: 2011-04-27 11:00AM CEST.
[2] Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, “Deﬁnition of Indi-
cates,” http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/indicates,
2008, Accessed: 2011-04-27 11:00AM CEST.
[3] R. S. Kaplan and D. P. Norton, “The Balanced Scorecard
– Measures That Drive Performance,” Harvard Business
Review, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 71–79, 1992.
[4] Object Management Group, “Uniﬁed Modeling Language
Speciﬁcation, version 2.0,” 2004.
[5] Council of Europe, “Convention for the Protection of Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms,” 1954.
[6] European Court of Human Rights, “Press Release – Chamber
Judgments 17.07.08,” 17. July 2008.
[7] Helsedirektoratet, “Code of Conduct for Information Se-
curity – The Healthcare, Care, and Social Services Sec-
tor,”
http://www.helsedirektoratet.no/vp/multimedia/archive/
00278/The Code of conduct 278829a.pdf, 2. June 2010,
Accessed: 2011-04-27 11:00AM CEST.
[8] M. Abe, J. Jeng, and Y. Li, “A Tool Framework for KPI
Application Development,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Inter-
national Conference on e-Business Engineering (ICEBE’07).
IEEE Computer Society, 2007, pp. 22–29.
[9] A. Morali and R. Wieringa, “Towards Validating Risk In-
dicators Based on Measurement Theory,” in Proceedings of
First International Workshop on Risk and Trust in Extended
Enterprises.
IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pp. 443–447.
[10] T. Schoenecker and L. Swanson, “Indicators of Firm Techno-
logical Capability: Validity and Performance Implications,”
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, vol. 49,
no. 1, pp. 36–44, 2002.
[11] M. Reitzig, “Improving Patent Valuations for Management
Purposes – Validating New Indicators by Analyzing Applica-
tion Rationales,” Research Policy, vol. 33, no. 6-7, pp. 939–
957, 2004.
[12] IT Governance Institute, “COBIT 4.1,” 2007.
[13] W. Jansen, Directions in Security Metrics Research. DIANE
Publishing, 2010.
[14] V. R. Basili and D. M. Weiss, “A Methodology for Collecting
Valid Software Engineering Data,” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, vol. SE-10, no. 6, pp. 728–738, 1984.
[15] R. V. Solingen and E. Berghout, The Goal/Question/Metric
method: A Practical Guide for Quality Improvement of Soft-
ware Development.
McGraw-Hill International, 1999.
[16] A. Neely, J. Mills, K. Platts, H. Richards, M. Gregory,
M. Bourne, and M. Kennerley, “Performance Measurement
System Design: Developing and Testing a Process-based
Approach,” International Journal of Operation & Production
Management, vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 1119–1145, 2000.
[17] T.
Lester,
“Measure
for
Measure,”
http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/2/31e6b750-16e9-11d9-a89a-00000e2511c8.html#
axzz1ImHJOLmg, 5. October 2004, Accessed: 2011-04-27
11:00AM CEST.
[18] A. Neely and M. Bourne, “Why Measurement Initiatives
Fail,” Measuring Business Excellence, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 3–6,
2000.
[19] S. M. Bird, D. Cox, V. T. Farewell, H. Goldstein, T. Holt, and
P. C. Smith, “Performance Indicators: Good, Bad, and Ugly,”
Journal Of The Royal Statistical Society. Series A (Statistics
in Society), vol. 168, no. 1, pp. 1–27, 2005.
[20] D. M. Eddy, “Performance Measurement: Problems and So-
lutions,” Health Affairs, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 7–25, 1998.
[21] V. Masayna, A. Koronios, J. Gao, “A Framework for the De-
velopment of the Business Case for the Introduction of Data
Quality Program Linked to Corporate KPIs & Governance,”
in Proceedings of the 2009 Fourth International Conference
on Cooperation and Promotion of Information Resources in
Science and Technology (COINFO’09).
IEEE Computer
Society, 2009, pp. 230–235.
[22] C. Rodr´ıguez, F. Daniel, F. Casati, and C. Cappiello, “Com-
puting Uncertain Key Indicators from Uncertain Data,” in
Proceedings of 14th International Conference on Information
Quality (ICIQ’09).
HPI/MIT, 2009, pp. 106–120.
[23] C. Rodr´ıguez, F. Daniel, F. Casati, and C. Cappiello, “Toward
Uncertain Business Intelligence: the Case of Key Indicators,”
Internet Computing, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 32–40, 2010.
65
BUSTECH 2011 : The First International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-160-1

