Governance, Risk and Compliance in BPM - A Survey of Software Tools
Falko Koetter, Monika Kochanowski, Jens Drawehn
Fraunhofer Institute for Industrial Engineering IAO
and University of Stuttgart IAT
Stuttgart, Germany
Email: ﬁrstname.lastname@iao.fraunhofer.de
Abstract—Governance, risk and compliance (GRC) are current
research topics in business process management (BPM). However,
the state of the art in research and practice does not match.
In this work, we investigate the practice of GRC in BPM tools
based on a survey of 14 software providers. Identifying commonly
shared features and components we determine the state of the
art of GRC support in BPM tools. We found software providers
agree in their deﬁnitions of GRC. Today’s tools provide mature
solutions for GRC, displaying a common base of features. This
provides a basis for further research in the area of GRC.
Keywords–business process management; governance; risk;
compliance; state of practice
I.
INTRODUCTION
Compliance to laws and regulations is a growing challenge
in Business Process Management (BPM) [1] and has become
a mature research topic [2]. However, compared to research,
which may tackle the topic of compliance independently,
often rethinking solutions and processes from scratch, com-
mercial software needs to integrate in existing business process
management systems and organizational structures [3]. Thus,
the solution provided by industry and research differ [2]. In
our applied research projects, we cooperate with insurance
companies, banks, etc. active in the German market [4]. To
understand the challenges these companies face in achieving
business process compliance, the current state of practice
and available commercial software needs to be surveyed. In
this work, we summarize the results of a survey of software
tools for business process compliance [5]. Using the results,
we determine the state of the art in Governance, risk and
compliance (GRC) in business process management tools in
the German market.
The remainder of this work is structured as follows. Related
work investigating the state of the art in science and practice
is described in Section II. In Section III, we describe the focus
of the survey and how it was chosen. Section IV describes the
methodology of the survey. In Section V, the role of GRC in
the BPM lifecycle is described. The results of the survey are
given in Section VI, both regarding the software providers as
well as the tool support for GRC. Finally, a conclusion and
outlook are given in Section VII.
II.
RELATED WORK
In [2], we conducted preliminary interviews with different
stakeholders in business process compliance: experts from a
BPM department, from a compliance and law department, par-
ticipants at a compliance conference and BPM tool providers.
We used these interviews to construct the questionnaire [6]
for the survey summarized in this work. Especially we found
a divide between the feature set offered by tool providers
and the features and tools used by the other stakeholders.
While practitioners showed an organizational divide between
IT, BPM and compliance departments, tool providers divided
their functionality in GRC.
Two studies regarding the state of the art of compliance in
German insurance companies have been conducted in 2010 [7]
and 2013 [8]. Both studies ﬁnd a lack of integration between
compliance and other processes. Only 11 percent and 7 percent
respectively state a full integration with other processes. In an-
other survey [9], 93 percent of insurance companies state that
their compliance activities are not or only partially supported
by IT.
[1] provides an analysis of emerging IT challenges for com-
pliance management by conducting interviews with Australian
compliance experts. Challenges identiﬁed include the high cost
and the difﬁculty of providing evidence for compliance. A need
for affordable software tools is identiﬁed, which not only tackle
compliance in BPM but also the communication to and among
staff as well as the documentation of compliance knowledge
and the incentivization of a compliance culture.
[3] presents the results of an exploratory study of 8 GRC
software providers. The survey found differing understanding
of GRC between the vendors and found solutions to differ
in their degree of integration. As marketable software must
be compatible to existing enterprise structures, it differs from
GRC research, which may propose more sweeping changes
and rethink GRC outside of the constraints of the status quo.
Forrester publishes a periodic report [10] on GRC plat-
forms. For this, 66 GRC customers were surveyed, almost
half of which use more than one GRC platform. Use cases
among customers vary extremely, leading to tools with broad
capabilities. Though users found beneﬁt in the GRC tools,
overall satisfaction with end user interfaces, dashboards and
analytics was low. 18 software providers were studied and
classiﬁed by current offerings, strategy and market presence,
though the classiﬁcation was not broken down to a feature
level. Compared to the companies in this work, the chosen
companies were larger global players and not limited to BPM
tool providers.
Similarly, Gartner published multiple studies in the area
of GRC. However, Gartner decided in 2014 to reset their
approach to GRC, focusing on use cases and real life use [11]
instead of features. Similarly to this work, they found feature
sets and presentation to be similar and use this reset to better
differentiate between tools.
III.
FOCUS OF THE SURVEY
During preliminary interviews we discovered that Com-
pliance as a general term does not fully match the features
software tools provide [2]. Therefore, we extended the scope
to GRC. In [12], a frame of reference for GRC is constructed,
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

in which GRC is deﬁned as an integrated, holistic approach to
organization-wide governance, risk and compliance ensuring
that an organization acts ethically correct and in accordance
with its risk appetite, internal policies and external regulations
through the alignment of strategy, processes, technology and
people, thereby improving efﬁciency and effectiveness‘ [12].
This frame of reference is used to deﬁne the focus of the
survey, as shown in Figure 1. While GRC encompasses all
aspects of an organization, the survey focuses on the aspects
relevant to processes, though this distinction is not clear-cut.
Governance in the context of BPM includes the governance of
processes and the governance of IT which is used to realize
these processes. Risk management is realized by internal
controls or enterprise risk management (ERM). Compliance of
business processes is often part of BPM products or realized
by extensions or integrated components.
IV.
METHODOLOGY
We invited all known BPM software providers active in the
German market to participate in our survey. 28 providers par-
took in a general survey of BPM tools [13]. Of these providers,
14 opted to partake in an additional in-depth GRC survey. A
full survey describing each provider in detail is available [5]
in German. The providers were sent an online questionnaire
containing 46 structured and unstructured questions regarding
the software tool and the software provider. All 14 providers
fully completed the questionnaire.
The full questionnaire can be found at [6] (in German).
The results of the questionnaire are listed in detail and
analyzed in the GRC survey [5]. This work summarizes the
ﬁndings of the survey to determine the state of the art among
all 14 providers.
V.
GRC IN THE BPM LIFECYCLE
The BPM lifecycle shows the phases a business process
goes through organized in a cycle to indicate that activities are
performed continuously to optimize the process [14]. Figure 2
shows the lifecycle and GRC activities associated to each
phase, which will be explained in the following section.
Governance spans the whole process lifecycle, prescribing
frameworks, templates and best practices for all steps and
artifacts. During process redesign and implementation different
versions of a process need to be tracked as well as protected
from unauthorized access and changes. Before a new version
is implemented, a sign-off process can take place to make sure
the new version is authorized.
In the area of risk management, during process discovery
and process analysis risks need to be identiﬁed and assessed.
These risks can be modeled and visualized during process (re)-
design to make informed design decisions. This includes the
deﬁnition of internal controls for risk management. During
process execution risks need to be tracked and if necessary
internal controls need to counteract occurring risks. Finally,
the results of these activities need to be stored in a veriﬁable
and traceable way, to provide data for analysis and reporting.
Compliance requirements are deﬁned during process (re)-
design and enforced at the appropriate parts of the process
lifecycle. Requirements can be enforced during process (re)-
design, implementation and execution. Requirement fulﬁllment
needs to be monitored and stored to provide documentation and
reports as well as provide a basis for analysis.
During our research we identiﬁed four types of BPM
software supporting GRC functionality.
•
Process modeling tools allow creating process mod-
els, but provide little functionality beyond that. In
comparison to other tools, they have a low barrier to
entry and are used if the main task is documenting
processes. They may be used to model relevant risks
and internal controls and to document compliance
requirements already covered within the process mod-
els. Regarding governance, these tools provide process
model management support, for example templates,
sign-off and version control.
•
Process analytics tools allow analyzing processes
and may contain functionality for process simulation
and optimization. These tools often contain process
modeling functionality or are bundled with a process
modeling tool to provide models as a basis for analy-
sis.
•
Business process management tools or BPM sys-
tems [14] support the whole process lifecycle includ-
ing process execution. Typically process models are
used to create and run process instances. This offers
extensive possibilities to support internal controls, risk
tracking, enforcement and monitoring of compliance
requirements. Additionally, BPM tools can fully sup-
port governance processes. Some BPM tools may not
offer a full execution environment but rather provide
parts of the described functionality - for example by
offering internal controls for a process executed by
other means.
•
Workﬂow management systems are focused on pro-
cess execution. Similar to BPM tools they use process
models to instantiate and run processes. Other parts
of the process lifecycle are supported scarcely or not
at all.
Note that the survey was limited to BPM providers, which
is why dedicated GRC tools without a BPM component are
not covered by the survey.
VI.
RESULTS
In this section, we give the results of the survey to
illuminate the state of the art in business process management
software regarding GRC.
A. Participants
All 14 participants are business process management soft-
ware providers active in the German market, which offer GRC
functionality as part of their tools. Of these 14 participants,
6 are companies with less than 100 employees, while 8 are
companies with 100 or more employees.
For 6 providers, BPM is the only business segment. For
5 providers, it is the most important business segment. For
the remaining 3 providers, it is one of several important
business segments. All 14 companies offer BPM software
and all but one additionally offer BPM consulting services.
6 companies offer other software. 6 companies offer other
consulting services.
During the survey, companies were questioned since when
compliance is a focus of their activities. All companies except
one started focusing on compliance after the year 2000. 9 com-
panies named a date between 2000 and 2009, 4 companies
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Governance 
Risk 
Management 
Compliance 
integrated 
holistic 
organisation-wide 
Operations managed 
and supported 
through GRC 
ethically correct 
behaviour 
improved efficiency 
improved 
effectiveness 
internal control 
BPM 
products 
IT governance 
process 
governance 
integration / 
extension 
activities in 
BPM 
internal policies 
risk appetite 
external regulations 
Processes 
Technology 
People 
Strategy 
Figure 1. Framework for GRC with focus areas of survey (bolded, grey). Based on [12]
Process discovery 
Process analysis 
Process redesign 
Process 
implementation 
Process execution 
Process 
monitoring and 
controlling 
Process 
identification 
Modelling and 
visualization of 
risks 
Risk tracking 
Analysis, storage 
traceability and 
reporting 
Definition of 
internal control 
Execution of 
internal control 
Documentation 
of compliance 
requirements 
Enforcement of 
compliance 
requirements 
Frameworks 
Templates 
Best Practices 
Process 
versioning, acess 
rights, sign-off 
Identification of 
risks 
Assessment of 
risks 
Figure 2. GRC activities in the process lifecycle. Based on [14]
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

named a date 2010 or later. This indicates a rising demand
for compliance functionality in business process management
tools within the last 10 years.
B. Software tools
In this section, a general classiﬁcation of the surveyed
software tools is given to illustrate on which areas the software
providers focus.
Regarding the BPM lifecycle (see Section V), all software
providers support process discovery and process analysis. 9
providers support business process simulation. 11 providers
support process execution, of which 7 provide a workﬂow
engine. Process monitoring is supported by 9 providers.
Regarding tool classiﬁcation, 3 software tools can be
classiﬁed as process analytics tools, one can be classiﬁed
as a workﬂow management system and 10 can be classiﬁed
as business process management tools. It is to note that the
bundling of software between providers varies. Some provide
a single feature-rich solution, while others provide a collection
of independent components that work together.
Looking at GRC, all software providers focus on all three
areas. This indicates a trend to integrated GRC solutions.
In the survey, companies were allowed to indicate classes
of business they focus on. However, no company named a
special focus. This indicates that software tools are general
purpose and not tailored to a speciﬁc industry.
C. Governance
To get the view of software providers on governance, we
asked them for their deﬁnition of governance. Most providers
see governance as a task for the enterprise as a whole,
encompassing other topics besides process, e.g., organizational
structure, roles, responsibilities and documentation. Gover-
nance is a leadership task, providing and enforcing rules and
regulation frameworks as well as best practices.
Software components for governance encompass process
organization (process versioning, access rights, sign-off, etc.),
modeling and quality guidelines, modeling support and model
checking, documentation and change management.
We identiﬁed the following software features as state of
the art, which is supported by almost all software providers:
•
Built in collections of best practices regarding model-
ing guidelines, etc.
•
Creation and management of custom modeling guide-
lines
•
Automated checking of process models using model-
ing guidelines
•
Process portal or similar platform for collaborative
business process management
•
Support of management processes (e.g., sign-off)
•
Version management of process models
As shown in Figure 2, Governance in BPM focuses on
process design and implementation, aiding process modeling,
collaboration and model management throughout the lifecycle.
Governance also includes a knowledge management compo-
nent, helping to communicate guidelines, templates and best
practices.
Other features supported by some tools are:
•
Process model templates and fragments enabling re-
use
•
Assisted modeling (automatic layout, model valida-
tion, etc.)
•
Variant management of process models
•
Governance dashboards
•
Link of BPM and organizational structure
Several frameworks related to governance exist and may be
used separately or in conjunction [15]. The following standards
are most commonly supported by software providers:
•
Control Objectives for Information and Related Tech-
nology (COBIT) [16] is supported by 8 of 14 providers
•
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Tread-
way Commission framework (COSO) [17] is sup-
ported by 4 of 14 providers
•
Information
Technology
Infrastructure
Library
(ITIL) [18] is supported by 4 of 14 providers
•
International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
9000/9001 is supported by 4 of 14 providers
Other supported standards include ISO 27001, ISO 31000,
European
Foundation
for
Quality
Management
(EFQM)
model, Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) and
Software Process Improvement and Capability Determination
(SPICE).
Several features to support these standards are included in
most software tools:
•
Checklists for requirements, etc.
•
Reference process models
•
Reference key performance indicators
•
Linking of modeling elements to rules and require-
ments
•
Linking of management processes to rules and require-
ments
•
Support for reviews and audits
To summarize, all software providers focus on process
governance, but link it to other areas of governance as well.
The basic feature set is homogenous among the tools. Re-
garding governance frameworks the support varies among
tools, indicating there is no dominant established governance
standard, though a further investigation of industry sectors may
give a clearer picture of standard proliferation.
D. Risk
Similarly to governance, we asked the software providers
for a deﬁnition of risk management, showing a common view
between all providers. Risk management is itself seen as a
process by the software providers, including risk identiﬁcation,
assessment and management. Often used words include control
and inspection measure. Aside from general risk management
in the enterprise, providers emphasize the linking of risks to
processes.
Software components for risk management include risk
modeling and visualization, risk tracking and monitoring, risk
analysis, documentation and reporting and risk control.
We investigated four areas of risk management to identify
software features.
In the ﬁeld of risk modeling and visualization, the follow-
ing features are included in most software tools:
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

•
Risk modeling
•
Linking of risks to process activities
•
Linking of risks to other modeling elements
•
Linking of risks to other objects (e.g., roles)
•
Visualization of risks within process models
•
Documentation of risks in a table
•
Visualization of risks in a risk matrix [19]
•
Hierarchical aggregation of risks
Other features supported by some software tools include
other visualizations (e.g., heat maps, dashboards, customized
reports and portlets), import and export of risks in external
risk management systems, integration of risk and document
management. This indicates three main activities. First, the
risks are identiﬁed and modeled, then they are located within
the process and ﬁnally they are visualized and documented.
In the ﬁeld of risk tracking and monitoring, the following
features are included in most software tools:
•
Management of risk amounts and probability of oc-
currence
•
Questionnaires to assist in risk tracking
•
Monitoring of risks during process execution
•
Triggering of risk management processes for certain
risks
Other supported features by some software tools include
risk monitoring dashboards, management of risk metadata
(e.g., mandatory and optional information, assets, etc.) and link
to response management.
In the ﬁeld of risk analysis, documentation and reporting,
the following features are included in most software tools:
•
Creation of risk reports
•
Audit-proof storage of reports
•
Export of risk reports
Other supported features include risk visualization and
analysis (in portals, cockpits, dashboards, etc.), creation of a
data warehouse and export functionality of raw data.
All software tools include internal controls, which allow
companies to control their risks by deﬁning and implementing
controls, audits, countermeasures, etc.
For the deﬁnition and documentation of internal controls,
the following features are included in all software tools:
•
Deﬁnition of controls
•
Assignment of controls to risks
•
Assignment of controls to processes
•
Deﬁnition of roles for internal controls
•
Visualization of controls within a process model
Most tools support Visualization of risks and controls in
a risk control matrix. Additional features supported by some
tools are the assignment of control tests and results to con-
trols and integration of document management, organizational
structure and response management.
11 of 14 tools support the execution of internal controls.
The following features are supported by most of these tools:
•
Performing controls in the process execution environ-
ment
•
Scheduling and performing controls outside of the
execution environment
•
Audit-proof records of performed controls
•
Analysis of performed controls
To summarize, risk management is supported throughout
the process lifecycle, though some tools do not provide risk
management support during process execution. All tools con-
tain internal controls as an integral part of risk management
in BPM.
E. Compliance
Similar to the other topics, we asked the software providers
for a deﬁnition of compliance. All providers deﬁne compliance
as conformance to rules and regulations. Aside from process
compliance they mention other parts of the enterprise, e.g.,
personnel, culture, strategy, goals, responsibilities and compo-
nents. Compliance is not seen as an isolated BPM topic, but
as an encompassing task throughout the enterprise.
Compliance features can be divided in two categories.
Deﬁnition of compliance requirements and checking of com-
pliance requirements. It is to note that checking may mean
both the enforcement of a requirement or the monitoring
of a requirement, depending on the tool and the kind of
requirement. For example, structural requirements to a process
model can be enforced, while timing requirements during
execution can only be monitored.
The following features regarding compliance requirement
deﬁnition are included in most software tools:
•
Deﬁnition of compliance requirements for business
processes
•
Management of requirement documents (regulatory
texts, etc.)
•
Linking of compliance requirements to documents
•
Linking of compliance requirements to process steps
•
Linking of compliance requirements to other elements
•
Documentation of compliance requirements in a table
•
Visualization of compliance requirements within pro-
cess models
•
Audit-proof record of compliance requirements and
changes to them
Similarly to risk management, three main activities can be
identiﬁed. Compliance requirements are derived from regula-
tory documents and deﬁned, then located within the process
or related artifacts and ﬁnally documented for further modiﬁ-
cation as well as for audits.
Regarding compliance checking, not all tools support auto-
mated compliance monitoring, which seems to be not part of
the state of the art. However, most tools support compliance
enforcement with the following features:
•
Creation and processing of checklists for compliance
requirements
•
Templates and fragments for common compliance
requirements
•
Visualization of current compliance status
•
Aggregated visualization of overall compliance status
•
Generation of compliance reports
This shows that automated compliance enforcement is not
state of the art, as manual compliance enforcement using
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

checklists is part of most tools. This may indicate both a lack
of process automation as well as the difﬁculty of automated
requirement checking. In our talks with users, they noted
difﬁculties in deﬁning precise compliance requirements from
laws as well as in process automation, as processes are not
yet fully documented [2]. Checklists can provide an interim
solution to be compliant.
9 of 14 software providers offer a business rules engine,
either as part of their tool or as a separate component. Business
rules may be used to automatically monitor, enforce and
document compliance requirements, but necessitate automated
business processes.
8 of 14 software providers provide built-in rulesets for
regulatory texts. 3 providers support Basel 2/3 [20], 3 providers
support the SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 (SOX) [21]. Other
rulesets are only supported by single providers. As no provider
has named classes of business they specialize on, this may
indicate a high level of customization in the compliance
rulesets of their customers so built-in rulesets are of limited
use.
To summarize, the deﬁnition of compliance requirements in
the context of documents and business processes is supported
by all software tools. Regarding compliance checking, the
state of the art in compliance checking is more uneven.
Some solution components help model compliant processes
and check compliance manually (e.g., by checklists). For
automated compliance checking, business rules engines are the
prevalent solution.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
In this work, we summarized a survey of 14 BPM software
providers active in the German market. This survey investi-
gated the support of GRC in BPM tools.
Support of GRC in business processes is not only a mature
research topic, but has also been incorporated in software
tools. Software providers showed a common understanding of
GRC, providing similar deﬁnitions for all three terms. Gov-
ernance is supported by a homogenous feature set, indicating
a proven approach in practice. Risk management is supported
throughout the BPM life cycle with internal controls as an
integral component. Deﬁnition of compliance requirements is
supported uniformly, but compliance checking is realized more
unevenly with business rules engines and checklists as the
prevalent solutions.
Overall, the industry provides mature tools for handling
GRC in business process management. While state of the art
in industry can be a helpful indicator for scientiﬁc research, it
alone does not sufﬁce because the questions and constraints for
industry and science are different. Examples are the questions
of interoperability and integration, which were not covered by
the survey.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work published in this article was partially funded by
the Co.M.B. project of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) under the promotional reference SP 448/27-1. The
authors would like to thank all participants.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. Syed Abdullah, S. Sadiq, and M. Indulska, “Emerging challenges in
information systems research for regulatory compliance management,”
in Advanced Information Systems Engineering, ser. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, B. Pernici, Ed.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010,
vol. 6051, pp. 251–265.
[2]
M. Kochanowski, C. Fehling, F. Koetter, F. Leymann, and A. Weis-
becker, “Compliance in bpm today - an insight into experts’ views and
industry challenges,” in Proceedings of INFORMATIK 2014. GI, 2014.
[3]
N. Racz, E. Weippl, and A. Seufert, “Governance, risk & compliance
(grc) software-an exploratory study of software vendor and market
research perspectives,” in System Sciences (HICSS), 2011 44th Hawaii
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–10.
[4]
F. Koetter, M. Kochanowski, and M. Kintz, “Leveraging Model-Driven
Monitoring for Event-Driven Business Process Control,” in 1. Workshop
zur Ereignismodellierung und verarbeitung im Geschaeftsprozessman-
agement (EMOV).
to appear, 2014.
[5]
M. Kochanowski, J. Drawehn, F. Koetter, and T. Renner, Compliance
in Business Processes - Business Process Management Tools 2014 (in
German).
Fraunhofer Verlag, 2014.
[6]
Kochanowski,
Monika
and
Koetter,
Falko,
“Compliance
in
Business
Process
Management
(in
German),”
2014,
last
accessed
29.01.2015.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.e-
business.iao.fraunhofer.de/de/projekte/beschreibung/compliance.html
[7]
BDO
AG
Wirtschaftspr¨ufungsgesellschaft,
“Compliance
Survey
of
Insurance
Companies
(in
German),”
2010,
last
accessed
29.01.2015.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.bdo.de/uploads/media/BDO Compliance Studie.pdf
[8]
——,
“Compliance
Study
in
Insurance
Com-
panies
(in
German),”
2013,
last
accessed
29.01.2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.bdo.de/uploads/media/-
BDO Compliance Studie Versicherung web.pdf
[9]
BearingPoint
GmbH,
“Agenda
2015
:
Compliance
Man-
agement
as
growing
challenge
for
insurance
companies
(in
German),”
2012,
last
accessed
29.01.2015.
[On-
line].
Available:
http://www.bearingpoint.com/de-de/7-4788/agenda-
2015-compliance-als-stetig-wachsende-herausforderung/
[10]
C. McClean, N. Hayes, and R. Murphy, “The forrester wave: Gover-
nance, risk, and compliance platforms, q1 2014,” 2014.
[11]
Proctor,
Paul,
“Gartner
Resets
Approach
to
GRC,”
2014,
last
accessed 29.01.2015. [Online]. Available: http://blogs.gartner.com/paul-
proctor/2014/02/03/gartner-resets-approach-to-grc/
[12]
N. Racz, E. Weippl, and A. Seufert, “A frame of reference for research
of integrated governance, risk and compliance (grc),” in Communica-
tions and Multimedia Security.
Springer, 2010, pp. 106–117.
[13]
J. Drawehn, M. Kochanowski, and F. Koetter, Business Process Man-
agement Tools 2014.
Fraunhofer Verlag, 2014.
[14]
M. Dumas, M. La Rosa, J. Mendling, and H. A. Reijers, Fundamentals
of business process management.
Springer.
[15]
J. J. S. Pe˜na, E. Fern´andez Vicente, and A. Moratilla Oca˜na, “Itil,
cobit and efqm: Can they work together?” International Journal of
Combinatorial Optimization Problems and Informatics, vol. 4, no. 1,
2012, pp. 54–64.
[16]
ISACA, “COBIT 5: A Business Framework for the Governance
and Management of Enterprise IT,” 2014, last accessed 29.01.2015.
[Online]. Available: http://www.isaca.org/cobit
[17]
COSO, “Internal Control - Integrated Framework,” 2013, last accessed
29.01.2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.coso.org/ic.htm
[18]
AXELOS, “Information Technology Infrastructure Library,” 2014, last
accessed 29.01.2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.axelos.com/itil
[19]
P. R. Garvey and Z. F. Lansdowne, “Risk matrix: an approach for
identifying, assessing, and ranking program risks,” Air Force Journal
of Logistics, vol. 22, no. 1, 1998, pp. 18–21.
[20]
Bank for International Settlements, “International regulatory framework
for banks (Basel III),” 2014, last accessed 29.01.2015. [Online].
Available: http://www.bis.org/bcbs/basel3.htm
[21]
P. Sarbanes, “Sarbanes-oxley act of 2002,” in The Public Company
Accounting Reform and Investor Protection Act. Washington DC: US
Congress, 2002.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

