There is More to Intelligent Business Than Business Intelligence 
 
Janne J. Korhonen 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Aalto University School of Science 
Espoo, Finland 
janne.korhonen@aalto.fi 
Isabel Page 
Fraser Page 
Uebersyren, Luxembourg 
ipage@pt.lu
 
 
Abstract — Business Intelligence (BI) purports to support 
decision-making with better insights into the organization’s 
environment and sophisticated analysis techniques of ‘Big 
Data’ help make more effective use of the vast data for 
competitive advantage. Given adequate sponsorship, approval, 
and funding from the top level, business intelligence and 
analytics (BI/A) technologies are also purported to help in 
organizational transformations. However, BI/A come with a 
number of inherent limitations. The amount of organized data 
is relatively small and these technologies do not adequately 
account for the social and psychological aspects of the 
transformation. They provide decision-makers only with 
lagging indicators – view on past and present performance – 
and inform strategy with extrapolations of trends, at best. 
However, organizational transformation calls for forward-
looking transformational thinking and human discretion that 
can be assisted with technology only to a limited extent. In this 
paper, we posit the potential consequences of not taking these 
limitations into account. We will also discuss how the business 
intelligence and analytics technologies on one hand, and the 
social technology of  ‘presencing,’ on the other, could be 
synergistically combined to support integrated organizational 
transformation. 
Keywords — business intelligence; analytics; big data; 
organizational transformation; Theory U; change management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Information on the operational environment is a 
fundamental need for human beings and organizations alike 
[1]. The capability that enables monitoring changes in an 
organization’s environment is called Business Intelligence 
(BI). The term usually refers to technologies and techniques 
for gathering, aggregating, storing, accessing, analyzing and 
utilizing data to support decision-making, but it can also be 
seen as an overall process that provides the business with 
better insights into the environment [2]. 
However, the lack of relevant information appears to be 
less of a critical issue for managers than an over-abundance 
of irrelevant information [3]. Six out of ten respondents in a 
global executive study [4] agreed that their organization has 
more data than it can use effectively. Recently, Big Data – 
“large pools of data that can be captured, communicated, 
aggregated, stored, and analyzed” [5] – has been seen as a 
way to cope with the growing data deluge and to harness 
computational power to productivity improvements and 
innovation. It is seen as the next source of competitive 
differentiation and advantage [6][7], and, indeed, top-
performing organizations use analytics five times more than 
lower performers [4]. 
Business Intelligence and Analytics (BI/A) technology 
alone is not the silver bullet that would enable requisite 
strategic agility. The value of information technology (IT) 
stems increasingly from the capability, skills and motivation 
of people to leverage the technology. However, many 
companies pay only marginal managerial attention to this 
human capital, which, as a result, is misused, wasted or lost 
[8]. Consequently, “today’s managers are trying to 
implement third-generation strategies through second-
generation organizations with first-generation management” 
[8]. 
Sustainable organizations balance public interest with 
financial returns and place society and people at the core of 
organizational purpose [9]. As per this institutional logic, 
leaders need to persuade and motivate others in their 
organizations to make transformation a reality. High 
performing leaders do this by combining external data on 
competitive environment and industry as well as internal data 
in the form of gut feeling derived from experience and 
wisdom. Using gut feelings combined with strong systems 
thinking, self-awareness of their own blind spots and 
limitations [10], and emotional awareness of others, enlarges 
and enriches how leaders set and execute competitive 
strategy. 
A social technology is “a replicable set of procedures that 
is designed to produce an effect upon socially important 
behaviours of relevant participants under a variety of real life 
conditions” [11]. Social technologies may be used to enable 
the development of skills to facilitate ‘participatory 
competence’ [12].  
Turbulence is a relative condition [13]: different 
organizations 
experience 
threatening 
environmental 
conditions differently, depending on the amount and variety 
of resources and skills they have available – their adaptive 
capacity – for managing those conditions. Theory U [14] is a 
social technology that, in our view, will help recognize and 
navigate turbulence – misalignment between the system’s 
adaptive capacity and complexity of its environment. 
In this paper, we set out to answer the following research 
questions: 
1. What is the role of BI/A capability in organizational 
change and transformation? 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

2. What are the limits of BI/A technologies in 
supporting 
organizational 
change 
and 
transformation? 
3. How can these limits be mitigated or overcome 
through the application of an integrative social 
technology, in general, and Theory U, in particular? 
Our paper is conceptual and exploratory in nature. It is 
intended to provide a step towards deeper understanding of 
the 
nature 
of 
BI/A 
capability, 
its 
socio-technical 
underpinnings, and its role in organizational change and 
transformation. The contribution of our paper lies primarily 
in the insights into the potentially consequential role of 
integrative social technologies such as Theory U in 
complementing the use of BI/A technologies to the ends of 
organizational change and transformation. 
The structure of the paper is as follows: In Section II, we 
present three progressively more advanced capabilities of 
using BI/A technologies. In Section III, we discuss Theory U 
as a social technology for transformational change: process 
and communication tools that help translate strategy to 
implementation. In Section IV, we review Babüroðlu’s [25] 
framework of maladaptive responses to turbulence. Drawing 
on the prior sections and some further literature, Sections V 
through 
VII 
address 
our 
three 
research 
questions, 
respectively. Finally, in Section VIII we briefly draw 
conclusions, discuss the implications of our conjectures, and 
call for further research. 
II. 
LEVELS OF BI/A CAPABILITY 
LaValle and his colleagues [4] report the results of IBM 
Institute for Business Value survey of nearly 3,000 
executives, managers and analysts working across more than 
30 industries and 100 countries, in which they identified 
three distinctive levels of capability in organizations’ 
analytics prowess: 
1) Aspirational. These organizations are focusing on 
efficiency or automation of existing processes. The primary 
driver is that of cutting costs. 
2) Experienced. These organizations look beyond cost 
management. With some analytic experience under the belt, 
they are developing better analytics practices and beginning 
to optimize their organizations. 
3) Transformed. These organizations are the analytics 
competitors [6] that use analytics as a competitive 
differentiator. Having learnt to organize the necessary 
elements 
– 
people, 
processes, 
and 
tools 
– 
these 
organizations are focused on driving customer profitability. 
Relatedly, Watson [15][16] identifies three typical 
‘targets’ of BI initiatives, differing in “their focus; scope; 
level of sponsorship, commitment, and required resources; 
technical architecture; impact on personnel and business 
processes; and benefits” [16]: 
1) The development of independent BI applications, 
each with its own users, software and data sources. These 
point solutions are often data marts that cater for a specific 
departmental need, and their sponsorship, approval, funding, 
and governance also occur at the departmental level. 
2) The creation of enterprise-wide infrastructure that 
provides more consistent decision-support data and supports 
current and future BI needs. A critical component in this 
infrastructure is a data warehouse that has impact and 
creates benefits throughout the organization. Accordingly, 
senior 
business 
management 
provides 
sponsorship, 
approval, and funding for the initiative. 
3) Organizational transformation, where the data 
warehouse is leveraged to the business strategy and to 
transform how the business competes in the marketplace. 
Accordingly, sponsorship, approval, and funding of the 
initiative originate at the highest executive levels. 
We view that the type of capability developed and targets 
of business intelligence selected in an organization, whether 
by accident or intention, will strongly impact its 
transformational outcomes.  
III. 
THEORY U: SOCIAL TECHNOLOGY FOR 
ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATION  
Scharmer’s [14] Theory U, as the social technology of 
presencing, is about profound transformation: personal, 
social and global, and is therefore our social technology of 
choice. The deep focus of Theory U is on self-awareness of 
personal blind spots and the building of empathy combined 
with the practical development of sensing.  This focus sits 
inside a framework that takes into account levels of attention 
paid to the exterior (fields of attention), levels of learning 
and change, and the reduction and elimination of 
pathological anti-practice. This approach provides a far more 
comprehensive and integrated model for change than other 
popular organizational transformational models such as 
Appreciative Inquiry [17]. In our view, Theory U is also 
inexpensive, effective, decentralized, flexible, sustainable, 
simple and compatible with existing customs, beliefs and 
values. As such, it is particularly useful as a social 
technology [11].  
Originally developed by Friedrich Glasl and Dirk 
Lemson as the U-procedure [18], Theory U, in its current 
form, has come to be understood in three ways: as a 
framework, as a method for leading and embedding profound 
organizational co-creative change and as a way of being, 
connecting to the more authentic aspects of our higher self 
[19]. 
Theory U is based on the premise that we cannot 
transform the behavior of systems unless we transform the 
quality of awareness and attention that people apply to their 
actions within these systems, both individually and 
collectively. 
Scharmer 
[14] 
maintains 
that 
through 
‘presencing’ – being in touch with the inner place or source 
from which attention and intention originate – individuals, 
teams, organizations and global systems alike are able to 
raise to a higher level of operation to seize the highest future 
possibilities that ‘want to emerge.’ The deepest level of 
transformation not only reflects on what has happened in the 
past, but draws from a more generative and more authentic 
presence in the moment linked with the individual’s or 
organization’s highest future potential. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

A. Field structures of attention 
Theory U is based on seven field structures of attention 
in an U-shape (Figure 1; [14]): 
1) Downloading. Attention is guided by habitual 
patterns that go unquestioned. Existing patterns of behavior 
are collectively reproduced. Stopping downloading is the 
precondition for entering the U process.  
2) Seeing. Attention moves from the center of 
organization (i.e., the system of habits and routines) to the 
periphery, i.e. to the edge of the organizational boundary, 
which allows the observer to become aware of what is 
happening outside. 
3) Sensing. 
Attention 
moves 
from 
inside 
the 
organization – looking at the field – to outside the 
organizational boundaries, where perception begins to 
happen ‘from the whole field.’ The system being observed 
is no longer seen as something external ‘out there,’ but it 
also includes the observer as part of the system. 
4) Presencing. Attention shifts to the source of the 
highest future possibility that is seeking to emerge. The 
boundaries between the presence of the past (current field) 
and the presence of the future (the emerging field of the 
future) collapse. 
5) Crystallizing. Attention is sustained in the source and 
one starts to operate from it. Crystallizing denotes the first 
step in the presencing journey (connecting and operating 
from source): clarifying vision and intention from the 
highest future possibility. “We put into specific language 
what it is that we want to create.” (p. 192). 
6) Prototyping. The future is explored by doing and 
experimenting. The field structure of attention deepens, as 
the holding space advances the letting come process from 
envisioning to enacting. 
7) Performing. Attention is focused on how presencing 
embodies itself into everyday practices within the larger 
institutional ecology. The new pattern that started to shape 
at the bottom of the U is now fully unfolded. 
 
Figure 1. The U Process [14] 
B. Four levels of learning and change 
Figure 1 depicts the four levels of (organizational) 
learning and change [14]. 
1) 
Reacting. Response to change happens in the 
context of existing habits and routines [14]. This is 
essentially developmental change [20], which represents 
improvement of what is already known or practiced: an 
existing skill, method, or performance standard. The new 
state is an enhancement of the old state rather than a 
radically new one. The required decisions are likely to be 
‘programmed’ [21] – repetitive and routine – and can hence 
be relatively readily supported by technology. 
2) 
Redesigning. At this level, the underlying structure 
and processes are changed [14]. Change is transitional [20]: 
the old state of the system must be dismantled and 
emotionally let go of and the new state clearly created to 
replace the old one. However, the transition between as-is 
and to-be states is not as straightforward as in developmental 
change and should be managed [22]. These types of changes 
are typically required in repositioning the organization to the 
changing 
environment. 
Decisions 
tend 
to 
be 
non-
programmed [21]: novel, unstructured, and consequential. 
Middle management uses its judgment and general capacity 
for intelligent, adaptive, problem-oriented action. 
3) 
Reframing. Changing the underlying pattern of 
thought [14] is about the target of transformational change 
[20]. It calls for rethinking the very identity, purpose or 
business model of the organization, which is reflected in 
change of individual and collective mindsets, beliefs and 
values. 
4) 
Presencing. “Leading from the future as it emerges” 
[14] can be seen as changing the context, whose content will 
subsequently be filled [23]. Moving from “not knowing that 
you don’t know” to “knowing that you don’t know,” (cf., 
[23]) this transformation of the context raises more questions 
than it answers. Such change cannot be addressed adequately 
by reflecting only on the past [14]. 
C. Inverse U: Pathological anti-practices 
If the systemic complexity of the exterior surpasses the 
interior capacity to access the deeper streams of emergence, 
the system may go off track and resort to the following anti-
practices (Figure 2; [14]): 
1) Downloading. The anti-space also starts with 
downloading: reproducing existing patterns of behavior. 
However, these perpetuated patterns grow increasingly 
disconnected from the embedding field. 
2) Not seeing. This stage of ‘anti-emergence’ means 
rendering increasingly blind and unable to recognize 
anything new. The system is stuck in the ideology of a 
single truth and isolated from the parts of reality that are not 
congruent therewith.  
3) De-sensing. This stage pertains to the inability to be 
in touch with the emerging social fields external to the 
system. The individual or collective is stuck inside its 
boundaries. 
4) Absencing. This is the opposite of presencing: 
incapacity to relate to the future that wants to emerge. The 
space is that of self-delusional hubris, not conducive to co-
evolution with the embedding social field. 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

5) Self-deluding. This stage represents a total disconnect 
between the reality and one’s image of the unfolding future. 
6) Aborting. Just as prototyping is about experimenting 
with the future, aborting is about killing the chances of the 
future altogether. 
7) Destroying. The last stage of anti-emergence brings 
the system to its inexorable end of destruction. 
 
Figure 2. The anti-space of social pathology [14] 
 
A move away from best-practice models that tend to keep 
organizations abreast of current trends towards an integrated 
approach gives rise to the possibility of innovation or 
industry disruption.  The scope of a transformational model 
is therefore crucial, and should include addressing the anti-
space of social pathology. Theory U provides such a 
framework for learning and change, allowing analysis and 
process in an integrated way, as well as systemic, collective, 
cultural and individual aspects necessary in transformational 
organizational change.  
 
IV. 
MALADAPTIVE RESPONSES TO TURBULENCE 
If the organization experiences turbulence (relatively 
higher external complexity than its internal adaptive 
capacity) for a prolonged period of time and fails to develop 
active adaptive strategies, its members will produce 
maladaptive responses [24]. 
Babüroðlu 
[24] 
provides 
a 
three-dimensional 
classification of these maladaptive responses based on 
Angyal’s [25] dimensions of the structure of dynamic 
wholes: 
1) The vertical dimension. The two poles of this 
dimension are the depth and the surface. The depth is more 
enduring and permanent, while the surface is more 
changeable. The depth is not subject to direct observation, 
but needs to be inferred from the surface manifestations. 
2) The dimension of progression. This dimension begets 
a teleological means–end structure, in which each phase is 
the end for the preceding phase and the means for the 
following one. 
3) The transverse dimension. This is the dimension of 
breadth, along which the parts exist side by side to organize 
into a whole. 
First order maladaptive responses aim to reduce the 
complexity of the social field. These come in three different 
forms, respectively: 
• 
Superficiality refers to “indifference to what needs or 
demands are taken as a starting point for one’s 
behavioral responses.” 
• 
Segmentation pertains to separation of means and 
ends, wherein the social field is transformed into 
segments, each of which is integrated within itself 
but poorly with other segments. 
• 
Dissociation is manifested by a lack of coordination 
between the parts in the whole. 
Each of these three passive responses also has a 
respective, active correlate aimed at reducing the uncertainty 
and complexity of the turbulent environment ([26], cited in 
[24]): 
• 
Synoptic idealism: an attempt to comprehensively 
cover all relevant information to control and to 
reduce the causal texture of the environment to a 
lower level. 
• 
Authoritarianism: an attempt to impose a very rigid 
structure to prevent the means-ends or part-whole 
relationships from breaking down. 
• 
Evangelism: an attempt to coordinate the field 
through notions such as ‘all pulling together.’ 
While first order maladaptive responses attempt to reduce 
the causal texture, the second order responses crystallize it. 
Whereas the first order disintegrative disturbance of 
segregation would lead to fragmentation, the second order 
disintegrative disturbance implodes the whole into parts that 
can no longer be reintegrated [24]. The first order passive 
and active maladaptive responses will convert to the 
following second order maladaptive responses, respectively: 
• 
Monothematic dogmatism: Dogma replaces the 
relevant uncertainty by ‘crystal clear truth.’ It 
becomes the normative base of the monothematic 
society, which is committed to the same theme (e.g., 
theocracy) and cannot transcend it. 
• 
Stalemate: The means and ends are separated to the 
extent of nearly rendering the social system 
purposeless. The parts of the whole, in pursuit of 
their own agenda, do not contribute toward the 
common goal and may even oppose each other. As a 
result, the whole system is unable to pursue its ends. 
• 
Polarization: The parts of the social field are 
polarized to cohesive and well-integrated social 
enclaves 
and 
sub-optimally 
functioning 
and 
declining social vortices [13], resulting in destructive 
in-group–out-group dynamic. 
The development of active strategies is therefore 
essential to counter the development of maladaptive 
responses to turbulence that tend towards increased internal 
dogma, stalemates and polarizations.  
 
V. 
THE ROLE OF BI/A CAPABILITY IN ORGANIZATIONAL 
CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION 
Theory U as framework for change, consists of four 
levels of organizational learning and change: developmental 
(reacting), changing underlying structure and processes 
(redesigning), changing the underlying pattern of thought 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

(reframing), and leading from the future as it emerges 
(presencing) (Figure 1) [14]. In the following, we will 
discuss the role of BI/A technologies at each level of depth: 
1) 
Reacting. Independent BI applications such as 
departmental data marts (cf., [15]) are helpful in diagnosing 
current 
systems 
and 
identifying 
opportunities 
for 
improvement. Focus on efficiency suffices.   
In this stage, unless a journey through the U is 
implemented, a very likely outcome in terms of Scharmer’s 
anti-practices is downloading same-old-same-old responses 
to challenges, reduced ‘seeing’ and becoming stuck with 
outcomes that nobody really wants.   
2) 
Redesigning. At this level, tactical BI solutions can 
greatly support the decision-making in ‘experienced’ [4] 
organizations. These types of changes would typically fit 
with the BI target of creating an enterprise-wide 
infrastructure target [15]. Theory U would provide a 
framework to guide transitional change through uncovering 
common intent, seeing the system-in-transition with fresh 
eyes, and co-creating a new system.   
3) 
Reframing. While ‘transformed’ [4] organizations 
leverage strategic business intelligence and big data analytics 
to elicit insights into external influences – technical 
advances, 
market 
shifts, 
environmental 
factors, 
or 
competition – developing long-term business goals, 
decisions at this level relies heavily on personal judgment 
and executive intuition. Theory U would help in ‘sensing 
from the field,’ in reflecting on the deep, taken-for-granted 
assumptions, and in enacting a new frame of thinking and 
way of being. 
4) 
Presencing. Big data analytics may have a role in 
uncovering what is not known – the uncharted ‘blue oceans’ 
(cf., [27]) of uncontested market space amenable to new 
value creation – but at the end of the day, it is the intuition, 
judgment, and embodied experience of decision makers that 
underlie context-shifting strategic commitments like these. 
Theory U would help “connect to inner Source” to unleash 
the highest future potential accessible this way. 
The BI/A strategy is therefore very largely dependent on 
the level of sophistication and integration achieved by 
organizations. Level 3 (reframing) may be regarded as 
transformative, while level 4 (presencing) is seen as essential 
in the formation of innovative and disruptive industry 
strategies. 
 
 
VI. 
LIMITS OF BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE AND ANALYTICS 
We view that there are inherent limitations for the use of 
BI/A in organizational transformation along the afore-
mentioned ‘dimensions of dynamic wholes’ ([24], recasting 
[25]). Specifically: 
• 
The BI/A technologies tend to focus on directly 
observable and measurable surface features, such 
as computer records. Decision-making in enterprise 
transformations, however, entails deeply embedded 
considerations 
of 
the 
social 
context 
and 
psychological 
undercurrents 
that 
cannot 
be 
addressed by these technologies. (The vertical 
dimension.) 
• 
The BI/A provide insights into past and present 
performance and, at best, into how to project trends 
to the future. Confined to linear, closed system 
thinking, it cannot inform on highly complex full-
system organizational transformations that are 
ultimately unpredictable. In other words, the means 
of the BI/A are not in sync with the ends (i.e., 
insights into the future). (The dimension of 
progression.) 
• 
The BI/A technologies are of great help in 
supporting decision-makers with relevant and 
timely information. At the end of the day, however, 
it is human judgment and discretion as to how to 
integrate and make sense of the information (the 
transverse dimension) that is brought to bear in 
decision-making. (The transversal dimension.) 
In the following, we will discuss these limitations of the 
use of BI/A in the context of organizational transformation. 
A. Transformations entail social and psychological 
considerations 
“There’s no map / to human behavior,” sings Björk, 
referring to the fact that human beings vary from person to 
person and from time to time. As purposeful beings that 
exhibit will [28], people observe, learn, change their goals, 
choose their behavior and communicate with each other, 
making social situations inherently uncertain, indeterminate 
and ambiguous. 
A typical, but superficial, response to the wicked 
complexity [29], arising from this reflexivity, intentionality 
and evolution of human systems and institutions [30], is to 
make blanket assumptions about the mix of motive patterns 
[31]: to what extent employee behavior is driven by fear of 
punishment, external rewards, or intrinsic motivation. The 
organizational decisions are then based on these coarse, 
approximate generalizations. 
While Big Data can give more detailed insights into 
collective human behavior and even anticipate future actions 
[32], social media and other digital footprints provide 
decision-makers with markedly different kinds of data points 
than social data that is based on personal interactions [33]. 
We would argue that the leader’s ‘gut feeling’ of the big 
picture integrating people and social dynamics with 
commercial and technical considerations continues to be an 
important source of insight. 
B. Transformations are inherently unpredictable 
BI/A technologies tend to provide decision-makers with 
lagging indicators – view on past and present performance – 
and to inform strategy with extrapolations of trends, at best. 
However, transformational organizational change [20] 
cannot be predicted with logical thinking that relies on 
lagging (past-oriented) indicators, as transformation is a 
developmental movement across time that “explodes any 
closed system in its entirety” [34]. According to Laske [34], 
formal logical thinking is confined to closed systems that 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

cannot size up non-physical moving targets. Open, living 
systems always include contradictions and things ‘other’ 
than what the system in its present form openly manifests.  
Davis [23] suggests that organizational transformations 
are shifts in context: from (1) not knowing that you don’t 
know to (2) knowing that you don’t know. The effective 
organization, he argues, starts from the context that it has 
already succeeded as opposed to the context of disparity 
between ‘as-is’ and ‘to-be.’ By redrawing the boundaries, 
what is inside the boundary of inquiry becomes what we 
know that we don’t know. This focuses attention to create 
the content, a new reality that derives from this ‘ground of 
being.’ Rather than being pulled along by the strategy, 
organization can be used to push the strategy toward its 
realization [23]. 
C. Ultimately, it is people who make decisions 
In The Form of Time, Jaques [35] identifies two sides of 
‘the human equation:’ 1) the surface part of mental activity – 
preconscious awareness on which we consciously draw and 
conscious knowledge that provides context for behavior; and 
2) unconscious sensing – the “continuously shifting direction 
of intentionality” [35]. 
Jaques [35] also revives the ancient Greek distinction of 
two dimensions of time: chronos and kairos. At each point of 
chronological or sequential time, a person’s internal 
experience is framed in kairos, in which the immediacy of 
the present, memories of the past, and hopes for the future 
are intertwined [36]. This unconscious, unverbalized 
protomental experience:  
comprises the psychological world of desires, of passion, 
of goals and intentions and will. It is the world of 
primally fused memory, perception, desire, and intention 
(the unified field which exist before we consciously 
differentiate the parts), combined into what might be 
termed the moving present, a present which is felt as 
moving from out of the past and into the future. It is this 
unconscious phenomena which give us the notion of time 
as having a direction which expresses goal-directedness 
of intentional behavior. ([35], p. 53). 
To Jaques [37], the effort experienced in decision-
making pertains to giving energy and direction to this non-
verbal mental processing and bringing its outcomes into 
verbalizable awareness to be integrated with knowledge and 
used in conscious problem solving. Human work can never 
be exclusively knowledge-based, for when all non-verbal 
judgment is taken out of a decision, it becomes a calculation, 
not a decision [37]. 
A recent TechAmerica study [38] tells us that 15 % of the 
information today is structured and 85 % is still unstructured.  
That means there is still a huge amount of information that 
has to be sifted and analyzed by human contact or 
discussion. 
The huge amount of unsifted and unstructured 
information places immediate potential limitations on the 
value and scope of BI/A inside any transformational change 
initiative. Some of this data may be extremely critical.  
However, transformation still depends largely on the social 
and psychological considerations of contextual human 
judgment. 
VII. NEGLECT SOCIAL TECHNOLOGY – AT YOUR PERIL 
Business intelligence and analytics technologies have an 
important role in informing strategy and organizational 
change. However, we view that, due to the limitations 
outlined in Section VI, these technologies, in and of 
themselves, are inherently inadequate in this respect and 
should 
be 
complemented 
with 
appropriate 
change 
management practices and social technologies.  
While BI/A technologies may help the organization deal 
with greater complexity and change, without the requisite 
capability of individuals to use these systems properly they 
may also prove ineffective (cf., [13]). If the organization’s 
analytics capability falls short of the requirements of its 
context, maladaptive responses can be expected.  
We find that an integrative social technology helps 
mitigate or overcome the limitations outlined in Section VI 
by providing a framework in which to investigate and make 
sense of the big picture provided by BI/A. Theory U, in 
particular, is a useful meta-level framework in guiding how 
to deliberately shift attention from the present state of the 
organization to its future one, and providing the practice and 
process tools to achieve this shift, Theory U helps midwife 
organizational change and transformation in a conscious 
way. 
For instance, the efficiency focus of an ‘aspirational’ user 
of analytics and resulting deployment of independent BI 
solutions is too superficial, segmented and dissociated for 
redesigning the type of change which calls for higher 
awareness of the external developments in order to make 
valid choices among the tactical options to realign properly 
the business. Relying too much on partial, partitioned, and 
uncoordinated information at the expense of understanding 
the social dynamics, appreciation of the common purpose, 
and coordination between parties is bound to fail, as are 
attempts to rein in the organization through synoptic control, 
authoritarian leadership regime, or evangelic proclamations. 
‘Not seeing’ the trajectories of the embedding field, 
technology may just deepen the rut the organization is in. 
 The development of analytics capability is a long 
process and truly adaptive strategies cannot be implemented 
expeditiously. Furthermore, the emergence of a higher order 
capability may be impeded by the current system in place 
(cf., [24]). Continued denial of turbulence and resort to quick 
fixes in terms of passive or active maladaptive strategies (de-
sensing) is likely to beget second order maladaptive 
responses. Unless the analytics capability succeeds to 
outgrow its efficiency focus, the organization runs the risk of 
monothematic dogmatism – “This is the way things are done 
around here.” Going unchecked, business intelligence and 
analytics may become self-serving and self-perpetuating, 
growing increasingly apart from their sensing and sense-
making purpose. Individual core areas may remain pockets 
of performance, but the periphery erodes to a ‘social vortex’ 
[13] of limited success. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

VIII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
There is more to intelligent business than business 
intelligence. In our view, business intelligence and analytics 
(BI/A) 
technologies 
bear 
the 
potential 
to 
benefit 
organizational 
transformations, 
but 
in 
order 
for 
transformation to be successful will need to be accompanied 
by 
appropriate 
attention-focusing, 
integrative 
social 
technology such as Theory U. Whereas BI/A technologies 
provide a clue to possible areas in a system that may be 
leveraged for organizational transformation, Theory U 
provides a framework and process model in which to place, 
examine and integrate those leverage points, taking account 
of the context, the system and people involved in 
transformation initiatives. 
In this conceptual paper, we have argued why it is 
important to integrate BI/A with a social technology, in 
general, and Theory U, in particular, and suggested what 
may happen, if the social and psychological aspects of 
organizational transformation are downplayed. 
We have explored the following research questions: 
1. What is the role of BI/A capability in organizational 
change and transformation? 
2. What are the limits of BI/A technologies in 
supporting 
organizational 
change 
and 
transformation? 
3. How can these limits be mitigated or overcome 
through the application of a social technology, in 
general, and Theory U, in particular? 
In conclusion: 
1) The deeper the organizational change, the more 
mature level of BI/A is required and the more pronouncedly 
important it is to use integrative social technologies such as 
Theory U. 
2) BI/A technologies, per se, are not adequate to 
support organizational transformations due to social 
complexity, the non-linear nature of transformation, and the 
need for human judgment. 
3) An integrative social technology, such as Theory U, 
complements BI/A technologies by directing conscious 
attention to the required adaptive capacity in the face of 
encountered environmental conditions. 
Due to the explorative nature of our inquiry, our literature 
review was rather initial and tentative. To further develop the 
initial insights of this paper, we would like to construct a 
conceptual framework that would elaborate on the posited 
relationships between the theoretical elements. To this end, a 
more detailed and comprehensive literature review would be 
required. Finally, we call for empirical research to 
investigate the initial conjectures presented herein and in any 
follow-on conceptual inquiry. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Cohen, Business Intelligence: Evaluation and Impact on 
Performance, ISTE / John Wiley & Sons, 2009. 
[2] C. M. Olszak, “Competing with business intelligence,” 
Proceedings on IT for Practice, VSB-TU, Ostrava, 2012, pp. 
98-108. 
[3] R. L. Ackoff, “Management misinformation systems,” 
Management Science, vol. 14, no. 4, Application Series, 
1967, pp. B147-B156. 
[4] S. LaValle, E. Lesser, R. Shockley, M. S. Hopkins, and N. T. 
H. Kruschwitz, “Big data, analytics and the path from insights 
to value,” MIT Sloan Management Review, Winter 2011, 
December 21, 2010. 
[5] J. Manyika, M. Chui, B. Brown, J. Bughin, R. Dobbs, C. 
Roxburgh, and A. Hung Byers, “Big Data: The next frontier 
for innovation, competition, and productivity,” McKinsey 
Global Institute, 2011. 
[6] Davenport and J. G. Harris, Competing on Analytics: The 
New Science of Winning, Boston, MA: Harvard Business 
School Press, 2006. 
[7] J. R. Galbraith, Designing Organizations: Strategy, Structure, 
and Process at the Business Unit and Enterprise Levels, 3rd 
edn. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2014. 
[8] C. A. Bartlett and S. Ghoshal, “Building competitive 
advantage through people,” MIT Sloan Management Review, 
Winter 2002, January 15, 2002. 
[9] R. M. Kanter, “How great companies think differently,” 
Harvard Business Review, vol. 89, no. 11, 2011, pp. 66-78. 
[10] R. Greifeneder, H. Bless, and M. T. Pham, “When do people 
rely on affective and cognitive feelings in judgment? A 
review,” Personality and Social Psychology Review, vol. 15, 
no. 2, 2011, pp. 107-142. 
[11] C. B. Fawcett, S. Seekins, P. L. Wang, C. Mute, and Y. 
Suarez de Balcazar, “Creating and using social technologies 
for community empowerment,” Prevention in Human 
Services, vol. 3, no. 2-3, 1984, pp. 145-171. 
[12] M. Todd and T. Gilbert, Eds, Learning Disabilities: Practice 
Issues in Health Settings, London and New York: Routledge, 
1995. 
[13] J. E. McCann and J. Selsky, “Hyperturbulence and the 
emergence of type 5 environments,” The Academy of 
Management Review, vol. 9, no. 3, 1984, pp. 460-470. 
[14] C. O. Scharmer, Theory U: Leading from the Future as It 
Emerges, San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 
2009. 
[15] H. J. Watson, “The targets for data warehousing,” Business 
Intelligence Journal, vol. 11, no. 4, 2006, pp. 4-7. 
[16] H. J. Watson, “Tutorial: Business intelligence: past, present, 
and future,” Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems, vol. 25, article 39, 2009, pp. 487-510. 
[17] Cooperrider and Srivastva 
[18] F. Glasl, The Enterprise of the Future: Moral Intuition in 
Leadership and Organisational Development, English edition, 
Hawthorne Press, 1997. 
[19] Presencing Institute, Theory U. [Online] Available at: 
https://www.presencing.com/theoryu/ 2014.09.21 
[20] D. Anderson and L. S. Ackerman Anderson, Beyond Change 
Management: 
Advanced 
Strategies 
for 
Today’s 
Transformational Leaders, San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
Bass/Pfeiffer, 2001. 
[21] H. A. Simon, The New Science of Management Decision, 
Harper & Brothers, 1960. 
[22] R. Beckhard and R. Harris, Organizational Transitions: 
Managing Complex Changes: Understanding Complex 
Change, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1987. 
[23] S. M. Davis, “Transforming organizations: The key to 
strategy is context,” Organizational Dynamics, vol. 10, no. 3, 
1982, pp. 64-80. 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

[24] O. Babüroðlu, “The vortical environment: The fifth in the 
Emery-Trist levels of organizational environments,” Human 
Relations, vol. 41, no. 3, 1988, pp. 181-210. 
[25] Angyal, Foundations for a Science of Personality, New York: 
The Commonwealth Fund, 1941. 
[26] D. 
Crombie, 
Planning 
for 
Turbulent 
Social 
Fields, 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, A.N.U. Canberra, 1972. 
[27] W. C. Kim and R. Mauborgne, Blue Ocean Strategy: How to 
Create Uncontested Market Space and Make the Competition 
Irrelevant, Harvard Business School Press, 2005.  
[28] R. Ackoff, “Towards a system of systems concepts,” 
Management Science, vol. 17, no. 11, 1971, pp. 661-671. 
[29] H. W. Rittel and M. M. Webber, “Dilemmas in a general 
theory of planning,” Policy Sciences, vol. 4, no. 2, 1973, pp. 
155-169. 
[30] B. R. Allenby and D. Sarewitz, The Techno-Human 
Condition, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2011. 
[31] D. Katz and R. L. Kahn, The Social Psychology of 
Organizations, 2nd edition, New York, NY: John Wiley & 
Sons, 1978. 
[32] H. S. Moat, T. Preis, C. Y. Olivola, C. Liu, and N. Chater, 
“Using big data to predict collective behavior in the real 
world,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 37, no. 1, 2014, 
pp. 92-93. 
[33] L. Manovich, “Trending: The Promises and the Challenges of 
Big Social Data,” in M. K. Gold (Ed.), Debates in the Digital 
Humanities, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota 
Press, 2012, pp. 460-475. 
[34] O. Laske, Measuring Hidden Dimensions of Human Systems: 
Foundations of Requisite Organization, IDM Press, 2008. 
[35] E. Jaques, The Form of Time, New York, NY: Crane Russak 
& Co.,1982. 
[36] M. Dyer-Smith, “The form of time: A special theory for the 
human 
sciences,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Psychoanalytical Studies, vol. 3, no. 4, 2006, pp. 336-347. 
[37] E. Jaques, Requisite Organization: A Total System for 
Effective 
Managerial 
Organization 
and 
Managerial 
Leadership for the 21st Century, Revised second edition, 
Cason Hall & Co. Publishers, 1998. 
[38] TechAmerica, “Demystifying big data: A practical guide to 
transforming the business of government,” TechAmerica 
Foundation’s Federal Big Data Commission, 2012. 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-395-7
BUSTECH 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

