Using Process Simulation to Assess the Effect of 
Data Format Standardization in Collaborative 
Processes 
Olga Levina, Marcel Schulz 
Department of Systems Analysis and IT 
Berlin Institute of Technology 
Berlin, Germany 
{olga.levina.1}, {marcel.schulz}@tu-berlin.de 
 
Abstract— Data quality plays an important role in the context 
of collaborative engineering and virtual enterprise. Drawing on 
business process management perspective, this paper attempts 
to gain deeper understanding of data format standardization 
in B2B processes by using process simulation methodology on 
data drawn from a large industrial project situated in 
automotive industry. Analysis results of this process from the 
virtual engineering domain show that implementation of the 
data format standard does have a positive effect on business 
process performance in terms of process costs and execution 
time not only for the main manufacturing enterprise but also 
for its suppliers. These findings have implications for data 
quality and standardization initiatives illustrating the use of 
simulation technique for process performance evaluation. 
 Keywords- Data in supply chain collaboration, data 
management, business process simulation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Process changes that are induced by re-engineering 
activities of process elements like activity, data or 
organizational structure are difficult to assess without 
implementing the process in real life. Simulation tools can 
support this assessment by providing first insights into the 
new process. Complex simulation scenarios require high 
amounts of data on the process details as well as on business 
process environment. Using business process modeling and 
simulation software enables process documentation that 
contains process details as well as subsequent process 
simulation based on the documented process flow and 
included information on process logic and tasks. This 
analysis technique is applied here to assess the effects that 
are induced by the introduction of a format standard for data 
interchange and documentation on process performance 
within a collaborative process in automotive industry. 
Being the foundation of business to business (B2B) 
communication, data needs to be managed towards several 
aspects. In 1999 a survey performed by NIST (National 
Institute of Standards and Technology) revealed that the 
economic cost of bad data exchange processes in the US 
automotive industry is $1 billion per year [7]. Similar studies 
with similar results have been conducted in Japan and 
Germany [16]. This problem can be approached from two 
angles: considering intrinsic or extrinsic aspects related to 
data exchange process. Intrinsic aspects cover data content 
and its structure, whereas extrinsic aspects relate to issues 
appearing during data translation [2]. 
Here, intrinsic aspects of data exchange in the context of 
collaborative engineering are put in focus. Simulation-based 
design tools in manufacturing context make it possible to 
analyze the behavior of complex products without 
constructing their physical prototypes. Manufactured parts 
can be virtually tested so that design and tolerance problems 
are detected in an early phase saving costs and time. This 
virtual prototyping can simulate a crash test with a virtual car 
and analyze dynamic behavior of mechanical parts. 
Two main simulation types can be distinguished [2]: 
Discrete event simulation and geometric (continuous) 
simulation. A case study from the second type situated in the 
context of a major German car manufacturer is analyzed in 
this paper. Heterogeneous simulation and design software as 
well as accordant data standards in the context of virtual 
engineering cause interoperability problems as well as 
process performance drawbacks within the considered 
supply chain. A consortium containing a major German car 
manufacturer as well as involved simulation partners was 
founded to develop a continuous simulation process to 
eliminate the mentioned drawbacks. 
One of the most important measures to achieve the goal 
of a continuous simulation process is the development of a 
data format standard that supports data transaction 
requirements in automotive industry with the focus on the 
virtual prototyping process. As the common format an XML-
based data format was developed and implemented 
throughout the process of virtual prototyping. To perform 
data exchange a central information system has been 
envisaged. Selecting XML as the data interchange syntax 
provides for enough freedom in structuring geometric data, 
at the same time ensuring that different proprietary standards 
can be made interoperable. XML is an open data format 
recommended by [17] for all communications between the 
elements in a mediator-based system that allows platform- 
and system-independent encoding and integration of semi-
structured data. Benefits of this standardization effort are 
expected on the output and process levels [19] supporting 
efficient and safe task execution [9]. Data is considered as 
the lowest level of abstraction resulting from measurement, 
that is storable in documents, i.e. semantically structured 
files, and processable using specific syntax. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

There is relatively little research activity in this domain, 
thus to close this gap, the guiding research question of the 
paper is focused on how to assess the impact of data format 
standardization in virtual prototyping on the process level. 
As the actual roll-out of the process is cost-intensive and 
requires re-structuring of the processes of the involved actors 
this question is addressed using the process simulation 
method. Furthermore, simulation allows creating “before” 
(as-is) and “after” (to-be) scenarios. 
Using the method of process simulation with time and 
cost related indicators on the as-is and to-be process that 
includes integration of the common data format, the question 
of the direction of the effect induced by data format 
standardization is addressed. The results show positive 
changes in the process performance measured using process 
simulation. This effect is referred here to the data format 
standardization. Although, these results might be expectable, 
only little scientific evidence on this matter exists. 
Furthermore, these results can be used by managers of 
collaborative processes to promote data standardization in 
the particular environment. 
The reminder of the paper is structured as follows. In 
Section II related work on the effects of data standardization 
as well as simulation in business process management 
context is presented. Section III describes the case study in 
focus as well as the process under analysis. In Section IV the 
applied research method as well as the simulation set-up is 
described. Analysis results are presented and discussed in 
Section V. Conclusion and outlook finish the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The effect of electronic data interchange (EDI) as 
paperless transmission of business documents between 
trading partners has been extensively covered in research. 
MacKay [6] defines EDI as “paperless transmission of 
business documents between trading partner application 
systems, via a computer and communications network, in a 
standard message format”. Survey-based research by 
MacKay [6] showed that the component sector in automotive 
industry did experienced benefits from EDI adoption being 
among others: improved relations with trading partners, 
improved data accuracy as well as increased productivity. 
Keller et al. [12] showed that external collaboration, i.e. 
collaboration between supply chain actors, does not directly 
improve logistical effectiveness, measured in 
costs. 
Nevertheless, their research shows that collaboration with 
external supply chain entities influences increased internal 
collaboration, which in turn improves logistical service. 
Rajgopal and Abdumalek [1] use a case-based approach to 
demonstrate how lean manufacturing tools can help process 
industry to obtain better overall financial and operational 
control. Therefore, they apply the value steam mapping (a 
simulation method by Rother and Shook [10]) on snapshot 
data such as inventory levels before each process, process 
cycle times, number of workers, and changeover times. They 
also use “before” and “after” scenarios as well as value 
stream mapping in order to demonstrate potential benefits of 
lean manufacturing tools.  
In the research area of business process management, 
business process simulation has been widely used for 
business process re-engineering [5], [15], [4] as well as 
organizational design [3] and quality assessment [18] among 
other domains. 
Business process simulation has gained a lot of attention 
in the context of business process re-engineering in 1990ies 
as a tool to support managerial decision and illustrate 
potential effects of a newly designed business process 
without significant financial effort. Business process 
simulation aims at assisting the process of modeling and 
analyzing organizational structures. Use of simulation in the 
context of business process re-engineering is based on the 
approach to computer-aided analysis expressed by [11]. 
Being an operational research technique simulation has a 
major advantage as it allows experimentation with any 
element of a business system [3] being used in order to 
measure, understand, and predict the metrics of process 
improvement and quality [5] and to explore the effects 
introduced IT-support on the process performance. 
III. 
PROCESS CONTEXT AND DESCRIPTION 
The goal of this paper is to use a case-based approach to 
demonstrate how data format standardization influences 
process performance. Here, the virtual prototyping process of 
a major German car manufacturer is analyzed. Since some of 
the information is confidential, the company is referred to as 
Construction throughout this paper. 
 
In the context of automotive manufacturing numerous 
actors are involved in the cooperative and digitalized 
development and manufacture planning composing a virtual 
or extended enterprise. Figure 1 shows the general 
architecture for the IT-supported processes during the 
product creation. Multiple actors are involved and different 
IT-support levels are needed to bring a (manufacturing) 
product to life. Here, the process of virtual prototyping of car 
parts consisting of the subprocesses: forming, joining, drying 
and crashing is considered. 
The sub-processes are performed by different actors that 
use different Computer Aided Engineering (CAE)-systems 
and data formats. Only after all the sub-processes are 
successfully performed and functionality of the parts is 
given, the parts can be built. Therefore, the process 
considered here is centered at data generation and 
transmission. The sub-processes are organized in a way that 
their sequence and thus generated data is crucial for the 
subsequent step. Without the data following sub-processes 
cannot be executed. The as-is process is shown in figure 2. 
Due to the heterogeneous architectures of the cooperation 
partners the prototyping process is currently time and cost 
consuming. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
Figure 1.  IT-support during the product creation process [13] 
To overcome the mentioned shortcomings, process actors 
built a consortium to develop a continuous simulation 
process that will be based on a data format standard, i.e. 
common data definitions, representation, and structures. This 
initiative is based on the expectation that this standard will 
allow a more robust process as well as diminish the effort of 
data transformation, i.e., the time and costs expenses. Thus, 
the main goal of the consortium is to integrate heterogeneous 
software and enterprise architecture and enable a continuous 
simulation chain from the concept to the product. As 
standard language for data structuring and transmission 
XML has been chosen and the process flow has been 
subsequently adapted to the emerged changes. Figure 4 
shows the envisaged to-be process that includes the data 
management system(s) that supports collaboration and data 
exchange between process actors. 
The process is situated in the automotive industry and 
describes prototype simulation within a construction process. 
Main actor is the car manufacturer (Construction). Parts 
(virtually) designed by the Construction need to be 
(virtually) tested in numerous scenarios to identify their fit 
and possible quality drawbacks before being sent for actual 
realization. Thus, the process contains four simulation sub-
processes (see figure 2): forming, joining, drying and 
crashing. These simulations are performed by different 
simulation partners (abstracted in the collapsed pool: 
simulation). Only when data from all simulations is derived 
and approved, the simulation process can end and the parts 
can be sent for physical construction. 
 
Figure 2.  As-is process: generalized cooperation view 
Figure 2 shows the cooperation activities between 
process actors, i.e., as-is simulation process from the abstract 
view point. Figure 3 shows an example of an as-is sub-
process, here: drying, on a detailed process level. 
The sub-processes are structured in a similar way. First 
the part has to be designed by the Construction and a 
contract with the simulation partner has to be negotiated. 
Then, Construction collects the data needed for simulation 
and sends this data to the accordant partner. The partner has 
to evaluate data for their completeness and correctness. If the 
data is not sufficiently elaborated, the partner sends the data 
back to Construction for re-work. Re-worked or complete 
initial data are then preprocessed, simulated and post-
processed by simulation partner and the results are sent to the 
Construction. Construction receives the results, evaluates 
them according to the test goals and disseminates them to 
further partners involved in the subsequential manufacturing 
activities.  
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
Figure 3.  As-is process: sub-process (simplilfied)  
As mentioned above, the as-is process provides potentials 
for performance enhancement that are addressed by the new 
data format standard. The re-engineered business process 
includes information systems that manage and convert 
incoming data into the defined format. Therefore, the process 
structure is changed to accommodate data management 
support and conversion efforts. In the process model these 
changes are visible through the addition of an extra pool 
called information systems (IS) that includes three 
application systems supporting cooperation in and execution 
of the process. Figure 4 shows the abstract view on the re-
engineered 
to-be 
process.
. 
 
Figure 4.  To-be process: abstract view 
Using these “before” and “after” scenarios process 
performance change is now analyzed towards the effect of 
data format standardization. 
IV. 
SIMULATION SET-UP 
The main research method that was used here to assess 
the research question whether data format standardization 
has an impact on a collaborative business process 
performance was business process simulation. The choice of 
the research method allows assessing the effect of 
standardization on process performance and structure in 
different business domains as well as industries. The 
simulation set-up is briefly described here. Figures 2 and 3 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

show the as-is process on the abstract level as well as an 
example of one of the sub-processes accordingly. 
Two processes, as-is as well as the to-be process, have 
been simulated and their results were compared (see Table I). 
A case-based research methodology was chosen here with 
the aim to provide an example of practice and test the 
proposition that the supporting tools of process mapping and 
business process simulation can illustrate the effect of data 
standardization on the process performance. Although a 
single-site study has obvious limitations with respect to the 
generalizability of the findings, the case is not aimed at being 
representative, but rather exemplary. Thus, the researcher 
does not need to assume that the simulation results that were 
retrieved are exhaustively representative for all similar 
situations (same reasoning has been successfully applied in 
[14]). 
To perform business process simulation of the described 
processes, they have been modeled according to interviews, 
workshops and documentation using Business Process 
Modeling Notation (BPMN) as well as enriched with 
detailed information on their organizational and temporal 
structure. 
Derived information as well as the business processes 
have been modeled using Adonis® 2.01 community edition 
software. It is a business process analysis tool supporting 
business process management, specifically simulation and 
calculation of business performance indicators, such as 
human resources, process costs, etc. It allows business 
process modeling using BPMN, process analysis, simulation, 
evaluation as well as publishing and process automation with 
BPMN 2.0 XML. 
To gain an insight on the effect of the introduced data 
format on the business process performance, the process has 
been modeled and simulated using two different scenarios. 
In the first scenario, the as-is process as described in 
interviews, workshops and documentations has been 
represented. In the second scenario, data management system 
and accordant process adjustments due to the new data 
format have been modeled. The overall duration of the 
simulation was set to five years in working days with 8 hours 
per working day and 190 working days per year (excluding 
holidays and vacation time) for both scenarios. Activity costs 
were assigned according to the data elevated in interviews. 
Hlupic [4] suggests a process for business process 
simulation that consists of the following phases that were 
also adopted in the presented research: 
• 
Define modeling objectives; 
• 
Decide on model boundaries; 
• 
 Collect and analyze data; 
• 
 Develop business process simulation model; 
• 
 Test model; 
• 
 Model experimentation; 
• 
 Analyze output; 
• 
 Provide business process change recommendations. 
Hlupic [4] suggests this proceeding for evaluation and 
decision support. Thus, the last phase is omitted here as the 
goal of the research is not recommendatory but rather 
exploratory. The modeling objective here is to document a 
business process to perform scenario-based performance 
evaluation using business process simulation. The model 
boundaries are the process boundaries, including process 
actors and their processes involved in the virtual engineering 
in the given case study. 
Data has been collected to define the process flow as well 
as performance characteristics such as time, costs and 
frequency of an activity. The simulation model used here, 
has been developed to include the process (logic and 
temporal) flow as well as execution times as defined by 
process workers in the as-is process. For the to-be scenario 
expert interviews were led with process workers, process 
managers and process owners to derive an estimate for 
realistic task times and costs. The to-be process has been 
modeled and simulated. 
These results were presented to the interviewees to assess 
their feasibility. Simulation results of both scenarios as well 
as their comparison are described and discussed in the 
following section. 
V. 
RESULTS 
A. Simulation Results 
Results of the process simulation are shown in Table I. 
 Process cycle time is elevated in days: hours: minutes: 
seconds format. Costs are expressed in money units (MU). 
Activity times are measured for one execution cycle (process 
cycle). Delta is computed in hours for the time metrics and as 
the difference in change between “before” and “after” 
metrics. 
Process execution time represents the sum of activity 
times without consideration of their parallel execution, while 
process cycle duration represents the time for the actual 
process flow. 
Performance quotient is an additional metric that enables 
a better assessment of time and costs performance of the 
process. It is calculated as the quotient of costs and actual 
process execution time. 
Simulation results show that process cycle duration of the 
to-be process is larger than in the as-is process. This is due to 
the fact that the goal of process re-engineering was to create 
a continuous process where the sub-processes are executed 
sequentially rather than parallel as it is the case in the as-is 
process. Nevertheless, execution time of the to-be process is 
by 19.59% shorter and costs by 17.83% lower than in the as-
is process. This effect is also reflected in the sub-processes, 
suggesting that simulation partners also benefit from data 
format standardization. The performance quotient of the to-
be process is more than 88% higher than for the as-is process 
indicating a more effective process flow. 
TABLE I.  
RESULTS OF PROCESS SIMULATION 
KPI 
As-is process 
To-be process 
Delta(in%) 
Process 
cycle 
duration 
4d:00h:09min:20s 
6d:01h 
52min:47s 
 + 55.12 
Process 
execution 
time 
38d:07h:26min:43s 
32d:04h: 
25min:22s 
- 19.59 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Process 
costs (MU) 
25772 
21176 
-17.83  
Performance 
quotient 
(MU/ cycle 
duration in 
h) 
802 
425 
-88.41 
Cycle time 
(costs): Join 
1d:3h:45min:14s 
(5937) 
1d:02h: 
36min:04s   
(5453) 
-11.9 (-8.88) 
Cycle time 
(costs): 
Form  
7h:38min:27s 
(3175) 
7h:06min:59s 
(2899) 
-8.03 (-9.52) 
Cycle time 
(costs): Dry 
4d:9min:20s 
(13076) 
3d:48min:40s 
(10047) 
-29.44 (-
30.15) 
Cycle time 
(costs): 
Crash 
1d:28min:48s 
(3583) 
6h:49min:26s 
(2828) 
-25 (-26.7) 
 
B.  Discussion of Results 
Business process simulation performed using business 
process modeling and simulation software was performed 
here to assess the effect of process element changes on 
process 
performance. 
Here, 
the 
context 
of 
virtual 
engineering, which relies on data management and exchange 
was analyzed. The goal of the to-be scenario was to design a 
continuous, sequential collaborative process for automotive 
parts simulation and thus to improve process performance. 
Therefore, a data standard was developed to make data 
exchange and its use of the CAE more efficient. 
Subsequentially, processes of the actors needed to be 
adjusted. As this is a costs- and time consuming 
transformation, its effect on process performance was 
measured using time and costs indicators in a process 
simulation. 
Results in Table I show that the sequential flow of the 
process increased the process cycle duration by almost 50 
per cent. Nevertheless, the other performance indicators such 
as process costs, process execution time as well as cycle 
times of the subprocesses were decreased resulting in a better 
performance quotient of the process. 
In the context of collaborative processes implementation 
of a common standard can be difficult as process members 
need to adopt their IT- and business infrastructure. Using the 
simulation it is now possible to outline the time and cost 
related benefits for process participants, creating a common 
ground for discussion on the adaptation of the standard. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
In this paper, the question has been addressed how data 
format standardization can affect process performance and 
structure. Business process simulation has been chosen as a 
method to assess performance changes in terms of time and 
costs. The results show that introducing a data format 
standard led to a continuous process flow that induced 
positive implications on process performance not only for the 
main manufacturing enterprise but also for the service 
partners. 
Results of the business process simulation showed that 
the 
re-engineered 
to-be 
process 
provides 
a 
better 
performance quotient due to both number of activities and 
cost reductions. Cost and time benefits are also passed over 
to simulation partners. This positive development is 
supported by the subsequential analysis of quality 
measurements performed with the simulated parts from the 
as-is and to-be process as well as real-life parts. These results 
provide insights that are crucial for managing collaborative 
processes. They show that measurements performed on 
virtually simulated parts in the to-be engineering process are 
more precise and allow insights into characteristics of the 
constructed parts that were not possible using data derived in 
the as-is process [8]. These research results can be used to 
assess the need for data standardization initiatives. Thus, 
future work will include a more extensive research on 
product costs and quality changes due to the data format 
standardization. 
Nevertheless, limitations of the presented research are 
obvious: only one process has been analyzed and only 
limited feedback from process management was collected. 
Also, the effects on the role distribution in the process as 
well as knowledge transfer that have been changed due to the 
changed standard need to be explored in the future research.  
Furthermore, future research need to include the analysis of 
the use of semantic technology such as RDF or OWL as they 
can provide an increased interoperability in collaborative 
processes and compare process performance difference to the 
performance gains induced by the use of XML documented 
here. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Rajgopal and F.A. Abdulmalek, “Analyzing the benefits of lean 
manufacturing and value stream mapping via simulation: A process 
sector case study.” International Journal of Production Economics, 
107(1):223–236, 2007. 
[2] M.  Contero,  P. Company, C. Vila, and N. Aleixos, “Product data 
quality and collaborative engineering”. IEEE Computer Graphics and 
Applications, 22(3):32–42, 2002. 
[3] G. Giaglis, R. Paul, and V. Hlupic, “Integrating simulation in 
organisational design studies”. International Journal of Information 
Management, 19(3):219– 236, 1999. 
[4] V. Hlupic and S. Robinson, “Business process modelling and analysis 
using discrete-event simulation”. In Proceedings of the 30th 
conference on Winter simulation. WSC 98, pages 1363– 1370, Los 
Alamitos, CA, USA, 1998. IEEE Computer Society Press. 
[5] P.J. MacArthur, R.L. Crosslin, and J.R. Warren, “A strategy for 
evaluating alternative information system designs for business 
process reengineering.” 
International Journal of 
Information 
Management, 14(4):237– 251, 1994. 
[6]  D. R. MacKay, “The impact of EDI on the components sector of the 
Australian automotive industry”. The Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems, 2(2):243–263, 1993. 
[7] NationalInstituteofStandardsandTechnology. 
Interoperability 
cost 
analysis of the us automotive supply chain, planning report, 1999. 
[8] B. Awiszus, B. Vogel, L. Leck, M. Rambke and S. Pinner, “Process 
chain simulation in automotive industry-combining forming and 
joining” (in German), 2010. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

[9] Th. Powell, “Data standardization”. Journal of Humanitarian 
Demining, 2( 3), 1998. 
[10] M. Rother and J. Shook, “Learning to See: Value Stream Mapping to 
Add Value and Eliminate Muda.” The Lean Enterprise Institute, Inc., 
Brookline, MA, 1999. 
[11] H.A. Simon, “Applying information technology to organization 
design.”, Public Administration Review, 33(3):268– 278, 1973. 
[12] S. B. Keller, P. J. Daugherty and T. P. Stank, “Supply chain 
collaboration and logistical service performance.” Journal of Business 
Logistics, 22(1):29– 48, 2001. 
[13] H. Stoeckert, K. Lindow, and R. Stark, “Collaborative engineering- 
issues and evidence from industry.” In Proc. of International Design- 
Design 2010, pages 1199–1208, Dubrovnic, Croatia, 2010. 
[14] I. Stuart, D. McCutcheon, R. Handfield, R. McLachlin, and D. 
Samson, “Effective case research in operations management: a 
process perspective.” Journal of Operations Management, 20:419– 
433, 2002. 
[15] A. Swami,“Building the business using process simulation.” In 
Simulation Conference, pages 1081– 1086. IEEE, 1995. 
[16]  F. Tanaka and T. Kishinami, “Step-based quality diagnosis of shape 
data of product models for collaborative e-engineering”. Computers 
in Industry, 57(3):245–260, 2006. 
[17]  W3C. Extensible markup language (XML) 1.0 (fifth edition), 2008. 
[18] K. Wong, R. Parkin, and J. Coy, “Integration of the cimosa and 
highlevel coloured petri net modelling techniques with application in 
the postal process using hierarchical dispatching rules.”, Proceedings 
of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part B: Journal of 
Engineering Manufacture, 221(5):775– 786, 2007. 
[19] K. Zhao, M. Xia, and M. J. Shaw, “What motivates firms to 
contribute 
to 
consortium-based 
e-business 
standardization?” 
Management of Information Systems, 28(2):305–334, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

