User as Innovator in IT development process 
  
Malgorzata Pankowska   
Information Systems Department 
University of Economics 
Katowice, Poland  
e-mail: pank@ue.katowice.pl 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, the benefits of user participation in 
value creation in the information technology (IT) development 
process are discussed. The literature studies allow for the 
conclusion that user role is very important and new methods 
are developed to increase user participation. The research 
results indicate that the user participation, although requested, 
is limited, therefore in the paper some changes are suggested.  
Keywords-innovation; lead user; user centered design; user 
experience; user participation   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION   
Encouraging users to be value creators in IT development 
processes is an important step in the competitive 
effectiveness increase activity. Many authors argue the user 
involvement in IT process is critical for IT implementation 
success because under the service-dominant logic users are 
contributing to the process of IT exploitation.  
According to Claycomb et al. [12] users can actively 
participate in creating a solution, when IT service failure 
occurs by applying specialised skills and knowledge. For 
example a user can diagnose their laptop problems based on 
the product's user manual. Research on user participation so 
far has focused on how to employ users to increase 
productivity in the service delivery context [18]. The purpose 
of this research is to bridge the gap in the literature by 
investigating user participation in IT development process 
and to present some suggestions on users' future co-creation 
behaviours. The paper is to show that nowadays users are no 
longer passive audience, but under certain circumstances 
they are active co-producers. Williford [27] has noticed that 
for many years, the computer-literate users developed simple 
applications to increase their personal productivity. User 
applications development has evolved to include complex 
application development by groups of users and shared 
across departmental boundaries. However, there still prevails 
a common mistake that user applications are not significant, 
transient, disposable as not production-oriented.  
In 2009, Anderson [2] had noticed that in the markets, 
there are a lot of niche goods, the costs of reaching them are 
going down because of the IT development. Anderson [2] 
argues that for long-term demand development is the 
democratizing the tools of production. So, individuals can do 
now what just a few years ago only professionals could do. 
He argues that now people have the tools and the methods to 
become amateur producers. Some of them have talent and 
vision, so they are able to produce by and for themselves.    
The main problem of the paper is to explain the role of 
users as innovators in the business information system 
process. The paper consists of two main parts. The first 
covers analysis of the works from other researchers on user 
innovativeness and on user participation methods. The 
second includes considerations connected with empirical 
research on the user different activities, strong points and 
weaknesses of their behaviours. The further research could 
cover explanation of users attitudes differentiation according 
to the industry.     
II. 
CUSTOMERS AS INNOVATORS 
Innovation can be seen as a management activity, which 
involves focusing on the organization's mission, searching 
for unique opportunities, determining whether they fit the 
organization's strategic directions. Innovators look to the 
future with knowledge of the past. They are expected to 
deliver something new - new products, new processes and 
new designs, which create change in goods as well as in 
lifestyles. Roberts and Frohman [21] generalize that 
innovation is an invention plus the exploitation. The 
invention process covers all efforts aimed at creating new 
ideas and getting them to work. The exploitation process 
includes all stages of commercial development, application 
and transfer, including the focusing of ideas or inventions 
toward specific objectives, evaluating these objectives, 
downstream transfer of research and development results, 
and eventually a broad-based utilization, dissemination and 
diffusion of technology-based outcomes. 
Tidd and Bessant [25] argue that innovation is driven by 
the ability to see connections and opportunities and to take 
advantage of them. The creativity in innovations adds value 
to the individual and the community and is based upon 
perceiving and capturing an opportunity. They consider four 
types of innovations:  
 
Product innovation - changes in the products or 
services that a business organization offers. 
 
Process innovation - changes in the ways in which 
they are created and delivered. 
 
Position innovation - changes in the context in which 
the products and services are introduced. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

 
Paradigm  innovation - changes in the underlying 
mental models which frame what the business 
organization does. 
The innovation process consists of an idea that comes 
from some recognized need that is developed into a concept, 
followed by invention and then taken through development, 
production, diffusion and adoption by end users. The 
innovation process will be guided by the type of innovation, 
the importance of innovation, the elapsed time and expected 
time of introduction, sources of innovation, the character of 
the organizational infrastructure, and the number of 
technology and market unknowns. There are many models 
of innovation process [19], [24], [25]. All of them 
emphasize the necessity to recognize the opportunity and 
through the research and design  transform it into a market 
product.   
IT innovation as any innovation demands the co-
evolution and co-existence of the information technology 
invention and the business process of any organization. 
Innovations are realized in the context of socio-economic 
institutions. The object of IT innovation does not stand 
alone, but is set in the economy, cultural and business 
practices, social values and interests. Innovation research has 
emphasized the importance of understanding user needs in 
the process of new product development. However, it is not 
sufficient to understand or even satisfy existing customers, 
but rather it is necessary to lead existing customers and 
create new customer segments. Therefore, companies could 
be interested in customer involvement in production or 
service delivery process. Customers are expected to support 
companies to reduce research and development costs, to 
differentiate services, reduce the time to market, facilitate 
user education, improve market acceptance, or even to 
provide more original and valuable proposals than 
professional developers. General classification of customers 
in IT sector covers lead user, normal user and user 
community [3], [15]. Lead users are critical to the 
development and adoption of complex products. They 
demand innovations ahead of the general market of other 
users. They face needs that will be the future trends in the 
market place and they are actively engaged in the innovative 
process. Normal users could help to provide superior and 
differentiated 
services, 
reduce 
cycle 
time, 
increase 
acceptance of the new service. Community users are 
interested in technological products  and they play important 
role in advance of technologies [23]. Communities are 
treated as a decentralized virtual design teams, as designers 
and as a source of innovations. Websites such as Twitter, 
Facebook, MetaCafe, Wikipedia, Flickr among others, have 
all been introduced within the last decade and rapidly grew 
in user communities. Organizations are beginning to invest 
time and effort in developing a social media presence e.g. on 
Facebook, to capitalize on a growing user population that is 
interested in creating, retrieving, and exploring the Websites. 
Organizations are beginning to realize the potential benefits 
that can be captured when users and organizations co-create 
value.  Users benefit from their positive experience that 
fulfils personal needs and interests. Experience is defined as 
an intense individually involved event. Designing for use and 
testing by use are the essential characteristics of user-
innovators; they may subcontract production and parts 
supply. The user-innovators are motivated by the users' own 
desires for a better product. However, there is a risk that the 
user involvement in the design process will never be 
properly rewarded and an organization fails to provide a 
positive user experience, so the negative consequences can 
occur such as negative publicity and loss of user 
engagement. Therefore, only through the social interactions, 
perceived dialogue online and social accessibility and 
transparency the value can be co-created. Some initiatives 
have institutional backing involving professional staff, others 
build on communities of practitioners and rely on their 
voluntary work. Repositories can be organised as a place to 
share and exchange resources, which means that people are 
either users or producers, or they can promote the 
collaborative production of common resources. There are a 
couple of models of open collaboration: 
 
User-producer model: centralized model, although 
real costs can be met with resources other than 
money, most initiatives need to raise some capital. 
 
Co-production model: equal participation,  
 
The replacement model, open content replaces 
other uses and benefits from cost savings.  
 
The foundation, donation or endowment model in 
which funding for the project is provided by an 
external actor. 
 
The segmentation model, in which the provider 
offers value-added services to user segments and 
charges them for these services.  
 
The conversion model, in which "you give 
something away for free and then convert the 
consumer to a paying customer". 
 
Membership model, voluntary support model, based 
on fund-raising campaigns or paying members [13]. 
In innovation process, customers are perceived as having 
an integral pro-active role in collaboration to innovate. 
Bhalla [8] discussed the changed profile of the new customer 
(see Table I).   
TABLE I. 
 CUSTOMER PROFILE CHANGES 
  
Classic Management 
Organization 
New Economics 
Organization  
Identity 
Consumers, Recipients 
Creative Partners 
Role 
Passive 
Active Collaborators, Co-
producers of Value  
Source of 
Insights  
Surveys, observation of 
customers 
Conversations, online 
comments  
Relations 
with 
company 
Transaction-based 
Experience-based 
Location 
Fixed and visible 
customers 
Virtual customers 
Influence 
media 
Advertising, expert 
opinions 
Social media, peer-to-peer 
Source of 
value 
Company offers 
Customer preferences and 
experiences  
Source: [8]. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

For 
many 
years 
mass 
production 
and 
product 
customization were business strategies that aimed at 
fulfilling individual user needs quickly and efficiently. 
However, concepts such as customer orientation, user 
centered 
design, 
close 
to 
the 
customer, 
customer 
segmentation, customer relationship  management reveal the 
importance of the user involvement.   
III. 
USER PARTICIPATION METHODS 
Barki and Hartwick [4] proposed a distinction of user 
involvement from user participation. They define user 
participation as the assignments, activities and behaviours 
that users and their representatives perform during the 
system development process. User involvement refers to the 
subjective psychological state reflecting the importance and 
personal relevance that a user attaches to a given system. 
User participation is defined as the degree to which the 
customer is involved in producing and delivering the 
service. System designers have promoted techniques 
requiring user participation, such as prototyping, rapid 
application development and joint application design.  
A user is a person using services on a day-to-day basis 
within the business. This means that IT staff need to be 
involved in the development and production of appropriate 
and relevant Service Level Requirements (SLRs) and 
Agreements (SLAs) that detail the business quality targets, 
together with required business functionality.  
According to Cartlidge [11], an Informed Customer (IC) 
is a term that came into use in the late 1990s. to describe a 
customer with some information system (IS) perspective. 
Typically the areas of involvement of ICs are: 
 
The alignment of business and IT plans and 
strategies.  
 
The development of Business Unit objectives and 
requirements for IS.  
 
The establishment and co-ordination of user groups. 
 
The development, negotiation and agreement of 
SLRs and SLAs.  
 
Managing the provision of the IS services on behalf 
of their Business Unit. 
 
Shared risk and reward, e.g., agreeing how 
investment costs and resultant efficiency benefits 
are shared. 
For example, in PRINCE2 project management 
methodology [6], [16], the Senior User represents the 
interests of the users, who will use the final products of the 
project, those for whom the product will achieve an 
objective, or those who will use the product to deliver 
benefits.  
A. User Experience 
The concept of user experience is understood as the 
subjective relationship between user and application. It goes 
beyond the usability of the application, focusing on the 
personal outcome that the user gets from interacting with the 
application while performing a task [10]. In Human 
Computer Interaction (HCI), the term of experience design is 
about considering the user, the task and the context when 
designing a computer application [9]. Usually, the projects 
have a large context that the users should understand and IT 
people should integrate into their planning. This context is 
the project's ecosystem and it includes the environment they 
are working within the company culture, the general type of 
work they all will be engaged and the people with whom 
they interact within their roles and responsibilities. 
According to Beccari and Oliveira [5] the User Experience 
orientation points to project goals, but not just to attain 
effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction, but it aims to 
enhance the entire experience resulting from  the use of a 
product, system or service.     
B. User Centered Development Process 
The purpose of User Centered Development (UCD) is to 
develop products with a high degree of usability. The user 
becomes the centre of focus in the product development 
process. UCD is defined as a user interface design process 
that focuses on usability goals, user characteristics, 
environment, tasks and workflows in the design of an 
interface [20], [7]. According to Goncalves and Santos [14] 
the UCD is a philosophy that is based on the needs and 
interests of user and requires an investigation of user 
activities, profile, environment and goals. The key common 
concepts in UCD are as follows: 
 
Focus early on users and tasks to understand user 
cognitive, 
behavioural 
and 
attitudinal 
characteristics. 
 
First design the user interface.  
 
Involving the users in design and design reviews. 
 
Insisting on iterative prototyping and evaluation 
[17].  
Design methods include prototyping and participatory 
design. Among the evaluation methods, there are usability 
inspection methods, and user testing methods such as 
laboratory and field tests. Participatory design concerns the 
direct participation of the beneficiaries of the introduction of 
a computer application. Major issues considered in this 
approach cover the expertise regarding users' own work, 
sustainable innovation opportunities, multiple viewpoints 
and taking differences seriously as facts and resources, the 
linking of the work practices, technology, and work 
environment context [26].  
IV. 
EMPIRICAL RESEARCH ON USER INVOLVEMENT  
The literature studies created the need to empirically 
verify that very optimistic attitude of academic publications' 
authors towards user involvement. Therefore, the empirical 
research was done in 2011. The research covered the 
interviews with Chief Information Officers  (CIOs) from 270 
firms in Poland.  Characteristics of the surveyed firms are 
presented in Table  II. User involvement in this paper is 
considered as participation in the business information 
system development process measured as a set of activities 
that users have performed. In this research, CIOs answered 
the questions concerning the activities of users at their 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

companies. Historically, there are several kinds of adaptive 
methods of information system development that build a 
model of users' knowledge and their involvement in that 
process. Active participation of a person in a community is a 
powerful indicator of the person's interests, preferences, 
beliefs and social and demographic context. Community 
members are a part of users' model and can contribute to 
tasks 
like 
personalized 
services, 
assistance 
and 
recommendations.  
TABLE II.  
SURVEYED COMPANIES FEATURES  
Feature   
N=270 
Number of employees 
 
Micro Enterprises (1-9 employees)  
44,4% 
Small Enterprises (10-49 employees) 
29,3% 
Medium Enterprises (50-250 employees) 
15,2 % 
Big Companies (more than 250 employees) 
11,1 % 
Dominating Activities  
 
Production 
9,3% 
Commerce 
22,6% 
Services 
50,4% 
Mixture of above activities  
17,8% 
Main Clients  
 
Individual 
61,1% 
Institutional 
38,9% 
Scope of Activities 
 
Local market  
27,8% 
Regional market 
23,7% 
National market 
35,6% 
International market 
7,4% 
Global market 
5,6% 
 
Involvement of the end users in IT projects covering IS 
development is presented in Table III. In Table III, the 
following activities of users have been specified: goal 
specification and project concepts (GSPC), business logic 
analysis and business process modelling (BLA BPM), 
requirements engineering (RE), information system design 
(ISD), information system implementation (ISI), information 
system testing (IST), information system installation and 
migration to a new IT environment (ISE),  information 
system maintenance (ISM), security of information system 
(SIS), information system usage (ISU).    
TABLE III.  
PARTICIPATION OF USERS IN IT PROJECTS 
User 
 
Passive 
Evaluator 
Co-
creator 
Partner 
Producer 
Prosumer 
GS  
PC 
15% 
17% 
33% 
24% 
10% 
1% 
BLA 
BPM 
32% 
22% 
19% 
20% 
5% 
1% 
RE 
37% 
19% 
17% 
16% 
10% 
1% 
ISD 
34% 
20% 
19% 
15% 
10% 
1% 
ISI 
39% 
16% 
19% 
15% 
9% 
1% 
IST 
18% 
20% 
24% 
21% 
15% 
2% 
ISE 
22% 
27% 
24% 
14% 
10% 
2% 
ISM 
20% 
23% 
24% 
19% 
12% 
3% 
SIS 
33% 
18% 
20% 
14% 
13% 
1% 
ISU 
7% 
23% 
20% 
30% 
15% 
4% 
 
 In Table III, six different profiles of users has been 
included. Passive users and users-evaluators are oriented 
towards the observation and acceptance of other people 
efforts. Co-creator supports IT staff in business information 
system development works. User as the partner plays equally 
important role as IT professional in the system development 
process. User as the producer is self-dependent and has got 
sufficient competencies to utilize IT independently of the IT 
staff help. The last, i.e., prosumers are able to utilize IT by 
themselves and for their work purposes. In this paper the 
definition of prosumption was adapted from the work of Xie 
et al. [28]. According to Xie et al., prosumption consists of 
individual and social acts by users in an exchange 
relationship that help to co-produce and gives rise to 
sociopsychological experiences for the buyers (i.e., users) in 
cooperation with the sellers (i.e., IT people) [28]. Taking into 
account the survey results, it should be noticed that only 
some percent of users were evaluated as prosumers. 
Generally, they are from SMEs sector and they are working 
on their Web portals and e-business system development. 
Prosumption implies that buyers produce products for their 
own consumption. Although most contribution in marketing 
today have been constructed with the view of consumers as 
passive buyers of what others produce, there is a perspective 
that it is rather limited approach and in e-business users have 
tools to produce Website for their own usage. Taking into 
account the results included in Table III you can notice that 
users are rather inactive. CIOs evaluate users as inactive at 
business analysis and business process modelling stages as 
well as at requirements engineering,  system design and 
implementation. IT people do not demand the technical 
expertise from users, they should be helpful at the initial 
stages of business information system development process. 
Users were evaluated as co-creator in project concepts 
specification, information system testing  and maintenance. 
Security of IS is the domain of IT professionals, and of 
course the strong activity of users is revealed at the business 
information system exploitation stage.  
In the survey, CIOs were asked about the attitudes of the 
users towards changes of IT/IS.  Eventually, CIOs admitted 
that users have got innovative ideas concerning information 
systems functionalities, but they do not solve the problems 
independently. Radical as well as evolutional changes of 
information systems functionalities are implemented with 
involvement of user as well as IT professionals. Users are 
not able  to find the solution, solve the problem and create 
the software product independently. They prefer the product 
developed and maintained by IT professionals or in co-
operation with them. CIOs were asked about the user support 
in IT product promotion process (see Table IV). According 
to CIOs, users are not involved in the distribution of  
information about IT product. Mostly,  they distribute 
information about the product usage (see Table IV).  
CIOs provided opinions on users' involvement in the IT 
product promotion process. The process was divided into 
three stages:  
 
Stage 1 (S1), before entrance of the product to the 
market.  
 
Stage 2 (S2), when the IT product is on the market.  
 
Stage 3 (S3), when the IT  product is removed from 
the market.   
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

TABLE IV.  
IT PRODUCT DISTRIBUTION SUPPORT  
User supports distribution of the IT product information 
Support of IT product 
information on: 
Yes 
No  
IT product design 
39% 
61% 
IT product installation methods  
41% 
59% 
IT product maintenance methods 
41% 
59% 
IT product usage  
59% 
41% 
The implemented product in 
comparison with other similar 
products  
50% 
50% 
 
As it is presented in Table V users are not interested in 
promotion of IT products on the market.  CIOs explain that 
the IT products are for business usage, and not for the 
meeting of the private needs, therefore the users are not 
involved and they do not identify themselves with the 
enterprise and its IT resources utilization strategies. CIOs 
admit that lead users are able to define the IT trends, but 
preferences of lead users and normal users are not the same.  
The normal users focus not only on new functionalities of IT 
products, but also take into account non-functional 
requirements, i.e., cost, processing time, scalability, 
interoperability, compatibility, reliability and security of IT 
products, and  technical support.   
TABLE V.  
USER INVOLVEMENT IN IT PRODUCT PROMOTION  
 
User involvement in IT product promotion 
 
Very 
frequently 
Frequently 
Rarely 
Very 
rarely 
Never 
S1 
11% 
17% 
24% 
17% 
30% 
S2 
18% 
24% 
21% 
13% 
23% 
S3 
4% 
11% 
18% 
12% 
55% 
 
CIOs have noticed the development of user communities, 
but that process is still at the beginning stage and the final 
results will be available in a few years (see Table VI).  
TABLE VI.  
USER COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
User Communities Development  
Type of online community  
Percent of reviewing 
companies 
Yes 
No  
Community created by the 
enterprise management 
35% 
65% 
Community created by the 
enterprise users 
31% 
69% 
Community created by the 
similar product proponents 
22% 
78% 
 
The user involvement in the IT product development was 
evaluated through the questions concerning the user 
participation in IT research (see Table VII).  
CIOs argue that users are involved in the IT research. 
They are  less engaged in the basic research, but their efforts 
are highly appreciated in the developmental works, 
implementation and exploitation processes.  For example, 
users are encouraged to take part in the Operational 
Programme Innovative Economy projects for SMEs, where 
they have the opportunities to use the knowledge and 
expertise for new IT products implementation and 
exploitation.  
TABLE VII.  
USER PARTICIPATION IN RESEARCH  
User Participation in Research   
Type of research work  
Percent of reviewing 
companies 
Yes 
No  
Technology development 
research 
25% 
75% 
Application development 
research 
39% 
61% 
Developmental works 
49% 
51% 
Pilot implementations 
66% 
34% 
Commercial product exploitation 
and maintenance 
69% 
31% 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND FURTHER RESEARCH  
The approach concerning the user as an innovator has 
led to  a new innovation paradigm, in which customers play 
a central and very active role. Rather than seeing users as 
the market, the new paradigms and IT product development 
methods focus on users involvement. According to Xie et al. 
the realization that users are actively involved in creating 
value and benefits for their own consumption is aligned 
with the post-modernist view that the user is a participant in 
the IT development process. The user involvement is 
important because of the necessity to develop end user 
computing (EUC) and reduce the risks of EUC [22]. The 
risks associated with the end user computing include: weak 
security, inefficient use of resources, inadequate training, 
inadequate support, incompatible and redundant systems, 
ineffective implementations, copyright violations, the 
destruction 
of 
information 
by 
computer 
viruses, 
unauthorized access or changes to data and programs, 
unauthorized remote access, reliance on inaccurate 
information [1].  
In the aspect of end users, their involvement in the 
information system development process results from the 
opportunities to openly criticize insufficient ICTs solutions 
provided to the customers i.e., users. Users have got their 
own personal satisfaction and have possibilities to learn new 
products. They want to be followers of their competitors and 
business partners, if only the IT solutions implementations 
have provided financial benefits. Users can learn new 
products in the production process and through this "learning 
by doing" can reduce the cost of trainings.  The interviewed 
CIOs share the opinions that in the co-development process, 
users benefit because: 
 
Their own ideas enrich the software products 
functionalities 
as 
well 
as 
non-functional 
characteristics of the products.  
 
Software firms encourage users to be involved in 
the production process and pay them.  
 
The software implementation costs are reduced.  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Therefore, the further research of users attitudes seems 
to be important.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
Perhaps the research results are not very impressive in 
comparison with the literature reviews and other authors' 
studies, which include a more optimistic vision of end user 
involvement 
in 
IT 
implementation 
and 
exploitation 
processes. The references cover works where qualitative 
research and theoretical considerations are included. This 
statistical survey presents that users are not strongly involved 
and only spectacular cases describe an innovative approach 
of users. According to this research results, users are afraid 
of novelty and risks and they prefer to rely on IT people 
knowledge and preferences.  
However, the research results reveal generally positive 
opinions about user participation in business information 
system development  projects. Probably, there is a need to 
create the culture of end user involvement and participation 
in the social and business organizations to encourage users to 
IT development activities. Within an organization there are 
various groups of interests that have their own cultures. 
Across the entire company there is often a corporate culture 
that is the collected set of values, traditions or other elements 
that characterize the company. Therefore, the cultures should 
develop 
generally 
positive 
attitudes 
towards 
users' 
innovativeness.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work is funded by the National Science Centre in 
Poland. The grant number is 4100/B/H03/2011/40. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S.D. Allen-Senft and F. Gallegos, "Managing Risks in User 
Computing," in IS Management Handbook, 8th Edition, C.V. 
Brown, H.Topi, Eds. Auerbach Publications, London, 2003, pp. 
771-780  
[2] Ch. Anderson, The longer Long Tail, How Endless Choice is 
Creating Unlimited Demand. Business Books, London, 2009. 
[3] C. Baldwin, Ch. Hienerth and E. von Hippel, "How user 
innovations become commercial products: a theoretical 
investigation and case study," Research Policy, 35(9), 2006, 
pp.1291-1313. 
[4] H. Barki and J. Hartwick, "Rethinking the concept of user 
involvement, and user attitude," MIS Quarterly, 18(1), 1994, 
pp.  59-79.  
[5] M.N. Beccari and T.L. Oliveira, "A Philosophical Approach 
about User Experience Methodology," in Design, User 
Experience and Usability, Theory, Methods, Tools and 
Practice, A.Marcus, Ed. Springer, Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 13-
22. 
[6] C. Bentley, PRINCE2, A Practical Handbook. Butterworth-
Heinemann, Amsterdam, 2010.  
[7] H. Beyer, User-Centered Agile Methods. Morgan & Claypool 
Publishers, Boston, 2010. 
[8] G. Bhalla, Collaboration and Co-creation, New Platforms for 
Marketing and Innovation. Springer, Berlin, 2011. 
[9] B. Buxton, Sketching User Experiences. Morgan Kaufmann, 
San Francisco, CA, 2007. 
[10] E.H. Calvillo-Gamez, P. Cairns and A.L. Cox, "Assessing the 
Core Elements of the Gaming Experience, " in  Evaluating 
User Experince in Games, Concepts and Methods, R. 
Bernhaupt, Ed. Springer, London, 2010,  pp. 47-72. 
[11] A. Cartlidge, Best Practice for Business Perspective: The IS 
View on Delivering Services to the Business, ITIL, the key to 
Managing IT services. TSO, Norwich, 2004. 
[12] C. Claycomb, C.A. Lengnick-Hall and L.W. Inks "The 
customer as a productive resource: A pilot study and strategic 
implications," Journal of Business Strategies, 18(1), 2001, pp. 
47-69. 
[13] Giving Knowledge for Free, The emergence of open 
education resources, Centre for educational reserach and 
innovation, Organisation for economic co-operation and 
development, 
OECD, 
Paris, 
2007. 
http://www.oecd.org/document/41/0,3343,en_2649_35845581
_38659497_1_1_1_1,00.html, retrieved: May 2011. 
[14] J. Goncalves and C. Santos, "POLVO- Software for 
Prototyping 
of 
Low-Fidelity 
Interfaces 
in 
Agile 
Development," in Human-Computer Interaction, Design and 
Development Approaches, J.A.Jacko, Ed. Springer-Verlag 
Berlin, Heildeberg, 2011, pp. 63-71.  
[15] J. Matthing, B. Sandem and B. Edvardsson, "New service 
development: 
learning 
from 
and 
with 
customers," 
International Journal of Service Industry Management, 15(5), 
2004, pp. 479-498.  
[16] M. Pieper and J. van Bon, Project Management Based on 
PRINCE2. Van Haren Publishing, Zaltbommel, 2005 
[17] H. Pradeep, User-Centered Information Design for Improved 
Software Usability. Artech House, Inc. London, 2004.  
[18] C.K. Prahalad and V. Ramaswamy, "Co-opting customer 
competence", Harvard Business Review, 78(1), 2000, pp. 79-
87.  
[19] J.B. Quinn "Managing Innovation: Controlled Chaos," 
Harvard Business Review, May-June 1995, pp. 73-84. 
[20] C. Righi and J.James, User-Centered Design Stories. Elsevier, 
Amsterdam, 2007. 
[21] E.B. Roberts and A.L. Frohman "Strategies for Improving 
Research Utilization," Technology Review, March-April, 
1997, pp. 33-36. 
[22] S. Senft and F. Gallegos, Information Technology Control 
and Audit, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group, London, 
2009 
[23] D. Tapscott and A.D. Williams, Wikinomics: How Mass 
Collaboration Changes Everything. Penguin, New York 2007.  
[24] J. Tidd, J. Bessant and K.Pavitt, Managing innovation, 
Integrating technological, market and organizational change, 
3rd Edition. J.Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 2005. 
[25] J. Tidd and J. Bessant, Managing innovation, integrating 
technological, market and organizational change. J.Wiley and 
Sons, Ltd, Chichester, 2009. 
[26] B. Torpel, A.Voss, M. Hartswood and R. Procter, 
"Participatory Design: Issues and Approaches in Dynamic 
Constallations of Use, Design and Research," in Configuring 
User-Designer Relations, A. Voss,  M. Hartswood, R. Procter, 
M. Rouncefield, R.S. Slack, M. Buscher, Eds. Springer 
Verlag London, 2009, pp. 13-30. 
[27] S.M. Williford "Reviewing User-Developed Applications," in 
IS Management Handbook, 8th Edition, C.V.Brown and H. 
Topi, Eds. Auerbach Publications, London, 2003, pp. 781-
798.  
[28] Ch. Xie, R.P. Bagozzi and S.V. Troye, "Trying to prosume: 
toward a theory of consumers as co-creators of value," 
Journal of the Acad.Mark.Sci (2008) 36, 2008, pp. 109-122.
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-223-3
BUSTECH 2012 : The Second International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

