Factors Influencing Pervasiveness of Organisational Business Intelligence 
Marlé Bijker and Mike Hart 
Department of Information Systems 
University of Cape Town 
Cape Town, South Africa 
marle.bijker@gmail.com; mike.hart@uct.ac.za 
 
Abstract—Organisations can derive great value from the 
effective use of business intelligence (BI). The pervasive use of 
BI can help improve decision making by providing business 
users with relevant information, which will ultimately lead to 
better organisational performance and efficiency. However, 
organisations still struggle to derive the full benefits BI has to 
offer. The purpose of this study is to gain deeper insight into 
the factors that influence pervasiveness of BI, specifically in 
South African organisations. This is an inductive, exploratory 
study with data collected through semi-structured interviews 
across various industries. Thematic analysis was used in order 
to determine the main factors contributing to the pervasiveness 
of BI in the participating organisations. The major themes that 
emerged included executive buy-in, strong business focus and 
ownership, perceived value, education, communication and 
support. An incremental, phased approach when implementing 
BI and information quality were also prominent themes. These 
diffusion factors that promote or impede pervasive BI in the 
organisation are also discussed through the three contexts of 
the Technology-Organisation-Environment (TOE) framework. 
The Organisational context was found to be the strongest 
influencer of BI pervasiveness in these organisations. 
Keywords-business intelligence; pervasive; diffusion; TOE 
framework.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
For the last four years, business intelligence (BI) has 
been rated as the number one “application and technology 
development investment” [1], having been in the top three 
every year since 2003.  Various leading international 
consultancies give it similar prominence. Why does BI 
continue to retain this top rating?  Why have companies not 
completed their BI implementations (as with, e.g., ERP), and 
moved on to other “key issues”?  It is clear that many BI 
implementations are incomplete or unsuccessful, and can 
only be regarded as delivering full value when BI is 
pervasive in their organisations.  This research explores the 
BI experiences of a number of South African organisations 
that have travelled far along the BI road, in order to uncover 
the key factors that have made BI pervasive there. 
The paper first gives some limited background to aspects 
of the BI area, then explains the research methodology 
adopted. Interview data is then analysed to obtain key factors 
of pervasive BI.  This is further discussed with reference to 
the technology-organisation-environment (TOE) framework 
and other literature, and the paper then concludes. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Business Intelligence is a collective term describing the 
business systems and applications that organisations use to 
support their decision making processes. Through the use of 
information technology, BI allows organisations to gather, 
store, analyse and disseminate large volumes of data, in 
order to make better and more informed business decisions 
[2][3]. More concisely, “business intelligence systems 
provide actionable information and knowledge at the right 
time, in the right location, and in the right form” [4, p .176]. 
Although the first use of the term “Business Intelligence” 
is generally attributed to Howard Dresner of Gartner in 1989, 
H.P. Luhn published the article “A business intelligence 
system” in a 1958 IBM journal [5].  Since that early era of 
IT, business intelligence has evolved in many forms.  
Academically the “umbrella term” has until recently 
generally been decision support systems (DSS), but lately 
academia has also adopted the term BI used by industry. 
Space limitations do not permit a detailed review of the 
styles and functional components of BI.  A good summary is 
given in [6].  Usage of BI may be classified as enterprise vs 
departmental BI [7] and operational vs tactical and strategic 
BI [8].  Recently there has been a move to real-time or right-
time BI [4][9]. BI technologies may be divided, e.g., into 
back-end and front-end [10] or technologies enabling 
(respectively) 
organisational 
memory; 
information 
integration; insights and decisions; and presentation [11].  
The main back-end components are the data warehouse 
and data extraction, transformation and loading (ETL) 
systems that populate it [7][12]. BI front-end components 
comprise tools used by business users to interrogate the data 
stored in the data warehouse. The most commonly used tools 
enable ad hoc querying, reporting and analysis. Other front-
end tool sets offer the following functionalities: Online 
analytical 
processing 
(OLAP); 
Dashboarding 
and 
scorecarding; Performance management; Predictive analytics 
and data mining; Alerts and notifications; BI portal and MS 
Excel integration [2][6][7][11][13]. 
Pervasive Business Intelligence 
Given lack of a consistent definition of pervasive BI in 
the literature, the following is given: Pervasive BI is the 
ability to deliver the right information at the right time to 
business users across all levels of the organization, in order 
to make better decisions in all processes at all times. It 
provides users in different functional areas with the 
necessary visibility into their key business metrics, as 
defined by their strategic objectives, whilst providing insight 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

and understanding into how it impacts on the organisation as 
a whole [9][14][15]. 
The value of pervasive BI lies in its ability to create 
performance transparency in the organisation through clear 
and consistent communication of management’s strategic 
objectives. Insight into the organisation’s key performance 
indicators (KPI’s) allows managers to react in a timely 
manner to opportunities or issues that may occur, thus 
creating a competitive advantage [14]. Value also lies in the 
improvement of key business processes [15] and improved 
information quality [10], time and cost savings through 
automated delivery of information to users, and reduced IT 
infrastructure costs due to optimised storage and processing 
of data [9]. Often these benefits are not clear to business 
executives as they are intangible and therefore difficult to 
measure [3]. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The objective of the research is to determine factors that 
can assist organisations to be more successful in achieving 
pervasive use of BI. This led to the following research 
questions:  
• 
What are the main factors influencing pervasive BI? 
• 
How do these factors fit into a TOE framework? 
A. Research Purpose, Philosophy and Approach 
The underlying philosophy of this exploratory research 
was interpretivism, as it aimed to gain a deeper 
understanding of factors influencing the pervasive use of BI 
within South African organisations, based on the experiences 
and organisational contexts of the participants [16][17]. The 
qualitative data provided the researchers with rich, 
descriptive responses that facilitated in-depth understanding, 
and the approach was inductive as the researchers populated 
the TOE framework with the factors that emerged from the 
data collected. The research timeframe was cross-sectional. 
B. Research Sample 
To gain good insight into pervasive use of BI (not merely 
adoption), it was important to obtain data from organisations 
with an established BI programme. The researchers used 
purposive sampling to choose five large organisations from 
different 
industries 
(including 
retail, 
insurance, 
telecommunications and health services) with mature BI 
programmes established between nine and 15 years ago. The 
decision was made to involve fewer organisations in order to 
be able to interview multiple people within each 
organisation, and gain multiple perspectives regarding each 
organisation’s BI programme. The researchers conducted 
interviews with eleven participants who all had a very good 
understanding and substantial experience of BI. They 
included users at executive, tactical and operational levels, as 
well as BI practitioners who had implemented BI solutions.  
C. Data Collection and Analysis 
Semi-structured qualitative interviews comprised of 
open-ended questions allowed the researchers to ask 
additional questions based on the interviewee’s responses, 
and to enable the interviewees to elaborate further on their  
TABLE I. CODING EXTRACTS 
Code 
Partici
pant Data Extract 
Education 
and support  
 
Business 
Ownership 
PG 
I think that other key thing that we did was, 
we gave the ownership of training to the 
business. So those business champions that 
owned BI in the various business units also 
make sure that they had a group of people 
there that would provide training on the tool.  
Incremental 
approach 
PA 
starting small, and delivering something and 
actually showing people the benefit and then 
getting momentum or gaining momentum 
from there is the way to go. If we'd gone Big 
Bang, nobody would've signed the check; I 
mean there's not a chance. 
 
responses [17]. The list of interview questions was derived 
from related BI literature, and an interview protocol served 
as a guideline to ensure all issues were covered. This 
comprised areas such as: reliance on BI in decision-making, 
degree of internal use, degree of information sharing, degree 
of external use, degree of information integration, number of 
subject areas in data warehouse, data latency, BI alignment 
to corporate strategy, governance, influence of BI on users’ 
actions, and vendor knowledge and support. Interviews of 60 
minutes plus were conducted at the interviewees’ premises. 
Thematic analysis and coding were used to uncover 
themes and patterns in the data [18][19]. This inductive 
approach allowed for “research findings to emerge from the 
frequent, dominant or significant themes inherent in the raw 
data, without the restraints imposed by structured 
methodologies” [19, p. 238]. Table I provides an example of 
related codes for data extracts from two of the participants 
(who were given labels from PA to PK). 
 
The resulting pervasiveness factors were also viewed 
through the lens of Tornatsky and Fleischer’s Technology-
Organisation-Environment (TOE) framework [20] – chosen 
as it is broad and does not impose restrictions on the possible 
diffusion factors that might have emerged during analysis. 
Two widely used models for adoption, assimilation and 
diffusion at the firm (as opposed to individual) level are the 
TOE framework and Rogers’ Diffusion of Innovation Theory 
(DOI) [21]. The TOE framework identifies three aspects of 
an enterprise's context that influence the process by which it 
adopts 
and 
implements 
a 
technological 
innovation: 
technological 
context, 
organizational 
context, 
and 
environmental context (this aspect not included in the DOI 
theory). These three elements present “both constraints and 
opportunities for technological innovation” [20, p. 154]. The 
TOE framework has a solid theoretical basis, consistent 
empirical support, and has been used for adoption and 
diffusion of amongst others: EDI, open systems, websites, E-
commerce, the Internet, ERP, e-business, and knowledge 
management systems [22]. 
D. Other Aspects 
To establish validity the researchers clearly described the 
data collection and analysis processes; and categorisation 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

and coding of data was carefully documented. All data was 
collected from credible sources involving experienced 
people from industry. Due to the purposive sampling 
technique and sample size the study’s findings cannot be 
generalized or considered representative of all South African 
organisations, but rather give insight into the phenomenon of 
pervasive BI. Participation in the interviews was voluntary, 
approval was obtained from the respective organisations, and 
full confidentiality was observed. 
IV. 
DATA ANALYSIS 
During the data analysis process, five major themes 
emerged: senior executive buy-in; business involvement and 
ownership; education and support; the importance of an 
incremental, phased approach; and information quality, form 
and availability. Each of these represents multifaceted 
aspects, so despite limited space a few examples are given of 
sub-themes to ensure most are represented. Some minor 
themes also emerged as possible influencers of pervasive BI 
within the participating organisations. These themes were not 
common across all participating organisations, but are 
included to ensure a holistic analysis. Interview participants 
will be referred to as PA, PB, .., PK. 
A. Senior Executive Buy-In and Involvement 
A prominent theme is top executive buy-in. All 
participants confirmed senior executive support and 
involvement as critical to success of any BI implementation. 
PA, an experienced BI manager of a large insurance 
company, stated “one of the main, main, main things is 
getting top management buy-in. Without that you are sunk”. 
PI, a retail BI manager, suggests that “BI needs to be 
changed from top down. You shouldn't grow it bottom up”. 
PG, another retail BI manager, says “Try at the most senior 
level - I don't think you'll always get it at CEO level - but 
certainly at the executive committee level.” 
1) Executives’ perception of BI 
PJ, manager of the enterprise data warehouse (EDW) in a 
telecommunications company, states that executives are 
“taking information for granted; they don’t realise that you 
have to put in a lot to get valuable information out”. PG 
describes the perception of executives in his organisation as 
follows: “I think they perceived it to be of value, but they 
also had a perception that BI didn't deliver. And I think that's 
because, especially in the legacy environment, it took very, 
very long for things to get done.” 
2) Obtaining executive buy-in 
PA mentions they “decided to basically give him [CEO] 
something first, even though from a business perspective it 
wasn't probably the biggest value add, but it's scored a lot of 
executive points.” PG stresses the CEO-CIO link: “Our CEO 
and CIO had a very close relationship, broader than just BI, 
I think the CEO got a greater appreciation of how IT can 
provide business advantage, and I think they saw BI as one 
of those key strategic types to enable that.” 
3) Executives’ active use of BI 
In almost all cases participants reported limited usage 
and involvement by senior executives. PA suggested: “I 
don't think an executive is going to use BI as much 
necessarily as somebody at an operational level. But they 
could use one piece of information, once a year and make a 
critical decision that impacts the whole business.” 
Executives will generally rely on the next layer of 
management to actively use the information and they only 
want to “be fed back summaries or be notified of decisions, 
they don't want the blow-by-blow of what's happening”. 
B. Strong Business Focus and Ownership 
In all instances participants recommended that the main 
focus should be on the needs of the business, who should 
take ownership of the BI programme. “You should have your 
most influential and most relevant executives across the 
business stipulate what their requirements are ….. and when 
BI meets that requirement everything else will follow” (PI). 
PK, a senior IT executive in health services noted that their 
BI “was more an IT initiative”, but despite that, they would 
not develop or implement anything without “full sponsorship 
and ownership from that business discipline.” 
1) Establish business ownership 
Business should drive and own the decisions made in 
terms of the organisation’s BI strategy and initiatives. “The 
business owns the information, so there's no decision making 
or sign-off of a solution without business buy-in” (PI). PG 
suggests that key individuals should be identified in the 
business, but with executive sponsorship: “While there was 
senior executive sponsorship, there were key senior 
managers or executives in the business that owned BI for 
that business unit.” 
2) Obtaining business buy-in 
Establishing business ownership requires business buy-
in, an important facilitator of pervasive BI. Ideally a BI 
programme should be initiated from the business side, but 
participants’ BI programmes originated as both business and 
IT initiatives. One organisation’s participants clearly stated it 
was an IT initiative, whereas PA stated: “They came to us 
and said ‘We need BI’. So that’s a whole different ballgame, 
they were kind of sold up front”. PG recommends 
approaching business users “seen as business process 
champions” who “[understand] the business process” and 
ideally “[understand] a little bit about IT”.  
3) Understand business need 
All participants agree that a good understanding of 
business requirements and how business wants to use the 
information is essential to ensure BI delivers business value. 
The insurance organisation identified business champions, 
and makes “Subject Matter Experts”, available to the BI 
business analysts (PB). The telecommunications company 
developed a “BI SDLC”, featuring much “prototyping with 
the users” (PE), and gets the true business users involved as 
early as possible. The retail organisation focuses strongly on 
self-service BI, equipping business users with the flexibility 
and tools to explore their own data and through a prototyping 
approach express their information requirements (PG). 
C. Education, Communication and Support 
These appear to be strong influencers of pervasiveness of 
BI. All organisations had invested much resource and effort 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

to establish a dedicated training and support programme for 
business users. These programmes educated and supported 
users not only in the use of the tool, but on the information 
itself and how to interpret and use it in daily decision making 
activities. Most participants agreed that education in the 
interpretation and application of the information was much 
more critical to the pervasiveness of BI than the features and 
functions of the tool. PI stated: “quite frankly, without that 
[training and support], they wouldn't get half the value they 
get from BI”, and PA noted: “I also think the whole 
education, training, support and communication side of 
things is absolutely vital……. Because that is what I really 
believe is the key to really pervasive BI.” 
1) Education and Training 
Four of the organisations reported that business users 
often struggle to use information correctly in their decision 
making activities. PE found that “they could be pulling 
dimensions around and having great fun with the tool, in a 
sense, but they’re doing it for the wrong reasons…they're not 
thinking beyond the use of the tool”. PC describes training as 
“a slow and ongoing process” that requires patience and 
perseverance, adding that “you can't repeat it enough”. 
Multiple training methods were used to accommodate 
different types of users. PJ suggests a mixed training session, 
with a group session in the morning and one-on-one sessions 
in the afternoon. “A lot of the executive training was one-on-
one”. PD believes that one-on-one training sessions are more 
effective as “there's too much internal competition 
sometimes” and “they are more likely to clam up”. In some 
instances business users “outsourced” training to their 
personal assistants.  
2) Communication and marketing 
Three organisations reported having dedicated BI 
marketing and communication resources and processes: “the 
more effective you can be in telling people what is 
happening, branding it, and really making it part of the 
business, is absolutely key” (PA). Regular update sessions 
communicate changes and improvements to the system, with 
group sessions or electronic newsletters for more complex 
changes (PH). 
3) Support 
Business users also need dedicated channels to provide 
feedback and ask questions if they are unable to locate or 
interpret information. All organisations provided support 
mechanisms for their respective business communities, that 
assist business users with both tool and business related 
queries. PC commented that educating, mentoring and 
encouraging business users require a lot of patience and 
perseverance. PD noted the challenge in finding the right 
type of person: “there have been very few that are well cut 
out that can be working as trainers, mentors, general 
support; and general communication, marketing all together 
- effectively rolled into one”.  
D. Incremental, Phased Approach 
All participants agreed that the best approach is to 
establish a solid, overall architecture and design, then 
proceed to incrementally build sections of it; preferably 
focusing first on areas that will add most value to the 
business. Continuously delivering business value was a 
recurring theme in interviews. “You have to be selling it 
purely on what is the incremental value you're giving each 
step of the way and you build it up and you make sure that 
you've got the capabilities when you need them” (PD). PA 
concurs, saying “incremental delivery is much more 
attractive to the business”. Benefits of BI are not always 
tangible and make it difficult to quantify ROI. An 
incremental approach that continuously delivers value to the 
business helps address this challenge. PD comments that 
“delivery must really be on a small, manageable topic that 
you can deliver in six months. Max!”, whereas PA suggests 
“nothing longer than three month increments”. PG describes 
their delivery cycles as a staggered approach with some 
overlapping of phases, with each phase between six and 
eight months.  
E. Information Quality, Format and Availability 
BI provides value when it delivers the right information, 
at the right time and in the right format. But challenges are 
that users at different levels in the organisation need 
information at different levels of detail at different time 
intervals, and people have different preferences of format, 
display and interaction. These challenges were expressed in 
nine of the interviews.  
1) The need for a data warehouse 
All participants expressed the importance of a data 
warehouse for large scale deployment of BI. PG states: “I 
think that is the foundation and cornerstone”. Three 
organisations have an EDW in place that supported reporting 
across multiple business processes. The other two had a data 
warehouse per company, but it was not fully consolidated, as 
the diverse business streams of the respective companies in 
the group did not warrant this. PA explains “it depends on 
how much commonality there is between the various 
business units and how much opportunity there is for 
sharing, from a data and from an information perspective”.  
2) The right level and format of information 
PD suggests that organisations should look critically at 
what they are trying to measure and decide “at what level is 
it useful and when does it become true, but useless”. Another 
challenge is that business users don’t always know what 
information they need, or struggle to define accurate 
measures that will be useful in monitoring their business. 
The format the information was delivered in also influenced 
whether business users made use of the information. “You 
must identify the various users and have various 
presentation methods for the various groups of users. I think 
that is the key”, comments PJ.  
3) Data quality and availability 
Data quality and consistent delivery of accurate data 
were stated to be important factors. “Source the data in a 
timeous fashion, and make it available, accurately, to the 
user”, mentions PH. PB comments that it is important for 
users to trust the information: “as soon as they don't trust the 
information then whatever you've done is gone”, but PE 
notes: “I don't know if the data governance part is really 
appreciated on an executive level”.  
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

F. Perceived Value 
Value is a frequently recurring factor threading across the 
themes discussed in this section. Participants used the term 
“value” repeatedly in their discussions around business 
focus, education, data quality and using a phased approach, 
e.g., “You have to be selling it purely on what is the 
incremental value you're giving each step of the way” (PD), 
and “Start off by showing value first” (PB). 
G. Minor Themes 
In addition to the major themes discussed so far, some 
minor themes emerged that also play a role in the 
organisations’ drive for pervasive BI. 
1) Vendor involvement  
Participants felt it important to have a close working 
relationship with the BI vendor(s), as BI is a long-term 
project. PG explains: “There's a road you need to walk with 
BI, it's not something that evolves in any organisation 
overnight, and that's why you need to pick those strategic 
partners”. However PA said: “I think that companies are 
way too reliant on the vendor and they shouldn't be. I think 
they need to get skills in house, so build them up.” 
2) BI tools, infrastructure and standardisation 
PE explains that “while the tools are very important, 
what's more important is how you utilise and implement the 
tools”. Self-service varied across the organisations, being 
seen as a promoter of pervasive BI by some, and a deterrent 
by others. Performance has a big influence on perceived user 
experience and is highly dependent on infrastructure capacity 
and network bandwidth (especially in country areas). 
Standardising on a single vendor’s BI tool was not 
considered to be a big driving factor in whether business 
users made use of BI. Cost appears to be the biggest factor 
driving BI tool standardisation. 
3) Technology Cost 
Participants reported that companies were always 
searching for the cheapest solution to make information 
available. Four organisations had an enterprise licence 
agreement in place with their respective vendors. Cost 
appears to be a bigger obstacle in smaller organisations. 
4) Regulatory compliance 
While regulatory compliance had not been a major 
influence on the pervasiveness of their BI, participants noted 
that it was now playing more of a role in BI programmes, 
and would be a future influencer of pervasiveness. 
V. 
DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS 
Based on the earlier definition of pervasiveness, it 
appears that the participating organisations are relatively 
successful. This section discusses the factors influencing 
(impeding or promoting) pervasive BI that emerged from the 
study, in context of the TOE framework [20]. 
Table II shows the factors influencing pervasive BI that 
emerged from the study, summarized in terms of the three 
aspects of the TOE framework. Most are positively related to 
pervasiveness, and all but technology cost, vendor 
relationship, and regulatory compliance are “internal”. 
 
TABLE II. FACTORS INFLUENCING PERVASIVE BI BY TOE 
Diffusion Factors 
Technology 
- Technology Cost 
+ Infrastructure capacity 
+ Use of BI Tools 
Organisation 
+ Perceived value 
+ Executive buy-in & involvement 
+ Strong business focus & ownership 
+ Education & support 
+ Incremental, phased approach 
+ Information quality, form & availability 
Environment 
+ Vendor relationship & support 
+ Regulatory Compliance 
 
A. Technology Context 
The three diffusion factors listed under the technology 
context influence the extent to which BI is used across the 
organisation, and the diffusion of self-service capabilities. 
The strongest (negative) diffusion factor emerging in this 
context was the licence cost of BI tools. Most organisations 
had enterprise licences, which helped to mitigate this. All 
participating organisations were large, which made acquiring 
an enterprise licence feasible.  
Slow performance impacts negatively on user experience, 
discouraging future use. Organisations have to plan ahead to 
ensure their infrastructure can cope with increased demand 
as BI becomes more pervasive in the organisation [7]. Most 
challenges experienced were due to network bandwidth 
limitations, particularly affecting self-service capabilities.  
Organisations all invested in BI tools from leading 
vendors, including IBM Cognos, 
Business 
Objects, 
Qlikview, SAS and SPSS. They all attempted to standardise 
the tool sets used, but this was not considered to be critical to 
the pervasive use of BI. This is in contrast to literature that 
places a strong focus on BI tool standardisation [7]. 
B. Organisation Context 
Several diffusion factors relating to the organisation 
context emerged. A recurring theme is the importance of 
BI’s perceived value to the organisation. The strongest 
factor, described as critical, is the importance of executive 
buy-in and sponsorship to an organisation’s BI programme. 
Establishing business ownership was another strong 
organisational 
factor. 
All 
participants 
reported 
that 
organisations need to involve business as much as possible 
and make sure their needs are addressed; thereby ensuring BI 
is delivering value. These factors are consistent with key 
success factors reported in the literature [2][7][9], and were 
significant influencers driving alignment between the BI 
strategy and the corporate strategy. 
Ongoing education, communication and support were 
considered to be essential in helping business users get most 
value from the information provided by the BI tools. 
Business users empowered with the right information to 
manage their business will ultimately make better decisions 
[14][15]. This will further encourage their use of BI and lead 
to a culture of fact-based decision making. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

Participants strongly recommended a phased, incremental 
approach that continuously delivers value to the organisation. 
Organisations should focus on areas of maximum impact, 
with each subsequent phase driven by a strategic business 
objective. This correlates with the literature [2].  
All participants rated data quality of critical importance 
to ensure adoption and continued usage. Good data 
governance and the implementation of a single, trusted data 
repository are recommended [2][9]. In all instances a data 
warehouse was the source system for the BI implementation 
and was believed to be a cornerstone of the BI solution. 
C. Environment Context 
Participants reported that regulatory compliance is 
starting to play more of a role in their BI programme. A 
factor that emerged in this context was the importance of 
having a strategic, long-term relationship with the vendor. 
Both vendor relationship and regulatory compliance are 
potential future influencers in the degree of BI use. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Pervasive BI is achieved when BI forms an integral part 
of the decision making activities that occur within the 
business. BI is used in various ways in different 
organisations, and what one organisation might consider 
being pervasive BI might vary significantly from the next 
organisation’s definition of pervasive BI.  
It appears that the participating organisations rely heavily 
on BI in their decision making activities and continuously 
attempt to encourage a culture of fact-based decision 
making. These organisations align their BI strategy with their 
organisation’s strategic goals, and BI receives strong support 
and buy-in from top management and the business areas for 
the value it generates. Ongoing education, communication 
and support, quality information and an incremental 
approach were also important in facilitating the pervasive use 
of BI within the organisations.  
The T, O and E factors that influence pervasive BI were 
also researched as part of this study. The findings showed 
that the “O” context was the strongest influencer of BI 
pervasiveness in these organisations, as opposed to 
Technology, and the “E” context the least. It is hoped that 
this study will provide researchers and BI practitioners alike 
with some new perspectives into factors that promote 
pervasive use of BI; and also provide better insight into 
optimal use of their BI investment, facilitation of fact-based 
decision making, and improved performance for the 
organisation. Future research may look at how this develops 
in the light of the opportunities and hype of Big Data. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Luftman and B. Derksen, “Key Issues for IT Executives 
2012: Doing More with Less,” MISQ Executive, vol. 11, no. 
4, Dec. 2012, pp. 207-218. 
[2] T. Davenport, “Competing on Analytics,” Harvard Business 
Review, vol. 84, no. 1, 2006, pp. 98–107. 
[3] A. Lönnqvist and V. Pirttimäki, “The measurement of 
Business Intelligence,” Information Systems Management, 
vol. 23, no. 1, 2006, pp. 32-40. 
[4] S. Negash and P. Gray, “Business Intelligence,” in Handbook 
on Decision Support Systems vol. 2, F. Burstein and C.W. 
Holsapple, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2008, pp. 175-
193. 
[5] H. P. Luhn, “A Business Intelligence System,” IBM Journal 
of Research & Development, vol. 2, no. 4, 1958, pp. 314-319. 
[6] H. J. Watson, “Tutorial: Business Intelligence – Past, Present, 
and Future,” Communications of the AIS, vol. 25, article 39, 
2009, pp. 487-510. 
[7] C. Howson, Successful Business Intelligence: Secrets to 
Making BI a Killer App. Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill, 2008. 
[8] R. 
Bose, 
“Advanced 
Analytics: 
Opportunities 
and 
Challenges,” Industrial Management and Data Systems, vol. 
109, no. 2, 2009, pp. 155-172. 
[9] H. J. Watson and B. H. Wixom, “The Current State of 
Business Intelligence,” IEEE Computer, vol. 40, no. 9, 2007, 
pp. 96-99. 
[10] A. Popovic, T. Turk, and J. Jaklic, “Business value of 
business intelligence systems lies in improved business 
processes,” Proc. 5th WSEAS Conference on Applied 
Computer Science, Hangzhou, China, 2006, pp. 837-842. 
[11] R. Sabherwal and I. Becerra-Fernandez, Business Intelligence 
Practices, Technologies and Management. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley, 2011. 
[12] D. Arnott, “Success Factors for Data Warehouse and Business 
Intelligence Systems,” Proc. ACIS 2008, Paper 16, 2008, pp. 
55-65. 
[13] W. W. Eckerson, Performance Dashboards - Measuring, 
Monitoring and Managing Your Business, 2nd ed., New 
Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 2011. 
[14] L. De Voe and K. Neal, “When Business Intelligence equals 
Business Value,” Business Intelligence Journal, vol. 10, no. 3, 
2005, pp. 57-63. 
[15] S. Williams and N. Williams, “Assessing BI Readiness: The 
Key to BI ROI,” Business Intelligence Journal, vol. 9, 2004, 
pp. 15-23. 
[16] W. J. Orlikowski and J. J. Baroudi, “Studying Information 
Technology in Organizations: Research Approaches and 
Assumptions,” Information Systems Research, vol. 2, no. 1, 
1991, pp. 1-28. 
[17] M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, Research methods 
for 
business 
students, 
5th 
ed. 
London: 
Pearson 
Education/Prentice Hall, 2009. 
[18] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in 
psychology,” Qualitative Research in Psychology, vol. 3, no. 
1, 2006, pp. 77-101. 
[19] D. R. Thomas, “A general inductive approach for qualitative 
data analysis,” American Journal of Evaluation, vol. 27, no. 2, 
2006, pp. 237-246. 
[20] L. G. Tornatzky and M. Fleischer, The Processes of 
Technological Innovation. Lexington, Mass: Lexington 
Books, 1990. 
[21] E. M. Rogers, Diffusion of innovations, 4th ed. New York: 
Free Press, 1995. 
[22] T. Oliveira and M. F. Martins, “Literature Review of 
Information Technology Adoption Models at Firm Level,” 
The Electronic Journal of Information Systems Evaluation, 
vol. 14, iss. 1, 2011, pp. 110-121. 
 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-278-3
BUSTECH 2013 : The Third International Conference on Business Intelligence and Technology

