ADDMANU – An Austrian Lighthouse Project for Additive Manfacturing
Christian Wögerer
PROFACTOR GmbH
Vienna, Austria
christian.woegerer@profactor.at
Michael Mühlberger / Markus Ikeda
PROFACTOR GmbH
Steyr – Gleink, Austria
Michael.muehlberger@profactor.at
Markus.ikeda@profactor.at
Abstract— AddManu is a national Austrian flagship project for
research, development and the establishment of additive
manufacturing.
There
are
four
topics
defined
as
key
technologies for additive manufacturing: Lithography based
manufacturing (LBF), Fused Filament Fabrication (FFF),
Laser beam melting (LBM) and the InkJet printing. These
have, from today's perspective, the highest potential for
applications and further developments.
The first
results
(process concept and first printing trails) of Inkjet printing of
the project are presented in the paper.
Keywords:
Additive
manufacturing,
3D
Printing,
Lithography Based Manufacturing (LBF), Fused Filament
Fabrication (FFF), Laser Beam Melting (LBM), InkJet printing
I.
INTRODUCTION
To reach a significant progress beyond the state of the art
in additive manufacturing, an extensive discussion of various
technologies, which can be achieved only by a large
consortium with various technology know-how, is necessary.
This is the idea of the lead project AddManu.
The process of InkJet printing on 3D curved surfaces has
different challenges which must be solved in the project
(Materials,
Process,
Quality
Control).
The
issue
of
appropriate materials as well as a precise knowledge of the
process must be integrated in a suitable system. Each
component of the system must work exactly with all others
and must be optimized in hard- and software. The idea of
robot-based InkJet printing is the key issue and it is
described in this paper, together with the material, soft and
hardware requirements. The purpose of the article is also the
presentation of the first results after the concept phase.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
presents an overview of the consortium, the project goals and
the motivation as well as the key facts of the project. Section
III shows a general overview of the technical work, followed
by a more detailed description of PROFACTOR´s work
inside the consortium. This is focused on the development of
basics for a multimaterial hybrid manufacturing technology
based on InkJet printing. In addition, the concept of robot-
based ink jet printing and material development is presented.
Section IV provides an overview of the first results. Section
V concludes the paper.
II.
THE ADDMANU PROJECT
A.
General project description
The Lead-project AddManu [1] will form a national
research network with an international scientific board in
order to find recognition and acceptance within the Austrian
economy. Four AM (Additive Manufacturing) technologies
are brought into focus (Lithography-based AM, Fused
Filament Fabrication (FFF), InkJet and Selective Laser
Melting), which have the largest potential for industrial
application and further development (Figure 1). The most
important families of engineering materials, i.e., ceramics,
polymers and metals are included. Based on longtime
expertise of consortium partners and intensive research work,
the project will deal with those problems, which can be
considered
as
barriers
for
further
developments
and
economic use or which have a very high innovation
potential. Within AddManu.at, the R&D-activities (Research
& Development) are divided in four areas: materials
development, design and dimensioning, process-specific and
application-oriented aspects, each for metals and non-metals.
Cross-sectional issues, like system integration are covered in
a separate working package.
B.
Key facts
The work of AddManu was launched in May 2015 and
will run until April 2018th. The projects involve 19 different
partners from research and industry, which are the key
players for additive manufacturing in Austria [5]. The
partners are situated along the manufacturing value chain
from basic research to industrial implementation, from
material
development,
process
development
to
manufacturing and product development.
The following industrial sectors were addressed:
•
Materials/Surface Technologies
•
Plant Construction
•
Machine Building Industry and Engineering
•
Automotive
•
Aerospace Industries
•
Research, Science and Education
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

Figure 1.
AddManu´s overall concept [1]
C.
Objectives:
The most important objectives are:
•
Material developments for improved processing and
service properties of AM-built components, like new
powder
materials
and
hybrids
(composites,
segmented structures, etc.)
•
The innovation potential of AM-processes will
primarily depend on the designer’s creativity and the
use of sophisticated FEM (Finite element method)
[14] -software packages for light weight design. By
adaption
of methods
like topology and
shape
optimization to AM-specific issues and coupling
with extremely fine lattice structures, novel solutions
are
generated
and
new
user
markets
can
be
generated.
•
Process
developments
for
AM-technologies,
lithography-based AM, Fused Filament Fabrication
and InkJet.
•
The
industrial
implementation
of
novel
AM-
concepts within the fundamental R&D areas will be
done in separate working packages, which are
dedicated to the branches mechanical engineering,
tooling,
automotive
engineering,
semiconductor
industry, refractory industry and aerospace industry.
Solutions will be searched, which offer significant
competitive advantages.
The most important deliverables and findings will be:
•
Development of new materials (metal powders,
ceramics and thermoplastic photopolymers) with
significantly improved material properties.
•
Development of an AM-concept to build hybrid
components made of metal/ceramics, steel/aluminum
•
Development
of
novel
lithography-based
AM-
processes with significantly improved resolution and
higher operational capacity.
•
Development
of
post-processing-methods
to
improve the surface quality of AM-built products.
•
Development of new industrial applications taking
into account the whole processing chain.
D.
Thesis of AddManu
Success stories for additive manufacturing show us that a
simple substitution of existing manufacturing technologies
without increasing the complexity of part geometry or/and a
better integration of the part functionality is not really
productive.
Therefore the AddManu project is mainly based on four
leading hypotheses: These four hypotheses determined the
research agenda of the project, the objectives, the project
structure and the consortium. These hypotheses are also
aligned with the defined goals of the call and the definition
of a “lead project” and with the industrial needs.
HYP1 Freedom of Design: Additive manufacturing
allows manufacturing of complex parts with significantly
less financial effort and with reduced equipment compared to
conventional technologies. So, a cost neutral “Freedom of
design”
exists
and
leads
to
a
higher
integration
of
functionalities in parts or units. Examples are light weight
constructions or manufacturing without assembly. One result
of this is that, overtaking existing or classic design from the
conventional manufacturing into additive manufacturing, a
main benefit from additive manufacturing is not taken into
account.
HYP2
Flexibility
of
fabrication:
Additive
manufacturing requires, in general, no tooling costs and also
low set-up costs. The outcome of this is a massive advantage
in logistics, so new business models for custom made parts
are possible. An on-side production is of great interest again,
and additive manufacturing is a key component for Europe’s
Re-Industrialization.
HYP3 Rules of scaling: The up-scaling of the part costs
in additive manufacturing is directly proportional to the
manufactured volume. Costs of additive manufactured parts
are not really depending on lot sizes. This is in contrast to
tooling based manufacturing (injection molding, forging).
So,
additive
manufacturing
has
its
advantage
in
manufacturing of high complex parts and small lot sizes.
HYP4 Process integration and shortening the value
chain:
The
classic
manufacturing
chain
consists
of
independent suppliers for material, design (CAD/CAM -
(computer-aided
design/manufacturing)
and
production
(milling/CNC
-
Computerized
Numerical
Control
-
machines). Additive manufacturing benefits from fewer
requirements as far as design for manufacturability is
concerned, but knowledge from the whole manufacturing
chain (material to production) is needed at almost every step
in the manufacturing chain to be able to profit from potential
benefits. Design, material and process are dependent on each
other. New business models must face this fact from the
beginning to be successful.
III.
PROFACTOR´S TASK
The project partner PROFACTOR [9] is inside AddManu
Workpackage Leader and is developing a basis for a multi-
material hybrid manufacturing technology based on InkJet
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

printing. The challenge is that InkJet printing should be done
on 3D curved surfaces of parts which are pre-manufactured
with other processes or technologies developed in AddManu,
i.e., an advanced FFF process. The goals of the tasks are
divided in 4 different parts which enable a new process
technology (Figure 2).
•
Development of UV (ultra violet) curable Inks for
multi-material hybrid manufacturing technologies
•
Research on printing processes using InkJet printing
on FFF pre-manufactured free-form parts.
•
System
and
process
development
of
free-form
printing using a robot based Ink-Jet printing system.
•
Development of a non-destructive quality control
system using machine vision.
The general approach of the new multi-material hybrid
manufacturing process is that additive technologies promise
new functionality.
Figure 2.
InkJet printing on curved sufaces with robots and inspection
systems
To design a pilot system, several challenges must be
solved. These challenges include: InkJet printing to apply the
imprint material on the right spot (Figure 3) and 3D machine
vision [2] (Figure 4) in combination with robotics [3][4]
(Figure 5) to position the print head above the 3D-printed
surface.
Figure 3.
Optical micrograph of InkJet printed UV-curable ink on a 3D-
printed surface.
The curvature resulting from the 3D-printing process can
clearly be seen in Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Illustration of the use of the Candelor software library to
identify objects (grey/blue) within a 3D pointcloud (red). [2]
Figure 5.
Photograph of a robot while measuring
A detailed work plan with different steps and milestones
is defined to reach the goal for a prototype installation.
A.
Description of activities
The first step is the development of functional special
inks
which
optimize
the
3D
surface
of
an
FDM
manufactured part with respect to chemical/mechanical
stability and water tightness printable on 3D FFF surfaces.
Additional to this, a second special Ink is developed. This
Ink is for surfaces with special haptics (rubber like).
These special Inks will be printed by a robot-controlled
Ink Jet head on 3D free form surfaces.
The robot assisted 3D InkJet system and the necessary
process planning software respecting the critical parameters
(printing distance, angle of printing head to the vertical,
printing velocity and angle to the substrate) and a collision
free path planning will be designed and developed. Enabling
a constant coating (printing) speed flow rate and quantity
will be coordinated and highly dynamic.
Recognizing the topography of the substrate to be coated
and for determination and controlling of critical parameters it
is necessary to implement a 3D-control system. This could
be also used as quality control system. Surface roughness
and other fails are registered, rated and corrected if
necessary.
The goal is a proof of concept demonstrator for a
multilayer printing of FFF manufactured 3D printed freeform
parts using InkJet printing. It will be only printed on the
areas where it is necessary for correction of geometry or
functionalisation of the part. The technology to be developed
is based on existing PROFACTOR Knowhow [10].
B.
Method:
According to concept descript above, special InkJet Inks
for multi-material hybrid-manufacturing will be developed.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

A test bed for robot assisted 3D InkJet Printing will be
built in parallel and the necessary software for the control
system developed. Developed InkJet Inks will be tested and
evaluated
against
their
printing
behavior
and
their
functionality. For identification of the part topography an
adequate
3D
control
system
will
be
designed
and
implemented.
C.
Deliverables
•
Functional special Inks with optimised properties
(chemical/mechanical
stability,
water
tightness)
printable on 3D FFF surfaces.
•
Functional special Inks with optimised haptics
printable on 3D FFF surfaces.
•
Robot controlled InkJet printing head with process
control for printing on 3D free forms.
•
Non-destructive quality control system based on
machine vision.
IV.
FIRST RESULTS
The first results of the project are available at this time,
after one year from the start of the project, and are
represented mostly by theoretical/concept level results. The
design of the robot based process is finished and an analysis
of possible technologies for vision control systems was done.
Additionally, the first experimental results of printing trials
on curved surfaces are available.
A.
Robot controled InkJet printing head with process
control for free form printing
The work was divided into software and hardware related
research.
Hardware: The necessary hardware is the printing head,
ink transport system, meniscus control system, drivers for the
printing head with master control unit und slave control unit
and the software for controlling the printing head and to
integrate the head into the robot.
Parameters which were important for the decision of the
printing head included only one supplier for all components
and also an open software system. At the end, a Ricoh Gen 4
[11] printing head was chosen (Figure 6).
Figure 6.
Ricoh Gen 4 MH2420 printing head
Reasons for the decision:
•
Compact
Dimension:
In
general,
compact
dimensions are an advantage for the integration on
the robot. Additional it’s a benefit for printing on
curved surfaces if the printing area is not too broad.
Other printing heads are broader, e.g., Dimatix
Spectra 150mm, Xaar 501 125mm. Konica Minolta
512 printing head is match-able with 67mm wide
(32,4mm printing wide). A smaller printing enables
a better printed image over the total printed area,
because the variation of the distance from printing
head to the surface can be better controlled.
•
Integrated heating: If we use a printing head with
integrated heater, then inks which do not have a
suitable viscosity at room temperature could also be
used. It is not necessary to heat the Ink transport
system and therefore the whole system could be
easier integrated into the robot system.
•
Dumping: The printing head could be also used in a
dumped or sloped position for printing. This is an
essential feature for printing on curved surfaces.
•
Compatibility with project partner TIGER´s [8]
Heavy Duty Ink: TIGER Inks were already tested
with this printing head.
Mechanical design and
construction: Based on an
analyses of accessibility the most convenient robot position
(Industrial Robot model Stäubli TX90L) [12] for a square
working space (800x800mm) was determined (Figure 7).
Figure 7.
Simulation – Analyses of accessibility
Requirements to the tool holder are
•
Automatic tooling system for an easy demounting of
the printing head from the robot arm
•
Mechanical fixtures for
o
Printing head (Ricoh Gen IV MH2420)
o
Driver board (Ardeje)
o
Ink-storage (2 nozzles with connecting tubes)
o
Automatic tooling system
•
For safety reasons the robot system has to operate
behind
a
mechanical
disconnecting
safety
installation (fence)
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

•
A PC-working place is situated near the system
•
The controller for the printing head must be situated
close to the robot caused by limited length of wires
(robot foot)
For the robot assisted InkJet printing process, the
necessary system components are shown in Figure 8.
Figure 8.
System overview of robot based printing system
A PC creates a robot program for guiding the printing
head simultaneously with a command list for the (printing
head) controller. This controller starts the real printing
process. For synchronizing of single printing commands with
the spatial position we cannot use path points, because the
necessary high frequencies are not available. So we use
between the sychronisation points a trigger signal which is
generated by a frequency generator and depends on the
instantaneous velocity.
Software: For the configuration and the activation of the
control a firmware of the controller manufacturer is used.
Figure 9
shows the suggested workflow for printing
(disregarding the path planning for the robot).
Using the software module „Image composition“ a
printing picture is created and prepared for the Printing Head
controller by a special „Raster Image Processing“ Software -
module.
In this step, vector-graphics are calculated into raster-
graphics, resolutions are converted, color channels separated
and color management processes executed. Precompiled
information is sent to the controller. This controller needs
afterwards only a start signal (Enable) and the “feed” signal
(synchronized with the robot movement)
Figure 9.
Work flow „priniting on an known path“
B.
First printing trails with heavy duty ink on curved
surfaces
First InkJet printing trials were done on 3D printed
surfaces (FFF) using a Heavy Dury Ink from TIGER. Used
Substrate were FFF printed parts without any pre-treatment.
The material was white PLA (Polylactides from Orbi-Tech)
[13] which was printed with a HAGE 3Dp-A2 printer in the
Labs of PROFACTOR. The thickness was, in most cases
0.4mm printed at 210°C. The geometry of the teste samples
was a simply cuboid (75x25x10mm³, 30% infill). The side
areas were used for the InkJet printing (Figure 10).
Figure 10. Explaination of test printing
In the first trails, the results are three important findings:
•
Adhesion on PLA substrate is very good, even
without pre-treatment of the substrate good results
were reached.
•
The printed image was strongly influenced by the
capillary effects. These capillaries occur during the
FFF process.
•
Curing with UV-LEDS (Ultraviolet Light-emitting
diode) (395nm) worked very well in a few seconds
(also in Air).
Figures 11 -14 are showing the first test samples. Missing
horizontal lines are caused by suboptimal parameters on the
used Dimatix printer and are not dependent upon the 3D
printed substrate.
Figure 11. Overview of printed sample, lenghth ~ 55mm
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

Figure 12. Details of printed sample
Figure 13. Angular view of sample, FFF Layers are visible well, luting
caused by cappilary – effects
By choosing a greater distance between the drops the
capillary effect could be reduced. It is better (for example)
printing 2x50 µm drop distance than using 1x25µm. A
smaller layer thickness (0.2mm instead 0.4mm) raised the
possibility that drops are getting inside the small channels.
Figure 14. PLA 0.2 mm thickness-missing lines as a consequence of not
using opmimized printer parameters
V.
CONCLUISION AND FURTHER WORK
A.
Conclusion
Multilayer printing on FFF manufactured parts needs a
lot of processing and also material development to be
successfully implemented and brought to Industry. The first
steps of a proof of concept show promising results, but each
component of the system has to be optimized on its own and
in the system.
B.
Further work and next planned steps
Based on the studies and on the results of the first
printing tests, the next steps will be:
•
Installation and implementing of printing head and
robot in the PROFACTOR Lab
•
Ongoing printing tests and generation of parameters
for further Ink Development and for advanced Robot
set up
•
Trails for Quality control with existing equipment of
PROFACTOR and implementing the best fitting
technology into the printing system
•
Surveying test samples from other project partner to
find a set of parameters for quality control
•
Ongoing Haptic- Ink development by project partner
TIGER and testing this new inks at the lab and with
the robot system
•
Optimisation of printing parameters and comparison
of equal inks with different colours.
All steps will be done in a strong interaction with
industry to have a feedback and a “closed loop” development
which meets the industrial requirements.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The project is funded by the Austrian Ministry for
Transport, Innovation and Technology (BMVIT) [6]) and the
Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG) [7]. It is a
lighthouse project in the frame of the initiative “production
of the future”. We also acknowledge the Company TIGER
[8] coatings for supplying the UV-curable ink.
REFERENCES
[1]
AddManu: Avialable online at www.addmanu.at
[2]
Candelor: Avialable online at http://candelor.com
[3]
E. Weigl, W. Heidl, E. Lughofer, C. Eitzinger, and T.
Radauer, On improving performance of surface inspection
systems by on-line active learning and flexible classifier
updates, Machine Vision and Applications, 27(1), 103-127,
Jan. 2016, doi:10.1007/s00138-015-0731-9.
[4]
E. Weigl, S. Zambal, M. Stöger, C. Eitzinger, Photometric
stereo sensor for robot-assisted industrial quality inspection of
coated composite material surfaces, QCAV 2015, SPIE
Proceedings Volume 9534, 2015, doi:10.1117/12.2182750
[5]
Austrias Key Players in Additive Manufacuring avialable
online
at
http://www.addmanu.at/de/4886/
and
http://www.addmanu.at/de/4885/
[6]
BMVIT- Avialable online at www.bmvit.gv.at/en/index.html
[7]
FFG – Avialable online at https://www.ffg.at/
[8]
TIGER - Avialable online at http://www.tiger-coatings.com/
[9]
PROFACTOR – Avialable online at www.profactor.at
[10] ANIPF
project:
Avialable
online
at:
http://www.profactor.at/index.php?id=895&L=1
[11] Ricoh
Gen
4:
Avialable
online
at
http://www.rpsa.ricoh.com/gen4.html
[12] Stäubli
TX90L:
Avialable
online
at:
http://www.upc.edu/sct/documents_equipament/d_181_id-
492.pdf
[13] Orbi-Tech: Avialable online at www.orbi-tech.de
[14] FEM Software: Avialabel online at: http://3dsim.com/
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

