COTS or Custom Made? Design Decisions for Industrial Control Systems
Falk Salewski
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Muenster University of Applied Sciences
Germany
Email: falk.salewski@fh-muenster.de
Abstract—In the area of industrial control systems, the choice
between custom made (CM) electronics and the use of commercial
of the shelf (COTS) components is often not trivial. Especially,
when required quantities or speciﬁc requirements do not give a
clear sign for selection. From a pure cost point of view (devel-
opment costs and product costs) a decision might look trivial,
but a broader view helps to perform an sound decision. In this
work, decision criteria and a decision method are presented for
industrial control systems targeting COTS devices, CM devices
or a combination of both. Moreover, a case study with three
industrial control systems is presented showing the application
of the approach.
Keywords–commercial of the shelf; electronic design decisions;
industrial control units
I.
INTRODUCTION
In industrial automation, commercial of the shelf (COTS)
components as programmable logic controllers (PLCs) and
industrial PCs (IPCs) are widely used as control units (For this
paper, we follow the following deﬁnition for COTS: A COTS
device can be bought from a catalog without modiﬁcations [1]).
In some applications, companies are faced with the decision
if a custom made (CM) design of a control unit might be
beneﬁcial for their products and systems. In other application,
a change from a custom made design of control units to COTS
components is discussed.
A custom made development often comes with an opti-
mized functionality and an attractive price of the ﬁnal product,
but involves much more than own development activities.
Especially in case of safety or mission critical systems, it
has to be assured that speciﬁc requirements (temperature
range, failure rate, electrical robustness, etc.) are met over the
complete product life cycle (and not only with a prototype
during development). While a custom made design allows full
control of the ﬁnal product, all relevant aspects have to be
veriﬁed. These activities are performed on basis of prototypes
and ﬁrst series devices, but also have to be reconsidered in case
of changes (e.g., obsolete memory chips require replacement).
On the other hand, the use of COTS components often
requires more than applying a plug and play procedure. In the
example of COTS components in critical applications, it could
be required to establish speciﬁc relationships with the suppliers
and/or to perform additional tests on the COTS components
(examples can be found in [1]).
In both cases, the complete life cycle of the product has
to be considered for a sound selection. An approach for
such a selection is the so called Total Cost of Ownership
(TCO) [2] that aims to consider all cost factors of a product
during product life. To supplement existing approaches with
the required technical data, this paper deals with the differences
of the following approaches for industrial control units:
1)
Commercial of the shelf (COTS)
2)
Custom made (CM)
3)
Combination of 1 and 2.
The main focus of this paper is on electronic control units
(including their software), but not on pure software products
as discussed for example in [3].
As a basis for a systematic selection procedure, we collect
relevant selection criteria in the following Section II. Next, the
specialties of the three approaches are analyzed based on their
product life cycle in Section III. Based on these two sections,
a selection procedure is presented in Section IV, followed by
a case study in Section V. After a discussion in Section VI,
the paper ends with a conclusion.
II.
TARGETS FOR SELECTION
Before having a closer look on the different approaches,
it is necessary to deﬁne the key targets to be fulﬁlled by
the devices. Common targets often cited are fast time to
market, improved costs and competitive advantages [4]. These
competitive advantages describe product properties beside the
price and differ between application domains. In previous
work, we already identiﬁed a set of impact factors for hardware
platforms [5]. For this work, we take a system view on the
control units (electronics + software + mechanical). Moreover,
we assume that the functional requirements are fulﬁlled for
industrial environments in case of all candidates. The resulting
set of impacts is presented in Figure 1 and will be further
described below.
A. Time to Market
A fast time to market is an obvious target. As soon as the
product is on the market amortization of non-recurrent costs
can start. Moreover, a fast time to market can be a competitive
advantage to competitors.
B. Costs
As with time to market, it is an obvious target to keep
the costs low. However, several aspects have an impact on the
overall costs for a product. In case of recurrent costs, it is
the cost of purchasing or manufacturing the product itself. In
addition, license costs for software (drivers, operating systems,
etc.) and/or hardware modules (e.g., inclusion of externally
developed modules in custom made products) as well as
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-430-5
CENICS 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

Technical System
Electronic 
control unit
Product 
properties
Costs
Time to 
market
Recurring Costs
-
Product costs 
(manufacturing or 
purchasing)
-
Licenses (e.g. SW)
-
Maintenance
Availability of product
Reliability, Safety
Security, IP-Protection
Adaptability
Energy efficiency
Size, Weight
Non-Recurring Costs
-
Development
-
Manufacturing setup
-
Integration
-
Verification & 
Validation
-
Certification
-
Documentation
customer 
perception
Figure 1. Targets for selection of electronic control units
costs resulting from later maintenance activities have to be
considered. The non-recurrent costs for a custom made control
unit include development costs (including costs for prototypes
and test activities during development) as well as costs for
the preparation of the series production (creation and test of
tooling, as soldering frames, adapters for automatic assembly,
programs for test equipment as automated optical inspection
(AOI), in circuit tester (ICT), and/or functional tester, test
adapters and speciﬁc test electronics). Further non-recurrent
costs that also appear for COTS systems are the costs of inte-
gration of the electronic control system into the target system
as well as those for veriﬁcation, validation and certiﬁcation
activities (performed before and/or after integration in target
system). Often, at least certiﬁcation activities are executed
on system level, but beneﬁt from pre-certiﬁed components.
Finally, costs resulting from required documentation activities
(product + development process) have to be considered.
C. Product Properties
While we assume that all candidates can fulﬁll the func-
tional requirements, further properties could make a difference.
A ﬁrst important property is the availability of the product
(availability in this context is not the operational availability
but the possibility to purchase or manufacture the product).
For any application, it is important that the required control
electronics are available for new products and replacements of
defect units.
As many industrial control electronics perform safety
and/or mission critical tasks, their reliability and functional
safety is another important factor. As evaluated in previous
work, the choice of the hardware platform has impacts on the
safety properties of the overall system [6]. The speciﬁc needs
have to be analyzed for each application individually.
Security is another important property. Especially the in-
creasing interconnection of industrial automation systems via
the internet requires corresponding measures [7], [8], [9].
Additionally, a protection of the intellectual property (IP:
ﬁrmware, electronics, design, etc.) is often desirable to protect
own products from plagiarizing. As with functional safety
and reliability, the requirements depend on the individual
application.
For applications that evolve during their life time (e.g., an
industrial plant undergoing modernization) or those in which
a control unit should be applied in several different target
applications (perhaps not all of them deﬁned today), it is
desirable to work with systems that can be adapted to different
or changing requirements. Examples are modular PLCs which
allow to add a variety of different plug-in modules (analog
and digital I/O, communication interfaces, special function
modules). Another approach is to deﬁne major parts of the
product via software or reconﬁgurable hardware (e.g., FPGAs).
While energy efﬁciency of control units was predominantly
an issue in mobile and battery powered devices in the past, it
is now also an issue in all industrial application (especially if
a high number of control units is applied). Additionally, size
and/or weight is an issue in several applications.
D. Customer Perception
Finally, an impact that could be important is the customer
perception. While a decision could not be the optimum choice,
it still might be the optimum solution from the customers
perspective. As an example, the use of a COTS device with
a good reputation might increase customer’s conﬁdence in the
product although it does not differ from alternatives from a
technical point of view.
III.
PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE
In this section, a typical product life cycle is presented in
Figure 2 for a design based on COTS control units, a design
with custom made control units and a combination of COTS
and CM components.
Following accepted processes, the product life cycle starts
with a speciﬁcation. While the creation of a sound speciﬁcation
is a major task, we assume it is already existent for the
next step. Based on the speciﬁcation, an implementation could
be realized in the three ways presented above. Additionally,
each product life cycle ends with some end of life activities,
typically decommissioning. As the impact of this phase is
considered low for the selection process, end of life activities
are not considered in this paper. The following subsections
deal with the remaining phases for the three approaches.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-430-5
CENICS 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

COTS 
selection
Specification
Integration
Verification & 
Validation
Certification
Development incl.
Verification & Validation
Specification
Integration
Certification
Verification & 
Validation
Prototypes
Manufacturing 
Setup
COTS 
qualification
Iterations
CM
COTS
Electronic Control Unit
System under Control (e.g. single machine, part of factory, …)
Operation, 
Maintenance 
and Repair
Optimization Series Production incl. Test
Serial Production
Modifications and Retrofit
Development
COTS 
qualification
COTS 
selection
COTS
+ CM
Figure 2. Product life cycle for different approaches (length of phases does not necessarily reﬂect the effort required for this phase)
A. COTS
In case of a COTS design, a suitable device has to be
selected. The aim is to identify an existing product that fulﬁlls
the requirements given in the speciﬁcation. Moreover, further
aspects as those presented above could be important for the
selection, although often not explicitly stated in the speciﬁ-
cation. Depending on the application, it might be useful to
reconsider the speciﬁcation, if no suitable COTS device could
be identiﬁed. Moreover, the fulﬁllment of the requirements is
often not only determined by the product itself and related
aspects (e.g., documentation), but also by the relationship
to the supplier of this device (support during integration,
operation, maintenance, long time availability, insight into
veriﬁcation and validation activities, willingness to perform
further veriﬁcation and validation activities if needed, etc.).
Especially for critical applications, additional veriﬁcation ac-
tivities could be required to apply COTS devices (see
[1]
as an example for military applications). If these veriﬁcation
activities are required and cannot be performed by the supplier,
own veriﬁcation activities have to be performed with the COTS
device.
In the next phase, the selected COTS device has to be
integrated into the application (for this approach, we assume
that no modiﬁcations are required to integrate the COTS
device). In this phase, the knowledge of the COTS device’s
properties is of great importance. Gaining this knowledge
could be time consuming, but could be eased by support given
by the supplier (good documentation, qualiﬁed hotline support,
tools supporting integration, etc.).
While veriﬁcation and validation of the control unit itself
has already been targeted, it is the overall system that has to
fulﬁll the requirements. Thus, veriﬁcation and validation activ-
ities have to be performed also on system level. Based on the
application, also certiﬁcations are required or recommended
(e.g., functional safety applications). Several COTS devices
come with some pre-certiﬁcation for certain applications (as
the mentioned safety applications). These pre-certiﬁcations
typically ease the certiﬁcation activities on system level.
B. Custom Made
The CM approach requires development and manufacturing
activities. During development, prototypes are implemented
and veriﬁed on basis of the speciﬁcation. Design decisions
have to consider functional aspects, as well as further impacts
(see Figure 1). Some aspects for COTS apply here for speciﬁc
integrated circuits used in the design. They can simplify design
and veriﬁcation activities, but also lead to the challenges
listed in the COTS section (e.g., availability). Especially in
complex designs, often several prototype stages are required
until veriﬁcation and validation activities are passed success-
fully. Additionally, an ideal design is optimized for later
manufacturing reducing manufacturing times and tooling costs.
Generally speaking, the aim is to deal with the complexity
in development and manufacturing [10]. For optimum time-
to-market, the preparation for manufacturing is started before
the development activities are ﬁnished. The required synchro-
nization between development and manufacturing activities are
often challenging [11]. Moreover, to determine the start time
of preparation activities, a tradeoff between risks of changes
in the product relevant for production and reduced preparation
time is necessary.
In the following steps, optimizations of the manufacturing
process take place, mostly to optimize manufacturing time and
quality. Integration, veriﬁcation and validation activities can
start with prototypes, but ﬁnal tests and certiﬁcation typically
require ﬁrst samples from the serial manufacturing process.
In case of a COTS product, analysis of defect products, ob-
solete components or changes in regulatory requirements (e.g.,
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-430-5
CENICS 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

EMC requirements) are typically performed by the supplier.
Also in case of a CM design, this analysis has to be performed
periodically to check if changes in the product are required.
While these activities could be outsourced, the effort for these
activities has to be considered. Moreover, required changes
could result in costly redesign activities (new veriﬁcation,
validation and certiﬁcation activities might be needed), a risk
worn by the supplier in case of COTS components.
C. Combination
The process of combining COTS components with a cus-
tom made design follows a combination of both processes.
Typically, the product core is implemented with a COTS
component and the interfaces are custom made, but also other
parts as interfaces or power supplies can be implemented with
COTS parts. Thus, during development all aspect of a custom
made design have to be followed in addition to a selection
of suitable COTS components (lower part of Figure 2, only
the differences to the CM process are displayed). While the
use of COTS components comes with some challenges to be
considered (see section above), it can simplify the remaining
development signiﬁcantly. An example is the use of a COTS
single board PC on a custom made printed circuit board (PCB)
populated with interface and power supply circuits (and some
application speciﬁc functions if needed, see also Section V).
This combination can simplify the manufacturing process if the
main PCB is populated with comparatively simple components
only. Furthermore, PC parts tend to become easily obsolete,
a problem now covered by the supplier of the PC board. But
the supplier of the PC board beneﬁts from his high production
volume. Thus, the resulting price of the PC module could be
lower than to manufacture low quantities in house.
IV.
SELECTION PROCEDURE
Based on the targets presented in Section II and the
product life cycles presented in the preceding Section III, a
systematic selection is feasible. For an objective evaluation,
it is recommended to evaluate each factor in a team (at least
technical and sales representatives). In case a custom made
design might be the desired choice, experts from the area of
electronic development and manufacturing should be consulted
(internal or external partners). This way, quantitative data can
be achieved for costs and time-to-market aspects. However, for
reliable data, a sound speciﬁcation and ”trustworthy” experts
are required.
Besides costs and time to market, the targets are of qualita-
tive nature. While a qualitative analysis is probably sufﬁcient
in many cases, a rating system can be applied in case of all
qualitative aspects (e.g., rating of products availability from 1
to 10) if needed, for example in form of a decision matrix.
Rating can be agreed on in the team or it can be build from
a set of individual ratings. Further approaches for these so
called multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) can be found
in literature (e.g., [12]).
V.
CASE STUDY
In this section, three existing control units are evaluated
based on the criteria deﬁned before. The emphasis of the
following description is on the properties of the selected
system and not on the selection process (devices already exist).
A. Three Control Units
1. Machine for sorting metal parts: The control unit is re-
quired to switch electric motors and pneumatic valves and read
several position sensors and an analogue input for measuring
the metal parts. Moreover, the status of the machine has to be
displayed on a screen. The volume of this machine is ≤ 50
per year.
2. User terminal for embroidery machine: The Control
unit has to read the required embroidery pattern from a USB
stick and display it on the screen of the terminal. Moreover,
user commands have to be read from the terminal. A set of
commands is computed and send to the embroidery machine
via a proprietary interface. The volume is 800 units per year.
3. Window control unit: This electronic unit has to control
a DC motor (PWM, encoders) based on sensor information
and a proprietary bus interface. Moreover, the available space
for this device is limited to 100x40x18mm. The volume here
is ≥ 1000 units per year.
B. Evaluation
An overview of the evaluation can be found in Figure 3
while details will be described below.
1) Case A: The low quantity of required products indicate
a COTS device as best choice. However, a conﬂict could arise
from the remaining targets. The non recurrent costs, as well
as the required time to market clearly beneﬁt from the use of
a COTS component. The recurrent price is probably higher
than a custom made approach, but a quantity of 50 units in
most cases does not allow to amortize non recurrent costs
for a custom made design incl. veriﬁcation. Finally, product
properties have to be considered. Size and Weight targets, as
well as energy efﬁciency, which could be a tough challenge for
COTS approaches, are not critical here. For this application,
a modular programmable logic controller (PLC) has been
chosen. This approach allows to adapt the control units in
case of later changes. Moreover, this approach allows to use
similar approaches in different machines. During the selection
of the device, the availability of this device or potential
replacements is crucial. Well established systems, as well as
individual contracts can mitigate the risks. Additionally, the use
of standardized components (including the programming lan-
guages) ease the migration to alternative systems when needed.
Finally, no speciﬁc safety, security or reliability requirements
were given in this application. However, speciﬁc PLC systems
targeting these requirements are available. Based on this brief
evaluation, a COTS approach is the optimum solution for this
application.
2) Case B: In this application, the need for a proprietary
interface requires at least some custom made design. Moreover,
the visualization requirements for the terminal screen require
a certain amount of processing power. In this application,
a combination of a COTS processor board was chosen in
combination with a custom made main board implementing
the power supply and required interfaces. The use of the COTS
board was driven by the following aspects:
•
simpliﬁes design and manufacturing of main board (no
ﬁne pitch components, less high speed design)
•
in required quantities, COTS board has an attractive
price compared to CM approach.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-430-5
CENICS 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

Case A
Case B
Case C
Machine for sorting metal parts
User terminal for embroidery machine
Window control unit
 ≤ 50
800
≥ 1000
COTS
COTS + CM
CM
Product
high, but according to low quantity best 
with COTS device (here PLC)
combination of a COTS processor board 
with a custom made main board allows a 
competitive product price
custom made design allows cost optimized 
approach (for given constraints)
Licenses
no licence for operation 
open source operating system
none
Maintenance
diagnosis features supported by PLC, 
modular PLC allows replacement/ repair of 
modules  
individual repair/replacement of processor 
and main board possible, maintenance 
features have to be custom made
diagnosis features implemented via bus 
interface
Development
HW: only selection & integration
SW: based on PLC operating system => 
application only
HW: only main board + selection processor 
board & integration
SW: operating system has to be adapted to 
custom design + application SW
full development of electronics and 
software
Manufacturing 
Setup
none
manufacturing of main board + integration 
processor board + test in manufacturing;
separate processor board, no fine pitch 
devices on main board => simplifies 
manufacturing process
full manufacturing setup incl. test required
Integration
HW setup with COTS IDE + wiring of sensors 
and actuators
1) main and processor board
2) operating system and HW
3) application
HW/SW integration in development,
integration with remaining system via bus 
interface
V&V
focus on SW + overall system
complete system 
complete system 
Certification
not required for control unit
EMC test for CE marking
EMC test for CE marking,
further tests with complete system 
Documentation
SW + wiring (hardware configuration saved 
in project data)
full documentation,
exisiting documentation for processor board 
and operating system can be included
full documentation
Availability of 
product
depends on PLC supplier,  long term 
industrial availability provided
depends on supplier of processor board 
(long term contract), processor board can 
be replaced (redesign main board + 
comparable alternative processor board)
depends only on components used, 
obsolences can be handeld with 2nd source 
components, if needed in combination with 
redesign (HW or HW+SW)
Reliability & Safety
no specific requirements, COTS HW is 
assumed to be well tested,
COTS devices typically = black box, but 
reliability and safety data is available for 
certain devices
complete reliability analysis possible for 
main board, data für processor board 
available from supplier.
No specific safety requirements. 
(implementation on main board could be an 
option if required)
complete reliability analysis possible for 
electronics.
Specific safety requirements could be 
implemented in SW and HW (emergency 
stop, life beat)
Security & IP-
Protection
supported, setting via COTS IDE
processor supports protection of program 
memory
processor supports protection of program 
memory
Adaptability 
modular PLC systems allows to add further 
modules (I/O, special function, …), other 
devices can be added via bus interface
full control of SW,
custom main board allows adaptations, but 
these changes require redesigns of the 
hardware (incl. verification and 
certification)
full control of SW,
full control of HW, but changes require 
redesign (incl. verification and certification)
Energy efficiency
COTS devices with acceptable energy 
efficiency are available
the custom made design and the selection 
of a suitable processor board allows an 
optimized design
stand by <0,4W => low power controller in 
combination with suitable HW and SW 
design (sleep modi)
Size & Weight
no specific requirements
size of PCB determined by 10" screen (not 
critical)
no specific weight requirements
critical => only achievable with custom 
design
fast (weeks)
medium (months),
with COTS processor board, the SW 
development can start before custom made 
HW is ready,
risk of design iterations
medium-high (months),
with evaluation board, the SW development 
can start before custom made HW is ready,
risk of design iterations
selected brand of COTS device supports 
image of high quality product
customized solution allows separation from 
competitors
customized solution allows to meet the 
targets for size and product price
customer perception
Targets ↓ Choice →
Case :
Description : 
Assumed annual quantity :
time to market
Costs
Recurring
Costs
Non-
Recurring
Product
Properties
Figure 3. Case Study
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-430-5
CENICS 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

•
components as memory chips change frequently. In
COTS approach, the qualiﬁcation of new chips is done
by supplier.
•
an approach of a complete COTS user terminal in
combination with an interface converter was resulting
in a signiﬁcantly higher product price.
Also the remaining cost related factors show no disadvantage
of this approach compared to a full custom made design. With
respect to time to market this approach beneﬁts from the COTS
components in comparison to the CM approach, as a major part
of the design could be implemented as a pretested module. The
product properties are inﬂuenced as follows:
As the COTS board has a major impact on the availability,
a long term contract was set up with the supplier. Never-
theless, a migration to another processor board is possible
(probably involves redesign). Reliability analysis is possible
as the complete design is known. Optimizations could have
been performed if required, as well as the implementation
of safety functions on the main board. A protection of the
program memory is supported by the processor, no further
security or IP protection requirements exist. Adaptability can
be achieved by modiﬁcations of the main board. However, this
approach requires redesigns (incl. veriﬁcation activities). In
this application, it is expected to handle all modiﬁcations via
SW. Customization allows optimization of energy, size and
weight properties. However, non of these are considered as
critical here.
Finally, a custom made design allows signiﬁcant separation
from competitors (customers perception). In summary, the
application beneﬁts from the chosen combination of COTS
and CM.
3) Case C: Size and product price restrictions are major
impacts for this application and could not be fulﬁlled with
available COTS components. The non-recurring costs for the
required design and manufacturing activities are signiﬁcantly
higher than with a COTS approach, but could be amortized
by the expected quantity in an acceptable period. Costs for
veriﬁcation and certiﬁcation activities could be held on a
moderate level as the complete system was already undergoing
sufﬁcient procedures. With full control of HW and SW design,
speciﬁc project properties could be fulﬁlled. The time to
market was (with almost a year) long compared to a COTS
approach, but not critical as the development of the complete
system took similar time.
VI.
DISCUSSION
While the emphasis of the presented case study is on
the differences of the three cases, the compiled data can be
used as the basis for a systematic decision process. Even in a
pure qualitative approach, the collection and evaluation of the
proposed targets and the consideration of the design process
prevent that important factors are neglected during the decision
process. If required, quantitative approaches as described in
Section IV can be applied to further formalize the selection.
A ﬁrst impression could be that the decision for or against
COTS devices is solely driven by the quantity of the required
units. For sure, in extreme cases (less than 10 units, more
than 100000 units) the decision is probably simple. However,
for medium numbers and depending on further targets to be
fulﬁlled by the control unit the decision process differs. As an
example, a product with a quantity of 1000 units/year could
be better implemented with COTS (high volume product that
perfectly matches requirements) and a unit only needed a few
100 times a year might be better in CM (e.g., when other
targets do not allow a pure COTS approach). Additionally,
the importance of the different targets could be rated very
differently for different applications. If for example the avail-
ability of a product is rated very high and CM design is
possible with standard components (all with 2nd source), a
high independence from suppliers could be achieved by a CM
design.
VII.
CONCLUSION
Comparing COTS and CM approaches (or combinations
of both) requires more than just an analysis of cost and
time to market. Moreover, the overall costs (recurring and
non-recurring) are compiled from several aspects. This paper
presents a set of important targets to be considered in the
decision process, as well as impacts on the product life cycle
of the different approaches. A systematic selection process can
be based on this evaluation as demonstrated in a case study
with three industrial control units.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Hall and R. Naff, “The cost of cots,” in Proceedings of the Digital
Avionics Systems Conference.
IEEE, 2000, pp. 20–24.
[2]
F. Wynstra and K. Hurkens, “Total cost and total value of ownership,”
in Perspektiven des Supply Management, M. Eig, Ed.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 463–482.
[3]
K. Megas, G. Belli, W. B. Frakes, J. Urbano, and R. Anguswamy, “A
study of cots integration projects: Product characteristics, organization,
and life cycle models,” in Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM
Symposium on Applied Computing, ser. SAC ’13.
New York, NY,
USA: ACM, 2013, pp. 1025–1030.
[4]
E. R. Hnatek, Practical Reliability Of Electronic Equipment And
Products.
Marcel Decker, 2003.
[5]
F. Salewski and S. Kowalewski, “Hardware platform design decisions in
embedded systems - a systematic teaching approach,” in Special Issue
on the Second Workshop on Embedded System Education (WESE),
vol. 4, no. 1, SIGBED Review.
ACM, Jan. 2007, pp. 27–35.
[6]
——, “The effect of hardware platform selection on safety-critical soft-
ware in embedded systems: Empirical evaluations,” in IEEE Symposium
on Industrial Embedded Systems (SIES’07).
IEEE, July 2007, pp. 78–
85.
[7]
E. Byres and J. Lowe, “The myths and facts behind cyber security risks
for industrial control systems,” in Proceedings of the VDE Kongress,
vol. 116, 2004, pp. 213–218.
[8]
K. Stouffer, J. Falco, and K. Scarfone, “Guide to industrial control
systems (ics) security,” NIST special publication, 2011, pp. 800–82.
[9]
C. Alcaraz, R. Roman, P. Najera, and J. Lopez, “Security of industrial
sensor network-based remote substations in the context of the internet
of things,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 11, no. 3, 2013, pp. 1091–1104.
[10]
W. ElMaraghya, H. ElMaraghy, T. Tomiyamac, and L. Monostorid,
“Complexity in engineering design and manufacturing,” CIRP Annals
- Manufacturing Technology, vol. 61, no. 2, 2012, pp. 793 – 814.
[11]
E. Puik, P. Gielen, D. Telgen, L. van Moergestel, and D. Ceglarek,
“A generic systems engineering method for concurrent development
of products and manufacturing equipment,” in Precision Assembly
Technologies and Systems, ser. IFIP Advances in Information and Com-
munication Technology, S. Ratchev, Ed.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2014, vol. 435, pp. 139–146.
[12]
E. Triantaphyllou, “Multi-criteria decision making methods: A compar-
ative study,” Applied Optimization, vol. 44, 2000.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-430-5
CENICS 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

