Interaction of Semiconductor Laser Chirp with Fiber Dispersion:  
Impact on WDM Directly Modulated System Performance 
 
Carmina del Río Campos 
Dpto. de Sistemas de Información  y 
Telecomunicación Universidad San Pablo CEU 
Madrid, Spain 
e-mail: carmina.eps@ceu.es 
Paloma R. Horche, Alfredo Martín Mínguez 
ETSI Telecomunicación  
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid 
Madrid, Spain 
e-mail: phorche@tfo.upm.es  
e-mail: alfredo.minguez@tfo.upm.es
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we have analyzed the interaction of 
semiconductor laser chirp with the fiber chromatic dispersion 
characteristics in order to study the impact on a Wavelength 
Division Multiplexing (WDM) directly modulated system 
performance. Also, we have demonstrated that the system 
transmission performance depends, strongly, on the Directly 
Modulated Laser (DML) output power and its adiabatic and 
transient chirp parameters. We have calculated by simulation, 
that the effect of DMLs chirp can be compensated by a 
negative dispersion fiber in a specific range of the DML output 
power. In addition, a pulse broadened by the positive 
dispersion fiber can be equalized using self-phase-modulation 
(SPM) in the optical fiber. The majority of metro and access 
networks are made up of conventional single-mode fibers 
(SMF) which are positive dispersion fibers. We have 
demonstrated that the optimum compensation is always 
feasible for such fibers by changing the optical output power in 
the DML laser. Furthermore, simulations suggest that this 
technique is able to enhance the performance of directly 
modulated wavelength division multiplexed systems if the 
power of each channel is chosen correctly. 
Keywords- directly modulated laser; adiabatic and transient 
chirp; linewidth enhancement factor; adiabatic coefficient; fiber 
chromatic dispersion.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Direct modulation laser schemes have been used during 
last few years because of their intrinsic simplicity  and  cost-
effectiveness,  especially  when  applied  to  metro  and  
access  networks. However, frequency chirp characteristics 
of directly modulated lasers (DMLs) limit significantly the 
maximum achievable transmission distance over standard 
single-mode fibers (SMF).   
A number of different approaches have been studied to 
improve transmission performance using DMLs, including 
cutting down the chirp externally using a narrow band-pass 
filter and the deployment of a negative dispersion fiber. With 
respect to this last approach, others authors have proposed 
their use (i.e., MetroCorTM fiber) in order to take advantage 
of the positive transient chirp of DMLs to increase 
transmission distances, [1-4]. However, typical metro and 
access networks installations use conventional single-mode 
fibers (SMF) and because of the cost and difficulty (or lack 
of feasibility) in changing embedded fiber links, a method 
that enhances system performance requiring only the 
modification of one or both endpoints of a link is a critical 
requirement. 
In this work, we have demonstrated that the transmission 
performance depends strongly on DML output power and on 
its adiabatic and transient chirp. We also demonstrated that 
systems using SMF fibers can achieve a good performance if 
the DML output power is properly chosen. We have found a 
mathematical expression that make an estimation for a power 
value to fix the laser power output for each channel in WDM 
systems. 
Section II is dealing with a short theoretical background 
to understand the impact of the chirp, adiabatic and transient, 
in DML lasers; Section III points out the system of reference 
characteristics (16 channel WDM) for the simulations and 
the different cases considered and finally in Section IV 
comparisons after simulations of different cases in a 32 
channel WDM system are commented. 
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
A Distributed Feed-Back (DFB) laser which oscillates in 
a single longitudinal mode, under CW (Continuous Wave) 
operation, may experience dynamic line broadening when 
the injection current is directly modulated. This line 
broadening is a frequency chirp associated with modulation-
induced changes in the carried density [5-6]. The frequency 
variation, , of a DFB-DML is related to the laser output 
optical power, P(t), through the expression, [7]: 







( )
ln( ( )
4
( )
kP t
P t
dt
d
t





where  is the linewidth enhancement factor [8] and k is the 
adiabatic chirp coefficient. The first term of (1), related to 
transient chirp, causes variations in the pulse width, while 
the second term (adiabatic chirp) produces a timing shift 
between   “1” and “0” levels, depending on the output power.  
The frequency chirp, due to the adiabatic chirp and shown 
in Figure 1 (a), implies a shift in the wavelength emission, as 
17
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

it shown in Figure 1 (b). The optical frequency shift from the 
actual laser output frequency is the principal cause of system 
performance variations.   
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 1.  (a) Chirp and (b) Spectrum of the signal at the output DML 
for a power range 0.1-15 mW. 
 
 The -parameter affects the laser bandwidth, so that large 
-parameters cause increased laser spectral width. Figure 2 
shows the output spectrum laser for -parameters 1 and 10. 
A higher spectral width for α = 10 case is obtained.   
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Output laser spectra for  = 1 and  =10. 
 
This spectral bandwidth causes a pulse time broadening, 
T1, when it goes through the fiber [9], which expression after 
a length z of fiber is: 













 




 


2
2
0
2
2
2
0
2
0
1
1
( )
T
z
T
z
T
T
z
bf


        (2) 
 
where β2 is the group velocity dispersion  parameter (GVD) 
and T0 is related with the FWHM (full width at half-
maximum) as TFWHM=2(ln2)1/2T0 ≈1.665 T0 .   
In Fig. 3, the pulse broadening parameter variation is 
shown. The initial pulse width chosen is T0 30 ps (TFWHM 
= 50 ps), for 3 different values of the -parameter: 0, 2 and 
4.  In all cases there is a minimum broadening of the pulse 
obtaining, for this case, the best behaviour of the system. 
The adiabatic coefficient, κ, depends on the laser 
structure, being the figure that takes into account the output 
power and the generated chirp, (1). The relationship to the 
photon energy, h, optical frequency, υ, and laser quantum 
efficiency,0 , confinement factor, , cavity volume, V0 and 
gain compression factor, , is in agreement with the 
expression:  
         

 

h Va
0
2

                           (3)                      
      
 
Figure 3.   Pulse broadening parameter for transient chirp , at λ = 1550 
nm, as a function of the accumulated dispersion, D.L 
In Fig. 4 the optical spectrum for three lasers, with the 
same output power and different κ coefficient is shown. The 
wavelength of emission is 1551 nm. As bigger is the κ 
coefficient, wider is the spectrum and lower is the output 
power.  
 
Figure 4.  Laser spectrum shifting due to an adiabatic chirp  with 
different values of κ  
Laser chirping can lead to a significant dispersion effects 
for intensity-modulated pulses when the laser emission 
wavelength is displaced from the zero-dispersion wavelength 
of the fiber. In Fig. 5, the pulse chirp is plotted together with 
the pulse intensity. Whereas the input pulse is chirpless, the 
instantaneous frequency of the output pulse decreases from 
the leading to the trailing edge of the pulse. The reason for 
this is the Group Velocity Dispersion (GVD). In case of 
anomalous GVD, the higher frequency ("blue-shifted") 
components of the pulse travel faster than the lower 
frequency (or "red-shifted") ones, [10]. 
k 
k 
18
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

The effect of GVD on the pulse propagation depends, 
mainly, on whether or not the pulse is chirped, the laser   
injection pulse shape, [11-12], and also on the fiber SPM 
(Self Phase Modulation). With the correct relation between 
the initial chirp and the GVD parameters, the pulse 
broadening (which occurs in the absence of any initial chirp) 
will be preceded by a narrowing stage (pulse compression). 
On the other hand, the SPM alone leads to a pulse chirping, 
with the sign of the SPM-induced chirp, being opposite to 
that induced by anomalous GVD. This means that in the 
presence of SPM, the GVD induced pulse-broadening will be 
reduced (in the case of anomalous), while extra broadening 
occurs in the case of normal GVD. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 5.  (a) Output pulse shape and chirp for free chirp Gaussian 
pulse (b) Output pulse shape and chirp after a fiber length 
III. 
SYSTEM OF REFERENCE 
We have to point out that the transmission performance 
of waveforms produced by directly modulated lasers, in 
fibers with different signs of dispersion, depends strongly on 
the characteristics of the laser frequency chirp.  
 
TABLE I.   VALUES AND RANGES OF DML PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
DML-T 
DML-A 
Alpha coefficient,  
5.6 
2.2  
Adiabatic chirp,  (W.s)-1 
1.5·1012  
28.7·10
12 
Output Power range 
0.1  -  15 mW 
Extinction Ratio 
 9 dB 
RIN (Relative Intensity Noise) 
- 130 dB/ Hz 
 
For this reason, to study the WDM system performance, 
a simple arrangement is proposed. It is made up of two kinds 
of DFB-DMLs lasers presenting extreme behaviors: DML-A 
is strongly Adiabatic chirp dominated and DML-T is 
strongly Transient chirp dominated. The parameter values 
for the two simulated DMLs are shown in Table I. 
   We have used two kinds of optical fibers; the 
already laid and widely deployed single-mode ITU-T 
G.652 
fiber 
(SMF) 
and 
ITUT-T 
G.655 
fiber 
Recommendations with a negative dispersion sign around 
C band, Non-Zero Negative Dispersion Shifted Fiber (NZ- 
NDSF) (see Fig. 6).    
 
Figure 6.   Dispersion Coefficient for different optical fibers  
In a computer simulations, four different systems (Cases 
A, B, C and D) have been analyzed based on the optical 
system of Fig. 7.  Table II summarize the different Cases.  
 
TABLE II.   ANALYZED CASES  
Case 
DML 
Fiber 
A 
DML-A 
SMF 
B  
DML-A 
NZ-NDSF 
C 
DML-T 
SMF 
D 
DML-T 
NZ-NDSF 
 
In this work, we are mainly interested in comparing the 
system performance based on the type of fiber and DML 
used; for this reason, the rest of link components have been 
modeled by considering ideal behavior. After 100 km of 
fiber transmission, channels are demultiplexed and detected 
using a typical pin photodiode. The system quality and its 
performance, in terms of Q-factor, is analyzed for each 
transmitted channel.  
The Q factor is the signal-to-noise ratio at the decision 
point, in voltage or current units, and it is typically expressed 
by, [13]: 


where μi and σi are average values and variances of the “1” 
and “0” values for each pattern. Q  7.03 corresponds to a 
BER of 10–12.  
Fig. 8 shows the Q-factor dependence on the power of 
the channel for the wavelength channel centered at 1551 nm. 
0
1
0
1







Q
19
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

Independently of the Case and wavelength channels, the Q-
factor always presents a maximum value for a specific DML 
output power. This behavior demonstrates the existence of an 
optimum channel power to be considered during the system 
design. As can be seen from Figure 8, this behavior is the 
same for all analyzed Cases but it is a result of different 
phenomena. For Cases which use adiabatic chirp dominated 
DML-A lasers (A y B), the Qmax value is reached at 0.3-0.46 
mW, independently of the fiber type. In this case, the result 
of the interaction of the dispersion with the specific chirp 
characteristics produces a high intensity spike, at the front of 
the pulses for transmission along a fiber with positive 
dispersion (SMF) and, at the end for negative dispersion 
(NZ-NDSF) fibers. The absolute value of the dispersion (and 
not its sign) will play a major role in the transmission 
performance. 
 
                                       
 
a) 16-channel WDM system 
 
 
b)Tx 
 
c) Rx 
 
Figure 7.  a) Schematic part of the complete arrangement set up; b) transmission side and c) reception side 
Then, the performance corresponding to transmission 
along a SMF fiber will be worse than that corresponding to 
transmission through a NZ-NDSF fiber because of the larger 
absolute value of the dispersion. For small powers, the Q-
factor increases with the power channel, Pch. because a large 
amount of power reaches the detector. For higher Pch the 
optical pulse deformation arising from chirp induced by the 
DML becomes too large and causes an error in pulse 
reconstruction [14]. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8. Q-factor dependence on channel power for λ = 1551 nm. 
 
Figure 9.  Shapes of optical pulses for different DML-A output 
powers, after transmission through a negative dispersion fiber.  
Fig. 9 represents the power waveforms for five different 
optical output powers (from 0.5 to 4 mW) after transmission 
through a NZ-NDSF fiber. As can be seen, the increment of 
Pch will result in a higher intensity spike at the trailing edge 
of the pulse. As a consequence the eye pattern after 
transmission will be severely closed. In Cases which use 
transient chirp dominated DML-T lasers, the Qmax value 
occurs for an output power of  6.7 mW for Case-C, or the 
Qmax is around 2.3-3.4 mW in Case-D. 
In DML-T, the wavelength shift by laser transient chirp 
is a blue shift during the pulse rise time and a red shift during 
the pulse fall time; exactly the opposite effects takes place 
with SPM (Self-phase-modulation). Therefore, the optical 
pulse chirped by direct modulation is compressed in fibers 
with negative dispersion, while that chirped by SPM is 
compressed in fibers with positive dispersion (SMF).  
OM 
OD 
 
  16 
TX 
TX 
TX 
Rx 
Rx 
Rx 
Optical 
Fiber 
 1 
 1 
 2 
 2 
 16 
After 
Before 
20
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

Therefore, we can conclude that systems using an SMF 
fiber can have a similar or better performance to those 
systems that use an NZ-NDSF fiber if the DML is transient 
chirp dominated and its output power is properly chosen. 
IV. 
32-CHANNEL WDM SYSTEM  
In order to analyze the influence of the number of 
channels on the relation between Pch and Qmax in a WDM 
system, simulations with a number of channels from 1 to 32 
have been carried out, using the same schematic arrangement 
set up shown in Fig. 7. The channel wavelengths are between 
1531 and 1591 nm. Some channels were located at 
compatibles frequencies with CWDM ITU-T grid in order to, 
in the future, extend this work to whole useful fiber optic 
spectral range (1271-1611 nm).  For every case, the Q-factor 
shows a maximum value for a given optical output power.  
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 10.   Q-factor versus channel power for channels centered at 1531, 
1551, 1571 and 1591 nm, respectively, for a 32-Channel WDM system 
using (a) DML-T/SMF and (b) DML-T/NZ-NDSF. 
As an example, if a 32-Channel WDM system is 
designed using DML-T and SMF with channel powers equal 
to the optimum Pch. all 32 channels will have a Q higher than 
8, corresponding to a BER lower than 10-15. In the contrary, 
if a system design with equal channel power is used some of 
channels (higher dispersive channels) will fail after 
propagation along a SMF fiber. 
Fig. 10 shows the Q-factor versus channel power for 
channels centered at 1531, 1551, 1571 and 1591 nm, 
respectively, for a 32-Channel WDM system using (a) DML-
T/SMF (Case-C) and (b) DML-T/NZ-NDSF (Case-D).  In 
both cases, each channel presents a different optimum Pch. 
Then, by the Pch. control of each channel it is possible to 
reach the Qmax and an enhancement of the WDM system 
performance can be achieved. This optimum Pch is the 
conclusion of the following considerations: for low power 
levels, below the optimum power, the Q-factor increases 
with Pch because a larger amount of power reaches the 
detector and the performance enhancement will be dependent 
upon the level power, so that the greater the power in the 
receiver, higher system performance is obtained; while, for 
Pch higher than optimum power, the chirp increases with 
level power and it causes greater frequency shift and 
linewidth broadening which results in an error in pulse 
reconstruction. 
Optimum Pch depends on fiber optic dispersive 
characteristics as well as on link length. The optimum 
channel powers (Pch to reach Qmax) are plotted as a function 
of dispersion in Fig. 11 (open circles in the case of 
transmission through positive dispersion fiber and solid 
circles for negative dispersion fiber).   
In Figure 11, the results for a channel centered at 1551 
nm as well as a potential CWDM channel centered at 1391 
nm, after transmission over 100 km of SMF and NZ-NDSF 
fibers, are shown. Attenuation dependence with wavelength 
was taken into account in the calculation of optimum Pch and, 
in all cases, a Qmax > 7 (BER < 10-12) was obtained. 
 
Figure 11.  Comparison of Optimum Channel Power versus accumulated 
dispersion for a positive dispersion fiber (open circles) and negative 
dispersion fiber (solid circles) 
A mathematical expression that fits this curve would be 
very useful, since it would make an estimation of the power 
value to fix the laser output for each channel. For this reason, 
using the Matlab simulation tool, this function has been 
estimated from a polynomial expression of degree 4 (Fig. 
12): 
e
dx
cx
bx
ax
f x





2
3
4
( )
                 (5) 
 
a = -3.482 ·10-14; b = -6.588·10-11; c = 4.202·10-07; 
d = 0.001435;    e = 3.673 
where x is the dispersion accumulated across the link. 
 
21
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

 
Figure 12.  Estimated curve for optimum channel power 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The performance of fibers relative to positive or negative 
dispersion characteristics is discussed for the case of directly 
modulated lasers. The effects of chirp and fiber nonlinearity 
in a directly modulated 2.5-Gb/s transmission system have 
been investigated by simulation. We can conclude that 
systems using SMF fiber can have a similar or better 
performance to those systems that use NZ-NDSF fiber if the 
DML is transient chirp dominated and its output power is 
properly chosen. From Fig. 8 we can conclude that DMLs 
transient dominated chirp are better controlled to compensate 
dispersion in both SMF and NZ-NDSF fibers. 
Since the magnitude of chirp can be changed by 
controlling the optical power, the balance between SPM, 
chromatic dispersion and laser transient chirp can be 
controlled. Therefore, an optimum compensation condition 
can be achieved by controlling the optical DML output 
power. To analyze the effectiveness of this technique for 
WDM systems, simulations varying the number of channels 
from 1 to 32 have been carried out and checking. In every 
case, Q-factor shows a maximum value depending on the 
optical power of each channel and accumulated dispersion. 
This maximum value decreases depending on the number of 
channels used. Also, we have shown that the control of the 
channel power could improve the performance of each 
channel as well as the whole WDM system.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the 
MICINN (Spain) through projects TEC2010-18540 and 
MAT2010-21088-C03-03. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H.S.   Jang and Y.G.   Chung, “Directly modulated 
CWDM/DWDM system using negative dispersion fiber for 
metro network application”. Optical Fiber Communication 
Conference, OFC 2004, vol. 1, WG5. 
[2] J.A.P.Morgado and A.V.T. Cartaxo, ”Dispersion Supported 
Transmission Technique: comparison of performance in 
anomalous and normal propagation regimes”, IEE Proc. Opto-
Electr., vol. 148, pp.107-116, 2001 
[3] J.A.P. Morgado and A.V.T. Cartaxo, “Directly Modulated 
Laser parameters Optimization for Metropolitan Area 
Networks Utilizing Negative Dispersion Fibers". IEEE J. 
Select. Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 9, no. 5, pp.  1315 – 
1324, 2003 
[4] Tomkos et Al., “Demonstration of negative dispersion fibers 
for DWDM metropolitan Area networks”, IEEE J. of Select. 
Top. in Quan. Elec. vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 439-60, 2001 
[5] Krelik P. “Characterization of semiconductor laser frequency 
chirp based on signal distorsion in dispersive optical fiber". 
Opto-electronics review. vol. 14, no.2, pp. 123-128, 2006 
[6] Zhang Tao, Zhu  Ning, Hua Zhang, and Bang Hong 
“Measurement of Chirp Parameter and Modulation Index of a 
Semiconductor Laser Based on Optical Spectrum Analysis”, 
IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 19, issue 4, pp. 227-229, 
2007  
[7] P.J.Corvini and T.L.Koch. “Computer simulation of high bit 
rate optical fiber transmission using single-frequency lasers”, 
J. Lightw. Technol. Vol. 5, pp. 1591–1595, 1987 
[8] C. H. Henry  “Theory of the linewidth of Semiconductor 
Lasers”. IEEE J. Quantum Electron., vol.18, pp.  259 – 264, 
1982 
[9] C. del Río, P.R. Horche, and A. M. Minguez, “Analysis of 
Linewidth and Extinction Ratio in Directly Modulated Lasers 
for Performance Optimization in 10 Gbit/s CWDM Systems”. 
Optics Com., vol. 283, Issue 15, pp. 3058-3066, 2010 
[10] G.P. Agrawal: Fiber-Optic Communication System. A John 
Wiley & Sons Ed., 2010.  
[11] C. del Río, P.R. Horche, and A. M. Minguez, “Effects of 
Modulation Current Shape on Laser Chirp of 2.5 Gb/s 
Directly Modulated DFB-Laser”. Proc. Conf. on Advances in 
Circuits and Micro-electronics,  pp. 51-55, CENICS 2010 
[12] A. Consoli, C. del Río Campos, F.J. López Hernández, and  P. 
R.  Horche, "Transmission performance improvement of 
directly modulated 1.5 µm VCSEL: simulation and 
experiments", Proc. Conference on Ad. in Circuits, El. and 
Micro-electronics, , pp. 56-60, CENICS 2010 
[13] Gerd Kaiser “Optical fiber Communications”. Mc Graw-Hill 
science, 4th Edit., 2010. 
[14] Nobou Suzuki. “Simultaneous Compensation of Laser Chirp, 
Kerr Effect, and Dispersion in 10 Gp/s Long-Haul 
Transmission Systems”. J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 11. no 9, pp. 
1486 – 1494, 1993 
 
Simulated 
Estimated 
22
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

