A Flexible Sensor-mat to Automate the Process of People Counting
Christof Kutschera, Martin Horauer, Markus Rayy, Daniel Steinmairz and Peter Gorskix
 University of Applied Sciences Technikum Wien, H¨ochst¨adtplatz 5,
A-1200 Vienna, Austria, Email: fkutschera, horauerg@technikum-wien.at
y Austrian Institute of Technology, Gieﬁnggasse 2, 1210 Vienna, Austria, Email: markus.ray@ait.ac.at
z Bluetechnix GmbH, Lainzerstr. 162/3, A-1130 Vienna, Austria, Email: daniel.steinmair@bluetechnix.at
x Getzner Werkstoffe GmbH, Herrenau 5, A-6706 B¨urs, Austria, Email: peter.gorski@getzner.com
Abstract—Real data on the peoples mobility are an essential
input for decision-makers of city and regional planning. They
allow for various optimizations like trafﬁc routes, public places
or safety measures at public events. Obtaining such data in
an automated and reliable way is a burdensome task since
usually the requirements on the respective solutions depend on
the actual situation (e.g., indoors, outdoors, different counting
cross-sections). This paper reports on the work-in-progress
of the development for a ﬂexible, low-power sensor-mat that
automates people counting.
Keywords-sensor-mat; people counter; mobility; wireless net-
works.
I. INTRODUCTION
Accurate and representative mobility data, especially for
motorized trafﬁc is a vital information for our daily life. It
allows for up-to-date trafﬁc control and provides input for
spatial planning and resource optimizations of the public
infrastructure, see, e.g., [8]). In fact, many automated count-
ing techniques (e.g., [12], [11]) are in use today and have
superseded almost all manual counting’s. In fact permanent,
fully automated counting solutions are installed at many
street sections of high interest, delivering reliable trafﬁc data
that is used for dynamic speed control information systems,
navigation systems, etc.
Respective mobility data for non-motorized trafﬁc, so far, is
primarily used by operators of infrastructures like railway
stations, airports or shopping malls for various optimiza-
tions. For example, using this data one can optimize train
schedules and respective transfer times to enhance the attrac-
tiveness of public transportation. Likewise, a shopping mall
operator can inﬂuence the habitual buying behavior and thus
better the overall property value. The same data can be used
for safety measures in public buildings or at large events by,
e.g., restricting access to certain regions when the number
of people exceeds the respective capacity. There exist a
multitude of automated people counting technologies, see,
e.g., [2], [5], or [16]. At present, however, none satisﬁes all
the diverse requirements commonly encountered in practice.
Section II highlights our motivation and lists requirements
contributed in a project workshop by various infrastructure
operators and urban planners. Next, section III elaborates
on related work, before we highlight the challenges and our
ﬁrst concepts in section IV. Finally, we present our status
quo before we conclude the paper with an outlook of our
next steps.
II. MOTIVATION AND REQUIREMENTS
Manual people counting’s using some sort of tally counter
are still frequently performed in practice to gather infor-
mation on the non-motorized trafﬁc patterns. This manual
approach suits short counting’s and low to medium traf-
ﬁc densities; especially since almost no installation/setup
overhead is required. For longer durations or dense trafﬁc,
however, the data gathered using a manual approach is often
either not representative or inaccurate. To overcome this
issue, many automated people counting approaches exist,
see Section III for an overview. However, many of these
solutions only ﬁt part of the requirements on an automated
people counting system as listed below:
Costs: Some solutions for automated people counting ne-
cessitate rather high equipment investments (e.g., many
solutions based on laser technologies), require elaborate
software for data analysis and are costly in terms of extra
on-site installations (power and/or network access).
Flexibility: Restriction due to local geometries (e.g., at en-
trance situations) or due to size restrictions of the measure-
ment technology frequently limit the ﬂexibility of existing
methods in practice. Furthermore, most automated people
counters require dedicated on-site installations.
Quality: Especially in dense trafﬁc or extreme environmental
situations the automatically gathered data is often inaccurate.
Furthermore, for almost all commercial-off-the-shelf people
counters no explicit measuring error probability is available,
limiting the use of collected data in such situations.
Environmental Inﬂuences: Several sensors have problems
with ﬂuctuations in temperature or lighting – e.g., at en-
trances – and eventually wind-up delivering incorrect data.
Furthermore, only a sub-set of the available solutions can
be used out-doors.
Mobility: For temporal people counting’s spanning several
days/weeks (e.g., to optimize pedestrian trafﬁc lights) an
autonomous, almost energy self-sufﬁcient system is required.
Existing, solutions that ﬁt this requirement are only available
13
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

for counting individuals (e.g., using active infra-red sensors).
Data collected via sensor fusion addresses most of the afore-
mentioned requirements, increases, however, the system
complexity and costs, cf. [14]. In the project Flexicount we
are developing an outdoor capable sensor-mat that enables
plug&play counting of people crossing a deﬁned intersec-
tion.
III. RELATED WORK
In recent years different technologies for counting people
have been developed and used. The following list gives a
short overview and provides an informal assessment of the
respective strengths and weaknesses:
Counters based on active infrared sensors are typically
low-cost, have low power consumption, allow for a simple
installation and are portable. These devices, however, are not
able to discern between pedestrians and other moving objects
(e.g., raindrops) and cannot separate multiple pedestrians
crossing a given line-of-sight at the same time.
Passive infrared counters, see e.g., [7] and [9], using thermal
images are available at moderate costs, feature low energy
consumption and are operable in humid or foggy weather
conditions. Furthermore, these systems are legally defensible
with regard to data privacy. Drawbacks of these devices
are their rather limited usability in dense trafﬁc situations,
the requirement for over-head installation, the limited co,
see [3]verage of widths where counting is feasible and their
dependence on temperature differences.
Better counting accuracy is obtained by relying on laser-
scanners, see [15], [6]. These counters work reasonably
well even in crowded areas, allow separation of individuals,
usually are simple to setup and can operate on wider cross-
sections. Their drawback is mainly due to the high initial
costs, their limited usage under different weather conditions
and their rather bulky and heavy construction.
Vision based counting solutions, see [10], [13], can operate
on larger cross-sections, and give somewhat accurate results
– some even under varying lighting conditions (stereo vision
based systems) and when recorded allow for further post-
analysis. These systems are usually simple to setup and
require only moderate installations. Drawbacks are inﬂu-
ences of the operation on different environmental conditions,
legal issues with respect to data privacy, and are often only
available for indoor scenarios.
The company eco-counter (http://www.eco-compteur.com)
distributes an acoustic counting solutions where plates are
buried about 5cm below the surface. Individuals crossing
the respective section get counted by acoustic means. This
outdoor capable solution operates in an almost energy self-
sufﬁcient way for several years, allows, however, to count
only one crossing person per plate. Thus this method is only
usable for low trafﬁc density scenarios. Multiple plates are
required for bi-directional counting and signiﬁcant installa-
tion overhead is required. Hence, the solution is best suited
for ﬁxed installations.
A solution measuring the change in the magnetic ﬁeld is
distributed by the company Future Shape (http://www.future-
shape.com) under the product name SensFloor. This tech-
nology, however, has only limited use for actual people
counting’s since it was speciﬁcally developed for the domain
of ambient assistive living.
A detailed overview and evaluation of existing people count-
ing solutions was presented in [1] and [4]. Despite all the
advances, manual counting’s using tally counters are still
used most of the times, see [3], [4]. For small samples this
method is cost-effective and allows high accuracy for low
trafﬁc densities. However, bidirectional counting’s, higher
people trafﬁc densities, and the short time-spans that can be
covered in this way limit this method.
IV. FLEXICOUNT - DEVELOPMENT OF A FLEXIBLE
SENSOR-MAT FOR PEOPLE COUNTING
A ﬂexible solution that enables an automated counting
of passenger trafﬁc delivering reliable data is needed with
growing urbanization and ever increasing trafﬁc. In partic-
ular, such a solution should be mobile, allowing to count
for several days or weeks, cost effective and require only
a minimum of installation and maintenance overhead. In
addition it must be adaptable for various different cross-
sections (counting widths) and robust against environmental
inﬂuences for outdoor use.
A. Aims
In the project Flexicount we are developing a sensor-mat
with integrated sensors that register people traversing the
mat. The gathered measurement values are relayed via a
wireless sensor network to a host computer that performs
the actual analysis and counting. The mats are self-sufﬁcient
and can be simply placed beneath each other, hence one can
ﬂexibly cover different cross-sections. Figure 1 illustrates
the prospective approach.
The following functional requirements will be addressed
in Flexicount:
(r1) sensors to identify people crossing in any direction
(ability to discern between people and most other
objects)
(r2) temporal referenced, multi-directional counting’s
(r3) real-time wireless data transmission (plug&play opera-
tion)
(r4) high accuracy with known error probability
(r5) ability to calibrate the electronics
(r6) energy self-sufﬁcient operation for multiple weeks
(r7) polymer-matrix that provides a reasonable load and
pressure distribution (e.g., to handle stilettos)
Furthermore, we will address the following non-functional
aspects:
14
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

sensor  (inactive)
sensor (active)
control electronics
mat
Figure 1.
Multiple Flexicount mats in operation
(r8) small weight
(r9) simple adaption to different cross-section
(r10) minimum installation and maintenance overhead
(r11) usable for in- and out-door applications (waterproof,
wide temperature range, robustness)
(r12) safety related features (skid-proof, small mat heights,
markings, etc.)
(r13) hardened against vandalism and denial-of-service
(r14) low cost
B. Status Quo
So far, we have developed the sensors with respective
control electronics, evaluated some commercial-off-the-shelf
wireless radios for our application, and performed a polymer
integration with a ﬁrst prototype.
The sensors – addressing requirements (r1-r2) – basically
consist of a multiplexed switch array where contacts are
placed at regular intervals (30mm apart) on a 0:15mm thick
printed circuit board with a dimension of 450x450mm. On
top of this PCB we use a separate contact plane; currently
we are evaluating and testing different options with regard
to their long-term behaviour (>100.000 load cycles):
(a) a microwave absorbing elastomer with a volume resis-
tivity of 4-5
=cm
(b) an array of snap-disks with constant force-displacement
characteristics
(c) an elastomer treated with a conductive coating
For the case when we select options (b) or (c) we will
complement this sensor array with a number of equidistantly
distributed force-sensors. In case option (a) will be selected
we are able to omit the latter sensors since the force can¨oah
be directly measured via the contact resistance between the
elastomer and the contacts on the printed circuit board.
In this case all multiplexed rows must be analog-to-digital
converted. First experiments seem promising in this regard,
however, a careful long-term evaluation is still under way.
Figure 2 shows the mat build-up sequence of an early
prototype peeled apart.
For the wireless network we have currently opted for a
low-power commercial-off-the-shelf, meshed ZigBee solu-
tion; mainly to satisfy the required bandwidth required to
Figure 2.
Mat buildup sequence of an early prototype
handle the worst-case data volume, cf. requirement (r3). For
an end-product, we will eventually be able to replace ZigBee
with ANT — in case we can reduce the transmitted data
volume — in order to optimize for low power consumption.
Our prototypes’ power is currently supplied via a recharge-
able battery that is charged occasionally (after some weeks
of operation) via an inductive loop (similar to the principle
widely employed in electrical tooth-brushes), cf. (r6).
The polymer integration of our prototype is presently build
from a 3mm thick viscous elastic polymer at the bottom
to accommodate for various different surfaces (e.g., stone
chips). Above we use an elastomer to embed the electronic
circuitry; this layer must incorporate the various different
heights of the devices. On top of this layer we place our
contact plate (options (a)-(c) from above) followed by a
15
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

3mm thick elastomer that provides the desired load and
pressure distribution and serves as protective layer. The top-
most layer is made of a sunfast abrasive wear that provides
the visible surface ﬁnish. The entire polymer embedding is
waterproof and enables an outdoor use.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a work-in-progress report of the
development of a sensor-mat that will eventually facilitate
an automated counting of peoples traversing the mats. The
approach has the potential for use even in dense trafﬁc
scenarios both in- and outdoors and will eventually provide
a solid data basis for regional planners.
Our next steps are to ﬁnalize the long-term evaluations and
analysis of our contact planes, before we are able to produce
the ﬁrst prototypes. The latter will than be used for ﬁeld
tests in order to optimize the sensor-mats for the given
requirements in a follow-up re-design.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The project FlexiCount has received support by the
IV2SPLUS – ways2go program managed by the Austrian
Research Agency under grant 825286.
REFERENCES
[1] Bu F., Greene-Roesel R., Diogenes M.C., and Ragland D.R.:
Estimating Pedestrian Accident Exposure: Automated Pedes-
trian Counting Devices Report, Transportation Research Re-
port (TRB 2007), p. 31, March 2007.
[2] Crabtree M.R.: Smart pedestrian counter system (SPECS),
11th International Conference on Road Transport Information
and Control, pp. 100–104, 2002.
[3] Diogenes M., Greene-Roesel R., Arnold L., and Ragland D.:
Pedestrian counting methods at intersections: A comparative
study, Transportation Research Report (TRB 2007), p. 12,
April 2007.
[4] Greene-Roesel R., Diogenes M., Ragland D., and Lindau L.:
Effectiveness of a commercially available automated pedes-
trian counting device in urban environments: Comparison
with manual counts, Proceedings of the 2008 Transportation
Research Board 87th Annual Meeting: Conference Recordings,
pp. 1–17, 2008.
[5] Gasparini L., Manduchi R., and Gottardi M.: An Ultra-Low-
Power Contrast-Based Integrated Camera Node and its Ap-
plication as a People Counter, Seventh IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance
(AVSS), pp. 547–554, 2010.
[6] Huijing Z. and Shibasaki R.: A novel system for tracking
pedestrians using multiple single-row laser-range scanners,
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Vol.
35, Iss. 2, pp. 283–291, 2005.
[7] Hao Q., et al: Human tracking with wireless distributed py-
roelectric sensors, IEEE Sensors Journal, Vol. 6, No. 6, pp.
1683–1694, Dec. 2006.
[8] Haihong F., Jiang P., Shuijin S., and Anke X.: Research on a
New Type of City Intelligent Trafﬁc Lights, Control Conference
(CCC 2006), pp. 1733–1736, 2006.
[9] Li N. and Hao Q.: Multiple walker recognition with wireless
distributed pyroelectric sensors, Proceedings of SPIE Defense
and Security, pp. 694034(1-12), March 2008.
[10] Rabaud V. and Belongie S.: Counting Crowded Moving
Objects, Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 705–711, 2006.
[11] Tanaka M.: Development of trafﬁc counters by laser range
scanners, Proceedings of the SICE Annual Conference 2010,
pp. 3128–3134, 2010.
[12] Tseng B.L., Ching-Yung L., and Smith J.R.: Real-time video
surveillance for trafﬁc monitoring using virtual line analysis,
Proceedings of 2002 IEEE International Conference on Multi-
media and Expo, 2002 (ICME ’02), Vol. 2, pp. 541–544, 2002.
[13] Teixeira T. and Savvides A.: Lightweight People Counting
and Localizing in Indoor Spaces Using Camera Sensor Nodes,
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Distributed Smart
Cameras, pp. 36–43, 2007.
[14] Weingand R. and Hehring T.: Tipps zur Planung eines Per-
sonenz¨ahlsystems, Artikel im POS Manager: Fachmagazin f¨ur
IT-L¨osungen und Management im Einzelhandel, Ausgabe 1,
pp. 55-57, 2009. (in german)
[15] Zhao H. and Shibasaki R.: A Real-Time System for Monitoring
Pedestrians, 7th IEEE Workshop on Application of Computer
Vision (WACV/MOTION’05), Vol. 1, pp. 378–385, 2005.
[16] Zhu Q., Tang L., Jiang Y., and Deng W.: A novel approach
of counting people based on stereovision and DSP, The 2nd
International Conference on Computer and Automation Engi-
neering (ICCAE), Vol. 1, pp.81–84, 2010.
16
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

