Simultaneous Measurement of Temperature  
and Expansion on Radio Frequency Power Electronic Components 
 
Eric Joubert, Olivier Latry 
GPM UMR 6634 
Université de Rouen - France 
eric.joubert@univ-rouen.fr 
olivier.latry@univ-rouen.fr 
Jean-Philippe Roux 
CEVAA - France 
 jp.roux@cevaa.com
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a new approach for measuring 
physical variables on micro-electronic components. An optical 
system is used to simultaneously quantify the surface 
temperature of a component and its expansion. This double 
acquisition is achieved by a Michelson interferometer coupled 
with a Charge Coupled Device (CCD) line device. To validate 
this method, the temperature measurements were directly 
compared with the results obtained by an infrared camera and 
by a measurement of variation of I(V). The displacement 
measurements were compared with those obtained by a laser 
3D vibrometer, whose physical principle is completely 
different. Consistent results were obtained regarding the 
different techniques.  
Keywords-thermal 
measurement; 
laser; 
electronic 
components. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Modern telecommunications and radar systems require 
the development of increasing Radio Frequency (RF) power. 
The new generation of electronic power transmitters uses 
solid state technology (GaAs, LDMOS, GaN) transistors. To 
properly manage parameters, such as size, weight and 
cooling requirements, these components have to improve 
many other parameters, such as electrical efficiency and 
power density while maintaining a high level of reliability 
and miniaturization. Because of these constraints, the 
behavior of these components that are subject to high 
thermal stress, is increasingly difficult to characterize. There 
is currently a high demand to fully understand the impact of 
thermal parameters on overall performance and lifetime. 
This is why it has become essential to develop measurement 
tools that characterize these kinds of phenomena. 
In literature, many technologies are very efficient to 
extract different types of parameters separately. Some 
methods use a measurement of Vbe on a small cycle of the 
signal to extract the average junction temperature [2]. Others 
place thermal sensors directly in power Print Circuit Board  
[5]. The micro-Raman spectroscopy combined with infrared 
technology provides accurate thermal values [1][7]. Using 
nematic liquid crystal thermography is very efficient for 
specific emissive components [4]. Thermoreflectance 
imaging using specific wavelengths measurement allows 
thermal changes measurements over large time scales [8]. It 
is possible to reach very high thermal resolutions with an 
Optical Time Domain Reflectometer coupled with a 
Michelson interferometer [3]. Finally, speckle interferometry 
provides data on the physical deformation of a component 
subjected to thermal stress [6]. 
In this state of the art, all the methods aim at providing 
unique physical data for a device. However, integrating 
temperature and expansion makes it possible to estimate the 
dilatation factor of the constitutive material of a power 
electronic device. In fact, this parameter provides valuable 
information in the study of the degradation of electronic 
component under stress. 
 This paper also suggests a method for measuring 
simultaneously temperature and expansion of micro-
electronic components. The first part presents the optical 
structure of our bench and the physical data measured to 
estimate temperature and expansion. The second part 
describes the particular optical calibration process. The third 
part details the specific sensor we used to transfer the 
interferometric information to the acquisition device. At last, 
test devices and results obtained are proposed and discussed 
in relation with other thermometric/expansion methods. 
 
II. 
OPTICAL SYSTEM 
The system is based on a Michelson interferometer [6], 
as presented in Figure 1. The beam produced by a laser is 
split into two separate paths. The measuring path uses the 
device under test and the reference path is reflecting on a 
plane mirror. The interferometric pattern, which is the sum 
of the two branches, passes thereafter through a long focal 
lens. 
LASER
DUT
Mirror
d
Mirror
Splier
CCDSensor
LongFocalLens
SmallFocalLens
 
Figure 1.  Structure of the interferometer. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-379-7
CENICS 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

 
A Charge Coupled Device analyses the interference 
pattern, contrary to conventional interferometers that are 
using a single point measurement. This feature allows to 
measure two parameters: the displacement and amplitude of 
the interference fringes. This makes our method completely 
unique. Thereafter, these parameters are used to determine 
respectively the expansion and temperature of the component 
(see Figure 2).  
0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
-0.25
-0.3
-0.35
-0.4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Fringes Amplitudes
(V)
Time (µs)
AT1
 A T2
 
 
Figure 2.  Fringes changes according to expansion and temperature. 
The distance between the lens and the sensor is adjusted 
to take the inter-pixel distance into account. A polynomial 
interpolation is applied to ensure an efficient filtering of the 
recovered electrical signal (see Figure 3). 
 
0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
-0.25
-0.3
-0.35
-0.4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Raw signal
13th degree polyn.t
Amplitude (V)
Time
(µs)
 
Figure 3.  Fitting to 13th degree polynomial 
A. Temperature measurement 
The temperature is calculated from the amplitude of the 
interference fringes obtained. Indeed, the reflectance of the 
material depends on the temperature encountered through its 
refractive index according to the equation:  
 
 
R T( ) = n1 − n2 T( )
n1 + n2 T( )
"
#
$$
%
&
''
2
  
(1) 
 
where R(T) denotes the reflection coefficient, n1 and n2 
are the refractive indices of the materials 1 and 2,  
respectively. Under these conditions, the intensity for each 
point of the interference pattern (perpendicular to the optical 
axis z) is affected by the reflection coefficient: 
 
 
I x, y
(
)∝ A1
2 x, y
(
)+ R T( ).A2
2 x, y
(
)
+ 2..A1 x, y
(
). R T( ).A2 x, y
(
)
.cos φ2 x, y
(
)−φ1 x, y
(
)
(
)
 
(2) 
where φ1 (x, y) and φ2 (x, y) are the local phases of the 
waves 1 and 2. The amplitude of the interference (the third 
term of equation 2) is increasing linearly as a function of the 
reflection coefficient. By measuring changes of contrast of 
the interference fringes, or measuring the peak to peak values 
of the fringes, it is also possible to measure the temperature 
of the component. 
 
B. Expansion measurement 
The expansion of the component is determined by 
measuring the displacement of the fringes of the interference 
pattern. The phase shift induced by the expansion causes a 
shift in the interference pattern. The circular fringes move 
outwardly in the case of expansion and inwardly in the case 
of a contraction. 
For a contraction of 10µm, the fringes move a few 
millimeters. Simultaneously, these fringes have their width 
changed. The expansion can either be determined by 
observing the displacement or the width of the fringes. 
 
III. 
CALIBRATION METHOD 
 
The system is calibrated with a raw wafer of silicon. The 
ideal surface of the material allows an easy implementation 
of the interferometer system. 
The wafer is thermally excited by a Peltier module. The 
temperature induced by this module is directly measured by 
the voltage Up at its terminals. Indeed, the temperature 
difference ∆T provides by the Peltier module is in relation 
with its electrical characteristics according to the equation:  
 
 
ΔT = Up − n.R.I p
n.α
 
(3)
 
 
where n is the number of cells in the module, R the 
resistivity of the module, Ip the module current and α the 
Seebeck coefficient. 
The expansion is calibrated by comparing it with that 
obtained by an industrial laser Doppler vibrometer at a 
frequency in convenience with the characteristics of the 
interferometer (frequency not exceeding a few Hz). 
 
IV. 
ACQUISITION 
 
During the thermal excitation, the cross-sections of 
interference pattern are acquired by the CCD line sensor. 
This sensor transfers 1024 points within a period of 1.7 ms. 
The analog video signal is converted by a National 
Instrument acquisition unit that has a depth of 24 bits and a 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-379-7
CENICS 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

sampling rate of 100kS/s. The recovered data are thereafter 
processed with Labview [9] to compute displacements and 
amplitudes of fringes at the maximum rate of the acquisition 
unit. 
Speckle phenomenon in interference pattern brings noise 
in video signal and reduced overall measurement accuracy. 
A polynomial fitting of 13th degree is first performed to 
improve the quality of the signal. A detection algorithm 
follows this filtering to determine the peak amplitude of the 
fringes. The temperature is determined from this peak after a 
calibration process. 
Measuring displacement of the fringes (and also the 
expansion of the component) is more complex, because fast 
moving fringes can be processed as appearing or 
disappearing. These changes have an important impact on 
the result. A suitable algorithm allows such a monitoring. 
The overall process is not real-time: the data are processed 
after acquisition for avoiding slowing acquisition with 
computing times. 
 
V. 
TEST DEVICES 
 
Two test components were investigated in order to 
highlight the characteristics of the temperature measurement 
on the one hand, and of the expansion on the other hand. 
The component used for temperature measurements is an 
integrated preamplifier that was opened by laser ablation and 
chemical attack. This component comprises an ElectroStatic 
Discharge (ESD) diode that allows in situ measurement of 
the component temperature. As it is a complex integrated 
circuit, an externally controlled Peltier cell [10] was used to 
heat the component. 
The component used for the expansion action was a 
14x3cm aluminum blade simulating a real board used in 
radar systems. The size of this board allowed to use a 
miniature shaker.  
 
VI. 
RESULTS 
A. Temperature 
The temperature measurements on the test component 
were validated by two measurement systems: an internal 
measurement with an ESD diode and a measurement carried 
out by a dedicated Infra-Red camera. 
The ESD diode was polarized to a constant current so as 
to generate a voltage near the threshold voltage. This bias 
point limits the self-heating of the diode. Locally, the 
changes in the voltage V are a quasi-linear function of the 
temperature T in ° C: 
 
 
T = 1280,6 x V - 156,43 
(4) 
 
This equation is corresponding to the calibration curve on 
the real component, obtained by comparison with a 
thermocouple (see Figure 4). 
 
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
Relative Temp. (°C)
Measures
Linear regression
Voltage (V)
 
Figure 4.  T(V) with constant current for an ESD diode 
The second set of measurements was performed using an 
infrared camera for electronic components. The camera was 
corrected for emissivity at 20°C. 
 
The interferometer measurement was not performed 
simultaneously due to the lack of space above the device 
under test. However, the physical conditions (heat rise) were 
identical. 
 
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Time(s)
Temperature (°C)
ESDDiode
IRCamera
Interfero.
 
Figure 5.  Result for a long temperature rise with the three methods 
These results show a good correspondence between the 
three techniques, even if the interferometer has a 
measurement uncertainty (see Figure 5). These errors 
(±10°C) are due to measurement conditions that were not 
optimal on the component under test. A better mechanical 
isolation should limit these effects. Moreover, one must keep 
in mind that the detection area is very small for the 
interferometer, whereas detection areas for the other 
techniques are larger. A larger area obviously brings an 
averaging effect. The error of 15°C at 100s between IR 
camera and ESD diode is due to an emissivity compensation 
problem. This gap on the infrared camera could be removed 
efficiently by using black paint on the component to 
compensate the emissivity of the emitting surface. 
 
B. Expansion 
The goal here was to measure the ability of the 
interferometer to reach high frequencies and thus to provide 
a possible recovery operation range with Polytech 
vibrometer PSV400. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-379-7
CENICS 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

0
2
4
6
8
10
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Dsiplacementampplitude(µm)
Frequency(Hz)
Interferometer
Vibrometer
 
Figure 6.  Comparison of the amplitudes measured with the two systems 
Comparative measurements were made sequentially to 
solve practical issues of space above the component to be 
tested. For each measurement, conditions were the same: 
aluminum board was subjected to a shaker controlled by 
1KHz sine signal bursts whose repetition frequency varied 
between 5Hz and 35Hz. The resulting signals were processed 
by time FFT and compared in Figure 6. 
This figure shows the results for the two systems are 
quite consistent with the curve of mechanical response of the 
shaker. The average uncertainty of the vibrometer depends 
on working frequency and is about 1% on the frequency 
range 5hz-35Hz. Beyond this overall trend, both techniques 
show very similar results, despite very important differences 
in their physical principle. In fact, the interferometer is 
limited at high frequencies by the sampling due to CCD 
sensor. In the same time, the Doppler vibrometer principle 
implies that a minimum frequency is required for the 
detection to take place. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
 
The bench that we built enables to simultaneously 
acquire surface temperature and expansion of an electronic 
component. These measurements are made on the fringes of 
the interference pattern resulting from a Michelson 
interferometer. 
In this pattern, two important parameters are extracted. 
On the one hand, the displacement of the fringes relative to 
the center of the interference pattern provides useful 
information regarding the thermal expansion of the 
component. On the other hand, the variation of the intensity 
of the fringes is due to changes in reflectance of the observed 
surface. These changes are due to the variations in the 
refractive index as a function of temperature. The intensity of 
the fringes therefore indirectly provides the temperature of 
the component. Our method allows to de-correlate two 
quantities linked physically. This makes it possible to 
evaluate specific mechanical parameters of the component 
like its expansion coefficient. 
This simultaneity is obtained using a CCD line sensor. 
Adjusting the position sensor and optimally setting the 
focusing lens system allow adaptation to different contexts. 
Our system was compared to other systems for 
measuring temperature and another system for measuring 
dynamic 
displacement. 
This 
separated 
temperature/ 
expansion comparison was inevitable because unlike ours no 
system can simultaneously measure these parameters. These 
results show a good correspondence of our method with 
others, which makes it valid and promising. 
 
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
 
The authors wish to thank the cluster Moveo partners, 
Audacity project and ESP Carnot Institute for the 
contribution to collaboration GPM/CEVAA. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
R. Aubry et al., “Temperature measurement by micro-raman 
scattering spectroscopy in the active zone of AlGaN/GaN high-
electron-mobility transistors,” Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 27, 
2004, pp. 293-296. 
[2] 
B. M. Cain, P. A. Goud, and C.G. Englefield, “Electrical 
measurement of the junction temperature of an rf power transistor,” 
IEEE Trans. on Instr. And Meas., vol. 41, 1992, pp. 663-665. 
[3] 
S. Dilhaire, T. Phan, E. Schauf, and W. Claeys, “Laser probes and 
methodology for thermal analysis at micrometric scale. Application to 
microelectronics,” . Rev. Gen. Therm., vol. 37, 1998, pp. 49-59.  
[4] 
C. C. Lee and J. Park, “Temperature measurement of visible light-
emitting diodes using nematic liquid crystal thermography with laser 
illumination,” IEEE PhotonicsTechnology Let., vol. 16, 2004, pp. 
1706-1708. 
[5] 
D. Mc Namara, “Temperature measurement theory and practical 
techniques,” Analog Devices, AN-892, 2006.  
[6] 
K. Nassim, L. Joannes, A. Cornet, S. Dilhaire, E. Schaub, and W. 
Claeys, “High- resolution interferometry and electronic speckle 
pattern interferometry applied to the thermomechanical study of a 
mos power transistor,” Microelec. J., vol. 30, 1999, pp. 1125-1128. 
[7] 
A. Sarua et al., “Combined infrared and raman temperature 
measurements 
on 
device 
structures,”. 
Mantech 
Conference 
Vancouver Canada, 2006, pp. 179-182.  
[8] 
G. Tessier, S. Holé, and D. Fournier, “Quantitative thermal imaging 
by synchronous thermoreflectance with optimized illumination 
wavelengths,” Appl. Phys. Let., vol. 78, 2001, pp. 2267-2269.  
[9] 
A. S. Morris and R. Langari, Measurement and Instrumentation – 
Theory and Application, Elsevier, 2012. 
[10] D. Astrain, J. G. Vian, and J. Albizua, “Computational model for 
refrigerators based on Peltier effect application,” Applied Thermal 
Engineering, vol. 25, 2005, pp. 3149-3162. 
 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-379-7
CENICS 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

