A Cost Model for SMARTLAM
Max Dobler∗, James Gourlay‡, Steffen Scholz†, Andreas Schmidt†∗
∗ Department of Computer Science and Business Information Systems,
Karlsruhe University of Applied Sciences
Karlsruhe, Germany
Email: max.dobler@gmail.com
‡ Design LED Products Ltd
Alba Innovation Centre
Livingston, United Kingdom
Email: james.gourlay@designledproducts.com
† Institute for Applied Computer Science
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe, Germany
Email: {steffen.scholz, andreas.schmidt}@kit.edu
Abstract—In this paper, we present a cost model for the produc-
tion of small and medium batch series based on the SMARTLAM
3D-Integration approach, which allows fast prototyping without
the normally neccessary allocation of tools. To accomplish this
task, we use the concept of total value, which also includes the
beneﬁt. Because the majority of costs in SMARTLAM are caused
by manufacturing overhead costs, we use an overhead calculation
based on the machine-hour rate. Our model includes production
cost calculation for the different used modules (i.e., Excimer-
and CO2 laser, aerosol-jet 3D printer, laminator, micro-assembly
module) as well as for the coordination module and the whole
manufactoring plant.
Keywords–micro-systems; additive manufacturing equipment;
cost model.
I.
INTRODUCTION
SMARTLAM (Smart production of Microsystems based on
Laminated Polymer Films) is a project funded by the European
Commission, with the goal to develop and integrate a complete
set of micro technology based fabrication modules into a full
production line without the normally required allocation and
or modiﬁcation of tools, masks, and hardware adaptations [1].
The aim is to develop a highly ﬂexible and reconﬁgurable
hot pluggable production unit which allows for the production
of smaller lot sizes even down to customized tailored parts
with lot size down to one part. With this approach a fast
and ﬂexible prototyping can be realized, but also competitive
production of individual items or small batch series and mass
customisation was in the scope of this project. The SMART-
LAM 3D-Integration approach (3D-I) combines new material
properties with state of the art, scalable 3D technologies such
as aerosol jet printing, laser based micro structuring, laser
welding, processes for combined micro milling, surface func-
tionalisation, micro welding, and micro cutting [2]. Important
questions in this context are how to calculate the costs of
a micro technical component and if the production costs are
competitive compared to established production methods. The
SMARTLAM production cell is illustrated in Figure 1.
To answer these questions, the SMARTLAM production
system will be analyzed and evaluated with the methods
of cost accounting. The paper is structured as follows: In
Section II, we present the different costs, which must be
Figure 1. Simulation of SMARTLAM Production cell
considered in our model. The main ideas of this paper are
presented in Section III, where we develop the actual cost
model. Starting with generic costs and the costs of the different
modules (Excimer-Laser, CO2-Laser, Aerosol-Jet 3-D printer,
Laminator, and Micro-assembly) we develop the cost function
of the overall process. Further, the paper will ﬁnish with a
short conclusion in Section IV.
II.
COST CONCEPTS
A. Cost concept of total value
The literature embraces different deﬁnitions of cost con-
cepts: the cash-based cost concept and the concept of total
value [3], [4]. The concept of total value differs in the
valuation of the consumption of goods compared to the ﬁrst
concept. The total value approach uses the ﬁnal utility for
evaluation; the cash-based concept uses the actual value on
the buying market.
This paper establishes a cost model of the manufacturing
process. The cost concept of total value is used in this paper
to identify the costs, because it includes the beneﬁts. In the
following, all types of costs in SMARTLAM will be speciﬁed.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

Figure 2. Types of costs for the production costs accountable in
SMARTLAM (from [5])
B. Production Costs
The consideration of the production costs is the essential
basis of the carried out analyses. This is why in the following,
this speciﬁc cost structure is addressed in detail. The pro-
duction costs accrue during fabrication. There are differences
between costs for the material (material costs) and arising costs
during manufacturing a product.
Figure 2 shows a simpliﬁed presentation of the approach
of Walter and W¨unsche [3], since the material overhead costs
and extra production direct costs were not considered. The
production costs in SMARTLAM are divided into material
and manufacturing costs, the latter further differed in direct
and overhead costs. Direct costs will be assigned directly to a
product or cost centre, overhead costs are assigned indirectly,
as these costs are caused by several products or cost centres.
The material overhead cost consists mainly of procurement
of the material and administrative costs for this material. As
this work considers only costs generated during production,
these costs are not taken into account. For the evaluation of
the manufacturing process in SMARTLAM, only the material
direct costs and the attributable manufacturing direct and
overhead costs are relevant.
In the following, these types of costs are explained in detail.
•
Material direct costs: The direct costs of material are
valued on basis of the value on the buying market.
•
Manufacturing direct costs: These costs occur during
the production and can directly be ascribed to a
product.
•
Manufacturing overhead costs: The majority of costs
in SMARTLAM fall into this category. The over-
head costs occur for several products and are spread
prorated between the products. Following costs are
assigned to this category especially for SMARTLAM:
◦
Wage costs
◦
Costs for supplies
◦
Energy costs
◦
Depreciation costs
◦
Interest charges
◦
Costs for operating materials
The following section describes the method for spreading
the overhead costs.
C. Production Costs
1) Overhead calculation: In addition to the direct costs
there are overhead costs of the production. To get these costs
split in a correct way among the products, the overhead
calculation method is used. In the following, this method will
be described in detail.
There are several overhead rates to characterize the over-
head costs:
•
Material overhead
•
Manufacturing overhead
•
Administration costs
•
Selling expenses
For this paper, only the manufacturing costs are relevant,
because these are the only ones who are collected in the
production costs.
The SMARTLAM process provides a high ﬂexibility and
a module-based design, which makes machine-hour rate cal-
culations the most suitable solution for SAMRTLAM. In the
following, the method of machine-hour rate calculation will be
explained in detail.
2) Machine-hour rate calculation: Due to high automation
and new, ﬂexible manufacturing plants the wages in production
decreased signiﬁcantely, followed by an increase in the manu-
facturing overheads (e.g., plant construction and controlling).
The limits of the overhead calculation method are reached with
products using the manufacturing plant in different ways and
time, because the overhead rates depend mainly on the wages,
which are not proportional to the production time.
Non machine-dependent overhead costs are not considered
in this method and will be allocated to the direct costs via
overhead calculation [4]. The SMARTLAM production has
different products and a very ﬂexible production planning,
which allows to split the overhead costs precisely to each
product depending on their production time.
The following calculation model in (1) is used for the
machine-hours [3]):
machine hour rate(MHR) = machine overhead
machine runtime
(1)
To calculate the machine hour rate (MHR), the machine-
dependent overhead costs should be determined very precisely.
The following list displays the necessary parameters for cal-
culation the MHR [4]:
•
Machine replacement value (Crepl)
•
Useful life of machine in years (tlife)
•
Interest rate for replacement value (I)
•
Repair and maintenance costs of machine per year
(Cmaint)
•
Work center costs of machine per year (Cspace)
•
Fixed auxiliary material of machine per year (energy)
(Cfix)
•
Variable auxiliary material of machine per year (en-
ergy) (Cvar)
The MHR for the manufacturing plant is calculated in the
following way (2):
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

MHS =
Crepl
tlife + Crepl ∗ I + Cmaint + Cspace + Cfix + Cvar
tmachine runtime
(2)
The methods of overhead calculation on basis of machine-
hour rate calculation are suitable for the modelling of the
manufacturing costs calculation above, because the overhead
costs of the manufacturing plant can be registered through
the production time which complements perfectly the ﬂexible
manufacturing process of SMARTLAM.
A calculation model for the manufacturing costs is sought,
which shows the cost structures of the process and enables the
calculation of the accumulating costs.
III.
ELABORATION OF THE SMARTLAM COST MODEL
This section shows the development of a model to identify
and calculate the manufacturing costs of the production with
the SMARTLAM 3D-I process.
A. Generic costs
1) Overhead costs of the SMARTLAM production: In this
section, all overhead costs of the manufacturing plant will be
deﬁned, i.e., all costs, which can be attributed to each product
or are produced on the SMARTLAM plant. The production
plant works autonomous most of the time; there is only one
worker per shift necessary for operating of the facility. This
worker reﬁlls the material (production raw material, auxiliary
supplies, working supplies), modiﬁes the plant between prod-
ucts, reacts to errors and picks up completed products and
stores them in the warehouse.
The wages of the worker will be allocated on the products
with the wages-rate. This value is calculated by (3):
wages rate(Cwages) =
Wages
machine running time
(3)
The wage of one worker is about 80,000 eper year and
the machine running time is 2,000 hours per year (assumption:
work to capacity). This leads to a wage rate (Cwages) of 0.67
e/min. (4).
Cwages =
80, 000
2, 000 ∗ 60 e/min = 0.67 e/min.
(4)
The wages are charged to the product costs via their
operating time on the manufacturing plant. This is done with
the time the product is processed on the plant, multiplied
with the wages-rate. Within the product cost calculation, these
generic costs are added to the caused costs of a module. In the
following, the unconsidered manufacturing plant-related costs
will be discussed.
2) Collective plant costs: Besides the modules for each
technology, the manufacturing plant also owns a material-ﬂow
system, which connects the modules and a collective control
computer for the complete plant. This computer optimizes the
production ﬂow and coordinates the modules. As these parts
are working with each module, the costs are allocated equally
to each module. On basis of the machine-minute-rate (CM)
and the process time (tpi) the variable machine overhead costs
TABLE I. OVERHEAD COSTS OF THE COLLECTIVE
MANUFACTURING PLANT OF SMARTLAM
Types of cost
Variable
Value
Replacement value of the machine
Crepl
65,000 e
Useful life of the machine
tlife
5 years
Interest rate of the replacement value
I
5%
Work centre costs of the machine
Cwrk
25m2 ∗ 72 e/m2
= 1, 800 e
Variable auxiliary material (energy)
Cvar
5 e/hour
can be charged. In Table 1, all costs of the manufacturing plant
are listed [6]. These costs can be allocated to each module.
These costs accrue annually for the use of the machine and
are calculated with an operating time of 2,000 hours per year.
The model displayed in (5) is used to calculate the machine-
hour-rate (MHR):
MHR =
Crepl
tlife + Crepl∗I
2
+ Cwrk + Cvar
trunning
(5)
With the values of Table I, the MHR can be calculated with
13.23 e
per machine-hour.
The production time in SMARTLAM is measured in
minutes, therefore the machine-hour-rate is converted to the
machine-minute-rate (CM) with the value 0.22 eper produc-
tion minute.
By adding up the wages costs (4), the overhead per minute
raises to the value of 0.89 e.
B. Functions for the production cost of the modules
The SMARTLAM 3D-I process enables a ﬂexible produc-
tion of several products with different speciﬁcations. Due to
the modular concept of the manufacturing plant it is possible
to reorganize the modules for each product. This makes it
more difﬁcult to calculate the production costs, because on
one hand the calculation model has to be ﬂexible and generic.
On the other hand the model must ﬁt all production processes.
Variables, which stay unchanged for each product, will already
be valued in the generic model with values of the production.
The rejects, the products with defects from the production,
are separately considered for each module. In the microsystem
technology it is called Yield (Y ) matches the yield in percent
(%) of the ﬁnal products [7].
The production costs per ﬁlm (Csheet) of a process step,
divided by the yield results in the total production costs
(Ctotal) and reject costs (Cy) are shown in (6):
Ctotal = Csheet
Y
Cy = Ctotal
Y
− Ctotal
(6)
The time of transport between the modules and for conﬁg-
uration of the module is considered in the time ttc and has a
ﬁxed value of 30 seconds.
1) Costs of the Excimer Laser module: The Excimer Laser
module includes the Excimer Laser technology.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

a) Manufacturing overhead costs: The Excimer Laser
costs 65,000 e and is the most expensive laser technology
of SMARTLAM. Additional costs of 12,000 e incur for the
module housing and controlling. The life time is ﬁve years.
The depreciation costs (CDepr) for this module are calculated
as shown in (7):
CDepr = 65, 000 + 12, 000e
5 years
= 15, 400e/year
(7)
This
yields
to
depreciation
cost
(CInvExLas)
of
0.13 e/min.
The acquisition costs above do not include all costs for
optics and lenses, because some objects wear out multiple
times a year. Every year there are wear costs of 23,000 e
or 0.19 e per minute. Added to the acquisition costs, this
results in overhead costs (CrExLas) of 0.32 e per minute for
the Excimer Laser module.
Several gases and masks are used for laser operations. The
costs therefore are collected in the rate CG for gas (0.03 e
per minute) and CM for the masks.
The overhead costs are allocated to the products using their
process time. The time depends on the ablation volume (V )
and the speed of the laser (vExLas), which depends on the
material. Added to the time for the transport and changing the
worktables (ttc) it results in the formula for the process time
(t) as shown in (8):
t =
V
vExLas
+ ttc
(8)
b) Total cost function for Excimer Laser: Cutting off
a lot of material leads to disposal costs (Cd), which must be
added to the production cost of the module.
For SMARTLAM there is a yield of 95% for operations
with the Excimer Laser. Together with the manufacturing over-
head costs it results in the total cost function for calculating
the production costs of the Excimer Laser module as shown
in (9):
CExLas =
(CrExLas + CM + CG) ∗
V
VExLas + ttc + Cd
Y
(9)
2) Costs of the CO2 Laser module: The CO2-Laser mod-
ule includes the CO2 Laser technology. Compared to the
Excimer Laser the acquisition value of the CO2 Laser of
45,000 e is signiﬁcantly cheaper and so, the depreciation per
year is only 11,400 e (CInvCo2Las = 0.10e/min.).
Costs for Gas (CG) amounts to 0.01 e per minute and are
therefore also cheaper compared to the Excimer Laser.
a) Total cost function for the CO2 Laser module: The
total cost function is similar the Excimer Laser, but there are
no costs for masks. The yield is also 95%. Equation 10 shows
the formula (with ablation speed vco2Las, ablation volume V ):
CCo2Las =
(CInvCo2Las + CG) ∗ (
V
vCo2Las + ttc) + Cd
Y
(10)
3) Costs of the Aerosol-Jet 3D printer module:
The
Aerosol-Jet 3D printer module includes the Aerosol-Jet 3D
printer technology. In the following, the cost model of this
module will be deﬁned.
a) Manufacturing overhead costs:
The replacement
value of this module includes the acquisition costs of the
3D printer and housing costs for the module. The acquisition
costs are today 130,000 e, whereas the module costs are
12,000 e. The technology has a normal lifetime of ﬁve years,
but depending on its operations it can last much longer [8]. The
following formula shows the deprecation costs of the Aerosol-
Jet 3D printer module.
Depreciation costs per minute are calculated in (11):
Depreciation = 130, 000 e + 12, 000 e
5 years
= 28, 400 e/year
(11)
This yields to depreciation costs (CInvAero) of 0.24 e per
minute.
The process time can be measured based on the ink and the
printing speed of the 3D printer. The amount of ink depends
on the printing area and how thick the ink should be applied
on the material. This can vary depending on the ink and the
thermal sensitivity of the material [8].
The following formula shows the calculation of the process
time, depending on printing volume V ), ink quality kink,
printing speed vaero, and the transport time between the
modules ttc.
t = V ∗ kink
vaero
+ ttc
(12)
The Aerosol-Jet 3D Printer needs a nitrogen supply. The
costs for this gas are displayed in (13):
CN2 ∗ t = 0.001 e/min ∗ t
(13)
b) Material costs: Material costs for ink (14) include
the exercise price multiplied with the printing area and the
factor for the application thickness of the ink.
Cink ∗ V ∗ kink
(14)
The exercise price depends on the raw material costs and
the costs for the ink catridge.
c) Total cost function Aerosol-Jet 3D printer:
The
Aerosol-Jet 3D Printer has a yield of 90% for SMARTLAM.
The following formula includes the manufacturing overhead
costs and material costs of the printer, together in one total
cost function.
CAero =
(CInvAero + CN2) ∗ ( V ∗kink
VAero + ttc)
Y
+Cink ∗ V ∗ kink
Y
(15)
4) Costs for the Laminator module: The Laminator module
includes the laminating technology. In the following, a cost
model for this module will be deﬁned.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

a) Manufacturing overhead costs: Compared to the
other technologies in SMARTLAM, the laminator ranges in the
midﬁeld with a total of 65,000 e. This module is featured with
a long life time of 10 years. For calculating the depreciation
costs, the costs of housing and controlling of the module
should be considered.
Depreciation = 65, 000 e + 12, 000 e
10 years
= 7, 700 e/year
(16)
This corresponds to a depreciation value (CInvLam) of
0.06 e per minute.
The overhead costs are allocated to the products throughout
their operating time on the laminator module. The process time
depends on the material (resistance to heat) and the necessary
accuracy. If there is only one layer with functionality, the
alignment time of the layers is nearly negligible. If both layers
possess functionalities, the alignment is crucial for this process.
The process time also depends on the length of the layer
and the speed of the laminator. If none of the ﬁlms has an
adhesive layer, additional adhesive has to be applied, which
causes further costs of auxiliary material in the amount of
Cad ∗ Afilm. After the lamination process the adhesive has to
be cured.
t = (Lfilm
vLam
+ tpos + tad) + ttc
(17)
b) Material costs: In most cases, only one layer has
functionality. This has the advantage that no exact alignment
is necessary for a good quality. The costs of the second ﬁlm
belong to the material costs. If the second layer is also edited,
the costs for material are already collected and therefore not
listed in the laminator costs.
c) Total cost function for the Laminator module: Equa-
tion 18 combines the manufacturing overhead and material
costs of the laminator module in one function. Table II shows
the used variables.
TABLE II. PARAMETER FOR THE LAMINATING MODULE
Parameter
Meaning
CInvLam
Depreciation costs for the adhesive in e/min.
Cfilm
Material costs of the second layer
Y
Yield
Cad
Material costs for the adhesive in e/min.
t
Process time in sec.
vlam
Lamination speed im mm2/sec.
tpos
Positioning of both layers in sec.
tad
Applying time of the adhesive in sec.
Afilm
Laminating area in mm2
Lfilm
Length of ﬁlm in mm
CLam = CInvLam ∗
Lfilm
vLam +tpos+tad+ttc
60
Y
+Cfilm + CAd ∗ Afilm
Y
(18)
5) Costs of the Micro-Assembly module: Applying adhe-
sive, putting materials (e.g., LED chips) in place or curing of
adhesive, as well as curing of the laminated ﬁlms is done by
this technology. In the following, a cost model for this module
will be deﬁned.
a) Manufacturing overhead costs: This technology has
an acquisition value of 60,000 e and a lifetime of ﬁve years.
With the costs for housing and controlling of the module
(12,000 e) the depreciation costs are calculated
Depreciation = 60, 000 e + 12, 000 e
5 years
= 14, 400 e/year
(19)
This yields to depreciation costs (CInvMon) of 0.12 e per
minute.
The manufacturing overhead costs are allocated to the
products through their process time in the Micro-Assembly
module. The time depends on the operation and further on
material, adhesive and components. Furthermore factors like
precision, thermal sensitivity and number of parts per ﬁlm are
important for calculation. The process time of this module
is split into time for adhesive application, positioning of
components and curing of adhesive. Necessary time frames
are measured individually per part and must therefore be
multiplied with the number of parts per ﬁlm.
t = n ∗ (tadh + tpos + tcur) + ttc
(20)
b) Material costs: There are material costs for adhesive
(CMatDis ∗ V ∗ n) and components (CMatComp ∗ n).
c) Total cost function for the Micro-Assembly Module:
Equation 21 shows the manufacturing overhead costs and the
material cost combined in one function. The yield of this
technology is 99.38%. The used parameters can bee seen in
Table III.
TABLE III. PARAMETER FOR THE MICRO ASSEMBLY MODULE
Parameter
Meaning
Y
Yield
CInvMon
Depreciation costs of the module in e/min.
Cad
Material costs for the adhesive in e/mm3
t
Process time in sec.
n
Number of operations in min.
V
Volume of pockests in mm3
tadh
Time for ﬁlling one socket in min.
tpos
Positioning per socket in min.
tcur
Curing time of adhesive per pocket in min.
CMon = CInvMon ∗ n ∗ (tadh + tpos + tcur + ttc)
Y
+n ∗ (CAd ∗ V + CMatComp)
Y
(21)
C. Cost function of an overall process
The production cost function of an overall process is put
together with the cost functions of the modules. Depending on
the process some module are used multiple times, which makes
the overall function an accumulation of all cost functions.
Costs for transport between the modules and controlling the
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

facility are covered with the time ttc, which is used in every
module.
The overhead costs of the manufacturing plant are allocated
to the products with their production time on the facility. Nor-
mally there are several products on the plant at the same time,
which makes the slowest module decisive for the overhead
costs of a product.
The following function shows the calculation of the produc-
tion costs of a ﬁlm in SMARTLAM (use parameters explained
in Table IV):
TABLE IV. PARAMETER FOR THE COST CALCULATION OF THE
OVERALL PROCESS
Parameter
Meaning
Cunit
Costs per unit
Cprocess
Costs of all process steps
CMtotal
Machine-related overhead costs of a product
Cpi
Costs of the process step i
Coh
Overhead cost rate in e/min.
timax
Time of the proces step with the longest operation in sec.
n
Number of products on a ﬁlm
CSheet = CP rocess +CMtotal =
n
X
i=1
Cpi+Coh ∗ timax
60
(22)
The production costs per unit results from the division of
the production cost of a ﬁlm by the number of products on the
ﬁlm which are shown in (23).
CUNIT = Csheet
noutput
(23)
IV.
CONCLUSION
With the generic costs described in Section III-A and the
cost functions of the modules described in Section III-B, which
are combined in the overall cost function in Section III-C, the
calculation of the production costs of any product, manufac-
tured on the SMARTLAM production plant can be done. This
model is applicable to any production using these six modules.
If more technologies are added to the manufacturing plant the
model has to be reworked.
Costs for transport between the modules, inspection and
controlling of the plant are detected in the ﬁxed time ttc in
every module. Within the implementation of the ﬁrst produc-
tion plant new knowledge should replace the ﬁxed time.
If there are new functionalities or an updated technology,
the cost function of the modules must be expanded. Each
addition can be done in the function of a module and does
not change anything on the overall cost function.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
SMARTLAM is funded by the European Commission un-
der FP7 Cooperation Programme Grant agreement No. 314580.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Scholz, T. Mueller, M. Plasch, H. Limbeck, R. Adamietz, T. Isering-
hausen, D. Kimmig, M. Dickerhof, and C. Woegerer, “A modular ﬂexible
scalable and reconﬁgurable system for manufacturing of Microsystems
based on additive manufacturing and e-printing,” Robotics and Computer-
Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 40, 2015, pp. 14–23.
[2]
“SMARTLAM
-
Home,”
http://www.smartlam.eu,
[last
accessed:
17.5.2016].
[3]
W. G. Walter and I. W¨unsche, Einf¨uhrung in die moderne Kosten-
rechnung: Grundlagen - Methoden - Neue Ans¨atze (english translation:
Introduction into modern Cost Accounting: Basic Principles – Methods
– New Approaches.
Springer, 2013.
[4]
A. G. Coenenberg, T. M. Fischer, and T. G¨unther, Kostenrechnung und
Kostenanalyse, (english translation: Cost Accounting and Cost Analysis.
Sch¨affel Poeschel Verlag Stuttgart, 2009.
[5]
M. Dobler, “Analyse der Leistungsf¨ahigkeit und Wettbewerbsf¨ahigkeit
von Fertigungstechnologien im EU-Projekt SMARTLAM (english trans-
lation: Analysis of the Efﬁciency and Competitive Capacity of the
Manufacturing Technology in the EU-Project SMARTLAM),” Bachelor
Thesis, Karlsruhe University of Applied Sciences, 2013.
[6]
“Interview Max Dobler with R. Adamietz: Anlagekosten in SMART-
LAM,” 2013.
[7]
M.
Dickerhof,
“Ein
neues
Konzept
f¨ur
das
bedarfsgerechte
Informations- und Wissensmanagement in Unternehmenskooperationen
der
Multimaterial-Mikrosystemtechnik
(english
translation:
A
new
Concept for an Appropriate Information and Knowledgemanagement
for Business Cooperation in the Field of Multimaterial-Microsystem
Technology),”
Ph.D.
dissertation,
Institute
for
Applied
Computer
Science, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.5445/KSP/1000011501
[8]
“Interview Max Dobler with M. Hedges,” 2013.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

