Towards Secure Building Management System based on Internet of Things
Alie El-din Mady∗, Ruben Trapero†, Antonio Skarmeta‡ and Stefano Bianchi§
∗United Technologies Research Center, Cork Ireland
Email: madyaa@utrc.utc.com
†Cybersecurity Laboratory, Atos Research & Innovation, Spain
Email: ruben.trapero.external@atos.net
‡Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain
Email: skarmeta@um.es
§Softeco Sismat, Genova, Italy
Email:stefano.bianchi@softeco.it
Abstract—Energy management systems are used to control energy
usage in buildings and campuses in order to provide reliable
energy supply and maximize user comfort while minimizing
energy usage. The heterogeneous, distributed, and dynamically
evolving nature of energy management systems based on internet
of things introduces new and unexpected risks that cannot be
solved by current state-of-the-art security solutions. For this, new
paradigms and methods are required in order to i) build security
into the Information Communication Technology (ICT) system at
the outset, ii) adapt to changing security conditions, iii) reduce
the need to ﬁx ﬂaws after deploying the system, and iv) provide
the assurance that the ICT system is secure and trustworthy at
all times. This paper provides a holistic overview of designing a
secure framework for Internet of Things (IoT) system, where the
framework will be implemented as part of an ongoing H2020
project called ANASTACIA: Advanced Networked Agents for
Security and Trust Assessment in Cyber-Physical System (CPS)
based on IoT Architectures.
Keywords–Cyber-physical systems; Intrusion detection; Cyber-
security
I.
INTRODUCTION
The aim of a modern Energy Management System (EMS)
is to enhance the functionality of interactive control strategies
leading towards energy efﬁciency and a more user friendly
environment. Typically, the EMS operates several building
systems, such as the supervisory control and data acquisition
(SCADA), which controls the smartgrid of one or more build-
ings, and the Building Management System (BMS), which
controls the building heating demand, security system, ﬁre
alarm system, etc. Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC) is considered to be the highest source of energy
consumption in the building operation, and the systems most
affecting user comfort [1].
Historically, EMS systems were installed when potential
security threats were only physical. In addition, having EMS
connected on a segregated network reduces the risk of cyber
and remote attacks. However, the evolving in building con-
trol requires connecting EMS to Internet of Things (IoT) to
optimize accurately the user needs and building operations
[2]. By connecting EMS to the building communication net-
work, the possibility of EMS cyber-attack increases, which
can lead to signiﬁcant ﬁnancial impact. The StuxNet cyber-
attack supposedly targeting a nuclear-enrichment plant (by
corrupting the measurements and actuator signals) in Iran
[3], and BlackEnergy malware targeting several electricity
distribution companies in Ukraine [4], are concrete examples
of cyber-attacks. Thus, it is crucial to make the control of EMS
to be resilient against cyber-crime.
The existing frameworks for EMS consider the system
integration, connectivity and optimal control performance. The
cyber-security in the EMS framework is mainly performed
based on running tests and benchmarks to evaluate the possible
cyber-attacks and their impact [5].
As part of an ongoing research in ANASTACIA project [6],
this paper aims to propose a high-level framework architecture
for Cyber-Physical System based on IoT, where EMS is an ap-
plication of CPS. In this framework, we develop a trustworthy-
by-design autonomic security framework with testing, vali-
dation and security optimization capabilities. ANASTACIA
framework combines several elements from different domains:
from IoT controllers to virtual functions accessible through
Software Deﬁned Network (SDN) interfaces, orchestration of
security policies and enforcement of security preferences in
heterogeneous scenarios.
In Section II, we present a CPS model used to show
the usage of the developed security framework. Section III
explains the the developed cyber security framework architec-
ture. Section IV discusses a validation methodology to proof
the efﬁciency of the developed framework. Finally, Section V
provides a conclusion and future work.
II.
CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEM MODEL
ANASTACIA CPS model provides a representation of how
ANASTACIA framework can be integrated within a CPS. Fig-
ure 1 depicts the ANASTACIA system model. ANASTACIA
is envisioned to enable trust and security by-design for CPS
based on IoT and cloud architectures. In general terms, an
IoT Infrastructure can be seen as a system with two well
differentiated planes. The Data Plane is closer to the physical
domain and is composed of IoT devices, the network that
interconnect them and in general, the elements providing
resources, such as servers or routers. On top of the Data
Plane is the Control Plane that enables the management of
the underlying devices. These include either IoT controllers
that directly control the devices resources (sometimes even
integrated in the same device) or Virtual Interfaces (i.e., VNFs)
that are able to control/access to the Data Plane resources
through the cloud.
IoT platforms are currently threatened by a myriad of
external dangers. Advanced attacks targets IoT platforms
by taking in account the existing vulnerabilities in devices
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-585-2
CENICS 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

Figure 1. CPS Modeling
with poorly managed/conﬁgured security settings (i.e., default
passwords) or even by using social engineering techniques
that engage users to install malwares or disclose passwords.
ANASTACIA is built on top of IoT platforms to protect them
against such threats. ANASTACIA is conceived as a policy
based framework where system admins, at the User plane,
set a speciﬁc security policy that must be fulﬁlled within an
IoT platform. This security policy is enforced within the IoT
platform by orchestrating its resources (devices, services, etc.).
The control of the fulﬁllment of the security policy is carried
out by the ANASTACIA framework at the Autonomic plane by
monitoring the IoT platform and detecting threats and ongoing
attacks. Additionally, the ANASTACIA framework is able to
create and trigger reactions that mitigate the effects of attacks,
prevent against threats and guarantee the fulﬁllment of the
security policy.
One of the most novel features of ANASTACIA is car-
ried out at the Seal Management plane, built on top of the
ANASTACIA framework. At this plane, a dynamic seal is
created, representing the current level of security of the IoT
platform.
III.
CYBER-SECURITY FRAMEWORK ARCHITECTURE
The ANASTACIA system model (as presented in Figure
1) is structured as a set of layers that provide a broad view
of the framework and stand out its integration within IoT
infrastructures. ANASTACIA is envisioned as a framework
built on top of an IoT infrastructure where network elements,
physical and virtual network elements interact in the Data
Plane. The interaction with these elements is done by using
virtual interfaces with cloud computing networks for the usage
of external resources (such as computing or storage). On top of
that, the Control Plane manages the Data Plane by using APIs
and by orchestrating Network Function Virtualization (NFV).
Figure 2 represents ANASTACIA framework, which ex-
tends the ANASTACIA system model by expanding the func-
tions of the ANASTACIA core. The Autonomic Plane includes
the components that provide the ANASTACIA framework
with its intelligence and dynamic behavior. This plane can
Figure 2. ANASTACIA Cyber-Security Framework Architecture
be divided into three sub-planes, which carry out speciﬁc
activities within the framework as follows:
•
Security Orchestrator Plane organizes the resources
that support the Enforcement Plane, carrying out ac-
tivities such as the transformation of security prop-
erties to conﬁguration rules and aligning the security
policies deﬁned by the security interpreter with the
provisioning of relevant security mechanisms. It has
the whole vision of the underlying infrastructure and
the resources and interfaces available at the Security
Enforcement Plane.
•
Security Enforcement Plane connects the ANASTA-
CIA core with the IoT Platform, managing the interac-
tions among objects and components for the enforce-
ment of the security policy deﬁned at the User Plane.
This plane supports the enforcement of conﬁgurations
and reactions triggered by the Security Orchestrator
Plane, in order to preserve the expected security level.
At this plane the agents that support the monitoring
of IoT devices or the enforcement of reactions are
instantiated, either if they are operating on remote or
directly attached to the device.
•
Monitoring and Reaction Plane connects to the IoT
Platform through the Security Enforcement Plane in
order to collect security-focused information related
to the system behavior. At this plane, intelligent
data-driven automated and contextual monitoring of
activities at embedded devices, legacy systems and
IoT devices by retrieving signals, event logs, traces,
heartbeats signals, status reports or operational infor-
mation. This plane also evaluates the fulﬁlment of
the security policy by checking security models or
threats signatures, detecting anomalies and creating
reactions to mitigate such anomalies, in terms or
reconﬁgurations and alerts to system administrators
[1] [7].
Additionally, on top of the architecture the User Plane and
the Seal Management Plane interact with the Autonomic plane:
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-585-2
CENICS 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

•
The User Plane includes interfaces, applications and
tools that help system administrators to manage the
IoT platform through the ANASTACIA framework.
For example, at this plane system admins are able to
edit the security policies that govern the underlying
IoT platform.
•
The Seal Manager is in charge of providing users with
a real-time indicator of the overall security level.
The high level architecture can be used to identify the main
activities to be carried out by the ANASTACIA framework,
which is used to identify the speciﬁc components that are part
of every identiﬁed plane. By analyzing several use-cases for
EMS application, we can identify ﬁve main activities to be
supported by the platform:
•
Security policy set-up This is the initial process
triggered once a security policy has been deﬁned by
the user. In this process the policy has to be conﬁgured
in the platform in order to be enforced. The interpre-
tation of the security policy claims, the conﬁgurations
required to monitor the security controls associated
to a policy or the deﬁnition of thresholds to identify
policy violations, are some activities carried out by
this process.
•
Security policy orchestration Once the policy has
been set-up, it is necessary to enforce the controls
speciﬁed at the policy. The interfaces and IoT con-
trollers must be orchestrated according to the security
policy.
•
Security monitoring In this process, the monitoring
information is extracted from the devices through
monitoring agents and according to the security con-
trols interpreted from the security policy. In this ac-
tivity, the monitoring data is ﬁltered and aggregated
in order to carry out its analysis and the detection of
anomalies.
•
Security reaction In this process, the detected anoma-
lies are evaluated to design counter measures in order
to mitigate the effects of attacks and potential threats.
•
Dynamic security and privacy seal In this process,
relevant information about detected threats, monitored
information is evaluated to create a seal that deter-
mines the level of security guaranteed/offered by an
IoT platform.
IV.
ANASTACIA FRAMEWORK VALIDATION
In order to perform quick, scalable and automated testing
over the architecture several interconnected virtual machines
have been deployed covering the functionality for policy
enforcement over IoT and SDN integration, speciﬁcally, the
test has been realized for the isolation sensor use-case. As
shown in Figure 3, the deployment includes the next seven
virtual machines or isolated containers like docker:
1) IoT Application.
2) Micro Orchestrator.
3) SECURED Policy Interpreter.
4) ONOS SDN Controller [8].
5) OpenDayLight SDN Controller [9].
6) Open Virtual Switch.
7) Contiki emulator [10].
Figure 3. ANASTACIA Virtual TESTBED Deployment
The idea of the scenario is that the IoT Application can
establish communication with a mote using a global IPv6
address and the communication can be interrupted through
the enforcement of security policies applied by the SDN
controller. To this purpose we have develop a little python
script for the IoT Application, a python micro orchestrator
and basic SDN plugins on the interpreter (for each of the
mainstream controllers, this is OpenDayLight and ONOS).
For the IoT application, the script sends sporadically CoAP
request messages to the motes using global IPv6 addresses
as source and destination. The CoAP message is received
by the SDN Network (the OVS instance in this case) and
forwarded to the virtual machine that contains the Contiki
emulator. The Contiki emulator provides the capability to
deploy a gateway between the 6LoWPAN network and the host
virtual machine network, so the CoAP message is received
by the Gateway and forwarded to the mote. During the
communication, we decide to isolate the sensor, so we start
in the micro orchestrator the policy enforcement. The micro
orchestrator sends a reﬁnement request to the interpreter and
after the high to medium reﬁnement process, the interpreter
transforms the policy on a SDN conﬁguration. At this point,
we can to use ODL-SDN plugin or ONOS-SDN plugin in order
to get the appropriate conﬁguration for the selected platform.
Once the policy reﬁnement process has been ﬁnished, the
micro orchestrator receives the SDN conﬁguration ﬁle and
invokes a speciﬁc call for the SDN controller’s Northbound
API according to the controller election. Speciﬁcally, for the
sensor isolation use case we are installing a ﬂow rule on the
OVS indicating that all trafﬁc containing the sensor’s IPv6
address must be dropped.
We are currently working on the integration of the virtual
IoT environment with the physical one; this means, allowing
the connectivity from/to the emulator to leave the machine
and be connected to a real SDN deployment. Therefore, the
emulator could speak with real IoT devices or mimic them so
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-585-2
CENICS 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

that the SDN could redirect an attacker to a cloned scenario
like a honeynet.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The paper has presented a preliminary design of secure
framework for cyber-physical system based on IoT. The design
of the framework was derived by energy management system,
which can be a critical CPS application considering safety
critical infrastructure, such as hospitals, airports, etc. The
novelty of the framework is based on the integrating and the
coordination of serval security stages, leading to (semi) auto-
matic security platform for CPS based IoT system. The future
work under ANASTACIA project will focus on developing
each component of the framework and validate it with different
applications of CPS.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and inno-
vation programme under Grant Agreement No. 731558.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Paridari, A. Mady, S. L. Porta, R. Chabukswar, J. Blanco, A. Teixeira,
H. Sandberg, and M. Boubekeur, “Cyber-physical-security framework
for building energy management system,” ACM/IEEE 7th International
Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), April 2016.
[2]
D. Minoli, K. Sohraby, and B. Occhiogrosso, “Iot considerations, re-
quirements, and architectures for smart buildings—energy optimization
and next-generation building management systems,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 4, January 2017, pp. 269–283.
[3]
J. P. Farwell and R. Rohozinski, “Stuxnet and the future of cyber war,”
Survival, vol. 53, 2011, pp. 23–40.
[4]
O.
Available.
Blackenergy.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.securityweek.com/blackenergy-group-uses-destructive-
plugin-ukraine-attacks (2015)
[5]
S. Gold, “The scada challenge: securing critical infrastructure,” Network
Security, vol. 8, 2009, pp. 18–20.
[6]
[Online]. Anastacia h2020 project. [Online]. Available: http://www.
anastacia-h2020.eu/
[7]
A. Mady, D. Mehta, D. M. Shila, and M. Boubekeur, “Towards resilient
cyber security for embedded devices on internet,” 2016 IEEE 3rd World
Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT) (2016), vol. 0, Dec. 2016, pp.
1–2.
[8]
[Online].
Open
network
operating
system
(onos).
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sdxcentral.com/projects/on-lab-open-network-
operating-system-onos/
[9]
O.
(ODL).
opendaylight
sdn.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.
opendaylight.org/
[10]
Contiki. Contiki: The open source OS for the Internet of Things.
[Online]. Available: http://www.contiki-os.org/
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-585-2
CENICS 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

