Low Power Charge Recycling D-FF
Karol Niewiadomski, Dietmar Tutsch
University of Wuppertal
Chair of Automation and Computer Science
Wuppertal, Germany
Email: {niewiadomski, tutsch}@uni-wuppertal.de
Abstract—The rising number of mobile applications leads to
the necessity of powerful and energy-efﬁcient designs. Field
Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) depict a suitable solution
to this upcoming challenge. In the recent years, different FPGA
designs have been released, covering the range from low-cost
demands up to high-end applications in different industries. The
downside of the increasing number of electronic functions in,
e.g., vehicles, smartphones, etc., is limited resources of the built-
in batteries. To overcome these limitations, appropriate power
reduction measures have to be implemented at the circuit and
architectural level. The correct function of each FPGA relies
on data ﬂip-ﬂops (D-FFs) as basic data storage element. In this
paper, a new D-FF cell design is introduced and implemented with
focus on substantial power savings for low power applications
and a higher resistance against differential power analysis (DPA),
which is an inevitable step of side-channel attacks. This new D-FF
design is compared to various, already existing implementations.
Keywords—FPGA; D-FF; charge recycling; leakage-current
reduction; differential power analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
Mobile applications like notebooks, smartphones, tablets
and wearables have changed the usage behavior over the last
years. The access to information shall be available everywhere
and completely independent from classic computers. This
trend can be clearly seen in the current digitalization of vehi-
cles, providing more and more features like driving assistance
systems and interfaces for the connection of smartphones
for displaying installed apps on the embedded infotainment
system. A modern, upper-class vehicle contains more than 70
electronic control units (ECUs) to provide all features desired
by consumers these days [1]. Such applications rely on the
provision of sufﬁcient processing power, which in turn requires
adequate energy resources. Both, handheld computation units
and vehicles have only limited battery capacities, therefore a
necessity for power optimized integrated electronics is given.
One approach to overcome these challenges are FPGAs.
These integrated circuits play a major role for the realization
of adaptive and efﬁcient systems, offering vast reconﬁguration
abilities [2] [3]. Reconﬁgurability goes back on arrays of
memory cells like static random access memory (SRAM).
In order to optimize an FPGA in terms of energy efﬁciency,
these memory cells have to be extended with power reduction
measures [4]. In addition to that, each FPGA works with ﬂip-
ﬂops, which have an inﬂuence on the overall speed of the
design since they are driven by the system clock. Furthermore,
approximately 30% - 70% of the total power in a clocked de-
sign is dissipated by the clocking network, which is absolutely
crucial for the operation of these circuits [5]. In consequence,
by carefully re-designing these commonly used D-FFs, energy
consumption can be decreased by applying static and dynamic
power reduction measures. Power constraints are one of the
most important challenges in modern circuit design. In addi-
tion, cyber security has become a frequently discussed topic
in recent years, due to many incidents and a rising awareness
for data protection. Side-channel attacks, which are based on
differential power analysis, illustrate a possibility how to reveal
conﬁdential data without physical access to critical devices [6].
Thus, dedicated circuit modiﬁcations at circuit level shall be
used for catching potential threats.
In this paper, we investigate selected D-FF cell designs on
their low power characteristics, which can not be neglected in
battery-powered systems. In Section II, we give an overview
about related work and key aspects of dependencies between
performance and power consumption. In Section III, we in-
vestigate a selection of existing D-FF designs on their assets
and drawbacks and discuss the simulation results. In Section
IV, we present our charge recycling (CR) D-FF and explain
the implemented circuit improvement methods for static and
dynamic power reduction. In Section V, we discuss simulation
results of the D-FF and analyze the beneﬁts of power reduc-
tion measures based on these simulations. In Section VI, all
previous discussions are summarized and concluded.
II. RELATED WORK
D-FFs are the working horse in different applications, like
storage registers, counters, frequency dividers, etc. FPGAs
resort on these circuits in each slice, which is a basic compu-
tational element, shown in Figure 1.
4LUT
&
4LUT
&
4LUT
&
4LUT
&
Switch Matrix
CLB
Config MCs
Routing MUX
SLICE
D-FF
D-FF
D-FF
D-FF
Fig. 1. Simpliﬁed SLICE structure of an FPGA
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-585-2
CENICS 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

Each slice contains one D-FF for storage of computed
values prior to forwarding them to the next conﬁgurable logic
block (CLB). Since even a low-cost FPGA, e.g., Xilinx Spartan
3A, contains up to 8320 CLBs [7], one can see the strong
impact on area and energy consumption of these clocked
devices. The relation between consumed power and the supply
voltage, load capacitance and system clock can be seen in (1):
P = αCV 2fClk
(1)
The activity factor α represents the cadence of write re-
quests. A reduction of α can be achieved by special memory
cell designs [8] or alternatively with auxiliary comparator
circuitry. Another efﬁcient approach is reducing the operating
voltage. This can be achieved by techniques like dynamic
voltage scaling (DVS), which was evaluated in various pub-
lications [9]. Power gating is certainly the strongest way
to achieve a measurable reduction of energy consumption.
However, this can be only applied, if there is no focus on data
retention. A further possibility for raising the energy efﬁciency
is lowering the clock frequency fClk. Circuitry, which is not
timing critical can be clocked down to a minimum speed,
which ensures a reliable operation of the system. If certain
circuit parts can be completely stopped while retaining stored
logic values, full clock gating can be a feasible solution to save
power [10]. Both methods can be combined on a coarse-grain
or ﬁne-grain level.
These techniques are only an extract of a set consisting of
different methods on how to handle the challenges of demand-
ing functions. A majority of these solutions require additional
circuitry to be added and implemented at a higher architectural
level. Our approach goes one step further and is based on direct
circuit level improvements to a D-FF by reasonable selection
of a suitable D-FF cell design and substantial modiﬁcations
of the internal cell circuitry to achieve better efﬁciency. The
improvements achieved on that level are essential for important
energy dissipation suppression and are an inevitable step for
optimization to be combined with architectural amendments.
III. D-FF CELL DESIGNS
Different concepts have been introduced in the recent years.
In general, we can distinguish between latches and ﬂip-ﬂops.
Whilst latches are level-sensitive designs, ﬂip-ﬂops are egde-
sensitive. Latches are transparent and therefore not suitable
for timing-critical applications due to possible glitches in the
signal path. For avoiding glitches and in consequence timing
problems in complex designs, many ﬂip-ﬂop designs implicate
the principle of cascading master-slave D-FFs. This standard
design in shown in Figure 2.
Both, master and slave unit, consist of a feedback loop of
inverters and transmission gates. Once Clk is set to HIGH,
the input data provided by D is latched in the master circuit.
At this point, the transmission gate connecting master and
slave circuit, is in cut-off mode and therefore avoiding any
glitches, e.g., direct throughput of D to Q. When Clk is set
D
Q
Clk
Clk
Clk
Clk
Clk
Clk
Clk
Clk
Master
Slave
TG 1
TG 2
Fig. 2. Master-slave arrangement
to LOW, the stored data at the output of the master circuit
is latched by the subsequent slave unit and provided at the
output node Q. Any changes of D will not inﬂuence the logic
value stored at Q due to the fact that both transistors of TG
1 are in cut-off mode. This legacy design was the starting
point for numerous variations in the past. All simulations have
been performed with Cadence tools and a 90nm technology
provided by TSMC at an ambient temperature of 27◦C. The
clock frequency was set to 250MHz.
1) SET D-FF: A simpliﬁed implementation is shown in
Figure 3. Whilst the reference design of a D-FF uses 16
transistors in total, this design consists of 10 transistors only,
leading to a higher chip density and reduced manufacturing
costs [11].
D
Q
Clk
Clk
Clk
Clk
Q
M1
M2
Fig. 3. Single Edge Triggerd D-FF
Instead of 4 TGs, this design works with 1 TG and
achieves the same function by replacing the remaining TGs
by nMOS transistors. This reduction of transistors comes
along with cutting down the number of slower and larger
pMOS transistors. Furthermore, this implementation provides
the generation of both Q and Q. The functionality of the
SET D-FF is similar to the reference design: glitching is
avoided by complementary control of both pass-transistors
M1 and M2. Latching and generation of the output values
is done in the feedback loop after the activation of M2.
Analog to the previous standard design, this concept relies on
the preparation of complementary Clk signals, which requires
additional circuitry for signal generation.
2) Low-power D-FF: Another variation, which displays an
attempt on how to optimize a D-FF with respect to power
consumption, is shown in Figure 4. The key aspect of this
design is to eliminate short-circuit power dissipation from
the feedback path [12] due to the tri-state inverter. Although
keeping the same number of transistor like in the reference
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-585-2
CENICS 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

design, considerable power savings can be achieved. This will
be discussed in the last section of this paper.
D
Q
Clk
Clk
Clk
Clk
Vdd
Vdd
Gnd
Gnd
Fig. 4. Low-power modiﬁcation of D-FF
3) PPI D-FF: In order to get a better performance of a
conventional D-FF, the Push-Pull-Isolation (PPI) D-FF was
presented in [12]. The main advantage of this implementation
is the reduced clock-to-output delay from two gates in the
reference design to one gate in the PPI D-FF, which is shown
in Figure 5.
D
Q
Clk
Clk
M1
M2
Clk
Clk
Clk
Clk
Clk
Clk
FB loop 1
FB loop 2
Fig. 5. Push-Pull-Isolation D-FF
The insertion of an inverter and a TG between the output
nodes of master and slave latches provides a push-pull effect
at the slave latch. In consequence, the input and output of
the inverter in the slave unit will be driven to opposite logic
values during operation. This design is approximately 31%
faster than the reference D-FF, but has a power overhead of
22%. To counter the increased power consumption 2 pMOS
transistors, M1 and M2, are added to the feedback loops in
the master and slave latches. In direct comparison with the
conventional D-FF, the PPI D-FF improves speed by 56% at
an expense of 6% of additional power dissipation.
For all introduced cell designs in this paper, the average
power consumption, the maximum and minimum power con-
sumption during simulation time were traced and summarized
in Table I. These results show that the reference D-FF dis-
sipates the highest average power consumption by 1186nW,
due to lack of power savings measures. The maximum power
dissipation conﬁrms this result by revealing a higher consump-
tion by the factor of approximately 4 in direct comparison
with the optimized low-power D-FF. However, this result
was expected and highlights the improvements of previously
introduced designs.
TABLE I. SIMULATION RESULTS (PWR)
D-FF Type
Average Power nW
Max. Power uW
Min. Power fW
Reference
1186
233.3
51.47
SETD
280.3
26.21
22.39
Low-power
272.7
61.55
19.92
PPI
435.4
88.71
28.01
On the other hand, similar results are reﬂected by measuring
the leakage current of each design, shown in Table II. The
reference D-FF exhibits the highest average leakage current
Ileak by 1262nA, which is approximately ﬁvefold higher than
average Ileak of the low-power D-FF. Analog to the average
leakage current, the maximum leakage current is also allocated
to the reference design and points out that all power-optimized
variations perform better in terms of energy efﬁciency.
TABLE II. SIMULATION RESULTS ILeak
D-FF Type
Avg. Current nA
Max. Current uW
Min. Current uW
Reference
1262
336.3
346
SETD
265.7
48.94
50.41
Low-power
235.1
28.83
45.9
PPI
403.7
39.4
56.35
The respective simulation results are shown in Figure 6,
which illustrates the input signal D, the clock signal Clk
and the respective power dissipation output proﬁles for the
presented input sequence with an alternating 0→1→0→1
sequence.
Fig. 6. Comparison Results
All designs exhibit strongly varying power consumption for
each transition on the input nodes during the rising edge of
the Clk signal, which comes along with an exploitable vul-
nerability for side-channel attacks. Glitches can be identiﬁed
during the falling edge of Clk, which indicates weaknesses in
the latching mechanism of master and slave latch, therefore
revealing undesired transparency. None of the previously pre-
sented designs is optimized in terms of static leakage current
suppression or energy recovery during runtime, which will be
key aspects of our presented design in the next section.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-585-2
CENICS 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

IV. CR D-FF
Based on the analysis of drawbacks of existing D-FF
designs, we present a new approach of a low-power, energy-
efﬁcient and glitch-free D-FF, which is suitable for security-
relevant applications with limited energy resources. Referring
to the standard design shown in Figure 2, our intention was to
redesign a new ﬂip-ﬂop cell from scratch. Without any direct
relation to the D-FFs presented in the previous section, we
present our charge recycling (CR) D-FF, which is illustrated
in Figure 7.
Gnd
Gnd
Gnd
D
D
Out
Out
Out
Out
Clk
Clk
Vdd
Sleep
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
M7
M8
M9
M10
M11
M12
M13
Gnd
Gnd
Vdd
Set
Reset
Reset
Set
Q
Q
M14
M15
M16
M17
M18
M20
M21
M19
Master
Slave
Vdd_Master
Vdd_Slave
Fig. 7. CR D-FF
This design features a series of dedicated power savings
mechanisms, which will be discussed in the following sections.
A. Charge recycling
Storing and processing logic values in ﬂip-ﬂops, registers,
memories leads to charging and discharging of parasitic ca-
pacitances, which are an essential part of each integrated
circuit. Since the CR D-FF features dynamic logic, periodic
charge & discharge cycles are an integral part of the in-
tended function and require special attention during the design.
This design works with 2 alternating phases during runtime:
precharge & evaluate, which are both triggered by the Clk
signal. Whilst Clk turns to LOW, M5 is turned on and
in consequence also switching on the pMOS transistors M3
& M6. Illustrating a critical point with respect to power
savings within an integrated circuit, the precharge phase is
the more deciding one. Due to the fact that these transistors
are therefore in a conducting state, the capacitances at the
output nodes Out & Out are shortened. Hence, not discharged
electrons at one of the complementary output nodes are used
for charging the previously discharged output node. This effect
is used for equilibrating electron charges and thus relieving
the battery due to the fact that less energy is needed. This is
a strong method for achieving a better performance in terms
of dissipation reduction during dynamic behavior.
After Clk applies a logic HIGH at the gate of M4,
this transistor is turned off whereas M11 is turned on and
subsequently starting the evaluation phase in terms of sensing
the difference between the complementary inputs D & D. One
of the various beneﬁts of sense ampliﬁer based logic is that
even a small ∆ voltage between both input signals will be
sensed and evaluated, providing a higher speed of the D-FF.
B. Dual Threshold CMOS
Leakage currents Ileak during standby contribute to a sig-
niﬁcant amount of total dissipation loss. By adding dedicated
countermeasures, appreciable power savings can be achieved
without investing much effort for realization. This can be
done by the usage of transistors with a high threshold voltage
Vth. Transistors with a high Vth require a proportional higher
VGS voltage at their gate nodes in order to be turned on,
which implies a mitigation of leakage currents. This method
can be combined be applying a negative VGS for leading
transistors into a deep turn-off status and therefore supporting
suppression of leakage currents. This technique should be only
applied carefully on circuit parts, which are not timing-critical
since higher threshold voltages usually equal in slower signal
transition. All transistors in our design are high Vth transistors
for the sake of strongest suppression of Ileak.
C. Multi-oxide technology
Closely related to the previous section, static power
dissipation can be further decreased by improving the
tunneling-barrier for electrons. Undesired tunneling of elec-
trons through the gate to bulk leads to current ﬂows, which
shall be eliminated. The relation between Ileak and the
tunneling-barrier is shown in (2):
Ileak∝A(Vox
Tox
)2
(2)
Increasing the tunneling-barrier can be realized by increas-
ing the gate oxide thickness Tox. A higher oxide thickness
leads immediately to a reduction of the tunneling current
density Ileak, following the goal to extend battery lifetime
of mobile devices even in standby mode. The drawback of
this technique is similar to the previous one: penalty of the
circuit speed may occur if not applied carefully. Based on this
reason, we decided to use high Tox transistors for M4, M5
and M11. All of these transistors are not timing-critical, since
M4 is used to activate a dedicated sleep mode and M5 for
balancing the outputs. All of these functions are not slowing
the circuit speed.
D. Clk- and power-gating
For further reduction of dynamic power dissipation, cutting
off the Clk signal leads to transfer the circuit to a hold
state, while maintaining the stored data inside the latches.
Circuitry, which is not executing different operations over
runtime, can be kept in a WAIT state, ready to continue
calculation whenever the Clk signal is set to HIGH again.
In the proposed design, M5 & M11 are used for stopping the
D-FF from operating, but still keeping the correct data at the
outputs of the cross-coupled inverters. Of course, additional
circuitry driving and distributing the Clk signal over a whole
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-585-2
CENICS 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

design is an indispensable requirement. This can be provided
by digital clock managers (DCMs), which are not covered by
this paper.
In case that data storage is not necessary, gating of the
supply voltage is an effective method how to save power in
unused parts of a circuit. Power gating can be applied on
different hierarchical levels. Our decision was to follow a ﬁne-
grain approach, leading to equipping the proposed D-FF with a
power gating transistor M4. If the SLEEP signal turns from 0
to 1, M4 is off and therefore disconnecting the D-FF from Vdd.
If this technique is applied in accordance with clock gating,
total rail-to-rail-decoupling (Vdd & Gnd) can be realized.
E. Stacking
Transistor stacking is a further, strong technique for sub-
threshold current reduction. Stacking transistors means to
increase to source voltage VS while keeping the gate voltage
VG at the same level. At a certain point of time, VGS becomes
negative, which leads the transistor into super cut-off mode
and turns it deeply off. The more transistors are stacked in
series, the better leakage current reduction will be. However,
the most signiﬁcant results can be achieved by adding a
second transistor in series, because the effect of subthreshold
current reduction becomes diminished with a rising number of
transistors. Our proposed D-FF features stacking as a design
principle, e.g., in the pull-down-networks of the slave latch,
realized by M16 M17 and M20 & M21.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
The CR D-FF senses the inputs D & D at the positive edge
of Clk and stores these data independently from any changes
at the input nodes of this circuit. Due to all implemented circuit
improvements, an average static leakage current of 173nA is
achieved, which is sufﬁciently low to be accepted. During the
negative edge of Clk, the CR D-FF turns into the precharge
phase, where all internal and external nodes are charged. The
characteristic curves in Figure 8 show one beneﬁcial features
of the CR D-FF over the other discussed designs. This can be
seen in both output curves of Q & Q.
Since this design features charge recycling, the output nodes
and all internal nodes are precharged to Vdd − Vth only,
which is beneﬁcial for the energy balance of this circuit. The
reason for this is that precharge is ﬁnished by achieving an
output voltage, which is one threshold voltage below Vdd.
Thus, the less energy from the power supply is required for
precharging the CR D-FF, the more suitable circuitry for low-
power applications will be. Based on the reduced voltage range
at the outputs of the master latch, it is possible to decrease
permanently the supply voltage Vdd Slave. Hence, we choose
a supply voltage of 800mV for the conventional slave circuit,
which supports further power dissipation reduction. For a
better comparison, we enhance Table I with relevant simluation
results of the CR D-FF, shown in Table III.
The results in Table III show that the introduced CR D-FF
outperforms most of the previously analyzed designs in terms
Clk (V)
-.25
0.0
.25
.5
.75
1.0
1.25
-100
-50.0
0.0
50.0
100
I (uA)
2.5
10.0
PWR (uW)
-2.5
15.0
D (V)
0.0
.25
.5
.75
1.0
1.25
-.25
H1
Q (V)
-.25
0.0
.25
.5
.75
1.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
25.0
time (ns)
0.0
20.0
800 mV
Fig. 8. Simulation Results CR D-FF
TABLE III. SIMULATION RESULTS (PWR)
D-FF Type
Average PWR nW
Max. PWR uW
Min. PWR fW
Reference
1186
233.3
51.47
SETD
374.1
32.01
22.39
Low-power
275.7
73.89
19.92
PPI
435.4
110.5
172.3
CR
303.5
13.84
27.59
of average power consumption. It achieves the second-best per-
formance for average power consumption (319.7nW) and the
best result for maximum power dissipation (13.84uW). The
minimum power consumption of 27.59fW can be neglected,
since the inﬂuence of these contributions is not signiﬁcant for
the overall performance of all discussed designs. Even though
the conventional low-power ﬂip-ﬂop achieves a slightly lower
average power consumption than the CR D-FF, the peak power
dissipation is approximately quintuple higher and it offers no
resistance features against DPA. Figure 9 shows a comparison
of the average power consumption.
Fig. 9. Comparison of Average Power Dissipation
It can be clearly seen in Table III that the CR D-FF
provides the most constant power consumption among all
considered designs, therefore also providing the best oppor-
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-585-2
CENICS 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

tunities to be chosen in security-sensitive applications. The
smaller the differences in energy consumption between each
data transition are, the more difﬁcult a differential power
analysis will be, which is always the starting point for a side-
channel attack. Hence, the introduced CR D-FF provides both,
remarkable low-power characteristics for mobile, embedded
circuitry, which comes along with a necessity for robustness
against intended attacks. However, beneﬁts in superior energy
efﬁciency and noticeable robustness against differential power
analysis come at the cost of a higher number of transistors,
shown in Table IV.
TABLE IV. TRANSISTOR COUNT AND POWER VARIATION
D-FF Type
Reference
SETD
LP
PPI
CR
No. of transistors
16
10
16
18
21
Max. PWR ∆ (%)
18.78
94.7
94.03
98.62
6.8
This fact usually leads to a penalty in required area for
manufacturing, which is certainly an aspect to be considered.
A CR D-FF consists of 21 transistors and requires preparation
of complementary input signals, which depend on additional
wiring and therefore lead to extra area on the chip. On
the other hand, this implementation provides also 2 com-
plementary outputs with no delay between both signals and
no necessity of additional circuitry for generation. Table IV
also emphasizes the differences between the analyzed cells in
switching behavior. Whilst the ∆ of dissipated power of the
CR D-FF never exceeds variations of 6.8% in maximum, the
results of the alternative designs show much higher noticeable
differences. Despite the fact that all designs have been ana-
lyzed without putting a stronger focus on speed and timing
aspects, further measurements on the maximum operating
frequency have been done. For this purpose, the elapsed time
for each switching transition was measured and compared
against each other. Figure 10 illustrates a direct comparison of
the output Q of all considered circuits after being stimulated
with an input signal D. Depending on the switching transition
and the characteristics of the ﬂip-ﬂops, expected differences
on the edge steepness can be identiﬁed.
Fig. 10. Comparison of Switching Transitios Of All Designs
Based on these simulation results, the consumed time for
a HIGH → LOW and a LOW → HIGH transition has
been measured and summarized in Table V. The maximum
achievable switching frequency fmax reveals the penalty in
operating speed of the CR D-FF, due to the increased number
of transistors. However, a maximum switching frequency of
≈ 6.4GHz is still a notable result.
TABLE V. TIMING COMPARISON
D-FF Type
T High-Low ps
T Low-High ps
Max. freq. GHz
Reference
42.5
58.3
9.9
SETD
422
101
1.9
Low-power
43.63
51.58
10
PPI
60.48
79.16
7.1
CR
41
114
6.4
VI. CONCLUSION
We analyzed a selected number of existing ﬂip-ﬂop designs
upon their characteristics and suitability for usage in low-
power applications. Beside that, we have investigated each de-
sign on its capabilities to be resistant against differential power
analysis. Our goal was to design a D-FF, which provides both,
a remarkable reduction of power consumption and robustness
against side-channel attacks. Hence, we designed a charge
recycling D-FF, which uses the not discharged electrons at
one of the complementary output nodes to support the battery
during the precharge phase. This beneﬁt comes along with
the fact that the outputs of the master latch are precharged to
Vdd − Vth only, providing the opportunity to power the slave
latch with the same supply voltage (≈ 800mV ). Furthermore,
we applied additional power saving modiﬁcations and achieved
remarkable improvements of power reduction and standby
leakage suppression. Simulation results have shown that the
CR D-FF offers the best overall performance with an average
power consumption, which reduced the dissipated power by
about ≈ 75%. Complementary generation of output signals
with no requirement for delay correction is a further advantage
of this circuit when compared to other designs, which do
not feature parallel, complementary creation of D & D. The
variations of the measured power consumption do not exceed
differences of ≈ 7% and remain constant independent from the
switching event, which is sufﬁcient to withstand differential
power analysis and which is not achieved by the alternative
ﬂip-ﬂops. These beneﬁts come at the cost of a higher number
of required transistors and the layout after synthesis of a CR
D-FF requires careful routing of all metal interconnections
between these cells for keeping the parasitic capacitances as
equal as possible.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Pierre Mayr, from Ruhr University of
Bochum, for his advice on veriﬁcation strategies and proce-
dures. We would like to give credit to Grant Martin, from
Cadence Tensilica, for many interesting discussion about em-
bedded devices and low-power technologies. We are grateful to
Andreas Ullrich, from University of Wuppertal, for immediate
PDK / tool support.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-585-2
CENICS 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

REFERENCES
[1] S. F¨urst, “Challenges in the design of automotive software,” in
Proceedings of the Conference on Design, Automation and Test in
Europe, ser. DATE ’10.
3001 Leuven, Belgium, Belgium: European
Design and Automation Association, 2010, pp. 256–258. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1870926.1870987
[2] M. Ullmann, M. H¨ubner, B. Grimm, and J. Becker, “An fpga run-time
system for dynamical on-demand reconﬁguration,” in Parallel and Dis-
tributed Processing Symposium, 2004. Proceedings. 18th International.
IEEE, 2004, p. 135.
[3] R. A. et al., “Towards a dynamically reconﬁgurable automotive control
system architecture,” in Embedded System Design: Topics, Techniques
and Trends.
Springer, 20017, pp. 71–84.
[4] K. Niewiadomski, C. Gremzow, and D. Tutsch, “4t loadless srams for
low power fpga lut optimization,” in Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
(ADAPTIVE 2017), February 2017, pp. 1–7.
[5] V. Stojanovic and V. G. Oklobdzija, “Comparative analysis of master-
slave latches and ﬂip-ﬂops for high-performance and low-power sys-
tems,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 536–548,
Apr 1999.
[6] K. Tiri and I. Verbauwhede, “A vlsi design ﬂow for secure side-
channel attack resistant ics,” in Proceedings of the Conference on
Design, Automation and Test in Europe - Volume 3, ser. DATE ’05.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2005, pp. 58–63.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/DATE.2005.44
[7] XA Spartan-3A Automotive FPGA Family Data Sheet, Xilinx, 04 2011,
rev. 2.0.
[8] R. E. Aly, M. I. Faisal, and M. A. Bayoumi, “Novel 7t sram cell for
low power cache design,” in Proceedings 2005 IEEE International SOC
Conference, Sept 2005, pp. 171–174.
[9] J. M. Rabaey, A. Chandrakasan, and B. Nikolic, Digital integrated
circuits- A design perspective, 2nd ed.
Prentice Hall, 2004.
[10] C. Maxﬁeld, The Design Warrior’s Guide to FPGAs: Devices, Tools and
Flows, 1st ed.
Newton, MA, USA: Newnes, 2004.
[11] M. Sharma, A. Noor, S. C. Tiwari, and K. Singh, “An area and power ef-
ﬁcient design of single edge triggered d-ﬂip ﬂop,” in 2009 International
Conference on Advances in Recent Technologies in Communication and
Computing, Oct 2009, pp. 478–481.
[12] U. Ko and P. T. Balsara, “High-performance energy-efﬁcient d-ﬂip-ﬂop
circuits,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI)
Systems, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 94–98, Feb 2000.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-585-2
CENICS 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

