Robustness Study of SiC MOSFET Under Harsh Electrical and Thermal 
Constraints 
To an in-depth physical failure analysis 
 
Safa Mbarek, Pascal Dherbécourt, Olivier Latry, 
François Fouquet* 
University of Rouen, GPM UMR CNRS 6634 
*IRSEEM, Esigelec  
Rouen, France 
mbarek.safa@gmail.com 
Dhouha Othman, Mounira Berkani, Stéphane Lefebvre 
SATIE UMR CNRS 8029 ENS Cachan 
Cachan, France  
 
 
Abstract— The improvement of power conversion systems 
makes SiC devices very attractive for efficiency, compacity and 
robustness. However, their behavior in response to short 
circuit mode must be carefully studied to ensure the reliability 
of systems. This study deals with a SiC MOSFET. After the 
description of the component structure and its electrical 
performances, the paper presents some preliminary results for 
robustness evaluation in harsh electrical and thermal 
conditions. Extensive studies are underway to try to correlate 
the electrical measurements with an in-depth structural 
analysis. 
Keywords-SiC MOSFET; Robustness; Failure analysis; Short-
Circuit.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The SiC powers Metal Oxide Semiconductor Transistors 
(MOSFET) are very attractive for high temperature 
application in automotive or aeronautics. The isolated gate 
and the low drain to source resistance in on-state (RDSon) 
make them ideal for using the MOSFET as a switch for all 
power electronics applications where efficiency, compacity 
and robustness are needed.  
First, SiC MOSFET had been realized since 1986 [1] 
even if oxide on SiC were studied before. Many challenges 
in design have been made in order to expect higher 
frequencies switching than with Silicon Insulated Gate 
Bipolar Transistor (IGBT) and with higher operating 
temperature [7]. Investigations of different types of 
structures with 4H-SiC or 6H-SiC polytypes have been 
proposed with different challenges [8] and the vertical power 
devices double implanted MOSFET (DIMOS) shows very 
good performances due to its higher bulk mobility [9]. 
In order to evaluate the robustness of this type of 
MOSFET, several tests are possible. High temperature gate-
bias (HTGB) and high temperature reverse-bias (HTRB) 
tests 
are 
common 
qualification 
tests 
for 
discrete 
semiconductor devices [10] however the short-circuit test 
[4][6][11] is one of the most used to evaluate the ruggedness 
of power devices during conduction. By using this test on a 
commercial 1.2 kV SiC Power MOSFET, the thermal 
instability and the electro-thermal behaviour are investigated 
in [11] by the mean of a state-of-art IR thermographic set-up. 
Othman et al. [4][6] present a comparison study on 
performances, reliability and robustness between SiC 
MOSFET and JFET devices. The aim of the studies is to 
evaluate the abilities and effects of each technology on the 
conception of power converter for avionic applications and 
to analyse their capability to withstand with harsh electrical 
constrains. The purpose of this paper is to present 
preliminary experimental results that could help to 
understand impact of the physical failure on the performance 
of the SiC MOSFET. First, the DIMOS is characterised in 
short circuit test. Then, two failure mechanisms are put in 
light with microstructural analysis. 
II. 
COMPONENT UNDER TEST 
 
The device under test (DUT) is a 1.2 kV SiC-MOSFET 
with continuous drain current IDmax equal to 24 A at 25 °C.   
The DUT is a vertical DIMOS transistor and its structure for 
an elementary cell is presented in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1.  Structure investigation of DUT. 
The Poly-Silicon Gate is isolated from the lateral 
channel with a thin oxide layer and the channel length is Lg. 
The Drain terminal is connected to the bottom of the device 
and is coupled to the channel through a drift layer that 
contributes to the on-state resistance and allows to apply 
large voltages between Drain and Source during off-state. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-379-7
CENICS 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

The other two terminals are fixed on the top of the device 
and the Source electrode, which is made of Aluminum, 
entirely covers the top face except on the Gate bonding wire 
pad. 
Finally, the die is brazed on a Copper base plate that 
carries out the heat preventing from over self-heating during 
electrical conduction. The brazing, an alloy of Tin, Silver 
and Antinomy, is limited to a maximum operating 
temperature of 260°C. 
As our main goal is to correlate the physical failure 
analysis of the DUT and the analysis of its cross section 
structure with the help of Scanning Electron Microscopy 
(SEM) after Focused Ion Beam (FIB) sample etching, the 
first step is to make sure that the depackaging process has 
no impact on the DUT electrical behavior. In order to verify 
this point, we have compared current-voltage (IV) 
characteristics before and after opening. 
III. 
IVT CHARACTERIZATION  
The static behavior of the transistor is studied over the 
recommended range of operating temperature according to 
the constructor datasheet (from -55 °C to +135 °C). Our 
study is restricted to the evolution of the drain current ID 
depending on temperature variation, reflecting the behavior 
of the transistor. 
To perform the current-voltage-temperature (IVT) 
measurements while providing thermal stabilization of the 
DUT, three experimental means have been implemented. 
For the negative temperatures, a cold forced air system is 
used; for positive and high temperatures, a Peltier module 
and a plate heating resistor are required. A thermocouple 
sensor, positioned as close to the base plate of the DUT as 
possible, controls its temperature. This setup provides a 
good 
accuracy 
and 
a 
satisfactory 
stability 
during 
measurements. 
Pulsed mode is suitable to avoid any self-heating of the 
DUT during the static measurements. To satisfy this 
requirement, the pulse drain temporally includes the gate 
pulse. The pulse drain duration is fixed to 3 microseconds, 
with a duty cycle equal to 0.15%. 
The output curves ID (VDS, T) in Figure 2 are plotted for 
a low gate voltage VGS equal to 10V over a temperature 
range extending from -50 °C to 135 °C showing a steady 
increase in the drain current with the temperature increase. 
The input curves ID (VGS, T) in Figure 3 are plotted for 
the same values of temperature, and for an output voltage 
VDS equal to 18 V. The measurements suggest, as expected, 
a significant reduction in the threshold voltage Vth as a 
function of temperature. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Output characteric ID (VDS,T) for different temperatures with 
VGS = 10V. 
 
Figure 3.  Input characteric ID (VGS,T) for different temperatures with   
VDS = 18V. 
 
Figure 4.  Drain current IDsat variation versus the temperature for  
VGS=10V and VDS =19V. 
 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-379-7
CENICS 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

The variation of the drain current is given in Figure 4 in 
the area of near saturation of the output characteristic, for a 
gate voltage VGS equal to 10 V and for a drain voltage 
VDS equal to 19 V. 
IV. 
ROBUSTNESS 
Once the fresh electrical characterization of the devices 
achieved, a stress campaign is carried out under short circuit 
tests at room temperature, T = 25 °C. We apply a drain 
voltage of 600V without any output load. During the short 
circuit phase, the DUT is maintained in the on-state by 
applying a gate voltage of 20V and is then switched off by 
reverse biasing the gate [6]. Dedicated test bench schematic 
circuit is shown in Figure 5.  
 
Figure 5.  Test circuit for short circuit robustness analysis [6]. 
The first step consists in evaluating the energy 
responsible for the failure over long pulse duration. We 
applied the short circuit stress to a first component DUT1 
for long pulse duration until complete failure. Figure 6 
reports waveforms (VDriver, VGS and ID) measured during the 
short circuit test. The corresponding dissipated energy 
before failure is about 0.96 J. Results indicate that the 
device was capable to sustain short circuit tests for a gate 
drive duration tSC equal to 16 µs. 
From these observations, we apply the same constraints 
to a second component DUT2 by applying successive short 
circuit tests with pulse duration tSC increased by 2 µs at each 
test. In these conditions of experimentation, we try to 
determine the critical energy that is the maximum value of 
energy controllable by the DUT. 
 
Figure 6.  DUT1 : Robustness analysis under long pulse short circuit. 
 
Figure 7.  DUT2 : Evolution of gate to source voltage during short circuit 
tests showing a gate leakage current. 
 
Figure 8.  Failure of DUT2 during short circuit test, VDS = 600V, 
tSC=14µs, T=25 °C.  
As illustrated, Figure 7 shows gate voltage waveforms 
measured during short circuit operations. The last short 
circuit stress of tSC = 14µs applied to DUT2 causes the 
device failure.  Figure 8 reports waveforms (VDriver, VGS and 
ID) measured during the last short circuit test 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Static I-V characteristics of the DUT 
The drain current expression in linear operating region is 
given by (1), which describes the evolution of ID (VGS, VDS) 
characteristic. For drain-source voltage (VDS) values lower 
than VGS-Vth, the drain current characteristic is linear, the 
behavior of the component is then like of a linear voltage-
controlled inductance. 
 
         
 
 [(       )       
 
 ] 
(1) 
 
Where W and L are respectively the gate width and the 
gate length, µn is the charge-carrier effective mobility and 
Cox is the gate oxide capacitance per unit area. 
The drain voltage corresponding to saturation mode is 
defined by the difference between the applied gate voltage 
and the threshold voltage that is, VDsat = VGS-Vth. The VDsat 
value read from the output curve of Figure 2, for a 
temperature of 40 ° C, is equivalent to 10 - 2.9 (V), that to 
say 7.1V. Beyond this value, for increasing VDS, the 
600 V 
10 Ω 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-379-7
CENICS 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

component works in saturation mode and the current value 
maintains substantially the IDsat value. Then, the current 
value is independent from VDS and its expression is given by 
(2). By experimental measurement, we found a decrease in 
Vth with temperature over a range from -50 °C to 135 °C. 
For a given value of VGS, equation (2) predicts an increase 
of the saturation current IDsat, which is experimentally 
verified. 
 
            
 
 [
(       ) 
 
] 
(2) 
More rigorously, we should also take into account the 
evolution of the mobility µn which decreases with 
temperature [5]. Vth is also decreasing with temperature; the 
two variations (µn and Vth) have an opposite effect on IDsat. 
Threshold voltage variation is predominant at low gate 
voltage 
[2][3], 
which 
corresponds 
to 
our 
IVT 
characterizations as shown in Figures 2 and 3. The opposite 
behavior occurs for high gate voltage values, i.e., VGS equal 
to 20V corresponding to robustness tests conditions 
presented in section IV. 
B. Robustness 
It is clearly seen during these robustness tests that the 
two devices had different failure mechanisms. 
As shown in Figure 6, DUT1 fails after thermal runaway 
by the rapid increase in the drain current due to failure in 
short-circuit between drain and source. Similar failures were 
observed for SiC JFET devices for which increase of the 
temperature beyond the fusion limit of the device 
metallization was proposed in order to explain failures [4]. 
However, the transistor DUT2 first turns-off safely and 
short-circuits current falls down to zero as seen in Figure 8. 
But, few microseconds after the switch-off, a sudden short-
circuit is observed between gate and source. So, gate failure 
occurred during transistor’s off state after short-circuit but no 
failure occurred between drain and source electrodes. 
According to some authors, the gate oxide could be 
destroyed and the device became uncontrollable [6]. The 
time between the end of short-circuit and the gate failure 
may be due to temperature diffusion inside the device, which 
delay heating on the gate oxide 
In Figures 6 and 8, we can clearly notice that a 
significant leakage current appears about 12 µs after the 
beginning of the short circuit, which seems to be responsible 
for the devices failures even if the failures seem to be 
different regarding the gate to source voltage evolution at 
failure. The decrease of the gate to source voltage during 
short circuit seems to show degradation between gate and 
source electrodes during this particular test [4]. 
C. Structural analysis of degradations  
The stressed component DUT1 presenting GDS short-
circuit degradation was unpacked and an example of a FIB 
cut (Focused Ion Beam) is given in Figure 9.  
 
Figure 9.  Material degradation analysis of DUT1.  
Analyzing the figure, we could make the following 
observations: 
- We are able to identify the different elements of the 
structure of the MOSFET, 
- The aluminum layer corresponding to the source contact 
largely melted.  
However the reduction of the oxide over the gate 
polysilicon may be due to the unpacking process; further 
tests will be performed. 
 
Figure 10.  FIB cut location and surface degradation of DUT1.  
Regarding the gate oxide, between channel and 
polysilicon gate, it does not appear to have been damaged 
by the stress but the FIB cut was performed in a randomly 
selected location and not where the surface degradations 
appeared to be the strongest Figure 10. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
A complete thermal IVT characterization has been 
performed and shows a behavior consistent with the 
manufacturer’s data. Short circuit tests, conducted under 
extreme conditions, showed a destruction of the two devices 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-379-7
CENICS 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

under test. However, different failure modes were observed. 
To better understand the failure mechanisms, current studies 
are carried out under softer short circuit test in order to 
highlight significant variations in electrical measurements. 
Defects generated in the device structure will be located and 
analyzed by SEM and FIB in the aim to correlate these 
observations with the electrical measurements. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Kondo et al., “Experimental 3C-SiC MOSFET,” Electron Device 
Letters, IEEE, vol. 7, no. 7, July 1986, pp. 404–406. 
[2] P. H. Aaen, J. A. Pla, and J. Wood, “Modeling and 
characterization of RF and microwave power FETs,” 
Cambridge University Press, Ed2007. 
[3] Md. Hasanuzzaman, S. K. Islam, L. M. Tolbert, and M. T. 
Alam, “Temperature dependency of MOSFET device 
characteristics in 4H and 6H silicon carbide (SiC),” Solid-
Sate Electronics, vol. 48, 2004, pp. 1877-1881. 
[4] D. Othman et al., “Comparison study on performances and 
robustness between SiC MOSFET & JFET devices – Abilities 
for aeronautics application,” Microelectronics Reliability, vol. 
52, 2012, pp 1859-1864. 
[5] B. J. Biliga, “Silicon Carbide Power Devices,” North Carolina 
state university, USA, World Scientific Publishing, Ed 2005. 
[6] D. Othman et al., “Robustness of 1.2 kV SiC MOSFET 
devices,” Microelectronics Reliability, vol. 53, 2013, pp. 
1735-1738.  
[7] K. Matocha, “Challenges in SiC power MOSFET design,” 
Solid-State Electronics, vol. 52, no. 10, October 2008, pp. 
1631–1635. 
[8] S. Dimitrijev and P. Jamet, “Advances in SiC power 
MOSFET technology,” Microelectronics Reliability, vol. 43, 
no. 2, February 2003, pp. 225–233. 
[9] V. R. Vathulya and M. H. White, “Characterization and 
performance comparison of the power DIMOS structure 
fabricated with a reduced thermal budget in 4H and 6H-SiC,” 
Solid-State Electronics, vol. 44, no. 2, February 2000, pp. 
309–315.  
[10] L. Yang and A. Castellazzi, “High temperature gate-bias and 
reverse-bias tests on SiC MOSFETs,” Microelectronics 
Reliability, vol. 53, no. 9–11, September–November 2013, pp. 
1771-1773. 
[11] M. Riccio, A. Castellazzi, G. De Falco and A. Irace, 
“Experimental analysis of electro-thermal instability in SiC 
Power MOSFETs,” Microelectronics Reliability, vol. 53, no. 
9–11, September–November 2013, pp. 1739-1744. 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-379-7
CENICS 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

