Novel Nanoparticle Enhanced Digital Materials for 3D Printing and their 
Application Shown for the Robotic and Electronic Industry 
Introduction on the DIMAP project 
 
Steffen Scholz, Adrien Brunet, Tobias Müller 
Institute for Applied Computer Science 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
Email: 
[steffen.scholz;adrien.brunet;tobias.mueller2]@kit.edu 
Anita Fuchsbauer 
Profactor GmbH 
Steyr-Gleink, Austria 
Email: anita.fuchsbauer@profactor.at
 
Abstract— In this paper the general idea of the DIMAP 
project is presented. The ultimate goal of the project is 
to fabricate innovative applications using new additive 
manufacturing technologies. In order to do so, four new 
materials and a new generation of 3D printers are 
developed. The eight main objectives of the project are 
described, in order to present the backbone of the 
concept. Then a status of the project is given and the 
future work is explained. The DIMAP project is 
application-driven and intends to lead to advances in 
additive manufacturing technologies, therefore this 
paper is strongly relevant to the ADAAM symposium. 
Keywords: Digital Material, 3D Printing, Robotic, Electronic, 
Nanoparticule 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The here described DIMAP (Novel nanoparticle 
enhanced Digital Materials for 3D Printing and their 
application) idea focuses on the development of novel ink 
materials for 3D multi-material printing by PolyJet 
technology 
[1]. 
The 
state-of-the 
art 
of 
Additive 
Manufacturing 
(AM) 
will 
be 
advanced 
through 
modifications of the fundamental material properties, 
mainly by using nanoscale material enhanced inks [2, 3]. 
This widens the range of current available additive AM 
materials and implements functionalities in final objects. 
Therefore, applications will not be limited to rapid 
prototyping but can be used directly in production 
processes. DIMAP will show this transition in two selected 
application fields: the production of soft robotic arms/ joints 
and customized luminaires. In order to cope with these new 
material classes, the existing PolyJet technology [4] is 
further developed and therefore improved. The DIMAP 
project has the following objectives: additive manufactured 
joints, additive manufactured luminaires, ceramic enhanced 
materials, electrically conducting materials, light-weight 
polymeric materials, high-strength polymeric materials, 
novel multi-material 3D-printer and safe by design. With the 
development 
of 
novel 
ink 
materials 
based 
on 
nanotechnology improvement of the mechanical properties 
(ceramic enhanced and high strength polymeric inks), the 
electrical conductivity (metal enhanced inks) and the weight 
(light-weight polymeric materials) are achieved. Based on 
the voxel printing by PolyJet, these new materials lead to a 
huge broadening of the range of available digital material 
combinations. Further focus points during the material and 
printer development are safe by design approaches, work 
place safety, risk assessment, collaboration with European 
Union (EU) safety cluster and life cycle assessment. An 
established roadmap at the end of project enables the 
identification of future development needs in related fields 
order to allow Europe also in the future to compete at the 
forefront of the additive manufacturing revolution. In 
Section II, the eight main objectives of the project are 
described. A status of the project is given in Section III. At 
the end, in Section IV, the future strategy is explained.  
 
II. 
THE EIGHT DIMAP OBJECTIVES 
The DIMAP project intends to implement an idea born 
among various industrial and research centers across 
Europe. The overall objective is to enhance digital materials 
with novel nanoparticles for 3D Printing. Four different inks 
are investigated, electrically conductive inks, ceramic inks, 
high strength polymeric inks and lightweight polymeric 
inks. The idea is to implement those materials into two 
concrete demonstrators (luminaires and bio inspires robotic 
joints) requiring specific processes. In parallel to the ink and 
process developments, safe by design and work place safety 
approaches are conducted in order to minimize the risk due 
to nanoparticles use. The 
whole concept can be 
differentiated into 8 objectives, summarized in Figure 1. 
A. Objective 1: Additive manufactured joints 
Environmental interaction, the so-called man-machine 
interaction, is a great challenge for mechanical devices and 
modern robot design. Currently, research suggests “low 
impedance” as key strategy and an approach is provided by 
bionics [5]. Flexibility and low weight are two main aspects 
of reducing impedance that are perfectly realized in 
biological systems. 3D Printing technologies offer freedom 
of design to manufacturing and therefore are predestined for 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

the production of bio-inspired solutions, which are the prime 
example for such designs. Significant limitations in AM 
technologies are found in available materials, in particular 
functional materials to solve above-mentioned technical 
questions. Within DIMAP the manufacturing of bio-inspired 
joints, solutions derived from arthropod “jointed legs”, will 
show novel solutions in robot design and man-machine 
interaction. These innovations will be reached with the 
development of aforementioned functional materials and 
technical improvements to the 3D-printer, e.g., combined 
thermal and Ultraviolet (UV) curing strategies, to be able to 
print the novel materials. 
 
B. Objective 2: Additive manufactured luminaires 
One of the main drawbacks in the development of 
lightning applications is the lead time, which can take up to 6 
months. This is due to the use of injection molding that also 
adds high costs for the required tooling (up to 1.5 million 
Euros) and limits the applicability to customized small series 
production. The implementation of AM is expected to 
increase the ability of companies to introduce new and 
improved products at accelerated rates as well as addressing 
the market for customization due to highly value added 
product diversity. Within DIMAP the material portfolio for 
the PolyJet Printing will be expanded to achieve higher 
mechanical strength, electrical conductivity and flexibility in 
order to be able to manufacture a lighting application with 
movable parts for a user-controllable light orientation. 
DIMAP will show that the new developed ink systems and 
improvements to the printing process are able to lead the way 
to manufacturing small to medium series of customized 
luminaires. 
 
C. Objective 3: Ceramic enhanced materials 
The addition of ceramic particles allows the addition of 
new functionalities in products. The mechanical, electrical or 
magnetic properties of the resulting polymer matrix after 
solidification can be tailored. In the last couple of years, 
ceramic filled photo-curable inks have been used in 
stereolithography (SLA). Here solid loading up top 50 Vol% 
have been reported [6]. Based on the structuring method 
higher viscosities in the range of several 1000 mPas are 
acceptable in this case. In order to use the advantage of 
creating digital materials with PolyJet Printing the 
requirements in terms of viscosity are different: an ink 
viscosity below 100 mPas is crucial. However, high 
nanoparticle loading is necessary to enable huge property 
adjustments. Within DIMAP this will be achieved by using 
nanoparticles not smaller than 100 nm as smaller 
nanoparticles come along with larger specific surface areas 
leading to a significant viscosity increase. In addition higher 
solid loadings (up to 50 Vol% without solvent) retaining low 
viscosity values should be achieved via selection of suitable 
additives such as liquefiers and dispersants. 
 
D. Objective 4: Electrically conducting materials  
Nowadays, electric conductors are made in industrial 
environment mainly by screen printing or photolithography 
which carry severe environmental concerns due to the low 
metal ink yield and the large quantity of hazardous waste as 
well as limited applicability for customization. Electrically 
conductive inks for digital inkjet conductive printing are a 
challenge as its necessary to balance several counter 
influence properties, such as: high metal content, low 
viscosity, small non agglomerated particles, surface tension 
properties compatible with the print heads and substrates. 
The only viable way to achieve this balance of properties is 
by formulating inks with nano-metal particles. Such inks for 
digital conductive 3D Printing are currently not available on 
the market. Within DIMAP UV curable inks will be 
developed which address these issues - printed paths 
containing a monomer will be cured (polymerized) while at 
the same time keeping suitable conductive properties (e.g., 
resistivity below 10 μΩ·cm). These goals will be achieved 
by a selection of suitable monomers, optionally solvents and 
photo initiators in metallic nanoparticle ink formulation. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Concept for novel nanoparticle enhanced Digtial Materials for 3D Printing and their application shown for the robotic and electronic 
industry 
  
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

E. Objective 5: High strength polymeric materials  
Since both demonstrators may be exposed to mechanical 
stresses a high strength material will be part of the material 
development. Also, a high temperature tolerance is 
favorable, especially in case of the lighting device. 
Therefore, a new thermoplastic material will be added to the 
portfolio of PolyJet materials, opening up new possibilities 
in functionality and mechanical strength. Strategies to realize 
3D Printing of these materials are based on the preparation of 
highly filled 3D-inks made of soluble polymer particles or by 
developing reactive 3D-inks based on precursors.  
 
F. Objective 6: Light weight polymeric materials 
Various polymers can be designed to uptake high 
mechanical forces comparable to metal, glass and ceramics 
used in industrial application. A further reduction of weight 
from the solid polymeric object can be achieved with foams 
and foam-like structures. The strength of hard foams is found 
in the combination of different positive properties e.g., their 
light-weight structure and at the same time possessing high 
mechanical load capacity. Currently, 3D Printing of foam-
like structures requires several working steps, e.g., Fused 
Deposition Modelling (FDM) printing and adjacent leaching 
in water for several days, obtaining soft foam-like objects. 
3D Printing of foams with PolyJet technologies has not been 
realized yet. Within DIMAP printing of hard foams in one 
production step will be implemented to PolyJet 3D Printing. 
Thus, especially designed 3D-printable ink based on 
foamable core-shell particles and enhancements concerning 
the PolyJet-3D-printer will be developed. Printing of hard, 
closed foams will enable several new possibilities in AM 
including the print of light-weight, highly mechanically 
robust objects or the use of the closed foam as supporting 
material that allows printing on top of “hollow” objects, e.g., 
the top-surface of a 3D-printed cube. 
 
G. Objective 7: Novel multi-material 3D-printer 
The PolyJet technology is based on a multi-jet and multi-
head inkjet technology where objects are constructed layer-
by-layer. 
PolyJets’ 
uniqueness 
among 
other 
AM 
technologies is its ability to control the material deposition 
for building an object to the level of a single voxel allowing 
a precise control of the structure and of the properties of 
object printed. In order to address new markets widening the 
range of available materials and implementation of functions 
into the printed objects is crucial. As shown on the two 
applications this will allow SMEs to manufacture functional 
objects with tabletop multimaterials printers. In addition to 
the novel materials mentioned before a further development 
of the technology in order to cope with the ink requirements 
is needed. DIMAP will perform investigations and 
integration of novel printhead systems for higher ink 
viscosities (100 mPas at printing temperature) including ink 
circulation systems. Furthermore, an inline control of the 
printing process is needed to investigate the quality of the 
joint between already hardened drops and new deposited 
drops to be able to predict the toughness of the final 3D 
printed product. Thermographic flash method is known as a 
proper method for the investigation of the mechanical 
consistency of manufactured parts. DIMAP will investigate 
the appropriateness of this method for PolyJet 3D Printing. 
 
H. Objective 8: Safe by design 
Nanotechnology is a key enabling technology for the 
development of innovative products of a large variety of 
industries. Impact and interaction of nanomaterials on 
environment and human health is a widely discussed 
question. Considering ink-formulations as proposed within 
DIMAP the handling of the base materials prior to ink 
formulation and excess materials after the printing process 
are the main challenges. In DIMAP a concern-driven 
guidance for investigating potential risks of engineered 
nanomaterials (ENM) will be established according to the 
NanoSafetyClusters’ Research strategy 2015 – 2025. This 
allows a focused research on exposure levels and exposure 
routes, material properties, various in silico models as well 
as hazard and biokinetic data [7, 8]. In order to reach a Safe-
by-Design approach for the process chains proposed within 
DIMAP assessment of the exposure rates during the 
manufacturing processes, usage time and end of life will be 
carried out. Furthermore, the implementation of a highly 
efficient risk management system will be targeted. Based on 
the data of existing databases and studies the process chain 
and materials will be evaluated and potential hazards will be 
identified. In combination with assessment of exposure rates 
mentioned above a strategy for the control and reduction of 
exposure rates will be proposed to reach a less hazardous 
product life cycle. The information gathered within DIMAP 
will be shared with the scientific community to further 
improve the knowledge base. 
 
III. 
CURRENT STATUS 
During the first six months of the project, the main focus 
of the consortium was on the assessment of requirements for 
the demonstrators, materials and processes that will be used 
throughout the runtime of DIMAP. The base information 
needed for the developments within the project were the 
envisaged properties of the robotic arm and the luminaire 
system. Therefore, the main mechanical, electrical and 
thermal properties of the products themselves as well as the 
operating conditions and the limitations given by the current 
state of the PolyJet technique were collected. Based on these 
assumptions the development for the novel material classes 
and improvement of the printing technology is currently 
performed. 
In close cooperation with a powder supplier (TECNAN 
S.L.)[9] the development of ceramic filled inks at the 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) is currently 
focusing on selecting the most suitable components. 
Ceramic nanoparticles for mechanical stability (Al2O3 or 
ZrO2) or thermal conductivity (AlN or BN) are currently 
customized in order to adapt the particle size distribution 
and surface properties. Additionally, a wide variety of 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

binder materials and surfactants will be examined for their 
suitability to reduce the ink viscosity to a processable level. 
PVNanoCell Ltd. [10] develops conductive materials, 
mainly conductive inks for digital conductive printing based 
on silver nanoparticles. Silver-based inks will be used for 
printing conducting paths that are required in both 
applications. Currently, the main focus of the research is on 
the composition of the ink, as well as on the stability of the 
ink, reducing the percolation of the dense silver particles. In 
parallel, first printing test will be performed in the near 
future using the first promising ink compositions available. 
As described above, the use of a new class of 
thermoplastics as a high strength polymer is a completely 
new approach in context of the PolyJet technology. 
Therefore, investigations at the Soreq [11] research center 
had to start from scratch by determining the most promising 
approach to create a suitable ink. Two different routes were 
evaluated, one using pre-polymer powders and the second 
by cross-linking low-molecular weight oligomers. At the 
current state, the second approach seems to show better 
compliance to the desired properties, which is why this 
route will be followed. 
The last material is the foam-like material for the bone 
structure. At the Johannes-Kepler University of Linz and 
Borealis AG two different types of foams will be analyzed. 
The first type is a closed cell foam based on the principle of 
blowing agents that are dispersed in a polymer matrix and 
that forms voids with a outer shell upon UV- or heat 
treatment. The second type is an open cell foam that is 
produced by using organic blowing agents within the ink 
matrix. 
All developments on the ink systems are carried out in 
close cooperation with TIGER Coatings GmbH & Co KG 
[12], who are focusing their work on the composition of the 
ink matrix, and Profactor GmbH, that are responsible for the 
ink curing strategies, that have to be individually adapted 
for each material. Finally, the practical test and printer 
development is done by Stratasys Ltd [13]. since some 
materials may not be fitting to the current PolyJet standards 
and may require new generation print heads or combined 
dispensing techniques. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
DIMAP will provide a new range of materials as well as 
significant 
improvements 
concerning 
the 
dispensing 
technique to the PolyJet Printing within the runtime of the 
project. Two exemplary applications will be produced to 
show the capabilities of the development of the process 
chain. Although the project has just been running for 6 
months, significant steps have already been made by 
defining the material and product properties in detail and 
first investigations in the field of ink development with very 
promising results so far.  
The next steps are the development of suitable ink 
formulations using the designated nano materials defined in 
the previous months, ink stability testing and, in some cases, 
also first printing and modeling trials using the newly 
developed materials.  
The printing technology has to be adapted for the 
expected higher values of viscosity. Therefore, the print 
heads used in the inkjet printer will be changed to upgrade 
the capability for higher viscous inks wherever it is needed. 
In addition, a possible combination with other dispensing 
techniques is currently thought of, depending on the 
properties of the final inks. 
For the safety aspect, personal monitoring devices that 
measure workplace exposures will be implemented in the ink 
production processes to determine the possible influence of 
nano materials in the workplace safety. 
 
REFERENCES 
  
[1] http://www.stratasys.com/3d-printers/technologies/polyjet-
technology [accessed June 2016] 
[2] T. 
Hanemann, 
D.V. 
Szabó, 
“Polymer-Nanoparticle 
Composites: From Synthesis to Modern Applications”, 
Materials, 3, pp. 3468-3517 (2010), doi: 10.3390/ma3063468. 
[3] R. Zichner, E. Sowade, R. R. Baumann, “Inkjet printed 
WLAN antenna for an application in smartphones”, Jpn. J. 
Appl. Phys. 2014, 53, 05HB06. 
[4] http://www.stratasys.com/fr/imprimantes-
3d/technologies/polyjet-technology  
[5] S. P. Buerger, “Stable, high-force, low-impedance robotic 
actuators for human-interactive machines”, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, 2005. 
[6] C. Provin, S. Monneret, H. Le Gall and S. Corbel,  “Three-
Dimensional 
Ceramic 
Microcomponents 
Made 
Using 
Microstereolithography”Adv. Mater. 2003, 15, pp. 994–997. 
[7] A. G. Oomen  et al., “ Concern-driven integrated approaches 
to nanomaterial testing and assessment – report of the 
NanoSafety Cluster Working Group 10”, Nanotoxicology 
2014, 8, pp. 334–348, doi: 10.3109/17435390.2013.802387 
[8] V. Stone et al., “ITS-NANO – Prioritising nanosafety 
research to develop a stakeholder driven intelligent testing 
strategy”, Particle and fibre toxicology, 2014, 11, 9, doi: 
10.1186/1743-8977-11-9 
[9] https://tecnan-nanomat.es/ [accessed June 2016] 
[10] http://www.pvnanocell.com/ [accessed June 2016] 
[11] http://soreq.gov.il [accessed June 2016] 
[12] http://www.tiger-coatings.com/ [accessed June 2016] 
[13] www.stratasys.com [accessed June 2016] 
 
  
 
 
 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

