Requirements for 3D Printed Applications using Novel Nanoparticle Enhanced 
Digital Materials 
3D printed robotic and electronic applications  
 
Adrien Brunet, Tobias Müller, Steffen Scholz 
Institute for Applied Computer Science 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
E-Mail: 
[adrien.brunet;tobias.mueller2;steffen.scholz]@kit.edu 
Anita Fuchsbauer 
Profactor GmbH 
Steyr-Gleink, Austria 
Email: anita.fuchsbauer@profactor.at
Abstract— The DIMAP idea focuses on the development 
of innovative applications using additive manufacturing 
technologies. This paper describes the requirements for 
a 3D printed robotic arm and a luminaire application. In 
addition, the advances on novel ink materials for 3D 
multi-material printing by PolyJet technology are 
reported as well as advances on the printing equipment. 
The approach is application-driven and the first results 
of the project show advances in additive manufacturing 
technologies.   
Keywords: Digital Material, 3D Printing, Robotic, Electronic, 
Nanoparticule 
I. 
INTRODUCTION ON DIMAP CONCEPT 
The DIMAP (novel nanoparticle enhanced DIgital 
MAterials for 3D Printing) [1] project intends to implement 
an idea born among various industrial and research centres 
across Europe. DIMAP aims to develop applications not 
only limited to rapid prototyping but that address production 
processes. Two applications of high interest are being 
developed to demonstrate the printing feasibility of 
functional inks. The first application is a bio-inspired 
robotic arm developed by Festo [2] and Cirp [3], the second 
is a shape changing luminaire developed by Philips [4]. The 
challenges created by applications, materials and printing 
processes requirement interdependencies are numerous and 
complex. Namely, the development of novel ink systems 
with incorporated nanoparticles is especially challenging. In 
order to cope with these new material classes, the existing 
PolyJet technology is further developed and therefore 
improved. 
The overall objective of the project is to enhance digital 
materials with novel nanoparticles for 3D Printing in order 
to increase design possibilities. Indeed, developing robots 
poses particular challenges in terms of design [5]. DIMAP 
proposes to learn from nature to create bio-inspired robotic 
joints and it appears that the additive manufacturing (AM) 
provides a suitable basis to mimic this approach [6]. As 
well, additive manufacturing enables a high-customized 
production. It has been demonstrated that customers 
perceive customized luminaires as high value products 
compare to standard products [7,8]. In order to develop 
those innovative added-value products, four different inks 
are investigated: electrically conductive inks, ceramic inks, 
high strength polymeric inks and lightweight polymeric 
inks. In parallel to the ink and process developments, safe 
by design and work place safety approaches are conducted 
in order to minimize the risk due to nanoparticles use. The 
 
Figure 1. Concept for novel nanoparticle enhanced Digital Materials for 3D Printing and their application shown for the robotic and electronic industry 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

whole can be differentiated into 8 objectives [1,9]. Those 
objectives (four novel digital material developments, novel 
multi-material 3D printer, safe by design approach and two 
innovative demonstrators) are summarized in Figure 1. 
Within this paper, the requirements elaborated during the 
starting phase of the project and the challenges in material 
development are presented. The paper is structured as 
follows: In Section II, the designs and the concepts of the 
3D printed robotic arm and luminaire are described. In 
Section III, the faced hurdles and the envisaged solutions 
are discussed. Section IV concludes the paper.    
 
II. 
DESIGN SPECIFICATION AND MATERIAL 
REQUIREMENTS FOR ROBOTIC ARM AND LUMINAIRE 
DEMONSTRATOR  
 
A.  Additive manufactured robotic arm 
DIMAP intends to 3D print bio inspired robotic joints. 
Man-machine interaction is a great challenge for mechanical 
devices and modern robot design. Low impedance and high 
force-to-weight ratio is currently seen as a key approach for 
bionics [10]. Flexibility and low weight are two sine qua non 
aspects of reducing impedance. 3D printing technologies 
offer freedom of design to manufacturing and therefore are 
predestined for the production of bio-inspired solutions. 
Nevertheless, each AM-technology currently available is 
limited within the available materials. Typically, only a 
limited number of polymer types are applicable when 
compared to other manufacturing techniques such as 
injection moulding or hot pressing. On the other hand, 
specialized technologies like selective laser sintering (SLS) 
or –melting (SLM) are capable of producing metal parts, but 
are heavily dependent on the quality and reproducibility of 
the base material/powder. 
DIMAP application requirements create the basis to solve 
those technical limitations. The chosen solution is derived 
from Arthropod “jointed legs” and require development of 
functional materials (with high strength, light-weight, 
dielectric, magnetism or conductive properties), as well as 
technical improvements to the 3D-printer (combining 
thermal and Ultraviolet (UV) curing strategies). 
The first draft of the joint (i.e., Figure 2) consists of two 
bellows surrounding the actual hinge, operated by 
compressed air. The current design features a material 
combination of a rubbery, flexible and deformable material 
on the one hand and a rigid material on the other hand. 
Mechanical properties mainly characterized the two 
materials. The second main part is the hinge, which is 
proposed to resemble to a human elbow joint. Therefore, a 
hard material is necessary to withstand the tribological stress 
generated by the movement of the connected elements 
without wearing out too fast. The last element is the arm 
structure; it should be made of a rigid, yet light material in 
order to reduce weight when compared with current designs 
being produced with other manufacturing techniques. 
Therefore, a combination of a hard shell filled with a porous 
(or foam-like) structure is considered. Finally, conductive 
tracts are intended to be printed on the structure to connect 
sensors (pressure, position, etc.). The length of the tracks is 
expected to be superior to 300 mm, which implies new 
challenges.  
The development of such application to be 3D printed 
requires to conduct research activities on the material side as 
well as on the printer itself.  
 
Figure 2: Conceptual drawing of robotic joint actuator 
 
B. Additive manufactured luminaires 
In lightning applications, the lead times from design to 
available finished products is long even for low volume 
productions (up to 6 months). This is based on the currently 
used injection moulding technique, which in addition is 
rather costly. Depending on the complexity of part and 
mould, the design and manufacturing of the mould can cost 
up to 1.5 million Euros. The implementation of AM is 
expected to increase the ability of companies to introduce 
new and improved products at accelerated rates. The 
profession retail lighting market is an interesting market for 
customization due to highly value added product diversity. 
There is a variety of different levels, on which one can 
customize parts and products using novel digital materials. 
Customization can happen at the material level, on the part 
level and finally on the modular level. In terms of 
mechanical strength and electrical conductivity, material 
requirements for this application have to be fulfilled, in order 
to accelerate the transition from mere prototyping towards 
production. DIMAP will show that the new developed ink 
systems lead the way to additive manufacturing of 
customized luminaires. 
To that end, DIMAP will develop a luminaire 
demonstrator. Figure 3 shows a sketch of this demonstrator 
developed by Philips. It is a linear array of LED distant of 
100 mm from each other. One pattern of the array is 
composed of one LED and of surrounding moveable 
elements, shaped as a V and dedicated to direct the light. The 
parts of the V facing the LED are reflective in order to 
minimize light losses. The movement is performed by 
pressurized air coming through a lower channel. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

The approach chosen within DIMAP is to separate the 
development in two parts. The first one is the Printed 
Circuit Board (PCB) receiving the LED. The PCB part is 
made of a thermally conductive layer, used as a substrate for 
the rest of the structure and as a heat spreader.  The second 
layer is made of a dielectric material to avoid sparking and 
electric bridging. On top of it, the electrical pattern is 
printed with conductive ink. A driver and an optical source 
(the LED itself) are mounted in further steps. Finally, a 
highly reflective layer (printed or coated) will cover the 
PCB.  
The second part is the LED array; its function is to 
control the light effect, changing the angle of the V. The 
main challenge in this part is to print simultaneously hard 
and soft material. Indeed the reflective part has to maintain 
its shape and therefore high-strength ink should be used.   
 
III. 
HURDLES AND SOLUTIONS  
Additive manufacturing techniques offer an unchallenged 
design freedom. Nevertheless, the material variety is limited. 
One of the main challenge faced by DIMAP concerns the 
ceramic inks being researched in Karlsruhe Institute of 
Technology in the group of Prof. Thomas Hanemann [11]. 
The ceramic inks developed in DIMAP are partially 
dedicated to the Printed Circuit Board on which the Light-
Emitting Diode is printed. One of the main challenges for 
PCBs is to dissipate the heat generated by electrical current 
and to limit the material deformation induced by this heat. 
Therefore the ceramic part has to perform high heat 
dissipation (10 – 50 W.mK-1) and small linear thermal 
expansion coefficient (inferior to 10-6 K-1). If expansion is 
too high, it can lead to solder fatigue and cracks in 
conductive tracks.     
Ceramic inks developed by DIMAP are actually based on 
polymer ink. Within a certain range, the physical properties 
of resins and polymer can be adjusted by the addition of 
organic or inorganic nano-sized fillers [12-14]. The addition 
of spherical ceramic particles with average particle size 
larger than several micrometres normally deteriorates the 
resulting mechanical properties, while ceramic fibres 
enhance them. The addition of ceramic nanoparticles causes 
an enhancement of the thermomechanical properties due the 
particle’s very large surface area generating an interfacial 
layer with pronounced attractive forces [15-17].  
As explained in the previous paragraph, the addition of 
nanofiller can be used to tune thermomechanical properties 
of polymer-based ink. The specifications given by Philips 
and Festo imply a high load that will increase the ink 
viscosity significantly. Now, the ink viscosity at jetting 
temperature (60-90°C) excides the 20 mPas recommended 
by Stratasys to use the actual PolyJet technology. The 
solutions to overcome this problem heads towards a new 
generation printhead accepting higher viscosity or a hybrid 
solution including existing technologies (i.e advanced ink-jet 
(e.g., SIJ Technology), air pressure-based multi-nozzle 
dispenser, Aerosol-type (e.g., Optomec) [18], syringe-type 
dispenser). Due to their high hardness, ceramic materials are 
also considered for printing the hard-shelve structure of the 
robotic arm hinge. Since materials like ZrO2 and Al2O3 are 
also brittle and relatively heavy, DIMAP proposes to fill the 
ceramic hard-shelve with a foam-like material. The purpose 
of a foam-like material is to reinforce the ceramic structure 
and maintain an overall low-weight. For example, solid PS 
has a density of 1050 kg m-3, but expanded PS can have a 
density as low as 15 kg m-3 [19-21]. The development of 
such inks is challenging and therefore different approaches 
are envisaged. The first approach developed by the 
University Johannes Kepler of Linz [22], is to include in 
polymer based inks Microspheres. The microspheres are 
made of a shell-polymer and of a core blowing agent. Under 
heat or UV exposure, the core material blows, resulting in 
expanded microspheres with thinner polymer shell. To 
maximize the chance of developing foam-like ink, an open-
cell foam approach is also considered. Unlike the 
microsphere approach, this does not require synthesis of 
polymeric material. The blowing agent is ground down to an 
acceptable size and uniformly dispersed in the matrix ink. 
Depending if the compound is organic or inorganic, the 
agent will be blown using heat or UV exposure. During the 
expansion process, the bubbles can freely merge creating a 
porous foam and gas permeable structure.   
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
New printing techniques allow the creation of so-called 
digital materials with which multiple material combinations 
and novel composites with predictable physical properties 
can be produced. As explained in the previous parts, DIMAP 
intends to use the design freedom given by AM and the 
PolyJet technology to produce demonstrators with innovative 
design and exceptional mechanical properties. Different 
material properties can be achieved and used to implement 
functional materials to the portfolio of printable materials, 
either by adding nanoparticles or by adjusting the polymeric 
ink composition and the curing processes;. 
In the upcoming months the main focus of the project 
will be on the development of suitable ink formulations with 
incorporated nanoparticles. In addition, the ink stability and 
curing strategies will be developed and first printing tests 
will be performed. 
Since the filler materials raise the viscosity of the inks, an 
adaptation of the printing technology will be mandatory. 
Upgraded print heads that are able to cope with the new 
 
Figure 3: Concept sketch of hard/soft combination activated by pressurized 
air 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

materials are one way this will be achieved during the 
runtime of DIMAP. A different approach could be a 
combination of different dispensing techniques. Depending 
on the final ink properties a appropriate solution will be 
implemented. 
With regards to the safe-by-design approach and safety 
aspects, each material will be evaluated and a Safety Data 
Sheet (SDS) will be developed. Personal monitoring devices 
will be used during the material preparation and printing 
steps to analyze exposure to nanoparticles in these stages of 
the whole process. Also, a life cycle assessment will be 
carried out to determine the impact of the printed product 
throughout the whole production, usage and disposal span. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] http://www.dimap-project.eu/ [accessed June 2016] 
[2] www.festo.com [accessed June 2016] 
[3] www.cirp.de [accessed June 2016] 
[4] www.philips.com [accessed June 2016] 
[5] R. Neumann, A. Hildebrandt and E. M. Knubben (Eds.) 
“Fluid Power in Motion”, 2008. 
[6] K. Liu and L. Jiang, “Multifunctional Integration: From 
Biological to Bio-Inspired Materials”, ACS nano 2011, 
5(9), pp. 6786–6790. 
[7] B. Soars, “Driving sales through shoppers’ sense of sound, 
sight, smell and touch”, Intl J of Retail & Distrib Mgt 2009, 
37(3), pp. 286–298 
[8] D. Hinks and R. Shamey, “Review of Retail Store Lighting: 
Implications for Colour Control of Products”, Coloration 
Technology, 2011, 127, pp. 121–128. 
[9] S. Scholz, A. Brunet., T. Müller and A. Fuchsbauer, “Novel 
Nanoparticle Enhanced Digital Materials for 3D Printing and 
their Application Shown for the Robotic and Electronic 
Industry”, proceding of the CENICS 2016 conference. 
[10] S.P. Buerger, Stable, high-force, “low-impedance robotic 
actuator for human-interactive machines”, Ph.D. Thesis, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Dept. of Mechanical 
Engineering, 2005. 
[11] T. Hanemann, W. Bauer, R. Knitter and P. Woias, “Rapid 
Prototyping 
and 
Rapid 
Tooling 
Techniques 
for the 
Manufacturing of Silicon, Polymer, Metal and Ceramic 
Microdevices”, in: “MEMS/NEMS” (Ed.: C. Leondes), 
Springer US, 2006, pp. 801-869, ISBN: 978-0-387-25786-0 
[12] T. Hanemann and D.V. Szabó, “Polymer-Nanoparticle 
Composites: From Synthesis to Modern Applications”, 
Materials, 2010, 3, pp. 3468-3517, doi: 10.3390/ma3063468. 
[13] S. Schlabach, R. Ochs and T. Hanemann, D.V. Szabo, 
“Nanoparticles in polymer-matrix composites”, Microsystem 
Technologies, 2011, 17, 183-193, doi: 10.1007/s00542-010-
1176-8. 
[14] D.V. Szabó and T. Hanemann, “Polymer nanocomposites for 
optical 
applications”, 
In 
Advances 
in 
Polymer 
Nanocomposites: Types and Applications; Ed. F. Gao, 
Woodhead Publ., Oxford, 2012, pp. 567-604, ISBN 978-1-
8456-9940-6 
[15] L.S. Schadler, L. Brinson and W. Sawyer, “Polymer 
nanocomposites: A small part of the story”, JOM Journal of 
the Minerals, Metals and Materials Society, 2007, 3, pp. 53-
60, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11837-007-0040-5. 
[16] L.S. Schadler, S.K. Kumar, B.C. Benicewicz, S.L. Lewis and 
S. 
E. 
Harton, 
“Designed 
Interfaces 
in 
Polymer 
Nanocomposites: A Fundamental Viewpoin”t, MRS Bulletin, 
2007, 32, pp. 335-340. 
[17] W.R. Caseri, “Nanocomposites of polymers and inorganic 
particles: preparation, structure and properties”, Materials 
Science and Technology, 2006, 22(7), pp. 807-817. 
[18]  http://www.optomec.com/ [accessed June 2016] 
[19] H. Weber, I. Grave, E. Röhrl, “Foamed Plastics”, in: 
Ullmann's encyclopedia of industrial chemistry, 2010, Wiley, 
Chichester. 
[20] Handbook of polymer foams, Ed.: Eaves, D., 2004, Rapra 
Technology, Shawbury, Shrewsbury, Shropshire, U.K. 
[21] J. Maul, B. G. Frushour, J. R. Kontoff, H. Eichenauer, K.-H. 
Ott, C. Schade, “Polystyrene and Styrene Copolymers”, In: 
Ullmann's encyclopedia of industrial chemistry, 2010, Wiley, 
Chichester. 
[22] http://www.jku.at/ [accessed June 2016]     
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-496-1
CENICS 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

