Reliable CMOS VLSI Design Considering Gate Oxide Breakdown 
 
Kyung Ki Kim 
School of Electronic and Electrical Engineering 
Daegu University 
Daegu, South Korea 
e-mail: kkkim@daegu.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—As technology scales down into the nanometer 
region, the reliability mechanism caused by time dependent 
dielectric breakdown (TDDB) has become one of the major 
reliability 
concerns. 
TDDB 
can 
lead 
to 
performance 
degradation or logic failures in nanoscale CMOS devices, and 
can cause significant increase of leakage power in the standby 
mode. In this paper, the TDDB effects on the delay and power 
of the nanoscale CMOS circuits are analyzed using ISCAS85 
benchmark circuits that are designed using a 45-nm CMOS 
predictive technology model. Based on the TDDB analysis, a 
reliable CMOS VLSI design methodology using a redundancy 
system has been proposed. 
Keywords-TDDB; Reliability; Gate oxide breakdown; Time 
dependent dielectric breakdown; Aging effect  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As MOSFET [1] technology is scaled down more 
aggressively, various aging phenomena (or reliability 
mechanisms) such as negative bias temperature instability 
(NBTI), hot carrier injection (HCI), and time-dependent 
dielectric breakdown (TDDB) on the MOSFET device have 
become one of the most important issues in the nanoscale 
MOSFET technology [1]. These mechanisms lead to device 
aging, resulting in performance degradation and eventually 
design failures during the expected system lifetime [2]-[4]. 
Recently, the oxide thickness of less than 2nm is common in 
state-of-the-art technologies, and TDDB becomes one of the 
key challenges among these reliability mechanisms [5][6].   
Moreover, the saturating trend for supply voltage scaling 
causes a large electric field in the gate oxide, which 
generates gate tunneling currents. The lifetime of a particular 
gate oxide thickness is determined by the total amount of 
charge that flows through the gate oxide by the tunneling 
current. Therefore, nanometer devices are more prone to 
oxide breakdown compared to micrometer devices. The 
oxide breakdown is categorized into hard breakdown (HBD) 
and soft breakdown (SBD): HBD causes a catastrophic 
failure of the device and the entire circuits. On the other hand, 
SBD leads to parametric variations such as energy, delay, 
and noise margin of a gate although it does not bring about 
functional failures [5]. 
Figure 1 shows the variation of leakage path current 
depending on the wear-out and breakdown phase for thin 
gate oxides. At the end of the phase I, the traps start to be 
increased. During Phase II, moving traps lead to random 
fluctuation in the leakage current, power and delay, where 
the device is still functional. In phase III, the conduction path 
is created in the oxide, the leakage current is exponentially 
increased, and then, finally, the conduction path causes a 
catastrophic failure of the device [6].  
TDDB is typically treated statistically using the Weibull 
distribution [7]. For this reason, usually a large gate oxide 
area has to be used in order to be able to detect the 
breakdown. Gate oxide breakdown manifests itself as an 
increase of gate current while retaining its insulating 
properties (soft break down-SBD or hard break down-HBD) 
that happens when I-V curve becomes linear, i.e., manifests a 
resistor-like behavior. For thinner gate oxides (≤ 3010-10m), 
SBD is the most likely event. In this paper, TDDB effect 
only in NMOS devices is considered because the probability 
of PMOS gate-oxide breakdown is at least an order less than 
that of NMOS breakdown [8]. 
Recently, many researches on the TDDB effect have 
been proposed, but they have mainly focused on device 
physics not circuit-level analysis. Although a few researches 
on the circuit-level analysis of TDDB in nanoscale CMOS 
circuits have been proposed, they have concentrated on 
mathematical modeling and performance degradations only 
in simple digital circuits. In this paper, we propose a new 
simple reliable CMOS VLSI design methodology using a 
redundancy system.  
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II introduces the TDDB modeling in nanoscale 
This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through 
the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of 
Education, Science and Technology. (2011-0014255) 
 
Figure 1.  Wear-out and breakdown model for thin gate oxides[6]. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-213-4
CENICS 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

CMOS circuits. Section III shows our proposed reliable 
system, followed by the conclusion in Section IV. 
II. 
TDDB MODELING 
At current operating voltages for MOSFETs, the 
degradation mechanism can be approximated by an 
exponential function of voltage applied across gate oxide and 
Arrhenius function of temperature as follows: 
exp(
) exp(
)
a
g
E
TDDB
C
V
kT





           (1) 
 
where Vg is the voltage across gate oxide, Ea is the activation 
Energy, k is the Boltzman's constant, T is the junction 
temperature, C and β are the technology specific constants. 
 
Gate oxide breakdown is sensitive to: 
 
 
Voltage across the gate oxide (Vg): The higher Vg and 
the higher Vg duty cycles the shorter TDDB. For this 
reason, worst case condition for gate oxide occurs when 
the device is operated in DC mode (100% duty cycle). 
 
Junction temperature 
 
Gate oxide thickness: The thinner the gate oxide the 
more difficult it is to get good quality oxides and 
interfaces.  
 
Gate oxide area: The bigger the gate oxide area the 
higher the gate oxide breakdown induced failure rate. 
SRAMs typically have intensive gate oxide area and 
can be good vehicles to test gate oxide lifetime. 
 
In this paper, for post-breakdown analysis at the circuit-
level, a MOSFET with the oxide breakdown is modeled 
using two breakdown resistors (RBD) as shown in Figure 2 
[8]. The RBD value ranges from GΩ (no TDDB) to a few 
hundreds of KΩ (HBD). The time-dependent gate to 
source/drain resistor model was experimentally verified in 
Lombardo et al. [9]. 
The worst stress for NMOS and PMOS gate oxide 
happens when NMOS and PMOS are in ON state. For this 
reason, in calculating product the gate oxide FIT, we make 
the assumptions that duty cycle of the voltage across gate 
oxide is 50%. However, when PMOS and NMOS are off, 
respectively gate/drain and gate/source overlaps are stressed, 
i.e, gate oxide in overlap region is continuously stressed. The 
FIT contribution from this stress condition is small due to the 
relatively smaller gate oxide area in the overlap regions.  
Based on time dependent dielectric breakdown data 
(TDDB), there is a maximum voltage across gate oxide that a 
given technology can support, for a given gate oxide area 
and failure rate. The oxide thickness, for a technology, is 
determined so that this voltage is not exceeded, in a dc sense, 
for any circuit design. However, when signals are driven, 
there is a certain amount of overshoot/undershoot in the 
waveform that can result in accelerated gate oxide wear-out 
and lower reliability, if appropriate limits are not established. 
In Figure  3, it is assumed that the NMOS (MN1) of the 
1st inverter is stressed by the gate oxide breakdown; while 
Input signal is changed from logic “0” to “1’, the NMOS of 
the 1st inverter is turned on; the node n1 capacitor starts to be 
discharged through MN1, but the discharge time is longer 
than the normal discharging time because of the breakdown 
resistor. As a result, this makes the charging time at Output 
node longer, which means the propagation time from Input 
to Output will be longer comparing to the normal case 
without TDDB. The propagation time depends on the 
breakdown resistor value: if the resistor is large, the charging 
time at Output node will be a little increased; however, if the 
resistor is small, the charging time at Output node will be 
much more increased due to the small voltage-swing at node 
n1 caused by the small breakdown resistor. 
On the other hand, while Input signal is changed from 
logic “1” to “0’, the PMOS of the 1st inverter is turned on; 
the node1 capacitor starts to be charged through MP1; 
however, the rising time and rising voltage at node n1 are 
affected by the breakdown resistor. As a result, this makes 
the charging time at Output node shorter, which means the 
propagation time from Input to Output will be shorter 
comparing to the normal case without TDDB. In this case, if 
the resistor is large, the discharging time at Output node will 
be much more decreased because the a small voltage-swing 
at node n1 (caused by the breakdown resistor) moves up the 
high-to-low transition at Output node; however, if the 
resistor is too small, the charging time at Output node will be 
a little decreased because less voltage-swing (compared to 
the voltage-swing when the resistor is large) at node n1 
makes the current driving force of the 1st inverter weak.  
Putting the abovementioned two transitions together, if 
the breakdown resistor is small, the propagation time from 
Input to Output will be increased; if the breakdown resistor is 
Gate
Source
Drain
RBD
RBD
 
Figure 2. TDDB model for NMOS 
 
 
RDB1
RDB2
MP1
MN1
MP2
MN2
VDD
VDD
GND
GND
Input
n1
Output
 
 
Figure 3. TDDB resistance in NMOSFET  
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-213-4
CENICS 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

large, the propagation time from Input to Output will be 
decreased. This means that the propagation time in the case 
with SBD might be shorter than the time in the normal case 
without TDDB; and as a gate oxide goes to HDB, the 
propagation time might be longer than the time in the normal 
case without TDDB. 
In addition, the total delay of the inverter chain depends 
on the spatial correlation between stressed devices and un-
stressed devices; that is, the total delay can increase or 
decrease depending on the location of the stressed device and 
the number of stressed device [10]. Figure 4 shows the 
breakdown resistor impact on the Nand chain circuit delay. 
As expected, as the breakdown resistor size decreases, the 
delay of the Nand chain becomes decreased around up to 
49KΩ, then the delay gets increased and finally the inverter 
chain goes to a functional failure. Figure 4 (a) shows the 
effect of the number of Nand gates with the breakdown 
resistor on the Nand chain delay: as the number of inverters 
with breakdown resistor increases, the total delay gets 
shorter. In Figure  4 (b), it is presented that the total delay of 
the inverter chain depends on the spatial correlation between 
stressed devices and un-stressed devices. Although the 
spatial correlation can change the total delay, the total 
number of the stressed inverter has a great influence on the 
total delay. 
 
III. 
PROPOSED RELIABLE CMOS VLSI DESIGN 
Figure 5 shows a reliable C432 ISCAS benchmark circuit 
using a redundancy system. The targeting circuit consists of 
old_c432 and new_c432. The proposed reliable circuit turns 
off the old_c432 circuit when the test device circuit suffers 
from HBD and leads to functional failure and turns on the 
new_c432 circuit with no TDDB according to the indication 
of the TDDB monitoring circuits consisting of a ring 
oscillator and T-flip flops. At the beginning point, both of the 
old and new circuits do not suffer from TDDB effects and 
“Select” signal output is logic ‘0’. At this time, the PMOS 
header of the old_c432 circuit is turned on, but the PMOS 
header of the old_c432 circuit is turned off. The primary 
inputs and outputs of the c432 circuits are connected to flip-
flops that are controlled by the “Select” signal output. 
In the proposed circuit, the ring oscillator operates as a 
replica circuit of a designed digital system. In the stress 
mode, the external signal En asserts logic ‘0’ in order to turn 
off the ring oscillator. On the other hand, in the sensing 
mode, to monitor the TDDB effect on the ring oscillator, the 
external signal En asserts logic ‘1’ in order to turn on the 
ring oscillator. During the sensing mode, when a soft 
breakdown presents at the ring oscillator, the gate to 
source/drain leakage current gets increased due to the 
decreasing of the breakdown resistor. Therefore, the counter 
consisted of four T flip-flops generates different numbers of 
pulses depending on the total delay of the ring oscillator with 
the breakdown resistor. When the ring oscillator goes to 
functional failure owing to the HBD effect, the ring oscillator 
finally stops oscillating. The proposed HBD sensor circuit 
detects this moment using an NOR gate. When the ring 
 
 (a)  
 
(b) 
Figure 4. Delay vs. breakdown resistor considering the spatial correlation 
and the number of inverters with the breakdown resistor, where inverter-
chain has 11 inverters; “T” means the inverter with the breakdown resistor; 
and “0” means the inverter without the breakdown resistor: (a) Delay vs. 
resistor size vs. the number of inverters with the resistor, (b) Delay vs. 
resistor size vs. the spatial correlation. 
 
T
Q
Qb
rst
T
Q
Qb
rst
T
Q
Qb
rst
T
Q
Qb
rst
En
Q0
Q1
Q2
Q3
reset
Pulse Generator
Select signal generator
Old_c432
New_c432
VDD
VDD
GND
GND
 
   
Figure 5. Proposed reliable C432 circuit 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-213-4
CENICS 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

oscillator has HBD resistors on inverters, the “Sensor_ 
Output” signal is changed to logic “0”.  
When “Select” signal output is logic ‘1’, the primary 
inputs and outputs are connected to new_c432. At the initial 
time, the select signal output is logic ‘0’, and the primary 
inputs and outputs are connected to old_c432. When HBD is 
generated in the old_c432 circuit, “Select” signal will be 
changed to logic ‘1’ due to the output of the TDDB 
monitoring circuit. The PMOS header of the old_c432 circuit 
will be turned off, and the PMOS header of the new_c432 
circuit will be turned on. Therefore, the impact of the HBD 
on digital circuit can be completely avoided using the 
proposed design methodology. Figure 6 shows transition 
waveforms, where HBD in the C432 circuit brings about 
functional failures. When the circuit leads to functional 
failures, the binary counter generates ‘0’ outputs, which is 
different from the circuit with no TDDB or SBD. On the 
other hands, the monitoring circuit generates meaningful 
output only when the HBD is generated in the replica circuit 
(ring oscillator) after long time. When the replica circuit has 
the HBD effect, the outputs of monitoring circuit (Q0, Q1, 
Q2, and Q3 are all ‘0’) are asserted to the TDDB signal 
generator circuit. The TDDB_out signal from the signal 
generator circuit is changed to logic ‘0’, and then old_c432 
circuit is blocked, but the new_c432 circuit will work instead 
of old_c432. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WROK 
In this paper, we proposed a reliable CMOS design 
methodology considering the gate oxide breakdown in the 
45nm CMOS technology. The proposed design is based on 
the TDDB monitoring circuit, the simulation results shows 
that the impact of TDDB due to severe HBD on the digital 
circuit can be compensated by the proposed circuit design. 
Finally, we can extend the life time of the targeting circuit 
and prevent from performance degradation as well as 
functional failures due to TDDB. Future efforts aim at 
applying our proposed monitoring circuit to real systems. 
Moreover, a reliable system considering all the aging effects 
(NBTI, PBTI, HCI, and TDDB) will be designed and 
implemented in the nanoscale technology. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. J. Baker, “CMOS-Circuit design, layout, and simulation,” Wiley 
and IEEE Press, 2010. 
[2] A. B. Kahng, “Design challenges at 65nm and beyond,” Design, 
Automation and Test in Europe (DATE) Conference, pp. 1-2, Nice 
Acrolis, France, March  2007. 
[3] J. W. McPherson, “Reliability challenges for 45nm and beyond,” 
Proceeding of IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC), pp. 176-
181, San Francisco, USA, July 2006. 
[4] X. Li, J. Qin, and J. B. Bernstein, “Compact modeling of MOSFET 
wearout mechanisms for circuit-reliability simulation,” IEEE 
Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability, Vol. 8, Issue 1, pp. 
98-121, March 2008. 
[5] M. Choudhury, V. Chandra, K. Mohanram, and R. Aitken, 
“Analytical model for TDDB-based performance degradation in 
combinational logic”, Design, Automation & Test in Europe (DATE) 
Conference, pp. 423–428, , Dresden, Germany,  March 2010. 
[6] H. Wang, M. Miranda, F. Cattoor, and D. Wim, “Impact of random 
soft oxide breakdown on SRAM energy/delay drift,” IEEE 
Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability, Vol. 7, Issue 4, pp. 
581-591, Dec. 2007. 
[7] B. Kaczer, R. Degraeve, M. Rasras, K. Van de Mieroop, P. J. Roussel, 
and G. Groeseneken, “Impact of MOSFET gate oxide breakdown on 
digital circuit operation and reliability,” IEEE Transactions on 
Electron Devices, Vol. 49, No. 3,  pp. 500–506, 2002. 
[8] R. Rodriguez, R. V. Joshi, J. H. Stathis, and C. T. Chuang, “Oxide 
breakdown model and its impact on SRAM cell functionality,” 
International conference on Simulation of Semiconductor Processes 
and Devices (SISPAD), pp. 283–286, Cambridge, USA, September 
2003. 
[9] S. S. Lombardo, J.H. Stathis, B.P. Linder, K.L. Pey, F. Palumbo, and 
C.H. Tung, "Dielectric breakdown mechanisms in gate oxides," 
Journal of Applied Physics, 98(12), pp. 1-36, 2005. 
[10] H. Luo, X. Chen, J. Velamala, Y. Wang, Y. Cao, V. Chandra, Y. Ma, 
and H. Yang, “Circuit-level delay modeling considering both TDDB 
and NBTI,” IEEE International Symposium on Quality Electronic 
Design (ISQED), pp. 14-21, Santa Clara, USA, March 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
10
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
10
20
30
40
50
Time (ns)
Voltage (V)
En
clk
Q
Q1
Q2
Q3
TDDB_out
circuit_in
original circuit out
new circuit out
 
  
Figure 6. The transition waveform for the proposed monitoring circuits 
when HBD is generated. 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-213-4
CENICS 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

