Design and Analysis of a Dual Loop CDR using Maneatis Delay Cell VCO 
 
Khalil Ibrahim Mahmoud,  J. Dhurga Devi, and P.V. Ramakrishna 
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering  
College of Engineering, Anna University, Chennai, INDIA 600025 
khalilaljabory@gmail.com, j_dhurgadevi@annauniv.edu, pvramakrishna@annauniv.edu
 
 
Abstract — Clock and Data Recovery (CDR) circuits have been 
used extensively in the receivers of optical communication 
systems, and a variety of applications of inter and intra chip 
communications. The primary design/performance metrics of 
CDR circuits are clock jitter, lock range, acquisition time, 
power consumption, silicon area, and noise immunity. The 
main source of jitter is the power supply noise. The present 
paper investigates the effects of power supply noise on the 
jitter performance of the well known dual loop architecture of 
CDR system. In order to improve the jitter performance of the 
dual loop CDR system, the VCO alone is replaced by the self-
biased Maneatis VCO which is well known for its immunity to 
power supply noise and process variations. The Maneatis VCO 
is widely used for microprocessors PLL systems but it is rarely 
used in CDR systems. The combination of the dual loop 
architecture and self-biased Maneatis VCO together provides 
the benefits of both schemes. 
Simulations were then carried out systematically to 
determine the capability of the proposed CDR circuit to 
tolerate power supply noise. The results presented in this paper 
show that while the conventional dual loop architecture cannot 
tolerate more than 20mV@10MHz noise on power supply 
terminal, the proposed CDR architecture can tolerate up to 
200mV@10MHz 
noise 
on 
the 
power 
supply 
without 
degradations in jitter performance. 
 
Keywords- CDR, PLL, VCO, Jitter, Power Supply Noise. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
During the past few decades, the CDR circuits have 
played an important role in a wide range of applications such 
as Gigabit Passive Optical Network (GPON), Gigabit 
Ethernet Passive Optical Network (GEPON), Synchronous 
Optical Network (SONET), optical transmission receiver, 
chip-chip interconnections, DDR, System on Chip (SOC), 
serial link communications, and PCI. The CDR circuits are 
normally used to extract the clock embedded in the received 
data and used to re-time and re-sample the received 
(distorted) data for further synchronous processing. 
The most important metric of CDR system performance 
is the jitter on the recovered clock, and it represents the 
deviations of the clock transitions from the ideal one. The 
state of the art CDR circuit architectures, and the trade-offs 
and techniques for reducing the jitter are discussed in recent 
tutorials [3]-[6]. Of late, with the increased integration of 
analog and digital functions on the same chip, immunity to 
power supply noise has emerged as a very important design 
constraint. Several studies on the mitigation of power supply 
noise on PLLs have been reported in [7]-[10]. In addition to 
using differential topologies, some of these studies suggest 
the use of regulators as common techniques used to mitigate 
the power supply noise. The design of PLLs considering 
immunity to power supply noise as a design constraint is 
presented in [9] and considers variants of the Maneatis VCO 
[11, 12] in the context of PLLs and their sensitivities to 
power supply noise. A fast Matlab simulation procedure for 
evaluating the impact of power supply noise on CDR system 
has been described in [10]. 
Very few studies on the mitigation of power supply noise 
for CDRs have been reported in the literature. The present 
work addresses this particular aspect of CDR circuits, 
specifically in the context of dual loop delay interpolating 
architectures. Although there are many architectural choices, 
the dual loop delay interpolating CDR described in [1]-[3] is 
chosen for the present study since this is considered as one of 
the important architectures for realizing CDR circuits with a 
wide operating frequency range while at the same time 
providing low jitter. 
The symmetric load, self-biased Maneatis VCO proposed 
by [11, 12], is well known for its ability to mitigate power 
supply noise and for this reason and is widely used in many 
of the state of the art of microprocessor PLLs. The present 
study investigates the possibilities of using this VCO in CDR 
circuits. It was observed that the Maneatis VCO as proposed 
in [11, 12] could not be used as such in the original dual loop 
CDR architecture since the former had only one control 
voltage input while the latter required a VCO with a coarse 
as well as fine control voltage inputs. Hence, in the present 
study, the bias generator of the self-biased Maneatis VCO 
from [11, 12] was suitably modified and then was 
incorporated into the CDR circuit. It is demonstrated in this 
paper that the modified Maneatis VCO is capable of 
providing improved performance with respect to power 
supply noise. Specifically, simulation results show that the 
proposed scheme tolerates up to seven times the power 
supply noise than in the conventional dual loop CDR for 
similar jitter performance. 
The present paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
presents a brief description and design details of the well-
known dual loop delay interpolation CDR. Section 3 
discusses the proposed modification of the Maneatis VCO 
for incorporation into the dual loop CDR design. Section 4 
gives the simulation results of noise performance for the 
delay interpolation dual loop CDR as well as for the 
proposed modified Maneatis dual loop CDR and in Section 
5, the conclusions are presented. 
6
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

II. 
THE DUAL LOOP CDR SYSTEM DESIGN 
The block diagram of the dual loop delay interpolating 
CDR is shown in Fig. 1 and is the same as the one presented 
in [1, 2]. This system will be considered as a reference 
system against which the performance of the proposed 
modifications will be compared. The system shown in Fig. 1 
consists of a coarse FLL and a fine PLL which operate 
together on the input data sequence and recover the clock 
which could be subsequently used for retiming the data. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The Complete CDR System Block Diagram 
 
The FLL provides a coarse acquisition of the clock and 
operates over a wide frequency range. It comprises of the 
Frequency Detector (FD), the Charge Pump (CP), the Low 
Pass Filter (LPF), Common Mode Feedback (CMFB), and a 
delay interpolating VCO. The FD is realized using a digital 
quadricorrelator and detects the frequency difference 
between the input data rate and the internally generated clock 
by the VCO. The outputs of the FD are the “UP‟ and 
“DOWN‟ pulses that have constant pulse durations and the 
number of pulses generated in a given time interval depends 
on the frequency difference. These pulses are fed to the 
charge pump, where they are converted into proportional 
charging and discharging currents for the LPF. The details of 
circuit design for individual blocks of the FD are given in [1, 
2] and the same procedure has been adopted for the present 
work. 
The design equations given below are from [1, 2, 13] and 
are used to determine the LPF parameters of the FLL. 


.2
.
.
p
VCO
cp
c
k
K
I

 
 
 
 
(1) 
p
p
c
z
C
R .
1
5 
  
 
 
 
 
(2) 
p
s
p
s
p
c
p
C R
C
C
C
.
.
.5





  
 
 
(3) 
1
1
.











p
p
p
s
C
R
C

  
 
 
(4) 
The symbols ωc, ωz, ωp, ζ, and KVCO in the above 
equations represent the crossover frequency, pole frequency, 
zero frequency, damping ratio, and VCO gain, respectively. 
The symbols Rp, Cp, and Cs represent the shunt resistor, 
capacitor and parallel smoothing capacitor, respectively. 
The PLL in Fig. 1 has a much smaller capture range and 
operates after the FLL has acquired lock and this 
combination of FLL lock followed by PLL lock reduces the 
jitter in the recovered clock considerably. The PLL loop 
consists of a Phase Detector (PD), a Voltage-to-Current 
converter (V/I), and the LPF. The PD is an analog sample 
and holds system which consists of a two sample and hold 
circuits and a multiplexer. The output of the PD is a 
differential voltage proportional to the input phase 
difference. These voltages are converted to proportional 
currents by the V/I converter and are used as the charging 
and discharging currents of the LPF of the PLL block. 
The VCO is a ring oscillator which is common to both 
FLL and PLL is realized with four delay cells and uses the 
delay interpolation concept with two paths, the fast path and 
the slow path. Fig. 2 shows the delay interpolation concept 
realized in the delay cell. The fast path consists of a 
differential stage, while the slow path consists of a constant 
delay stage and a differential stage. The two paths share the 
same output load. The output current is the sum of the slow  
and fast currents and is constant. The slow and fast currents 
are steered differentially depending on the control voltages to 
maintain constant sum. 
 
Figure 2.  Shows the Delay Interpolation Concept 
As in the case of the LPF of the FLL, the design 
procedure for determining the PLL loop filter parameters are 
adopted from [1, 2, 13] and the design equations are listed 
below: 
n



.2
2 
 
 
 
 
 
(5) 
. 4
.

K  Kpd KVCO
 
 
 
 
(6) 
1
.
.
.2
2
1 



 
n
K
 
 
 
 
(7) 

C
R
R
f
f
2 .
1
1

 
 
 
 
 
(8) 
Vout 
Delay 
Delay 
Control 
+ 
Vin 
Slow Path 
Fast Path 
PD 
FD 
CP 
VtoI 
LPF 
LPF 
CMFB 
CMFB 
VCO 
Vcoarse 
Vfine 
CKQ 
D 
D 
CKI 
7
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

Rf .C
2
2 
 
 
 
 
 
(9) 
Where the symbols τ1, τ2, Rf1, Rf2, and c are represent the 
time constants, series resistor, shunt resistor and capacitor, 
respectively, of LPF of the PLL. The symbols ωn, ζ, K, KPD, 
KVCO are the natural frequency, damping ratio, open loop 
gain, phase detector gain, and VCO gain, respectively and 
these values can all be determined once the operating 
frequency, bias currents and technology node of the CMOS 
process are chosen. 
Detailed simulations have been carried to determine the 
performance of the dual loop delay interpolation CDR with 
respect to power supply noise. Though the details and 
quantitative results of these simulations are presented 
subsequently in Section 4, the conclusion that clearly 
emerged from these simulations was that the performance of 
the dual loop delay interpolation CDR was very sensitive to 
power supply noise, and that one cannot possibly use this 
CDR without dedicated regulators providing clean power 
supply to the whole system. 
 
III. 
THE MANEATIS DELAY CELL-BASED VCO AND ITS 
MODIFICATION 
It is well known from the PLL literature that the major 
contribution to jitter (or phase noise) due to power supply 
noise comes from the VCO block of the PLL, and this was 
true in the present CDR case as well (quantitative results 
given in the next section). Since the Maneatis Delay Cell-
based VCO is well known for its immunity to power supply 
noise, the adaptation of this VCO to the dual loop CDR is 
described next. 
The block diagram of the original Maneatis VCO and its 
associated bias generator are shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, 
respectively. The Maneatis VCO shown in Fig. 3 basically 
comprises of four symmetric load delay cells for which the 
control voltages come from the bias generator circuit in Fig. 
4. The Maneatis Delay cell-based VCO posses two salient 
features, first is its high supply immunity, and the second is 
its symmetric load resistance based delay element. The latter 
enables the VCO to have a wide operating frequency range. 
The symmetric load resistance can also reject the supply 
noise (dynamic supply noise rejection) and is obtained by 
having the lower limit of the voltage swing to be equal to the 
control voltage itself. Further, for static supply noise 
rejection, it is required that Vcontrol track the supply voltage 
variations and hence it is referenced to (VDD) in [11, 12]. 
From this Vcontrol, one has to generate two bias voltages Vbp 
and Vbn to be fed to the VCO of Fig. 3. Of these, Vbp tracks 
the supply voltage changes to keep the load resistance of the 
delay cell and hence, the output frequency constant. On the 
other hand, Vbn is kept independent of supply voltage 
changes in order to keep the tail current constant. It can be 
seen that the conventional bias generator shown in Fig. 4 can 
accept only one control voltage Vcontrol, and hence cannot be 
directly incorporated directly into the dual loop CDR of Fig. 
1. 
To provide an option for accepting coarse and fine 
control voltages, the bias generator of the Maneatis VCO has 
been modified and is shown in Fig. 5. In this modified 
circuit, the coarse and fine control voltages are provided as 
gate voltages to two NMOS transistors which act as voltage 
controlled current sources (tail sources). These currents are 
summed up to form the drain current of a single PMOS 
transistor. Since the source of this diode connected PMOS 
transistor is connected directly to the supply rail, its gate 
voltage tracks the changes in supply voltage while 
maintaining the current set by the bottom tail transistors. 
This gate voltage of the PMOS is then used as part of a 
feedback loop containing the half replica delay cell to 
generate the bias voltages Vbp and Vbn which are used finally 
by the delay elements of the VCO. The final block diagram 
of modified Maneatis delay cell VCO is shown in Fig. 6. The 
voltage, Vbp, produced by the bias generator tracks the 
supply voltage and sets the lower limit of the oscillation 
swing (and the load resistance) to fix the output frequency. 
On the other hand, since the course (Vbn-coarse) and fine 
control voltages (Vbn-fine) are referenced to the ground 
terminal, the final voltage Vbn, which determines the tail 
current in the delay element, keeps the tail current constant. 
 
Figure 3.  The original Maneatis VCO 
 
Figure 4.  Original Bias Generator 
 
Figure 5.  Modified Bias Generator 
Bias 
Gen 
Vbp 
Vbn 
Vcontrol 
Vbn_coarse 
VDD
 
Half 
Replica
 
Vbn    
  _fine 
Vbn 
Vbp
 
Vbp_in
 
Output  
Buffer
 
Input 
Stage
 
VDD
 
Half 
Replica
 
Vbn 
Vbp
 
Vcontrol
 
Output  
Buffer
 
8
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

 
Figure 6.  The proposed modified VCO 
The simple modification proposed above for the bias 
generator provides a method for combining the coarse and 
fine control voltages while retaining the robustness of the 
original Maneatis VCO. The sensitivity of this VCO to 
power supply voltage variations were first assessed and then 
the VCO was incorporated into the original dual loop CDR 
scheme of Fig. 1. Using the same system specifications and 
design equations described earlier in Section 2, the 
parameters of the LPFs for the FLL and PLL have been 
determined and are listed in Table I. These parameters are 
different from those of the delay interpolation VCO because 
the coarse and fine gains of the modified Maneatis VCO are 
different from that of delay interpolation VCO. 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In this section, first, quantitative results related to the 
supply noise performance of the delay interpolating VCO 
based CDR are presented. Next, simulations results are 
presented to validate the modification carried out on the 
Maneatis VCO and also to demonstrate that it can indeed 
replace the delay interpolation VCO in the original dual loop 
CDR. Finally, for the modified dual loop CDR, simulation 
results related to its performance with respect to power 
supply noise are presented. 
All simulations have been carried out using the Cadence 
Spectre tool. The devices chosen for the simulations are from 
the 
0.35μm 
CMOS 
technology 
libraries 
from 
Austriamicrosystems and the various over-drive voltages and 
bias currents are chosen accordingly. For the present work, a 
nominal data rate of 833 Mbps is chosen for the CDR, the 
FLL cross over frequency is chosen as 30MHz, and the 
charge pump current of the FLL is found to be 125μA. The 
PLL loop natural frequency ωn, and damping ratio ζ are 
chosen to be 0.5 MHz and 4, respectively. The FLL and PLL 
LPF parameters have been determined for the above system 
specifications and given in Table I. For clock recovery 
simulations, PRBS data of length 214 were used as input data 
to the CDR system. 
First, the delay interpolation VCO characteristics are 
given in Fig. 7 where the output frequency dependence on 
coarse and fine control voltages is shown. The coarse and 
fine gains are found to be 506MHz/V and 65.9MHz/V, 
respectively. Similarly, the modified Maneatis VCO circuit 
was simulated and Fig. 8 shows the corresponding VCO 
gains plots. The coarse and fine gains were found to be 
3GHz/V and 230MHz/V, respectively.  
 
Figure 7.  Coarse and Fine Gains of the Delay Interpolation VCO  
 
Figure 8.  Coarse and Fine Gains of the Modified Maneatis VCO  
 
Figure 9.  The Delay Interpolation VCO Sensitivity to Power Supply 
Noise 
The static supply sensitivity of the delay interpolation 
VCO is shown in Fig. 9. For a nominal control voltage 
(Vc=0.74V, Vf=0.74V), it is found to be 185MHz/V and 
represents 6.6% frequency change for 10% change in the 
supply. The corresponding static supply sensitivity of the 
modified Maneatis VCO is shown Fig. 10.  
 
Figure 10.  The Modified Maneatis VCO Sensitivity to Power Supply Noise 
Vcoarse 
Bias 
Gen 
Vbp 
Vbn 
Vfine 
9
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

 
Figure 11.  Variations of Vbn and Vbp versus Power Supply Voltage 
For a nominal control voltage (Vc=0.95V, Vf=1.05V), it is 
found to be 67MHz/V and represents 2.4% frequency change 
for 10% power supply change. The reduction in sensitivity of 
the modified Maneatis VCO is to be expected and is due to 
the ability of the bias generator to track the variations of the 
power supply voltage and is demonstrated in Fig. 11. The 
variations of Vbn and Vbp with respect to VDD are plotted in 
Fig. 11 while maintaining the coarse and fine voltages 
constant and it can be seen Vbn is independent of VDD while 
Vbp tracks VDD for static power supply variations. 
Incidentally, the modified Maneatis VCO also has better 
power supply sensitivity of 67MHz/V as compared to the 
value 158MHz/V reported recently in [14], though the latter 
is for a PLL and for a somewhat higher frequency. 
Next, with PRBS data input, clock recovery was carried 
using two the CDR schemes using clean power supplies. The 
capture transient showing the evolution of coarse and fine 
control voltages of the dual loop delay interpolation CDR 
and the dual loop modified Maneatis CDR are depicted in 
Fig. 12 and Fig. 13, respectively. For the dual loop delay 
interpolation CDR, the lock time, the steady state ripple on 
the fine control voltage, and the recovered clock jitter are 
1μsec, 50mV and 4.3psec (0.4%UI), respectively. The 
corresponding quantities are for the dual loop modified 
Maneatis CDR are 0.6 μsec, 10mV, and 8.4 psec (0.7%UI), 
respectively. 
 
Figure 12.  CDR Coarse and Fine Control Voltages with Clean Power 
Supply for Delay Interpolation VCO 
 
Figure 13.  CDR Control Voltages with Clean Power Supply for Modified 
Maneatis VCO 
Immunity of the two CDR schemes to power supply 
noise is characterized by adopting the procedure followed in 
[11, 12]. Noise sources in the form of sinusoidal signals of 
different frequencies and amplitudes were superposed on the 
VDD supply node. The effects of this noise source on the 
CDR system are measured by two ways. First by measuring 
the ripple on the differential fine control voltage and the 
second one is measuring the rms jitter on the recovered 
clock. 
Table II provides the jitter performance of the dual loop 
delay interpolation CDR with noise injected individually into 
the power supply node of the different blocks of the CDR. 
Each column of the table indicates the ripple on the control 
voltage (after lock) of the dual loop CDR and the jitter on the 
recovered clock for a specific noise amplitude. It can be seen 
that the VCO is the most sensitive block and causes 
maximum degradation of performance. It was also found that 
the system fails to lock if the noise amplitude is increased 
beyond 30mV. Fig. 14 shows the differential fine control 
voltages of the dual loop delay interpolation CDR with noise 
of 20mV@10MHz on power supply terminal. For 
comparison, the same parameters are plotted for the dual 
loop modified Maneatis CDR in Fig. 15 but with a power 
supply noise of 200mV@10MHz. 
 
 
Figure 14.  CDR Control Voltages with 20mV@10MHz Power Supply 
Noise for Delay Interpolation VCO 
10
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

 
Figure 15.  CDR Control Voltages with 200mV@10MHz Power Supply 
Noise for Modified Maneatis VCO 
Finally the jitter performance of the integrated dual loop 
delay interpolation CDR and the proposed dual loop 
modified Maneatis CDR are given in Table III. It can be seen 
that the performance of the latter with 200mv noise is 
comparable to that of the former with a 30 mV noise on the 
supply line. The ripple voltage on the control voltage is not 
listed for the proposed CDR since this tracks the noise on the 
supply voltage as it is supposed to. 
Since the Maneatis VCO and the delay interpolation 
VCO of the original dual loop scheme are both differential 
delay cell-based ring oscillators, their power consumption is 
nearly the same. Since the loop parameters for the proposed 
scheme have been chosen to be the same as that of the 
original dual loop scheme, the acquisition time is also nearly 
the same. Maneatis VCO is inherently known to have a wide 
range of operating frequencies. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
While it is noted in the literature that the dual loop CDR 
architecture has certain important desirable features not 
available in other architectures (see [15] for example), there 
are no studies reporting its jitter performance with respect to 
power supply noise. While this might not have been an issue 
in the older technologies where dedicated external regulators 
providing clean supplies to the CDR can be assumed, in the 
context increased integration and System on Chip (SOC) 
schemes, on chip power supply noise often becomes a 
serious issue. The results presented in this paper provide 
three important conclusions. The first is that the original dual 
loop CDR as proposed in [1] is very sensitive to power 
supply noise and may require dedicated power supply 
regulators. The second conclusion is that the original 
Maneatis delay VCO can indeed be easily modified for 
incorporation into the dual loop CDR. The third conclusion 
is that the resulting modified dual loop CDR is capable 
tolerating nearly 200 mV noise on the supply line without 
degradation in performance. This in turn indicates that it can 
be easily integrated onto (SOC) architectures without 
requiring dedicated supply regulators. 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
THE PLL AND FLL LPF PARAMETERS 
CDR in Ref. [5] 
CDR with proposed VCO 
PLL 
FLL 
PLL 
FLL 
R1 (kΩ) 
996 
Rp (kΩ) 
3 
R1 (MΩ) 
4 
Rp (Ω) 503 
R2 (kΩ) 
107 
Cp (pF) 
9 
R2 (kΩ) 
107 
Cp (pF) 
53 
C (pF) 
150 
Cs (fF) 
371 
C (pF) 
150 
Cs (pF) 
2 
TABLE II.  
JITTER ON RECOVERED CLOCK OF THE CDR WITH VCO 
OF REF. [5] 
Parameters 
with Noisy Power 
Supply 
Noise amplitude at 10MHz 
(mV) 
10 
20 
30 
Jitter on Recovered clock 
ps, (%UI) 
25, (2) 52, (4) 63, (5) 
Ripple on Vfine (mV) 
50 
55 
60 
TABLE III.  
 BLOCKWISE NOISE PERFORMANCE OF THE CDR WITH 
VCO OF REF. [5] 
Parameters 
With Noisy Power Supply Only 
On  
Noise of 20mV 
at 10MHz 
VCO 
FD 
PD 
CP 
VtoI 
Jitter on 
Recovered clock 
ps, (%UI) 
50, (4) 11, (1) 11, (1) 8, (1) 16, (1) 
Ripple on Vfine 
(mV) 
75 
50 
45 
50 
40 
TABLE IV.  
JITTER ON RECOVERED CLOCK OF THE CDR WITH 
PROPOSED VCO 
Parameters 
with Noisy Power 
Supply 
Noise amplitude (mV) at 
10MHz 
50 
100 
200 
Jitter, ps (%UI) on 
Recovered clock 
23, (2) 34, (3) 57, (5) 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to acknowledge Iraq-India 
governments for extending facilities and financial support of 
the Scholarship through Indian Counsel for Cultural 
Relations (ICCR) and Ministry of Science and Technology 
of Iraq. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Seema Butala Anand and Behzad Razavi, “A CMOS Clock 
Recovery Circuit for 2.5-Gb/s NRZ Data”, (2001), IEEE 
Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 36, No. 3, pp. 432-439. 
[2] Yi-Ju Chen and Monuko du Plessis, “An integrated 0.35 µm 
CMOS optical receiver with clock and data recovery circuit”, 
(2006), Microelectronics Journal, pp. 985-992. 
[3] Ming-ta Hsieh and Gerald E. Sobelman, “Architectures for 
Multi-Gigabit Wire-Linked Clock and Data Recovery”, 
(2008), IEEE Circuit & System Magazine, pp. 45-57. 
11
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

[4] Bryan Casper and Frank O’Mahony, “Clocking Analysis, 
Implementation and Measurement Techniques for High-
Speed Data Links—A Tutorial”, (2009), IEEE Transaction 
Circuit and System—I: Regular papers, 56(1), pp. 17-39. 
[5] Behzad Razavi, “Phase-Locking in Wire line Systems: 
Present and Future”, (2008), IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits 
Conference, pp. 615-622. 
[6] Zuoguo (Joe) Wu and Evelina Yeung, “Multi-Gigabit I/O 
Link Circuit Design Challenges and Techniques”, (2007), 
Electromagnetic Compatibility Symposium. 
[7] Abhijith Arakali, Nema Talebbeydokthi, Srikanth Gondi, and 
Pavan Kumar Hanumolu, “Supply- Noise Mitigation 
Techniques in Phase-Locked Loops”, (2008), European Solid-
State Circuits Conference, pp. 374-377. 
[8] Tzung-Je Lee and Chua-Chin Wang, “A Phase-Locked Loop 
with 30%Jitter Reduction Using Separate Regulators”, (2008), 
VLSI Design, pp. 1-8. 
[9] Josh Carnes, Igor Vytyaz, Pavan Kumar Hanumolu, and 
Kartikeya Mayaram, Un-Ku Moon, “Design and analysis of 
noise tolerant ring oscillators using Maneatis delay cell”, 
(2007), IEEE International Conference on Electronics, 
Circuits, and Systems, pp. 494-497. 
[10] Marcus 
van 
Ierssel, 
Hisakatsu 
Yamaguchi, 
Ali 
Sheikholeslami, Hirotaka Tamura, and William W. Walker, 
“Event-Driven Modeling of CDR Jitter Induced by Power-
Supply Noise, Finite Decision-Circuit Bandwidth, and 
Channel ISI”, (2008), IEEE Transaction on Circuits And 
Systems—I, Vol. 55, No. 5, pp. 1306-1315. 
[11] John G. Maneatis and Mark A. Horowitz, “Precise Delay 
Generation Using Coupled Oscillators”, (1993), IEEE Journal 
Solid-State and Circuits, VOL. 28, NO. 12, pp. 1273-1282. 
[12] John G. Maneatis, “Low jitter process independent DLL and 
PLL based on self-biased techniques”, (1996), IEEE Journal 
of Solid-State and Circuits, Vol. 31, No. 11, pp. 1723-1732. 
[13] Keiji Kishine, Kiyoshi Ishii, and Haruhiko Ichino, “Loop-
Parameter Optimization of a PLL for a Low-Jitter 2.5-Gb/s 
One-Chip Optical Receiver IC with 1: 8 DEMUX”, (2002), 
IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp. 38-
50. 
[14] Xiong Liu, Alan N. Willson, and Jr., “A 3 mW/GHz Near 1-V 
VCO with Low Supply Sensitivity in 0.18-μm CMOS for SoC 
Applications”, 
(2009), 
IEEE 
International 
Midwest 
Symposium on Circuits and Systems pp. 90-93. 
 
[15] Ming-ta Hsieh, Gerald E. Sobelman, “Architectures for Multi-
Gigabit Wire-Linked Clock and Data Recovery”, Fourth 
Quarter (2008), IEEE Circuits and Systems Mag., pp. 45-57. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12
CENICS 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-150-2

