A 2.45 GHz CMOS Voltage Controlled Ring Oscillator for Active Transponder  
 
 
Jubayer Jalil, Manum Bin Ibne Reaz, Labonnah Farzana Rahman,  
Mohammad Marufuzzaman and Mohammad Syedul Amin  
Department of Electrical, Electronic and Systems Engineering, 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
43600 Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia 
 jubayer.jalil@gmail.com, mamun.reaz@gmail.com, labonnah.deep@gmail.com,  
marufsust@gmail.com, syedul8585@yahoo.com 
 
 
Abstract—An 
improperly 
designed 
voltage 
controlled 
oscillator (VCO) for radio frequency (RF) phase locked loop 
(PLL) 
simply 
degrades 
performance 
of 
wireless 
communication. This paper proposes a low power ring 
oscillator based VCO developed for 2.45 GHz operated 
active readerless RFID transponder compatible with IEEE 
802.11b protocol. In favor of easy integration and 
implementation of the module in small die size, a 3-stage 
differential delay cell has been adopted to fabricate the 
proposed voltage controlled ring oscillator (VCRO). 0.18 µm 
CMOS process is used for designing the proposed VCRO 
with 1.8 V power supply. Simulated results show that the 
proposed VCRO will work in the tuning range of 2.32 - 2.85 
GHz and dissipate only 11.25 mW of power at 2.45 GHz. 
Thus, the proposed VCRO will be a vital module for active 
readerless RFID transponder. 
Keywords-VCRO; 
RFID; 
Transponder; 
CMOS; 
Differential. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Radio-frequency identification (RFID) is a smart 
identification system, relying on storing and remotely 
retrieving data using devices called tags or transponders. 
The typical RFID system comprises one or several readers 
which communicate with many tags simultaneously. 
Nowadays, implementations of RFID systems are 
extensively introduced in the supply chain, public 
transportation and biomedical applications. The operating 
frequency ranges of current RFID systems established for 
international standards extend from 135 KHz to 2.45 GHz 
[1]. In the RFID systems, tags can be categorized generally 
into two types: Passive and Active based on the power 
source. Passive tags use the magnetic field of readers as a 
source of energy and thus communicate with the readers. 
Active tags are battery-powered devices that have an 
active transmitter onboard. Unlike passive tags, active tags 
generate RF energy by themselves and this autonomy from 
the reader means that they can communicate at long 
distances dissipating more power than their counterparts.  
 At 
present, 
RFID 
deployment 
in 
numerous 
applications is a key challenge for technologist due to 
multiple standardization issues and expensive vendor 
specific readers. Moreover, RFID tags operating in several 
bands—high-frequency (HF) (13.56 MHz), ultra-high-
frequency (UHF) (860–915 MHz), and microwave band 
(2.4 GHz), have limited operational range, less than 2m to 
maximum 9m [2].To overcome these concerns, a concept 
of reader-less RFID system based on IEEE 802.11b or Wi-
Fi technology has been proposed [3]. In that system, RFID 
transponder will be battery-powered active device and its 
operating frequency will be 2.45 GHz (unlicensed ISM 
band). Moreover, conventional reader will be replaced by 
wireless network interface card (WNIC) utilizing desktop 
computer or laptop to make the system generic. However, 
effective use of active transponder’s power is undoubtedly 
a crucial issue to implement this reader-less RFID system 
successfully. 
During its activation, a RF transceiver of operating in 
gigahertz range usually dissipates substantial amount of 
power. That is why a direct conversion RF transceiver was 
proposed to implement the readerless transponder [4]. In 
this analog transceiver, one of the major blocks is the 
frequency synthesizer or local oscillator, which is done 
typically by using phase lock loop (PLL). This PLL is 
composed of phase detector (PD), low pass filter (LPF), 
voltage controlled oscillator (VCO) and frequency divider 
shown in Fig. 1. In this type of PLL-based frequency 
synthesizer, the most power hungry module is VCO, 
which generates frequency and changes the oscillating 
frequency varying control voltage. 
 
Figure 1. Block diagram of PLL based frequency synthesizer 
Until now, LC-type and RC-type of CMOS VCOs 
have been used in wireless communication systems [5]. 
These VCOs performances are usually analyzed by low 
phase noise, low power dissipation, low voltage operation, 
high speed oscillation, multi-phase application, supply 
sensitivity reduction, simplified integration method, small 
layout area and wide tuning range. So far, LC based VCO 
has low level of phase noise among all CMOS VCOs [6]. 
However, it has narrow tuning range, greater power 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-213-4
CENICS 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

dissipation and large die area [7]. In addition, it is very 
difficult to integrate inductor in digital CMOS technology 
[8]. These shortcomings of LC-VCO are overcome by ring 
based VCO or better known VCRO. Recently, VCRO are 
widely accepted not only in wireless communication but 
also in optical communication and many more applications 
of the emerging ultra-wide band (UWB) and wireless 
sensor networks (WSNs).  
VCRO can be implemented by single-ended or 
differential architecture of delay cell. Usually a number of 
delay cell blocks are connected in a positive or 
regenerative feedback loop for building a ring oscillator 
(RO). In VCRO, single ended ring topology comprises of 
inverters and each inverter is made up of an NMOS and 
PMOS transistors. On the other hand, differential topology 
is made up of a load (active or passive) with a NMOS 
differential pair. Currently, differential circuit topology is 
getting popularity among designers as it has common-
mode rejection of supply and substrate noise [9]. 
Moreover, it could be formed by odd or even number of 
stages and is possible to achieve both in-phase and 
quadrature outputs in DROs [10].  
In this paper, a unique differential delay cell has been 
proposed in 0.18 µm CMOS process designing in DA-IC 
of Mentor Graphics environment. The novel delay cell will 
be used for the proposed VCRO of readerless RFID 
transceiver. While designing the module for 2.45 GHz 
operating frequency, power consumption should be 
reduced to improve the performance of the transponder. In 
this research work, it is focused on widening the tuning 
range and reduction of power of the VCRO.  
This paper will be organized as follows: Section II 
discusses the details of oscillator design; Section III 
describes construction of delay cell and its operation; 
Section IV presents simulation results and comparisons 
with other works; a conclusion is drawn in Section V. 
II. 
VCRO ARCHITECTURE 
For incorporation of this ring oscillator, only three of 
differential amplifiers or inverter stages are connected in a 
single delay path formation as shown in Fig. 2. Several 
novel delay cells have been demonstrated to compose the 
two-stage ring VCO, but extra power is inevitably needed 
to provide an excess phase shift for oscillation satisfying 
Barkhausen criterion. On the other hand, implementation 
of 4-stage of RO consumes considerable amount of power. 
Though three-stage ring oscillator cannot produce 
quadrature outputs like 2-stage or 4-stage RO, nevertheless 
it is faster than its four-stage counterpart. Moreover, in 
three-stage RO, fulfillment of proper start-up conditions 
can easily be attained unlike even number ROs, where 
latch-up frequently occur. Thus, the use of 3-stage is 
chosen to increase the oscillation and reduce power 
consumption at the same time. 
 Principle operation of this oscillator is that if one of 
the nodes is excited, the pulse will propagate through all 
the stages and will reverse the polarity of the initially 
excited node. For start-up and oscillation criteria, the 
transfer function for this ring oscillator with the number of 
stages set to 3 and can be represented as, 
 
ܪ(ܵ)=
ି஺బయ
ቀଵା ೄ 
ഘబቁ
య    
 
(1) 
 
where A0 denotes voltage gain of each delay cell and 
ω0 denotes 3dB bandwidth at each stage. 
 
 
Figure 2. Architecture of the three-stage ring oscillator 
 
As one of the criteria for oscillation is a phase shift of 
180° that is each stage contributes with 600 of phase shift, 
the frequency at which it occurs given as,  
 
 ߱௢௦௖ = ߱଴.ݐܽ݊ ൫180° ܰ
ൗ ൯  
 
(2) 
 
The other criterion for oscillation is a loop gain greater 
than 1 at ߱௢௦௖. Thus, it has been calculated the minimum 
voltage gain per delay cell by inserting the oscillation 
frequency expression of (2) into the gain equation found 
from (1). By solving this calculation, yields the minimum 
voltage gain of 2 (two) for each delay cell. 
For every signal cycle, there is a downward as well as 
an upward transition. Since the high-to-low (tpHL) and 
low-to-high (tpLH) propagation delays associated with 
these transitions are not usually equal, the average 
propagation delay is given by 
 
ܶ =
൫௧೛ಹಽା௧೛ಽಹ൯
ଶ
   
 
(3) 
 
The oscillation frequency for an N-stage ring is 
derived from the average propagation delay (T) of the 
inverter. A propagating signal will have to pass twice 
through the chain of delay cells, for a total delay of 2NT, 
to complete one period. Thus, the frequency of the 
oscillation (f) is expressed as, 
 
݂ =
ଵ
ଶே்   
 
 
(4) 
 
III. 
PROPOSED DELAY CELL ARCHITECTURE 
In this research, novel delay cell architecture for the 
VCRO has been proposed as shown in Fig. 3. The 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-213-4
CENICS 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

proposed combination of the delay cell circuit is preferred 
as it alleviates necessity of tail current transistor caused 
flicker noise [11]. Additionally, it will improve output 
voltage stability without redundant bias circuit, which 
occupies a large space in chip. 
 
Figure 3. Schematic diagram of the proposed delay cell 
 
A pair of CMOS differential push-pull inverter will be 
used as inputs in the new delay cell architecture, which is 
also shown in Fig.3. The push-pull inverter will consist of 
two different sizing of PMOS and NMOS. Additionally, 
two cross-coupled PMOS transistors will be connected in 
parallel with inverters PMOS transistors. These cross-
coupled PMOS transistors will be introduced for fast 
switching speed. Sizes of all four PMOS in the cell will be 
chosen equally for smooth oscillation. In addition, a 
serially connected PMOS with a load capacitor of 0.1 pF 
will be employed in parallel with each NMOS input for 
frequency tuning. 
The operation of the delay cell can be described 
considering half-cell circuit. While the input, InA will be 
high (near VDD), the input, InB will be low (equal to zero 
volt). This will turn on NMOS of the node, InA. On the 
other hand, PMOS of the input node, InA and cross-
coupled PMOS connected in parallel with this input 
PMOS will remain off. Then voltage of the output node, 
OutA will be grounded. During that period, charge from 
the capacitor (Cl) will be discharged, or in other words, a 
path will be formed, which sinks current from OutA to 
bring its potential to 0 V. Similarly, if the input, InA will 
turn into 0 V, then the input, the input, InB  will be high 
(near VDD). Zero potential of the input, InA will turn on 
PMOS and turn off NMOS simultaneously. Cross-coupled 
PMOS connected in parallel with the input PMOS of the 
node, InA will also remain switched on at this time. Thus, 
the discharged capacitor will be recharged again through 
these PMOS transistors. However, in both operations, a 
PMOS tuning transistor will control the overall charging 
and discharging of the load capacitor. 
 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS AND COMPARISONS 
The proposed delay cell circuit has been verified by 
using the ELDO RF simulator (Mentor Graphics) of the 
CEDEC process. To determine the center frequency of the 
proposed delay cell circuit, the simulated output of the 
VCRO is shown in Fig. 4. If the control voltage is set to 
0.22 V, frequency of 2.45 GHz is achieved as shown in 
Fig. 4. The supply voltage is set to 1.8 V and the 0.1 pF 
load capacitor is selected in the circuit for reducing die 
area.  
 
Figure 4. Simulated output of the proposed VCRO 
 
In order to validate the proposed circuit in wide 
frequency range, the simulation is done at different control 
voltage. The output of different control voltages are shown 
in Fig. 5. In Fig. 5, it is being shown that if the control 
voltage is set to 0 V the proposed circuit is able to work in 
2.32 GHz frequency. While VCRO’s control voltage is 
increased to 1.1 V, the circuit oscillates in 2.85 GHz 
frequency. It is observed that by increasing the control 
voltage made the circuit working in higher frequency 
without changing the oscillation output voltage, i.e., the 
amplitude remains constant with increasing frequency. 
The voltage gain of VCO (ܭݒܿ݋) is given by 
ܭݒܿ݋=
௙௠௔௫ି௙௠௜௡
௏௠௔௫ି௏௠௜௡   
 
(5) 
 
Figure 5. Simulated tuning range 
A frequency-tuning ratio of 18.60% is attained from 
2.32 GHz to 2.85 GHz. The gain of VCRO is achieved 480 
MHz/V from (5). Since IEEE 802.11b protocol required 
2.4 GHz to 2.5 GHz frequency, the proposed delay circuit 
will make the VCRO working on that frequency range 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-213-4
CENICS 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

which will be certainly a key component of readerless 
RFID transponder. It exhibits a single side-band phase 
noise of -112 dBc/Hz at 10 MHz offset frequency from a 
center frequency of 2.45 GHz shown in Fig. 6. 
 
Figure 6. Simulated single side-band phase noise 
TABLE I: PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS OF CMOS VCRO  
Architecture 
Center 
Frequency 
(GHz) 
Tuning  
Range 
(GHz) 
Supply 
Voltage 
 (V) 
Power 
(mW) 
CMOS 
Process 
(µm) 
4 stage, Dual 
delay loop [11] 
0.9 
0.75-1.2 
3 
- 
0.6 
2 stage, Single 
delay loop [12] 
0.9 
0.66-1.27 
2.5 
15.5 
0.5 
2 stage, Single 
delay loop [13] 
0.9 
0.73-1.43 
1.8 
65.5 
0.18 
4-stage , Dual 
delay loop [14] 
- 
1.77-1.92 
1.8 
13 
0.18 
3 stage, Single 
delay loop [This 
work] 
2.45 
2.2-2.85 
1.8 
11.25 
0.18 
  
Finally, the performance comparisons of CMOS 
VCRO of various technologies are shown in Table 1. 
Compared to other research works, it is shown that the 
proposed VCRO dissipates lowest power, which is around 
11.25 mW and can operate in very high frequencies than 
others.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Despite the continuous improvement in the-state-of-
the-art of CMOS VCOs’, these devices still remain the 
most key blocks of RF PLLs. In this paper, a ring VCO 
has been proposed developed for active readerless RFID 
transponder. The simulated results showed that its 
operating frequency is 2.45 GHz, which will be 
compatible with the readerless RFID transponder and able 
to work with IEEE 802.11b protocol. In future, the 
research will be concentrated in the area of improving 
phase noise to increase the signal-to-noise ratio as well as 
improving figure of merit (FOM) of VCRO. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to express sincere gratitude to 
the Ministry of Science Technology and Innovation 
(MOSTI) for supporting this research project through its 
MOSTI/BGM/R&D/20 (Brain Gain Malaysia) and UKM-
AP-ICT-20-2010 (Arus Perdana) program. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Y. S. Hwang and H. C. Lin, “A new CMOS analog front end for 
RFID tags,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 2299-
2307, July 2009. 
[2] 
V. Pillai, H. Heinrich, D. Dieska, P. V. Nikitin, R. Martinez, and 
K. V. S. Rao, "An ultra-low-power long range battery/passive 
RFID tag for UHF and microwave bands with a current 
consumption of 700 nA at 1.5 V," IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, 
Reg. Papers , vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1500-1512, July 2007. 
[3] 
F. R. Labonnah, M. B. I. Reaz, M. A. M. Ali, Mohd. 
Marufuzzaman, and M. R. Alam, “Beyond the WiFi: Introducing 
RFID system using IPv6”, in Proc. of the Kaleidoscope: Beyond 
the Internet? - Innovations for Future Networks and Services, ITU-
T, pp.1-4, 13-15 December 2010, Pune, India.  
[4] 
J. Jalil, M. B. I. Reaz, M. S. Amin, F. R. Labonnah, and Mohd. 
Marufuzzaman, “Development of 2.45 GHz analog front-end for 
readerless active RFID transponder”, in Proc. of Regional 
Engineering Postgraduate Conference (EPC), 6 pages, 4-5 
October 2011, UKM, Bangi, Malaysia. 
[5] 
M. Moghavvemi and A. Attaran, “Performance review of high-
quality-factor, low-noise, and wideband radio-frequency LC-VCO 
for wireless communication,” IEEE Microw. Mag., vol. 12, no. 4, 
pp. 130-146, June 2011.  
[6] 
O. Casha, I. Grech, and J. Micallef, “Comparative study of 
gigahertz CMOS LC quadrature voltage-controlled oscillators with 
relevance to phase noise,” Analog Integr. Circ. Sig. Process., vol. 
52, no. 1-2, pp. 1-14, 2007. 
[7] 
M. Moghavvemi and A. Attaran, “Recent advances in delay cell 
VCOs,” IEEE Microw. Mag., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 110-118, August 
2011. 
[8] 
B. Leung, “A novel model on phase noise in ring oscillator based 
on last passage time,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, 
vol. 51,no. 3, pp. 471–482, March 2004. 
[9] 
A. Hajimiri, S. Limotyrakis, and T. H. Lee, “Jitter and phase noise 
in ring oscillators,” IEEE J. of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 34, no. 6, 
pp. 790-804, June 1999. 
[10] Y. Toh and J. A. McNeill, “Single-ended to differential converter 
for multiple-stage single-ended ring oscillators,” IEEE J. of Solid-
State Circuits, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 141-145, January 2003.  
[11] C. H. Park and B. Kim, “A low-noise, 900-MHz VCO in 0.6-µm 
CMOS,” IEEE J. of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 586-
591, May 1999. 
[12]  W. S. T. Yan and H. C. Luong, “A 900-MHz CMOS low-phase-
noise voltage-controlled ring oscillator,” IEEE Trans. Circuits 
Syst. II, Analog Digit. Signal Process., vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 216-221, 
February 2001. 
[13] Z. Q. Lu, J. G. Ma, and F. C. Lai, “A low-phase-noise 900-MHz 
CMOS ring oscillator with quadrature output,”  Analog Integr. 
Circ. Sig. Process., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 27-30, 2006. 
[14] Z. Z. Chen and T. C. Lee, “The design and analysis of dual-delay-
path ring oscillators,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, 
vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 470-478,  March 2011. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-213-4
CENICS 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics

