Communication Behavior Modification 
Application for Promoting Wi-Fi Network Usage by Visualizing Usage History 
Sumaru Niida, Hidetoshi Yokota and Shigehiro Ano 
Communications Network Planning Laboratory 
KDDI R&D Laboratories Inc. 
Fujimino-shi, Japan 
{niida, yokota, ano}@kddilabs.jp 
 
 
Abstract— With the rapid increase in the use of high 
performance Information Communication Technologies (ICT) 
devices, the control of network quality for congestion 
avoidance has become increasingly important in network 
service design. Service quality should be discussed from a user 
experience perspective and the same holds for network quality. 
However, it is less common to integrate a human-centered 
design viewpoint when improving network performance. In 
this paper, we discuss a concept that allows users to choose an 
appropriate network by visualizing network usage history. The 
main contribution of this paper is to show quantitatively the 
effect of this concept by developing a prototype application for 
smart phones. The application visualizes network usage history 
through 
entertaining 
content. 
Users 
enjoyed 
it 
and 
consequently were able to improve network performance by 
modifying their communication behavior. Field studies show 
that 47% of participants enjoyed using the application and 
28% of participants increased their use of Wi-Fi networks. 
Keywords-service quality; user experience; human-centered 
design; human-network interaction; field study. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The rapid change in mobile usage has brought about 
greater diversity in lifestyles [1]. People more frequently use 
high-performance Information Communication Technologies 
(ICT) devices, such as smart phones and tablet computers, 
and traffic volume is showing a sharp increase, which is a 
primary cause of traffic congestion in Internet Protocol (IP) 
networks and degradation of network quality. To achieve 
better service quality, controlling network quality becomes 
increasingly important in ICT service design.  
One way this congestion problem is being tackled is 
through an engineering strategy, i.e., strengthening network 
infrastructure in terms of both quantity and quality. It makes 
a direct contribution to solving the congestion problem. 
However, this strategy is costly because of the vast size and 
complexity of implementing a cutting-edge network; 
consequently solving this problem weighs heavily on 
telecommunications operators. On the other hand, users 
sometimes develop a cognitive strategy to alleviate their 
dissatisfaction. A typical strategy is called multitasking 
whereby users move their attention away from the waiting 
process and try to reduce their sense of dissatisfaction.  
In order to understand users’ cognitive strategies, it is 
necessary to analyze network services from a user 
perspective. One approach is called Quality of Experience 
(QoE). In ITU-T Appendix I to P.10/G.100 [2], QoE is 
defined as “The overall acceptability of an application or 
service, as perceived subjectively by the end-user.” Several 
studies have analyzed network services taking this definition 
into consideration. For example, Niida et al. [3] have 
reported on user tolerance for waiting time in mobile 
communications. While this approach is very useful for 
providing quality criteria for network planning, a new 
perspective is required to deeply understand cognitive 
strategies. Users’ behavior when using devices connected to 
information networks (we call it communication behavior) is 
a contiguous judgment process embracing not only waiting, 
but also migration, cancellation, and so on. Users are 
influenced by past experiences and change their behavior 
accordingly. They are not static evaluators. To evaluate such 
dynamic communication behavior in order to understand 
cognitive strategy, the authors introduce the concept of 
“network usability”.  
Usability of ICT devices has been studied for a long time. 
In the earlier studies, it was mainly discussed in terms of 
time efficiency performance [4]. Subsequently, Norman 
defined a cognitive artifact as “an artificial device designed 
to maintain, display, or operate upon information in order to 
serve a representational function” [5], and the importance of 
human cognitive processes in interactions between users and 
artifacts was pointed out. The authors define network 
usability as the usability in Human-Network Interaction 
(HNI). Figure 1 shows a conceptual diagram of HNI which 
regards the network as a cognitive artifact. The network 
maintains and displays information which indicates network 
status. It is also controlled by users by selecting a preferred 
behavior. Users modify their communication behavior 
depending on the situation. If the network has a high degree 
of usability, this means that people can control network 
services with a low cognitive burden to accomplish their goal 
or solve their problem.  
 
Figure 1.  Conceptual diagram of human-network interaction. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

This paper proposes a concept that allows users to choose 
an appropriate time and place for using a wireless network 
based on their past experience. By learning from past 
experience, users are encouraged to use a high quality 
network. From the perspective of network usability, the 
authors designed an application that visualizes the network 
usage history as a form of entertainment and which allows 
users to understand past experiences easily. The main 
contribution of this paper is to demonstrate quantitatively the 
effect of the application by two different field studies 
conducted sequentially.  
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, related 
work is summarized. In Section 3, the proposed concept is 
presented. In Sections 4, the evaluation process based on the 
results of the field experiment using a prototype is presented. 
Finally, Section 5 concludes the discussion. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are three related areas to our research; the 
cognitive processes that are involved when using a network 
service, usability and communication behavior modification.  
Subjective quality assessment is one of the approaches 
utilized to analyze cognitive process when using a network 
service. It has been studied for a long time in the area of 
international standardization activities. For an interactive 
service such as web browsing and downloading, ITU-T 
Recommendation G.1030 [6] defines the procedure for 
subjective quality assessment of website access on PCs. 
Some research has also been conducted on QoE for web 
access services on personal computers [7] and downloading 
services [8]. There has also been some research on the 
cognitive processes related to waiting. Some studies have 
aimed at reducing the dissatisfaction associated with waiting 
by reporting the situation [9][10]. Antonides et al. [11] and 
Municho and Rafaeli [12] analyzed the effect of various 
time-fillers in telephone queues (fillers include music, 
apologies, and information about location in the queues) 
based on the results of field experiments. These studies 
succeeded in explaining the change in users’ impression but 
not the change in user’s behavior.  
Many studies have evaluated the usability of a mobile 
computing environment [13]. With regard to usability during 
multitasking, Nagata [14] has estimated the effect of 
interruption on web task performance, and Parlangeli et al. 
[15] evaluated the effects of a teaching system for distance 
learning in a multitasking context. These studies revealed the 
negative effect of multitasking on task performance. On the 
other hand, Uemura et al. [16] reported the positive effect of 
multitasking in reducing the dissatisfaction associated with 
waiting time. These studies did not address the question of 
network usability.  
There are few studies on communication behavior 
modification. Motoyoshi et al. [17] and Murase et al. [18] 
proposed a navigation system for behavior modification. 
They introduced a method called Comfort Route Navigation 
(CRN) which provides users with the optimal route for 
maximizing throughput in a heterogeneous network. This 
method can modify users’ behavior by anticipated 
throughput but does not take past experience into 
consideration. Another approach is utilizing pricing 
mechanisms to avoid network congestion [19]. This can be 
effective for modification of communication behavior in 
usage based pricing. However, with the popularization of flat 
rate pricing, we need different concept.  
III. 
PROPOSED CONCEPT 
We propose a concept that allows users to choose an 
appropriate network by helping them to understand network 
usage history. Recent mobile terminals support various 
wireless interfaces such as 3G, LTE, Wi-Fi and WiMAX. 
While people can use the terminal unconstrained by time and 
place, network performance depends on the time and place 
of use. For example, users can utilize a better quality 
network at home if they install Wi-Fi. In this case, users can 
improve average throughput by preferentially using Wi-Fi at 
home, meaning it is better if they download or upload large 
files at home. However, many users are not conscious of the 
correlation between throughput and time and/or place. 
Accordingly, they try to use a network whenever they want 
to and become frustrated if the network condition is poor.  
The authors have designed an application in which a city 
map expands based on network usage history data. It is not 
like gaming but more like entertainment. This will belong to 
concept of “gamification” [20]. Users can easily understand 
their usage history as the city map expands. Users cannot 
operate directly any items in this application. However, users 
can influence the application by changing their behavior in 
daily life. They can maintain the motivation to check 
network usage history while enjoying the entertainment 
application. In this paper, we will discuss a relation between 
users’ involvement level to this application and feedback 
level from this application. The design of the application is 
described in specific detail in the next section. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTAION AND FIELD TRIAL 
A. 1st Implementation 
Figure 2 shows screen shots of the application used in the 
first implementation. This is an entertainment application in 
which parts of city maps are added based on the cumulative 
amount of use of a network. In the initial state, the sea areas 
are displayed on all screens as shown in Fig. 2(a). The areas 
comprising the city will be arranged on a screen if the 
cumulative amount of use of a Wi-Fi network increases as 
shown in Fig. 2(b). There are about a hundred types of city 
parts and the algorithm of this application chooses city parts 
and adds them on the map. The more user uses Wi-Fi over 
the smart phone, the more city parts arrange on the map. The 
city parts are selected based on the types of applications 
which user has used over the smart phone. Then the 
ambience of the city differs depending on users’ behavior. It 
is expected that a user will feel motivated to connect with 
Wi-Fi spontaneously by promoting the growth of the city. 
Users enjoy the growth of the city and view it as 
entertainment and consequently improve the network 
performance they experience.  
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
(a) Initial state 
(b) Steady state 
Figure 2.  Screen shot of 1st implementation application 
We conducted a field study using this application. There 
were 31 participants (19 males, 12 females) in this 
experiment. The participants were all Japanese nationals and 
registered with an online survey company. They were aged 
from 20 to 34 years and used a smart phone in daily life. 
They were asked to use the application for one week and 
answer the questionnaire below after that. 
• 
Q1: Do you think the application helped you to 
understand the Wi-Fi usage history? (a five-point 
scale: very much = 5 to not at all= 1) 
• 
Q2: Did you increase the frequency of connecting to 
a Wi-Fi network at home? (a three-point scale: 
increase = 3, same as before = 2, decrease = 1) 
• 
Q3: Did you increase the frequency of connecting to 
a Wi-Fi network outside the home? (same as Q2) 
• 
Q4: Do you want to continue to use the application? 
(a five-point scale: very much = 5 to not at all= 1) 
Table I shows the percentage responses to each question. 
19.4% of participants had a positive response to Q1. 71.0% 
of participants increase the frequency of connecting to a Wi-
Fi network outside the home.  
TABLE I.  
RESPONSES TO 1ST TRIAL (%) 
Question No. 
Answer 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
Q1 (understand NW 
usage history) 
6.5% 
12.9% 
38.7% 
29.0% 
12.9% 
Q2 (increase Wi-Fi 
usage at home) 
- 
- 
9.7% 
90.3% 
0.0% 
Q3 (increase Wi-Fi 
usage outside) 
- 
- 
71.0% 
29.0% 
0.0% 
Q4 (continuation 
intention) 
0.0% 
22.6% 
12.9% 
38.7% 
25.8% 
 
Table II shows the correlation of each answer. Q1 
showed a weak correlation with Q3 and Q4. This indicates 
an increasing number of participants thought the application 
helped them to understand Wi-Fi usage history the more they 
increased their use of Wi-Fi and these participants also felt 
positive about continuing to use the application. However, 
only 22.6% of participants felt positive about continuing to 
use the application.  
TABLE II.  
CORRELATION BETWEEN ANSWERS IN 1ST TRIAL 
Question No. 
Question No. 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 (understand NW 
usage history) 
1 
.09 
.36* 
.36* 
Q2 (increase Wi-Fi 
usage at home) 
- 
1 
.21 
.20 
Q3 (increase Wi-Fi 
usage outside) 
- 
- 
1 
.26 
Q4 (continuation 
intention) 
- 
- 
- 
1 
* 5% level significance 
From these results, it has confirmed that communication 
behavior was modified by visualizing network usage history. 
However, the impact of the application did not reach the 
anticipated level. We redesigned the application based on the 
comments participants freely made about the questionnaire.  
B. 2nd Implementation 
Figure 3 shows a screen shot of the revised application 
used in the 2nd implementation. We added two new features. 
The first feature comprises two indicators which show 
cumulative traffic volume passing through a wireless 
network. These are the tree type indicator located in the 
center of the city map and the bar type indicator located on 
top of screen. Participants can check how much traffic is 
being transmitted over a Wi-Fi network more easily than 
with the 1st implementation. The second feature is 
cooperation with SNS (Social Network Service). It enhanced 
the 
entertainment 
property 
by 
arranging 
followees’ 
statements on the city map and expect to increase the 
frequency to check the application.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Screen shot of 2nd implementation application 
There were 32 participants (18 males, 14 females) in the 
2nd experiment. The participants were all inhabitants of 
Japan and registered with an online survey company. They 
were aged from 20 to 33 and used a smart phone in daily life. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

They were asked to use this application for one week and 
answer the questionnaire after that. In the 2nd field trial, we 
added the question below. 
• 
Q5: Did you enjoy using the application? (a five-
point scale: very much = 5 to not at all = 1) 
Table III shows the percentage response to this question. 
31.2% of participants had a positive response to Q1. 21.9% 
of participants increased their frequency of connecting to a 
Wi-Fi network at home or outside. 28% of participants 
increased their Wi-Fi usage at home and/or outside.  
TABLE III.  
RESPONSES TO 2ND TRIAL (%) 
Question No. 
Answer 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
Q1 (understand NW 
usage history) 
3.1% 
28.1% 
15.6% 
21.9% 
31.3% 
Q2 (increase Wi-Fi 
usage at home) 
- 
- 
21.9% 
75.0% 
3.1% 
Q3 (increase Wi-Fi 
usage outside) 
- 
- 
21.9% 
78.1% 
0.0% 
Q4 (continuation 
intention) 
6.3% 
25.0% 
15.6% 
21.9% 
31.3% 
Q5 (enjoy using 
application) 
15.6% 
31.3% 
12.5% 
15.6% 
25.0% 
 
Table IV shows the correlation of each answer. Q1 
showed a medium correlation with Q4 and Q5. There were 
more positive responses to the 2nd implementation compared 
to the 1st implementation. From these results, it can be seen 
that the new features improved the performance of the 
application.  
TABLE IV.  
CORRELATION BETWEEN ANSWERS IN 2ND TRIAL 
Question No.  
Question No.  
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q5 
Q1 (understand NW 
usage history) 
1 
.05 
-.03 
.62** 
.55** 
Q2 (increase Wi-Fi 
usage at home) 
- 
1 
.60** 
.45* 
.20 
Q3 (increase Wi-Fi 
usage outside) 
- 
- 
1 
.13 
.01 
Q4 (continuation 
intention) 
- 
- 
- 
1 
.74** 
Q5 (enjoy using 
application) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
** 1% level significance 
This indicates that an increasing number of participants 
thought the application helped them to understand usage 
history of Wi-Fi the more they felt positive about the 
application and continued to use it. However, the correlations 
between Q3 and other questions, which were apparent in the 
1st field test, disappeared.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We proposed a concept that allows users to choose an 
appropriate time and place for using a wireless network 
based on their past experience. We evaluated this concept by 
developing an application which visualizes the network 
usage history. The results from two field studies show that 
our concept has the potential to modify communication 
behavior. However, the impact of the application did not 
reach our expected level. We will redesign the application 
interaction again and confirm if users offload traffic to Wi-Fi 
by using this application.   
RESSFERENCES 
[1] M. Ito, D. Okabe, and M. Matsuda (Eds.) “Personal, Portable, 
Pedestrian: Mobile Phones in Japanese Life,” MIT Press, 
2005. 
[2] ITU-T Appendix I to P.10/G.100, “Definition of QoE,” 2007.  
[3] S. Niida, S. Uemura, and H. Nakamura, “Mobile services -
User 
tolerance 
for 
waiting 
time-,” 
IEEE 
Vehicular 
Technology Magazine, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 61-67, Sept. 2010.  
[4] S. K. Card, T. P. Moran, and A. Newell, The Psychology of 
Human-Computer Interaction, Erlhaum, Hillsdale, 1983. 
[5] D. A. Norman, “Cognitive Engineering,” In D. Norman and S. 
Draper (Eds.) User Centered System Design: New Perspective 
on Human Computer Interaction, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates Inc., pp. 31-62, 1986 
[6] ITU-T Recommendation G.1030, “Estimating end-to-end 
performance in IP networks for data applications,” 2005.  
[7] E. Ibarrola, F. Liberal, I. Taboada, and R. Ortega, “Web QoE 
evaluation in multi-agent networks: Validation of ITU-T 
G.1030,” Proc. ICAS'09, pp. 289-294, Apr. 2009.  
[8] K. Nomura, K. Yamori, E. Takahashi, T. Miyoshi, and Y. 
Tanaka, “Waiting time versus utility to download images,” 
Proc. APSITT 2001, pp. 128-132, Nov. 2001.  
[9] C. Harrison, Z. Yeo, and S.E. Hudson, “Faster Progress Bars: 
Manipulating 
Perceived 
Duration 
with 
Visual 
Augmentations,” Proc. CHI 2010, pp. 1545-1548, Apr. 2010.  
[10] S. Niida, S. Uemura, and E. T. Harada, “Design Requirements 
for Improving QoE of Web Service Using Time-Fillers,” 
IEICE Trans. Commun., E96-B, pp. 2069-2075, Aug. 2013.  
[11] G. Antonides, P.C. Verhoef, and M. van Aalst, “Consumer 
perception and evaluation of waiting time: A field 
experiment,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, no. 12, pp. 
193-202, 2002.  
[12] N. Munichor and A. Rafaeli. “Numbers or apologies? 
Customer reactions to telephone waiting time fillers,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology, no. 92, pp. 511-518, Mar. 2007. 
[13] C. K. Constantinos and D. J. Kim, “A Meta-Analytical 
Review of Empirical Mobile Usability Studies,” Journal of 
Usability Studies Vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 117-171, May 2011.  
[14] S. F. Nagata, “Multitasking and interruptions during mobile 
web tasks,” Proc. the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 
Annual Meeting, pp. 1341-1345 , 2003.  
[15] O. Parlangeli, G. Mengoni, and S. Guidi, “The effect of 
system usability and multitasking activities in distance 
learning,” Proc. CHItaly, Sep. 2011.  
[16] S. Uemura, S. Niida, and H. Nakamura, “Service control 
system 
based 
on 
behavioral 
characteristics 
of 
user 
multitasking,” Proc. CENTRIC 2011, pp. 22-27, Oct. 2011. 
[17] G. Motoyoshi, Y. Sudo, T. Murase, and T. Masuzawa, 
“Advantages of Optimal Longcut Route for Wireless Mobile 
Users,” Proc. IEEE ICC 2011, pp. 1-6, Jun. 2011.  
[18] T. Murase, G. Motoyoshi, K. Sonoda, and J. Katto, “Quality 
of service of mobile users for longcut routes with congested 
access points,” Proc. ACM ICUIMC '13, no. 40, Jan. 2013.  
[19] J. K. MacKie-Mason and H. R. Varian, “Pricing Congestible 
Network Resources,” IEEE J. SAC, pp. 1141-1149, Sept. 
1995. 
[20] S. Deterding, D. Dixon, R. Khaled, and L. Nacke, “From 
game design elements to gamefulness: defining gamification,” 
Proc. MindTrek '11, pp. 9-15, Sept. 2011.  
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

