A User Rights Concept for Semantic Media in Ambient Learning Spaces 
 
David Bouck-Standen, Christina Eggert, Alexander Ohlei, Michael Herczeg 
Institute for Multimedia and Interactive Systems (IMIS) 
University of Luebeck 
Luebeck, Germany 
email: [bouck-standen, eggert, ohlei, herczeg]@imis.uni-luebeck.de 
 
Abstract—In our research project Ambient Learning Spaces 
(ALS), users interact with Semantic Media. Semantic Media 
consist of both plain media, such as still images, audio, video, 
text, or 3D objects, enriched by semantic relations and 
annotations describing content and inheritance structure of the 
media. These annotations allow classifying and arranging the 
media into semantic models. Semantic Media represent the 
information users create, collect and access, e.g., in the 
museum or school context of our research project. As media 
are accessed and used in various applications from the family 
of ALS applications, a user rights concept is required to 
manage access to these media. Usually such user rights have to 
be set explicitly. 
Keywords-Semantic Media; User Rights Concept; Implicit 
User Rights Setting; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A single instance of plain media, such as a still image, 
audio, video, text or 3D object, represents information. Only 
when such media are integrated into meaningful information 
structures, these media become valuable in specific contexts 
[1]. We decided to build up such information structures as 
semantic models through semantic annotations. Thus, plain 
media enriched by semantic annotations will be referred to as 
Semantic Media. In our research project Ambient Learning 
Spaces (ALS), body- and space-related human-computer 
interaction, as well as the concept of cross-device interaction 
(XDI) defines the conceptual foundation. For this purpose, 
we have developed a family of interconnected learning 
applications. Providing these applications we focus on self-
directed learning with interactive media [2]. In our ALS 
environment, learners create and interact with such Semantic 
Media in school and museum contexts, using their own 
mobile devices [3]. In these contexts, users will typically be 
school students, teachers, museum visitors, staff, or curators. 
They interact with Semantic Media from mobile or 
stationary devices running applications from the ALS family, 
all interconnected through a framework of web-based 
services and a data repository, the Network Environment for 
Multimedia Objects (NEMO). NEMO stores and handles all 
media within the ALS research project. The framework is 
running in multiple instances cloud-based, as well as on-site 
with our project partners, two schools and two museums. 
During their use of ALS applications, users’ access to media 
is not limited to the media they create themselves. The 
philosophy of ALS is to share knowledge and engage in 
communicative and collaborative learning processes through 
these systems, where knowledge is expressed through 
Semantic Media [1]. This requires a user rights concept in 
order to manage access to these Semantic Media. 
Apart from setting user rights explicitly, it appears that in 
a multi-device and multi-user ecology, like ALS is used in 
schools and museums, implicit settings of user rights are 
even more significant. In an initial approach, we develop a 
concept, as outlined below, in which, we use semantic 
annotations to equip each instance of Semantic Media with 
the required settings. 
In Section 2 we regard related work, distinguishing our 
approach from those applying explicit user right. In Section 
3, we outline a concept that focuses on the implicit setting of 
user rights, which reflects the users’ contextualized use of 
the media in the context of its use. In Section 4, we conclude 
with a summary and outlook, as well as discussion stimuli. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Explicit user rights settings are required in various 
contexts and have been researched based on, e.g., 
inheritance, role hierarchies or in privacy-sensitive contexts, 
by Lu et al. [4]. User rights on media can be perceived 
similar to access permissions. Ferrara et al. [5] outline a 
concept to reduce annotation overhead by automatically 
inferring access permissions, which is also applicable to 
media, whereas Treu et al. [6] introduce a concept of 
granting implicit access to personal location information on 
basis of certain rules applied to the relations between users. 
Distinguishing the concept presented in this contribution 
from the related work, we connect the user’s explicit group-
based user rights settings for each medium with implicit user 
rights. These user rights are derived from the users’ 
utilization of the media in context of the applications, in 
which they create or interact with the media. 
III. 
CONCEPT FOR IMPLICIT USER RIGHTS 
To illustrate the concept for implicit user rights presented 
in this contribution for discussion, in the following we will 
use a school scenario. This is based on our concept of Se-
mantic Media, which is annotated in NEMO (see Figure 1). 
In ALS, users create new media with the Mobile 
Learning Exploration System (MoLES) [1], an ALS 
application for mobiles. In a typical setting, MoLES is used 
collaboratively by a group of 3-4 school students. On a field 
trip, multiple groups create and annotate media using 
MoLES in order to answer questions. These media are 
transferred to and stored inside NEMO. After the field trip 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

and back in school, the students prepare a presentation of 
their findings using the media they created previously. They 
discuss their findings and share media among each other and 
across their groups defined previously. When they finished 
their work, they showcase their presentation, at first in class. 
They can afterwards decide, whether to show their 
presentation (media) on displays in a public space in school. 
The scenario illustrates the use of media in tasks like 
creation, collaborative usage, and sharing. As the scenario 
outlines, no user explicitly sets user rights to their media. 
Instead, they simply interact with the media through ALS 
applications. Through this interaction, they implicitly set the 
user rights on their Semantic Media. 
This concept relies on a group-based model with three 
types of access permissions: noaccess, read, and write. 
These are sufficient for all ALS scenarios. At first, the users 
are explicitly assigned into groups, e.g., depending on 
classes, or school projects. They are also implicitly assigned 
to a group, e.g., when a group of students use MoLES 
together. Whenever a user in ALS creates media, NEMO 
applies a default private setting to protect the media from 
access of others (see Figure 1) by setting all users except the 
owner to noaccess. Depending on the application’s context 
the media was created in, this setting is adjusted. As our 
scenario outlines, the media was created with MoLES 
collaboratively. Thus, the media is implicitly shared among 
users using MoLES together, giving the group members 
write access implicitly. Together, they work on their 
presentation and engage in discussions with other students. 
Depending on their location, they share media during 
discussions, implicitly setting write access. When show-
casing the presentation in the classroom, the media becomes 
available to the members of the class, who implicitly gain 
read access. Also, the decision to show the presentation on 
public displays in school extends the group of users having 
access to those media. As ALS considers body- and space-
related interaction, using and displaying media on displays in 
a public space implies sharing media publicly. 
To complete this model, the owner can override implicit 
settings by setting them explicitly at any time. 
In general, our concept of implicitly setting user rights 
relies on (1) reasonable defaults, which are set upon media 
creation, (2) the users’ interaction with Semantic Media with 
ALS applications, through which user rights are set 
implicitly, and (3) explicit user rights, the users may set 
when necessary. Consequently, using ALS apps in certain 
contexts or in certain locations implies certain use cases, 
which implicate user rights. These are mapped to the user 
rights model shown in Figure 1. The key issue here is to 
identify contexts and locations and the effect they are 
supposed to have, also in the users’ affordance when using 
ALS apps. 
All settings for user rights are stored in NEMO in form of 
semantic annotations (see Figure 1), extending the sets of 
annotations of Semantic Media. This results in annotation 
overhead. As every request for Semantic Media is directed to 
NEMO computing whether a user has access to that media, 
the overhead produces constant effort. Thus, the user rights 
settings stored in NEMO through any ALS app have an 
effect on the accessibility of the media for all the ALS apps 
connected to NEMO. By this, Semantic Media will also 
preserve user rights settings when being moved. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
This article outlines the concept for implicit user rights 
with regard to the users’ interaction with Semantic Media for 
ALS. Based on a reliable explicit user rights concept, 
implicit user rights are deduced from the context, in which 
the media is used, and set through NEMO. The user rights 
are stored as semantic annotations for each medium and thus 
are a supplement to explicit user rights. From observations 
from our research project, we deduct that implicit user rights 
in many cases replace the necessity of defining explicit user 
rights. Reciprocally, explicit user rights may overwrite 
implicit user rights. Although the user rights model presented 
is sufficient for our research, an extension might be subject 
for discussion for the use in other contexts. Setting user 
rights implicitly may presents a security risk, which should 
be subject of further consideration and could result in new 
requirements for the user’s interaction concepts, e.g., to 
create awareness when interacting with media. We will 
continue our observations upon experimental deployment of 
this concept in NEMO and set up studies to see how well it 
corresponds with users’ needs and expectations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the German Research 
Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG). 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Bouck-Standen et al., “Reconstruction and Web-based Editing of 
3D Objects from Photo and Video Footage for Ambient Learning 
Spaces,” Int. J. Adv. Intell. Syst., IARIA, vol. 11, pp. 91-104, 2018. 
[2] T. Winkler, D. Bouck-standen, M. Ide, A. Ohlei, and M. Herczeg, 
“InteractiveWall 3.1 - Formal and Non-Formal Learning at School 
with Web-3.0-based Technology,” in EdMedia, pp. 1317-1326, 2017. 
[3] A. Ohlei, D. Bouck-Standen, T. Winkler, J. Wittmer, and M. Herczeg, 
“InfoGrid4Museum: A Media Mediation Strategy using Augmented 
Reality for Museums,” in 47. J. d. Ges. f. Inf. eV. (GI), pp. 1-8, 2017. 
[4] Y. Lu and R. O. Sinnott, “Semantic Security for E-health: A Case 
Study in Enhanced Access Control,” Proc. - 2015 IEEE 12th Int. Conf. 
Ubiq. Intell. Comput. 2015, pp. 407-414, 2015. 
[5] P. Ferrara and P. Müller, “Automatic Inference of Access 
Permissions,” Verif. Model Checking, Abstr. Interpret. - 13th Int. Conf. 
VMCAI 2012, no. May, pp. 202-218, 2012. 
[6] G. Treu, F. Fuchs, and C. Fuchs, “Implicit Authorization for Social 
Location Disclosure,” J. Softw., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 18-26, 2008. 
 
Figure 1. Left: NEMO annotation sets for Semantic Media.  
Right: Groups of the user rights model for ALS. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

