Applying Augmented Reality to Tourism Pamphlet and its Evaluation 
 
Tadashi Miyosawa, Kentaro Hara  
Department of Business Administration and Information  
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa  
Chino, Japan 
miyosawa@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp, 
jh109059@ed.suwa.tus.ac.jp 
Kikunori Shinohara 
Center of General Education and Humanities 
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa 
Chino, Japan 
s96hige@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—Various studies have been undertaken to adapt 
Augmented Reality (AR) technology for use in real application. 
We see AR as being suitable for creating an enjoyable tourism 
pamphlet for users. In this study, we developed an AR tourism 
pamphlet and compared three types of different pamphlet (AR 
with map, AR-only and map-only). The results show that the 
combination of a map and AR performed better the traditional 
map pamphlet. By conducting an experiment where we 
measured the participants’ brain activities, we confirmed that 
the burden on spatial cognizance and working memory, as well 
as throughout the rest of the brain, was reduced with the map-
and-AR combination. We also confirmed that the combination 
drew interest far more than the map-only pamphlet. We 
believe this shows that the proposed pamphlet is overall a more 
natural form of information and, when compared with a 
traditional pamphlet, has the potential to be more enjoyable 
and less stressful for users. 
Keywords—Augmented Reality; Tourism; Pamphlet; Brain 
Activity; NIRStation 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
A. Background 
Augmented Reality (AR) technology has gained 
attention in recent years. AR is defined as an extended (or 
heightened) sense of realism. As its name implies, the 
technology is designed to extend (or intensify) the real 
world [1]. More specifically, it can show us a world 
containing a greater amount of content by layering digital 
information over the real world as seen through a computer 
or smartphone screen. 
 AR is divided into several categories [2]. First is 
marker-type AR, defined by a marker image that, when seen 
through the camera attached to a Personal Computer (PC) or 
similar device, interacts with the image to display digital 
data. In contrast, there is also marker-less-type AR, which 
detects specific shapes and colors in the camera image to 
display digital data without a marker. Both marker-type and 
marker-less-type AR use image recognition technology. 
There is also location-information-type AR, which uses the 
Global Positioning System (GPS) and sensors present in 
smartphones and similar devices to determine the specifics 
of the user’s location in displaying digital information.  
AR allows worlds that previously only existed in comics 
and animation to be actualized, a concept that excites us 
with its amusement and charm. Kobayashi [2] states that 
“Media like television, movies, comics and games are not 
used solely for the purposes of entertainment. Pleasure is, of 
course, a huge factor in these media, but it is possible to use 
that pleasure to our advantage to produce the experience of 
‘being educated while being entertained’ (Edutainment) [3]. 
This point also applies to the new medium of AR.” With 
this principle in mind, we conducted research with the 
expectation that the excitement experienced by users using 
AR would also be effective for a tourism pamphlet. 
 
B. Past research 
There have been various research works on the practical 
use of AR. 
Kondo [4] states that one of the merits of composite 
reality (roughly equivalent to AR) is the ability to expand 
upon traditional teaching media such as textbooks. In 
addition, he developed three-dimensional computer graphics 
(3DCG) and audio explanations of the structure of the 
human brain. Materials useful for teaching mathematic 
spatial diagrams were developed and implemented in a 
high-school lesson. After the lesson, 70% of the students 
reported that it was easier to understand the content with the 
composite-reality technology.  
Alzua-Sorzabal et al. [5] presented a usability study of a 
new prototype based on AR technologies. The observation-
based study revealed the possibilities and limitations of the 
design of the prototype on the basis of the behavior of users. 
Most participants agreed that the approach of using AR 
technologies enhanced the interactive experience with 
tourist content. Moreover, they positively assessed the 
usefulness of the prototype as a tourist information point 
because of its ability to provide location-based content. 
Teshima and Kosugi [6] reported tests using cartography 
teaching materials made by the researchers. The tests 
demonstrated that AR 3DCG displays were effective in 
cartography study. It was confirmed that AR teaching 
materials significantly raised test scores when it came to 
questions about target locations and names. The researchers 
reasoned that AR had a great effect on the learning of 
important 
components 
(i.e., 
the 
place 
and 
name 
memorization) of cartography.    
Miyosawa et al. [7] states that AR is suitable for creating 
an enjoyable learning experience (i.e., edutainment) for 
students. They developed an AR application based on the 
same content as conventional printed teaching material in 
the field of foreign-language study. The learning efficacy of 
the two media was assessed by comparing the results of 
verification tests and monitoring brain activity during the 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

learning process. There were no significant differences in 
test results between the two media. However, it was found 
that the subjects’ brains were more active while studying the 
printed teaching materials than while studying the AR 
teaching materials. The researchers believed that this 
showed that the proposed method of study is overall a more 
natural one and, when compared with traditional methods of 
study, has the potential to be less stressful for students. 
Despite the above studies, there has been insufficient 
research and discussion on the effectiveness of AR in other 
fields and on whether AR is suitable for highly specific 
fields. 
 
C. Objective of the Paper 
A standard tourism pamphlet is an item that contains 
pictures and information regarding sightseeing locations. In 
this paper, we conduct a subjective evaluation via a 
questionnaire about a tour pamphlet that employs AR, in 
terms of the information obtained about sightseeing 
locations, and perform a test to observe any trends in brain 
activity. From these test results, we determine the 
compatibility of AR with tourism pamphlets. 
 
D. Composition of the Paper 
The first section covers the background to the present 
study, existing challenges, past research, and the objective 
of the paper. The second section introduces the thought put 
into developing the AR tourism pamphlet, and the 
pamphlet’s contents. The third section discusses the two 
tests conducted using the materials prepared in the second 
section, and the questionnaire results. The fourth section 
covers in further detail the results of each test performed in 
the third section. In the fifth section, we analyze the results 
obtained in the previous section. The sixth and final section 
presents our conclusion and discusses future research. 
 
II. 
THE TOURISM PAMPHLET 
A. Development environment 
1)  ARToolKit 
ARToolKit [8] is a C/C++ programming language 
library that allows support of marker-style AR applications. 
Originally, the process of detecting a marker in the captured 
image and acquiring data about the position and orientation 
required a fair amount of technical knowledge, but 
ARToolKit turns that data into a simple black box around a 
marker. Its primary feature is to obtain the image from the 
camera, detect the marker through pattern recognition, 
calculate the position of the marker in three-dimensional 
(3D) space, and display the composite 3DCG as shown in 
Fig. 1, allowing us to create an application where the printed 
marker is read through a webcam and then overlaid with 
3DCG. We were able to use markers and 3DCG that we had 
prepared. For this study, we created a tourism pamphlet 
using ARToolKit.  
 
 
Figure 1. Tourism pamphlet adopting AR (image) 
 
2)  Metasequoia 
Metasequoia [9] provides configuration materials for 
modeling and mapping. It is modeling software that allows 
3D objects to be compiled in polygonal units. In our 
research, we used the free version of Metasequoia to create 
five 3DCG models, as seen in Fig. 2.  
 
Figure 2. 3DCG objects created in Metasequoia 
 
B.  Applying AR 
In our research, we developed a pamphlet that put AR to 
practical use. By paying attention to the pictures of 
sightseeing locations on the map and replacing the pictures 
with 3DCG, we expect that it is possible to better capture 
the viewer’s interest. 
C.  Developed Tourism Pamphlet 
We produced three different tourism pamphlets. Figure 
3a shows the tourism pamphlet with map and AR, which 
provides information about sightseeing locations in Rome, 
Italy. Figure 3b shows the map-only tourism pamphlet, 
which provides information about sightseeing locations in 
Barcelona, Spain. Figure 3c shows the AR-only tourism 
pamphlet, which also provides information on attractions in 
Rome, Italy. 
 
Figure 3.   Pamphlets with a) map and AR, b) map only, and c) AR only 
 
The AR-with-map and AR-only pamphlets display the 
prepared 3DCG over the marker on the PC screen when the 
marker is viewed through a webcam connected to a PC. The 
map-only pamphlet specifies the sightseeing location on the 
map with a picture alongside. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 4. Examples of the included information sheets. 
 
The pamphlets introduced in Fig. 3 include information 
sheet on each location, as shown in Fig. 4. 
 
III. 
EXPERIMENTS 
We performed two experiments. Section 3.1 outlines the 
questionnaire for the first experiment using the pamphlet 
and information sheets. Section 3.2 details the second 
experiment in which brain activity was measured while the 
participants were given the pamphlets and informational 
sheets. Experiments 1 and 2 were carried out at the same 
time and for the same participants. 
 
A. Experiment 1: Questionnaire Results 
1)  Experiment Objective 
From the questionnaire results, we can examine whether 
the map with AR better conveys information and captures 
the interest of travelers than the traditional map-only 
pamphlet and AR-only pamphlet. The questionnaire results 
are used as indicators of the overall evaluation and points of 
possible improvement. 
2)  Participants 
Nineteen students (20 to 24 years old) from the Tokyo 
University of Science, Suwa, participated in the experiment. 
 
3)  Materials 
The materials used in the experiment were  
a) the three tourism pamphlets (the AR+map tourism 
pamphlet, the map-only pamphlet, and the AR-only 
pamphlet), 
b) 
the 
three 
information 
sheets 
(information 
corresponding to each of the three pamphlets), 
c) a laptop equipped with a webcam, and 
d) the questionnaire. 
 
 
4)  Experimental Method 
Each participant took information from each pamphlet 
for 1 minute (i.e., a total of 3 minutes for the three 
pamphlets). The order of the pamphlets was changed for 
each participant to prevent any bias due to the order of 
presentation. The participants then filled out a questionnaire. 
We ran a training session for participants not familiar with 
AR. 
 
 
5)  Questionnaire Results 
Four evaluation options were provided: “strongly agree”, 
“agree”, “disagree”, and “strongly disagree”. We chose four 
options to prevent a neutral answer. With each option 
respectively counting as four, three, two or one point, we 
used PASW Statistic (SPSS) to perform a statistical analysis. 
The significant variance using this software is below 5%.  
Significant variations in results among pamphlets were 
found for the statements “It was easy to connect the name 
with the location”, “I was interested in the location”, “I want 
to visit the location”, and “I want to use the pamphlet again”.  
The statements for the various pamphlets were compared 
using the Bonferroni method. This paper discusses only the 
significant variations that were observed. 
 
 
Figure 5. Was it easy to connect the name with the location? 
 
For the statement regarding how easy it was to connect 
the name with the location, we observed significant variance 
between map-only and AR-only pamphlets and between 
AR+map and AR-only pamphlets. Figure 5 shows that the 
average ratings descended from best to worst in the order 
AR+map > map-only > AR-only. We can conclude from 
these results that the AR+map pamphlet was best able to 
connect the name with the location. 
 
 
Figure  6. Were you interested in the location? 
 
For the statement regarding interest about a location, we 
observed significant variance between map-only and 
AR+map pamphlets. Figure 6 shows that the average ratings 
descended from best to worst in the order AR+map > AR-
only > map-only. We can conclude from these results that 
the AR+map pamphlet elicited the most interest in the 
participants. 
 
AR-only
AR+map
map-only
Estimated marginal means(EMMEANS)
AR-only
AR+map
map-only
Estimated marginal means(EMMEANS)
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 7. Did you want to visit the location? 
 
For the statement regarding the participant’s desire to 
visit a location, we observed significant variance between 
map-only and AR+map pamphlets. Figure 7 shows that the 
average ratings descended from best to worst in the order 
AR+map > AR-only > map-only. We can conclude from 
these results that the AR+map pamphlet elicited the most 
desire to visit a location. 
 
Figure 8. Do you want to use the pamphlet again? 
 
For the statement regarding the participant’s desire to 
use the pamphlet again, we observed significant variance 
between map-only and AR+map pamphlets. Figure 8 shows 
the average ratings descended from best to worst in the 
order AR+map > AR-only > map-only. We can conclude 
from these results that, of the three pamphlets, participants 
most wanted to use the AR+map pamphlet again. 
By condensing these statements, we can argue several 
points. 
 (1) The statements “It was easy to connect the name 
with the location” and “The information about the tourist 
locations was easy to understand” were categorized as 
statements measuring ease of comprehension. In that 
category, the order of results was AR+map > map-only > 
AR-only. There is a high probability that the AR-only 
pamphlet received low valuations because participants were 
unfamiliar with managing the markers. We also postulate 
that the AR+map pamphlet was the most intuitive scheme in 
allowing participants to understand the location. We can 
conclude that the AR+map pamphlet was easiest to 
understand. 
 (2) The statements “I was interested in the location”, “I 
want to visit the location” and “I want to use the pamphlet 
again” were classified as statements measuring interest. In 
that category, the order of results was AR+map > AR-only 
> map-only. We can conclude that the map-only pamphlet 
was insufficient for capturing the participants’ interest as 
both AR+map and AR-only pamphlets received higher 
valuations. 
B. Experiment 2: Measuring Brain Activity 
1)  Experiment Objective 
By measuring the brain activity of participants as they 
take information from the AR+map, map-only and AR-only 
tourism pamphlets, we can investigate which parts of the 
brain are most active. We can also confirm which pamphlet 
was easiest to use through differences in brain activity of 
participants between each pamphlet. 
 
2)  Participants 
We conducted the experiment with 19 students from the 
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa. 
 
3)  Materials 
The materials used in the experiment were  
a) the three tourism pamphlets (AR+map tourism 
pamphlet, the map-only pamphlet, and the AR-only 
pamphlet), 
b) 
the 
three 
information 
sheets 
(information 
corresponding to each of the three pamphlets), 
c) a laptop equipped with a webcam, and 
d) a brain-activity measuring device (NIRStation, a 
multichannel 
near-infrared 
spectroscopy 
brain-activity 
measuring device).  
As shown in Fig. 9, NIRStation measures changes in 
blood volume in the surface area of the cerebrum using 
optic fibers at the scalp to emit near-infrared light. Blood 
volume (oxyhemoglobin, oxy-Hb) is increased to send more 
oxygen to active parts of the brain. Near-infrared light 
enters 25–30 mm below the scalp and travels along the 
cerebral cortex and decays during a cycle of diffusion and 
absorption before returning in part to the scalp. From the 
light absorption levels and light path length in the oxy-Hb, 
we can detect changes in blood volume (indicating activity). 
As the equipment is non-invasive and unrestrictive for the 
wearer, it is possible to use the equipment in long and 
repeated measurements. 
 
4)  f-NIRStation Setup 
As seen in Figs. 9 and 10, using the summits of the 
triangles formed by the eye sockets and auricles, the 
headgear follows the latitudes provided by the 10-20 system 
for brain activity between the 6ch and 11ch of the left brain, 
and between the 29ch and 34ch of the right brain, allowing 
for measurement of each channel. The number of channels 
in f-NIRStation was set to 44. 
AR-only
AR+map
map-only
Estimated marginal means(EMMEANS)
AR-only
AR+map
map-only
Estimated marginal means(EMMEANS)
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 9. Measurements using the brain activity measuring device 
(NIRStation). 
 
Figure 10. Corresponding brain position and channel numbers 
 
5)  Experimental Method 
Brain activity was measured in the participants as they 
reviewed information in the tourism pamphlet for a duration 
of 1 minute. Before receiving the information, we 
established a 20-second rest (no action or thinking) period. 
This allowed us to determine the difference between the 
brain’s activity during the rest period and during the task. 
The participants were given each pamphlet for 1 minute. 
The order of the pamphlets was changed for each participant 
to prevent order bias. 
 
6)  Process 
Each participant was provided with a chart describing 
the process and a laptop with a Web camera for use with the 
AR+map pamphlet and AR-only pamphlet, with the AR 
application already prepared. For the map-only pamphlet, 
they were provided with only the pamphlet and the 
accompanying information sheet. Of the five sightseeing 
locations provided on each pamphlet, the participants were 
asked to select three. We had them repeat this three times 
for a total of nine places. We also provided information 
sheets about these locations. 
IV. 
BRAIN ACTIVITY MEASUREMENT RESULTS  
A.  Statistical Analysis of Brain Activity Measurement 
Results (Average Values) 
With f-NIRStation, it is possible to output the brain 
activity values during rest compared with the values during 
the task as a t-statistic. Using these t-statistics, we can 
perform a statistical analysis using PASW Statistic. The 
percentage of significant variations is within 5%. The 
Bonferroni method was used simultaneously for multiple 
comparisons.  
f-NIRStation outputs data for one experiment in 44 
channels for each activity. Since the experiment was 
performed three times, there are three instances of data for 
all 44 channels for each participant. Using PASW Statistic, 
we were able to obtain the average value of all channels of 
brain activity for each of the map-only, AR-only and 
AR+map pamphlets and search for any significant 
variations between the three. 
 
Figure 11. Differences in average brain activity between pamphlet 
types. 
 
As a result, we were able to confirm significant 
variations between the types of pamphlet. The bar graph in 
Fig. 11 shows the average amounts of brain activity. The 
figure shows that there is significant variation in brain 
activity for the AR+map and AR-only pamphlets. The 
descending order of average brain activity is AR-only > 
map-only > AR+map.  
When using the AR-only pamphlet, the brain activity 
increased. As there was no map, we conjecture that 
participants were required to carefully read the information 
sheets and to pay close attention to the sightseeing location. 
We can conclude that for purposes of stimulating the brain, 
the AR-only pamphlet is most suitable. 
There was little brain activity for the AR+map pamphlet. 
We postulate that this is because the pamphlet can be 
reviewed in a passive manner. When one is passively 
performing an action, brain activity is less than that when 
one is actively performing an action. As the AR will display 
the sightseeing location in 3DCG, it seems that one can 
comprehend the pamphlet without reading the additional 
information. We can conclude that for the purposes of not 
over-stimulating the brain, the AR+map pamphlet is most 
suitable. 
 
B. Considerations Regarding Brain Activity Measurement 
Figure 12 displays the parts of the brain assigned to the 
channels of f-NIRStation, the brain activity measurement 
device used. 
Sections 1 through 14 in Fig. 12 correspond to the 
following areas of the brain: ①left dorsolateral prefrontal 
AR-only
map-only
AR+map
Average amounts of brain activity
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

cortex, ②left inferior frontal gyrus, ③left angular gyrus, ④
left superior frontal gyrus, ⑤left frontotemporal region, ⑥
left superior parietal lobule, ⑦left motor cortex, ⑧right 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, ⑨right inferior frontal gyrus, 
⑩right angular gyrus,⑪right superior frontal gyrus, ⑫right 
frontotemporal region, ⑬right superior parietal lobule, ⑭ 
right motor cortex. 
 
Figure 12. f-NIRStation’s channels in relation to portions of the brain 
 
Parts in which significant variance was observed are 
aggregated in Fig. 13. From left to right, each bar graph 
represents the results for the AR+map, map-only, and AR-
only pamphlets. The bars display activity during the task as 
being in the plus-end, and at rest as being in the minus-end. 
The plus-ends of the graphs are proportionate to the amount 
of brain activity, while the minus-end is inversely 
proportionate. 
 
Figure 13. Areas in which significant variation was observed 
 
As seen by looking at each part in Fig. 13, significant 
variances were detected in ⑩ the right angular gyrus, ⑬the 
right superior parietal lobule, ⑪ the right superior frontal 
gyrus, ③ the left angular gyrus, ② the left inferior frontal 
gyrus, ④ the left superior frontal gyrus, and ⑤ the left 
frontotemporal region; however, after employing the 
Bonferroni method, we discovered there were no significant 
variations between types of pamphlet in the right superior 
frontal gyrus. 
 
1) The angular gyrus (③ and ⑩) is the parts of the brain 
responsible for language processing, particularly for 
figurative expressions and conjecturing [10]. When the parts 
of the brain are categorized, they are often grouped with the 
visual cortex. As seen in Fig. 13, the order of amount of 
activity descends in the order AR-only > AR with map > 
map-only. We postulate that with the AR-only pamphlet, the 
participants were able to confirm the contents of the 
information sheets using the 3DCG. Additionally, the AR 
allowed the participants to see the tourist locations before 
their own eyes and move around them freely. We believe it 
is possible that the AR gives the sensation that they are in 
fact in the place, rather than just viewing 3DCG on a screen. 
We believe it is for these reasons that the brain was more 
active for the AR-only pamphlet. 
 
2) Significant variation was only detected in the right of 
the superior parietal lobules (⑬). The parietal lobe is the 
part of the brain responsible for somatic sensations related 
to spatial reasoning. The right parietal lobe is concerned 
with input. As seen in Fig. 13, the order of amount of 
activity in the right parietal lobe descends in the order AR-
only > AR with map > map-only. This part of the brain 
inputs information related to deciphering the spatial image 
and location of the 3DCG from the AR-only pamphlet (the 
image appears in front of the eyes rather than one simply on 
top of a map). We postulate that the brain activity was low 
for the map-only pamphlet as one only had to read the 
information sheets, which required little input from the 
parietal lobe. 
 
3) The left and right superior frontal gyrus (④ and ⑪) is 
part of the working memory [11] that deals with spatial 
cognizance and allows us to concentrate. As seen in Fig. 13, 
the order of the amount of activity in the superior frontal 
gyrus descends in the order map-only > AR-only > AR and 
map. As activity in this area was greatest for the map-only 
pamphlet, more concentration was required to closely read 
the supplied material as there was no 3DCG. We postulate 
that for that reason, the map-only pamphlet made the 
working memory more active. 
 
4) Significant activity was detected only in the left 
frontotemporal region (⑤). The temporal lobe is responsible 
for understanding spoken language and grasping meaning 
and form. As seen in Fig. 13, the amount of activity 
descends in the order AR-only > map-only > AR and map, 
with the AR-only pamphlet inducing the most activity. We 
②
④
⑨
⑪
⑤
⑦
①
③
⑥
⑭
⑧
⑫
⑬
⑩
②
⑪
⑤
④
③
⑬
⑩
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

can postulate that by looking at computer graphics, our 
brain works harder at perceiving the form of an object. We 
believe that the activity was lowest for the AR+map 
pamphlet as the meaning and form of objects was easier to 
perceive and required less reasoning. 
V. 
OVERALL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
The objectives of this paper were to use AR with a map 
created by the researchers to examine any effect on interest 
of the observers in the field of tourism, to examine the 
compatibility of AR with tourism pamphlets, and to 
consider the effectiveness of AR with a typical tourism 
pamphlet. 
We first performed an experiment using a questionnaire 
to obtain subjective opinions on the information received 
about sightseeing locations. It was found that ease of 
comprehension 
(based 
on 
differences 
in 
averages) 
descended in the order AR+map > map-only > AR-only. It 
is highly probable that the AR-only pamphlet had the lowest 
valuation because participants were unfamiliar with how to 
manipulate the pamphlet. It is believed that with the 
AR+map pamphlet, the locations of the sightseeing 
locations were conveyed in an intuitive manner. As such, 
the AR+map pamphlet was easiest to understand. 
The interest in the locations (based on differences in 
averages) was found to descend in the order AR+map > AR-
only > map-only. The map-only pamphlet failed in 
capturing interest when compared with the two pamphlets 
implementing AR.   
We conducted another experiment to observe trends in 
brain activity and monitor any differences between the types 
of pamphlet. From the results, we can form the following 
conclusions for the combination of the map and AR. 
1) In terms of spatial cognizance, combining AR with the 
map induced significantly less brain activity than using AR 
alone. We believe that this reduces stress on the brain. 
2) In terms of working memory and grasping the 
significance/form of objects, a combination of AR and the 
map induced less brain activity than just one or the other 
alone.  
3) The overall brain activity descended in the order AR-
only > map-only > AR+map; this trend of brain activity 
applied to the whole brain. 
From the above points, we see that the AR+map 
pamphlet created the least stress in inputting the 
significance and form of objects into the working memory, 
leading us to believe that the combination of AR and a map 
(when used to convey location information) is effective not 
just when applied to tour pamphlets. 
VI. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE PROSPECTS 
 
We were able to grasp the features specific to each type 
of tourism pamphlet: one with a standard map, one with AR 
only, and one combining the map with AR. 
We 
demonstrated 
that 
there 
was 
predominance 
particularly in the combination of the map and AR over the 
traditional map pamphlet. By conducting an experiment 
where we measured the participants’ brain activities, we 
confirmed that the burden on spatial cognizance and 
working memory, and throughout the rest of the brain, was 
reduced with the map and AR combination. Additionally, 
we confirmed that the combination drew far more interest 
than the map-only pamphlet. 
In previous practical studies of AR in foreign-language 
studies, the results for AR studies were much the same, 
demonstrating that AR allows for study with reduced stress. 
In our research, though we were able to demonstrate that 
combining map information and AR increased interest and 
reduced stress, there was much that we were unable to 
confirm, such as how long the information lasts in the mid-
range memory.  
We are also interested in the differences between AR 
devices, for example a PC, Smartphone and head mount 
display. The effectiveness of AR may depend on the device 
type. We are thus planning to conduct more studies in this 
realm of research. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D.W.F. van Kreveren and R. Poelman, “A Survey of 
Augmented 
Reality 
Technologies, 
Application 
and 
Limitations”, The International Journal of Virtual Reality, 
2010, 9(2) :1-20 Rekimoto et al., “All about Augmented 
Reality”, Nikkei Coomunicatio, NikkeiBP, 2009 
[2] Akihito Kobayashi, “AR - Augmented Reality”, Mainichi 
Communications, 2010 
[3] Pan, Zhigeng et al., Transactions on Edutainment V, Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 6530, Springer 2011 
[4] Tomotsugu Kondo, “Educational Applications of Mixed 
Reality Technology and Current Issues”, Technical report of 
IEICE, vol. 106, Institute of Electronics, Information and 
Communication Engineers, 45-50, 2006 
[5] Aurkene Alzua-Sorzabal, María Teresa Linaza and Marina 
Abad, “An Experimental Usability Study for Augmented 
Reality Technologies in the Tourist Sector” , Information and 
Communication Technologies in Tourism 2007 2007, pp 231-
242 
[6] Yuji Teshima and Daisuke Kosugi, “A Development of 
Educational Materials for Children Using Augmented 
Reality”, IEICE Transactions IEICE Transactions, Vol. J92-D, 
Institute of Electronics, Information and Communication 
Engineers, 2067-2071, 2009 
[7] Tadashi  Miyosawa, Mayuko Akahane, Kentaro Hara, and 
Kikunori Shinohara, “Applying Augmented Reality to E-
Learning for Foreign Language Study and its Evaluation”, 
Proceedings Of The 2012 International Conference On E-
Learning, E-Business, Enterprise Information Systems, & 
E-Government 
[8] Hirokazu Kato, “ARToolKit: Library for Vision-based 
Augmented Reality”, Technical report of IEICE, Institute of 
Electronics, Information and Communication Engineers, 
PRMU 2001-232 (2002-2) 
[9] Daisuke Harada, “New: Starting from Metasequoia”, Gijyutsu 
hyoronnsa, 2009 
[10] Shun-ichi Amari, “Language and Thought in the Brain”, 
University of Tokyo Press, 2008 
[11] Baddeley, A. “Working Memory”, Oxford University Press, 
1986 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

