Agile and Reliable Design Decisions Based on the Perception of the Target Audience 
Waumap Plataform: Methodological Tool to Involve Potential Consumers in the Design Process  
 
Raquel Marzo Roselló 
Instituto de Biomecánica 
IBV 
Valencia, Spain 
e-mail: raquel.marzo@ibv.org 
Adrián Colomer Granero 
Universitat Politècnica de València 
UPV 
Valencia, Spain 
e-mail: adcogra@upv.es
 
 
Abstract—The conceptualization phase of a product plays a 
critical role in the design process as the decisions made during 
this phase directly affect the competitiveness of the product. 
During this phase, making decisions correctly becomes a very 
important activity for the company. However, decisions made 
during this phase often rely on subjective opinions, leading to 
uncertainty and errors, and consequently, high failure rates in 
the launch of new products. Few companies conduct user 
research studies due to the substantial time and cost 
investment, requisite expertise, technological resources, and 
access to adequately representative user samples necessary to 
obtain robust and reliable insights into people' preferences. 
This complexity makes such studies impractical for everyday 
design decision-making. In this context, this paper presents a 
methodological tool that allows companies to make objective 
decisions in the early phases of their design process. This tool 
takes advantage of the potential of Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
to analyze in a standardized, agile and autonomous way the 
perception of the consumer expressed naturally by a 
representative sample of remote users, combining classical 
qualitative user research with natural language processing 
techniques. The methodological tool has been validated 
through use cases from companies in different sectors in which 
remote tests have been carried out with representative samples 
of users, showing its suitability to obtain in a robust, reliable, 
agile and economical way the design optimization keys from 
the point of view of market acceptance. 
Keywords- market research solution; user insights; emotion 
design; decision-making; NLP. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The conceptualization phase of a product plays a critical 
role in the design process. The decisions made during this 
phase directly affect the degree of innovation, quality of 
design solutions, costs involved, and overall competitiveness 
of the product. During this stage, companies continuously 
accept and reject options, making it critical to make informed 
and appropriate decisions [1]. However, decision-making 
during this phase largely relies on internal groups and 
collaborative sessions, which are highly subjective and 
influenced by the design team's perceptions, tastes, 
knowledge, and previous experiences [2]. This often leads to 
uncertainty and errors during the design process, which is 
evident from the high failure rates of Fast-Moving Consumer 
Goods (FMCG) launches. Nielsen [3] reports that 76% of 
FMCG launches fail in their first year of life, primarily due 
to the failure to address consumer needs or frustrations. 
To address this issue, some companies conduct user 
research studies during the strategic definition phase to 
identify design requirements that cater to the needs of their 
target audience. However, these studies employ traditional 
market research methodologies, such as surveys, focus 
groups, and interviews, which are time-consuming and 
expensive. Furthermore, these studies are conducted at the 
beginning of the process, limiting the flexibility to respond to 
market changes in later stages of development. 
Moreover, marketing and user research managers in 
companies face constraints in terms of time and resources 
[4], resulting in a reduced frequency of these studies. 
Delaying involving potential consumers until the final 
validation stage increases the cost of development 
modifications significantly. According to Forrester [5], the 
cost of fixing a design problem after launch is 100 times 
higher than if it had been identified and rectified in the early 
stages of development. 
When studies are conducted during the design phase, 
companies typically employ cost-effective and swift 
techniques, such as surveys or AB tests. While these 
methods allow companies to decide on a design alternative 
among several options, they fail to provide information on 
the reasons for the preference or the related design elements, 
limiting the scope for maximizing customer satisfaction. In 
this context, there are user research techniques that focus not 
only on investigating user preferences but also on 
transferring them to the design elements of the product, such 
as Kansei Engineering, Conjoint analysis or the Repertory 
Grid Technique [6]. Another type of techniques used to 
design products are neuroscientific techniques, which allow 
us to know the influence of different attributes of the product 
(color, packaging...) on target audience’ impact [7], being 
EEG and eyetracking the most used by researchers [8]. The 
drawback of this type of techniques is that they require slow 
and expensive research work with users, as well as an 
analysis and interpretation of complex results for the daily 
decision making of companies during their design process, 
an aspect that goes against the need to reduce launch times 
due to the continuous reduction of product life cycles. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2024.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-100-8
CENTRIC 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 1.  Waumap test AB eye tracking report 
For this reason, the development of a user-centered 
design methodological tool is planned to allow companies to 
make objective and reliable decisions in early phases of the 
product development process, replacing the most frequent 
approaches of decision-making based on intuition. 
The main hypothesis of this research work was that the 
remote 
capture 
and 
subsequent 
automated 
analysis, 
employing AI algorithms, of the naturally expressed 
perception of a representative sample of potential users when 
faced with certain design alternatives, would obtain, in a 
simple and agile way for companies, key indicators for the 
optimization of the design in relation to market acceptance. 
While remote testing has inherent limitations, particularly the 
inability to present the physical product, it is deemed a 
favorable approach for approximating the capture of users' 
initial impressions during the early stages of development. 
In order to achieve the proposed hypothesis, a 
methodological tool that incorporates AI has been developed 
using the “Customer Development” methodology [9], as 
explained in section II. Section III describes the results of 11 
use cases from companies in different sectors and section IV, 
the reliability and robustness of the tool. Finally, the 
conclusions and future work of the study are shown in 
section V. 
 
II. 
A NEW METHODOLOGICAL TOOL FOR INCLUDING 
POTENTIAL CONSUMERS IN THE DESIGN PROCESS 
This section describes the tool developed, as well as the 
methodology followed for its development, considering the 
market problem. 
A. Final Design of the Methodological Tool for Design 
Decision Making 
To address the need for more efficient and effective 
methods for including users in the product development 
process, the Instituto de Biomecánica (IBV) has developed 
the Waumap methodological tool [13]. IBV has more than 
40 years of experience providing advisory services to 
companies for designing target audience-oriented products 
using the People Oriented Innovation (IOP) methodology 
[6]. 
This tool helps companies to make design decisions in 
early phases. It allows companies to carry out design testing 
with a representative sample of their target audience, 
obtaining key indicators for optimizing the design from the 
point of view of maximizing its positive perception. 
Waumap tool utilizes AI to analyze consumer 
perceptions of various design alternatives in a standardized, 
agile, and autonomous manner, allowing companies to make 
reliable and objective decisions during their design 
processes.  
 
The Waumap study is conducted in three simple steps: 
 
1. Defining the test based on two images or videos and 
the characteristics of the target audience. The test 
comprises a survey (with concepts defined by the 
company) and analysis of natural language using 
AI from open opinions expressed freely. Eye-
tracking may also be incorporated. 
2. Launching the remote study to a database of 
potential users that fit the defined profile. 
3. Automatically generating a report, which can be 
received within 7 days of launching the study. 
Figure 1 shows an example of a Waumap report. 
The Waumap report provides information on the 
factors driving preference and the emotions evoked 
by each design alternative through opinion polarity 
analysis. The eye-tracking feature generates heat 
maps displaying the areas of greatest visual 
attention. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2024.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-100-8
CENTRIC 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

The table below provides a detailed description of the 
methodology to obtain the key variables of the Waumap 
report by automatically recording and analyzing user 
perceptions. 
TABLE I.  
WAUMAP METHODOLOGY 
Variables 
Recording techniques 
Analysis techniques 
Areas 
of 
greatest 
visual 
attention 
Gaze 
tracking 
recording via webcam. 
IBV's 
own 
programming 
using OpenCV Models. 
Emotions 
(positive-
negative-
mixed-
neutral) 
Recording 
of 
first 
impression expressed 
in a natural way, either 
by voice or text. 
- 
Amazon 
Transcribe. 
Amazon 
Web 
Services 
(AWS) 
automatic 
speech 
recognition 
service 
that 
facilitates 
speech-to-text 
conversion. It provides the 
transcribed text, as well as 
confidence scores between 0 
and 1 (self-assessments by the 
service on how well it may 
have transcribed the text). It is 
used to convert the first 
impression 
expressed 
naturally by voice into text. 
- Amazon Comprehend. AWS 
natural language processing 
(NLP) service that allows, 
using 
machine 
learning 
techniques, to analyze and 
understand the meaning of 
text in different languages. 
Specifically, the Waumap tool 
uses the "Detect Sentiment" 
function, which analyzes the 
text 
and 
determines 
the 
polarity of the sentiment, i.e. 
whether the text is positive, 
negative, neutral or mixed. 
This 
function 
returns 
an 
inference of the predominant 
sentiment and provides for 
each sentiment the probability 
between 0 to 1 that it has been 
correctly detected.  
 
Key factors 
Closed survey with 
concepts, to know the 
perception 
of 
the 
design alternative in 
some 
concepts 
predefined 
by 
the 
company. The ordinal 
Likert 
scale 
of 
5 
categories has been 
defined, as it is the 
most used scale in 
market research and 
easy to answer (Likert, 
1932), being 1 the 
value associated with 
the most disagreement 
(e.g., I do not like it at 
all) and 5 the value 
associated 
with 
the 
most agreement (e.g., I 
like it a lot). 
 
Calculation of the total % of 
participants 
with 
answers 
classified as positive grouped 
in Top 2 Box value, i.e., 
percentage of people who 
select for each survey concept 
the two most positive values. 
Variables 
Recording techniques 
Analysis techniques 
Favorite 
design 
alternative 
Prioritization of design 
alternatives, 
clicking 
on 
the 
favorite 
stimulus. 
Calculation 
of 
% 
of 
participants 
selecting 
and 
discarding 
each 
design 
alternative as favorite. 
Reasons for 
choice and 
discard 
Justification 
of 
the 
reasons 
for 
the 
prioritization of design 
alternatives, expressed 
in a natural way by 
text. 
- Natural Language Toolkit 
(NLTK). A set of Python 
libraries and programs that 
facilitate 
natural 
language 
processing, 
such 
as 
the 
"nltk.corpus" library which 
provides access to a variety of 
corpora 
(text 
datasets). 
Among them is "Stopwords" 
which contains a predefined 
list of common words that do 
not provide value for text 
compression, such as articles, 
prepositions and conjunctions. 
- Wordcloud. Python function 
that 
generates 
a 
visual 
representation of the words in 
a text, where the size of each 
word represents its frequency. 
Prior to such visualization, 
natural language processing is 
required, 
such 
as 
the 
elimination of common words 
with 
the 
"Stopwords" 
function. 
In the Waumap tool, word 
clouds are represented for the 
selection and discard reasons 
for each design. 
 
B. Definition of a Methodological Tool taking into account 
Market Needs 
The development of this tool was carried out using the 
“Customer Development” methodology, which aims to 
understand the market problem and validate that the 
proposed solution will indeed meet customer needs and 
demand, reducing business risks by testing hypothesis [9]. 
Firstly, hypothesis about its company profile and value 
proposition were defined, using the “Business Model 
Canvas” template, a visual chart with elements describing a 
new business model [10]. On the other hand, hypotheses 
about the companies' problem and the possible solution were 
specified. These hypotheses were classified following the 
model proposed by Josh Seiden [11], based on risk and 
uncertainty, 
for 
prioritization 
when 
validating 
with 
companies: 
• 
Risk. 
If 
the 
hypothesis 
were 
false, 
the 
methodological tool would have a high risk of not 
achieving market acceptance. The classification 
based on risk has been carried out at expert 
criterion. 
• 
Uncertainty. A hypothesis with high uncertainty is a 
hypothesis with a high unknown (lack of data) 
regarding its truth or falsity. To classify the 
hypotheses based on uncertainty, a state of the art 
on decision making in the design process of 
companies has been carried out. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2024.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-100-8
CENTRIC 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

After the definition and prioritization of the hypotheses 
related to market acceptance, test cards [11] were developed 
for the definition of the experiments to be carried out to 
validate the most critical hypotheses and with greater 
uncertainty. In the experiments, Minimum Viable Products 
(MVP) of Waumap tool were used. 
To validate these hypotheses, from the beginning of the 
research work, a sample of 11 Valencian companies with 
variability in sectors and type of products (food, distribution, 
home, 
clothing, 
cleaning, 
advertising 
and 
tourism) 
collaborated and were interviewed after the experiments. The  
interviews lasted 30 minutes and followed the guidelines 
recommended in the book “Lean Customer Development” 
[9].  
Table II shows the results of the hypothesis validation. 
TABLE II.  
RESULTS OF THE HYPOTHESIS VALIDATION 
Hypothesis 
Experiment results 
The Waumap results are useful 
for its decision making 
True. 
8 of the 11 companies (> 60%) 
affirmed that waumap results are 
credible and clear for its decision 
making. 
Waumap tests help the company 
in its decision-making processes 
True. 
10 of the 11 companies (> 60%) 
named design problems of their 
company to test with waumap. 
Companies 
have 
adequate 
material to evaluate different 
design alternatives in Waumap 
True. 
8 of the 11 companies (>60%) 
provided stimuli of a design 
problem relevant to their company 
Waumap fits into the company's 
daily taks (actions to be carried 
out, availability...) 
True 
8 of the 11 companies (> 60%) 
completed 
the 
configuration 
process of a Waumap test and 
valued its ease of use. 
 
Another parameter to be defined prior to the final 
development of the tool was the sample size. To optimize the 
number of users needed to obtain reliable conclusions, a pilot 
study with 5 Waumap tests was conducted to estimate the 
effect size of the variable "favorite design alternative” (see 
Table I). Table III shows the value of this variable in the 5 
tests. 
TABLE III.  
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE PREFERENCE OF DESIGN 
ALTERNATIVES 
Waumap Tests 
Favorite 
design 
alternative 
Preference 
differences 
Casual footwear Test 
Stimulus A 
by 52% 
4% (52%-48%) 
Advertising 
campaigns 
Test 
Stimulus A 
by 57% 
14% (57%-43%) 
Cleaning products Test 
Stimulus A 
by 65% 
30% (65%-35%) 
Hotel rooms Test 
Stimulus A 
by 75% 
50% (75%-25%) 
Pasta dishes Test 
Stimulus A 
by 75% 
50% (75%-25%) 
After obtaining the results of the tests, it was deemed 
appropriate to establish an objective with the aim of 
detecting substantial differentials exceeding 30% in 
preference among design alternatives. This objective 
pertains, in particular, to the assessment of designs 
conducted in the context of the “cleaning products Test”, 
which serves as a representative archetype of the design 
category slated for evaluation using the Waumap tool, 
primarily intended for novel product concept assessment. 
The appropriate formula [12] with the data of “cleaning 
products test” was applied for experimental designs (contrast 
test) in which non-parametric statistical tests are applied 
(X2). 
 
 
Cohen's tables [4] were consulted for a test power of 
75%, =0.05 (95% confidence level), u=1 (2 designs 
alternatives -1) and W=0,3, obtaining n=75 users. 
 
Figure 2.   Cohen tables for sample size stimation. 
III. 
USER COMPANIES' FEEDBACK OF THE WAUMAP TOOL 
FOR PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 
After 
conducting 
the 
“Customer 
Development” 
methodology with the collaborating companies, the potential 
company profile of the methodological tool, and their needs 
and demands were identified (Table IV). 
TABLE IV.  
COMPANY PROFILE, NEEDS AND DEMANDS 
Sectors 
Food, distribution and cleaning. 
Tourism and advertising. 
Main activity 
Development of consumer goods, 
excluding commodity products. 
Tourism and advertising services. 
Other features 
• High billing 
• High investment in R&D before 
product launch or high product 
rotation. 
• Restless, eager to innovate 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2024.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-100-8
CENTRIC 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

• Currently carrying out some 
testing before launch, even if it is 
internally. 
• Awared that company could 
improve its decision making in the 
design. 
Needs/problems 
• 
Most 
companies 
claim 
to 
currently spend a lot of time and 
effort making decisions in the 
design and launch of products. 
• They have a lot of uncertainty 
about the success of new product 
launches (a company claims that 9 
out of 10 products fail). 
• In general, companies say they 
do not have the budget to carry 
out market studies that allow them 
to 
predict 
market 
acceptance 
before launch (in addition, these 
types of studies usually have long 
deadlines and do not fit into their 
processes). 
Demands/solutions 
Companies would like a solution 
that would allow them… 
• Reduce the risk of development 
due to non-acceptance by the 
market. 
• 
Decide/discriminate 
between 
different design alternatives. 
• Know the value proposition of 
their products/services and also 
the points for improvement. 
 
Furthermore, the Waumap methodological tool has been 
validated through various use cases with the 11 collaborating 
companies. These cases involved remote testing with 
representative user samples, which demonstrated the tool's 
effectiveness in obtaining the keys to design optimization. 
Companies appreciate the tool's simplicity, intuitiveness, and 
agility, especially in the areas of new product concepts, 
supermarket shelf (physical and/or virtual), packaging, and 
corporate image. 
The Waumap results have provided valuable insights in 
the decision-making process, allowing companies to access a 
representative sample of users remotely and reduce costs in 
user recruitment, testing, and prototype development. 
Companies also appreciate the short period of time it takes to 
obtain results, with reports typically available within a week. 
The report's clarity and ease of understanding not only helps 
companies make decisions but also justifies them internally 
and to B2B clients. 
The preference keys obtained through natural language 
processing analysis provide the most value in decision-
making, enabling companies to understand the reasons for 
preference/rejection and their relationship with the design 
elements.  
IV. 
REALIABILITY AND ROBUSTNESS OF WAUMAP  
This section describes the conducted analyses to show 
the suitability of the tool for obtaining design optimization 
keys in a reliable and robust manner. 
A. Reliability of Waumap Tool 
To demonstrate the reliability of the tool, a comparative 
analysis of the results obtained through a test developed with 
the Waumap tool and through a classic market research study 
(two focus groups) was carried out. In these studies, two 
sauce labels were assessed as design alternatives (Figure 3). 
It is worth mentioning that the focus groups were carried 
out by one of the collaborating companies (Choví), as this 
was the methodology they commonly used for this type of 
design problems and the results were not shared until 
Waumap test was completed. 
 
Figure 3.   Design alternatives evaluated in the comparative study. 
The results obtained with both tests were identical, 
obtaining the same design as a favorite and the same reasons 
for choice and discard. 
The comparative study has made it possible not only to 
demonstrate the reliability of the results, but also to 
demonstrate the advantages of Waumap tool over traditional 
studies, as the results are obtained in a much more agile, 
simple and economical way (see Table V). 
TABLE V.  
COMPARISON BETWEEN WAUMAP TEST AND FOCUS 
GROUPS 
Waumap Test 
2 focus groups 
N=75 users 
N=14 users 
Reporting deadline: 3 days 
Reporting deadline: 3 weeks  
Staff hours: 2,5 hours 
Staff hours: 45 hours 
User gratification cost: 225 euros 
User gratification cost: 420 euros 
B. Robustness of Waumap Tool 
To demonstrate the robustness of the tool, the perception 
results of a sauce packaging, assessed in two different 
Waumap tests with different samples of users and in 
different time periods were compared (Figure 4). 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2024.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-100-8
CENTRIC 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 4.   Design evaluated in two Waumap tests. 
The results related to the first impressions expressed 
naturally 
extracted 
by 
natural 
language 
processing 
algorithms were similar: polarity of the sentiments and word 
clouds. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The analysis of the perception of the consumers who 
have participated in the Waumap’ use cases have allowed to 
show that the automatic analysis of the user's perception 
through AI reduces the time and effort of analysis to generate 
the keys that make it easier for companies to make more 
informed decisions in the design of their products. 
The Waumap tool has a positive impact on the decision-
making process, facilitating better integration of the target 
audience in the product conceptualization phase by a simple, 
intuitive and agile process. Furthermore, this methodological 
tool provides key insights into design optimization from the 
perspective of market acceptance, with particular utility 
evident in the following application domains: new product 
concepts, supermarket shelf (physical and/or virtual), 
packaging and corporate image. 
The following future lines of work have been identified: 
• 
Including more than two design alternatives in 
the Waumap test. 
• 
Exploring sentiment analysis by also analyzing 
tone of voice. 
• 
Obtaining and validating a preference prediction 
model based on sentiment polarity, when more 
data is obtained with future use cases. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the Directorate 
General of Innovation of the Ministry of Innovation, 
Universities, Science and Digital Society, who financed the 
DEMOCRATIOP 
project 
(CONV21/DGINN/10 
and 
CONV22/DGINN/07). Also, we thank the following 
companies: Choví, Costa Brava, Pikolinos, Hosbec, SPB, 
Playfilm, Peronda and Luanvi. The development and 
validation of the Waumap tool would not have been possible 
without the active participation of these companies. Finally, 
we would like to thank José Antonio de Miguel Visa for his 
advice on the development of the Waumap tool using agile 
methodology and Lean Customer Development. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. C. Bernal, “Study on the decision-making process during 
the conceptual phase of product design”. Iconofacto, 2016. 
[2] J. Rasmussen, A. Pejtersen and L. P. Goodstein, “Cognitive 
engineering systems”. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1994. 
[3] R. Nielsen, “Nielsen Breakthrough Innovation Report”, 
European Edition, 2014. 
[4] I. Bortels, “Are we facing a 'revival' of qualitative research?” 
I&A. Investigación y Marketing, 2019. 
[5] R. K. Souza, "Get ROI from Design". Cambridge: Forrester 
Research, 2001. 
[6] Instituto 
de 
Biomecánica, 
New 
techniques 
for 
the 
development of innovative user-oriented products, 2001. 
[7] K. Ploom, K. Pentus, A. Kuusik and U. Varblane, “The effect 
of culture on the perception of product packaging: a 
multimethod cross-cultural study”. J. Int. Cons. Market. 32, 
1–15, 2019. 
[8] L. Alvino, “Picking Your Brains: Where and How 
Neuroscience Tools Can Enhance Marketing Research”. 
Frontiers in Neuroscience, 2020. 
[9] C. Alvarez, Lean Customer Development: Building Products 
Your Customers Will Buy, 2017. 
[10] A. Osterwalder, Value Proposition Design - How to Create 
Products and Services Customers Want, 2014. 
[11] J. Seiden, Lean UX: Designing Great Products with Agile 
Teams, 2016. 
[12] N. Cohen, Statistical Power Analysis for the behavioral 
Sciences. Academic Press, Inc., 1977. 
[13] https://waumap.ibv.org/, retrieved on 2023. 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2024.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-100-8
CENTRIC 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

