Narrative Semantic Media for Contextual Individualization  
of Ambient Learning Spaces 
 
David Bouck-Standen, Alexander Ohlei, Thomas Winkler, Michael Herczeg 
Institute for Multimedia and Interactive Systems 
University of Luebeck 
Luebeck, Germany 
email: [bouck-standen, ohlei, winkler, herczeg]@imis.uni-luebeck.de 
 
Abstract— Digital conservation and transformation of cultural 
content and cultural property are constantly increasing. In our 
research project Ambient Learning Spaces, funded for seven 
years by the German Research Foundation, we developed a 
user-centered scenario to individualize and personalize user 
experience through the use of what we call Narrative Semantic 
Media. In this context, museum exhibits installations and 
objects like fossils are digitally augmented into interactive 
objects for the visitors. Using the visitor’s personal mobile 
devices, our solution embeds the visitor into a flexible, self-
adapting narrative structure motivating a self-directed 
discovery, which creates an Ambient Learning Space inside the 
museum. The applications we develop running on visitors’ 
mobiles connect to our web- and service-based platform, the 
Network Environment for Multimedia Objects, a framework 
that also collects usage and interaction statistics, which are used 
to personalize the visitors’ user experience.  
Keywords-Museum; Narratives; Semantic Media; informal 
learning; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In contemporary approaches, aspects of our cultural 
property are more and more commemorated by the means of 
digitalization. Today, any physical object can somehow be 
transformed into digital media, such as texts, scans, pictures, 
audio, video footage, or 3D objects [1][2]. These media can 
be attributed and interconnected within a dynamic information 
model. For such information models, semantic classification 
systems for museums, already exist [3].  
The transformation from physical to digital space changes 
the means and expectations, by which exhibits are preserved, 
augmented, 
interconnected, 
and 
made 
accessible. 
Consequently, this will enrich, support and change human 
perception and receptions of the exhibits. Therefore, the 
individual visitors play an increasingly important role and 
should be given the opportunity to critically create their own 
perspective of the museum and it exhibits [4]. Thus, they 
become actively and individually involved recipients. 
For more than five years, the Institute for Multimedia and 
Interactive Systems (IMIS) at the University of Luebeck has 
been developing digitally enriched learning environments for 
schools and museums in the research project Ambient 
Learning Spaces (ALS) [5], supported by the German 
Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, 
DFG). In context of ALS, body- and space-related human-
computer interaction, as well as the concept of cross-device 
interaction (XDI), builds the conceptual foundations. For this 
purpose, a family of connected learning applications has been 
developed as the frontend systems for visitors and curators. 
Providing these applications, we focus on self-directed 
learning with interactive media [6].  
In the backend, the Network Environment for Multimedia 
Objects (NEMO) is the platform for all ALS applications [7]. 
NEMO stores all media created by learners in a specific 
semantic model, which supports the use by ALS applications 
and reflects the respective applications context. The ALS 
applications’ run on mobile or stationary devices and access 
NEMO as a contextualized repository. Media created in 
NEMO can be interrelated inside NEMO and will be 
presented to the visitors as augmentations of the physical 
exhibition on different interconnected digital devices like 
smartphones, tablets or large stationary multi-touch screens 
[6]. For the visitors, this creates an individual multi-
perspective experience of the exhibitions based on personal 
dynamic narrative paths. 
Narratives have always played a central role in museum 
didactics. It has been first of all “stories” that, physically, 
verbally, and later also technologically enhanced, guided the 
visitors through the exhibits [8] on a more or less linear path. 
In our project, we chose two very different museums as 
project partners. As testbeds for field studies, we are working 
closely together with the Günter Grass-House (GGH), 
dedicated to late Nobel Prize winner Günter Grass, and the 
Museum of Nature and Environment (MNU). Both museums 
belong to the foundation “Die Lübecker Museen” located in 
the Hanseatic City of Luebeck in Germany and require 
applications, which allow a personal view of the exhibition in 
a multi-perspective way [9]. Thus, any narrations may no 
longer consist of the same and expected, but rather the 
unexpected, alternatives, or evolutions. Museum visitors shall 
be able to actively construct and deconstruct their individual 
and contextualized stories through their interaction in the 
physical museum space. 
In our prototypical implementation, we use web-based 
systems to provide museum visitors with this personal 
narrative experience. In general, regarding the user interfaces, 
these systems are browser-based, with device-specific 
extensions. Our solution allows museum curators, as well as 
other museum professionals, to construct the digital 
augmentation of their physical exhibitions. Inside the 
museum, visitors will use InfoGrid as one of our ALS 
applications on their own mobile devices they are already 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

accustomed to [10]. InfoGrid [11] augments physical objects 
of the exhibition with digital media, e.g., by augmented reality 
(AR) and guides visitors through the exhibition by what we 
call Narrative Semantic Media (NSM). Museum visitors will 
also use the InteractiveWall [6], a software system for large 
multi-touch displays containing applications, e.g., displaying 
media from ALS. 
Our solution utilizes a concept of semantically enriching 
media in a particular way. All media handled through NEMO 
are modeled as NSM. NSM consists of media, such as text, 
still images, audio, video footage, or 3D objects, which 
NEMO stores as binary data. In NEMO, they are enriched by 
semantic attributions. The semantic attributions consist of a 
basic set of annotations, which are used internally by NEMO, 
as well as an extended set of annotations, which are specific 
for the context the media object is dedicated to. This context 
is projected into the semantic model for, e.g., the GGH or 
MNU, which we focus upon in more detail below. The 
semantic annotations describe the content and define its place 
in the semantic model. Although pedagogical and user-related 
implications with regard to narrations exist, in this 
contribution we focus on the technical solution. 
In this contribution, in Section 2, we regard related work. 
In Section 3, we illustrate our research scenario. In Section 4, 
we outline the system architecture. In Section 5, we describe 
the use of narrative semantic media in museums, and discuss 
results from the pre-evaluation and validation in Section 6. In 
Section 7, we present the conclusion and outlook. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
With our work, we focus on dynamic individual 
narratives, as well as the question of the possible influence of 
technology on the self-conception and the role of museums. 
Visitors entering a museum will come with substantial 
knowledge with potential references from and to the museum. 
However, depending on the individual, the type of museum, 
the exhibition, the level of visitor’s knowledge will range from 
complete novice to expert. Therefore, the most satisfying 
exhibitions for visitors will be those that resonate with their 
own experience and provide information in ways that confirm 
and enrich their personal view of the world. Conflicting 
perceptions induce personal critical reflections that may 
change knowledge and opinions. Visitors want museum visits 
to be inspirational and uplifting, emotionally developmental 
in some way, but also to be picked up with their existing points 
of view [12]. 
By digitally individualizing narrative structures inside the 
museum, new productive relationships between the curator 
and visitors may be established, especially if in the process of 
individualization a visitors profile is used to automatically 
provide the visitors with media potentially referring to the 
visitors’ knowledge and expectations. At the same time, 
however, the massive use of multimedia systems in museums 
are seen critical because of the potential decrease in the role 
and power of physical objects in museums [13]. 
With our work, we focus on using the outcome of the 
process of digitalization of museum content. According to 
Hyvönen [14], publishing linked Cultural Heritage collections 
creates a major challenge for interoperability. With the 
applications developed in ALS, we present a solution to make 
use of digital media collections to extend physical exhibitions 
with digital content. For museum visitors, we provide 
applications, which enable visitors to interact with the 
digitally augmented exhibition in an individual multi-
perspective experience. Enhancing a physical exhibition by 
the means of AR has already been accomplished in various 
related works. As in 2008, Miyashita et al. already presented 
an AR museum guide [15], this approach is not new, but the 
approach presented in this article embeds the visitors into a 
flexible, self-adapting narrative structure and thereby 
performs the augmentation. This also distinguishes our work 
from digital story-telling, like the approaches of Vayanou et 
al. [4], Antoniou et al. [16], Boy et al. [17], or van Dijk et al. 
[18]. These approaches, e.g., have in common to require data 
to be created or especially prepared for use in narrations. 
Although certain elements of our solution have been inspired 
by digital storytelling, our approach automatically generates a 
narration from semantically annotated media with only 
minimal annotations to the artefacts.  
Using NSM through NEMO, the visitor’s experience is 
individualized, making use of a knowledge management 
platform architecture, as Dragoni et al. outlined [19]. 
Distinguishing our solution from the approach of Blumenstein 
et al. [20], the visitors own mobile devices will be integrated 
seamlessly into the museum’s technological ecology while 
accessing NEMO, interconnecting to other technical museum 
systems. We also use the mobile devices to identify the 
museum visitors and thus, personalize their museum 
experience. Other ways of identification will be possible. 
III. 
SCENARIO 
Although this work presents a backend solution, we 
examine the following scenario of human-computer 
interaction to illustrate the backend work: 
Maureen O'Grady enters the Günter Grass-House through 
the shop entrance and buys a ticket. Next to the cash register, 
she notices a poster advertising the mobile app InfoGrid. 
Becoming even more curious, she downloads and installs the 
app on her smartphone. Upon startup, InfoGrid is asking some 
questions related to personal data and preferences. Maureen 
answers them, e.g., by selecting “literature”, “graphic art” and 
“sculpting” from a list of semantic tags suggestions. She also 
specifies that she has an hour time left for her visit to the GGH, 
She finishes this phase after just a minute and finally starts the 
tour “Günter Grass: My Century” within InfoGrid.  
Maureen leaves the shop while InfoGrid displays a hint 
indicating that she can always use the digital tour of “My 
Century” wherever she notices a depicted graphical symbol 
inside the exhibition. For now, she puts her smartphone away 
and continues through the courtyard and from there through a 
glass door into the foyer. On the right wall of the foyer, a large 
shelf with numerous items is attached, the “Cosmos Grass”. 
This is a collection of various items Günter Grass made or 
collected by himself. A sign says, “Please touch”. At the table 
in the middle of the room, the “Curator’s Table”, her 
smartphone suddenly vibrates. She pulls it out of her pocket 
and follows the instructions on the screen of InfoGrid. 
Holding her smartphone in a way that the camera captures the 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Curator's Table through her smartphone, she can see the 
sculpture of “Seven Birds” standing right up on the table like 
being real. Intuitively she tries to grab the virtual sculpture. 
Walking around the table, she looks at the high resolution 
virtual sculpture from all sides. Then, she puts the smartphone 
back into her pocket and, after taking a closer look at the 
"Cosmos Grass" and despite another symbol for “My 
Century”, for which she has not taken out her smartphone 
again, she continues into the next room. 
On the wall of the next room Maureen slowly passes the 
InteractiveWall. She notices how the wall's display suddenly 
changes, just as she approaches the screen. Instead of the 
general information displayed before, a media gallery with 
images and videos gets visible. The gallery is showing Günter 
Grass with some of his tools in his sculpture workshop. 
Maureen is thrilled to see how Günter Grass actually created 
the sculpture “Seven Birds” she had previously viewed from 
all sides as a 3D object in InfoGrid. She continues her way 
through the GGH smiling, as sculpturing is a special interest 
of her as she told InfoGrid earlier. 
Finally, Maureen makes her way to the exit. From a 
distance, she sees how another visitor passes the 
InteractiveWall screen and the content changes again. 
Curious, she comes closer and sees that completely different 
media have been displayed for the other visitor. He notices 
Maureen and they start a conversation about this phenomenon 
and their personal interests. 
IV. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
Museum visitors can use InfoGrid, described in more 
detail by Ohlei et at. [11], to experience information tours at 
specific locations with their own mobile devices. These 
locations can be inside a museum building as well as in urban 
or rural areas. With the help of web-based ALS software, 
curators can create or edit these information tours. The visitors 
can download InfoGrid inside the museum through regular 
Android or iOS app stores. Once installed and started, 
InfoGrid connects to an instance of NEMO on-site and 
displays NSM. NEMO individually selects these NSM for 
each visitor, e.g., from personal preferences the visitors enter 
on startup of InfoGrid. 
InteractiveWall, as introduced by Winkler et al. [6] is a 
web-based application, which runs on systems equipped with 
32”-90“ multi-touch screens. Each installation of the 
InteractiveWall is equipped with a Bluetooth LowEnergy 
beacon, which allows InfoGrid to detect the visitor’s position 
in the physical exhibition. This supports the individualized 
display of content on the InteractiveWall through NEMO, 
e.g., when a visitor is in front of the installation. 
NEMO is a web-based framework for ALS, described by 
Bouck-Standen et al. in more detail [21]. The NEMO API 
provides access for applications, such as InfoGrid, interacting 
through Web Services in an authenticated context over a 
secure connection. The NEMO framework decides which 
media is presented to the visitor depending on multiple 
algorithms.  
V. 
USING NARRATIVE SEMANTIC MEDIA IN MUSEUMS 
The scenario illustrates how InfoGrid guides the user 
through the exhibition. In the following, we describe how with 
the use of NSM, our backend solution provides the necessary 
media for display in InfoGrid.  
At first, Figure 1 shows the annotation sets and included 
tags required for our setup. With the annotations from the 
basic set, the media is described with a subset of annotations 
of the Ontology for Media Resources [22], which is sufficient 
for our purposes. These are compatible with the basic 
Museum Object Documentation, which Dresch and 
Mainberger [22] examine as a link between the real museum 
collection and the digital reflection of a museum. This is also 
utilized in museum documentation systems [3]. These 
implement the relationship between the systems presented in 
this article to museum systems already established. In addition 
to semantic annotations, narrative annotations extend media, 
as depicted in Figure 1. These are required by NEMO in order 
to place NSMs on narrative paths.  
In the following example, a narrative path has a fixed 
length l and consequently consists of l NSMs, which are 
selected by the NEMO applying to a story model. According 
to the visitor’s settings, e.g., depending on the time she or he 
can spend inside the museum, l is varied. The visitors set the 
 
Figure 1. Overview of annotation sets for NSM. 
 
 
Figure 2. Based on visitors’ preferences, history and tracking data, NEMO 
selects NSM in order to guide visitors with InfoGrid and additionally 
controls media displayed other devices in the museums. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

length l on startup of InfoGrid, when the application asks, how 
much time they would like to spend in the exhibition. 
As  
Figure 2 illustrates, NEMO selects Semantic Media based 
on the on-site data, semantic model and visitors input, 
interaction and usage history. By selecting a sequence of 
media and providing them to InfoGrid as a narrative path, the 
mobile app is able to guide the visitors by displaying the 
contents of the NSM to them according to their location inside 
the exhibition. During usage, InfoGrid continuously submits 
data about the visitor’s interactions in a way that NEMO is 
able adjust the selection of media during the visitor’s stay. 
Consequently, visitors do not necessarily follow a preset or 
given path through the museum, but are able to explore 
depending on their interest or intent raised by this digitally 
enriched exhibition. This can result in a possible change of the 
narrative path. 
For the scenarios presented in this article, we focus on a 
basic story model based on arc of suspense [23]. This story 
model is characterized by an introductory start, a part of 
raising tension followed by a climax, an optional phase of 
falling tension (outro) and an end, as illustrated in Figure 3. 
Technically, this requires the NSM to be assigned into these 
phases to determine the position of an NSM on a narrative 
path. In this implementation, the annotation act (see Figure 1) 
positions an NSM with the values of start, end, predecessor, 
successor, and context at the corresponding position of the 
narrative path. There are no special annotations for raising 
tension or climax, to allow those phases to consist of an 
unlimited number of NSM. Thus, the suspense of a narration 
is implicitly modeled by the positions of NSM through the act 
annotation. Other annotations shown in Figure 1, such as e.g., 
ageClass, gender, language, or constraint are used in order to 
select NSMs according to the visitor’s profile. 
The creation of a new narrative for a tour through an 
exhibition begins with the selection of media from the pool of 
media the museum has already semantically annotated. At 
first, for the start of the tour, an NSM has to be selected, which 
Figure 3 illustrates as s1. In the example, the tour should end 
with e1 or e2. For this, these media are annotated with the 
corresponding annotation. Consequently, Figure 3 shows, that 
a visitor can reach two possible ends.  
Having defined the start and end or a tour, all NSMs have 
to be identified the tour may consist from. In this case, there 
are 5 NSMs from the pool of media, which are suitable for the 
exhibition at hand. In this example, the media named f1 and 
h1 have the same structure annotation, and are both as 
successors of s1. The NSM named f2, g1 and h2 are also 
labeled with same structure annotation, which is different 
from f1 and h1. As a result, f1 and h1, as well as f2, g1, and h2 
are grouped in two separate groups, G1 and G2 as Figure 3 
shows. It can be observed from Figure 3, that starting from s1 
the narrative path branches out into f1 or h1. As those NSM to 
follow s1 on the narrative path are set manually, Figure 3 
shows the transition as undashed arrows. For visitors starting 
at s1, NEMO determines which path to take. This depends on 
the semantic annotations mentioned above in context with the 
users’ profile and history. If, e.g., f1 and h1 with a distinct 
ageClass annotation set were to distinguish different age 
classes of visitors, children would follow the path p1=s1, f1, 
whereas adults p2 = s1, h1, for example. Moving from G1, 
which contains NSM to raise tension, to the climax, which all 
NSM selected for G2 represent, the transitions Figure 3 shows 
as dashed arrows are automatically determined by NEMO. For 
this, at first, G2 is automatically aligned in sequence after G1 
due to timeSetting annotations of the NSM. As no other groups 
exist, G3 containing both ends e1 and e2 follows sequentially 
after G2, and the transitions Figure 3 are calculated 
equivalently. Afterwards, for each path leading into G2, from 
semantic and narrative annotations, such as tags, location, or 
constraints, NEMO determines, which NSM follows on the 
paths p1 or p2. In the exemplary abstract case shown in Figure 
3, p1, e.g., may be extended by both f2 and g1, as g1 can be 
served both age classes mentioned above. This results in 7 
possible narrative paths of length l=4. 
At any point, other additional transitions could be defined 
manually by adjusting the successor or predecessor 
annotation in act of the corresponding NSM. This provides the 
means to directly adjust narrative paths.  
The length l>=4 can be chosen by the visitor. However, a 
predefined narrative path with l=10 may be shortcut by 
visitors who lack time for completing the tour in full. In this 
case, the act and structure annotations make sure that the most 
important NSMs are included in the narrative path. In 
addition, NEMO is not limited to the story model introduced 
here.  
The narrative path calculated by NEMO also depends on 
the visitor’s physical location inside the exhibition. We detect 
the visitor’s location using InfoGrid and Bluetooth 
LowEnergy beacons, which are positioned at key points of the 
installation, such as room entrances. If a visitor is near such a 
point of interest, NEMO triggers recalculation of the NSM 
distributed to the instance of InfoGrid of the respective user. 
In Figure 4, we regard the world model of the GGH, which 
abstracts the museum, its exhibits, objects and research into 
digital space. This brings the late artist and writer Günter 
Grass into context with, e.g., persons he knew, was influenced 
by, and influenced upon, institutions, elements from his 
biography, elements from his world picture, and elements 
from his works. For complexity reasons, Figure 4 shows an 
overview of the model with focus on the sub-model used for 
 
Figure 3. Exemplary narrative paths of length l=4 generated  
from a total of 8 NSM. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

“My Century” in our scenario. For the Museum of Nature and 
Environment another model exists accordingly.  
Grass “My Century” casts a retrospective review of the 
20th century in a hundred stories and is narrated from the point 
of view of different people from all areas of German society, 
from an assembly line worker to a professor. Each story is 
accompanied by an artwork created by Grass and features 
crosslinks to persons, historic events, and other works of 
Grass, which are mostly hidden in textual hints or, e.g., 
allusions. 
As the above process of creating a narrative path with the 
use of NSM outlines, a user is required to define NSM as start 
and end narratives. However, the process of selecting 
narratives between starting and ending narratives can be 
automated. We achieve this by using the semantic model 
created for the particular context the media is selected in. For 
example, for a certain year from “My Century”, according to 
the semantic model (see Figure 4), NSM annotated from that 
year correlates to other NSM, not necessarily dated to the 
same year, and possibly annotated corresponding to the 
visitor’s interest. Thus, the process of media selection for any 
other than starting or ending NSM, NEMO automates the 
selection, leaving annotations such as ageClass, gender, 
language, or constraint for manual retouch only. 
VI. 
PRE-EVALUATION AND VALIDATION 
We 
have 
carried out 
a pre-evaluation of our 
implementation under laboratory conditions with 5 subjects 
using a total of 50 NSM with both 3 starting and ending 
narratives. The evaluation was conducted using the arc of 
suspense as the story mode. In our tests, l was defined as l ϵ 
{3, 7} and we configured NEMO to automatically create two 
tours per subject. The tours were displayed inside a web-
browser and we collected the user’s feedback according to the 
Think-Aloud method [24]. In all cases, the subjects 
experienced both tours and gave positive feedback. The NSMs 
were assembled to reasonable narrative paths that the subjects 
were able to comprehend. Under laboratory conditions, with 
50 NSM and both 5 starting and ending narratives, NEMO 
was able to construct narrative paths of all lengths l with l ϵ 
{3, 10}. The test show that, apart from the duration a visitor is 
willing to spend on a narration, the upper boundary of l 
depends on the number of semantic connections between the 
NSMs. However, we have not defined a measure for the 
complexity of semantic correlations between NSMs to be able 
to make a general statement with regard to the capabilities of 
NEMO being able to always create a narrative path to the 
visitors’ desire of length l. Although NEMO was able to 
generate the narrative paths in our test settings from only 50 
NSMs, there may exist scenarios, where NSMs may not be 
connected to each other. A solution to this challenge may 
present itself by selecting a story model with a looser coupling 
between the NSM. The postmodern story model [25] allows 
more combinations between NSMs, as the model does not 
follow an arc of suspense. We have also implemented and 
evaluated this story model with the subjects and analogous to 
the setting described above. However, the subjects clearly 
indicated that they did not understand the concept of the 
postmodern story model and experienced the narrative paths 
generated by NEMO from the postmodern story model as 
“disordered” or “incomprehensible”. Museum professionals 
from our project partners confirmed this observation. 
The pre-evaluation shows, that NEMO creates individual 
narrative paths that the subjects are able to understand and 
follow. This influences the perceived quality of the narration. 
The pre-evaluation indicates that the parameters of perceived 
quality and length of narrative paths generated from NSM 
have to be considered together. It also suggests that (a) the 
quality of narrative paths perceived by visitors depends on 
both quality and quantity of NSMs available, on which the 
narrative paths are based and from which they are generated 
by NEMO, as well as (b) the complexity of the story model, 
which is also dependent on the type of audience. 
For future evaluations, from the qualitative feedback and 
from the experience of our museum project partners, we 
derive that a questionnaire should focus on user experience 
and be accompanied by questions with regard to the visitors 
understanding of the story model, the visitors’ perception of 
the narrative path in total, and the perceived quality of the 
NSMs selected by NEMO as to their motivation of self-
directed discovery. 
 
Figure 4. The museum model of the GGH from an overview perspective at the current state of research.  
For the scenario presented in this contribution set in the GGH, we focus on the use of NSM in the “My Century” part of the model. 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

VII. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
In this contribution, we illustrate a system concept to 
provide an individualized museum experience. The goal is to 
augment physical museum exhibits with digital media in a 
personalized, flexible, and self-adapting narrative structure 
motivating self-directed discovery. Based on the scenario, we 
describe the use of technology to design an individual 
experience for visitors. Unlike other approaches of story-
telling, NEMO generates narrative paths from Narrative 
Semantic Media, presented in this contribution. Thus, 
museum narrations consist of media as digital overlays and 
extensions to physical exhibits. Narrative Semantic Media is 
one focus of our research and a main concept throughout ALS. 
In NEMO, we use semantic annotations to classify and 
interrelate plain media within semantic models, and 
algorithms accessing the semantic models and the users’ 
personal information, e.g., on interests or interaction history, 
in order to select semantic media for narratives. These media 
are enhanced for their use on dynamic narrative paths through 
narrative annotations, forming what we call Narrative 
Semantic Media. Having selected NSM for a narrative path 
for a thereby personalized user experience, NEMO depends 
on 
ALS 
applications, 
such 
as 
InfoGrid 
and 
the 
InteractiveWall. These frontend applications allow the users, 
in our scenario the museum visitors, to interact with NSM. 
In our future work, we will also study the visitor’s 
experience on-site with our project partners quantitatively and 
in more detail. Through the semantic relation of the stored 
data, visitors can discover new relationships between the 
museum objects or even urban structures outside the museum. 
Next to the visitors’ experience, we will study the curator’s 
experiences while using ALS systems. Furthermore, we will 
evaluate how curators build and how visitors use dynamic 
narrative paths throughout the museum. As InfoGrid and the 
InteractiveWall are part of the family of ALS applications, we 
plan to evaluate their interconnection with other applications, 
also in school context. In this context, the interconnection 
between multiple distributed instances of NEMO will be 
subject to further research and development. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We develop NEMO, InfoGrid, and other ALS-
applications in the research project Ambient Learning Spaces 
funded since 2008 by the German Research Foundation 
(Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG). 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Bouck-Standen, A. Ohlei, V. Daibert, T. Winkler, and M. Herczeg, 
“NEMO Converter 3D : Reconstruction of 3D Objects from Photo and 
Video Footage for Ambient Learning Spaces,” in AMBIENT 2017; The 
Seventh Int. Conf. on Ambient Comp., Applications, Services and 
Technologies, IARIA, Best Paper Award, pp. 6-12, 2017. 
[2] R. Li, T. Luo, and H. Zha, “3D digitization and its applications in 
cultural heritage,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including 
subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in 
Bioinformatics), vol. 6436 LNCS, M. Ioannides, D. Fellner, A. 
Georgopoulos, and D. G. Hadjimitsis, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 381-388, 2010. 
[3] “Europeana,” 2018. [retrieved: August, 2018]. Available: europeana.eu. 
[4] M. Vayanou, et al., “Authoring Personalized Interactive Museum 
Stories,” ICIDS 2014: Interactive Storytelling, pp. 37-48, 2014. 
[5] T. Winkler, F. Scharf, C. Hahn, and M. Herczeg, “Ambient learning 
spaces,” Educ. a Technol. world Commun. Curr. Emerg. Res. Technol. 
efforts, pp. 56-67, 2011. 
[6] T. Winkler, D. Bouck-standen, M. Ide, A. Ohlei, and M. Herczeg, 
“InteractiveWall 3.1 - Formal and Non - Formal Learning at School with 
Web - 3.0 - based Technology in Front of Large Multi-touch Screens,” 
EdMedia, Outst. Paper Award, Washington, DC, pp. 1317-1326, 2017. 
[7] D. Bouck-Standen, “Construction of an API connecting the Network 
Environment for Multimedia Objects with Ambient Learning Spaces,” 
University of Luebeck, 2016; DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.12155.00804. 
[8] B. MacIntyre, J. D. Bolter, E. Moreno, and B. Hannigan, “Augmented 
reality as a new media experience,” Proc. - IEEE ACM Int. Symp. 
Augment. Reality, ISAR 2001, pp. 197-206, 2001. 
[9] L. Pujol, et al., “Personalizing interactive digital storytelling in 
archaeological museums: the CHESS project,” Archaeol. Digit. Era. 
Pap. from 40th Annu. Conf. Comput. Appl. Quant. Methods Archaeol. 
(CAA), pp. 77-90, 2012. 
[10] B. Al Takrouri, K. Detken, and C. Martinez, “Mobile Holstentour: 
Contextualized Multimedia Museum Guide,” MoMM 2008, pp. 460–
463, 2008. 
[11] A. Ohlei, D. Bouck-Standen, T. Winkler, J. Wittmer, and M. Herczeg, “ 
InfoGrid4Museum: A Media Mediation Strategy using Augmented 
Reality for Museums,” in 47. Jahrestagung der Ges. für Informatik e.V. 
(GI), pp. 1-8, 2017. 
[12] Z. D. Doering and A. J. Pekarik, “Questioning the Entrance Narrative,” 
Source J. Museum Educ., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 20-23, 1996. 
[13] A. Davis and K. Smeds, Visiting the Visitor: An Enquiry Into the Visitor 
Business in Museums, Edition Mu. Transcript Verlag, 2016. 
[14] E. Hyvönen, “Cultural Heritage Linked Data on the Semantic Web: 
Three Case Studies Using the Sampo Model,” in Invited talk, Proc. of: 
VIII Encounter of Documentation Centres of Contemporary Art: Open 
Linked Data and Integral Management of Information in Cultural 
Centres, 2016. 
[15] T. Miyashita, p. Meier, and T. Tachikawa, “An Augmented Reality 
Museum Guide,” Proc. - 7th IEEE Int. Symp. Mix. Augment. Real., 
ISMAR 2008, pp. 103-106, 2008. 
[16] A. Antoniou et al., “Capturing the visitor profile for a personalized 
mobile museum experience: An indirect approach,” CEUR Workshop 
Proc., vol. 1618, el. ed., 2016. 
[17] J. Boy, F. Detienne, and J.-D. Fekete, “Storytelling in Information 
Visualizations,” Proc. 33rd Annu. ACM Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. 
Syst. - CHI ’15, pp. 1449-1458, 2015. 
[18] B. van Dijk, A. Lingnau, G. Vissers, and H. Kockelkorn, “Playful User 
Interfaces,” Play. User Interfaces, Gaming Media Soc. Eff., no. 
February, pp. 185-208, 2014. 
[19] M. Dragoni, S. Tonelli, G. Moretti, and F. B. Kessler, “5 A Knowledge 
Management Architecture for Digital Cultural Heritage,” ACM J. 
Comput. Cult. Herit. Artic., vol. 10, no. 18, pp. 1-18, 2017. 
[20] K. Blumenstein, M. Kaltenbrunner, M. Seidl, L. Breban, N. Thür, and 
W. Aigner, “Bringing Your Own Device into Multi-device Ecologies,” 
Proc. Interact. Surfaces Spaces ZZZ  - ISS ’17, pp. 306-311, 2017. 
[21] D. Bouck-Standen, et al., “Reconstruction and Web-based Editing of 3D 
Objects from Photo and Video Footage for Ambient Learning Spaces,” 
Int. J. Adv. Intell. Syst., vol. 11, IARIA, pp. 91-104, 2018. 
[22] V. Huck-Fries, F. Wiegand, K. Klinker, M. Wiesche, and H. Krcmar, “ 
Data glasses during maintenance: Evaluation of various input modalities 
by service technicians,” Inform. 2017, pp. 585-596, 2017. 
[23] B. O’Neill, “Toward a computational model of affective responses to 
stories for augmenting narrative generation,” in Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), vol. 6975 LNCS, no. 
PART 2, Memphis, TN: Springer-Verlag, pp. 256-263, 2011. 
[24] J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering. San Diego, CA: Kaufmann, 1994. 
[25] M. Currie, Postmodern Narrative Theory. Palgrave Macmillan, 1998. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

