Smart Toys for Game-based and Toy-based Learning 
A Study of Toy Marketers’, Preschool teachers’ and Parents’ Perspectives on Play 
 
 
Pirita Ihamäki 
Prizztech Ltd. 
Siltapuistokatu 14, 28101 
Pori, Finland 
pirita.ihamaki@prizz.fi 
Katriina Heljakka 
University of Turku 
Po.box. 124, 28101 
Pori, Finland 
katriina.heljakka@utu.fi 
Abstract—Over the next years smart Internet-connected toys 
are expected to grow significantly in numbers. Our study 
explores smart toys’ potential to deliver experiences related to 
playful learning. One key aspect of toys, such as the CogniToys 
Dino, Fisher-Price’s Smart Toy Bear and Wonder Workshop’s 
Dash Robot are their game-based and toy-based features and 
functions, which are suggested to have educational outcomes 
when used in play. Through a comparative investigation of toy 
marketers’, preschool teachers’ and the parents’ of preschool- 
aged children’s perspectives of smart toys potential—and a 
comparison to the actual play experiences of preschoolers 
discovered in earlier stages of research, we demonstrate how the 
educational potential of contemporary smart toys may be 
categorized into game-based and toy-based affordances that 
may be employed for specific educational goals in playful 
learning. 
Keywords - game-based learning; Internet of Toys (IoToys); 
play; preschoolers; smart toys. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper examines the kind of possibilities that the 
Internet of Toys (or, IoToys) offers for playful learning 
experiences through their various affordances analyzed 
through the Playful Experience (PLEX) model introduced by 
Lucero et al. [1]. We build on the suggested framework to 
conceptualize the gameful and toy play-like affordances of 
current smart toys. Our Playful Experience Framework for 
IoToys validation efforts include an earlier study of play- 
testing smart toys of the present to see what kind of play 
experiences these toys prompted in their players (in our case 
study, preschool-aged children). As a result, the 15 categories 
of the original framework were further divided into game- 
based and toy-based play experiences in the Playful 
Experience for IoToys Framework (See Table 1). This 
framework functions as a basis for our evaluation of the IoToys 
suitability for playful learning from the viewpoints of toy 
marketers, preschool teachers and preschooler’s parents. 
In earlier stages of our research, we have found that 
preschoolers use the toys for many kinds of play [2] [3]. This 
paper focuses on how these play experiences may be 
categorized into game-based and toy-based experiences, 
which both contribute to learning. With the previous findings 
in mind, our goal is to compare the results of the play tests 
with preschoolers with perspectives on smart toys as 
communicated by toy marketers, preschool teachers and 
parents of the preschool children who took part in our play 
tests. In this way, the paper at hand outlines three perspectives 
on playful learning related to smart toys: 1) the IoToys 
marketers’ point of view, 2) preschool teachers’ point of view, 
and 3) parents’ point of view on the educational possibilities 
of these contemporary toys. 
While some researchers believe that using computers 
before age seven subtracts from important developmental 
tasks and other types of learning [4], we believe that the 
IoToys with their ‘hidden’ [5], smart and connected 
technology, represents a medium for children’s social and 
intellectual development. There have been effective attempts 
at educational technology integration, but school reformers 
often expect educators to know how to incorporate technology 
into their teaching. Whereas it may be difficult for educators 
to realize the potential of new kinds of smart toys to be used 
in the context of early education, it is important to increase 
knowledge of the toys’ possibilities in the learning context. 
What is not to be neglected are the parents’ attitudes and 
opinions of using smart toys, as they represent so-called 
‘edutainment’, which may also be consumed when played 
with in the informal learning environment of the home. When 
children have a possibility to learn with smart toys, they can, 
for example, train their language and interaction skills. In this 
way, both the formal and informal play experiences related to 
these toys change children’s dispositions to learning and 
behaving. 
According to an early definition, a ‘smart toy’ has been 
defined as a device consisting of a physical toy component 
that connects to one or more toy computing services to 
facilitate gameplay in the cloud through networking and 
sensory technologies to enhance the functionality of a 
traditional toy [6]. There are three general properties of a 
smart toys: They are 1) pervasive – a smart toy may follow 
the child through everyday activities, 2) social – social 
aspects and multiplayer participation are becoming a 
mandatory aspect of interactive IoToys in one-to-one, one-to-
many and many- to-many relations [7], and 3) connected – 
contemporary smart toys as IoToys may connect and 
communicate with other toys and services through networks. 
For example, the CogniToys Dino can listen and answer to 
questions raised by children by voice recognition as the toy is 
connected to IBM Watson’s Elemental Path “friendgine”, 
which is a child 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
friendly database [8]. Recently, the smart, but previously non- 
connected toys have evolved into connected playthings, that 
according to Holloway and Green (2016) mean IoToys, 
which 1) are connected to online platforms through Wi-Fi and 
Bluetooth, but can also connect to other toys, 2) are equipped 
with sensors, and 3) relate one-on-one to children [9]. 
According to the marketers’ of IoToys, toys employed in 
our study like the CogniToys Dino, Wonder Workshop’s 
Dash and Fisher-Price’s Smart Toy Bear offer opportunities 
for both entertainment and learning. The toys present 
educational possibilities, particularly in informal situations. 
For example, the toy markers’ promote the toys’ capabilities 
to teach language when played with at home. In the toy 
marketers’ understanding, then, the IoToys offer significant 
educational benefits and bring with them new possibilities to 
existing learning technologies [2]. 
Our interest to explore the potential of the smart toys in a 
formal learning environment led us to investigate the toys 
employment in the preschool context. After studying the play 
experiences of young children between the ages 5-6 years, we 
wanted to explore how these experiences correlate with the 
toy marketers’, preschool teachers’ and parents’ perspectives 
of smart toys’ affordances suited for learning. What guided 
our interest was the understanding that play with smart toys 
may be viewed from the perspectives of rule-bound (game- 
like) and open-ended (toy play-like) interaction. In other 
words, they provide opportunities for both game-based and 
toy-based learning. 
In order to study the perspectives that the different 
stakeholders around smart toys have, we used three kinds of 
research material: 1) marketing texts related to the toys under 
investigation as communicated by IoToys marketers, and 2) a 
thematic survey to explore preschool teachers’ and, 3) 
parental attitudes, and parents’ experiences of digitally 
enhanced, smart toys in general. We interviewed two 
preschool teachers and the 14 parents of the altogether 20 
preschoolers who participated in our playtests with the help 
of semi-structured surveys. The participants were asked about 
a wide range of topics in relation to digitally-enhanced toys, 
which we here consider to represent smart toys. 
 
      In the following section 2, we describe earlier studies to 
explain how marketers’, early educators’ and parents’ 
attitudes have been investigated in research focusing on 
technology use in early education. We then go on to section 3 
to explain the methods used in our own study followed by 
section 4 describing the toys investigated. In section 5, we 
present and evaluate the results of our study with three 
perspectives on play with smart toys. We sum up by 
presenting a framework introducing the game-based and toy-
based play experiences potentials of smart and connected toys 
and end the paper with sections 6 and 7, discussing the results 
and proposing ideas for future research. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Attitudes of preschool educators towards the use of 
information and communication technology (ICT) are 
currently a major topic of research [10] [11] [12] [13]. 
One of the reasons for such interest lies in the fact that, as 
Hoffman, Park and Lin [10] suggest, today’s question is how 
to assist kindergarten and preschool educators by providing 
knowledge, tools, and strategies required to respond to rapid 
changes in the learning environment, for example, how to 
make use of smart toys such as the current connected IoToys 
in playful learning. But, since there are no systematic studies 
of the IoToys suitability in the early childhood curriculum, 
some educators use ICT to a great extent while others do not 
use it at all [2] [12]. “While parental beliefs appear to play a 
significant role in children’s development, play-learning 
beliefs remain relatively unexplored in the developmental 
literature”, Fisher et al. write [14]. Consequently, it is of 
crucial importance for educators to become familiarized with 
the new tools that for example the IoToys addressed in this 
paper represent. For example, Chiong and Shuler (2010) 
discuss that adults keep young children motivated to use apps 
and smart toys by providing an extra prompt for the child to 
understand smart toys and games [15]. In other words, the 
child’s capacities to use smart toys and games is influenced by 
the adult guidance. Thus, we claim that there is a need to 
recognize the importance of smart toys potentiality in early 
education to create opportunities for knowledge building and 
skills acquisition. The preschool teachers who participated in 
our study are using technology, such as tablets in learning 
activities. Their attitude toward digital devices and smart toys 
is positive. However, they are not familiar with smart toys’ 
possibilities in an educational context. 
In our earlier study (Ihamäki and Heljakka, 2018) we 
present the IoToys as a 21st century educational tool. 
Furthermore, we highlight the toy marketers’ views of four 
IoToys’ educational promises by describing the toys’ 
possibilities to be used to offer rich, interactive, innovative 
and mobile learning experiences to preschool children both in 
the educational environment as well as in play during leisure 
time, as suggested by the designers and marketers of the smart 
toys [2]. 
Media technology, smart toys, and Internet content have 
an important role in the everyday life of young children [16]. 
Skills for  understanding and using media are typically learned 
at home and from peers during the first years of a child’s life. 
Therefore, children learn skills for using media outside of 
formal education and if granted opportunities, could also use 
this competence in their early childhood education [17]. For 
example, in Greece [13] they suggest that in order to 
successfully integrate ICT in educators’ daily practices, it 
needs to be perceived as a mode of learning that should be 
embedded in the curriculum. 
As the toys may be played with both in preschool as well 
as in the home, it is also important for the parents of young 
children to understand their potential. In this study, we try to 
increase knowledge on how it is important for educators and 
parents to understand the IoToys as a phenomenon, its 
products and potentialities, especially from the viewpoint of 
early learning. What needs to be critically evaluated, then, are 
the toy marketers’ opinion on the capacities of these smart 
toys and the educational promises used in marketing them and 
what benefits the toys truly offer to children in terms of 
edutainment, that is, entertainment and education. Further, it 
is important for preschool teachers and parents to understand 
what kind of play experiences these smart toys can bring to 
the preschool context in the name of playful  learning. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

The many benefits of playful learning have been presented 
by Elkind (2007), who states that free, self- initiated, and 
spontaneous play contributes to the child’s healthy, emotional 
and social development. Elkind stresses that a playful 
childhood, in fact, is the most basic right for children [18]. As 
we see it, educators need to remember to think about how their 
attitudes and opinions influence the employment of new tools 
such as toys that are available to offer children edutainment 
by learning through play. It is probable that the educators who 
have more experience with digital devices and who use digital 
devices personally, have more positive opinions generally. 
The educators interviewed for our study perceive digital 
technology (like iPads) as an useful educational tool that can 
help children to develop practical competencies and social 
practices. They also expressed intentions to use new 
technology in their kindergarten. Finally, it is also important 
to understand how parents’ opinions and attitudes are formed, 
and how they may have an effect of making these kind of toys 
available for their young children in the context of home. At 
the same time, not every parent may have the possibility to 
offer children the opportunity to play with smart toys at home. 
However, since some IoToys are already available on the 
marketplace and their marketers are constantly trying to 
convince their buyers of their educational power, it is valid to 
ask whether or not they fulfil these promises for learning. 
Therefore, it is important to engage both educators and parents 
in a discussion around IoToys in order to know how they can 
be used in both unstructured, (toy-like) free play, and 
structured, (game-like) goal-oriented  play. 
III. METHOD 
Häkkinen et al. (2003) suggested a multi-method 
approach that is process-oriented and takes into account 
different contextual aspects [19]. Our case study uses this 
approach in order to provide a holistic and complimentary 
description of the smart toys’ possibilities for playful learning. 
Our study builds on the knowledge from the previous stages 
of our research: By using the findings of our study with 
preschoolers interested in the various play patterns IoToys as 
contemporary smart toys afford [3], and asking how this 
information from the play tests carried out with the IoToys 
correlates with smart toy marketers’, preschool teachers’, and 
parents of preschoolers’ perspectives on play with digitally-
enhanced toys, we set out to formulate a comprehensive 
understanding of how different stakeholder’s views on smart 
toys address affordances related to playful learning. In other 
words, we analyze smart toy marketers’ envisioned play 
experiences of three IoToys and compare these with 
preschool teachers’ and parents’ general attitudes towards 
smart toys and their educational potential. We examine the 
following research questions: 
 
RQ1 (targeting the toy marketers): What kind of promises 
related to play experiences are the toy marketers giving for 
the IoToys, as reflected in their marketing texts (i.e. on 
websites and other advertising materials)? 
RQ2 (targeting the preschool teachers): What kind of opinions 
do the preschool teachers’ have regarding the play experiences 
related to smart toys used for playful learning in the preschool 
environment? 
 
RQ3 (targeting the parents). What are the parents’ opinions and 
observations of their children’s play experiences with toys with 
digital dimensions, such as smart toys? 
 
In order to analyze the viewpoints of toy marketers, preschool 
teachers and parents of preschool children who participated in 
the playtests in an earlier study [2] [3], we have collected three 
kinds of research materials: First, toy marketer’s descriptions on 
three IoToys through websites, digital and printed marketing 
materials, second, a semi-structured survey for preschool 
teachers and third, a semi-structured survey for the parents of 
the preschool children. 
The toys under investigation fulfil the criteria of IoToys, 
they are ‘smart’, and their connectivity usually occurs through 
mobile devices or some cases, smart toys contain their own 
computer (e.g., the CogniToys Dino and Fisher-Price’s Smart 
Toy Bear.) The toys were chosen based on their age-
appropriateness, gender-neutrality as character types of toys, 
and their availability on Amazon US (in August 2017). Also 
one reason for selecting these IoToys was the awards they have 
received. For example, the CogniToys Dino has received the 
Silver Honor 2016 Parent’s choice award. 
To analyze the research materials, we have used content 
analysis. The goal of content analysis is to provide knowledge 
and understanding of the phenomenon under study [20]. It 
provides the researcher with the possibility to make a close 
reading of the data through a systematic classification process of 
coding and identifying themes and patterns. Researchers 
immerse themselves in the data to allow new insights to emerge 
[21]. The method is also described as inductive category 
development [22]. 
The motivation to use three sets of research materials 
enriches the holistic view of adult perspectives on smart toys: 
The marketing materials help us to understand aspects of 
learning and contextualize and elucidate marketer motives in 
relation to the IoToys promises for learning. The preschool 
teachers’ interviews inform us about the constraints and 
possibilities for using smart toys, such as IoToys in the context 
of early learning. Further, these interviews enable the 
articulation of aspects of learning with smart toys and help us to 
contextualize and elucidate individual attitudes and behavior, 
based on personal motives and perceptions in relation to use 
smart toys in the early education curriculum. We pursued those 
situational and contextual aspects of Finnish preschool that 
were identified by participants during our interviews. By using 
a semi-structured, thematic survey to explore parental attitudes, 
opinions and earlier experience of smart toys, we were able to 
draw parallels between ideas on toys’ capacities to ‘teach’ at 
home. Next, we describe the rich material in our case study to 
illustrate the possibilities for playful learning with three 
contemporary smart toys. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
A. Educational promises of the smart toys in our 
study: The marketers’ perspective 
We have chosen three smart toys (that also fulfil the 
criteria for IoToys), for which we have collected marketing 
materials to analyze the marketers’ perspective of their 
educational affordances. All of these smart toys connect to 
the Internet via Wi-Fi. The connected toys employed in this 
study are hybrid playthings, which means that they are both 
physical artefacts and objects, which also function as portals 
to digital devices and socially shared content [3]. 
Our study employs toys that represent ‘edutainment’, 
and that according to their marketers, cater both to 
enjoyment and opportunities for learning: CogniToys Dino, 
Wonder Workshop’s Dash and Fisher-Price Smart Toy 
Bear. These smart toys are briefly described in the following, 
based on their marketing texts: 
 
CogniToys Dino 
Amazon.com describes the CogniToys (by Elemental 
Path) as an educational toy, which includes stories, games, 
jokes and fun facts. Educational subjects including 
vocabulary, math, geography, science, which make children 
to engage more within an educational play based on their 
academic needs. The CogniToys Dino will constantly evolve 
because it is a cloud-connected, Wi-Fi enabled character 
allowing for the play experience to repeatedly improve and 
update automatically. The toy is said to engage children with a 
wide variety of content by encouraging learning and play 
using 
interactive 
dialogue. 
The 
CogniToys 
offers 
“FUNdemental Part of the CogniToys Experience”, where 
each Dino comes with “a variety of custom modules to engage 
children in educational play including problem-solving 
challenges, geography games, historical fun facts and more” 
[23]. According to a marketing text published by Kickstarter, 
the CogniToys Dino “creates an atmosphere of fun, playful 
education! Built into the play experience is a number of 
custom modules that engage the child in educational play. As 
the interaction increases so will the challenge of the 
educational content continuing to become more challenging 
as the child learns” [24]. 
Wonder Workshop’s Dash 
Wonder Workshops’ Dash’s own website includes an 
educational part, on which educational benefits for using for 
Wonder Workshop’s Dash in educational programs are 
introduced. The website describes how the Dash robot will 
“grow with students and it is easy for beginners to get started 
and 
then 
scaffolds 
learning 
through 
a 
meaningful 
curriculum.” It is supportive of 21
st century skills, by 
“encouraging students to continue building critical thinking, 
creativity, communication, and collaboration skills for 
tomorrow’s job market” [25]. As the website for Wonder 
Workshops’ Dash mentions, “play is a powerful teaching 
tool”. Dash has its own comprehensive curricular resources 
for teachers to help students’ practice computational thinking 
[26]. 
While the company sells Dash directly to families, it has 
also seen Dash and sidekick toy, Dot, to become part of 
schools’ curriculum and coding clubs over the years. 
According to Kolodny, some 8,500 schools are using Dash 
and Dot around the world today [27]. 
Fisher-Price’s Smart Toy Bear 
Fisher Price’s Smart Toy Bear is described as “an 
interactive learning friend as unique as your child” that comes 
without a screen. The toy responds to what the player says, and 
remembers things. It takes cues from its player, then invites 
play, talk, movement, imagination and learning. The Smart 
Toy is also able to recognize images with 9 ‘Smart Cards’ 
included, which the player can choose to play activities like 
listen to stories, play games and ‘go on adventures’. As the 
Smart Toy is constantly updated it is said to encourage social-
emotional development, imagination and creativity: “Your 
Smart Toy learn new activities every month” [28]. 
 
A. Preschool teacher survey interviews 
The importance of digital technology competencies of 
early education teachers is publicly recognized and supported 
in most countries around the world. One study from Mainland 
China showed that educators’ educational level and ICT- 
related training were found most important in determining 
whatever they use digital technology in their teaching [12]. 
According to Konca et al. it is important to support educators’ 
positive attitudes towards digital technology, but also their 
suggestion on using digital technology in kindergarten [11]. 
The research that investigated intentions of 50 early 
childhood educated teachers from University of Athens, 
Greece, using digital game-based learning, revealed that 
kindergarten educators in Greece generally have very positive 
views about the digital technology use and who owned a 
computer at home had more positive opinions. These 
educators perceive digital games as a useful educational tool 
for kindergarten environment [13]. 
In this study, we have used a semi-structured, thematic 
survey to explore two preschool teachers’ views on smart toys 
and their use in the preschool context. The teachers have 
informed that the children in their group each have their 
personal tablet at preschool, which they are allowed to use in 
supervision for a limited time per day. Out of the 20 
preschool-aged children (5-6 years of age), who took part in 
our play tests in previous stages of our research, we have 
asked how many of them have a mobile phone of their own. 
Of the children that participated in our study, 10 reported 
owning a mobile phone. The teachers were asked about the 
use of digital media and toys in the preschool context in 
general, their ideas on smart toys, and their opinion regarding 
the affordances of these toys that relate to playful learning. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
B. Parental survey interviews 
Previous studies have demonstrated that the extent to 
which parents’ guide their children’s media use, digital games 
and toys, and the strategies they apply, are related to 
demographic variables, such as the parent’s age, gender, and 
education or income level. In addition, the parent’s own media 
use and skills, and family context variables, such as family 
size, marital status and the number of media screens at home 
are important as well [29]. Furthermore, parents who are less 
skilled in using media and digital devices themselves may find 
it more difficult to install parental controls on the devices, 
games and smart toys or to discuss the media content critically 
with their children as compared to media literate parents [30]. 
Indeed, researchers have shown that parents’ mediation 
strategies are in accordance with their views on various effects 
of media content on children. Parents who feel that media 
offers educational or entertainment opportunities more often 
co-use the media, digital devices and smart toys with their 
child, or actively discuss the content [31]. Many parents feel 
that through media use their young children develop their 
physical, cognitive and emotional capacities, a wide range of 
media skills, defined as the child’s knowledge and 
understanding of the role of media and technology in society 
[32]. 
In our study, we have conducted survey interviews 
concerned with parents’ perspectives on digitally enhanced 
toys such as smart toys on a general level, the play of their 
children with these toys, and these toys’ capacity to cater for 
playful learning. We have used a semi-structured, thematic 
survey to explore parental attitudes, opinions and earlier 
experiences of smart toys. We have used a thematic survey to 
explore parental and kindergarten teachers’ attitudes and 
parent’s experiences of digitally enhanced toys in general. 
Thematic survey focuses on mainly on investigating the 
following questions: 
 
• 
Does your child play with the (digitally- 
enhanced) toy alone or in the company of other 
children? 
• 
Do you think that playing with this kind of a toy 
teaches the child new skills? 
• 
Does the child simultaneously use (other) mobile 
devices when playing with the toy? 
• 
Does your child play with the toy in any of the 
following ways: nurses the toy; uses the toy in 
narrative play (gives the toy a role and lines of 
speech in play); explores the toys’ mechanical 
features; tries to teach the toy new skills; uses the 
toy as a bedtime companion? 
 
We have recruited the parents of 20 preschool-aged 
children (altogether 14 parents, both male and female), the 
survey interviews with whom the interviews were carried out 
in October 2017 [2] [3]. 
The parents’ were asked about their attitudes to children’s 
use of digital media and toys in general, their opinions on 
digitally-enhanced toys such as smart toys, and their 
observations on their children’s play with smart toys related 
to solitary and social play, learning experiences, use of mobile 
devices as extensions of toy play, play patterns demonstrated 
by their children, and the importance of the toys’ various 
playful affordances. 
 
IV. RESULTS 
Next, we report the results of our study, organized around 
three perspectives on play with smart toys: the promises of 
playful learning as described by the smart toy marketers, the 
preschool teachers’ attitudes and opinions on smart toys, and 
the parental perspective concerning this type of toys. 
Toy marketers’ perspective on smart toys 
We begin by highlighting several aspects of marketers’ 
ideas on smart toys and their suitability to be used in playful 
learning, which helps to set the context of this study. We 
concentrate on three IoToys, which represent the most recent 
evolution of smart toys. These smart toys have won several 
awards and are named ‘children’s best toys’ [23]. In their 
communication marketers, have used words like ‘future 
technology’, ‘future education’ and they have also given the 
picture that these are ‘dream toys for children’ with which 
they also can learn for example languages, pronouncing skills 
and mathematical skills. These marketing texts are also 
directed towards parents’ in the extent to which they give a 
promise of learning opportunities to children. The marketers 
also use examples of how many kindergartens already have 
used for example the Dash robot in kindergarten. 
‘Educational value’ is frequently is used as a marketing 
concept for the connected toys of the present. In particular, the 
usage of the word “smart” occurs in high frequency to describe 
the level of intelligence in the toy that will transfer to its user. 
For example, on the website for the CogniToys Dino it is 
explained that that the toy could teach mathematics like 
addition, subtraction and division. The CogniToys Dino also 
offers digital games, with educational potential, like ‘Math 
Mouse’, ‘Capital Quest’, ‘Country Quest’, and so on [33]. The 
marketers describe the smart toys to learn and grow alongside 
children. Further, they believe that the toys can be used as 
educational tools for example in kindergarten. For instance, 
the toy marketer for Wonder Workshop’s Dash claims that 
their products and apps may teach students from kindergarten 
and up how to code. They offer six apps; students can for 
example tackle a series of challenges and in- app puzzles that 
introduce the concept of coding. The marketer describes the 
Wonder App ‘to use machine programming and an original 
visual design to advance young students’ understanding of 
computer science’. Again, the Blockly app is a block-based 
coding app that introduces children to programming [27]. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
The Fisher-Price Smart Toy Bear is marketed as an 
educational toy, which children can learn important 
concepts with through engaging in interactive play. 
Children can train their smart toy to recognize their voice 
through embedded voice recognition features, or to respond 
to their commands with a selected option. For example, the 
developers claim that the smart toy adapts to developmental 
changes while remembering the child’s name, favorite 
colors’, foods and more. The toy suggests adventures that 
they should ‘go on adventures together’, along with stories 
and games [29]. 
In sum, as smart toys, the IoToys chosen for our study 
have, by their marketers, been given promises regarding 
various play experiences that are believed to have values for 
use in education [2] [3]. From the perspective of the Playful 
Experience Framework (or PLEX), the study demonstrated, 
how the toy marketers’ ideas on the IoToys on the one hand 
correlated with the experiences categorized in the PLEX 
framework, and thus in both areas of play experiences: 
game- based and toy-based play experiences as categorized 
by the authors (See Table 1). The five most frequently 
occurring play experiences communicated in the analyzed 
marketing texts (websites, packaging), are listed in the 
following: 
 
1. 
Challenge (game-based PLEX); Content related 
to educational subjects, coding and games 
2. 
Humor, 
relaxation, 
thrill (toy-based 
PLEX); Storytelling, jokes 
3. 
Fellowship (toy-based PLEX); Collaboration 
4. 
Exploration (toy-based PLEX) ‘Go on adventures’ 
5. 
Discovery (toy-based PLEX); Content related to 
play by image recognition through ‘Smart Cards’ 
However, some differences could be detected in the 
envisioned play experiences of the IoToys: For example, 
the CogniToys Dino and Wonder Workshop’s Dash 
included more game-based affordances for playful learning 
(challenge, competition, completion and control), whereas 
the Fisher- Price’s Smart Toy Bear seemed to afford more 
toy-based play experiences for playful learning (for 
example, through humor, relaxation and sympathy). 
 
Preschool teachers’ perspective on smart toys 
Hannaway and Steyn (2017) propose that teachers’ use 
of digital technology influence their pedagogy and the ways 
knowledge is created in the classroom [34]. Again, 
teachers’ attitudes toward digital technology use of young 
children are informed by the children’s age: Mertala (2017) 
studied Finnish trainee teachers’ perceptions of the role of 
digital technology in early year education and concluded 
that technology-related concerns for the youngest children 
were related to the children’s physical health, whereas for 
older children it was their intellectual health [35]. 
The interaction with smart toys is generally not seen as very 
appealing from an educational perspective [36]. According to 
Ruckenstein (2010), the Nordic discourse on digital toys often 
constructs these toys as unnatural intrusions into the lives of 
small children [37]. As the category of smart toys has evolved 
and developed rapidly into more pedagogically informed 
devices, we were interested in preschool teachers’ attitudes 
and opinions on these digitally-enhanced toys. The preschool 
educators’ (n=2) perspective in this study allowed us to 
consider the differences that formal and informal learning 
environments may provide to the connected toys’ usage as 
playthings. The teachers’ informed us that the preschool 
currently uses learning games, but limits their use to a certain 
time of the day. The two female educators interviewed for our 
study identified toys such as Storyteller Yano and Tamagotchi 
to represent toys with digital enhancements and dimensions. 
Both interviewees considered the educational affordances of 
the smart toys to be highly important. Out of the play patterns 
described in our survey the teachers listed the narrativizing of 
the toy (i.e. storytelling with it) to be the most important. 
According to the research materials collected from the surveys, 
the teachers’ attitude towards educational technology was 
positive, as they claimed that “technology could be used even 
more in preschool”. However, a comment made by one of the 
preschool teachers supports Ruckenstein’s thinking of digital 
toys as ‘intrusions’ in the early education context [37]: “I see 
that digital toys are more suitable in the domestic environment 
than in the kindergarten” (preschool educator, 29 years in the 
profession). From the perspective of the PLEX Framework, 
preschool teachers considered control (“the player is able to 
teach the toy new skills”) as a game-based experience related 
to smart toys to be important for playful learning. Again, the 
toy- based play experiences of exploration, expression, 
nurture and relaxation were marked as important facets of 
smart toys’ dimensions in terms of playful learning. Together, 
the five most prominent play experiences were listed in the 
following order of importance in reference to playful learning 
by the teachers: 
 
1. 
Expression (toy-based PLEX); narrativizing theory 
2. 
Nurture (toy-based PLEX); nurturing of the toy 
3. 
Control (game-based PLEX); teaching the toy new 
skills 
4. 
Exploration (toy-based PLEX); exploring the toy’s 
mechanical features 
5. 
Relaxation (toy-based PLEX); using the toy as a 
bedtime companion) 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Parents’ perspective on smart toys 
We have used a thematic survey to explore parental 
attitudes and experiences of digitally enhanced toys. 
Although the 14 parents of the 20 preschoolers who 
participated in our play tests were interviewed about a wide 
range of topics in relation to digitally enhanced toys in 
general (to be presented in the subsequent stages of our 
research), this study focuses mainly on investigating the 
following questions: 
 
• 
Do you think that playing with a digitally- 
enhanced (smart) toy teaches the child new 
skills? 
• 
Does your child play with the toy in any of the 
following ways: Nurtures the toy; uses the toy in 
narrative play (gives the toy a role and lines of 
speech in play); explores the toys’ mechanical 
features; tries to teach the toy new skills; uses the 
toy as a bedtime companion? 
 
Altogether, 14 parents (n=11 female, n=3 male) from 
different socio-demographic backgrounds participated in 
our semi-structured survey. Ten of the parents reported their 
child as owning some kind of toy with digital dimensions. 
Half of the parents considered their child as learning 
something while playing with digitally enhanced toys. The 
most popular play pattern the parents reported their child as 
carrying out with the toy was exploring the toys’ mechanical 
features (9 children), and the second most popular play 
pattern was to use the toy in narrative play (7 children). The 
third most popular pattern on the list of play patterns 
children carry out with toys with digital dimensions was to 
nurture the toy and use it as a bedtime companion (6 
children). 
Considering the educational features of the digitally 
enhanced toys, the parents who answered these questions 
reported the most important feature as the toys’ capability 
of teaching the child to how to count and how to be self- 
expressive, teaching good manners, and taking other players 
into consideration. The toys’ ability to teach their players to 
read, ask questions, and be self-expressive (e.g., to come up 
with stories) were considered somewhat important by the 
parents. The majority of parents (8/14) answered that the 
toy’s educational aspect is its most important aspect. We 
consider this to represent the toy-based play experience of 
challenge. Together, the five most prominent play 
experiences were listed in the following order of importance 
in reference to the perspective of parents to playful learning: 
1. 
Challenge 8/14 (game-based PLEX) 
2. 
Expression, exploration 7/14 (toy-based PLEX) 
3. 
Relaxation 6/14 (toy-based PLEX) 
4. 
Fellowship 3/14 (toy-based PLEX) 
5. 
Nurture 2/14 (toy-based PLEX) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V. EVALUATION 
In this study, we have explored play experiences related to 
playful learning experiences of smart toys from the 
marketers, teachers and parents’ perspectives, which we 
analyzed through the PLEX Framework. We suggest that 
these play experiences can best be evaluated from the 
perspective of using smart toys in early education, and by 
dividing them further into game-based and toy-based 
learning experiences, which suit different learning goals. We 
have found that from the perspective of toy marketers’, play 
experiences that are connected with contemporary smart 
toys, or IoToys, relate most to the play experiences of 
challenge, which we consider an experience best understood 
as a play experience for game-based learning. In other words, 
toy marketers suggest that activities such as learning of 
educational subjects, coding and playing of games are 
meaningful for the players. Other play experiences 
envisioned by the toy marketers are the experiences related 
to storytelling and telling of jokes, which we interpret as the 
toy- based play experiences of humor, relaxation and thrill. 
Other play experiences accentuated in the toy marketers’ 
perspective are the play experiences of fellowship, 
exploration and discovery, which relate to the IoToys under 
scrutiny in terms of their affordances of pursuing 
collaboration between players, ‘going on adventures’ with 
the smart toy to explore new content communicated by the 
toy, and finally, enable the player to discover new play ideas 
by triggering interaction between the toy and the player by 
the use of image recognition through ‘smart cards’. 
According to preschool teachers control (“the player is able 
to teach the toy new skills”) as a game-based experience 
related to smart toys and the toy-based play experiences of 
exploration, expression, nurture and relaxation were marked 
as important facets of smart toys’ dimensions in terms of 
playful learning. Finally, the parents listed the toys ability to 
educate—the game-based play experience of challenge, to be 
a key aspect of smart toys in terms of playful learning. The 
toy-based play experiences of exploration, expression, 
nurture and relaxation were marked as important facets of 
smart toys’ dimensions in terms of playful learning. For all 
detected play experiences of smart toys, see the following 
Table 1. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

TABLE I. THE GAME-BASED AND TOY-BASED PLAY EXPERIENCES POTENTIALS OF SMART AND CONNECTED 
TOYS, PARENTS’ AND TEACHERS’ PERSPECTIVES, TOY MARKETERS’ PERSPECTIVES, AND RESULTS OF THE 
PLAY TESTS IN OUR EARLIER STUDY. 
 
 
Playful 
Experience 
Parental and preschool teachers’ 
perspectives on Play Experiences 
Toy marketers’ perspectives on 
Play Experiences 
Results of play-tests in our study 
Play 
experiences 
for 
gameplay 
and game- 
based 
learning 
Challenge 
Importance for the parent that the toy is 
educational: 
8 parents out of 14 parents most important PLEX 
2 parents out of 14 parents second important PLEX 
1 parents out of 14 parents third important PLEX 
“CogniToys offers game challenges like, 
“Dog Quiz game, Math Mouse, Ocean Quiz, 
Animal Expert, Capital Quest” etc.” 
(www.CogniToys.com) 
Children’s abilities are tested by the IoToys’ 
demanding tasks. (Wonder Workshop’s Dash) 
Competition 
Parents or preschool teachers did not mention this 
PLEX in our survey. 
“Wonder Workshop’s Dash has League 
Robotics Competitions to build teamwork 
and community spirit” 
(www.makewonder.com) 
Children can contest with their earlier 
experiences with IoToys. (Wonder 
Workshop’s Dash) 
 
Completion 
Parents or preschool teachers did not mention this 
PLEX in our study. 
“Program Wonder Workshop’s Dash to be a 
musical performer with Xylo. Used with the 
Xylophone accessory, kids can program 
Dash to play their favourite song or make 
new tunes of their own.” 
(www.makewonder.com) 
Finishing a major task, like listening to the 
IoToys’ story. (Fisher-Price Smart Toy Bear, 
CogniToy Dino) 
 
Control 
Play experience detected by the parents: The child 
aims to teach the toy new skills, 
4 parents out of 14 parents reported this PLEX. 
Teachers evaluated this to be the 3rd  
most important PLEX of all. 
“CogniToys offers General Command 
Prompts: Let’s play a game, tell me a story, 
tell me a joke, Play a Song etc.” 
(www.CogniToys.com) 
Commanding IoToys with an IPad. (Wonder 
Workshop’s Dash, Fisher-Price Smart Toy 
Bear, CogniToy Dino) 
Play 
experiences 
for 
open- 
ended play 
and toy 
based- 
learning 
Discovery 
Parents or preschool teachers did not mention this 
PLEX in our study. 
“Wonder Workshop’s Dash has more than 
600 built-in-tutorials, challenges and 
projects, the apps let children explore 
programming at their own pace.” (Wonder 
Workshop’s Dash Robot – Apple) 
Children’s imaginative play with IoToys 
presents a way of playing what the designer 
never even thought, like using the IoToys as a 
lamp. (Wonder Workshop’s Dash) 
Exploration 
Play experience detected by the parents: The child 
explores the mechanical features of the toy: 7 
parents out of 14 parents reported this. 
 
Teachers evaluated this to be the 4th most 
important PLEX. 
“CogniToys update automatically as new 
content becomes available.” 
(www.CogniToys.com) 
Investigating an object or situation with the 
IoToys. (Wonder Workshop’s Dash, Fisher- 
Price’s Smart Toy Bear, CogniToys Dino) 
 
Expression 
Play experience detected by the parents: The child 
narrates the toy: 8 parents out of 14 parents 
reported this 
Teachers evaluated this to be the 1st  
most important play experience. 
CogniToys expresses itself like green light in 
his/her mouth means “I am ready to play”, 
blue lights mean I am talking, yellow light 
means I am listening and so on”. 
(https://vimeo.com/158246191) 
Children make creative things by coding. 
(Wonder Workshop’s Dash) 
 
Fantasy 
Play experience detected by the parents: the child 
anthropomorphizes the toy: 2 parents out of 14 
parents reported this PLEX. 
“Wonder Workshop’s Dash makes robotics 
as delightful as finger painting. A picture- 
based coding language built for kids, 
children create detailed behaviours for 
Dash, creating the robot pet, pal or sidekick 
of their dreams.” (www.makewonder.com) 
An imagined experience, e.g. the “IoToy can 
teach me to fly”. (Fisher-Price’s Smart Toy 
Bear, CogniToys Dino) 
 
Fellowship 
Importance for the parent that the toy enables 
social play: 
3 parents out of the 14 parents most important 
PLEX 
7 parents out of the 14 parents second important 
PLEX 
1 parents out of the 14 parents third important PLEX 
“The Fisher-Price Smart Toy Bear is an 
interactive learning friend with all the brains 
of a computer, without the screen! The more 
your child plays with Smart Toy, the more 
this remarkable furry friend adapts to create 
personalized adventures the two of them will 
love! Sounds like the start of a true 
friendship!” (www.momvstheboys.com 2015) 
 
IoToys like the Dash Robot has their own 
community to share experiences of one’s 
own toy with others. (Wonder Workshop’s 
Dash) 
 
Humour 
Parents or preschool teachers did not mention this 
PLEX in our study. 
“The CogniToys Dino tells jokes, for example: 
“Punny yodeling joke: “Knock knock.” “Who’s 
there?” “Little old lady.” “Little old lady, 
who?” “Wow! I didn’t know you could 
yodel!” (www.pinterest.co.uk/cognitoys/)  
IoToys give children fun and joyous 
experiences by telling children stories and 
jokes. (Fisher-Price’s Smart Toy Bear, 
CogniToys Dino) 
 
Nurture 
Importance for the parent that child nurtures the 
toy: 
2 parents out of the 14 parents most important 
PLEX 
1 parents out of the 14 parents second important 
PLEX 
9 parents out of the 14 parents third important PLEX 
Teachers evaluated this to be the 2nd most important 
PLEX 
“Fisher-Price’s Smart Toy Bear of content 
really allows children to communicate with 
the Smart toy, which offer unique 
personalized content and nurturing them 
through play”. (www.smartoy.com) 
Children want to take care of their IoToys. 
(Fisher-Price’s Smart Toy Bear) 
 
Relaxation 
The child uses the toy as a bedtime companion: 6 
parents out of the 14 parents reported this. 
Teachers evaluated this to be the 5th important PLEX 
“Fisher-Price’s Smart Toy bear climb under 
the covers and enjoy bedtime stories, 
soothing music or nature sounds to help 
wind down after a long day”. 
(www.smartoy.com) 
Children comment that the IoToy can read 
them a bedtime story. (Fisher-Price’s Smart 
Toy Bear, CogniToys Dino) 
 
Sensation 
Parents or preschool teachers did not mention this 
PLEX in our study. 
“CogniToys are smart devices in toy form, 
tailored just for kids to provide an 
educational and entertaining experience 
without the need for a screen”. 
(www.CogniToys.com) 
Children think that IoToys are exciting as they 
stimulate the senses and give children 
feedback. (Fisher-Price’s Smart Toy Bear, 
CogniToys Dino) 
 
Sympathy 
Parents or preschool teachers did not mention this 
PLEX in our study. 
“Fisher-Price’s Smart Toy Bear: it’s never- 
ending fun that encourages social- 
emotional development, imagination and 
creativity with your child”. 
(www.smartoy.com) 
Children can share emotional states with 
their IoToys. (Fisher-Price’s Smart Toy Bear, 
CogniToys Dino) 
 
Thrill 
Parents or preschool teachers did not mention this 
PLEX in our study. 
“Fisher-Price’s Smart Toy Bear surprise 
means to explore a mysterious cave, soar 
on a magic carpet, rescue a pod of dolphins 
and more adventures.” (www.smartoy.com) 
Children’s excitement derives from to taking 
risks with the IoToy, e.g. by listening to a 
ghost story told by the toy or risk-taking in 
reference to coding with the IoToys. (Fisher- 
Price’s Smart Toy Bear, CogniToys Dino) 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

VI. DISCUSSION 
The IoToys have been on a high growth in numbers for 
some time now. Simultaneously, parents want to take a more 
active role in their children’s education and give them tools for 
that. The IoToys as an emerging category of smart toys, seems 
to deliver 
both 
entertainment 
and education, 
offer 
opportunities for free play and connect children to play games, 
and make activities by learning new skills, like mathematics 
and languages. Toy companies work to keep children and 
parents engaged, offering new ways to both play and learn. 
Playing with contemporary smart toys connected to the 
Internet, future play can be shaped as children may connect 
with others, in the online and offline domains, public and 
private spaces and in formal and informal learning 
environments. In other words, children’s playing is no longer 
confined to the physical space but extends to virtual realms, 
which means that the IoToys offer opportunities to engage in 
the kinds of transmedia and trans-domain practices. These 
practices transform the toy to operate as a kind of boundary 
object [38], enabling the children to transverse different 
domains and practices with ease. For example, the Fisher- 
Price Smart Toy Bear learns how the child plays and 
recommends new activities because of its connection to the 
Internet through Wi-Fi. 
In our study, we have presented three different 
perspectives on play with smart toys: Toy marketers’ 
suggestions on the IoToys’ potential for playful learning, 
preschool teachers’ views on smart toys suitability to be used 
in the early learning context, and parents’ attitudes towards 
smart toys based on their observations of children’s play in the 
domestic sphere. All these stakeholders have understood that 
play evolves, and modern technology can help a child feel 
more empowered, capable and they can learn with toys. Still 
the question of how to make use of these contemporary smart 
toys in early education can be raised. The preschool teachers’ 
attitudes will influence their teaching activities when using 
digital devices, games and smart toys in their education. 
Clearly, more research is needed to understand how preschool 
teachers could use for example the IoToys for learning. It is 
also important to remember that these toys function as 
entertainment, and children playing with the smart toys in 
home environments may not understand all their educational 
features. Like many studies have shown, when parents are 
more involved with their children’s education they also want 
toys to teach something to their children. Therefore, the 
parental perspective on what is considered important in terms 
of play experiences that may contribute to playful learning 
should be studied and acknowledged even more. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
The results of our study present that marketers have seen 
the educational potential of contemporary smart toys, and are 
using that in their communication. Moreover, they also 
reference early education parties, which have used their smart 
toys as a part education. 
Despite their complex technological systems, smart toys 
designed for the mass market come in relatively affordable 
prices for consumers of the Western world and are in this way 
more likely to enter the domestic playscapes of young 
children. Although, at many times, digitally-enhanced toys 
are still considered to fit informal learning environments such 
as the home better than the formal educational context of 
preschool, we believe that the ongoing digitalization 
development will eventually also introduce more preschools 
with more connected toys. We believe, that contemporary 
smart toys are bridging play and learning in positive ways, and 
could be used even more as a part of informal and formal 
learning. Therefore, it is beneficial for both educators and 
parents of young children to know the various possibilities 
these playthings afford both in terms of different play 
experiences. In future stages of our research, our aim is to 
conduct a longitudinal study with both preschoolers, their 
parents and their teachers in order to find out more about the 
play experiences the contemporary smart toys afford. 
In our study we explored smart toys’ potential to deliver 
experiences related to playful learning. One key aspect of toys 
such as the CogniToys Dino, Fisher-Price’s Smart Toy Bear 
and Wonder Workshop’s Dash Robot are their game-based 
and toy-based features and functions, which are suggested to 
have educational outcomes when used in play. 
We hope this paper to have highlighted the three 
perspectives on play with smart toys from the viewpoints of 
toy marketers’, preschool teachers and parents. As our results 
have shown, preschool teachers are generally positive 
towards the IoToys, but are not necessary sure about how to 
use them in education. This means that early educational 
professionals must be more informed about new technologies 
affordances for  playful learning. Furthermore, as our findings 
show, parents are generally welcoming to smart toys into their 
children’s lives as well, because they offer new modes of 
playing and learning, yet do not really know their potential. 
These modes for playful learning could therefore be evaluated 
based on play experiences related to smart toys’ as game- 
based and toy-based affordances, as presented in our paper. In 
this way, their suitability could be better considered to be used 
for playful learning in different learning situations and 
contexts. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We wish to express our gratitude to the parents and 
preschool teachers for participating in our surveys. This study 
has been partially funded by the Centre of Excellence in 
Game Culture Studies (decision #312396). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Lucero, E. Karapanos, J. Arrasvuori, and H. Korhonen,” 
Playful or Gameful? Creating Delightful User Experiences”, in 
Interaction Vol. 21, No. 3, pp. 34-39,  2014. 
[2] 
P. Ihamäki and K. Heljakka, “Smart, skilled and connected in 
the 21st century: Educational promises of the internet of toys 
(IoToys),” in Proceedings of the 2018 Hawaii University 
International Conferences, Arts, Humanities, Social Sciences 
& Education, Prince Waikiki Hotel, Honolulu, Hawaii, January 
3–6, 2018. 
[3] 
K. Heljakka and P. Ihamäki, ”Preschoolers learning with the 
Internet of Toys: From toy-based edutainment to transmedia 
literacy”, in Seminar.net, International Journal of Media, 
Technology & Lifelong Learning, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 85–102, 
2018, 
[4] 
J. M. Healy, “Failure to connect: How computers affect our 
children’s minds – For better and worse, New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1998. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[5] 
Z. Corbyn “The future of smart toys and the battle for digital 
children”, in The Guardian, 2016. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/22/digital- 
children-smart-toys-technology 
[6] 
Y. Ren, J. Shen, J. Wang, J., Han, and S. Lee, “Mutual Verifiable 
Provable Data Auditing in Public Cloud Storage”, in Journal of 
Internet Tech, Vol. 16, No, 2, pp. 317-323, 2015. 
[7] 
E. I. That, “Context data model for privacy,” PRIME 
Standardization Workshop, IBM Zurich, 6 Pages, 2006. 
[8] 
L. Rafferty, P. C. K, Hung, M. Fantinato, S. M. Peres, F. Iqbal, 
S-Y. Kuo, and S-C. Huang, “Towards a Privacy Rule 
Conceptual Model for Smart Toys”, In Proceedings of the 50th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 2017, pp. 
1226-1235, 2017, doi: 10.24251/HICSS.2017.146 
[9] 
D. Holloway and L. Green, “The Internet of Toys,” in 
Communication Research and Practice, Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 506– 
519, 2016. 
[10] 
E. S. Hoffman, E. Park, and M. G. Lin., “Beyond professional 
development: A case study of implementing iPads in early 
childhood education,” in D. Slykhuis and G. Marks (Eds.), 
Proceedings of Society for Information Technology & Teacher 
Education 
International 
Conference, 
Chesapeak, 
VA: 
Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education 
(AACE), pp. 2008–2015, 2015. 
[11] 
A. S. Konca, E. Ozel, and H. Zelyurt, “Attitudes of preschool 
teachers towards using information and communication 
technologies (ICT)”, in International Journal of Research in 
Education and Science (IJRES), Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 10–15, 2016. 
[12] 
X. Liu and J. Pange, “Early childhood teachers’ access to and 
use of ICT in teaching: The case of Mainland China”, in 
Proceedings of Global Learn, Berlin, Germany: Association for 
the Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE), pp. 
590–596, 2015. 
[13] 
K. Nikolopoulou and V. Gialamas, “ICT and play in preschool: 
Early childhood teachers’ beliefs and confidence”, in 
International Journal of Early Years Education, Vo. 23, No. 4, 
pp. 409–425, 2015, doi: 10.1080/09669760.2015.1078727 
[14] 
K. R. Fisher, K. Hirsh-Pasek, R. M. Glinkoff, and S.G. Gryfe, 
“Conceptual split? Parents’ and experts’ perceptions of play in 
the 21s century”, in Journal of Applied Developmental 
Psychology, Vol. 29, No. 4., pp. 305–316, 2008. 
[15] 
C. Chiong and C. Shuler, “Learning: Is there an app for that? 
Investigations of young children’s usage and learning with 
mobile devices and apps”, New York: The Joan Ganz Cooney 
Center at Sesame Workshop, 2010. 
[16] 
M. Ito, “Hanging out, messing around, and geeking out: Kids 
living and learning with new media”, MA: MIT Press, 2010. 
[17] 
L. Plowman, C. Stephen, and J. McPake, “Growing up with 
technology, Young children learning in a digital world, NY: 
Routledge, 2010. 
[18] 
D. Elkind, “The hurried child: growing up too fast too soon”, 
In 25th Anniversary edition New York, Da Capo Lifelong 
Learning, pp. XVII, 2007. 
[19] 
P. Häkkinen, S. Järvela, and K. Mäkitalo, “Sharing perspectives 
in virtual interaction: Review of methods of analysis”. In (Eds.) 
B. Watson, S. Ludvigson and U. Hoppe, Designing for Change 
in Networked Learning. Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Computer Support Collaborative Learning, 
Dordrecht: Kuwer, pp. 395–404, 2003. 
[20] 
B. Downe-Wambolt, “Content analysis: Method, applications 
and issues”, in Health Care for Women International, Vol. 13, 
pp. 313-321, 1992. 
[21] 
N. L. Kondraki and N. S. Wellman, “Content analysis: Review 
of methods and their applications in nutrition education”, in 
Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, Vol. 34, pp. 224- 
230, 2002. 
[22] 
P. Mayring, “Qualitative content analysis”, Forum: Qualitative 
Social Research, Vol. 1., No., 2, [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs-texte/2-00/02- 
00mayring-e.htm 
[23] 
CogniToys Dino, Powered by IBM Watson, Kids Cognitive 
Electronic Learning Toy, Amazon. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.amazon.com/CogniToys-Powered-Cognitive- 
Electronic- 
Learning/dp/B014IO4HYS/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=15340 
58082&sr=8-1&keywords=cognitoys+dino 
[24] 
CogniToys: Internet-connected Smart Toys that Learn and 
Grow, 
Kickstarter. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/cognitoys/cognitoys- 
internet-connected-smart-toys-that-learn 
[25] 
Wonder Workshop website, Education, [Online]. Available 
from: https://www.makewonder.com/education/ 
[26] 
Wonder Workshop website, Curriculum, [Online]. Available 
from: https://education.makewonder.com/curriculum/ 
[27] 
L. Kolody, “Kids can now program Dash and Dot robots 
through Swift Playgrounds”, In TechCrunch.com 18.10.2016. 
[Online]. Available from: 
https://techcrunch.com/2016/10/18/kids-can-now-program- 
dash-and-dot-robots-through-swift-playgrounds/ 
[28] 
Fisher Price Smart Toy, [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.smarttoy.com/products 
[29] 
D. Manessis, ”Early childhood post-educated teachers’ views 
and intentions about using digital games in the classroom”, in 
Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Games Based 
Learning, pp. 753-758, 2011. 
[30] 
J. De Haan, “Late on the curve; cause and consequences of 
differences in digital skills”, in E. Ferro, Y., Kumar Dwivedi, 
J.R. Gil-Garcia and M. D. Williams (Eds.) Handbook of 
research on overcoming digital divides: Constructing an 
equitable and competitive information society, pp. 292–308, 
Hershey: Information Science Reference, 2010. 
[31] 
N. Sonck, P. Nikken, and J. De Haan, “Determinants of internet 
mediation: A comparison of the reports by parents and 
children” in Journal of Children and Media 7, pp. 96-113, 2013. 
[32] 
J. Marsh, G. Brooks, J., Hughes, L., Ritchie, S. Roberts, and 
K. Wright, “Digital beginning: Young children’s use of 
popular culture, media and new technologies”. Sheffield: 
University of Sheffield, 2005. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Greg_Brooks/publicatio 
n/265183910_Digital_beginnings_Young_children%27s_use_ 
of_popular_culture_media_and_new_technologies/links/5473 
599e0cf2d67fc036d3df/Digital-beginnings-Young-childrens- 
use-of-popular-culture-media-and-new- 
technologies.pdf?origin=publication_detail 
[33] 
Cognitoys, Dino Commands, 2018. [Online]. Available from: 
https://cognitoys.com/pages/dino-commands 
[34] 
D. M. Hannaway and M. G. Steyn, “Teachers’ experiences of 
technology-based teaching and learning in the foundation 
phase. In Early Child Development and Care, Vol 187, No. 11, 
pp. 1745-1759, 2017. 
[35] 
P. Mertala “Digital technologies in early childhood education 
– a frame analysis of preservice teachers’ perceptions’, in Early 
Child Development and Care, pp. 1-14, 2017. doi: 
10.1080/03004430.2017.1372756 
[36] 
M. Ruckenstein, “Spatial extensions of childhood: from toy 
worlds to online communities”, in Children’s Geographies, 
Vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 476-489, 2013. 
[37] 
M. Ruckenstein, “Toying with the world: children, virtualpets 
and the value of mobility”, in Childhood, Vol. 17, No. 4, pp. 
500-513, 2010. 
[38] 
G.C. Bowker, S. Timmermans, A.E. Clarke, and E. Balka 
“Boundary objects and beyond: Working with Leigh Star”, 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2015. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

