Impact of Advertising Intensity on Customer Churn for Web-Mail Services:
Insights from a Customer Survey in Germany
Jasmin Ebert and Stephan B¨ohm
CAEBUS Center of Advanced E-Business Studies
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences
Wiesbaden, Germany
e-mail: jasebert@web.de,
stephan.boehm@hs-rm.de
Christian J¨ager and Frank Rudolf
Deutsche Telekom AG
Darmstadt,
Germany
e-mail: christian-jaeger@telekom.de,
rudolff@telekom.de
Abstract—Many services on the Internet are offered free of charge
to users. These include web-mail services, which allow access
to e-mails via the browser without the installation of an e-mail
client. Companies offer free web-mail services, for example, as a
complementary service to a paid service or as an introductory or
try-out offer. Advertisements are often placed on the portals of
web-mail services as a revenue model or to help cover costs.
Advertisements may not only contain interesting advertising
messages for users, but may also be perceived as annoying
depending on the content and extent of the advertising. Too much
advertising can lead to a churn of users. Providers, therefore, ﬁnd
themselves in an area of conﬂict between pushing advertising to
increase advertising revenues and limiting advertising to prevent
customer churn. This study examines the impact of advertising
intensity and the change intention of web-mail users. The study
was conducted among the customers of the Telekom E-Mail
Center, one of the popular web-mail offerings in Germany. A
total of 2,228 customers were surveyed, and the signiﬁcance of
the reasons for switching was evaluated by means of discriminant
analysis. After privacy concerns, the most important reason for
changing web-mail providers was found to be too high advertising
intensity.
Keywords–web-mail services; customer churn; advertising in-
tensity; discriminant analysis.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Advertising is of great importance to Internet service
providers, as their business models often depend on this
revenue stream. Online advertising can also contain valuable
information about products and services for Internet users.
Currently, there are more and more sophisticated technolo-
gies supporting the process of selecting advertising messages
relevant to users and deliver them with the lowest possible
dispersion losses. However, the placement of advertisements
may be perceived as annoying or undesirable by users [1].
Internet service providers are thus in a constant balancing act
between realizing advertising revenue potentials and maintain-
ing customer satisfaction. Existing studies on e-mail marketing
and online advertising [2] focus, for example, on the oppor-
tunities for Internet service providers to increase awareness
of their service portfolios, to attract attention, and to arouse
buying interest among potential customers. Moreover, there are
plenty of approaches to measuring customer satisfaction [3].
However, to the knowledge of the authors, there is a research
gap on investigating the negative effects of online advertising
on customer satisfaction as well as analyzing customer churn
as a result of excessive use of advertising by Internet service
providers. Additionally, while existing studies analyzed the
effects of online advertising from the perspective of Internet
service providers or customers (e.g. [4][5]), there is a lack of
studies that try to combine both perspectives.
The main research objective of our paper is, therefore, the
analysis of the effects of advertising on the web-mail portal of
Deutsche Telekom on customer churn. Theoretical principles
from the ﬁeld of operationalizing and measuring customer
satisfaction (e.g., conﬁrmation-disconﬁrmation paradigm, [6])
were included in the design of the customer study. In addition
to the users’ perception of advertising, the study investigated
inﬂuences on customer satisfaction and the intention to churn.
Moreover, various advertising formats and contents (e.g., per-
sonalization of advertising content) and the parallel use of e-
mail service offerings from competitors have been considered
in the study. The online survey focused on the usage of the
e-mail portal on the desktop browser and was conducted in
May and June 2019. Customers were randomly selected among
the visitors of the web-mail portal during a twelve-day survey
period. Since this is still a preliminary study, the analysis is
mainly exploratory, and no explicit research model, e.g., for
validating cause-effect relationships, has been formulated. A
discriminant analysis to identify distinguishing features and
the signiﬁcance of advertising intensity in the groups of users
with and without the intention to churn was carried out.
Against this background, our study is structured as follows:
In Section II, we ﬁrst discuss the use of web-mail in Germany
and describe important advertising content and formats. In the
following, related research on the impact of advertising on the
use of online services is examined and the research objectives
of the paper are presented. Section III then covers the method-
ology and approach of the customer study. Important results
and implications are presented in Section IV before this paper
closes with the conclusions in Section VI as well as limitations
and an outlook on further research in Section VII.
II.
RESEARCH BACKGROUND
A. Web-mail Services and Usage in Germany
The number of users in Germany who use the Internet
to send and receive e-mails has risen sharply in recent years
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

from 38 percent in 2002 to 86 percent in 2019 [7]. Thirty-ﬁve
percent of the customers surveyed also use an additional e-mail
service in parallel. According to this, there is no monopoly
among German e-mail providers, which means that customer
loyalty is becoming increasingly important.
This industry study was conducted among customers of the
web-mail offering of Deutsche Telekom. Deutsche Telekom
emerged from the former state-owned national telecommuni-
cations network operator in Germany and is now a leading
European telecommunications company with headquarters in
Germany. With around 184 million mobile customers, 27.5
million ﬁxed-network lines, and 21 million broadband lines,
the Deutsche Telekom Group is one of the world’s leading
integrated telecommunications companies [8]. The company
launched the ﬁrst mail service for the German mass market
under the T-Online brand in the summer 1995. As one of the
most used e-mail providers in Germany, more than 2.5 billion
e-mails were received via T-Online e-mail addresses in 2019
daily [9].
B. Advertising Content and Formats
In 2017, the Internet replaced classic television as the
world’s most popular advertising medium and this growth
has continued unabated ever since: [10], for example, fore-
casts that the share of Internet advertising in total global
spending will rise from 39 percent in 2017 to 49 percent
by 2021. Global spending on online advertising is expected
to increase from USD 273 billion in 2018 to USD 427
billion by 2022 [11]. In terms of online advertising formats,
the biggest growth is expected to be in display advertising
(banners, online videos), which is primarily due to high-quality
content, better screens and Internet connections, but also to
the creative and personalized approach to target groups [4]
thanks to ”programmatic buying” [10]. Programmatic buying
or programmatic advertising refers to ”... the automated pur-
chase and sale of advertising space” [12]. In the USA, where
digital advertising generates the highest revenues worldwide,
programmatic advertising is predicted to grow from 73 percent
in 2017 to 78 percent by 2023 [13]. Also, since 2017, global
spending on mobile advertising has been 109 billion USD,
exceeding desktop advertising spending of 104 billion USD
[10]. In Germany, the picture so far is still reversed: In 2018,
gross advertising expenditure totaled nearly EUR 12.6 billion,
with desktop advertising accounting for EUR 0.97 billion and
mobile advertising for EUR 0.36 billion [14]. Nevertheless,
the global development of mobile advertising media is also
becoming increasingly visible in Germany: If we look at the
growth of mobile advertising in 2019 (from January to May)
compared to 2018, an increase of 26 percent is apparent [14].
At the same time, gross expenditure on desktop advertising
in 2019 rose by only two percent compared to 2018. As
a result, the focus of online advertising concepts should be
increasingly directed towards mobile in the future, as the use of
mobile devices and thus mobile access to Internet offerings will
increase signiﬁcantly [15]. Table I lists the common advertising
formats within web-mail services.
III.
RELATED WORK AND RESEARCH OBJECTIVES
A. Related Work on Customer Churn at Online Services
The telecommunications industry, in particular, is interested
in predicting customer churn [16] because the telecommuni-
cations sector is a rapidly growing and highly competitive
TABLE I.
OVERVIEW OF IMPORTANT WEB-ADVERTISING FORMATS
Format
Description
Skyscraper
Vertical ad, static, animated or rotating
Text Link
Single-line ad text incl. hyperlink
Inbox Ad
Ad which is integrated into the message list
Transmission Conﬁrmation
Pop-up appearing after an e-mail has been sent
market [17] and it has a direct impact on the competitiveness
of a service provider [18]. Consequently, telecommunications
companies often use customer churn as an important KPI to
make forecasts [19]. The high intensity of competition makes
it more difﬁcult for telecommunications companies to bind
customers to their services in the long term, as it is easy for
customers to switch between providers [17].
B. Related Work on User Impact of Advertising
In the past, the two research areas e-mail marketing and on-
line advertising have already been discussed in detail [1][2][5].
The focus was, for example, on the opportunities offered to
Internet service providers to increase the awareness of their
service portfolio through external communication in order to
attract attention and arouse the buying interest of potential
customers [1][2]. However, this approach neglects when the
opposite could be achieved and customers churn due to exces-
sive advertising intensity. In addition, the personalization of
advertising has been intensively considered. According to [5],
for example, the intrusiveness of advertising increases when it
is personalized by the name of the recipient. Furthermore, there
are also data protection concerns in connection with personal-
ized advertising. In addition, penetrating Internet advertising
has a negative impact on customers’ purchase intentions,
even if it includes discounts. In contrast, personalized online
advertising can still be successful, depending on the industry
of the provider. As far as the telecommunications industry
is concerned, however, no correlation between personalized
advertising and revenue growth could be established in the
past [5].
The situation is similar to the research topic of customer
satisfaction. With regard to the ofﬂine presence of companies,
it has already been shown that the design of salesrooms has
an inﬂuence on customer satisfaction [4]. Even just seeing
the landing page of an e-commerce store can trigger emotions
in users that inﬂuence their behavior [20]. Although various
models and procedures for measuring customer satisfaction
already exist in the literature [3], they are essentially only
concerned with the evaluation of a product or service, customer
service, or the company in general. This fact justiﬁes the aim
of the following study to gain insights into the inﬂuence of
online advertising on customer satisfaction.
In summary, this results in two central research gaps
which are closed by this scientiﬁc work: On the one hand,
within the research ﬁelds of e-mail marketing and online
advertising, the customer perspective has so far receded into
the background, especially with regard to the extent to which
the use of advertising has negative consequences. On the other
hand, there is insufﬁcient research knowledge about customer
satisfaction with regard to the advertising ﬁnancing necessary
from the provider perspective.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

C. Research Objectives of the Customer Survey
The aim of the analysis was to ﬁnd out how strongly
online advertising within web-mail services inﬂuences cus-
tomer satisfaction and can even harm the providers in the
form of customer churn in the long term. For this purpose, the
perception and impact of different online advertising formats
within the Telekom E-Mail Center were measured. Speciﬁcally,
the current use of advertising in the browser application of
the Telekom e-mail service was investigated. The research
questions were:
•
How can advertising within the e-mail portal be used
sensibly without causing negative consequences on
customer satisfaction, e.g., customer churn?
•
How are different advertising formats evaluated from
the customer’s perspective?
•
Does
the
acceptance
of
personalized
and
non-
personalized advertising differ?
•
What is the maximum advertising intensity that can
be expected of users?
•
How is the current advertising volume within the e-
mail portal perceived in comparison to competing web
mail services?
IV.
METHODOLOGY AND STUDY APPROACH
In order to ﬁnd out to what extent the respondents would
change their main provider, i.e., not only the Telekom E-Mail
Center, due to excessive advertising intensity, a discriminant
analysis was applied. The aim of this method was to ﬁnd out
whether online advertising has a ”discriminatory signiﬁcance”
[21] with regard to the customer churn rate; in other words,
to what extent advertising acts as a disruptive factor so that
customers would consider changing providers as a result.
According to the method, customers were initially divided
into two groups, which are distinguished by a no-minus char-
acteristic [21]. The ”discrimination criterion” represents the
customers’ willingness to switch. This results in two groups:
the churners and the non-churners.
The so-called churners are characterized by the fact that
they consider changing their main provider within the next
six months. In contrast, the non-churners estimated their will-
ingness to change the provider within the next six months as
unlikely. In a broader sense, the group of churners can be
considered more dissatisﬁed than the group of non-churners.
Of course, there are also customers who are not willing
to change despite their dissatisfaction. Reasons for this can
be the convenience, barriers to change, or loyalty [22]. The
primary initial question of the discriminant analysis on the
topic of willingness to switch was followed by ordinally scaled
questions in order to determine which motives are most likely
to be behind a possible change of provider by the users.
Accordingly, the group of churners was asked to indicate those
motives for a probable change. In contrast, the group of non-
churners was asked from which motive they would change if
this were hypothetically the case, contrary to their previous
answer on the probability of switching within the next six
months. Possible reasons for the change are given as possible
answers to which the respondents could individually agree
using the ordinal scale. The following reasons for switch-
ing were available [23][24]: Recommendation of a friend or
acquaintance, too much advertising, too few functional and
conﬁguration options, poor usability, data protection concerns,
slow update speed or data transfer, as well as the desire for
change/new things to try out.
The questionnaire was played out randomly at a frequency
of 1/400 per login to the browser-based Telekom E-Mail
Center. In order to consider all usage rituals, all weekdays,
including weekends, were considered with regard to the dura-
tion of the survey. Speciﬁcally, the survey was put online for
around 12 days between Friday, May 31, and Tuesday, June
11, 2019. The test persons came from the existing customer
pool of web-mail service of Deutsche Telekom, which means
that the population was made up of real customers. According
to a previous study, there was also an overlap between the
users of the Telekom E-Mail Center and alternative providers:
44 percent of them also use a competitor’s web-mail offering.
In general, e-mail services are a highly competitive industry
[25]. Therefore, a comparison of competitors was implemented
in the questionnaire.
V.
STUDY FINDINGS AND IMPLICATIONS
In total, 2,228 users took part in the survey. Table II
shows some selected characteristics of the sample. The average
customer who completed the online questionnaire is male,
between 61 and 65 years old, who lives in a two-person
household and has a monthly net income between 2,500 and
2,999 euros. The sample size shows a possible bias as the
results are not representative for the total population.
TABLE II.
OVERVIEW OF SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS
Sample Characteristics
Percentage
Male
74.0%
Female
21.0%
71 years or older
27.0%
Two-person household
52.0%
Monthly net income between 2,500-2,999 euro
9.0%
Table III shows that a majority of the respondents reject
more ads in return for more functionality within the web-
mail offering. Moreover, the analysis showed that 84 percent
generally reject an increase in online advertising, regardless of
whether it is in line with their interests (personalized content)
or not. This anti-attitude of users towards the intensiﬁcation of
advertising makes the starting position more difﬁcult, both for
providers of web-mail services and for advertisers, since both
parties are dependent on advertising or indirectly on adver-
tising revenue or click rates. Even a functional enhancement,
such as increased storage space or spam protection in return
for a higher advertising volume would only be accepted by
twelve percent of the respondents. As far as this practical
example is concerned, it is becoming apparent that many of
the customers surveyed also use the products of alternative
web-mail providers.
As mentioned above, there is strong competition between
web-mail offerings in Germany. Against this background, it
can be assumed that the perceived advertising intensity also
has an inﬂuence on customer loyalty compared to competitors.
Nevertheless, there is a large discrepancy between the subjec-
tive customer opinions regarding the perception of advertising
intensity. This inconsistency in the customer perspective is
expressed in the fact that there is a disagreement between the
researched telecommunications company Deutsche Telekom
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

TABLE III.
ADVERTISING PREFERENCES OF THE STUDY
PARTICIPANTS
Advertising Preferences
Percentage
No acceptance for more ads in return for more
functionality
87.0%
Generally, not more ads, even if personalized
84.0%
Static instead of animated advertising
83.0%
Acceptance of a higher ad volume in return for
unlimited storage space
73.0%
Acceptance of a higher advertising volume in
return for more spam protection
71.0%
No personalized ads for data protection reasons
58.0%
and competing providers in the assessment of the extent
of advertising. According to the survey, 41 percent of the
respondents who actually use the services of other web-mail
providers were convinced that there are differences in the
intensity of advertising between web-mail providers.
Paradoxically, at the same time, 32 percent felt that the
advertising volume at the Deutsche Telekom portal in contrast
to other web-mail services they use is more or less the same.
This result changed insigniﬁcantly if one looks speciﬁcally
at the relationship between Deutsche Telekom and its largest
competitor with regard to differences in the perception of
advertising volume. In addition, it is not possible to generalize
as to whether personalized or non-personalized advertising,
in general, scored better in terms of usefulness. However,
customers in Germany are particularly sensitive when their
privacy is invaded in order to personalize advertising. Fifty-
eight percent of the users expressed data protection concerns
about personalized advertising content. In terms of advertising
format, especially with regard to the examined Telekom E-
Mail Center, simple text links, which redirect the user to the
advertiser via hyperlink if they are interested, performed best.
Only 23 percent found them very annoying. At 37 percent,
respondents felt slightly more disturbed by advertisements in
the form of skyscrapers. The greatest disruption was attributed
to advertising banners integrated into the transmission conﬁr-
mation (55 percent), closely followed by advertisements that
are located within the e-mail list of a mailbox and appear in
the same design as regular e-mails (52 percent).
Nonetheless, critical customer opinions about online adver-
tising were not necessarily reﬂected in their actual behavior,
as shown in Table IV. Forty-two percent of the respondents
would just reduce usage, while 35 percent would simply ignore
annoying advertising without resorting to further measures,
such as complaints or changing providers. Only 20 percent
of the respondents considered changing the provider in case
of too much advertising.
TABLE IV.
IMPACT OF WEB-MAIL ADVERTISING ON WEB-MAIL
USERS
Impacts
Percentage
Reduction of usage in case of too many ads
42.0%
Accept the higher ad volume without a reaction
35.0%
Change of provider in case of too many ads
20.0%
Table V shows that only seven percent of customers intend
to change their main web-mail provider within the next six
months. For 39 percent of the customers, too much advertising
was the reason, while 23 percent had performance problems
with the portal currently in use.
TABLE V.
INTENTION TO SWITCH AND CHURN REASONS
Intention to Switch and Churn Reasons
Percentage
Probability of changing the main provider within the next six
months
7.0%
Too many ads as a reason for changing the main provider
39.0%
Slow update speed/data transfer as a reason for the change
23.0%
In a further analysis step, the reasons for a change of
provider were examined in the group of respondents who had
indicated that they would change provider within the next
six months (churners). Table VI shows the ranking of the
most frequent motives for switching for the web-mail provider
mainly used as a result of the discriminant analysis conducted.
The motive of too much advertising (57 percent) was in second
place after the leading data protection concerns (74 percent).
TABLE VI.
RESULTS OF THE DISCRIMINANT ANALYSIS
Rank
Discriminants
Discriminant Value
1
Privacy concerns
74.3%
2
Too much advertising
57.3%
3
Poor usability
54.6%
4
Recommendation of a friend/acquaintance
12.7%
5
A desire for change/new things to try
9.7%
6
Too few functional and conﬁguration options
5.5%
7
Update speed/data transfer too slow
2.0%
In contrast, when asked explicitly about their risk of
switching to a competitor due to the current advertising use
regarding the Telekom E-Mail Center, 36 percent of customers
said that switching to the competition was very unlikely, and
only two percent considered it very probable. In addition,
a correlation was found between customers’ willingness to
switch and their age. Accordingly, to a certain extent: The
older researched customers are, the more likely they are to
consider switching to another provider due to the advertising
intensity of the considered supplier. This means that 28 percent
of the interviewed users are most willing to switch providers
at the age of 71 or older. In comparison, the average customer
churn measured at Deutsche Telekom was only seven percent.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
The present study examined the extent to which online
advertising in web-mail services affects customer satisfaction.
At the core of the analysis was not only the question of how
online advertising can be used optimally without triggering
negative effects on customer satisfaction or even customer
churn. Furthermore, empirical research was also conducted
on how different advertising formats and content were eval-
uated from the consumer’s point of view and what level
of advertising intensity the users accepted. To answer the
research questions, an online survey was conducted among
the customers of the web-mail service of Deutsche Telekom,
in which a total of 2,228 respondents took part.
In conclusion, it can be summarized that online advertising
is certainly criticized by users. The extent to which customer
satisfaction ultimately has an effect on negative changes in
user behavior, such as customer migration to competitors,
depends on the respective provider. Consequently, in addition
to advertising, other factors inﬂuencing customer satisfaction
should also be considered. This concerns above all the trust
of the customers in the provider with regard to the handling
of sensitive, personal data. Thus, a negative inﬂuence of high
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

advertising volume on the willingness of customers to switch
to web-mail services could be proven (57 percent), but played
a secondary role in addition to other factors, such as data
protection concerns (74 percent) or poor usability (55 percent).
VII.
LIMITATIONS AND OUTLOOK
In order to be able to derive long-term beneﬁts from the
results of a customer satisfaction survey, repeated measure-
ments at regular intervals will be required in the future [4].
The more intangible the service is, the more often satisfaction
measurements or complaint statistics should be analyzed [6].
In this context, the sample could generally be enlarged to
prevent possible bias and to represent the total population.
Moreover, a sample involving other web-mail services (e.g.
from several countries) could increase the generalization of
the results. Furthermore, according to the presented results, a
signiﬁcant percentage of customers believe that the volume of
advertising on the Deutsche Telekom portal is about the same
as that of other web-mail services they use. Therefore, it would
be interesting to ﬁnd out what causes a homogeneous increase
in advertising volume for most services. It might be possible
that the churn rate does not change for the same advertising
volume of competitors.
The connection between the topics of the inﬂuence of
online advertising on customer satisfaction and the pressure
to monetize for advertising-ﬁnanced Internet service providers
is outside the focus of the research but is, therefore, no
less important. The researched telecommunications provider
Deutsche Telekom will remain indirectly dependent on the
active advertising consumption of its users in the future if a free
version continues to be offered, which is ultimately ﬁnanced
by advertising revenue. As a result, Deutsche Telekom might
not only continue to depend on advertising partnerships but
also on achieving satisfactory click-through rates for its web-
mail customers on advertisements displayed in the researched
front-end of the Telekom E-Mail Center. Conversely, Deutsche
Telekom would lose revenue if the number of bookings of
online advertising spaces within the Telekom E-Mail Center
was to decline as a result of falling click rates.
In order to build on the insights gained, it is advisable
to additionally determine how strongly the placed advertising
is generally perceived by the customers. In addition, research
into the willingness to pay for web-mail services of customers
would be conceivable. On the basis of the current state of
research [26], it could, therefore, be investigated to what extent
customer satisfaction affects their willingness to pay for web-
mail services.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Bell and A. Buchner, “Positive effects of disruptive ad-
vertising on consumer preferences,” Journal of Interactive
Marketing, vol. 41, pp. 1–13, 2018.
[2]
M. Hudak, E. Kianickova, and R. Madlenak, “The importance
of e-mail marketing in e-commerce,” Procedia Engineering,
vol. 192, pp. 342–347, 2017.
[3]
R. Milner and A. Furnham, “Measuring customer feedback,
response and satisfaction,” Psychology, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 350–
362, 2017.
[4]
D. Ahlert, P. Kenning, and C. Brock, Handelsmarketing:
Grundlagen der marktorientierten F¨uhrung von Handelsbe-
trieben (Trade marketing: Basics of the market-oriented man-
agement of trading companies), 2. Auﬂ. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2018.
[5]
J. van Doorn and J. C. Hoekstra, “Customization of online
advertising: The role of intrusiveness,” Marketing Letters,
vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 339–351, 2013.
[6]
H. Meffert, M. Bruhn, and K. Hadwich, Dienstleistungsmarket-
ing: Grundlagen – Konzepte – Methoden (Service Marketing:
Basics – Concepts – Methods), 9., vollst¨andig ¨uberarbeitete
und erweiterte Auﬂage. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien
Wiesbaden, 2018.
[7]
Statista, E-Mail – Anteil der Nutzer in Deutschland 2019 (E-
mail - Proportion of users in Germany 2019), 2020. [Online].
Available: https://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/204272/
umfrage/nutzung- des- internets- fuer- versenden- empfangen-
von-e-mails-in-deutschland/ [retrieved: 07/15/2020].
[8]
Deutsche
Telekom
AG,
F¨uhrender
europ¨aischer
Telekommunikations-Anbieter
(Leading
European
telecommunications
provider),
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.telekom.com/de/konzern/konzernproﬁl [retrieved:
07/20/2020].
[9]
Infosat, Telekom startet neue Email-Domain @magenta.de
(Telekom starts new email domain @magenta.de), 2019. [On-
line]. Available: https : / / www . infosat . de / entertainment /
telekom - startet - neue - email - domain - magentade [retrieved:
07/20/2020].
[10]
J. Barnard, Advertising expenditure forecasts march 2019:
Executive summary, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.
zenithmedia.com/product/advertising-expenditure-forecasts-
march-2019/ [retrieved: 07/20/2020].
[11]
Statista, Programmatic advertising, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://de.statista.com/statistik/studie/id/54223/dokument/
programmatic-advertising/ [retrieved: 07/15/2020].
[12]
Statista, Ausgaben f¨ur Online-Werbung weltweit in den Jahren
2013 bis 2017 sowie eine Prognose bis 2022 (in Milliarden US-
Dollar) (Spending on online advertising worldwide from 2013
to 2017 and a forecast until 2022 (in billions of US dollars),
2018. [Online]. Available: https://de.statista.com/statistik/
daten / studie / 185637 / umfrage / prognose - der - entwicklung -
der - ausgaben - fuer - online - werbung - weltweit/ [retrieved:
07/20/2020].
[13]
Statista, Digitale Werbung (Digital advertising), 2019. [On-
line]. Available: https : / / de . statista . com / outlook / 216 / 137 /
digitale-werbung/deutschland [retrieved: 07/15/2020].
[14]
Nielsen, Bereinigter Werbetrend, Datenstand 17.06.2019: Wer-
betrend: Top Trends im Mai 2019. (Adjusted advertising trend,
data status 17.06.2019: Advertising trend: Top trends in May
2019.) 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.nielsen.com/
de/de/insights/reports/2019/top- ten- trends.html [retrieved:
07/20/2020].
[15]
Cisco, Cisco visual networking index: Global mobile data
trafﬁc forecast update, 2017-2022, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://davidellis.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/cisco-vni-
mobile-data-trafﬁc-feb-2019.pdf [retrieved: 07/20/2020].
[16]
A. Ahmed and D. M. Linen, “A review and analysis of
churn prediction methods for customer retention in telecom
industries,” in 2017 4th International Conference on Advanced
Computing and Communication Systems (ICACCS), IEEE,
2017, pp. 1–7.
[17]
O. Adwan, H. Faris, K. Jaradat, O. Harfoushi, and N.
Ghatasheh, “Predicting customer churn in telecom industry
using multilayer preceptron neural networks: Modeling and
analysis,” Life Science Journal, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 75–81, 2014,
ISSN: 1097-8135.
[18]
A. Sundararajan and K. Gursoy, Telecom customer churn
prediction, 2020. DOI: 10 . 7282 / t3 - 76xm - de75. [Online].
Available: https : / / rucore . libraries . rutgers . edu / rutgers - lib /
62514/PDF/1/play/ [retrieved: 07/20/2020].
[19]
A. Amin et al., “Customer churn prediction in the telecommu-
nication sector using a rough set approach,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 237, pp. 242–254, 2017.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[20]
A. Piazza, C. Lutz, D. Schuckay, C. Zagel, and F. Bodendorf,
“Emotionalizing e-commerce pages: Empirical evaluation of
design strategies for increasing the affective customer re-
sponse,” in Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing,
Springer, Ed., Nuremberg, Coburg: Springer, Cham, 2018,
pp. 252–263.
[21]
A. Tharwat, T. Gaber, A. Ibrahim, and A. E. Hassanien, “Lin-
ear discriminant analysis: A detailed tutorial,” AI Commun.,
vol. 30, pp. 169–190, 2017.
[22]
M. Bruhn, Qualit¨atsmanagement f¨ur Dienstleistungen: Hand-
buch f¨ur ein erfolgreiches Qualit¨atsmanagement. Grundlagen
– Konzepte – Methoden (Quality management for services:
Manual for successful quality management. Basics – concepts
– methods), 10. Berlin, Heidelberg, 2016.
[23]
G. B¨ottcher, Schlechter Service ist h¨auﬁger Grund f¨ur An-
bieterwechsel (Poor service is a common reason for change
of provider), 2013. [Online]. Available: https : / / www .
springerprofessional . de / kundenservice / kundenmanagement /
schlechter-service-ist-haeuﬁger-grund-fuer-anbieterwechsel/
6603850 [retrieved: 07/20/2020].
[24]
J. Mandak and J. Hanclova, “Use of logistic regression for
understanding and prediction of customer churn in telecom-
munications,” Statistika, vol. 99, no. 2, pp. 129–141, 2019.
[25]
Publicare Marketing Communications, Der Deutschen liebste
E-Mail-Dienste 2019 (The German’s favorite e-mail services
2019), 2018. [Online]. Available: https://publicare.de/blog/
publicare-e-mail-studie-2019/ [retrieved: 07/15/2020].
[26]
N. Koschate-Fischer, “Preisbezogene Auswirkungen von Kun-
denzufriedenheit (Price-related effects of customer satisfac-
tion),” in Kundenzufriedenheit, C. Homburg, Ed., Wiesbaden:
Springer Gabler, 2016, pp. 93–121, ISBN: 978-3-658-08688-6.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

