What Is There For Supper?
Remote Access to the Stock of Food in a Smart Kitchen
Anne Wegerich
Chair of Human–Machine Systems
TU Berlin
Berlin, Germany
Email: awe@mms.tu-berlin.de
Matthias Roetting
Chair of Human–Machine Systems
TU Berlin
Berlin, Germany
Email: roetting@mms.tu-berlin.de
Abstract—This article shows the ﬁrst steps of a new remote
access technology for a smart kitchen. With a mobile device
and this technology the user will be able to remotely check
the foodstock at home by using a smartphone application.
Therefore, we ﬁrstly integrated a scale application and Radio–
Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) to measure the ﬁll level of
food boxes in the kitchen. This information is processed and
stored by a speciﬁc component of an information system
called FillLevelCheck, which is part of a smart kitchen project.
By setting up a connected web server this information will
be available online and can be requested by mobile web
applications. This article describes the functionality of the
information system component FillLevelCheck and the used
hardware. In a next step, we will continue setting up the web
frontend and the mobile application for remotely accessing
the information. Altogether, this article presents a solution to
measure ﬁll levels of food boxes, which is more comfortable
than other applications and acceptable for users.
Keywords-Smart Kitchen; Information System; Remote Ac-
cess;
I. INTRODUCTION
The idea of the remote food access system is part of
a smart kitchen project (UARKit- Ubiquitous Augmented
Reality kitchen [7]). There a lot of different tasks occur, e.g.,
cooking a meal. These tasks are supported by tracking the
user and showing him projected hints where an ingredient
is located in the room and what to do with it. Beside the
research concerning correct Augmented Reality projections
for cooking steps, we set up a system component called
FillLevelCheck. It collects information about ﬁll levels in the
meaning of storing the remaining amount of food (types) in
the kitchen. For this task, we concentrate on the left amount
of food not on the usability of the food like their durability
or smell.
For UARKit, this information also enables different tech-
nical functions like projecting the amount of the next ingre-
dient which has to be thrown into the cake dough (projection
of coloured shapes on the butter for the amount of butter
which has to be taken). Another use case is the presentation
of suggested recipes which are possible for the current stock
of food as a list.
The FillLevelCheck consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part
will be explained in this paper and concerns the hardware
solution behind the measurement of the food (box) ﬁll level.
The second part is currently work in progress and only will
be described as a draft.
For the target applications, e.g., recipe or buying list
provisioning the measurement unit of every ingredient type
will be its weight. The identiﬁcation of the weighted objects
is done by using RFID. This technology is of growing
interest especially in the (food) producing and packaging
industry. Beside the common barcode identiﬁcation RFID
has the chance to become a resistant method of identifying
disposable articles such as food packages.
The following section gives insight into the measurement
of physical contents of boxes. Section 3 describes the
(proposed) functionality of the current system and its aim.
At the end, a summary and a discussion will involve the
comparison between the used and alternative technologies.
II. MEASURING AND ACCESSING FILL LEVELS
A lot of research has been done due to the topic of
measuring ﬁll levels especially in physically measuring the
contents of tanks ﬁlled with liquids or granular material.
Various patents for devices and methods exist. Current
approaches use ultrasonic or electromechanical technologies
for sensors which measure ﬁll levels of liquids, such as water
[1][2][8]. Here, a measuring device is connected to each tank
that has to be monitored. These devices still are very big and
expensive and cannot be used for the UARKit application
of measuring disposable articles with the FillLevelCheck
component. Additionally, the information about the content
measured in various possible physical units is not necessary
for this application. Because of the non existing restrictions
for food box sizes, the data about ﬁll levels expressed as a
percentage can not be used for recipe provisioning.
However, with this work, we want to set up a measuring
method which is based on the weight of the food. This
statement is necessary for a system which is able to handle
different food boxes with liquid or non-liquid contents at
the same time. Weight, therefore, is the lowest common
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

denominator for the entities gram, litre, and pieces. Further-
more, weight can be measured in a very simple way which is
only barely susceptible to measurement errors. Additionally,
the sensor technology should be inexpensive and must have
an interface to integrate it in the smart kitchen hardware
and software. This means that an ultrasonic sensor can not
be attached to each food box the kitchen contains. The
measurement has to be integrated in the furniture of the
kitchen.
Different technologies are suitable to additionally identify
objects. Possible are, e.g., barcodes combined with optical
identiﬁcation technologies. We cannot use this because a lot
of food packing do have this code on the bottom or in an area
where occlusions inhibit the optical identiﬁcation. Another
problem is the missing technical expandability. Barcode
reader can only recognize one code per measurement. This
means if the user has more than one object to put it on the
shelf (typically two) he has to hold each in front of the reader
one after another, whereas RFID reader can read up to 30
objects per second (measurement loop). Furthermore, RFID
is not inﬂuenced by optical occlusions. But, because of the
current little availability of RFID tags on food packing, for
this project, we use boxes with RFID tags. The food has
to be put in these boxes before they can be identiﬁed. The
boxes, therefore, have to be initialized as connected to a
speciﬁc food content like ﬂour at the moment the system is
launched.
Another similar project already uses weight sensors and
RFID [4]. They identify food ingredients and collect them to
facilitate the choice of food or recipes for healthy cooking.
Therefore, a similar sensor and identiﬁcation platform is
installed. But, in this project no remote access is possible or
planned. In addition the user has to collect the food boxes he
wants to take for his meal and must place them together on
a so called counter. Our project wants to integrate weight
sensors and identiﬁcation in every furniture, to realize a
hidden information system for all the food which is there. It
should reduce the need of unusual user behaviour as much
as possible. It also will help organizing the stock of food
for a lot of different applications around this system.
Remote Access to smart home information (systems) is
a well–deﬁned research ﬁeld and today also a huge market
for consumer applications. Computer-based services at home
can be monitored and controlled interactively from anywhere
in the world via the Internet. This incorporates safety checks
when the user is away as well as entertainment controlling
from one room which has inﬂuence on every display or
stereo in the whole house [3], [5].
Accessing the information about the left amount of food at
home only involves another type of information and another
relating database structure. We, therefore, will concentrate
on using technologies which are highly ﬂexible and fast,
easy to develop and integrate, and with which we can setup
a high data privacy level. This is of great importance because
of the very private (and attractive) user data about what a
user buys and eats.
III. PRELIMINARY SURVEY
The usage of an additional information system for check-
ing ﬁll levels in a kitchen is connected to speciﬁc user
behaviour. This is reduced to one step. Right after the food
has been bought it should be put into a RFID box which
is prepared for one food type. Figure 1 shows examples for
these boxes and the intended content.
Figure 1.
Examples for RFID tagged boxes and food content.
Because of the need for this unusual kitchen behaviour
we did a preliminary online survey. We, therefore, asked
50 people (27 male, 23 female, average age of 30.58 years,
standard deviation 6.6) online. The question was whether
people would sort their food into these boxes to have an
information system as described above. The online survey
offered a short description of the proposed system and
possible applications like the mobile usage of buying lists
for speciﬁc recipes or the provision of recipes which are
possible with the current stock of food. The description was
closed with the picture seen in Figure 1.
The question whether the unusual behaviour is accept-
able to have the system followed the picture. The answer
possibilities were presented with a 5-level Likert scale in
german analogue to the english scale with the options
from ”strongly agree” (for analytic reasons connected to the
number 5) to ”strongly disagree”(number 1) and the mid
option ”neutral”(3).
Descriptive statistics. 50 participants answered the ques-
tion. 5 of them had no preference and clicked ”neutral”. 8 %
chose ”strongly agree”, 46 % decided for ”agree”, 32 % for
”disagree”, and 4% for ”strongly disagree”. The arithmetic
mean is 3.22 (st. dev. 1.11) which shows the tendency to
accept this task.
We did not ask for reasons for this decision because of its
complexitiy. We already made this experience while making
surveys for developping other smart home applications. The
reasons in this case must be found out in further studies.
IV. THE FILLLEVELCHECK COMPONENT
A. FillLevelCheck System Setup
The system component for measuring and storing ﬁll
levels of food boxes consists of different hard- and software
parts. The system setup is shown in Fig. 2.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Figure 2.
System setup
For the object identiﬁcation, we use RFID-Reader and
tags which are ﬁxated on each food box. Therefore, we
applied passive transponder at the frequency of 125 kHz with
inductive power supply. This ensures a maximum reading
distance of up to 30 cm. The advantage of these tags,
compared to usual tags using the frequency at 13,56 MHz,
is, that the range of the reader is large enough to identify the
boxes while being small enough not to read the information
from other shelfs (no reader overlap). This reduces data
collisions if more than one reader is installed in one shelf.
Additionally difﬁcult climate conditions can be handled with
these tags like a high humidity because they have a robust
design (plastic jacket). Furthermore, if only small numbers
of tags should be red by one reader but a lot of those reader
have to be installed the costs for the expensive tags at 125
kHz but cheaper reader pay off for the kitchen application.
For the measurement of weight sensors are attached under
an additionally installed shelf base above the normal base
(see Fig. 2). For a later installation of such a system this is
an easy way of incorporating sensors and cables.
Both of these hardware parts are connected to the in-
formation system server which is implemented using Java.
It handles a lot of components like optical user tracking
and information presentations which are adapted to the used
display (different types are used in the kitchen) and the
shown information (navigational hints to a searched object
or presentation of recipe step).
Measuring and storing the ﬁll levels is solved within two
steps for later accessing the whole stock of food in the
kitchen.
The ﬁrst step is the identiﬁcation of all objects which are
available on one shelf. Therefore, every object has to be
recognized by the RFID reader. This happens automatically
if the object tag gets into the reading distance of the RFID
reader. But, every object has to pass the reader actively
(the user has to hold the object in this way once) if the
dimensions of the shelf allow greater distances than 30 cm
between objects and RFID reader. The information about
all currently available object IDs (up to 30 object IDs per
second) is used for the data integration of object identiﬁer
and current weight difference.
The second step involves a weight measuring loop which
provides the weight of the whole shelf base for the infor-
mation system and for the database. This means that if one
object is taken away or put into the shelf the difference be-
tween the past weight and the current weight are compared.
If the box (and the content) is taken away (difference in ID
list from step 1) the database holds the old weight value for
this ID. The appropriate value ’weight’ will be updated if
the same object (ID) is recognized again and the weighting
loop result shows the difference. If the object is new, a new
entry is generated with the current weight difference. The
measurements provided by the weight sensors are currently
requested every 200 milliseconds (adaptable).
Afterwards, the database contains the frequently updated
information about which food boxes are there and which
weight they have. This database will be requested by the
remote access system. This will enable the information
provosioning of at least possible meals by knowing the
amount of ingredients which are necessary for suggested
meals (from a stored list) and which are available in the
kitchen. Also a buying list can be created for a proposed
recipe or a weekly purchase.
B. FillLevelCheck Functionality and Open Issues
The measurement of shelf base weights and the identiﬁ-
cation of objects are designed ﬁt together. More precisely,
a cause of measurement and database failure can only be
generated by these two components and a measurement time
overlap of the two parts.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Figure 3.
Three screenshots of an exemplary ﬁll level measurement by
using a scale and RFID (stucked on the shelf)
Despite the investigations of an optimal loop duration for
the weight measurement it is still possible that a user is able
to put more than one object on the shelf within 200 ms. In
this case typically two objects are put on the shelf because
the user has one object in each hand. This results in the
described unclear assignment of the weight differences for
both food boxes in the database.
The system, therefore, can only handle one object per
200 ms. From our experience a user is not able to place
two objects in that way that the measurement identiﬁes both
objects and measures the different weight for both so that
it is unclear which weight belongs to each of the boxes.
Nevertheless, if two objects or more are put back into the
shelf the calculation can not assign the taken contents to the
database entries and throws an exception.
One obvious solution could be the shorter loop duration
to avoid the time overlapping processes of putting two (or
more) objects in the shelf. But, in this case situations are
still possible where the user puts objects into the shelf
at the exact same time (equal up to one millisecond).
The minimal possible time range of uncertainty or time
overlapping relates to the computers capacities because of
the implementation methods and latencies of opening serial
ports for reading the values of the weight sensors. These
durations have inﬂuence on the minimum loop duration.
Thus, the risk of getting a database error varies between
systems.
In our tests the system measurements had been correct
for taking weights of the objects and identifying them for a
weighting loop duration of 200 ms.
Another problem is the possible existence of different
food boxes (and tags) for the same or very similar contents,
e.g., sugar (normal sugar, powdered sugar, brown sugar,
etc.). The tags we use are associated only with one nu-
merical identiﬁer. These identiﬁers have to be associated
with a special ingredient (category) once they are new in
the shelf to avoid the described problem. At this point of
work, the user has to sort the object into the right box
(right after he or she has bought it). Currently, there is no
possibility of recognizing objects automatically because of
the missing RFID tags in the food industry. If this application
is established in the future this information can be stored in
the tag and must not be determinded by the user anymore.
Also other interactive identifying technologies like barcodes
are suitable for this purpose.
With an automatic identiﬁcation of the box contents the
information system implementation has to be changed in
that way that a category order sorts the ingredients by their
contents or categorial relations. This avoids that recipe sug-
gestions only relate to one box with sugar and misses other
boxes where also sugar can be found. But it also enables
automatic substitution suggestions if one speciﬁc ingredient
is missing but another very similar ingredient is available,
e.g., oregano is missing, but marjoram is there. However,
the appropriate sorting techniques may have any degree of
complexity relating to the purpose. For our proposed system
the apriori assignment of the user is the knowledge base for
the applications ’buying list’ and ’recipe suggestion’.
The left risk of not recognizing each food box on its
own and reading collisions for (two or more involved) RFID
reader with more than 30cm radio distances also is an open
issue. But, the usage of low frequencies for the RFID tag
technology and user instructions avoid this problems nearly
hundred percent. The recognition only fails if the tag (or
food box) is moved by the user with too much distance to the
reader. Beside the web application development we therefore
will incorporate a feedback sign (visual or acustic) to give
feedback about the correctness and amount of recognized
food boxes.
V. REMOTE ACCESS
The system component, so far, is able to manage and
provide valid values for the available weight of foods in
the (shelf of a) kitchen which are stored and accessed via
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

a database. No simple user interface is available yet. The
planned additional component of a web server will make
these data available online especially for mobile devices (see
Fig. 2). The appropriate application will suggest recipes for
the left food or can answer the question what to buy if the
user is in the supermarket and does not know his stocks of
food at home.
Therefore, a web and a mobile application will be im-
plemented in the next step of our work. We will use the
play! framework [9] to ﬁrst set up the web application. This
framework enables quick and easy application development
on the basis of the model, view, controller–pattern. Thus,
the information provided by the database can be accessed
by simply calling the website via a browser and using a
personal login. Therefore, we incorporate projects like play–
siena–user [6].
The next step will be to develop this access via a native
mobile application for smartphones. This intention is related
to the trends of interactive applications where smartphone
hardware is integrated in web search processes. In our case,
this for example could be a recipe suggestion generation by
scanning a barcode of a food box or recognizing a RFID tag
in the supermarket. The customer beneﬁt would be that if,
e.g., the substitution application of the information system
at home already knows that a similar product is available
there he or she does not need to buy the new product.
VI. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
In this article, we described the state of work concerning
a new system which enables the remote access to the stock
of food in a smart kitchen. Beside different other system
components in the kitchen like user tracking this system
measures and stores ﬁll levels of food boxes. In the next
step, we will develop a smartphone and web application
with a user interface to access this information by, e.g.,
having a buying list for a speciﬁc recipe or suggestions for
at least possible meals with the available food in the kitchen.
The current system setup incorporate RFID and weighting
techniques for a storage of data in a database which will be
accessable via web.
The system, in general, is designed to also help people
with handicaps or the elderly. Therefore the system provides
simple diplayable lists for the existing stock of food. The
user must not search the shelfs. The application of appropri-
ate recipe suggestions for the left food also allows a greater
variety of meals (also for speciﬁc nutrition schedules) with
avoiding (vicious) eating habits. Nevertheless, the system
helps to avoid unnecessary purchases and trips to the super-
market.
The open issues for such a system are the measurement
loop durations for the weight sensors and the approriate
identiﬁcation performance to generate only valid data with-
out unclear database assignment states. Also, the problem
of needed tasks, instructions, and feedback signs in a user
interface should be designed in a user friendly way.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Auber, M. Mellert, M. Mosmann, and T. Oehler. Fill level
measurement device and a method for operating such a ﬁll level
measurement device. Patent US 6769300, September 2000.
[2] W. Brutschin, A. Kaiser, C. Sawitzki, and K. Okazaki.
Electromechanical
ﬁll
level
measurement
unit.
Patent
WO/2012/089635, July 2012.
[3] Marmitek BV. Smart solutions at home. http://www.marmitek.
com/de/index.php, 2012. [retrieved : Oct., 2012].
[4] J. Chi, P.and Chen, H. Chu, and B. Chen. Enabling nutrition-
aware cooking in a smart kitchen.
In CHI ’07: Extended
abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, pages 2333–
2338, 2007. doi: 10.1109/MPRV.2010.75.
[5] Karlsruhe
Institute
of
Technology.
Energy
smart
home
lab.
http://www.kit.edu/besuchen/8992.php,
2012.
[retrieved : Oct., 2012].
[6] Open Project. Project play–siena–user. http://code.google.com/
p/play-siena-user/, 2012. [retrieved : Oct., 2012].
[7] UARKit Project.
Ubiquitous Augmented Reality Kitchen.
http://www.mms.tu-berlin.de\-/menue/forschung\-/projekte/
uarkit/, 2012. [retrieved : Oct., 2012].
[8] A. Wiedekind-Klein. Contactless ﬁlling level measurement of
liquids. Patent US 20110314907, December 2011.
[9] Typesafe
Zenexity.
play!
framework.
http://www.
playframework.org/, 2012. [retrieved : Oct., 2012].
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

