Serious Games to Improve the Physical Health of the Elderly:  
A Categorization Scheme  
Jaime A. Garcia Marin 
mHealth Laboratory, iNEXT 
University of Technology Sydney, FEIT 
Sydney, Australia 
Jaime.A.GarciaMarin@student.uts.edu.au 
Karla Felix Navarro, Elaine Lawrence 
mHealth Laboratory, iNEXT 
University of Technology Sydney, FEIT 
Sydney, Australia 
Karla.FelixNavarro;Elaine.Lawrence@uts.edu.au
 
 
Abstract— this paper aims to provide a snapshot of the 
current status in the field of serious games for improving the 
physical health of the elderly. This work covers recent research 
projects for stroke rehabilitation and for falls prevention 
where user-center design methodologies were applied in order 
to satisfy this audience. A classification of the most relevant 
work in this area is provided along with a brief description of 
the platform, technology required and user-center design 
principles applied. 
 
Keywords- 
serious 
games, 
classification, 
categorization 
scheme, elderly, games for health, user-center design . 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Based on recent studies, it is stated that the aged 
population is dramatically increasing in both developing and 
developed countries. As an example, in Australia the aged 
population (+65 years old) increased by 94,800 people 
between June 2009 and Jun 2010, representing a 3.3% 
increase. In the last decade the aged cohort increased from 
11.1% to 13.5%. These increases were also reflected in 
people over 85 years of age by  6.1 per cent and people over 
100 years by 18.2 percent [1].  A government  report 
predicts that the health spending will increase at the same 
rate as the number of aged Australians which is expected to 
double over the next four decades [2]. Therefore, the need 
of supporting this upcoming population has become a 
concern for governments and health providers around the 
world. 
As a consequence of aging, the human body suffers a 
series of changes that could lead to the decline of the mental 
and motor capabilities. Furthermore, diseases such as 
postural instability, balance disorders and stroke are 
common at this age and are considered the main cause of 
disability among the elderly.  [3, 4] 
Current rehabilitation methods normally require the user 
to perform repetitive activities in order to recover lost motor 
abilities. However, the mechanics of this practice are often 
boring 
for 
patients 
affecting 
their 
motivation 
and 
commitment to the treatment [3].  
Videogames have become popular among the aged 
population during the last decade, especially since the 
release of the Nintendo Wii [5]. Its revolutionary remote 
controller has changed the way to interact with videogames 
encouraging players to perform physical activities while 
playing [5].  
Specialists and researchers have applied efforts to 
include interactive games in health treatments looking for a 
suitable method to keep their patients engaged. According to 
the literature, a significant number of studies have been 
conducted showing a positive impact among elderly users 
who 
increased 
their 
motivation 
and 
adherence 
to 
rehabilitation [6]. However, this practice could also result in 
undesirable consequences or poor outcomes for elder 
players when the aged-related changes are not considered 
[7, 8]. Usability issues have been found mainly because 
these games are not designed for this audience leading to 
negative impacts for the elderly [7-10].In view of that, most 
recent research projects are more concern about the end user 
needs, preferences and limitations during the design process 
as a strategy to guarantee accessibility [11-13]. In fact, the 
literature suggests that focusing on the intended user and 
their requirements has shown satisfactory results in games 
[14, 15]. 
As the main interest of this work is the usage of video 
games as an effective tool for improving the health of the 
elderly, one of the main goals of our research is to identify 
how the proper design could guarantee optimal results. The 
work presented here aims to provide a snapshot of the 
current status in the area trough a literature review and 
categorization of relevant work. Therefore, special attention 
was given to research projects that presented tested working 
prototypes and that incorporated user-centered design for 
the elderly. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
presents a brief summary of the evolution of this area 
including previous relevant classifications of this discipline. 
In Section 3, we describe our methodology and present our 
criteria of selection in Section 4. Section 5 contains a review 
of the games and finally, the discussion and conclusions are 
found in Section 6.   
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Over the last decade, the usage of videogames has 
become popular among different audiences.  However such 
64
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

 
video games have a huge potential as a tool for other 
purposes. “Serious games” is a relatively new field that 
could be described as the usage of videogames to help users 
to achieve a specific goal by playing a game [16]. This 
concept has been used to develop games for a range of areas 
such as such as medicine, defense, education and health  
among others. 
In 2002, the ‘Serious Games’ initiative was formed to 
establish a formal basis for this emerging industry [17]. Two 
years later, the ‘Games for Health’ project was founded 
[18]. Its objective was to support community, knowledge 
and business development efforts to use games to improve 
health and health care. As a result of this movement, an 
annual conference is celebrated. The annual ‘Games for 
Health’ conference covers topics such as: exergaming, 
physical therapy, rehabilitation and training. In 2006, the 
ElderGAMES project started [19]. It was based on the use 
of entertainment in leisure time of the elderly as a tool for 
rehabilitation and prevention of the common diseases at this 
age. The project created an interactive-play board that aimed 
to maintain the elderly cognitive abilities through exercises 
[13].  
In 2008, Sawyer and Smith [15] presented a 
categorization of serious games. This work establishes a 
snapshot of the state of this area at that time.  The authors 
presented a general categorization of games and the 
application fields as well as further details for each 
category. Within the range of games for health, they present 
a classification of existing games grouped by intended 
audience and purpose.  
In 2010, Rego et al. [16] extended this work presenting a 
taxonomy that focuses on games for rehabilitation. This 
survey covers a range of games to serve people with 
declines in motor and cognitive capabilities. They identified 
a set of criteria for the classification that focused on the 
following dimensions: (1) the purpose of the game, as the 
game could be intended for cognitive rehabilitation or 
physical rehabilitation; (2) the way the user interacts with 
the game; (3) either the game interface was two dimensional 
or three dimensional; (4) if the game allows more than one 
simultaneous players; (5) if the challenge was dynamically 
adapted based on the patient performance; (6) if the system 
enables the patient to know their progress; (7) progress 
monitoring capability; (8) capacity of game portability. At 
the end the authors compared the most relevant work found 
and used a system called RehaCom as a reference. 
This 
work 
complements 
and 
extends 
previous 
classifications by presenting an expert categorization 
scheme where the use of games for improving the physical 
health of the elderly is the focal point. Consequently, the 
existing literature was surveyed focusing on games with this 
purpose. The inclusion of user centered design as a key 
element on this survey was incorporated as a result of 
previous studies conducted by the authors [20-22] as well as 
for its prevailing highlighted importance on existing 
literature in the area [11, 14, 15]. On account of the above 
the following topics were incorporated in this work: (1) 
games for post-stroke rehabilitation; (2) games for balance 
training and falls prevention; (3) user-centered design 
methodologies and evaluation; (4) guidelines for designing 
games for older adults. It is valuable to mention that stroke 
rehabilitation and fall prevention prevail through the 
literature , as stroke and falls are the most common causes 
of disability among the elderly [3, 23]. The next section set 
out the methodology used for our classification and the most 
relevant findings in terms of usability and gaming design for 
the elderly. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
A comprehensive search was conducted in order to 
gather relevant information for our categorization. 
 Searching for relevant data, peer reviewed journal 
articles (such as from ELSEVIER Health) and technical 
articles sourced from databases, for example,  IEEE, ACM, 
EBSCO were reviewed for this work. The first phase of our 
search focused on identifying key points for a proper design 
for the elderly. That included understanding the ageing 
process and changes in the human body and common 
diseases at this age.  
Based on our findings from stage one, we oriented the 
second phase of this work on technologies that included the 
entertainment factor to provide tools for physical and 
cognitive rehabilitation in patients that suffered stroke  and 
games for falls prevention and balance training in older 
adults.  
As our review was of a heterogeneous nature, a concept 
matrix was created in order to ease the classification of the 
existing games for improving the physical health of the 
elderly. 
For 
each 
reviewed 
project, 
the 
following 
information was registered: 
1) Audience: As we are focused on games for health and 
the elderly, one of our goals was to identify if the game 
was suitable for older adults. This includes testing 
phases with older users and design evaluation post-
playing. 
2) Goal: this dimension is related to which area of the 
human body perceives benefits from playing the game, 
Also it aims to show if the game is designed as a 
training tool or for rehabilitation and if the main 
purpose was to either improve physical functions or 
cognitive processes.  
3) Interaction: the way the user interacts with the game. 
Some systems use commercial input devices such as a 
remote controller, keyboard, mouse, etc. Some others 
developed their own input devices or ask the user to 
wear sensors that could be recognized by the platform. 
4) Technology: a brief description of components and 
techniques that make it possible to run the game. 
5) Special Age Appropriate Features: enhancement or 
mechanism that makes the game suitable for the elderly 
such as adapting the difficulty of the game dynamically. 
65
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

 
6) Home-based:  (yes/no) as many games are developed to 
be used at medical centers or rehabilitation centers. It is 
worth mentioning that games to be played at home 
could be more beneficial to users because this reduces 
the need to travel to rehabilitation centers.  
7) Feedback: this dimension is related to the kind of 
feedback provided. Some games only use images and 
graphics on the screen to represent user actions (visual). 
Some others emit sounds (audio) or use vibration alerts 
(haptics) to notify actions to the user. 
8) Measurement: 
this 
dimension 
is 
related 
to 
measurements that can be obtained during or after 
playing the game and could help specialists to 
determine improvements through medical assessment. 
9) Progress Record: game characteristics that record user 
results (score, performance, etc). 
IV. 
CRITERIA OF SELECTION 
Overall, the reviewed literature showed that using games 
as a tool for rehabilitation and training has shown a positive 
outcome for the elderly. However, many tests have revealed 
that seniors could perceive this practice as an unpleasant 
experience and unfavorable results could be obtained. The 
main cause of this lies on usability issues related to changes 
in the human body over the years. Therefore, much effort 
has been applied to establish guidelines in order to create 
suitable games for this audience [24]. 
 
IJsselsteijn et al. [10] and presented a compilation of age 
related changes that must be considered when designing 
digital games for elderly users. They state that, although 
each individual differs from others in terms of abilities and 
experience, the human body normally tends to suffer a 
series of changes in sensory-perceptual processes, motor 
abilities and cognitive processes when getting older. For 
these reasons, the elderly user may not find these games 
enjoyable or beneficial if the games are not properly 
designed.  
 
Flores et al. [9] conducted a search of journals and 
databases as a methodology to gather information regarding 
the most important game design principles for post-stroke 
rehabilitation. This review was focused on finding a set of 
criteria for both; a) designing effective therapy for post-
stroke patients and b) entertainment for the elderly. It was 
found that the most of the games for post-stroke 
rehabilitation did not include enjoyable content for the 
elderly. Furthermore, they proposed a set of criteria for both 
which is set out in Table 1. 
 
Based on these guidelines, key points for suitable design 
for the elderly were identified and used for classification. 
Thus, the concept matrix was used as a tool for filtering data 
and identifying the most relevant work. Our criteria of 
selection are set in Table 2. 
 
Table 1: Gaming design criteria for stroke rehabilitation 
programs serving elderly users [9] 
Criteria for Stroke 
Rehabilitation 
Criteria for Elderly 
Entertainment 
• 
Adaptability to motor skill 
level 
• 
Meaningful tasks 
• 
Appropriate feedback 
• 
Therapy-Appropriate 
Range of Motion 
• 
Focus 
diverted 
from 
exercise 
• 
Appropriate 
cognitive 
challenge 
• 
Simple objective/interface 
• 
Motivational Feedback 
• 
Element of social activity 
• 
Appropriateness of genre 
• 
Creation of new learning 
following 
guidelines 
of 
experts 
• 
Sensitivity to decreased 
sensory acuity and slower 
responses 
 
Table 2: Criteria of Selection 
Parameter 
Value 
Audience 
Elderly 
Goal 
Improve physical health (upper limbs, 
lower limbs, balance) 
Interaction 
Any of these: Shifting weight, Wearing 
Sensor (Image Recognition), Stepping 
on Surfaces, Touching Surfaces, and 
Grasping Objects. 
Technology 
Any of these: commercial platforms 
(Wii, PS, Xbox, Kinect), PC Games, 
Robot, Balance Board, commercial 
remote controller, Camera / WebCam, 
Dancing Pad, MultiTouch Tabletop. 
Special 
Age 
Appropriate 
Features 
Large 
visual 
instructions, 
audio 
assistance, mechanisms to dynamically 
adapt challenge, monitored by the 
Occupation Therapist. 
Home-based 
Preferable 
Feedback 
Any of these: Visual, Haptics, Audio 
Measurement 
Any of these: range of motion, user 
movements 
and 
trajectories, 
high 
scores, game results. 
Progress 
Record 
Preferable 
V. 
REVIEW OF GAMES FOR IMPROVING THE PHYSICAL 
HEALTH OF THE ELDERLY 
This section focuses on providing a brief description of 
each game(s), the range of technology used in this field, 
interactions with the games and usability studies and 
relevant results. As it was mentioned before, much attention 
was given to working prototypes that followed a user-
centered design methodology. We present here some of the 
research projects that meet the criteria of selection. They are 
grouped by as follows: (1) games for improving lower-limbs 
functions and balance training (see Table 3). (2) Games for 
rehabilitation / exercising of upper-limbs (see Table 4). 
 
66
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

 
Table 3: Games for balance training and for lower-limbs rehabilitation / exercising. 
 
  
 Game 
Interaction  
Technology 
Special Feature 
home-
based   
Feedback 
Measure 
Progress 
Record 
Smith et al [25] 
DDR 
Stepping on 
pad 
PC 
Dancing 
Pad 
Music 
Thematic of the game 
Share progress with 
OT 
(Number of 
Participants not stated) 
Yes 
Visual 
Audio 
Game 
Results 
Yes 
Doyle et al. 
[26] 
Otago 
Exercises 
Shifting 
weight 
PC 
Wii Balance 
Board 
Monitored by therapist 
Can skip non-playable 
content 
(6 Participants) 
Yes 
Visual 
Audio 
Game 
Results 
Yes 
Gerling et al [27] 
Task 1 
Shifting 
weight 
PC 
Wii Balance 
Board 
Simplistic design 
single tasks 
adaptive difficulty 
 
(9 Participants,  
Ages 77-91) 
Yes 
Visual 
Game 
Results 
High 
Scores 
Yes 
Task 2 
Jumping 
 
Smith et al. [25] uses a modified version of the game 
Dance Dance Revolution. The main purpose of this game is 
to provide a tool to train the stepping abilities of the elderly, 
a common problem experienced by this population. In order 
to interact with the game, the player must step on a dance 
pad sensor that has eight arrows. A display (TV or PC 
Monitor) provides step direction instructions to the player 
by scrolling arrows from the bottom to the top of the screen. 
The game is adapted for slower responses the elderly. Also, 
the author presents a design for monitoring the user 
performance by using mobile technology. This aims to 
enhance cooperation among patients and therapists by 
sending information about user performance to the 
practitioner. Finally, the system is designed to be used at 
home.  
Doyle et al. [26] developed a game to deliver balance 
and strength exercises. This project aims to help elderly 
users to improve their motor capabilities in lower-limbs in 
order to avoid falls. This system is made of a flash 
application running on a Laptop, a camera (webcam), a set 
of markers for upper and lower limbs and SHIMMER 
kinematic sensor for walking exercises. The game provides 
five exercises from the OTAGO exercise programme [28]. 
As the user performs the exercises, his/her performance is 
remotely monitored by the instructor in order to validate the 
correct completion of each exercise. Additionally, the author 
conducted a series of usability tests in order to identify the 
user preferences to make the platform more attractive to 
elderly users. These tests focused on evaluating visual and 
audio feedback, navigating through the application, 
providing instructions and measuring attitudes / motivation 
to exercise. The most important aspect found were: (1) users 
are more likely to play games that use an avatar instead of 
seeing themselves on screen (visual feedback). (2) With 
audio feedback, users prefer counters that emit single 
sounds (like: ‘ding’) instead of listening to number 
countdowns. The latter could be distracting for patients 
leading to lack of concentration. (3) It was found that 
providing options to pause / resume the game or skip to the 
next exercise eases the navigation through the application. 
(4) The notion of being under observation by a therapist 
increases the motivation of the patient.  
Gerling et al. [27] present a case study where they 
developed a game for balance training considering the needs 
of the elderly. Their prototype, called SilverBalance, uses 
the Wii Balance Board and consists of two single tasks with 
a simplistic graphic design. In task 1, a series of obstacles 
randomly appear aligned to the left or right and the user 
must shift weight to the opposite way in order to avoid the 
obstacles. As long as the user plays, the speed increases 
until the player is not able to achieve the goal. In task 2, the 
obstacles cover the width of the screen and the user must 
‘jump’ to avoid collisions. At the end of each task, the 
system shows the user performance and saves high scores. 
Both activities can be performed either sitting or standing, 
which is more accessible for this audience and allows 
people in wheelchairs to participate. The focus group test 
was composed of nine older adults with an average age of 
84. After testing the usability of this prototype, it was found 
that simplistic designs allow the user to concentrate on the 
game encouraging them to perform the exercises. Also, this 
work shows that applying design principles has a positive 
outcome for elder users. 
 
 
 
 
67
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

 
 
Table 4: Games for upper-limbs exercising / rehabilitation. 
 
  
 Game 
Interaction  
Technology 
Special Feature 
home-
based   
Feedback 
Measure 
Progress 
Record 
Burke et al. [3] 
RabbitChase 
Hand movements 
wearing gloves  
(image 
recognition) 
PC 
Camera 
Webcam 
Markers 
Mechanism to adapt 
difficulty  
based on user 
performance 
Tool for analyzing 
recorded log files 
(3 Participants, Ages 
65-73 ) 
Yes 
Visual 
Audio 
Player's 
movement 
trajectories 
Range of 
motion, 
Yes 
Bubble 
Trouble 
ArrowAttack 
Fasola & Mataríc  [29] 
Workout 
game 
Image Recognition  
without Markers 
Robot 
Camera 
Wiimote 
Social Factor 
Motivation 
(11 Participants, 
Ages > 65) 
No 
Audio 
Visual 
Hand 
location, 
Arm angles 
Not 
mentioned 
Imitation 
game 
Memory 
games 
Annet et al.[30] 
Pop those 
balloons 
Touching screen 
PC 
MultiTouch 
tabletop 
Therapist can modify  
the difficulty of the 
game, changed touch 
sensitivity 
(Number of 
participants not 
stated) 
No 
Visual 
Touch 
pressure 
Not 
mentioned 
Drumhab 
Paint by 
number 
Picture 
tracing 
Therapist Do-
It-Yourself 
 
Burke et al. [3, 31] developed a series of webcam 
games 
considering 
the 
theory 
for 
design 
and 
rehabilitation 
(meaningful 
games, 
appropriate 
challenge). This project aims to provide a low-cost tool 
for upper limbs rehabilitation that can be used at home. 
This platform was developed using a commercial 
development kit and libraries and requires a webcam, a 
PC and colored gloves in order to operate. Four games 
are provided:  
1) RabbitChase: the game presents four holes and one 
rabbit. Eventually, the rabbit comes out of one hole, 
walks and gets in another hole, both randomly 
chosen by the game. The player must point at the 
hole into which the rabbit hid. If the player is 
correct, encouraging visual/audio feedback is given. 
Also, these researchers developed a mechanism that 
automatically adapts the difficulty of the game 
based on patient success.  
2) Bubble Trouble: Floating bubbles randomly appear 
on the screen, then after a short period of time they 
disappear. They user must touch them before they 
disappear, making them burst.   
3) ArrowAttack: This game shows two arrows that are 
colored according to the user gloves or markers. 
One points to the left and the other to the right. Also 
four boxes are shown.  The arrows move from one 
box to another and the user must imitate this 
movement with their hands as long as they move.  
The system also includes a tool that analyses saved log 
files that are given to the therapist. Additionally, two 
playability studies were conducted. It was found that the 
adaptive mechanism that increases and decreases the 
difficulty of the game, was too aggressive when 
adjusting the challenges so it must be refined to be more 
‘gentle’. 
Fasola & Mataríc [29] implement an assistive robot to 
deliver arm exercises for the elderly. This robot 
monitors the performance of the user and provides 
motivation to the player promoting an increased range of 
motion. In order to operate, the user must sit in front of 
the robot and three different games are given:  
1) Workout game: the robot acts as a traditional 
instructor giving a series of exercise that the user 
must perform;  
2) Imitation game: the player acts as the instructor and 
the robot imitates the user movements; and 
3) Memory games: the robot provides a sequence of 
arm gestures and the player must memorize them 
and repeat them.  
In order to capture the user movements, the research 
team developed a vision module that recognizes the 
users’ faces and determines hand location. In order to 
simplify the visual recognition, they installed a black 
curtain behind the user to provide a contrasting and 
static background. At the end of the trials, a survey was 
conducted to determine the participants’ feeling and 
perceptions towards the robot. The results suggest that 
68
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

 
the participants perceive the robot as a trustable entity 
able to help them in exercising training. 
Annet et al. [30] developed a multi-touch table 
system to deliver training for upper-limbs. This platform 
was built under the guidance of occupational therapists, 
specialists who normally work with patients to help 
restore or improve motor functions. Three objectives 
were established at the beginning: (1) engage the user 
and provide easy to learn activities; (2) create repeatable 
activities, measure user performance and record it; (3) 
build on the therapist’s expertise and knowledge of a 
patient. The whole system is made of an existing multi-
touch technology in conjunction with a set of 
applications for rehabilitation. Five games are given: 
1) Pop those balloons: a landscape and a number of 
floating balloons are shown. The user must touch 
them in order to pop the balloons. Once the player 
touches the balloon, it disappears and increases the 
score. The therapist is able to modify the number of 
balloons and their speed while the patient is playing 
the game, in order to increase or decrease the 
difficulty of the activity.  
2) Drumhab: this game presents a center orb that emits 
‘beats’ from the middle of the screen to the four 
corners. Each corner has a drum that must be 
touched when a beat reaches its position. If the 
player hits the drum at the correct time, the ‘beat’ 
disappears. The therapists can control the game by 
changing the number of beats and their speed as 
well as which drums are targets.  
3) Paint by number: this game shows a group of paint 
buckets and an outline with numbers. Each paint 
bucket has a number and a different color. The user 
must use their hand as a paintbrush and paint the 
image.  
4) Picture tracing: In this game, the therapist draws a 
pattern on the surface of the tabletop and the patient 
is asked to trace overtop of the pattern.  
5) Therapist Do-It-Yourself: the therapist creates a 
sequence of points (targets) and the user must reach 
them. Once he/she touches a target, it disappears 
and the next one comes up.  
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND RESULTS 
One of the main limitations for this work was the 
lack of research across the area of the elderly and the 
user of serious games for health purposes. For that 
reason, literature from intersecting disciplines such as 
the use of games for stroke treatment and games for 
improving balance function was reviewed to obtain 
more data. In spite of that, it is valuable to mention that 
some work was conducted in the late eighties and early 
nineties. Some improvements in cognitive processes 
were observed after conducting trials with elderly 
patients who played specifically selected computer 
games [32, 33].  
On our previous research on the Nintendo Wii, the 
suitability and usability of six commercial balance 
games were assessed by three conventional health 
professionals and three alternative health professionals  
[11, 14, 15]. They identified a series of problems that 
could lead to negative results for the elderly cohort, as 
their needs were not considered during the design 
process. For instance, the health professionals stated that 
the elderly could learn inappropriate movements in 
response to game actions; resulting in risks for their 
physical condition. Also, they stated that hearing 
impairments and sight problems were not properly 
addressed when providing rules and instructions which 
could lead to confusion and frustration. However, we 
have learnt that current rehabilitation techniques that 
apply user-centered design principles are being well 
accepted by older patients, especially when the games 
and exercises involve fun factors. This highlights the 
importance of adequate design for this audience in order 
to obtain positive results.  
Additionally, we noticed that much effort is applied 
on developing games for improving upper-limb 
function. Some of the noted reasons for that in the 
literature were: (1) daily activities require the use of 
arms and hands such as grasping objects and brushing 
teeth among other daily activities [4, 34]. (2) A 
significant number of elder users could require a 
wheelchair, so they would not be able to perform 
activities that require the whole body [27, 35, 36]. 
In addition to the above, it is important to take into 
account that the use of webcams has been a popular  
low-cost input device solution. The nature of the device 
imposes inherent technological limitations to capture 
accurately the whole body. It is worth mentioning that 
costing of those games was not mentioned as the 
researchers developed extra items such as robots or 
mechanical arms and employed programmers to assist in 
the games’ construction. 
Regarding the usage of commercial platforms for 
this purpose, we found that there is a tendency towards 
the utilization of their input devices rather than the 
whole system. Although these innovative ways to 
interact increase the accessibility and motivation of 
patients, the coverage could be limited due to the lack of 
standardization among platforms.  
Finally, it was observed that even though most of the 
studied prototypes included progress monitoring and 
some type of measurement [3, 25], only a small number 
of these  leverage on the therapist knowledge to assess 
the effectiveness of the therapy [30].  Hence, future 
work on the inclusion of mechanisms to perform 
medical validation and assessment in real-time could 
bring important benefits for patients and therapists alike. 
69
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

 
VII. 
CONCLUSIONS  
In this paper we have classified the work of serious 
games for the elderly according to their specific goal and 
key design elements for improving the physical health of 
the target audience. This expert categorization scheme 
aims to help researchers in the area to identify the 
current status and major needs in this new field of 
research. It was found that current projects tended to 
have an increased awareness of the elder user needs in 
gaming design for health purposes. Yet, little effort has 
been made to take into account the limitations of the 
aged cohort along the entire design process. This could 
be attributed to the favorable results that have been 
obtained in the past on the incorporation of elderly 
specific human centered design guidelines to assists the 
design process. However, its theoretical nature could not 
be sufficient to guarantee optimal results, so testing 
phases and usability evaluation are needed. As a final 
point, the use of modern input devices has allowed 
specialists to determine the patient performance in terms 
of motor functions. Nevertheless, the potential of use 
this 
capabilities 
to 
accurately 
perform 
medical 
assessment as a tool to guarantee effectiveness is not 
being exploited. This has been identified by the authors 
as an important direction for future research in the area 
and it is intended to be the next stage of our research.  
VIII. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
(2010, May 7, 2011). Population by Age and Sex, Australian 
States 
and 
Territories, 
Jun 
2010 
Available: 
http://www.abs.gov.au/Ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/3201.0 
[2] 
E. Rodgers. (2010, May 17, 2011). Ageing population dragging 
Australia 
into 
the 
red. 
Available: 
http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2010/02/01/2806592.htm 
[3] 
J. Burke, M. McNeill, D. Charles, P. Morrow, J. Crosbie, and S. 
McDonough, "Optimising engagement for stroke rehabilitation 
using serious games," The Visual Computer, vol. 25, pp. 1085-
1099, 2009. 
[4] 
B. Cesqui, S. Micera, S. Mazzoleni, M. C. Carrozza, and P. 
Dario, "Analysis of Upper Limb Performance of Elderly People 
Using a Mechatronic System," in Biomedical Robotics and 
Biomechatronics, 2006. BioRob 2006. The First IEEE/RAS-
EMBS International Conference on, 2006, pp. 365-370. 
[5] 
Y.-L. Theng, P. Teo, and P. Truc, "Investigating Sociability and 
Affective Responses of Elderly Users through Digitally-
Mediated Exercises: A Case of the Nintendo Wii," in Human-
Computer Interaction. vol. 332, P. Forbrig, et al., Eds., ed: 
Springer Boston, 2010, pp. 152-162. 
[6] 
H. Sugarman, A. Weisel-Eichler, A. Burstin, and R. Brown, 
"Use of the Wii Fit system for the treatment of balance 
problems in the elderly: A feasibility study," in Virtual 
Rehabilitation International Conference, 2009, 2009, pp. 111-
116. 
[7] 
S. Hanneton and A. Varenne, "Coaching the Wii," in Haptic 
Audio visual Environments and Games, 2009. HAVE 2009. 
IEEE International Workshop on, 2009, pp. 54-57. 
[8] 
C. Neufeldt, "Wii play with elderly people," IISI2009. 
[9] 
E. Flores, G. Tobon, E. Cavallaro, F. I. Cavallaro, J. C. Perry, 
and T. Keller, "Improving patient motivation in game 
development for motor deficit rehabilitation," presented at the 
Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on Advances 
in Computer Entertainment Technology, Yokohama, Japan, 
2008. 
[10] W. Ijsselsteijn, H. H. Nap, Y. d. Kort, and K. Poels, "Digital 
game design for elderly users," presented at the Proceedings of 
the 2007 conference on Future Play, Toronto, Canada, 2007. 
[11] E. Kalapanidas, C. Davarakis, F. F. Aranda, S. Jiménez-Murcia, 
O. Kocsis, T. Ganchev, H. Kaufmann, T. Lam, and D. 
Konstantas:, "PlayMancer: Games for Health with Accessibility 
in Mind," Communications&Strategies, vol. 73, pp. 105-120, 
2009. 
[12] L. Gamberini, M. Alcaniz, G. Barresi, M. Fabregat, F. Ibanez, 
and L. Prontu, "Cognition, technology and games for the 
elderly: 
An 
introduction 
to 
ELDERGAMES 
Project," 
PsychNology Journal, vol. 4, pp. 285-308, 2006. 
[13] L. Gamberini, F. Martino, B. Seraglia, A. Spagnolli, M. 
Fabregat, F. Ibanez, M. Alcaniz, and J. M. Andres, "Eldergames 
project: An innovative mixed reality table-top solution to 
preserve cognitive functions in elderly people," in Human 
System Interactions, 2009. HSI '09. 2nd Conference on, 2009, 
pp. 164-169. 
[14] A. Väätänen and J. Leikas, "Human-Centred Design and 
Exercise Games," in Design and Use of Serious Games. vol. 37, 
M. Kankaanranta and P. Neittaanmäki, Eds., ed: Springer 
Netherlands, 2009, pp. 33-47. 
[15] V. A. V. Abeele and V. V. Rompaey, "Introducing human-
centered research to game design: designing game concepts for 
and with senior citizens," presented at the CHI '06 extended 
abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada, 2006. 
[16] P. Rego, P. M. Moreira, and L. P. Reis, "Serious games for 
rehabilitation: A survey and a classification towards a 
taxonomy," in Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI), 
2010 5th Iberian Conference on, 2010, pp. 1-6. 
[17] (May 17, 2011). Serious Games Initiative. Available: 
http://www.seriousgames.org/ 
[18] (2004, May 16, 2011). Games for Health Project. Available: 
http://www.gamesforhealth.org/ 
[19] (2006, May 16, 2011). The ElderGames  Project. Available: 
http://www.eldergames.org/ 
[20] K. M. F. Navarro, E. M. Lawrence, J. G. Marin, and C. Sax, "A 
Dynamic and Customisable Layered Serious Game Design 
Framework for Improving the Physical and Mental Health of the 
Aged and the Infirm," presented at the Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2011), Gosier, 
Guadeloupe, France, 2011. 
[21] J. G. Marin, E. M. Lawrence, K. M. F. Navarro, and C. Sax, 
"Heuristic Evaluation for Interactive Games within Elderly 
Users," presented at the Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, 
and Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2011), Gosier, Guadeloupe, 
France, 2011. 
[22] E. M. Lawrence, K. M. F. Navarro, J. G. Marin, and C. Sax, 
"Towards building health systems," presented at the The Sixth 
International Conference on Systems (ICONS 2011), St. 
Maarten, The Netherlands Antilees, 2011. 
[23] D. Lloyd-Jones, R. Adams, T. B. M. C. M, S. Dai, G. D. 
Simone, T. Ferguson, E. Ford, K. Furie, C. Gillespie, A. Go, K. 
Greenlund, N. Haase, S. Hailpern, P. Ho, V. Howard, B. 
Kissela, S. Kittner, D. Lackland, L. Lisabeth, A. Marelli, M. 
McDermott, J. Meigs, D. Mozaffarian, M. Mussolino, G. 
Nichol, V. Roger, W. Rosamond, R. Sacco, P. Sorlie, V. Roger, 
T. Thom, S. Wasserthiel-Smoller, N. Wong, and J. Wylie-
Rosett, "Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics - 2010 Update. A 
Report From the American Heart Association," Circulation, vol. 
121, Feb 23, 2010 2010. 
[24] L. Gamberini, M. Alcaniz, G. Barresi, M. Fabregat, F. Ibanez, 
and L. Prontu, "{Cognition, technology and games for the 
elderly: 
An 
introduction 
to 
ELDERGAMES 
Project}," 
PsychNology Journal, vol. 4, pp. 285-308, 2006. 
[25] S. T. Smith, A. Talaei-Khoei, M. Ray, and P. Ray, "Electronic 
Games for Aged Care and Rehabilitation," in e-Health 
70
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

 
Networking, Applications and Services, 2009. Healthcom 2009. 
11th International Conference on, 2009, pp. 42-47. 
[26] J. Doyle, C. Bailey, B. Dromey, and C. N. Scanaill, "BASE - 
An interactive technology solution to deliver balance and 
strength exercises to older adults," in Pervasive Computing 
Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2010 4th 
International Conference on-NO PERMISSIONS, 2010, pp. 1-5. 
[27] K. M. Gerling, J. Schild, and M. Masuch, "Exergame design for 
elderly users: the case study of SilverBalance," presented at the 
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Advances in 
Computer Entertainment Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, 2010. 
[28] N. Z. s. A. C. Corporation. (2009). Otago Exercise Programme. 
Available: 
http://www.acc.co.nz/preventing-injuries/at-
home/older-people/information-for-older-people/otago-
exercise-programme/index.htm 
[29] J. Fasola and M. J. Mataric, "Robot exercise instructor: A 
socially assistive robot system to monitor and encourage 
physical exercise for the elderly," in RO-MAN, 2010 IEEE, 
2010, pp. 416-421. 
[30] M. Annett, F. Anderson, D. Goertzen, J. Halton, Q. Ranson, W. 
F. Bischof, and P. Boulanger, "Using a multi-touch tabletop for 
upper extremity motor rehabilitation," presented at the 
Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference of the Australian 
Computer-Human Interaction Special Interest Group: Design: 
Open 24/7, Melbourne, Australia, 2009. 
[31] J. W. Burke, M. D. J. McNeill, D. K. Charles, P. J. Morrow, J. 
H. Crosbie, and S. M. McDonough, "Serious Games for Upper 
Limb Rehabilitation Following Stroke," in Games and Virtual 
Worlds for Serious Applications, 2009. VS-GAMES '09. 
Conference in, 2009, pp. 103-110. 
[32] G. R. Whitcomb, "Computer games for the elderly," SIGCAS 
Comput. Soc., vol. 20, pp. 112-115, 1990. 
[33] J. Goldstein, L. Cajko, M. Oosterbroek, M. Michielsen, O. Van 
Houten, and F. Salverda, "VIDEO GAMES AND THE 
ELDERLY," Social Behavior & Personality: An International 
Journal, vol. 25, p. 345, 1997. 
[34] J. P. Giuffrida, A. Lerner, R. Steiner, and J. Daly, "Upper-
Extremity Stroke Therapy Task Discrimination Using Motion 
Sensors 
and 
Electromyography," 
Neural 
Systems 
and 
Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 16, pp. 
82-90, 2008. 
[35] B. Herbelin, J. Ciger, and A. L. Brooks, "Customization of 
gaming 
technology 
and 
prototyping 
of 
rehabilitation 
applications," presented at the International Conference Series 
On Disability, Virtual Reality And Associated Technologies, 
Portugal, 2008. 
[36] H. Zabaleta, M. Bureau, G. Eizmendi, E. Olaiz, J. Medina, and 
M. Perez, "Exoskeleton design for functional rehabilitation in 
patients 
with 
neurological 
disorders 
and 
stroke," 
in 
Rehabilitation Robotics, 2007. ICORR 2007. IEEE 10th 
International Conference on, 2007, pp. 112-118.	  
 
71
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

