Enabling User Centered Distributed Stormwater Monitoring
Julio Ar´auz
School of Emerging
Communication Technologies
Ohio University
Athens, Ohio 45701
Email: arauz@ohio.edu
Amy Lynch
Department of Geography
Ohio University
Athens, Ohio 45701
Email: lyncha@ohio.edu
Abstract—Stormwater management is a signiﬁcant and expensive
problem for cities and communities around the world. Impervious
surfaces, such as roofs and parking lots, prevent water from being
absorbed into the ground and result in large volumes of runoff.
Stormwater runoff carries pollutants, such as oil and chemicals,
across the urban landscape and into waterways and can lead
to the overﬂow of combined sewer systems. Large volumes
of stormwater can also lead to ﬂooding and the erosion and
sedimentation of waterways. Conventional systems of managing
stormwater are centralized and expensive. Many communities
have been moving away from centralized stormwater manage-
ment systems and toward distributed solutions such as rain
gardens. These strategies are designed to absorb urban runoff
before it can leave the site. However, the distributed nature
of these installations poses a major management challenge for
cities and communities. There is a pressing need for low-cost
monitoring solutions that enable a continuous understanding
of the operation of these installations by their owners and by
municipalities. In this work, we present an open source, open
hardware design and ﬁrst results of a sensing system that allows
user centered monitoring of stormwater ﬂows for rain gardens.
Keywords–Urban; Stormwater; Management; User-centered.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Over the past 20 years, American communities of all
sizes have moved away from large, centralized storm water
management systems and toward small-scale decentralized
solutions. Decentralized strategies require a network of green
infrastructure features such as rain gardens, swales, green
roofs, and porous pavement which inﬁltrate and evaporate most
of the runoff on-site, reduce the volume of runoff, and prevent
the concentration of pollutants in waterways. Site-scale green
infrastructure, also known as low impact development (LID)
or site-based best management practices (BMPs), is designed
to approximate the pre-development hydrology of a speciﬁc
site [1]. Decentralized, green infrastructure, approaches can
reduce the burden on existing centralized systems and delay or
prevent the need for costly expansions or upgrades [2][3][4]. A
combination of green and gray infrastructure projects can result
in a lower total system cost than a centralized gray infrastruc-
ture system of tunnels, pipes, and treatment plants [2]. Green
infrastructure also provides an array of ancillary environmental
beneﬁts and ecosystem services, such as wildlife habitat and
reducing the urban heat island effect.
Despite a wide variety of beneﬁts to this type of stormwa-
ter management, the distributed nature of the installations
make monitoring a challenge and creates a barrier to broader
adoption. Municipalities across the United States now require
on-site stormwater management for new developments and
provide ﬁnancial incentives for landowners to retroﬁt existing
properties with decentralized stormwater management. The re-
sult is tens of thousands of small-scale citizen-owned stormwa-
ter facilities distributed throughout the landscape. While these
facilities may be small, each plays an important role. If
an installation overﬂows or malfunctions it could lead to
ﬂooding, overloading of centralized stormwater systems, and
the contamination of local waterways. Yet, it is difﬁcult to
know if these facilities are functioning properly. Stormwater
managers must visually inspect each rain garden and green roof
in the network. For local governments, who are accustomed to
a few large centralized facilities, but are now depending upon
the functionality of each component of a distributed network,
this is a time-consuming and costly change. The monitoring
challenge discourages further adoption of this promising strat-
egy. As a consequence, there is a need to develop new means
for understanding the functionality and efﬁcacy of distributed
stormwater facilities.
There is a pressing need for a technology-based approach to
monitoring distributed management stormwater systems, par-
ticularly for rain gardens, which are among the most popular
facilities. For these systems, where an area covered with es-
pecially chosen vegetation absorbs the collected stormwater, it
is possible to design monitoring solutions by taking advantage
of current low-cost sensing and wireless technologies. In such
solutions, it is desirable to monitor the incoming water ﬂow
and ground humidity. The rate at which water is discharged
into the garden can be used to understand if, and how well,
the water collection system is operating. Ground humidity is
also useful for estimating how much and how fast water can
be absorbed by the garden. To monitor these variables, low
complexity devices can be designed with a set of off-the shelf
sensors, integrated with basic cellular communications boards.
We designed, constructed, and evaluated a ﬁrst version of such
a system which currently allows the monitoring of stormwater
ﬂow and communicates real-time results to a cloud-based
Internet connected data repository through a third generation
wireless connection. All the components of the system were
selected taking into consideration performance, accuracy and
cost.
The management of distributed rain gardens and green
roofs at the user level can provide municipalities with a
granular understanding of the efﬁcacy of these installations
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

and enable them to create programs around user-centered
incentives. These incentives can assume the form of credits
towards already existing monthly sewage charges. In this man-
ner, current and future owners of distributed green stormwater
management infrastructure could be encouraged to install and
properly maintain it and help municipalities with the mitigation
of the effects of stormwater runoff.
Our work presented next starts in Section 2 with a discus-
sion on the motivation supporting the use of distributed mon-
itoring of stormwater ﬂows. Thereafter, in Section 3 we visit
relevant research literature in the area of green infrastructure.
We then propose, in Sections 4 and 5, our design for a low-
cost sensing device to monitor stormwater ﬂows in rain gardens
along an experimental design to evaluate its performance. In
Section 6, we visit the the current limitations of our approach.
Finally, in Section 7 we present our conclusions and discuss
some viable possibilities of future work in the area.
II.
MOTIVATION
Recent technological advances have allowed urban planners
to think about infrastructure in new ways and catalyzed a
“smart cities” movement. Smart city strategies use digital
technologies to improve the efﬁciency and efﬁcacy of city
services and enhance the livability of urban areas. These tech-
nologies allow the remote monitoring of broadly distributed
infrastructure like roads, bridges, and sewer systems.
While monitoring of all types of decentralized stormwater
facilities would be useful, this study focuses on rain gardens,
a prominent type of bio-retention. Bio-retention installations,
such as rain gardens and grass swales, are vegetated depressed
areas designed to receive, hold, and absorb stormwater. Re-
search has conﬁrmed the ability of bio-retention areas to reduce
the volume and contamination of stormwater [5][6][7]. Rain
gardens, in particular, are common in lower density urban and
suburban areas where there is sufﬁcient green space to support
them. They can also be inexpensive, attractive, when well
cared for, and require little investment or technical expertise to
maintain. Many cities offer rain garden workshops or publish
technical manuals to show landowners how to install and
manage small bio-retention facilities. They are one of the more
accessible strategies. But, while rain gardens are increasingly
common, they must be carefully maintained to ensure that
plantings survive and to manage erosion or sedimentation that
could inhibit stormwater management functions. Poor mainte-
nance can easily yield inadequate stormwater management. To
ensure the overall stormwater system remains effective, local
stormwater managers must be able to monitor the status of
rain gardens.
There are currently no means to monitor distributed
stormwater management systems implemented through rain
gardens. While it should be possible to use sensing technology
used to monitor centralized stormwater systems, this would
certainly be cost prohibitive for a distributed solution. Conse-
quently, there is a need and an opportunity to create a low-cost
monitoring solution that facilitates management and enables
the collection of real-time data.
III.
RELATED WORK IN THE AREA
Current literature incorporates a variety of laboratory and
ﬁeld studies that have examined the ability of bioretention
areas to reduce the volume and contamination of stormwater.
Reviews of bioretention literature conclude that reductions in
runoff volume and peak ﬂow range between 40% and 90% are
feasible [8]. A 2011 study found that a bioretention facility
reduced the ﬂow volume and rate from a parking lot by up to
99% [9]. Bioretention can also manage total suspended solids,
bacteria, and temperature, if speciﬁcally designed to do so
[7]. For example, average bacteria reduction for bioretention
facilities with appropriate media ranges from 70 to 99% [8].
Studies also agree that bioretention is highly successful at
removing metals, but identify variations in management of
nutrients, particularly nitrate.
Early research using laboratory prototypes suggested that
bioretention could reduce metal concentrations by over 90%
and many nutrients by between 60 and 80% [10]. Nitrate was
most problematic with 24%. Field studies have been simi-
lar. Results suggest that bioretention facilities are successful
at removing nutrients and other pollutants, but the magni-
tude of those reductions varies. Researchers applied synthetic
stormwater runoff to two bioretention facilities in Maryland,
US and found removal of metals to be very high and nutrient
management lagging. Total nitrogen and phosphorous loads
declined by between 49 to 59% and 65 to 87%, respectively.
A ﬁeld study of six bioretention cells in North Carolina, US
showed the facilities reduced metal and nitrogen loads, but
were less successful with phosphorous [7].
The use of green infrastructure to capture stormwater and
reduce the impact of combined sewer overﬂows has been
recently studied for the case of mega-cities [11]. A mega-city
is a deﬁned as one with over 10 million residents. In particular,
in the case of New York City, different green strategies, such as
bioretention facilities, rain gardens and porous pavement, have
been employed to reduce the amount of stormwater runoff.
This mix of strategies resulted in reductions of stormwater
runoff of up to 42% for the entire watershed and up to 55%
for individual cases. Similar goals for large cities have also
been studied for Chinese cities under the concept of ”Sponge
Cities”. These cities also incorporate LID green infrastructure
strategies. For the particular case of Beijing the current target
is to capture up to 85% of annual precipitation through the
strategies. Current modeling indicates that increases in the use
of rain gardens, green roofs and permeable pavement will allow
the city to achieve its capture target [12].
As discussed throughout this section, the beneﬁts of green
infrastructure to capture stormwater have been studied under
varied circumstances. Nevertheless, the adoption of particular
strategies at the residential level face some barriers. A partic-
ular incentive strategy could be the use of green infrastructure
for urban agricultural use, which empirical studies have found
to be a feasible option. The yield of vegetable rain gardens has
been found to be comparable to that of a control traditional
vegetable garden, while still reducing stormwater runoff by
90% [13].
The location of green infrastructure installations is also
of interest to municipalities. This is particularly true for
distributed rain gardens in individual residences. The selection
of suitable sites is a key component of a city’s strategy to
maximize the beneﬁts of runoff reduction. An approach that
has been shown to be effective is to quantify the suitability of
locations by analyzing soil attributes, slope, land use, ground
water level, available area and cost using already existing
geographical information systems [14].
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

While the use of green infrastructure to manage stormwater
is being employed in numerous locations around the U.S., the
monitoring of such distributed installations is still scarce [15].
One exception is an ongoing project launched in late 2016 by
City Digital a public-private initiative in Chicago [16]. In this
project, precipitation amounts, humidity levels, soil moisture
measurements, air pressure, and chemical absorption rates are
continuously monitored for large bio-swales. Then real-time
data is collected available for management purposes. However,
from the published details it is unclear what kind of sensing
devices are employed or their cost.
IV.
LOW-COST FLOW RATE SENSING DEVICE FOR RAIN
GARDENS
As discussed earlier, the use of distributed green infras-
tructure, such as rain gardens, can achieve signiﬁcant reduc-
tions of stormwater runoff. However, the distributed nature
of individual rain gardens pose a monitoring challenge, espe-
cially for small cities and communities with limited resources.
Therefore, a main goal of our work is to develop a low-cost
distributed monitoring solution that reports data over a wireless
network to a centralized site.
Distributed monitoring devices can help municipalities
understand the amount of rainwater captured and potentially
identify problems with the installation. Such problems may
occur when individual rain gardens stop collecting stormwater
due to debris on collecting gutters. Therefore, we designed
a device that can be directly attached to the lower part of
stormwater collecting downspouts. Our device then measures
stormwater activity right before the water is diverted towards
the rain garden. We are not aware of any low-cost distributed
solution similar to ours as currently rain gardens are typically
installed without any monitoring.
A. Variable Selection
The performance level of a rain garden is a function of
how well it can operate as a pervious system. There are two
variables of interest we consider describe the overall perfor-
mance of such a system. It is ﬁrst necessary to understand
how much water is ﬂowing into the soil in the garden, thus
it is vital to count with data that describes stormwater ﬂow
rate over time. Additionally, it is relevant to understand the
humidity levels of the garden’s soil. Under normal operation,
the vegetation and the soil in the garden should regularly
absorb the incoming stormwater. However, should the soil
become saturated, normal operation is hindered and stormwater
might overﬂow the garden.
B. System Architecture
The architecture of the system for monitoring the perfor-
mance of a rain garden encompasses two main sensors, a ﬂow
rate sensor and a soil moisture sensor. In this work, we focus
on the ﬂow rate sensor, as affordable soil humidity sensors
are readily available in the market. We designed a sensing
device that can operate continuously as energy is collected
through a small solar panel and stored in a battery. The design
is illustrated in Figure 1, where stormwater at the input (U-01)
passes through a custom ﬂow rate sensor (U-04/05) towards
the output (U-09) and then the rain garden (U-03). The output
of the sensor is the deviation angle of the ﬂoating pendulum
shown on the right of Figure 1. A microcontroller based device






	



Figure 1. Architecture of the rain garden monitoring device.
(U-02), with onboard wireless cellular connectivity (U-08),
controls the systems and collects telemetry data from the ﬂow
rate and a soil moisture sensor (U-06). The system is powered
by a small 10W solar panel and battery (U-07).
1) Volumetric Flow Rate Sensor Design: While there are
numerous commercial and industrial grade ﬂow rate sensors,
these are typically suited for measurements in clean water
scenarios. These sensors are not suitable for stormwater mea-
surements as they are prone to malfunction due to large
contaminants or objects likely to be present in stormwater
ﬂows. Furthermore, these sensors are generally very expensive
hindering the goal of constructing a low-cost device.
Using a simple approach based on a ﬂoating pendulum
and low-cost fabrication methods we designed a ﬁrst version
of the ﬂow-rate sensor. When stormwater ﬂows through a
pipe of inner diameter d, the sensor constantly measures
the angle α between the pendulum axis and the vertical
axis of the discharge pipe using an accelerometer. Figure 2
illustrates the geometry of the system. The ﬂow rate pendulum
sensor employs an accelerometer and gyroscope board based
on the MPU-6050, micro electromechanical system (MEMS),
manufactured by Invensense and available in small quantities
for approximately 5 USD. When a stormwater ﬂow is detected,
this sensing board supplies the microcontroller with the angle
α necessary to compute the ﬂow rate. The board is installed
in a custom designed, water sealed 3D printed housing that
incorporates the ﬂoating pendulum. An exploded view of the
housing and pendulum mechanism is shown in the top of
Figure 3. The housing installed on a four inch plastic pipe
is shown in Figure 4.
2) Sensor Calibration and Experimental Design: To esti-
mate the volumetric water ﬂow, Q, as a function of the angle
α we calibrated the system using a typical setup consisting
of a 2.5 meter tall downspout attached to a standard gutter.
A known water ﬂow rate was fed into the system and data
was collected for eight different ﬂow rates with three itera-
tions of 2 minutes each. We heuristically set the data to be
collected every 50 ms. This method has its limitations as it is
dependent on the physical characteristics of a particular setup.
Different installations will have downspouts of varying heights.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services


	

		
		
	
	

Figure 5. Sample publish of telemetry data via MQTT.
V.
FLOW RATE SENSOR RESULTS
The system we constructed was ﬁrst calibrated using the
procedure described in Section IV-B2, using eight input vol-
umetric ﬂow rates ranging from 0.0681 to 0.3419 liters per
second. The resulting variations over time of the pendulum’s
deviation angle α for three of these levels are plotted in the
top of Figure 6. Their respective histogram are shown in the
bottom of the ﬁgure. The plotted variations over time are the
result of applying a 20 sample average moving window (which
corresponds to one second of samples collected every 50 ms).
The changes of the angle, α, as a function of time plotted
in the top of Figure 6 ocassionally show signiﬁcant variations
around its mean value. While during the tests the ﬂow rate
stays relatively constant, the sampled angle varies around a
mean value as the water ﬂow is not laminar but turbulent. The
turbulent nature of the ﬂow was increased by the characteristics
of our test setup where water rushing down the downspout
collides with a 90 degree elbow connector before entering the
sensor housing.
Nevertheless, when these variations are studied by plotting
their histogram a unimodal distribution of the sampled angles
was observed. These distributions are shown in the bottom part
of Figure 6. This indicates that, under the conditions tested,
the mean of the sampled angles is an adequate metric that can
be used to estimate the ﬂow rate.
The effect of all eight volumetric ﬂow rates on the pendu-
lum’s angle is shown in Figure 7. Notice that the pendulum’s
angle for increasing ﬂow rates should monotonically increase
with the ﬂow rate. However, during the experiments some
increases in input ﬂow rate resulted in decreasing values of the
average angle (e.g., 0.1637 and 0.2310 liters per second) as ev-
idenced by the data plotted in Figure 7. This is counterintuitive,
as higher ﬂow rate must result in larger pendulum deviations.
After some investigation, we traced back this issue to random
deviations of the actual input ﬂow rate due to imperfections
of the water pumping mechanism.
To be able to estimate ﬂow rate for any angle we con-
structed a linear regression from our experimental data. The
regression result is shown in Figure 7. The value of the
coefﬁcient of determination, R2, for the regression was 0.91
which suggests our dataset approximately results in a linear
relationship between the measured angle and a known input
ﬂow rate. A set of summarized statistics is provided in Table
I.
Figure 6. Variation and histogram of angle α for three different volumetric
ﬂow rates as measured by the accelerometer board.
TABLE I. SUMMARY OF EXPERIMENTAL DATA
Flow
(l/s)
Mean α
(degrees)
Standard
deviation
Minimum
(l/s)
Maximum
(l/s)
0.3419
7.9440
0.9767
0.2259
11.7575
0.2310
4.7825
1.4651
0.5081
11.7580
0.1637
5.3209
0.9885
0.4581
8.4047
0.1338
5.8872
1.0612
1.7901
8.6158
0.1067
4.7872
1.0666
1.2105
8.4521
0.0876
3.5529
0.8082
1.1049
8.2843
0.0739
2.7729
0.6936
0.7093
6.2919
0.0681
2.6969
1.1247
0.7101
6.2919
VI.
LIMITATIONS
It is possible to use the linear regression provided in Figure
7 to estimate the ﬂow rate of stormwater passing through the
sensor for any particular measured angle of the pendulum.
However, this regression assumes the conditions the system is
operating in are similar to those described in Section IV-B2.
In different types of deployments, these assumptions might
not hold and it may be necessary to estimate the ﬂow velocity
inside the sensor.
Given that stormwater generally ﬂows inside a pipe fol-
lowing an open channel model where there is a pocket of air
occupying part of the cross section of the pipe, estimating this
velocity is not a straightforward process. Ideally our design
could incorporate a ﬂow velocity sensor; unfortunately this
would increase maintenance complexity and price. Therefore,
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Figure 7. Variation of the average angle α for all eight input volumetric ﬂow
rates along with results from a linear regression.
we are currently using a different approach to estimate ﬂow
rate given a known deﬂection angle of the pendulum.
The method we use also employs a linear regression but
uses as data the approximate ﬂow rates given by the amount of
rain water collected by the roof to which the sensor is attached.
For any particular installation we can accurately compute the
roof’s surface area. The amount of rain water collected over
time can be estimated by multiplying the surface area of the
roof by the inches of rainfall reported in the area by weather
services. The ﬂow rate is then obtained by dividing the result
by the length of the observation period. This method only
provides us with approximation, but is commonly used in the
sizing of residential and commercial stormwater downspouts
and rain water collection systems.
While our approach is easy to implement it requires rainfall
data that is only available from weather reports. On the other
hand, this is a one time process. Once we have a linear
regression to estimate ﬂow rate through our device.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The ﬁrst version of our Internet connected stormwater
management device offers a robust solution at a low-cost. We
estimate that in low quantities it is possible to construct the
device for less than 120 USD. The current version does have
limitations that need to be addressed, such as the need for
calibration at a per-site level. This can be avoided by adding
an additional sensor (e.g., ﬂow velocity sensor). However, in-
creasing the complexity would result in a higher cost. Thus we
preferred to use an approximate per-site calibration procedure.
We have carried out preliminary tests of our open solution
for a period of 30 days at two different rain gardens owned
by the City of Athens, OH, with encouraging results. We are
currently improving the design of our solution to allow the
sensor to be mounted on different types of discharge pipes as
well as to be used in green roof installations where both input
and output ﬂow volumes are of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was partially supported by a grant from Ohio’s
Environmental Protection Agency Environmental Education
Fund. The prototype of the sensing system was partially de-
signed and constructed by Mr. Tristan Mull a Civil Engineering
student with support from an Honors Tutorial College Research
Apprenticeship Grant from Ohio University.
REFERENCES
[1]
US Environmental Protection Agency. EPA: Green Infrastructure.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.epa.gov/green-infrastructure
2019.10.1
[2]
H. Thurston, H. Goddard, D. Szlar, and B. Lemberg, “Controlling
Storm-Water Runoff with Tradable Allowances for Impervious Sur-
faces,” Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management, vol. 129,
no. 5, 2003, pp. 409–418.
[3]
E. Villareal, A. Semadeni-Davies, and L. Bengtsson, “Inner City
Stormwater Control Using a Combination of Best Management Prac-
tices,” Ecological Engineering, vol. 22, 2004, pp. 279–298.
[4]
M. Keeley, “Using Individual Parcel Assessments to Improve Stormwa-
ter Management,” Journal of the American Planning Association,
vol. 73, no. 2, 2007, pp. 149–160.
[5]
A. Davis, M. Shokouhian, H. Sharma, and C. Minami, “Laboratory
Study of Biological Retention for Urban Stormwater Management,”
Water Environment Research, vol. 71, no. 1, 2001, pp. 5–14.
[6]
D. M, “Low Impact Development Practives: A Review of Current
Research and Recommendations for Future Directions,” Water, Air, and
Soil Pollution, vol. 186, 2007, pp. 351–352.
[7]
W. Hunt and W. Lord, “Bioretention Performance, Design, Construc-
tion, and Maintenance,” North Carolina State University Cooperative
Extension, 2006.
[8]
L. Ahiablame and B. Engel, “Effectiveness of Low Impact Development
Practices: Literature Review and Suggestions for Future Research,”
Water Air Soil Pollution, vol. 223, 2012, pp. 4253–4273.
[9]
K. DeBusk and K. Wynn, “Storm-water bioretention for runoff quality
and quantity mitigation,” Journal of Environmental Engineering, vol.
137, 2011, pp. 800–808.
[10]
A. Davis, M. Shokouhian, H. Sharma, and C. Minami, “Water quality
improvement through bioretention media: nitrogen and phosphorus
removal,” Water Environment Research, vol. 78, 2006, pp. 284–293.
[11]
T. Eaton, “Approach and Case-Study of Green Infrastructure Screening
Analysis for Urban Stormwater Control,” Journal of Environmental
Management, vol. 209, 2018, pp. 495–504.
[12]
M. Randall, F. Sun, Y. Zhang, and M. Bergen-Jensen, “Evaluating
Sponge City Volume Capture Ratio at the Catchment Scale Using
SWMM,” Journal of Environmental Management, vol. 246, 2019, pp.
745–757.
[13]
P. Richards, C. Farrell, M. Tom, N. Williams, and T. Fletcher, “Veg-
etable Raingardens can Produce Food and Reduce Stormwater Runoff,”
Urban Forestry and Urban Greening, vol. 14, no. 3, 2015, pp. 646–654.
[14]
V. Vaculova and J. Fuska, “Rain gardens – case study of potential loca-
tions identiﬁcation using gis,” Acta Scientiarum Polonorum. Formatio
Circumiectus, no. 3, 2017, p. 217.
[15]
US
Environmental
Protection
Agency.
EPA:
Green
In-
frastructure
Cost-Beneﬁt
Resources.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.epa.gov/green-infrastructure/green-infrastructure-
cost-beneﬁt-resources 2019.10.1
[16]
City Tech. City Tech: City Solutions. [Online]. Available from:
https://www.citytech.org/city-solutions 2019.10.1
[17]
AT&T. AT&T: M2X API Documentation. [Online]. Available from:
https://m2x.att.com/developer/documentation/v2/overview 2019.10.1
[18]
Message
Queueing
Telemetry
Transport
Organization.
MQTT:
MQTT
Version
5.0.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://docs.oasis-
open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v5.0/mqtt-v5.0.html 2019.10.1
[19]
Ohio
University
Smart
Infrastructure.
Ohio
University
Dis-
tributed
Stormwater
Management.
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.its.ohio.edu/raingardens 2019.10.1
[20]
Ohio
University
Smart
Infrastructure.
Distributed
Stormwa-
ter
Management
Open
Project.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://github.com/OUSmartInfrastructure/raingardenSensor 2019.10.1
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

