A Surveillance System to Counter Vandalism of Transmission Line Equipment 
Asiimwe JohnPaul R, Kyohairwe Adella, Cosmas Mwikirize, Richard Okou 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Makerere University Kampala 
Kampala, Uganda 
emails: {johnpaul.rutaremwa@gmail.com, adellakyohairwe@gmail.com,  
mwikirize.cosmas@gmail.com, richoko@gmail.com} 
Abstract—This paper presents the development of a 
customized surveillance system to counter the vandalism of 
transmission 
line 
equipment 
on 
Uganda’s 
national 
transmission operator’s network. The system is based on the 
Raspberry Pi platform and incorporates a Minisense Piezo-
vibration sensor, an Infrared-capable Camera board and a 
Huawei General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) modem. The 
system is able to detect vibrations arising from cutting of angle 
bars on steel pylons, take an evidentiary snapshot of the 
camera's field of view and annotates the snapshot with details 
such as Tower number, time and date. The system then relays 
this snapshot to a workstation in the monitoring centre and 
triggers an alert in the form of a blinking display. This 
surveillance system will be deployed on about 4800 steel tower 
pylons that are currently maintained by the transmission 
operator country-wide. 
 
Keywords - UETCL; Surveillance; Machine Vision; GPRS. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited 
(UETCL) is responsible for transmission of high voltage 
power (above 66kV), bulk purchase from Independent 
Power Producers and bulk sale to Distributors and 
Concessionaires in Uganda [1]. Currently, the transmission 
network in Uganda spans a total length of 1600km with a 
total number of approximately 4800 steel towers. UETCL 
faces a major problem of vandalism of pylon equipment 
along its transmission network causing financial losses to 
the tune of $41,000 monthly [2]. 
The vandals steal tower angle bars, nuts, stay and earth 
wires and barbed wires, which in turn leads to weakening 
and possible collapse of the pylons [3]. The collapse of one 
tower on the network leads to uneven stresses on the two 
adjacent tower leading to a possibility of a domino effect. 
This leads to severe power outages, which in turn, would 
lead to loss of revenue to the company as well as adverse 
socio-economic challenges. An additional revenue loss is 
incurred as a result of the capacity charge for the period that 
the available power cannot be evacuated from the 
generating plants. It should be noted that replacement of 
towers is a very time-consuming process requiring about 4 
to 6 months for concrete foundations to cure. 
Investing in the energy sector is very costly, and therefore, 
installations should be protected from vandalism so as to 
safeguard value for money spent. To overcome the problem, 
UETCL has ensured construction of access roads along the 
transmission lines to enable routine inspection to detect 
weak towers and spot welding of the angle bar nuts. There 
are intensified military patrols into the heavily-affected 
areas. Sensitization campaigns with District Local Councils 
have been carried out to reach an objective of co-opting 
Whistle-blowers to safeguard the transmission lines. 
UETCL provided for special anti-theft Huck-bolts and 
fasteners on the towers constructed (up-to 3m above the 
foundation cap) and an anti-climbing spike system [3]. 
Surveillance has typically involved the placement of 
analog cameras in sensitive or strategic areas of a particular 
business for live monitoring [4]. This serves not only as a 
deterrent to crime, but also to record the movement of 
people and property [5][6]. Automated visual surveillance 
is becoming an increasingly important area of research in 
computer vision. Interest has been motivated by commercial 
applications, such as surveillance of airports and office 
buildings, as well as military ones, such as monitoring the 
battlefield to automatically collect strategic information 
[7][8]. 
Detecting humans in images is a challenging task owing 
to their predominantly variable appearance and the wide 
range of poses that they can adopt. The ﬁrst need is a robust 
feature set that allows the human form to be discriminated 
cleanly, even in cluttered backgrounds under difﬁcult 
illumination [9]. 
Machine vision has been defined as the use of devices for 
optical, non-contact sensing to automatically receive and 
interpret an image of a real scene in order to obtain 
information and/or control machines or process [10][11].  
Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HOG) are feature 
descriptors, used in computer vision and image processing 
for the purpose of object detection [9].  
A system that incorporates detection of vibrations arising 
from hacking actions of the vandals, automated capturing of 
images, Human Detection in Images, as well as relaying 
evidence and alerting monitoring personnel in real-time 
would go a long way in combatting of the vice of vandalism. 
This paper presents the design and development of a 
customized surveillance solution in two sections. The 
methodology discusses the specification of a logical 
framework, design of a physical model, as well as the 
implementation of a working prototype. The final section 
deals with the assembly of individual components, power 
requirements, tamper-proofing and cost implications of the 
system. 
 
 
 
 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

II.  METHODOLOGY 
A. Context Diagram 
The prototype is deployed on individual steel tower 
pylons. It consists of a camera placed at the top of the tower, 
trained downwards towards the base. A vibration sensor is 
attached to the steel frame of the tower so as to detect the 
vibrations caused by the cutting action of the vandals.  
  
 
CONTROL 
PROCESS
CAMERA UNIT
POWER SUPPLY
VIBRATION 
SENSOR
GPRS MODULE
DATA ARCHIVAL
 
 
 Figure 1. Context Diagram. 
 
A microprocessor provides for implementation of the 
analytic algorithms to sift through the image data, as well as 
to take signal input from the vibration sensor. In addition, 
external storage is provided for the image data captured as 
well as a GPRS module to facilitate communication 
between the system and the command centre. A solar panel 
and battery unit is sized to provide the power requirement 
of the system setup.  This is illustrated in the context 
diagram in Figure 1. 
 
B. Technology Architecture 
The Technology architecture model of the system is 
illustrated in Figure 2. The customized surveillance system 
is built upon the 512MB Raspberry Pi (R-Pi) Model B 
Single-board computer [12]. A single Pi NoIR infrared 
camera provides the image input at high resolution 
1080pixel quality frames at a rate of 30 frames per second. 
The Pi NoIR unit communicates with the R-Pi via the 
Camera Serial Interface (CSI) located on the body of the R-
Pi unit.  
The customized surveillance system is built upon the 
512MB Raspberry Pi (R-Pi) Model B Single-board 
computer [6]. A single Pi NoIR infrared camera provides 
the image input at high resolution 1080pixel quality frames 
at a rate of 30 frames per second. The Pi NoIR unit 
communicates with the R-Pi via the Camera Serial Interface 
(CSI) located on the body of the R-Pi unit.  
 
 
GPIO
CSI
ARM11
USB 2.0 INTERFACE
Pi NoIR 
Camera
PIEZO VIBRATION 
SENSOR
GPRS 
MODULE
POWER SUPPLY
SanDISK SDHC Card
Raspberry Pi
KEY
SUB-SYSTEMS
EXTERNAL ENTITIES
SDHC INTERFACE
 
Figure 2. Technology Architecture. 
 
A Piezo Vibration Sensor is connected via the General 
Purpose Input / Output (GPIO) interface and provides 
sensory input pertaining to the mechanical vibration of the 
steel frame to which it is attached. A battery power supply 
provides the power requirements of the R-Pi unit, as well as 
the attached external hard drive. The R-Pi requires a steady 
5V and draws 2.5W during peak operation.  
A 4GB San Disk Secure Digital High Capacity (SDHC) 
memory card is attached to the ARM11 microprocessor via 
the SDHC Card slot that is provided on the R-Pi unit to 
handle the storage requirements of the system. Finally, a 
generic GPRS module is connected to the USB interface on 
the R-Pi unit to provide communication capability to the 
system. 
C. 3D-Modeling 
The 3-dimensional model of the proposed surveillance 
unit was created using SketchUp®Tools. The layout 
includes visualizations of the Raspberry Pi, a GPRS Modem 
as well as a deep-cycle Lead Acid battery and its associated 
Charge Controller and Voltage Regulator. All components 
were enclosed in a stainless steel box. This is illustrated in 
Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3. 3D Model. 
 
A visualization was created of the proposed surveillance 
unit, and its intended mounting on the transmission line 
towers. The enclosing box is placed on the highest possible 
bracing of the steel pylon making considerations of 
maximum camera viewing angle. This is illustrated in 
Figure 4. 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 4. 3D Model of deployment. 
 
It is screwed or welded to the bracing angle bars securely 
to prevent attempts by vandals at circumventing the security 
system. Also, placement at the height of the live conductors 
reduces the accessibility of the surveillance system and 
hence safeguards it against tampering. This placement is 
illustrated in the 3D model in Figure 4. 
A solar panel was thus included in the visualization in 
Figure 4 to cater for the energy requirements of the system. 
It is placed vertically above the enclosing box to provide 
shadowing against direct sunlight and unnecessary heating. 
In addition, the placement of the solar panel above the 
enclosing box provides protection against the effects of 
direct precipitation (rain or hail). 
D. Vibration Sensor Interrupt 
A wiring schematic was generated using the TinyCAD 
software package. Of paramount importance was the 
specification of the connection of the Piezo-Vibration 
sensor to the GPIO pins of the Raspberry Pi. The circuitry 
was based on the implementation of a Monostable vibrator 
based on the 555 timer. This is illustrated in Figure 5. 
This circuit layout is necessary to amplify and to shape 
the output of the vibration sensor into a clean square wave 
whose Positive going transition can be used to trigger the 
GPIO interrupt. A resistor between the Vibration Sensor 
terminals alters the sensitivity of the device while the 
Operational Amplifier ensures that the voltage output of the 
sensor is of the correct magnitude to trigger operation of the 
555 timer Integrated Circuit (IC). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Vibration sensor interrupt was implemented using 
Python, making use of the RPi.GPIO library. This was done 
by setting up the Pin 23 of the GPIO on the Raspberry Pi to 
wait for a Positive-going transition of a pulse occurring on 
the input to the pin. On the rising edge of the pulse generated 
by the 555-timer circuit, the microprocessor starts the 
camera routine by running a call to the peopledetect.py 
script. This is followed up by a system call to the ftpsync.py 
script. 
 
E. Automation of Camera Routine 
 
The Pi NoIR camera board is provided without an IR 
Filter. This allows it to take images or record video 
illuminated with IR Light, even in low visible-light 
conditions. 
 It is capable of producing 2592 X 1944 resolution still 
images, although this markedly slows down machine vision 
algorithms. Optimal performance was achieved with the 
camera limited to 600 X 450 resolution images. 
A Human Detection Algorithm was written, based on 
Dalal Triggs’ work [9] with HOG. The algorithm used in 
this project was heavily based on the examples included in 
the OpenCV 2.4.7 library distribution for Python. Upon 
detection of each instance of vibration, the camera is 
prompted to capture a single snapshot of the current field of 
view exposed to the camera. 
Raspistill [13] is the command-line-driven application 
provided to take still photos using the Pi NoIR Camera 
board. The extra flags used with this command specify the 
output image name, photo resolution, exposure time (30 
microseconds) and night time exposure mode. In addition, 
the command specifies that no preview window should be 
opened. All these flags were necessary to ensure an 
instantaneous capture of the still photograph. The final 
output of the image capture and processing routine is 
illustrated in Figure 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Schematic of Vibration Sensor Circuit. 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 6. Annotated Critical Evidence Snapshot. 
 
The HOG algorithm implemented by the python program 
to carry out the detection of Human forms within the 
captured image is run first. A yellow rectangular boundary 
is drawn around the region of the image within which the 
human form detection has been made. 
Captioning of images is carried out by a sequence of 
commands. The first line places a black solid filled rectangle 
near the bottom of the input image. The second line of code 
is responsible for generating the text to place over the black 
rectangle.  
The metadata text generated by the code includes the 
Tower number and location information. For purposes of 
this example, the code generated a random integer between 
0 and 500 to simulate actual tower numbers attached to steel 
pylons on the transmission network. 
In addition, the code creates a Timestamp including date 
and time information for accurate reference. The text is 
generated in white on top of a black background for 
maximum contrast. The SaveImage function is then invoked 
to store the output image, henceforth referred to as a Critical 
Evidence Snapshot (CES) [14], in a uniform output image  
and directory to allow the FTP transfer script to access it. 
 
F. Automation of GPRS Dialup Connection 
 
The Raspberry Pi supports usage of the Huawei E220 
USB GPRS Modem. WV Dial is a script that facilitates 
initiating a dial-up connection from the Raspberry Pi to 
create an Internet connection via the Modem. USB 
Modeswitch, on the other hand, is a utility that toggles 
functionality of the USB device from Mass storage (which 
is enabled by default) to GPRS Modem (which is required 
for this purpose) 
The WVDial Configuration file is edited via a command-
line-based text editor, so as to configure the operation of the 
WV Dial script. The carrier-specific settings required to set 
up a Dial-Up connection to the internet are specified in this 
file. 
 
 
G. Automation of FTP File Transfer 
 
The File Transfer Protocol (FTP) is a standard network 
protocol used to transfer computer files from one host to 
another host over a TCP-based network, such as the Internet. 
The transfer was done by using two Python scripts. The 
upload of the Annotated Critical Evidence Snapshot from 
the remote surveillance unit was automated with a system 
call to the ftpupload.py script. 
The preliminary program routines in the script are 
responsible for creating a string value for the file name 
associated with the image being uploaded. This string value 
conforms to a uniform naming criteria including the current 
date and time of the snapshot capture. This is important for 
the proper curating of the CES archive on the monitoring 
station. 
On the monitoring station, the download of Annotated 
Critical Evidence Snapshot was accomplished by a repeated 
call to the ftpsync.py script. This essentially synchronizes 
the directory contents on the FTP file server and the folder 
hierarchy on the local monitoring station. The download 
function queries the ftp file server directory and only 
downloads files that are currently on the server but are not 
listed on the local directory. 
H. Implementation of a Front end monitoring panel 
 
The actual GUI (Graphical User Interface) for the Front 
End Monitoring Panel was coded via Python, making 
particular use of the TkInter graphics library. The ordering 
of the widgets was achieved by nesting of several containers 
in varying orientations. 
A single image is loaded from a directory, after being 
provided with the image file name. The image is then loaded 
into memory as a local variable. Finally, the variable is 
packed into the Frame container which was defined 
previously. Orientation and padding information was passed 
as variables to the pack function.  
To implement a flashing alert signal, the color of the Text 
canvas item was repeatedly changed from the base Gray-95% 
to red and back to capture the users’ attention every time a 
new CES image is acquired and registered on the system. 
The <False Alarm> and <Action Taken> buttons were 
bound to the stop_blinking function. The complete layout of 
the monitoring panel is illustrated in Figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 7. Front End Monitoring Panel. 
 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

The Front End Monitoring Panel was designed to achieve 
the following functionality: 
• 
Access and display locally stored CES images 
• 
Allow browsing through the CES images in a sequence 
• 
Continuously update the directory of CES images via 
FTP synchronization 
• 
Alert the monitoring personnel of new CES images and 
prompt personnel to take action 
• 
Allow personnel to flag CES as “False Alarm” 
whenever system presents False Positive 
• 
Allow browsing through CES image archive 
 
 
III. PROTOTYPE 
A. Assembly of components 
The assembly of components is as illustrated in Figure 8. 
A cast-steel casing was chosen for the housing of the system 
to protect the setup from attempts at vandalism. 
Furthermore, shock-proofing was provided by cushioning 
the components in a Styrofoam mould that was secured to 
the stainless steel case as illustrated in Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 8. Prototype before Encasing. 
 
 
Figure 9. Prototype with Lid removed. 
 
 
Figure 10. Remote Unit Prototype. 
 
For purposes of this prototype, a 12000mAh battery bank 
was included to provide the powering requirements of the 
system. This is to be replaced with a deep-cycle Lead acid 
battery, charge controller and Solar panel before 
deployment and field tests. 
A clear plastic window in the housing provided a viewing 
portal for the camera to ensure unobstructed viewing angles 
for the entire field of view. The final assembly of 
components and housing of a single surveillance unit is 
demonstrated in Figure 10. 
B. Sizing of solar panel 
The Raspberry Pi model B draws 3.5W of power. Even 
with a very efficient voltage regulator, there will still be 
some losses in our power system. It is best to assume 80% 
efficiency, and therefore approximately 4.0 Watts (the 
battery needs to give more power to cater for inefficiency in 
the regulator) will be taken from the battery to keep the 
Raspberry Pi powered. Following a rigorous sizing 
procedure, it was decided that a 30W/12V/2A mono-
crystalline solar panel is required.  A 40W mono-crystalline 
solar panel can also serve this purpose. 
C. Sizing of the Battery 
The Raspberry Pi will be taking approximately 8Ah of 
charge from the battery each day, and there may well be 
days (or multiple days in a row) without any sunshine and 
therefore, the battery should be sized to provide at least 7 
days of power for the Raspberry Pi without sunshine and 
without the charge of the battery falling below 40%. 
Therefore, as 7x8=56Ah is at most 60% of the charge of the 
battery we need a battery of at least 56/0.6=93.33Ah. Thus, 
a 95Ah or 100Ah battery may be used. Hence, a 12V, 95Ah 
or 12V, 100Ah battery is used. 
D. Testing of the system 
The prototype has not yet been tested in a realistic 
deployment environment. This was mainly because it does 
not meet the minimum weather-proofing requirements for 
outdoor deployment. In addition, the national transmission 
operator was reluctant to effect the shutdown necessary to 
deploy the system on one of the live towers. 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Possible test cases for the prototype system upon 
deployment on a remote tower would be designed to assess 
the accuracy and reliability, depending on mounting height, 
weather and conditions of illumination. Of further 
importance is the sensitivity of the system to different 
magnitudes of vibration, and the ability of the system to 
discriminate and discard different naturally occurring 
vibrations, such as those due to wind or earth tremors. 
E. Tamper-proofing of prototype 
 
 No single solution can be considered as "tamper-proof". 
Often multiple levels of security need to be addressed to 
reduce the risk of tampering. Some considerations might 
include the following: 
 
 The proposed surveillance unit is enclosed inside a 
steel casing which is either screwed or welded shut 
to prevent unauthorized access and improve tamper 
resistance.  
 
 It is deployed at a height, 3m below the lowest 
hanging conductor to control or limit access to 
products or systems of interest. 
F. Cost of the system 
One of the motivations for this research was the need for 
a cost-effective solution to the problem of vandalism. The 
cost of hardware requirements for the prototype including 
the solar powering and battery was computed to be $700 per 
unit of the surveillance system. Assuming that installation 
is to proceed on all the 4800 transmission towers on the 
transmission network, this would total up to a rough cost of 
$3,360,000 for the initial investment. 
This is easily justified by the capital cost of replacement 
of vandalized tower angle bars or the cost associated with 
the loss of supply due to power outages. Further, assuming 
a 100% efficacy of the system after installation and a total 
eradication of the problem of vandalism, this would imply a 
payback period of up to 7 years.  
 
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
In this paper, the development of a remotely deployed 
surveillance unit and its accompanying central monitoring 
station software was presented. The justification for the 
proposed system was discussed at length in the introduction. 
The functional and design requirements of the system were 
presented in detail and then the methodology followed in 
implementation of the system specified by the functional 
and design requirements.  
Finally, the outcomes of the research endeavor were laid 
out in the Prototype section. In addition, the final costing of 
the proposed system was done basing on the cost of the cost 
of implementing the prototype. The basis for further 
research and testing of the system was also presented.  
This research has dug deep into the potential for the 
utilization of machine vision algorithms on the cost-
effective platform of Raspberry Pi for Surveillance 
applications. However, we were unable to fully optimize the 
Human Detection algorithm to allow an acceptable frame-
rate for live video analysis, as opposed to the still image 
analysis used in this project. 
In addition, integration of the system into the widely 
accepted 
SCADA 
(Supervisory 
Control 
and 
Data 
Acquisition) would greatly facilitate its adoption in most 
transmission network operators. This is motivated by the 
fact that a similar system is already in place to monitor the 
different power flow parameters on the transmission 
network. 
Securing of the communication channel is another 
important research area that needs deeper consideration. 
This will effectively deter technology-savvy criminals from 
compromising the integrity of the surveillance data relayed 
from the remote monitoring units. In addition, reliability of 
the GPRS network over the entire span of the transmission 
network needs to be ascertained. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was conducted under the iLabs@MAK 
Research Project, based in the College of Engineering, 
Design, Art and Technology at Makerere University with 
support from the Government of Uganda. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  UETCL, “UETCL Official Website,” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.uetcl.com/. [Accessed 05 August 2014]. 
[2]  OPM, “Office of the Prime Minister,” June 1999. [Online]. 
Available: www.opm.go.ug/. [Accessed August 2014]. 
[3]  UETCL, “Vandals, a cost and menace to the energy sector,” The 
Transmitter, pp. 11-12, October 2007.  
[4]  IPVM, Video Surveillance Book, 1st ed., Chicago, 2012.  
[5]  S. Mubarak, J. Omar and S. Khurram, “Automated Visual 
Surveillance in Realistic Scenarios,” IEEE Computer Society, pp. 
30-39, 2007.  
[6]  S. Russo, “Digital Video Surveillance: Enhancing physical security 
with analytic capabilities,” California, 2008.  
[7]  Motorola Solutions Inc, “Motorola Optimized Video Security,” 
Illinois, 2011. 
[8]  Seagate Technology LLC, “Security Gets Smarter With Intelligent 
Video Surveillance Systems,” New York, 2012. 
[9]  N. Dalal and T. Bill, “Histograms of Oriented Gradients for Human 
Detection,” Paris. 
[10]  N. Zuech, Understanding and Applying Machihe Vision, 2nd ed., 
New York: Marcel Dekker, 2000.  
[11]  B. Gary and K. Adrian, Learning OpenCV, 1st ed., Cambridge: 
O'Reilly, 2008.  
[12]  Raspberry Pi Foundation, “About Us,” [Online]. Available: 
http://raspberrypi.org/about/. [Accessed 13 August 2014]. 
[13]  Raspberry Pi Foundation, RaspiCam Documentation, London, 2013.  
[14]  D. Gorodnichy and M. Tony, “Automated video surveillance: ACE 
Surveillance (Annotated Critical Evidence) case study,” Ontario, 
2008.  
 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

