Influence of the Perception of Data Security on Customer Usage of Internet Services  
Erik Massarczyk, Peter Winzer 
Faculty of Design – Computer Science – Media 
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences 
Wiesbaden, Germany 
Email: erik.massarczyk@hs-rm.de, peter.winzer@hs-rm.de 
 
 
Abstract—An increasing customer usage of Internet services 
with various devices demands a greater effort on data security 
and privacy issues, because more and more devices are 
connected and personal data are spread more widely. 
However, in many cases the performance of services is more 
important than the provision of data security. So, this leads to 
a need to investigate how the user perception of data security 
influences the usage of Internet services, which will be 
analyzed with the Technology Acceptance Model. Here, the 
aim of this paper is to figure out a possible negative impact of 
the perception of data security on the usage of Internet 
services. The aim of this paper will be that within the usage of 
the Technology Acceptance Model an influence of data security 
issues can be proven.  
Keywords-data security; devices; customer usage; Internet 
services.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
During the last 10 to 15 years, more and more people use 
the Internet and Internet services in their daily life. This 
development leads to a rising global Internet penetration and 
data flow [1]. Further, most people use mainly services for 
Social Media, broadcasting/streaming, gaming and cloud 
computing. Especially during the last years, people start to 
use the different services with various devices. This 
approach conducts that people apply more and more 
different devices for the usage of services [2][3]. Due to this 
application of services the devices get connected among 
each other. Hence, it can be assumed, that the personal user 
data spread to a larger degree [2]. For the customers of 
Internet services, it is elusive where the personal data is 
stored and who gets access to the personal data, because the 
smart connected devices cover wide range of information 
over geographical boundaries [3][4]. Finally, the usage of 
Internet services by customers faces the problem of data 
security and privacy from the user perspective. Personal 
data include critical information and intellectual properties 
about the users themselves and these data are countable 
assets from which enterprises, companies and also criminals 
can benefit [5].  
In general, the users are responsible which personal data 
they spread for the usage of different Internet services. 
Hurdle free communication, marketing measures and 
advertisement disclose also more personal data of the users. 
Further, a lot of people are also willing to share their 
personal data in ignorance of risks of data leakage and data 
theft. Out of it, it can be concluded that data security and 
privacy gets more and more important, because more 
personal data is disclosed and often the users are not able to 
examine who gets access to their personal information and 
who uses them for legal and illegal motives.  
The authors will figure out what the user perception of 
data security and privacy is, when they use different Internet 
services with various devices, especially mobile devices 
with wireless Internet connections. Moreover, each Internet 
usage is in direct connection with data security and privacy 
issues. For these reasons, it has to be investigated whether a 
higher perception of data security and trust in a service leads 
to a preferred usage of this service or device.  
Accordingly, the authors analyze what the users of 
Internet services do to prevent unauthorized access to their 
personal data. In Section II, the term data security will be 
described. Following this section, the authors will figure out 
the challenges of service and technology usage. In Section 
IV, the methodology presents the theoretical background of 
our research and in Section V the further approach will be 
described. 
II. 
DATA SECURITY 
Data security conducts that users want to keep their 
personal data to themselves. Here, for the user must be 
clear, who gets access to the personal information. Hence, 
no one should get access to the user’s personal data, who 
does not have the right permission for the usage [4]. 
However, a lot of companies use personal data of customers, 
which customers spread in their Internet services, because a 
lot of users are not fully aware of the possible risks of 
sharing information [5][6]. Furthermore, they do not know 
which huge amount of data they produce and how they can 
prevent such risks [7]. This behavior could be a problem for 
residential users, because 56% of Internet services and 
platforms 
transmit 
personal 
information 
without 
permissions to third parties [8]. So, users should be better 
informed and aware of their personal data. In many cases, 
persons divulge information, which they may regret in a 
future situation. Further, the data can be linked to critical 
personal information like credit card numbers, etc. [5][6]. 
In general, most users fear: (a) capturing of passwords 
and accounts, (b) blackmails, (c) eavesdropping, and (d) 
undesired access to personal data from criminals [2]. The 
users want a secure transmission of data and the services 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

should guarantee integrity, availability and confidentiality of 
the data and their transmission [9]. 
Otherwise, the users also have to prevent unauthorized 
accesses by changing the passwords regularly, what the 
authors also investigate with a survey. If the users lose their 
access and their data is leaked, normally the users have to 
bear the loss in reputation of image, business partners, 
relatives and friends [2]. 
III. 
CHALLENGES 
The main challenge for analyzing user perceptions of data 
security is that all user attitudes and beliefs are completely 
subjective and depend on demographic (age) and cultural 
factors, which influence the customer willing to share data 
[5].  These discrepancies also include that each user has his 
perceptions of risks and prevention of risks. As mentioned 
in Section I, in many cases the people prefer to look for the 
performance of services instead of the security and data 
protection measures. To increase the customer caution for 
disclosure and leakage of private data, services should insert 
several measures and rules which the customers have to 
imply to use the services [10]. Further, services and 
applications should state consequences of misuse and data 
leakage and insert different messages to make sure that the 
users understand of their data distribution. However, it is 
necessary to investigate, what kind of impact the factors 
have on the individual perception of data security and the 
influence on the usage of Internet services, especially 
mobile services.  
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
For the analysis of the connection between the perception 
of data security and the usage of Internet services, the 
authors will use the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM). 
The TAM shall clarify, how the customer individual’s 
acceptance of Information Technologies (IT) can be 
explained and predicted [11][12]. Our paper will focus on 
the dependence of the usage of mobile Internet services on 
security issues and the acceptance of new technologies. It is 
currently known that the perceived usefulness has a positive 
impact on behavioral intentions, which turns in an actual 
customer usage [12]. However, perceived usefulness does 
not cover the user’s perception, that the usage of the service 
will enhance his performance [11].  
Moreover, perceived usefulness and behavioral intentions 
are not able to analyze and to reflect user perceptions of data 
security and the adoption of mobile Internet services. 
Therefore, the authors implement an external variable as 
influence factor for perceived usefulness. The external 
variable will be perceived credibility, which covers the user 
beliefs and attitudes that the used systems would be free of 
privacy and security threats [13]. Lin et al. further figured 
out that data security and privacy are the most affecting 
factors for an adoption of technology [13]. It is also known 
that perceived credibility influence positively the behavioral 
intention to use [14]. But, the authors do not conclude that 
users believe that using mobile Internet services will not 
imply security or privacy threats [14]. Here, the authors are 
of the opinion that the customers carry security and privacy 
threats by using mobile Internet services. To examine this 
hypothesis, the authors will use a survey to prove that data 
security issues have a negative impact on behavioral 
intentions to use mobile Internet services. For the analysis 
of the individual customer groups, separate cross-sectional 
surveys ("one-shot survey") will be conducted within a short 
period of time [15]. Here, the answers are taken by 
interviewers in personal oral interviews, thus ensuring 
completeness and accuracy of the answers. The personal 
interview will be conducted on the basis of a random quota 
sample based on the demographic characteristics of gender 
and age in order to be representative of the local population 
[16][17]. To cover the frequency of mobile data usage and 
the perception of data security, a 5-point-Likert-scale (very 
often to very few and very important to very important) will 
be implemented. The discrepancy to the previous study will 
be underlined by the analysis of other impact factors like 
culture values and traditions. 
V. 
APPROACH 
The idea of this paper is to present a relationship 
between a perception of data security and usage of Internet 
services, especially of mobile Internet services. After a 
review of literature to gain an overview about existing 
concepts and theories over customer behaviors in 
circumstances of data security issues, a survey shall find out 
and investigate current customer Internet behaviors. The 
data will be analyzed with quantitative research methods 
under usage of the statistical program Statistical Package for 
the Social Sciences (SPSS). After the evaluation credibility, 
the Exploratory Factor Analysis will be done to ensure the 
validity and to present related groups of perceptions and 
services. The analysis of the survey shall present the 
regression 
between 
the 
external 
variable 
perceived 
credibility and perceived usefulness and behavioral 
intentions. After completion of the data analysis, next steps 
aim at figuring out the results of least square regression and 
completion to support the hypothesis and findings of the 
TAM in relation of data security issues. 
REFERENCES 
[1] International Telecommunication Union (ITU), “ICT Facts & 
Figures – The world in 2015”, May 2015, [Online]. 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2015.pdf, 
2016.07.11. 
[2] P. W. Dowd and J. T. McHenry, “Network Security: It’s Time 
to Take It Seriously” Computer (1998), vol. 31, issue 9, IEEE, 
Sept. 1998, pp. 24-28. 
[3] D. Desai, “Law and Technology – Beyond Location: Data 
Security in the 21st Century” Magazine Communications of 
the ACM (2013), vol. 56, issue 1, ACM, Jan. 2013, pp. 34-36. 
[4] F. S. Ferraz and C. A. Guimarães Ferraz, “Smart City 
Security Issues: Depicting information security issues in the 
role of a urban environment”, 7th International Conference on 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Utility and Cloud Computing, IEEE/ACM, 2014, pp. 842-
846. 
[5] S. Dhawan, K. Singh, and S. Goel, “Impact of Privacy 
Attitude. Concern and Awareness on Use of Online Social 
Networking” 5th International Conference - Confluence The 
Next Generation Information Technology Summit 2013, 
IEEE, Sept. 2014, pp. 14-17. 
[6] D. Malandrino, V. Scarano, and R. Spinelli, “How increased 
awareness can impact attitudes and behaviors toward online 
privacy protection”, International Conference on Social 
Computing (Social Com), IEEE, Sept. 2013, pp. 57-62. 
[7] A. N. Joinson. U.-D. Reips, T. Buchanan, and C. B. Paine 
Schofield, “Privacy, Trust, and Self-Disclosure Online“, 
Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 25, no. 1, 2010, pp. 1-24. 
[8] B. Krishnamurthy, K. Naryshkin, and C. Wills, “Privacy 
leakage vs. protection measures: the growing disconnect”, in 
Web 2.0 Security and Privacy Workshop, 2011, pp. 1-10. 
[9] D. Nayak, N. Rajendran, D. B. Phatak, and V. P. Gulati, 
“Security Issues in Mobile Data Networks” Vehicular 
Technology Conference (VTC 2004), vol. 5, IEEE , Sept. 
2004, pp. 3229-3233. 
[10] Q. Tan and F. Pivot, “Big Data Privacy: Changing Perception 
of 
Privacy, 
International 
Conference 
on 
Smart 
City/SocialCom/SustainCom, IEEE, 2015, pp. 860-865 
[11] F. D. Davis, “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and 
user acceptance of information technology”, MIS Quarterly, 
Vol. 13, 1989, pp. 318-340. 
[12] F. D. Davis, R. P. Bagozzi, and P. R. Warshaw, “User 
acceptance of computer technology: a comparison of two 
theoretical models”, Management Science, Vol. 35, 1989, pp. 
982-1003. 
[13] F.-T. Lin, H.-Y. Wu, and T. T. Nguyet Nga, “Adoption of 
Internet Banking: An Empirical Study in Vietnam”, 10th 
International Conference on e-Business Engnineering, IEEE, 
2013, pp. 282-287. 
[14] Y. S. Wang, Y. M. Wang, H. H. Lin, and T. I. Tang, 
“Determinants of user acceptance of Internet banking: an 
empirical study”, International Journal of Service Industry 
Management, vol. 14, 2003, pp. 501-519. 
[15] A. Diekmann, „Empirical Social Research“, [German] 
„Empirische 
Sozialforschung“, 
Reinbek 
/ 
Hamburg, 
Rowohlt-Taschenbuch-Verlag, Vol. 5, 2011 
[16] J. Bortz and N. Dö ring, „Research Methods and Evaluations“, 
[German] „Forschungsmethoden und Evaluation; für Human- 
und Sozialwissenschaftler“, Heidelberg, Springer-Medizin-
Verlag, vol. 4, 2009 
[17] M. Kaya, „Data Collection Procedure“, [German] „Verfahren 
der 
Datenerhebung“, 
in 
Albers, 
S./Klapper, 
D./Konradt, U./Walter, A./Wolf, J. (Hrsg.): Methodik der 
empirischen Forschung, Wiesbaden, Gabler, vol. 3, 2013, pp. 
49-64. 
 
 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

