Mobile Recruiting Beyond Job Search: 
A User-Centered Approach for Smartphone-Based Job Applications 
 
Stephan Böhm 
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences 
Department of Media Management 
Wiesbaden, Germany 
e-mail: stephan.boehm@hs-rm.de 
Wolfgang Achilles 
Jobware Online 
Service GmbH 
Paderborn, Germany 
e-mail: w.achilles@jobware.de
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a user-centered approach to 
identify user requirements for smartphone-based job applica-
tions. Initial user requirements were derived from a question-
naire within a smartphone-affine user group. The survey find-
ings were then used to generate low- and high-fidelity proto-
types of a mobile app supporting job applications. The proto-
types were tested to collect user feedback and to improve their 
functionality and usability. As a result, some key recommenda-
tions for the implementation of smartphone-supported job ap-
plication processes can be presented at the end of this paper. 
Keywords-Mobile recruiting; mobile job applications; user-
centered design; mobile application; mobile usage behavior. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to the GSM Association, worldwide mobile 
Internet penetration reached 44 percent at the end of 2015 
and is predicted to grow to 60 percent of the world popula-
tion by the end of the decade in 2020. In the same time peri-
od, mobile Internet penetration is expected to increase from 
66 percent to 77 percent in the developed countries [1]. The 
growth of mobile Internet changes user behavior and shifts 
information retrieval activities from desktop to mobile de-
vices. In mid-2015, Google searches on mobile devices al-
ready exceeded those on computers in ten countries includ-
ing the US and Japan [2]. Drivers of the development are a 
greater availability and affordability of smartphones as well 
as broadband mobile network infrastructures. Smartphone 
adoption rate in the developed world was already 65 percent 
of the connection base at the end of 2015 [1]. 
Smartphones connected to the mobile Internet can be 
used to access a wide variety of information for very differ-
ent purposes. One field of application is the search for job-
related information by job seekers. Access to this kind of in-
formation via smartphone depends on how the content and 
its presentation is adapted to the special requirements and 
limitations of mobile devices. Despite the considerable tech-
nical improvements achieved, mobile devices are still char-
acterized by smaller displays, limited keyboards, as well as 
less processing power and memory compared to desktop 
computers. For this reason, the web-based offerings of job-
related information like career websites and job portals need 
to be optimized for access by mobile devices to provide an 
adequate user or “candidate” experience. Another reason 
why this is business critical for employers is that search en-
gines like Google have started to consider mobile-friendli-
ness of websites as a ranking factor [3]. Mobile-friendly web 
pages will appear higher on search results which corresponds 
with a higher chance to be recognized and clicked by mobile 
job seekers.  
Responsive web design is one popular technical approach 
to provide an improved user experience of websites across 
multiple devices [4]. Besides this, the structure and the con-
tent needs to be adapted to the requirements of a mobile us-
age context (e.g., text adapted to shorter attention span). An-
other approach to provide a mobile-optimized candidate ex-
perience is to provide job-related information via mobile ap-
plications. Besides the device limitations mentioned above, 
the use of mobile technology can enable organizations to 
find new ways to attract or hire potential candidates. Exam-
ples are the use of QR codes in job advertisements to provide 
additional job-related information or to filter job offers by 
the jobseekers’ current location. The use of innovative mo-
bile technologies for recruiting purposes is often referred to 
as “mobile recruiting”. More precisely, mobile recruiting can 
be defined as “… any organizational information provided 
for or delivered to a mobile device in order to attract and hire 
potential applicants and employees” [5]. It can be interpreted 
as a field of e-recruiting that deals with the challenges and 
opportunities of deploying mobile technologies along the 
whole “recruiting funnel”. This recruiting process begins 
with the use of mobile media to increase awareness of the 
employer brand and it ends with the support of the candi-
date’s application via mobile devices [6]. 
In contrast to the mobile recruiting activities for job 
search, the job application is a more interactive process. For 
example, candidates might need to submit comprehensive 
application documents to the prospective employer or want 
to include a cover letter to highlight particular qualifications 
for a job. Smartphone user interfaces are not designed for 
extensive text input or document management efficiently. 
This is why a mobile-optimization of the job application 
cannot be confined to the adaptation of the job-related con-
tent and its presentation. Rather, the complete application 
process has to be redefined and aligned for smartphone-
based job applications. 
Against this background, the aim of this study is to iden-
tify user requirements of such a mobile-optimized job appli-
cation process. Following this introduction, the research 
background and objectives with regards to mobile job appli-
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

cations are discussed in Section II. The study’s user-centered 
design approach is the subject of Section III before the key 
findings are presented in Section IV. The paper concludes 
with best-practice recommendations for the implementation 
of the mobile application process in Section V and the 
study’s limitations and an outlook on further research in Sec-
tion VI.  
II. 
RESEARCH BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES 
According to the results of a global IBM Work Trends 
Study from 2015, more than half of all job seekers (53 per-
cent) used their mobile devices to search for a job. The most 
typical mobile job seekers’ activities are the search for job 
postings (74 percent) or job-related information (55 percent) 
and to get job alerts (54 percent). Less common within the 
group of mobile job seekers is the use of mobile devices to 
express job interest (35 percent) or taking job-related as-
sessments (18 percent) [7]. Use of mobile devices for job 
search also changed job seeker behavior. Job search with 
mobile devices is a less focused and planned activity than 
something that occurs incidentally and often done to fill 
waiting or idle time during the day. According to Jobvite [8], 
most of the job seekers (32 percent) spend between six and 
ten minutes on mobile devices for job searches. Common 
situations for mobile job search mentioned in this study are 
in bed (47 percent), during commute (38 percent), in a res-
taurant (36 percent), on the job (30 percent), during a meet-
ing (21 percent) and even in the restroom (18 percent). 
While job search via mobile devices is becoming more 
and more common, applying for a job using a smartphone is 
still less popular. With regard to the IBM study mentioned 
before, only 25 percent of the global employees who have 
used mobile in their job search also completed entire job ap-
plications on this device [7]. The user acceptance to apply 
mobile varies between countries. A recent study carried out 
by the job portal provider Careerbuilder reports that 9 per-
cent applied for a job on a mobile device in the US but 14 
percent in Germany. The main reasons to not apply mobile in 
both countries (US; Germany) are the lack of a full keyboard 
(53; 58 percent), too small screens (47; 44 percent), prob-
lems regarding the availability of a resume on the device (30; 
21 percent), the creation of personalized cover letters (18; 25 
percent) or the perception that this way of applying is too 
hard in general (19; 16 percent) [9][10]. This industry re-
search shows that there is a gap between mobile job search-
ing and application behavior and that there are some usage 
barriers which need to be overcome. 
However, more detailed findings on user expectations 
and requirements as well as more concrete recommendations 
on how to design a mobile-optimized job application process 
are not revealed within these studies. Similarly, empirical 
knowledge and findings from scientific research on mobile 
job applications are still rare. Only few authors have identi-
fied mobile recruiting as an object for research or considered 
it to be a trend within e-recruiting during the last five years. 
The majority of these publications discuss the status quo [5], 
challenges and opportunities for HR and personnel recruit-
ment [11][12][13][14] as well as factors influencing user ac-
ceptance of this new recruiting channel [15][16][17]. Some 
more industry-oriented publications have analyzed mobile 
job seeker behavior [6] as well as mobile-optimization [18] 
or video-enhancement of job advertisements [19]. The au-
thors of this paper are not aware of any article that has ana-
lyzed the user requirements for mobile job applications. 
Summarizing the discussion above, it can be stated that 
there is a research deficit and a demand in practice to gain 
knowledge on the user-oriented design of mobile job appli-
cation processes. In this regard, this study has the following 
three objectives: 
 
Describe the status quo of job applications via mo-
bile devices from the employer and the candidate 
perspective: The focus is on early adopters and the 
group of young talents in Germany. 
 
Identify basic user requirements with regard to the 
mobile job application process and deduce some 
fundamental best-practice recommendations for a 
user-centric design of such a process. 
 
Generate a prototype for an app-based mobile job 
application support as a basis for initial user testing 
and feedback-based improvements. 
As this work was conducted in cooperation with a job 
portal provider, the focus of this study was application-
oriented research with the aim to generate scientific 
knowledge that can be applied in the further development of 
job portal systems. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The previous section revealed that the support of job ap-
plications by smartphones is a relatively new topic and can 
be assumed to a certain extent to be unknown within the tar-
get groups of recruiters. In this situation, the identification of 
user requirements cannot be based solely on user surveys. 
For this reason, this study is built around a user-centered de-
sign approach. User-centered Design (UCD) can be seen as a 
“… methodology used by developers and designers to ensure 
they’re creating products that meet users’ needs” [20]. The 
basic idea is to involve users at a very early stage of the de-
velopment to acquire information on users’ expectations, be-
havior, and perceptions in order to continuously evolve and 
improve the product design in an iterative and interactive 
process [21]. A key element of UCD are prototypes. Proto-
types demonstrate and visualize a design idea prior to im-
plementation, enable user experiments with design varia-
tions, as well as clarification of user requirements. They are a 
communication tool between the different stakeholders in the 
product design and development process [22]. A UCD pro-
cess can be structured in five phases: initial assessment, up-
front user research, design and development, implementa-
tion, and market introduction [21][23]. The focus of this 
study is on the first three phases and thus the early stages 
within the UCD process. 
 
Initial assessment: In a first step, the general objec-
tives and requirements need to be defined. The ob-
jective is to present a user-centered concept for an 
app that enables users to apply for jobs by smart-
phone. As there are already existing solutions to en-
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

able mobile job application, we started this study 
with an in-depth competitive user experience analy-
sis [23]. For this purpose, the recruiting apps and 
websites of the 30 highest-turnover companies 
(2014) in Germany as well as 14 websites of job por-
tals and 21 related mobile apps were analyzed. The 
objective of this initial assessment was to (1) outline 
the status quo on the implementation status in Ger-
many, (2) identify components and process steps 
from the employer perspective as well as (3) best-
practices and what to avoid with regard to the cur-
rent implementation status. 
 
Up-front user-research: The results of the initial 
phase were then structured by using a morphological 
box approach [24]. The parameters of this box were 
defined by the identified components and process 
steps of a generic mobile job application process. 
Therefore, the employer-driven perspective from the 
initial assessment was extended and completed by a 
user journey for a mobile application process derived 
from expert discussion. As a result, a two-dimen-
sional morphological box was created with process 
steps and components as a first dimension and a var-
ying number of corresponding implementation vari-
ants as a second dimension. Each combination of 
implementation variants along the process steps and 
components represents a possible implementation of 
a mobile application process. The result was then 
used to identify areas where the knowledge of user 
preferences could help to reduce the number of im-
plementation variants that need to be considered for 
prototyping and user testing. For this purpose, a 
questionnaire was developed and used to collect 
feedback on user preferences of young talents within 
the German job-applicant market. The questionnaire 
was distributed online and offline among media-
affine students in Germany by using a convenient 
sampling method. The survey contained 29 questions 
on the participants’ general job application behavior 
as well as experiences and expectations towards mo-
bile job applications. The survey was actively dis-
tributed from December 7th to 30th, 2015 and resulted 
in a data sample of 382 participants. 
 
Design and development: The prototypes for user 
testing were generated in the last step of this study. 
Scribbles of screen designs were developed for each 
of the process steps and the user interface compo-
nents along the generic user journey mentioned 
above. This was necessary to identify elements with-
in the screen flow that can be separated from each 
other or need to be combined. The resulting library 
of user interface patterns was then used to deploy the 
empirical findings from the questionnaire to define 
user-oriented job-application process variants as a 
subject of further user testing. The process variants 
identified were then discussed with experts for job 
portals and transferred into first interactive high-
fidelity prototypes using the mobile prototyping tool 
proto.io [25]. Based on two prototype variants, demo 
videos were produced. This was in order to be able 
to present a standardized stimulus and to reduce 
complexity as it was not possible to generate an in-
teractive prototype in this phase that supports all the 
features required for a realistic screen flow (e.g., 
cloud upload, text recognition). Each demo video 
was then presented to test users (18 and 17 partici-
pants) between January 20th and 22nd, 2015. Feed-
back was collected based on a questionnaire at the 
end of the sessions and used to develop improved 
prototypes summarizing the study’s findings. 
To sum up, on the basis of the above, the procedure pre-
sented can be categorized as a (sequential) multi-method or 
mixed-method approach combining qualitative and quantita-
tive approaches. The study is focused on the early stages 
within a UCD process to generate knowledge about user re-
quirements with regard to a smartphone-supported job-
application process. Intended outcomes are a prototype visu-
alizing the mobile-optimized and user-oriented mobile job-
application process as well as best-practices or recommenda-
tions on how to fulfill user requirements. 
IV. 
STUDY RESULTS 
Following the presented approach and for the sake of 
brevity the presentation of the study’s results, in this section, 
will focus on selected findings: (1) market analysis, (2) user 
survey and (3) key characteristics of the prototype. 
A. Market Analysis 
Only five of the analyzed career websites of the 30 high-
est-turnover companies in Germany support a mobile job ap-
plication. In most cases (4), the applicants have to enter their 
profile data manually. Some of the employers (2) offer an 
option to import this data from (business-oriented) social 
networking services. Application documents can be uploaded 
from the smartphone (4). One company supports mobile ap-
plications and abstains entirely from additional documents. 
An option to upload from a cloud service was not offered by 
any website. Only three of the 30 companies offer a mobile 
app with an option to apply for jobs. Two of these apps sup-
port the creation of a candidate profile by text entry or im-
port from social network providers. The findings demon-
strate that mobile job applications are not yet of any great 
importance for German top employers. However, some in-
novators have started to test the applicability and possibilities 
of this new recruiting channel and integrated features beyond 
the traditional online application. Among those features iden-
tified in the analysis are video-based applications, options to 
give feedback on the application process, or include text 
recognition capabilities that reduce the necessity of extensive 
text entry. 
The situation is slightly different for the job portals. Five 
of the 14 popular job portal websites investigated provide an 
option to apply via a mobile device. One without and four 
with the requirement of user registration. Application docu-
ments can be uploaded from the smartphone (4) or –again 
rarely supported– by cloud services (1). However, support of 
smartphone-based job applications appears to be a domain of 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

mobile apps from job portals and related service providers. 
Fifteen of the 21 apps analyzed offered such an option. Can-
didates can apply in different ways: directly without registra-
tion (5), after they have registered at a job portal (10), or by 
using an existing login from a social network (8). The picture 
is more mixed regarding the collection of candidate infor-
mation. Most of the apps (9) required manual text entry for 
the profile data. Five apps offered an option to apply without 
resumes and cover letters. The support to submit additional 
candidate information of the other apps varied in terms of the 
type of documents between uploads, social network import 
or manual text entries. 
The findings from the market research were consolidated 
with feedback from job portal experts and summarized in a 
list of fundamental mobile application components and im-
plementation variants as presented in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
FUNDAMENTAL MOBILE JOB APPLICATION COMPONENTS 
AND IMPLEMENTATION VARIANTS 
Login/ 
Registration 
No registration, register account, register with 
existing social network account (e.g., LinkedIn, 
XING) 
Candidate  
Profile 
None, text entry, import from job portal, import 
from social network profile 
Photo 
Camera, gallery, cloud upload (e.g,, Dropbox), 
import from social media profile 
Cover 
Letter 
None, free text, predefined text templates and 
blocks, customizable text, text entry structured by 
questions, upload (non-editable), upload and text 
recognition (import for editing), video-based self-
presentation 
Submission 
None, text entry, form, local upload, cloud upload 
Resume 
None, free text, text entry structured by questions, 
upload (non-editable), upload and text recognition 
(import for editing) 
Submission 
None, text entry, form, local upload, cloud upload, 
import from job portal, import from social net-
work profile 
Certificates 
None, grades only, free text, scanned documents 
Submission 
None, text entry, form, local upload, cloud upload 
User Control 
None, confirmations, save and submit later 
Guidance 
None, status bar, tooltips, popups 
 
These results of the market analysis were then used to de-
fine a questionnaire to identify user requirements and prefer-
ences with regard to the implementation variants as dis-
cussed in Section III.  
B. User Survey 
The questionnaire on the user preferences and require-
ments was completed by 382 respondents. As mentioned in 
Section III, the survey was conducted as a convenience sam-
ple and thus reflects more or less the demographics of the 
Media Management students at RheinMain University. The 
average age of the respondents was 22 years and 64 percent 
of the participants were female. The majority of the students 
are studying for a bachelor degree (78 percent) and 54 per-
cent will graduate by 2017. 
Almost all the participants own a smartphone (99 per-
cent) with Android being the most used mobile operating 
system (50 percent). Facebook is the most popular social 
network and 81 percent use it often or regularly. Business-
oriented social networks are only used regularly by a very 
small proportion of the young talents (LinkedIn: 1 percent; 
XING: 2 percent). In this regard, it can already be assumed 
that importing candidate profiles from this type of social 
network –as is already offered by German career websites 
and job portals– is not an adequate option for this specific 
target group. Dropbox is the most common cloud service, 
regularly or often used by 63 percent of the participants 
(Google drive: 14 percent; OneDrive: 5 percent). 
The majority of the young talents have experience with 
job applications: 39 percent have applied for a job within the 
last six months and 14 percent were currently seeking a job. 
Most of the jobs in scope are internships (30 percent), part-
time jobs (24 percent) or working student positions (18 per-
cent). About 70 percent send between one and five applica-
tions when seeking a job. Seventy-one percent manage to 
complete the preparation of a job application within one 
hour. The perceived importance of candidate information 
varies by type of document (important or rather important): 
resume (94 percent), cover letter (83 percent), certificates (77 
percent), and photo (46 percent). The most popular platform 
to search for a job is still the desktop computer. More than 
half (54 percent) of the respondents stated that they always 
use a computer. Mobile devices are still less popular for job 
searches. A smartphone is always (often) used for job search 
by only 6 percent (22 percent) of the respondents. 
The study participants had little or no experience with job 
applications via mobile devices. Less than one fifth (17 per-
cent) had ever seen such an option and only 7 percent have 
already applied for a job from a mobile device. However, the 
low level of experience seems to be more a result of a lack of 
opportunities than a lack of interest. Half of the respondents 
are open-minded towards this new way to apply for a job. 
The majority of those who can imagine applying mobile stat-
ed that such an option is a contemporary requirement (79 
percent), should be offered more often (61 percent), and can 
be expected from innovative employers (56 percent). The 
main reasons to use such an option are non-availability of 
computer access (79 percent), applying while being on-the-
go (68 percent), to make an initial contact (67 percent), or if 
such an option is less complicated and more convenient to 
use (66 percent). Only 9 percent would apply via mobile if 
they could do so by submitting a video-based application. 
The main causes of concerns with regard to applying 
with a smartphone are uncomfortable and awkward text en-
try (82 percent) as well as small screens (81 percent) and un-
reliable Internet connections (71 percent). Beside these more 
technical problems, the respondents are concerned with re-
gard to limited possibilities for self-presentation (46 percent) 
and the acceptance of mobile job applications by HR de-
partments (45 percent). With regard to the application docu-
ments, most of the study participants consider it likely that 
they would prepare a cover letter on the computer (72 per-
cent) or make only small modifications with the smartphone 
keyboard (59 percent). Even short text entry was more ac-
cepted (37 percent) than relying on standardized text mod-
ules (18 percent) or always reusing the same cover letter un-
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

changed (15 percent). The most preferred option for upload-
ing information was a local upload from the smartphone. 
This might be due to privacy concerns when uploading the 
documents via the Internet. With this regard it was a surprise 
that the study participants would rather upload from a cloud 
service (e.g., Dropbox) than use a job portal provider as a 
repository for their application documents. 
C. Prototype 
Prototypes were designed to acquire more knowledge on 
the submission of candidate information like cover letter, re-
sume, and certificates that revealed to be critical for user ac-
ceptance based on the results of the user survey. In addition 
to a base case scenario, a prototype variant supporting “one-
click applications” was designed. The prototypes were sub-
ject to user testing and improved based on the user feedback 
in two successive stages. The most important result from the 
prototyping phase was the requirement to provide a high lev-
el of guidance (e.g., show current and required steps for 
completion) and control (e.g., details of required documents 
and submission status). Unexpectedly, and contrary to the 
survey results, the majority (71 percent) of the participants 
refused to accept “one-click applications” after being ex-
posed to the corresponding prototype. This might be due to 
the fact that the effort on the user side was quite similar for 
both prototype variants. Moreover, the one-click application 
function required some additional input for the personaliza-
tion of a re-usable candidate profile. This is why the ad-
vantages of the one-click application for the user become ap-
parent only when the candidate reuses the pre-prepared in-
formation for multiple applications. It turned out that a demo 
video to demonstrate the prototype functionality might be 
insufficient to convey such a user experience.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The growing shift of Internet usage from desktop to mo-
bile devices puts increasing pressure on employers to provide 
a continuous mobile-optimized candidate experience over 
the entire recruiting process. Likewise applying for a job di-
rectly from a smartphone will become more and more com-
mon and expected especially by upcoming job seeker gen-
erations. Meanwhile, smartphone support can be introduced 
selectively to benefit from a potential faster response or low-
er barriers to submitting a job application. This study re-
vealed important user requirements that have to be consid-
ered for a successful implementation: 
 
Links to profiles in business networks cannot substi-
tute the submission of application documents. This is 
because business networks (e.g., XING, LinkedIn) 
are not very popular in the group of young talents 
investigated in this study. 
 
Upload and cloud functions need to be integrated for 
document upload. Candidates prefer public cloud 
services like Dropbox to a document upload to job 
portal providers.  
 
Extensive text entry needs to be avoided but options 
for application document individualization are abso-
lutely essential. Usability can be increased by offer-
ing text recognition capabilities (to make documents 
editable) and pre-structured formats and layouts 
(e.g., resume). 
 
Employers need to actively dispel candidates’ reser-
vations to apply via mobile. Employers should re-
duce the uncertainty about the employer’s ac-
ceptance of mobile applications by more actively 
promoting this new hiring channel. 
 
Simplicity is the key. Employers have to reduce the 
amount of required candidate information to the 
minimum necessary or allow “one-click applica-
tions” with pre-prepared documents. Again, the ac-
ceptance of such “streamlined applications” need to 
be actively communicated to the candidates in the 
job advertisements. 
 
An elaborated user guidance through the application 
process is essential for usability. Candidates need to 
keep control and keep track of each step in the appli-
cation process. Due to the specific nature of mobile 
usage situations, the users must be able to interrupt 
and continue the application at any time. 
Additional requirements for the implementation of a mo-
bile application process need to be considered depending on 
the respective platform. Job openings published on corporate 
websites with singular candidate contacts might require a dif-
ferent approach for implementation compared to job portals 
with cross-company job offerings and recurrent users. A 
“one-click-application” for example requires the candidate to 
initially upload standardized application documents to be 
able to quickly respond to new job alerts. Therefore, from a 
user perspective, a “one-click-application” is attractive only 
for job portals or large enterprises with a high number of 
open positions matching the candidate’s qualification. 
VI. 
LIMITATIONS 
This study was based on a convenient sample and can 
therefore not be considered to be representative. The data 
was collected in the environment of media-affine students. 
Therefore, it can be assumed that the results represent an ear-
ly adopter group rather than the larger majority of young tal-
ents. Another limitation results from this study’s focus on the 
user requirements with regard to the frontend interface on the 
smartphone. This is a gross simplification of reality as most 
of today’s job offers and online applications are interfaced 
with backend systems for candidate management. Further 
research is needed on an appropriate design of backend sys-
tems and processes to deduce the implications of the user re-
quirements presented here. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank V. Hähnel, E. Haupt, J. 
Huth, N. Iwanowski, and L. Pfeifer for contributing to this 
research paper by supporting the data collection and app pro-
totyping. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

REFERENCES 
[1] 
GSMA, 
2016, 
The 
Mobile 
Economy 
2016. 
https://gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=97928efe0
9cdba2864cdcf1ad1a2f58c&download, 
retrieved: 
14.03.2016. 
[2] 
J. Dischler, 2015, Building for the next moment. 
http://adwords.blogspot.de/2015/05/building-for-next-
moment.html, retrieved: 14.03.2016. 
[3] 
S. Angeles, 2015, Google Gives Mobile-Friendly Sites 
a Boost in Search Ranking. http://www.businessnew 
sdaily.com/7808-google-search-ranking-mobile.html, 
retrieved: 14.03.2016. 
[4] 
E. Marcotte, Responsive web design. A Book Apart, 
New York, 2014. 
[5] 
S. Böhm and S. J. Niklas, “Mobile recruiting: Insights 
from a survey among German HR managers,” 
SIGMIS-CPR ‘12 Proceedings of the 50th annual con-
ference on Computers and People Research, Milwau-
kee, USA, May 31-June 02, 2012, pp. 117–122. 
[6] 
S. Böhm, “Behavior and expectations of mobile job 
seekers: An industry study focusing on job boards,” 
SIGMIS-CPR ‘13 Proceedings of the 2013 Annual 
Conference on Computers and People Research, Cin-
cinnati, USA, May 30-June 01, 2013, pp. 105–110. 
[7] 
H. Zhang, 2015, Mobilize to realize: Job seeker in-
sights for mobile recruitment success. http://public. 
dhe.ibm.com/common/ssi/ecm/lo/en/low14307usen/L
OW14307USEN.PDF?, retrieved: 15.03.2016. 
[8] 
Jobvite, 2015, Job Seeker Nation Study. Inside the 
Mind 
of 
the 
Modern 
Job 
Seeker. 
http:// 
web.jobvite.com/FY15_Website_JobSeekerNation_LP.
html?utm_source=Website&utm_medium=PressReleas
e&utm_campaign=2015JobSeekerNation, 
retrieved: 
14.03.2016. 
[9] 
Careerbuilder, 
2015, 
2015 
Candidate 
Behav-
ior U.S. Job-Seeker Data. http://b2b.careerbuilder.com/ 
l/27812/ior-Report---US-JOB-SEEKER-pdf/7t7gk, re-
trieved: 14.03.2016. 
[10] Careerbuilder, 2015, 2015 Candidate Behavior Germa-
ny Job-Seeker Data. http://b2b.careerbuilder.com/l/ 
27812/eport---GERMANY-JOB-SEEKER-pdf/7nwgh, 
retrieved: 14.03.2016. 
[11] S. Pande and N. Gomes, “Leveraging Mobile Devices 
for Human Resource Information Systems,” Int’l J. of 
Business Information Systems 20, 1, pp. 23–40, 2015. 
[12] S. Madan and K. Vasanth, “Mobile Recruitment - A 
Cutting or a Bleeding Edge…?,” Int’l Journal of Man-
agement, IT and Engineering 3, 9, pp. 228–241, 2013. 
[13] A. Zaheera, N. Khan, and C. B. Senthilkumar, “E-
Recruitment: Criteria for its Effectiveness and Modern 
Trends,” Int’l Journal of Business Administration and 
Management Research 1, 3, pp. 10–14, 2015. 
[14] A. Eckhardt, S. Laumer, C. Maier, and T. Weitzel, 
“The transformation of people, processes, and IT in e-
recruiting,” Employee Relations 36, 4, pp. 415–431, 
2014. 
[15] S. J. B. Niklas and S. Strohmeier, “Exploring the Im-
pact of Usefulness and Enjoyment on Mobile Service 
Acceptance: A Comparative Study,” 2011 44th Hawaii 
Int’l Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2011), 
pp. 1–10. 
[16] S. J. Niklas and S. Böhm, “Applying Mobile Technol-
ogies for Personnel Recruiting. An Analysis of User-
sided Acceptance Factors,” Int’l Journal of eBusiness 
and eGoverment Studies 3, 1, pp. 169–178, 2011. 
[17] S. J. Niklas, “Mobile IS Success in Personnel Market-
ing: A Consumer-based Analysis of Quality and Per-
ceived Value,” SIGMIS-CPR ‘11 Proceedings of the 
49th SIGMIS annual conference on Computer person-
nel research, May 19-21, 2011, 2011, pp. 91–95. 
[18] S. Böhm, W. Jäger, S. Meurer, and S. J. Niklas, “Op-
timizing the Usability of Mobile Job Advertisements: 
A Multi-Method Approach,” Int’l Journal on Advances 
in Intelligent Systems 7, 1&2, pp. 257–266, 2014. 
[19] S. Böhm, W. Jäger, S. Meurer, U. Rust, and W. Achil-
les, “Mobile Recruiting and Video Enhanced Job Ad-
vertisements: A Case Study Analysis within a German 
Job Portal,” Proceedings of The Eighth International 
Conference on Advances in Human-Oriented and Per-
sonalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services, 
November 15-20, 2015, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 80–85. 
[20] T. Lowdermilk, User-centered design. O’Reilly Media, 
Inc, Sebastopol, CA, 2013. 
[21] S. Böhm and B. Igler, 2013, “A Tool-based Approach 
for Structuring Feedback for User Interface Evalua-
tions of Mobile Applications,” MobileHCI 2013 Work-
shop on Prototyping to Support the Interaction Design-
ing in Mobile Application Development, pp. 1–4. 
[22] S. Bochmann and T. Ritz, Prototyping tools for mobile 
applications. Steinbeis-Ed, Stuttgart, 2013. 
[23] S. Ginsburg, Designing the iPhone user experience. A 
user-centered approach to sketching and prototyping 
iPhone apps. Addison-Wesley, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 2011. 
[24] M.-S. Kim and C. Kim, “A Methodology for the De-
velopment of New Mobile Application Service Con-
cepts,” Advanced Science Letters 20, 1, pp. 336–339, 
2014. 
[25] Proto.io, Prototypes that feel real. https://proto.io/, re-
trieved: 
05.04.2016. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

