Using Mobile Geographical Information System for Biomass Waste Management
Valentim Realinho, Miguel Belém 
Polytechnic Institute of Portalegre 
Portalegre, Portugal 
e-mail: vrealinho@estgp.pt, miguel.belem@ipportalegre.pt 
 
Abstract—Land cover maps are one of the main data sources 
used to assess the availability of biomass residues. Mobile 
Geographic Information Systems can help field work 
providing spatial data including map browsing, query and 
collecting field information. However, the large amount of data 
undergoing processing, creates challenges for its use on mobile 
devices, because of the typical constraints of these devices. In 
this paper, it is presented a mobile solution that is able to 
handle efficiently large amount of spatial data, which is part of 
a platform for biomass waste management. 
Keywords-Mobile 
geographic 
information 
system; 
geovisualization; mobile computing; biomass waste; field work. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Almost 13% of the renewable energy consumed around 
the world in 2006 derived from biomass [1]. The biomass 
resources are of different types and its availability varies 
geographically widely. On the other hand, the biomass 
resources exhibit different power generation characteristics 
and have to be transported to power plants. These demands 
have created opportunities for the use of decision support 
systems based on spatial information that utilize advanced 
mapping, mobile field-based applications and Location 
Based Systems (LBS). These systems can be used for the 
selection of places for bioenergy projects or in the 
assessment and mapping of biomass residues and the 
estimation of transport costs to existent or proposed power 
plants.  
Land cover maps are one of the main data sources which 
feed those systems [2]. They are produced using mainly 
orthorectified imagery from satellites, aircraft, Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicles (UAV) and also information collected in 
field in a high cost process. Because of this, the land cover 
maps are often out of date due to natural causes or human 
intervention, which could represent a problem in some uses. 
A geographic information system (GIS) has the ability to 
handle and process land cover maps, enabling users to view 
and analyze geospatial data with ease. A GIS is an expensive 
investment and data intensive system that must handle a 
large amount of data. The use of mobile GIS tools can 
provide information for real time analysis and data collection 
in the field. However, condensing GIS information for 
mobile computing, is a complex task due to typical 
constraints of this types of devices. 
In this work, it is presented a mobile tool that is part of a 
platform that allow the biomass waste management which 
include data from Alto Alentejo (Portugal) and Extremadura 
(Spain) regions in a total of 3.230.323 ha registered in the 
platform. 
In addition to this introductory section, this paper is 
organized as follows: Section 2 presents a summary of key 
technologies and projects in the field of GIS and mobile GIS. 
Section 3 presents some topics concerned the processing of 
land cover maps. Section 4 deals with the technical approach 
and finally in Section 5, we present the main conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Modern GIS architectures rely on a client/server model  
[3] in a distributed environment based on a GIS Server  and 
clients that can be desktop, web or mobile applications. A 
GIS Server share geospatial data and functions, while client 
subsystems act as consumers through a set of interfaces. The 
Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) provides a blueprint for 
implementing these interfaces in a Service Oriented 
Architecture 
(SOA) 
[4]. 
These 
interfaces 
support 
interoperable solutions and empower technology developers 
to make complex spatial information and services accessible 
and useful with all kinds of applications. They are 
categorized according to the type of data they provide and 
the most important are the Web Map Service (WMS), the 
Web Feature Service (WFS) and the Web Coverage Service 
(WCS). The Web Map Service provides a simple HTTP 
interface for requesting geo-registered map images from one 
or more distributed geospatial databases [5]. A WMS request 
produces complete maps, rendered at the server and 
transmitted as images to the client that can be displayed in a 
browser application. The Web Feature Service provides 
an interface allowing 
requests 
for geographical features 
across the web using platform-independent calls [6]. It 
supplies individual features, encoded as vectors, selected 
from the underlying spatial database, to be rendered at the 
client side. The Web Coverage Service offers multi-
dimensional coverage data for access over the Internet [7]. 
Unlike WMS, WCS provides only non-interactive data 
access. Besides commercial products, there is a number of 
open source projects, such as MapServer, GeoServer or 
GeoNetwork, which provide OGC compliant servers for 
sharing geospatial data, suitable for the development of 
custom applications. 
The data tier of a GIS Server include spatial database 
servers that store geo-data and retrieve data according to 
client or application server business logic. Products like 
PostGIS, SpatiaLite, Oracle Spatial and ArcSDE, are 
examples of spatial database servers. They supports spatial 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

and non-spatial data, besides common geographic file 
formats such as Shapefiles, GeoTiff, Keyhole Markup 
Language (KML), Geography Markup Language (GML), 
Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG), GeoRSS or GeoJSON. 
Mobile devices have a lack of resources when compared 
with a desktop computer that represent constraints to handle 
massive amount of data such in GIS. There are form factor, 
storage, computing, battery and network issues that need to 
be addressed. Projects like the ones presented in  [3][8][9], 
attempt to introduce mobile computing as an aid for ﬁeld 
work and data collection.  
The mobile tool presented in this article implements a 
location-based system that provides information on the 
availability of biomass and its potential to produce energy, 
still allowing the correction of spatial data in the field. To 
make this possible, in an efficiently way, spatial data are 
preprocessed in a server and only then made available to the 
mobile device. 
III. 
PROCESSING LAND COVER MAPS 
The land cover maps we used (Alto Alentejo-Portugal 
and Extremadura-Spain), totalize an area of 3.230.323 ha. 
This area is represented as over 78.000 polygons and multi-
polygons, which describe a particular agricultural or forest 
residues within the boundaries of the municipality. This 
create a geospatial dataset of over 8 million data points, and 
represents a challenge especially for use in field work 
through mobile devices. 
The analysis of the land cover maps, revels a huge 
number of polygons and multi-polygons that can be 
optimized through the use of dissolve operations. Dissolve is 
an aggregation process in which a new map feature is created 
by merging adjacent polygons that have a common value for 
a specified attribute, in this case the same biomass family 
and the same parish or municipality. Fig. 1 illustrates how a 
dissolve operation work.  
Holm Oak
Holm Oak
Holm Oak
Oak
Chestnut
Oak
Oak
Chestnut
Holm Oak
Oak
Chestnut
 
Figure 1. Dissolve operation. 
With this, we reduced the number of polygons in 97% 
(from 78.854 to 2.339), and the number of data points in 
35% (from 8.031.020 to over 5.216.195). The resulting 
geospatial dataset was then loaded into the server with 
metadata, which include, among others, the estimation of 
existent biomass residues and the determination of electrical 
generation potential according with the model defined in [2]. 
IV. 
TECHNICAL APPROACH 
The system architecture is illustrated in Fig. 2. This 
architecture consists of a server that responds to the project 
domain [10]. We use GeoServer with PostGIS which share 
its data through WMS and WFS standards.  
 
BioenergyMap
Server
Mobile Clients
HTTP
REST/WMS/WFS
GeoServer
PostGIS DB
Spatialite DB
Tile Cache
 
Figure 2. System architecture. 
The mobile clients (Android smartphones or tablets) 
show spatial data using Google Maps overlaid with tiles 
received from GeoServer which represent the layers 
concerning a particular feature like biomass families, 
production, energy potential or cover type among others 
(Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b). A tile overlay (or tile layer) is a 
collection of images that are displayed on top of the base 
map. 
 
 
a) 
b) 
Figure 3. The layer of energy potential (a) and the layer of biomass families 
with a multi-polygon selected represented Cork Oak of Urra parish (b). 
In a field work environment, the mobile client works in a 
setting where the connection to the server is unstable or 
slow. For this reason, mobile clients has an implemented 
mechanism for caching map tiles received from the server.  
We use Spatialite (a spatial extension to SQLite) in the 
mobile clients. The database is synchronized with the server 
and maintain the same information for offline use.  
Besides the map, the mobile client also allows the 
visualization of spatial data in a table fashion. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

V. 
CONCLUSIONS  
In this paper, we present a solution for the use of a 
mobile GIS which is part of a platform for biomass waste 
management. This solution can help field work providing 
spatial data including map browsing, query and collecting 
field information. 
Currently we have registered information from Alto 
Alentejo (Portugal) and Extremadura (Spain) regions in a 
total of more than 3,2 millions hectares registered in the 
platform. The evaluation performed proved that the solution 
is able to handle efficiently this large amount of data. 
The mobile application is free available in Google Play 
and all the platform in [10].  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was cofounded by FEDER under program 
POCTEP, priority axis 1 (Promoting competitiveness and 
employment promotion - project 0606_MITTIC_4_E).  
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Cigolotti, “Biomass and Waste as Sustainable Resources,” 
in Fuel Cells in the Waste-to-Energy Chain, London: Springer 
London, 2012, pp. 23–44. 
[2] G. Lourinho and P. Brito, “Assessment of biomass energy 
potential in a region of Portugal (Alto Alentejo),” Energy, vol. 
81, pp. 189–201, 2015. 
[3] N. Jajac, D. Stojanovic, B. Predic, and D. Rancic, “Efficient 
replication of geospatial data for mobile GIS in field work,” 
in 
2013 
11th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Telecommunications 
in 
Modern 
Satellite, 
Cable 
and 
Broadcasting Services (TELSIKS), 2013, vol. 02, pp. 393–
396. 
[4] Open 
Geospatial 
Consortium, 
“OGC 
Standards 
and 
Supporting 
Documents.” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards 2016.06.15. 
[5] Open Geospatial Consortium, “Web Map Service.” [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wms 2016.06.15. 
[6] Open Geospatial Consortium, “Web Feature Service.” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wfs 2016.06.15. 
[7] Open Geospatial Consortium, “Web Coverage Service.” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wcs 2016.06.15. 
[8] A. Huynh and A. Y.-M. Lin, “Mobile Analysis of Large 
Temporal Datasets for Exploration and Discovery,” in 2013 
Digital Heritage International Congress (DigitalHeritage), 
2013, vol. 2, pp. 535–538. 
[9] M. M. Elwakil, R. F. Ibrahim, and H. A. Hefny, “New 
Architecture for Mobile GIS Cloud Computing,” Int. J. Adv. 
Res. Comput. Commun. Eng., vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 1–7, 2015. 
[10] C3i/IPP, “Bioenergy Map - Plataforma de Geestão de 
Biomassa,” 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
www.bioenergymap.pt 2016.06.15. 
 
 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

