Mobile Recruiting and Video Enhanced Job Advertisements: 
A Case Study Analysis within a German Job Portal
Stephan Böhm, Wolfgang Jäger, Sebastian Meurer  
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences 
Department of Media Management 
Wiesbaden, Germany 
e-mail: {stephan.boehm, wolfgang.jaeger}@hs-rm.de, 
s.meurer@djm.de 
Ulrich Rust, Wolfgang Achilles 
Jobware 
Online-Service GmbH 
Paderborn, Germany 
e-mail: {u.rust, w.achilles}@jobware.de
 
Abstract—The proliferation of smartphones has increased sig-
nificantly in recent years. Due to the availability of higher data 
rates, video content is increasingly being accessed via these de-
vices. Due to changes in media usage behaviour, companies are 
currently faced with the challenge of adapting their recruit-
ment activities to enable access via mobile devices and increas-
ingly to integrate multimedia and dynamic content. In view of 
the above, this study examines user reactions to the enhance-
ment of job ads with video content using a case study in a 
German job portal. The results of this study are promising and 
suggest that the integration of mobile video may be appropri-
ate to increase interest in job advertisements. In addition, ini-
tial findings for the design and integration of such recruiting 
videos can be derived. The limits of panel surveys, however, 
also became apparent and more extensive research will be re-
quired in order to be able to make general recommendations. 
Keywords-Mobile Recruiting; Mobile Video; Job Advertise-
ments; Video Enhanced Job Advertisements; Case Study. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The adjustment of recruiting processes to changing mar-
ket conditions and potential candidates’ usage habits con-
stantly presents employers and operators of job portals with 
new challenges. One such challenge relates to the present-
day ubiquitous use of mobile devices such as smartphones 
and tablets. In the German market, more than 69 percent of 
Internet users were already accessing the Web using mobile 
devices in 2014. In the target group of 14 to 29 year old, this 
figure was even higher at over 75 percent [1][2]. The type of 
content consumed is also changing and the use of video con-
tent, for example, is steadily increasing. In Germany, almost 
every second Internet user (45 percent) aged 14 and above 
already accesses videos on the Internet at least once a week, 
while the usage rate among 14 to 29 year old is as high as 79 
percent [1]. Particularly, high growth rates are evident as far 
as the amount of video content being accessed via mobile 
devices is concerned. In the US, video consumption via 
smartphone in 2014 increased by 73 percent compared to the 
previous year [3]. For the European market, a recent study 
from 2015 concludes that already about 60 percent of those 
surveyed consume short videos on their smartphones on a 
daily basis [4].  
The need to integrate such developments ‒especially the 
shift in use to mobile devices‒ in corporate recruiting activi-
ties has been discussed for some time, also in international 
literature, under the name “Mobile Recruiting”. Accordingly, 
mobile recruiting can be defined as “… any organizational 
information provided for or delivered to a mobile device in 
order to attract and hire potential applicants and employ-
ees.”[5]. This implies continuous development and ultimate-
ly consistent mobile-optimisation in terms of technology, de-
sign and content of at least the central processing steps in the 
"recruiting funnel". For example, this could include the mo-
bile optimization of career websites and job ads or even the 
possibility to apply directly via mobile devices.  The ultimate 
goal of such development and optimization efforts would be 
to offer applicants a consistent and continuous „Mobile Can-
didate Experience”[6][7]. In addition to mobile-optimisation, 
the design of, e.g., job advertisements also needs to be 
adapted to the growing importance of dynamic and multime-
dia content. Accordingly, in a recent German study, more 
than 70 percent of the participating HR professionals as-
signed (high) importance to the integration of dynamic con-
tent such as recruiting videos in job advertisements. Besides 
written specifications, such as job description and profile re-
quirements, photos and recruiting videos were identified as 
being important content elements of future online job adver-
tisements [8]. A correspondingly comprehensive (mobile) 
recruitment strategy has, however, so far hardly been estab-
lished in practice. Moreover, there are still no systematic 
studies that deal with the aspect of the integration of video 
content in (mobile-optimised) online job ads. 
In view of the above, this study investigates user re-
sponse to video-enhanced job advertisements using the ex-
ample of a German job portal and the method of case study 
analysis. Currently available findings on the subject matter 
and relevant research are presented in Section II. The re-
search methodology is described in Section III and subse-
quently, in Section IV, initial findings based on the study are 
presented. The paper ends with a discussion of fundamental 
conclusions for practical application in Section V. Further-
more, this closing section contains a discussion of the limita-
tions of this study as well as the need for further research. 
II. 
RESEARCH BACKGROUND 
Initially, as the basis of our study and to define the re-
search needs, the status quo with regard to mobile recruiting 
and the integration of video content in job advertisements are 
investigated using the example of the German job market. 
Following this, there is a brief presentation of relevant re-
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

search on mobile video to define the research needs and to 
set the boundaries of the research question. 
A. Status Quo 
According to a global recruiting study [9] in 2014 only 
30 percent (34 percent) of the recruiting decision makers 
stated that their company provides mobile-optimized job 
postings (career sites). This study focuses on the German 
market. While mobile recruiting in the form of mobile job 
search is already common practice, companies often still lag 
behind the applicants’ requirements in terms of what they 
offer. This is especially true for the consistent optimisation 
of the entire mobile recruiting process [10]. According to a 
recent study on the German recruiting market [11], nearly 40 
percent of job seekers in 2014 already used their 
smartphones to search for job vacancies. About 8 percent al-
so already apply via their mobile device. However, the opti-
misation of job-related content for mobile devices is still in 
need of improvement. According to the aforementioned 
study, about 70 percent of respondents report display issues 
on career websites when accessing them on their mobile de-
vices. With online job advertisements on company websites, 
this figure rises to 75 percent. In principle, companies have, 
however, recognised the shift in usage habits when searching 
for job-related information. In a recent survey of German 
companies from the year 2014, 78 percent of study partici-
pants stated that the increasing use of mobile devices will 
have a major impact on recruiting. Nevertheless, only about 
44 percent of the companies in this study reported that they 
provide a mobile career website. Similar to the aforemen-
tioned results of the global study, only about 31 percent of 
the companies in Germany mobile-optimised their job adver-
tisements [12]. Another study, in which the recruiting offer-
ings on the Internet of the 180 largest and most important 
employers in Germany [13] were examined, came to similar 
results. As shown in Figure 1, at the end of 2014, thus not 
even half of the companies included in the study provided a 
mobile career website, only 30 percent offered potential can-
didates mobile job advertisements and just one in ten com-
panies offered the option to apply via a mobile device. 
48%
35%
30%
11%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Mobile Career Website
Mobile Job Board
Mobile Job Advertisement
Mobile Application
Percentage of Companies
 
Figure 1.  Mobile Recruiting Offerings in Germany [13] 
Overall, job seekers in Germany still have to deal with 
recruiting offers which leave considerable room for im-
provement with regard to its mobile optimization. Therefore, 
many companies still need to improve the mobile experience 
by implementing new technologies, e.g., responsive design, 
to adapt their recruiting offerings to touch screens, small 
screen sizes and other characteristics and limitations of mo-
bile devices. However, as mentioned above, companies are 
already encountering new challenges when adapting to the 
increased use of dynamic contents such as recruiting videos 
in job advertisements. As Figure 2 shows, only 10 percent of 
the companies in the study integrate job-related videos in 
their online job ads. Furthermore, mobile-optimised video 
job advertisements are used by just eight percent of these 
companies [13]. 
 
65%
53%
10%
8%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80% 100%
Image-/Employer Branding Videos
(Career Website, YouTube Career
Channel)
Recruiting Videos (Career Website,
YouTube Career Channel)
Job-Related Videos  (Job Ads)
Job-Related Videos  (Mobile Optimized
Job Ads)
Percentage of Companies
 
Figure 2.  Implementation Status of Recruiting Videos in Germany [13] 
Usage statistics of relevant YouTube channels confirm 
the increase in user demand for access to recruiting videos 
via mobile devices. According to the German job portal 
Jobstairs, in mid 2015 an average of 35 percent of recruiting 
videos on the Youtube channel were already being accessed 
via mobile devices. In a pilot study with mobile-optimised 
video-enhanced job ads, mobile access rates were as high as 
40 percent [14]. Against this background, this paper focuses 
on video-enhanced job advertisements as a next level of mo-
bile recruiting. 
B. Related Work 
A number of research studies can already be found on the 
structure and content of job advertisements. Relevant arti-
cles, however, often concentrate on the content analysis of 
these ads to identify requirements and characteristics in 
terms of job descriptions or professional fields [15][16][17]. 
A closer focus on requirements, usability aspects and design 
principles specifically of mobile job advertisements can be 
found in [7][18]. In these papers, however, specific aspects 
of the integration of video content in job advertisements have 
not yet been considered. The issue of mobile video has, 
however, already been investigated more comprehensively in 
papers dealing with the topic separately from the context of 
job advertisements and recruiting. These include various 
analyses dealing with the aspects of technical implementa-
tion of mobile video services or the perception of their quali-
ty and their market perspectives [19][20][21]. Research can 
also be found which deals with the use of (mobile) video for 
marketing and advertising purposes [22][23]. This research 
offers few findings with regards to the integration of recruit-
ing videos in job advertisements. To our knowledge, the im-
portance and the benefits of video-enhanced job ads have 
thus not yet been examined in any research papers. More 
specific recommendations on the content and user-oriented 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

design of video-enhanced job ads in the context of stationary 
and mobile use are also nowhere to be found. In view of the 
above, this study attempts to present initial findings to close 
this research gap. The focal point of the investigation in this 
case is the examination of user reactions that arise when pre-
sented with video-enhanced jobs ads. 
III. 
APPROACH 
The placement of video content in mobile job ads repre-
sents a very specific application of mobile video. In order to 
investigate the potential of enhancing mobile job ads with 
recruiting videos appropriately, the analysis must be applied 
to suitable applicant target groups. Not only do these target 
groups need to match the requirements for the advertised job, 
they must also be interested in applying for the position. In 
light of these facts, it can be assumed that limited findings 
regarding interest in and reception of video content in job 
ads, can be obtained by using a standard online survey and a 
fictitious job ad. 
For this reason, this study is based on an analysis of real 
job ads that were posted on the German job portal Jobware. 
A systematic variation of characteristics of the job ads was 
therefore not possible. However, the case studies provide 
first insights into the interest in and the reception of video-
enhanced (mobile) job ads. As a first step, three companies 
were recruited as partners that agreed to integrate recruiting 
videos in their job ads and to permit the analysis of usage 
data. These were businesses ranging from a medium-sized 
“hidden champion” to a major global player. Basic character-
istics of these companies, which cannot be named directly 
due to the confidential nature of the study, and of the videos 
used, are shown in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
CASE STUDY RECRUITING VIDEO CHARACTERISTICS 
 
Video 1 
Video 2 
Video 3 
Industry 
Electronics 
Insurance 
Automotive 
Enterprise Size 
(Employees) 
~ 14.000 
~ 147.000 
~ 280.000 
Enterprise 
Reputation 
Hidden 
Champion 
Blue 
Chip 
Global 
Player 
Position 
Engineer 
IT-Trainee 
Engineer 
Video-type 
Job-related 
Job-related 
Image Video 
Length 
1:59 min 
1:46 min 
7:02 min 
 
The differences in the type and length of the video are 
due to the fact that only two of the companies provided or 
produced a job-related video for the study. In the case of the 
third company, an existing recruiting/image video was used. 
Due to the cooperation with the job portal, it was possible to 
carry out four different sub-analyses for each of the job ads 
described: 
 
Job Ad Analytics: The statistics on retrieval of the 
job ad in the job portal form the basis of the subse-
quent analysis steps. 
 
Video Analytics: In addition to the number of video 
views, the system could also detect how often each 
video was watched up to 25%, 50%, 75% or up to 
the end. 
 
Online Questionnaire: After exiting the video in the 
job ads, users of the job portal were asked to volun-
tarily fill in a short questionnaire. 
 
Online Panel: A survey was carried out in an online 
panel outside the job portal. 
In the online panel, participants were asked to select one 
of the three jobs in accordance with their areas of interest 
and to fill in a questionnaire after viewing the accompanying 
videos. The results of the panel survey were intended to sup-
plement and verify the previously obtained responses given 
by job seekers in the job portal. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
After recruiting the cooperation partners, the video-
enhanced (mobile-optimised) job ads were posted on the job 
portal. The data for the job ads on the job portal was ac-
quired for the period May 25th to June 22nd, 2014. The pan-
el data were collected between June 20th and 27th, 2014. 
Table II shows the views of the job ads included in the study. 
The number of visitors to each job advertisement shows that 
the number of views significantly varies according to the size 
of the associated company. Presumably this is also an ex-
pression of either the company's prominence or the attrac-
tiveness of the position. Surprisingly, however, the click-
through-rate from the job ads to the companies’ career web-
sites and application forms varied considerably. The click-
through rate from the job ad to the career website of the less-
er known company (“hidden champion”) was almost three 
times as high as that of the global player. Furthermore, the 
click-through rate to the application form was more than 
twice as high for the hidden champion. Target groups and 
advertised vacancies in job ad 1 and job ad 3 were similar. 
The differences in click rates could therefore be seen as a 
first indication that job ad 1 was more able to arouse interest 
in not only the company but also applying for the job. 
TABLE II.  
JOB ADVERTISEMENT ANALYTICS 
 
Job Ad 1 
Job Ad 2 
Job Ad 3 
Job Ad 
Visitors 
182 
263 
287 
Click-through 
Rate (Clicks) to 
Career Website 
15% 
(28) 
8% 
(21) 
5% 
(13) 
Click-through 
Rate (Clicks) to 
Application Form 
19% 
(35) 
10% 
(25) 
8% 
(22) 
 
When analysing the video views shown in Table III, a 
similar picture emerges. The hidden champion’s video 1 had 
by far the highest play rate and was played during almost 
every tenth view by the users of the job portal. The differ-
ence is even more significant when considering the extent to 
which the video was actually played. Although approximate-
ly 24 percent of viewers discontinued video 1 a quarter of the 
way through, this discontinuation rate is nearly 63 percent 
for video 3. Only about 17 percent watched video 3 to the 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

end, whereas 56 percent of the viewers did so with video 1 
and 42 percent with video 2. Here, the length of the video is 
likely to have had a significant effect. Both videos 1 and 2 
were under 2 minutes while video 3 ran over 7 minutes. It is 
also interesting that although the two videos of companies 1 
and 2 were similar in length and both job-related, they were 
played at very different rates of frequency. This could indi-
cate that videos with job-related content and those with com-
pany-related content arouse different levels of interest or of-
fer varying levels of benefit. As already mentioned, company 
1 is not a very well-known company, while company 2, as a 
blue chip, is likely to be known by almost all the applicants. 
Thus, this may mean that applicants could have a higher 
need for information in the case of company 1. 
TABLE III.  
RECRUITING VIDEO ANALYTICS 
 
Video 1 
Video 2 
Video 3 
Play Rate (overall) 
9.5% 
2.5% 
2.2% 
Completion Rate (minimum played video length) 
25% 
23.9% 
35.8% 
62,7% 
50% 
8.5% 
13.4% 
16.9% 
75% 
11.3% 
9.0% 
3.4% 
100% 
56.3% 
41.8% 
16.9% 
 
As mentioned earlier, an online questionnaire was im-
plemented within the job portal, which could be answered 
voluntarily on exiting the job ad. However, the job seekers’ 
willingness to participate was very low (job ad 1: 15; 2: 22; 
3: 12). In addition, the participants did not always answer all 
the questions in the questionnaire. In total, the questionnaire 
included five questions. The participants were first asked 
whether they had even watched the video in the job posting 
(Job ad 1: 87%; 2: 68%; 3: 75%). Those that viewed the vid-
eo were then asked about the authenticity and quality of the 
video. In addition, they were asked whether the video pre-
sented a better picture of the job and whether they generally 
considered videos in job ads to be useful. In this case, the 
respondents could answer in the form of a 5-point Likert 
scale (degrees of agreement). The results of this online sur-
vey are shown in Figure 3.  
3,2
2,3
4,0
2,4
4,0
3,9
4,5
4,4
4,0
3,9
3,5
4,3
1
2
3
4
5
Usefullness of videos in job ads
Provides better understandig of the job
Quality of the video
Authenticity of the video
Average Ratings
Video 1
Video 2
Video 3
 
Figure 3.  Jobportal Results on the Online Questionnaire 
 
Of particular note is the fact that the results are very simi-
lar for the job-related videos 1 and 2. Only the quality of 
video 2 is rated as being significantly higher than that of vid-
eo 1. The ratings for video 3, which, in contrast to the other 
two, was a recruiting video more focused on image and em-
ployer brand, are however significantly different. Despite 
high quality ratings, the authenticity was rated as very low 
and the job seekers were not able to obtain a better picture of 
the advertised position. We can therefore assume that the 
added value of this video in the job ad was perceived as ra-
ther low, which may have also had an effect on the otherwise 
high rating of the fundamental usefulness of videos in job 
advertisements. 
A final survey within an online panel with a total of 100 
participants was intended to obtain additional information on 
the reception of the recruiting videos in the job ads and also 
to verify the results of the online questionnaire within the job 
portal. As a first step, the survey participants were asked to 
choose a suitable job advertisement and subsequently asked 
whether the video had also been viewed. The play rate iden-
tified here (video 1: 31%; 2: 32%; 3: 19%) turned out signif-
icantly higher than in the video analytics of the job portal, 
which is probably due to the test situation. Nevertheless, we 
can see here again that video 3 was accessed much less often. 
Subsequently, those who had not watched the video were 
asked for their reasons. In Figure 4, we can see that the im-
portance of the reasons is similar across all the videos. The 
most common reason given was that the video had not been 
seen or found. Therefore, references to the video as well as 
its positioning in the ad must be improved. In this regard, 
only the visibility of the video in job ad 2 is better.  
44%
20%
12%
16%
28%
32%
16%
12%
40%
32%
8%
16%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
Video not recognized
No relevant information expected
Product advertising expected
No interest on linked information
Percentage of Answers (Multiple Answers)
Video 1
Video 2
Video 3
 
Figure 4.  Panel Results on the Reasons for Not Watching the Video 
 
With regards to the reasons for discontinuing viewing, 
the study participants’ presumptions of product advertising 
in the hidden champion’s job ad and of non-relevant content 
in the global player’s job ad turned out to be below average. 
This is likely to be connected to the differences in terms of 
(brand) awareness. 
Finally, three of the questions already contained in the 
online survey on the job portal were posed to the participants 
of the panel survey. It should be noted that all participants in 
the panel survey (job ad 1: 35; 2: 34; 3: 31) were asked to 
watch the video in the job ad in order to answer these ques-
tions. The results of this survey are shown in Figure 5. The 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

question on the subject of quality was no longer asked as no 
additional findings were expected in the test situation of the 
panel. Overall, the results of the panel survey were rather 
disappointing and characterised by a significantly lower 
range of variation and less clear statements than the results of 
the online survey on the job portal. On the one hand, this 
could be due to the fact that the panel participants were ran-
domly selected for the survey. Although screening questions 
were asked on the field of study and other socio-demo-
graphic characteristics, the respondents were not directly in 
the process of looking for a job. 
3,3
3,4
3,7
3,6
3,1
3,3
3,7
3,9
3,8
1
2
3
4
5
Usefullness of videos in job ads
Provides better understandig of the job
Authenticity of the video
Average Ratings
Video 1
Video 2
Video 3
 
Figure 5.  Panel Results on the Questions of the Online Questionnaire 
 
Additionally, in the second part of the survey, partici-
pants were prompted to look at the job ad regardless of inter-
est. Thus, brand awareness or the professional appearance of 
the video may have played a role in the evaluation, rather 
than applicant-specific information needs. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The current shift in Internet usage from stationary to mo-
bile devices is a major challenge to companies to adapt their 
offerings in the area of e-recruiting. Online job ads, career 
websites and application management systems have to be 
optimised for access via mobile devices. While this initially 
affected primarily the presentation and layout of the user in-
terface design, employers must now also increasingly adjust 
the content design of their offers. The integration of recruit-
ing videos in job ads, for example, is a possibility here. Es-
pecially, when considering that many job seekers are now 
accessing the information via mobile devices, video will al-
low the presentation of more complex content and context in 
a mobile friendly manner. In this study, the integration of 
such videos in job advertisements was systematically inves-
tigated. As a result, in particular the following findings can 
be noted: 
 
Usage: Applicants generally consider additional vid-
eo content in job ads useful. In the study, however, 
click rates of under 10 percent were identified. 
 
Video duration: The length of the videos should be 
less than two minutes. Longer videos lead to signifi-
cantly higher discontinuation rates. 
 
Video content: Job-related videos that convey an au-
thentic picture of the advertised vacancy are prefera-
ble to general corporate image videos and content re-
lated to employer branding. 
 
Embedding: The videos should be directly referred 
to in the job advertisement, also in order to clearly 
differentiate them from other advertising. Videos 
must be positioned directly in the job advertisement 
to make them easy to find. 
 
Based on the results of this study, we can also assume 
that especially lesser known companies could benefit from 
video integration. While applicants probably already have 
some knowledge of companies with a well-known employer 
brand, lesser known employers can convey this information 
via an appropriate video. 
The generalisability of the findings of the present study is 
limited. Firstly, the fact that the investigation was carried out 
as a case study is significant, as only three different job ads 
could be investigated and interventions in the ads were lim-
ited to the integration of the video. Furthermore, the system 
was not yet able to determine the share of observations di-
rectly attributable to mobile access. Such enhancements in 
the analysis should accordingly be the subject of further re-
search. This could be done, for example, on the basis of 
structured A/B testing. The results of the panel surveys show 
that an integration of the analysis in real job portals is prefer-
able in order to evaluate the attitudes and behaviour of real 
job seekers. In addition, differences in the content reception 
of video content in stationary and mobile contexts should be 
examined in further studies. Important insights could also be 
derived from such studies as to how the design and the con-
tents of recruiting videos can be suitably adapted to mobile 
usage situations. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
ARD/ZDF, 
2014, 
ARD/ZDF-Onlinestudie 
2014. 
http://www.ard-zdf-onlinestudie.de/, 
retrieved: 
October, 
2015. 
[2] 
Initiative 
D21, 
2014, 
Mobile 
Internetnutzung 
2014. 
http://www.initiatived21.de/wp-
content/uploads/2014/12/Mobile-Internetnutzung-
2014_WEB.pdf, retrieved: October, 2015. 
[3] 
Brightroll, 2014, Mobile Video Advertising Strengthens 
TV Media 
Investments. 
http://info.brightroll.com/rs/ 
brightrollinc/images/BrightRoll_mobile_video_study.pdf, re-
trieved: October, 2015. 
[4] 
On Device Research, 2015, Mobile Video 2015: A global 
perspective. 
http://www.iab.net/media/file/IAB_Mobile_Video_Usage_FI
NAL.pdf, retrieved: October, 2015. 
[5] 
S. Böhm and S. J. Niklas, "Mobile recruiting: Insights from a 
survey among German HR managers," SIGMIS-CPR '12 
Proceedings of the 50th annual conference on Computers and 
People Research, Milwaukee, USA, May 31-June 02, 2012, 
2012, pp. 117–122. 
[6] 
S. Böhm, "Behavior and expectations of mobile job seekers: 
An industry study focusing on job boards," SIGMIS-CPR '13 
Proceedings of the 2013 Annual Conference on Computers 
and People Research, Cincinnati, USA, May 30-June 01, 
2013, 2013, pp. 105–110. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[7] 
S. Böhm, W. Jäger, S. Meurer, and S. J. Niklas, "Optimizing 
the Usability of Mobile Job Advertisements: A Multi-Method 
Approach," International Journal on Advances in Intelligent 
Systems 7, 1&2, 2014, pp. 257–266. 
[8] 
Jobstairs, 2015, Die Zukunft der Online-Stellenanzeigen ist 
mobil und dynamisch. http://www.jobstairs.de/index.php? 
ac=page&ci=1004, retrieved: October, 2015. 
[9] 
Linkedin, 2015, 4th Annual Report: 2015 Global Recruiting 
Trends. 
https://business.linkedin.com/talent-solutions/ 
resources/recruiting-tips/global-recruiting-trends, 
retrieved: 
October, 2015. 
[10] S. Meurer, W. Jäger, and S. Böhm, 2014, Mobile Recruiting 
2013. Eine empirische Untersuchung zur Bewerberansprache 
über mobile Endgeräte. http://www.djm.de/mr2013/mobile-
recruiting-2013_bericht.pdf, retrieved: October, 2015. 
[11] T. Weitzel, A. Eckhardt, S. Laumer, C. Maier, A. von Stetten, 
C. Weinert, J. Wirth, and B. Kraft, Bewerbungspraxis 2015. 
https://www.uni-
bam-
berg.de/fileadmin/uni/fakultaeten/wiai_lehrstuehle/isdl/Bewe
rbungspraxis_2015.pdf, retrieved: October, 2015. 
[12] T. Weitzel, A. Eckhardt, S. Laumer, C. Maier, A. von Stetten, 
C. Weinert, J. Wirth, and B. Kraft, Recruiting Trends 2015. 
https://www.uni-
bam-
berg.de/fileadmin/uni/fakultaeten/wiai_lehrstuehle/isdl/Recru
iting_Trends_2015.pdf, retrieved: October, 2015. 
[13] W. Jäger and S. Meurer, Human Resources im Internet 2014. 
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences (forthcoming), 
2015. 
[14] Jobstairs, Expert interview on (mobile) recruiting video usage 
on Youtube carrer channel, 19.06.2015. 
[15] B. K. Addom, Y. Kim, and J. M. Stanton, "eScience profes-
sional positions in the job market," Proceedings of the 2011 
iConference, February 8-11, 2011, Seattle, USA, pp. 630–
631. 
[16] C. Lauer and E. Brumberger, "Architect, Developer, Design-
er," Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference 
on The Design of Communication, September 27-28, 2014, 
Colorado Springs, USA, pp. 1–2. 
[17] F. Steinmann, K.-I. Voigt, and T. Schaeffler, "Engineering 
Competences: A Content Analysis of Job Advertisements," 
Proceedings of PICMET '13: Technology Management for 
Emerging Technologies. July 28-Aug 1, 2013, San Jose, 
USA, pp. 1925–1929. 
[18] S. Böhm, S. Niklas, and W. Jäger, 2015, "A Multi-Method 
Approach to Assessing the Usability of Mobile Job Adver-
tisements (Working Paper)," Proceedings of CENTRIC 2013, 
The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-
oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and 
Services, October 27-November 1, 2013, Venice, Italy, pp. 
108–111. 
[19] K. J. Ma, R. Bartos, S. Bhatia, and R. Nair, "Mobile video 
delivery with HTTP," IEEE Commun. Mag. 49, 4, 2011, pp. 
166–175. 
[20] J. Xue and C. W. Chen, "A study on perception of mobile 
video with surrounding contextual influences," 2012 Fourth 
International Workshop on Quality of Multimedia Experience 
(QoMEX 2012), pp. 248–253. 
[21] A. Dillistone, R. Moreno, and C. Voisey, "Market perspec-
tive," MoViD '10 Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Mo-
bile Video Delivery, October 25, 2010, Firenze, Italy, p. 69. 
[22] S. S. Krishnan and R. K. Sitaraman, "Understanding the ef-
fectiveness of video ads," Proceedings of the 2013 Confer-
ence on Internet Measurement, October 23-25, 2013, Barce-
lona, Spain, pp. 149–162. 
[23] M. Carpen Amarie, I. Pefkianakis, and H. Lundgren, "Mobile 
video ad caching on smartphones," UbiComp '14 Proceedings 
of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on Perva-
sive and Ubiquitous Computing, September 13 - 17, 2014, 
Seattle, USA, pp. 57–61. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

