Disaster Information Sharing System 
 Using Pictograms Only 
 
                   Kakeru Kusano                                      Tomoko Izumi                                      Yoshio Nakatani 
         Graduate School of Information              College of Information Science and            College of Information Science and 
              Science and Engineering                                        Engineering                                                  Engineering 
                Ritsumeikan University                               Ritsumeikan University                               Ritsumeikan University 
                       Shiga, JAPAN                                               Shiga, JAPAN                                             Shiga, JAPAN 
             is0013vi@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp                             izumi-t@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp                        nakatani@is.ritsumei.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract- In the case of disasters, people’s comprehension of 
the situation of the surrounding area is an important factor in 
deciding corresponding actions. In an area overflowing with 
people and rubble, it is dangerous to act recklessly. In this 
paper, we propose an information sharing method to ascertain 
present status and support decision of corresponding actions 
when a disaster occurs. Users of the system can decide a course 
of conduct and avoid risks such as injuries by ascertaining the 
situation of the surrounding area ahead of time. The disaster 
information collection system currently in operation in Japan 
is difficult to use for users unfamiliar with machine operation 
and is not intended for use by non-Japanese. This work aims to 
support such people during a disaster. This system uses 
pictograms that express meaning using shape and color instead 
of language. It expresses information visually and aims to 
provide easy operation by using mainly maps and pictograms. 
Moreover, this system adopts a social media model, which was 
recognized to be effective in the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake. We 
promote use of the system when a disaster occurs via a means 
for using the system in non-disaster situations. In this paper, 
we describe the system’s effectiveness and prospects for the 
future with an evaluation experiment targeting experts on 
disaster prevention, non-Japanese and general users. 
Keywords-Pictogram; Disaster Mitigation; Social Media; 
Information Sharing; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Japan is affected by many disasters; in fact, the country is 
an area that suffers a concentration of disasters. Although 
this area is only 0.25% of global landmass, it is the site of 
20.5% of all earthquakes of magnitude over 6.0, 7.1% of all 
active volcanoes, and 16.0% of disaster-related damage costs 
worldwide [1]. Furthermore, Japan is expected to be affected 
by a large earthquake such as the Nankai Trough Quake and 
an earthquake in the Tokyo Metropolitan area within 30 
years. For these reasons, interest in seismic countermeasures 
has increased and the government is beginning to take 
various 
measures. 
However, 
current 
disaster 
risk 
management is undertaken with local inhabitants, so 
measures for people unfamiliar with the area, such as tourists, 
are barely considered. 
Meanwhile, Japan is aiming to make the country a global 
travel destination, which is being treated as important policy 
in the 21st century [2]. As an example, Kyoto city is visited 
by one million foreign tourists every year, and foreign 
visitors across Japan are expected to increase in the future. 
Paris is a famous model of an internationally competitive 
sightseeing city, visited by 45 million tourists every year, 
60% of whom are from overseas [3]. When a disaster strikes 
such sightseeing cities, many tourists will suffer from heavy 
damage. They are unfamiliar with the area, local language, 
culture and disasters. The safety of foreign tourists is 
critically important, and actions to protect them are the 
responsibility of the region and the nation. We focus on the 
problem of language in this research. Most disaster 
information systems and services use letters to provide 
necessary information. When a disaster occurs, foreign 
tourists will be in a precarious situation because they are not 
likely to have sufficient ability in the local language, which 
limits their methods to collect information. 
On the other hand, there are many people who are not 
used to advanced information systems and services. As an 
ongoing problem, proportion of elderly population is rapidly 
increasing in Japan. Information collection in a disaster is 
difficult for the elderly, because many aged people are not 
proficient at using advanced information technology and 
services. A new approach is needed to support them collect 
disaster information by easy-to-use human machine interface. 
In this study, in response to these situations, we aim to 
propose a unified and integrated method to share information 
for disaster victims who have various different requirements.  
In the next section, related work is described. We present 
outline of proposed system in Section 3, and system 
architecture in Section 4. Then evaluation experiment is 
presented in Section 5. Finally, a conclusion and future work 
are described. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. Universal Design of Disaster Prevention Pictograms 
Kunoki et al. of Ritsumeikan University considered the 
provision of unified design of disaster prevention pictograms 
at tourist sites. They conducted an investigation into signs 
and guide plates at Kiyomizu Temple, a famous tourist 
attraction, as a target and suggested a method for 
improvement [4]. The summary of their results is as follows. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

1) Guide plates that display foreign languages or use 
pictograms are only about one quarter of the total. 
2) Methods to express color, shape and content are 
different depending on the place. There is no sense of unity 
and this hinders understanding. 
From the summary of results, Kunoki et al. advocated the 
necessity of offering information utilizing universal design to 
provide efficient evacuation guidance. These problems have 
been noticed by the Fire and Disaster Management Agency 
(FDMA) in Japan too. They are considering concretely 
implementing universal design [5]. Figure 1 shows sample 
models under consideration by the FDMA. 
 
          
 
 (a) Tsunami Warning      (b) Tsunami Warning Area 
  
 
(c) Tsunami Refuge Building 
Figure 1. 
Graphic Symbols for Tsunami Signs 
 
B. Analysis during the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake 
In the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake, the Tokyo metropolitan 
area suffered from disaster for the first time after being 
developed as a modern city, and there were many people 
who had difficulty returning home. This is relevant to this 
study, as it is useful to design our system through analysis 
related to information media. 
1)  Analysis of Victim Behavior 
From the summary of a Cabinet Office survey conducted 
via the Internet, there were 5.15 million persons who had 
difficulty returning home in the metropolitan area, which 
includes Tokyo, Kanagawa, Chiba, Saitama and Ibaraki [6]. 
The results of the survey into how people returned home are  
shown in Figure 2. 
In Figure 2, n = 5,372 persons who were affected by the 
disaster and responded to the survey. The most common 
method of returning home was on foot, accounting for 37.0% 
of the total victims, and the second most common method 
was by car. The percentages of walking and car are very 
similar. The reason for these being the most common is that 
trains ceased operation immediately after the earthquake. 
2) Necessary Information for Returning Home 
Disaster victims felt that certain information was 
necessary while returning home, as shown in Figure 3. In 
descending order, information on their families’ safety, 
investigation of the damage, and time until the trains and 
subway would resume operation, were the most cited.  If we 
exclude family safety information, we can see that victims 
need information about items required to return home. 
 
Figure 2. 
Methods of Returning Home 
 
Figure 3. 
Necessary Information 
 
3) Future Methods of Obtaining Information 
Figure 4 shows the results of a survey conducted about 
future methods of obtaining information hoped for by 
disaster victims. This survey targeted people who tried 
retuning home in a disaster. Results are grouped for three 
conditions related to whether victims were capable of 
returning home. In particular, the provision of information by 
TV is strongly hoped for. This reason is considered to be that 
TV is capable of providing information visually, and that 
people watching TV can know an overview of the disaster in 
various places. The number of people who wish to be 
provided information by cell phone is high, because it is easy 
to use while on the move. In particular, there is a tendency 
for this to be desired by people who tried to return home but 
were prevented. This may be estimated as due to the 
necessity for information to decide a new course of action 
after being prevented from returning home. 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 4. 
Desired Sources of Information in Future 
 
C. Social Media 
The effectiveness of social media was recognized during 
the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake, exemplified by Twitter. The 
“wisdom of crowds” was constructed from many users’ posts 
(Tweets) [7]. This is revolutionary as being the first system 
in which victims themselves provided information, in 
contrast to previous systems in which the victim is only 
provided information by the system. Official hash tags were 
provided by Twitter from the day after the disaster occurred.  
Examples of hash tags include ‘#j_j_helpme request rescue’, 
‘#anpi safety’, and more. Various kinds of information was 
posted on Twitter, such as the appearance of the disaster-hit 
area, means of transport, available toilets, evacuation sites, 
places for lodging, and more. 
D. An Information Collection Support System for disaster-
affected areas using Mini-blogs 
Yokobe et.al., proposed an information collection system 
using social medias and mini-blog to collect information 
when disaster occurs [8]. In this paper, the evaluation results 
using Twitter are shown. This research assumes the 
following two conditions: 
1) The useful information for victims is sent from 
disaster-affected areas. 
2)  The reliability of information is evaluated by people 
in the area where the information is sent. 
Based on these assumptions, the system deletes 
information which is sent at an area away from the disaster-
affected area because the information is decided as 
unnecessary and unreliable. Specifically, assuming that 
information with exact location data has high reliability, the 
reliability of each tweet and user of Twitter is evaluated 
based on the location data and the responses from people 
living around a location where the tweet is sent. From the 
results of the evaluation, it is shown that tweet including a 
name of the place has high relationship with the disaster-
affected area. This fact implies that a name of place is 
important in deciding the reliability of tweet. However, it is 
known that most of tweets do not have information of its 
location data. Thus, the detection of reliability based on 
location data is not available in many cases. 
III. 
OUTLINE OF PROPOSED SYSTEM 
A. Pictogram 
Pictograms are graphic symbols that express things or 
general ideas instead of using words. For example, signs 
such as ‘emergency exit’ and ‘disabled access’ are well 
known. In Japan, pictograms are adopted in places that are 
heavily used by the general public. Their biggest advantage 
is to enable communication of information without the 
restraints of language. In this paper, we devise a solution for 
problems contained in the present Japanese disaster 
information gathering and transmission system. 
B. Visual Provision of Information 
When victims need to evacuate or return home during a 
disaster, they are interested only in their present location and 
surrounding area. When a victim posts information, this can 
be expected to be a report of situation of their neighborhood. 
Recently it is easy to calculate present location by using GPS 
(Global Posting System) or networks. Also, the GIS 
(Geographic Information System) service is free of charge 
and easy to use too. We constructed a framework to show the 
information of present location and surrounding area using 
these two services. The system shows information 
automatically and visually, so it is easy to use. This is a 
highly important function in a disaster information system. 
C. Overloaded Communication Lines 
Cell phones and smartphones are one of the most 
frequently used methods to gather information when a 
disaster occurs. However, the calling function can barely be 
used, and mail and Internet is delayed significantly by 
limiting or congestion of communication lines. When we 
gather information using information infrastructure, the 
system needs to operate in this kind of situation. With this in 
mind, we propose a system built as a smartphone application.  
D. Disaster Information to Provide 
In this system, we deal with the kinds of information that 
were required during the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake. By 
determining information types beforehand, we can anticipate 
the degree of increase in comprehension and avoidance of 
misunderstanding. Furthermore, provision of information is 
separated into two types: information displayed by default 
and information displayed by user operation, as shown in 
Figure 5. 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

TABLE I. 
PROVISION OF INFORMATION 
Pictogram 
Meaning of Pictogram 
 
Usable Means of Transport 
 
Evacuation Site 
 
Place for Medical Treatment 
 
Place for Rest 
(a) 
Information Displayed by Default 
 
Food, Drink 
 
Available Toilet 
 
Place for Available Network 
 
Available Accommodation 
(b) 
Information Displayed by User Operation 
 
In the default settings, we limited the amount of 
pictograms to be displayed, so that it is easy to obtain 
information from the pictograms. The system can add 
pictograms to the display according to the user’s needs. In 
addition, if the user taps a pictogram, the time of the posting 
and the contributor are displayed as annotations. 
E. Dissemination of System  
At the present time, various measures are in place against 
disasters. However, their rate of utilization is a low 
percentage in total telecommunication services. We can 
consider that this is due to the fact that the service is not 
known among disaster victims. Information sharing systems 
cannot demonstrate effectiveness if they are not widely 
known. 
Accordingly, we propose a social media model as a 
method to raise the rate of utilization. This model is can also 
be used outside of disaster occurrence, and the users can 
freely change the genre of information. Disaster information 
is treated as one genre. During non-disaster times, users can 
view information pictograms about places (for example, 
tourist attractions and store information) and read comments 
posted by other users. In addition, users can post pictograms 
and comments themselves and add to other users’ 
contributions. This system is different from current social 
media that mainly use text, because it mainly uses maps and 
icons made from pictograms. We expect that the amount of 
information will increase because disaster victims can post 
information themselves. We aim to design a system to be 
used by victims when a disaster occurs, by encouraging them 
to use and familiarize themselves with the system during 
non-disaster times. This study assumes such a form of 
utilization for the system. 
IV. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
A. System Description 
This system uses a client-sever model in which the client 
is a smartphone application and the server is a web 
application utilizing a database and PHP programs. The 
database stores the pictogram type, location (latitude and 
longitude), contributed time, contributor and pictogram ID 
inputted by the user. PHP programs respond to requests by 
the client, acquire information from the database, then send 
the client information registered in server about their current 
surroundings. 
B. Disaster Data Collection 
The system’s initial screen is showed in Figure 5. The user 
can collect information on their current surroundings via map 
information and icons on this screen. The functions of each 
button are described. 
 
 
Figure 5. 
Information Collection Screen 
 
The following is a description of the system flow during 
information collection.  
1) Acquire latitude and longitude of current position from 
GPS and network. 
2) Using current position information, acquire information 
on the surrounding area up to a 3km radius from the 
database. 
3) Display map information for the surrounding area up to 
a 3km radius and place the pictograms in designated 
positions on the screen. 
By tapping an icon, the users can find out the contributor 
and posted time, which can aid in judging the situation, as 
showed in Figure 6.  
 
 
Figure 6. 
Annotation when Tapping an Icon 
 
When the user changes the information genre to 
information about disasters, the system displays only 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

important information. Other information can be seen by 
tapping the Layer Select Button. 
There are two methods to update information. The 
‘Information Update Button’ updates information. The 
‘Information Formatting Button’ updates information and 
also changes the information genre to default. Both actions 
update the user’s current location and center the map on the 
user. 
In this way, this system expresses information using 
shape and color without words, by which the user is able to 
collect information on their surrounding area. 
C. Contributing Disaster Information 
During disasters, the time and operations required to 
contribute information should be minimal. In this system, 
users can contribute with three steps, as shown in Figure 7. 
1) Change to “Contribute” screen 
2) Select the pictograms corresponding to the information 
the user wants to contribute from the icons at the bottom 
of screen 
3) Tap “Contribute” Button 
 
 
Figure 7. 
 Contributing Information 
 
Via this operation, the client-system sends the server 
information that includes the current position (latitude and 
longitude), pictogram name, time of contribution and 
pictogram ID determining whether to display the default 
display or layer selection. This information is obtained from 
the system automatically, with the exception of the 
pictogram name, so the system saves the user’s time. In non-
disaster situations, users can post comments and photos in 
the system, but if the information genre is changed to 
disaster, these functions are automatically suspended and 
text-based communication is prohibited. This reduces the 
amount of communication. 
V. 
SYSTEM EVALUATION  
A. Evaluation Method 
To verify the effectiveness of the system, we conducted an 
evaluation experiment separated into two patterns: for 
experts and for normal users. 
Three persons belong to Kyoto’s Disaster and Crisis 
Management Section and twelve persons belong to Konan 
Fire Department participated in the experiment as experts, 
performed simulated operation of the system and answered a 
questionnaire survey after we explained about the system. 
Two students from China and six students from Japan 
participated in the experiment as normal users, and answered 
the same survey without hearing an explanation of how to 
use this system. Three of the students had not used social 
media or smartphones before. The items of the survey are 
listed below. 
1) Do you think comprehension of the situation during a 
disaster would increase by using this system? 
2) Were the sizes and designs of pictogram appropriate? 
3) Was the system sufficiently easy to use? 
4) Are the types of information provided sufficient?  
5) Do you have other points of feedback or improvement? 
B. Expert Evaluation 
The following is a summary of the evaluation by the 
experts. 
1) Response to Question 1 
a) 
There are big advantages for evacuating to 
shelters and obtaining information for returning 
home 
b) 
Information is available quickly, as it is 
expressed using easy-to-understand pictograms 
c) Users can be psychologically reassured, as they can 
gather information on their surrounding area 
d) 
Comprehension of the situation can be increased, 
as information about the destination is easy to 
understand 
2) Response to Question 2 
a) 
Pictograms were appropriate  (13 out of 15 
experts) 
b) 
Users should be able to change the size of the 
pictograms (2 out of 15 experts) 
3) Response to Question 3 
a) 
If users already have smartphones, the system 
could be operated without problems 
b) 
Limiting the amount of provided information 
leads to ease of use 
c) 
Mental barriers to using this system are higher 
for elderly people 
4) Response to Question 4 
a) 
Information about unavailable facilities, not 
only available facilities, is necessary 
b) 
Information about means of transport (operation 
status and area) is necessary 
5) Response to Question 5 
a) 
Need 
accurate 
and 
safe 
user-contributed 
information 
b) 
Setting display periods for pictograms would 
improve management of information 
c) 
Wish to utilize Wi-Fi spots during disaster 
situations, for example bus stops 
C. Non-Japanese User Evaluation 
The following is a summary of the evaluation by non-
Japanese users (Chinese).  
1) 
The provided types of information and size of 
pictogram are appropriate. 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

2) 
It is easy to ascertain the situation in the surrounding 
area via the combination of GIS and pictograms. 
3) 
If we have experience of this system as social media 
during non-disaster times, we can use it when a 
disaster occurs. 
4) 
We could not understand the difference between 
‘Evacuation Site’ and ’Place for Rest’ only from the 
pictogram. 
D. General User Evaluation 
The following is a summary of the evaluation by general 
users. 
1) 
The provided information types, size of pictograms 
and denotation are suitable on the whole.  
2) 
It is easy to use this system because it only uses 
pictograms. 
3) 
If we have operated this system once, we can use 
when a disaster occurs. 
4) 
Because the display is based on maps, we could 
ascertain both the geography and situation of our 
surroundings simultaneously. 
5) 
We could understand the meaning of the information 
quickly, as there was no need to read text. 
6) 
The pictograms for ‘Evacuation Site’, ’Place for 
Rest’ and ‘Available Accommodation’ are too 
similar to distinguish. They should be revised or 
guidelines should be made. 
E. Consideration 
The results of our evaluation experiment are as follows. 
Although some deficiencies in the provided information and 
comprehension problems for some of the pictograms were 
pointed out, we were able to confirm that this system can be 
used as an easy-to-operate disaster information sharing 
system through evaluation from experts, non-Japanese and 
general Japanese users.  
Advantages and disadvantages are shown below. 
1) 
Advantages 
a) 
Contributing and sharing the information is 
easy 
b) 
Various people can use the system 
c) 
The disaster situation can be grasped 
intuitively 
2) 
Disadvantages 
a) 
The system cannot transmit details of the 
provided information 
b) 
There is no guarantee of accuracy of user-
contributed information 
Perceptions of color and shape vary between countries and 
cultures, because differences in sensitivities derive from the 
environment in which a person is raised. In this evaluation 
experiment there were only two non-Japanese evaluators, so 
we were unable to verify such differences. In future, we will 
pursue additional evaluations targeting more non-Japanese of 
multiple nationalities. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we focused on the importance of supporting 
persons who are affected heavily during disasters, such as 
those who are unaccustomed to using information-processing 
equipment, those who cannot read or speak the local 
language, elderly people, and foreign tourists. We designed a 
system whereby disaster victims can share information using 
pictograms instead of language, and correlate their current 
position on a digital map. The numbers of foreign tourists in 
Japan will increase more and more. Moreover, the proportion 
of elderly persons will increase in Japan’s aging society. 
Therefore, this system aims to support such people, and we 
are convinced that this support will be required in future.  
In future work, we will conduct further evaluation 
experiments and conduct questionnaires with large numbers 
of non-Japanese and persons unaccustomed to using 
information devices as targets, and improve the system 
accordingly. Additionally on the server side, we will also 
implement system functions that reflect the results of the 
experts’ assessment, and clarify their effectiveness via 
further experiments.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Cabinet Office, Goverment of Japan. White Paper on  
Disaster Management 2010. (in Japanese) Tokyo:2010. 
[2] Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, 
Japan Tourism Agency. “Tourism Nation Promotion Basic 
Law” (in Japanese).  
 
http://www.mlit.go.jp/kankocho/kankorikkoku/kihonhou.html 
（Accessed on Aug. 9, 2013） 
[3] H. Sakai, “General Investigative Report: Sightseeing 
Volunteers in Paris ‘Parisien d’un Jour’”,  2011 (in Japanese). 
http://www.pref.aichi.jp/ricchitsusho/gaikoku/report_letter/report/h23
/paris1002.pdf (Accessed on Aug. 9, 2013) 
[4] Fire and Disaster Management Agency, “Report of the 
Investigation Committee on Pictorial Symbols for Disasters” 
(in 
Japanese) 
http://www.fdma.go.jp/neuter/topics/houdou/h17/050329.pdf 
(Accessed on Aug. 9, 2013) 
[5] S. Kunogi, K. Izuno and Y. Yagi, “Universal Design for 
Disaster Mitigation in Tourist Resorts”, Disaster Mitigation of 
Cultural Heritage and Historic Cities Vol. 6, July. 2012, pp. 
369-376. (in Japanese) 
[6] Cabinet Office Council for Disaster Victims Unable to Return 
Home during a Tokyo Metropolitan Earthquake, “Results of 
Survey on Status of Measures for Disaster Victims Unable to 
Return Home: Response to 3/11 and Subsequent Initiatives” 
(in Japanese) 
http://www.bousai.metro.tokyo.jp/japanese/tmg/pdf/4-
1122kaigi.pdf (Accessed on Aug. 9,  2013) 
[7] City of Kyoto Industry and Tourism Bureau, “Annual Report 
of Survey on Tourism in Kyoto City for 2010”, 2011. 
[8] W. Yokobe and Y. Nakatani. “Information Collection, 
Distribution, and Provision Assistance in Disasters through 
Mini-blogs”. Innovations in Information and Communication 
Science and Technology IICST 2011, Tomsk, Russia October. 
2011, pp. 32-41 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

