Engaging Practitioners to Deliver Government Carbon and Energy Phased
Reduction Targets: Toward a Web 3.0 Approach
Yacine Rezgui, Haijiang Li, Tom Beach, Ioan Petri
BRE Institute in Sustainable Engineering
Cardiff University
Cardiff, UK
e-mails: {rezguiy, lih, beachts, petrii}@cf.ac.uk
Abstract—The construction industry is under pressure to
increase the sustainability of its practices to meet United
Kingdom’s commitments to alleviating climate change. This
paper, through the use of a mixed method approach, explores
the
readiness
and
level
of
engagement
of
construction
stakeholders in adopting government sustainability agendas.
Limited sustainability best practice, regulation awareness, and
information provision deficiencies emerged as key themes from
the initial survey. Subsequent combined consultations explored
stakeholders’ knowledge, understanding, attitudes, values and
behaviours, and helped identify key barriers to sustainability
engagement. This has informed the participative development
of
a
“one-stop-shop”
web-based
platform
that
provides
integrated access to sustainability resources in the form of
interactive, dynamic, and user-oriented services, delivered via
discrete "widgets", that exploit web 2.0 concepts, including
semantics, user profiling, and professional networking. The
innovative dimension of the solution lies in its open, scalable
and
polymorphic
context-based
widgets
approach
that
reconfigure and update themselves to respond to changing user
context and (sustainability related) queries, while enabling
serendipitous
information
and
knowledge
discovery.
The
authors believe that the proposed web portal (a) has the
potential
to
engage
further
practitioners
in
delivering
sustainable interventions, and (b) contributes to the ongoing
debate and shaping of Web 3.0 and beyond.
Keywords-User
engagement;
Web
3.0;
Knowledge
Management; Ontology; Sustainability.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Studies indicate that creation and operation of our built
environment is responsible for some of the most serious
global and local environmental changes [1, 2, 3], accounting
for at least 50% of all energy consumption in Europe
(European Commission, 2005).
In the United-Kingdom
(UK), more than 50% of all carbon emissions can be
attributed to energy use in buildings [4]. The UK Chancellor
of the Exchequer announced in the 2008 budget that the UK
government aspires to achieve construction of zero carbon
homes from 2016, Public sector buildings from 2018, and all
other non-domestic buildings from 2019 [5]. The Welsh
government has set aspirations for zero carbon for new
buildings earlier than proposed in the rest of the UK [6].
Consequently, the construction industry is under pressure to
increase the sustainability of its practices, the implication of
which is a requirement on the industry’s behalf to understand
the demands both from society and its clients, and its sense
of corporate responsibility, which, in turn, implies major
changes in its working practices [7, 8]. The large scale
consultation reported in this paper indicates a clear need for a
dedicated resource to enable shared and value-added relevant
resources of knowledge and expertise to inform sustainable
and energy regulatory compliant design and construction
activities. This is the core mission of the Script project,
which sets the objective to develop an advanced Web-based
“one-stop-shop” platform providing value added sustainable
construction experience shared amongst communities of
practitioners. Through our initial consultation, it has become
apparent that such a “one-stop-shop” platform should
address a number of attributes that exceed Web 2.0
capabilities and prompted the authors to explore and
contribute to the ongoing debate about the realm of Web 3.0
and beyond. The paper first introduces the methodology that
underpins the research and initial consultation results. The
authors
then
discuss
perceived
features
of
Web
3.0,
interpreted in the context of the “Script” platform. The latter
is
then
further
supported
by
the
description
of
the
underpinning system architecture and resulting interface. The
paper then illustrates the core aspect of the Script platform,
i.e., the sustainable construction ontology and its method of
development.
The
validation
of the
platform
is
then
discussed, focusing on its fulfillment of an enhanced users’
sustainable knowledge experience. The paper concludes with
a critical discussion of our Web 3.0 definition and approach,
its limitations, and directions for future research.
II.
THE "SCRIPT" METHODOLOGY
Requirement capture and elicitation are some of the most
critical tasks of any software development project. A socio-
technical
approach
is
employed
underpinned
by
the
following three research questions (RQ):

RQ1:
What
are
construction
stakeholders’
sustainability information needs and government provision
deficiencies?

RQ2:
What
are
construction
stakeholders’
engagement barriers with governmental carbon and energy
reduction targets?
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services


RQ3: Can the (above) elicited information needs
and engagement barriers inform the development of a
reference "one-stop-shop" Web platform for sustainable
construction?
These questions were explored via three mixed-method
studies. The first study, which addressed RQ1, employed an
online Europe-wide survey (February – April 2009) from
which 252 responses were received with participants being
demographically
representative
of
the
total
population
sampled. Quantitative data were analyzed in SPSS and
qualitative data were coded thematically in NVivo. Limited
sustainability
best
practice,
regulation
awareness
and
information provision deficiencies emerged as key themes
from the consultation and provided the ground to address
RQ2. To address this question, the methodology employed a
further study focused on industry consultations in Wales.
This involved three workshops (c.70 participants in total)
and a series of 15 semi-structured interviews with key
industry representatives (May – September 2009). The first
two
workshops
explored
stakeholders’
knowledge,
understanding, attitudes, values and behaviors, and helped
identify key barriers to sustainability engagement in Wales,
which were then debated and confirmed in a third workshop
hosted by the Low/Zero Carbon Hub in Wales (Wales LZC
Hub). The Wales LZC Hub is a coalition that is supported by
the Welsh Government, the building industry, housing, and
voluntary sectors, to help meet the policy targets. A number
of issues have been captured through our intensive industry
consultation and entails a need for construction stakeholders
to understand the changing landscape of sustainability and
associated legislation, which, in turn, demands easy and
timely access to fragmented and multi-faceted information.
Moreover, construction stakeholders involved in new or
refurbishment
projects
are
faced
with:
(a)
complex
legislation related to low carbon buildings, (b) a plethora of
overlapping commercial tools supporting the process of
delivering low carbon buildings, (c) numerous guidelines
and documentation, (d) an increasingly rigorous energy
certification process, and (e) lack of clarity on types of
financial assistance and eligibility criteria. Also, while a
great deal of expertise already exists in detailing and
constructing low-energy buildings, much of this expertise is
fragmented and exists in various forms, with no real
systematic means or mechanisms to assist construction
stakeholders in their low carbon decision-making [7]. In this
context, it is imperative to make building energy expertise
widely available. The findings from these workshops fed
forward to a series of interviews where identified barriers
were discussed from a variety of socio-technical perspectives.
RQ3 formed the focus of our third study, which involved the
script
platform
requirement
elicitation
from
extensive
consultations with industry stakeholders including online
surveys, semi-structured interviews, collaborative workshops
and focus meetings (a mix of one to one and small group
consultations).
Moreover,
2
workshops
and
13
focus
meetings (a mix of one-to-one and small group consultations)
were organized (February – November 2010). A total of 27
stakeholder organizations took part in the consultations,
including:
construction
companies
and
practitioners,
advisory
groups,
umbrella
professional
organizations,
consultants, policy makers and education and training bodies.
III.
SCRIPT CONCEPT
The Semantic Web and Web Services are transforming
the Internet from a network of information to a network of
knowledge and services. Using the read-write nature of Web
2.0 applications, new knowledge is inferred based on
mashups that occur at the data, rather than at the application
level. Web 3.0 in its present manifestation exploits Semantic
Web
technologies
integrated
into
large-scale
Web
applications [9]. In fact, the foundations of Web 3.0 services
involve Resource Description Framework (RDF) for linking
data from multiple distributed databases or Web sites. The
SPARQL query language (a SQL-like standard for querying
RDF data) enables Web services and applications to use
native graph-based RDF stores and extract RDF data from
traditional databases. Once the data is in RDF form, the use
of Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) for merging and
mapping
data
from
different
resources
facilitates
development of multiple distributed and fragmented site
mashups [9]. RDF Schema (RDFS) and the Web Ontology
Language (OWL) provide the ability to infer relationships
between data in different applications or in different parts of
the same application [10]. The term “linked data” is often
used to describe the evolving RDF development space, and
“Semantic Web” is increasingly being used to describe
coupling
linked
data
with
RDFS
and
OWL.
These
capabilities
are
currently
being
exploited
to
enable
enterprise data integration and related functions [9].
As noted earlier, the Script consultation indicates a need
for far greater sophistication than is currently employed in
the nearest comparable web resources for knowledge
harvesting and sharing. The need to efficiently categorize
information coupled with requirements for bi-directional
channels for knowledge sharing and enrichment, including
professional networking capabilities and access to dynamic
information
elements
aimed
at
a
large
constituency,
suggested a novel framework employing the concept of
‘widgets’ (discrete information or service containers). This
allows scalability and logical categorization of information,
knowledge, and services, augmented with the capability for
different
users
to
‘personalize’ their
Web
experience
according to their individual needs. As the user is in control
of which widgets are visible at any given time, a key benefit
of this system is that, rather than having to trawl through a
long list of search results for different subject areas in
relation
to
the
topic
being
searched,
the
system
automatically categorizes the results within those widgets of
particular interest to that user. Figure 1 illustrates the mock
interface used to capture and confirm users' expectations of
the modus-operandi of the proposed Web solution. Using
the example of a search over "Ground Source Heat Pumps
(GSHP)", the system would display widgets that contain
information about the search query, including (a) what are
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

they,
(b)
Legislation
and
regulations,
(c)
Guidance
documents, (d) Manufacturers, suppliers, and installers,
(e) projects which have used GSHP, (f) training and skills.
Figure 1.
User-centric Concept Elicitation
The proposed Script concept involves features, such as
semantics through ontology and user-profiling, widely
accepted by the Web 2.0 community. In fact, Web 2.0 is a
somewhat overloaded term that can refer either to user-
generated and/or managed online content, or the provision
of applications via the Web [11, 12]. In an effort to fully
understand the changing construction landscape, different
actors have built various repositories, organized events, etc.,
but with little or no coordination or awareness of what one
another is doing, and lack of clear guidance and assistance
on energy regulatory compliance. A plethora of portals,
which operate on an ‘‘information push” basis have been
developed [7]. There is little or no attempt to capture the
user experience. Also, on viewing these various sites for the
first time, in the process of searching for sustainable
construction information, there is a feeling of confusion and
uncertainty in what constitutes the best and, particularly, the
most important information.
A key barrier to engagement
with sustainability is the fragmented nature of sustainable
construction
information
and
knowledge,
which
is
exacerbated by the indiscriminate nature of currently
available search engines on the web. Our consultations
indicate that a sustainable construction dedicated search
facility would greatly alleviate this problem. The way to
achieve this is by creating and making available to the
system a sustainable construction domain ontology that
‘understands’ a user’s search queries, thereby facilitating
disambiguation, while ‘learning’ from a user’s queries.
Figure 2 illustrates the current script user interface with its
semantic widgets approach. The following section discusses
the script underpinning system architecture and services.
The innovative dimension of the Script solution lies in
its open, scalable and polymorphic context-based widgets
that reconfigure and update themselves to respond to
changing user context and (sustainability related) queries,
while enabling serendipitous information and knowledge
discovery.
IV.
THE SCRIPT WEB 3.0 PLATFORM
The Script Platform has been developed using a Service-
Oriented Architecture (SOA) and consists of a set of
interoperable services, accessed: by a choice of web-based
or mobile device-based clients. The architecture of the
Script platform is shown in Figure 3. It should be noted that
these services can be utilized independently of the platform
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

or within the platform brokered by our kernel. In this
context, we identify three types of provision that can be
implied:

Direct provision of services, with each service
being delivered as a separate discrete service.

Indirect provision of services occurs within the
platform. With this provision mechanism, each service
invocation is mediated by the kernel. In this method, the user
(client) requests functionality from the kernel and the kernel
delegates
the
execution
of
this
functionality
to
the
appropriate service.

Inter-service
provision.
A service
can
request
functionality directly from another service within the system.
This occurs frequently for our ontology as other services
utilize its functionality.
Figure 2.
The Script Web3.0 Concept
Each
service
has
an
associated
Application
Programming Interface (API), which serves as a description
for possible access requests. The API defines a set of
methods that a service can offer and a set of associated
parameters. In the design phase, care was taken to ensure
that the API provides maximum flexibility.
Figure 3 also shows how the services within the Script
platform interact. All communication within this system is
done using Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) and, for
communications purposes, the system can be divided into
four levels:
 The client level contains the client software with
which users interact with the system. Currently, Web-
based and Android application clients have been
implemented.
 The
kernel
level
facilitates
the
communication
between the clients and other levels of the platform.
The kernel acts as a broker, delegating requests to
other services within the system, and also as a service
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

directory allowing services to be added/removed
dynamically.
 The services level is the set of services that provides
the key functionality of the platform. These services
include:

The Knowledge Base Service contains a corpus of
related
guides,
regulations
and
various
existing
documentation related to sustainability in construction.

The Search Service performs semantic searching on
the platform knowledge base. The submitted query has a set
of
associated
ontological
concepts
for
improving
the
precision and the recall of the returned results.

The Professional Networking Service enables users
to collaborate using social networks, such and LinkedIn and
Twitter, while the communication is facilitated with voice-
over-IP instruments, such as Skype and Google-Talk.

The
Events
Calendar
Service
is
notification/reminder of the important events from the
engineering
community.
Users
can
subscribe
and
synchronize these events with their personal calendar.

The News Feeds Service provides aggregation of
information and updated news relevant to the users’ interests
and discipline(s).

The Forum Service allows users to interact by
sharing data and information within the platform.

The Sustainable Sourcing Service allows users to
lookup products (based on their current location) from
certified suppliers.
Figure 3. The Script Architecture

The core services level describes the services
that are not only used directly by users, but are
also utilized by other services within the system.
This is the level in which the ontology service is
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

integrated alongside the Profiling Service. The latter
manages the identities of users and controls the access to
the platform. Each user has a set of associated interests
and disciplines, which are used as input data for other
services, such as searching, professional networking or
news feeds.
V.
VALIDATION OF SCRIPT PLATFORM AND
UNDERPINNING ONTOLOGY
Utilization of automatic or semi-automatic methods for
the construction of ontology is not uncommon, and several
different examples can be seen in the literature. Rezgui [7]
outlines a system where a new ontology for the construction
domain is automatically constructed based on a set of
existing ontologies for specific related sub-domains and
from other semantic resources. Wachter and Schroeder [13]
describe a semi-automatic system that enables ontology
construction within the Bioinformatics domain based on pdf
document collections and the PubMed online database. Wu
et al. (2009) describe a methodology utilizing Latent
Semantic Analysis [14] to construct an ontology for the
semantic web by harvesting concepts from Web Service
Description Language (WSDL) files. The authors then apply
the process to locate similar Web services based on the
similarities
between
concepts,
achieving
an
average
precision of approximately 60%. The authors present
promising
results,
but
also
state
that
an
important
conclusion is that ontology construction can never be fully
automated, but well designed semi-automatic systems can
provide
significant
value
in
assisting
domain
experts/ontology engineers in their work.
Testing and validation relied on the group of users
involved in the initial requirement assessment phase and on
an increasingly expanding constituency as the platform was
extended to further users. We also monitored user activity
by employing Google Analytics. The initial feedback has
been positive and encouraging. The analysis of users’
comments helped identify some key issues to be addressed
in future releases of the platform, as summarized below:

The ontology needs to be refined and the concepts
should be expanded to increase the relevance in searching.

A new widget is needed reflecting updates taking
place within the platform, such as new documents being
added, new versions of documents being uploaded, or new
events being added.

Explanation of the different types of documents
needs to be available on the platform: due to the nature of
the documents available, it is important to support end-users
in understanding the exact terminology used to define
regulatory (directives, decisions, etc.) and other documents
(white papers, project results, etc.)

A social networking widget is needed, where users
can access various social profiles such as LinkedIn, Twitter,
Facebook.

The integration with mobile devices represents an
important issue to address. It was identified that many of the
visitors
prefer
mobile
devices
for
retrieving
their
information.

The
legislation
should
be
extended
to
UK
legislation and possibly to Europe.

Graphical Interface: The interface should be more
intuitive to generally improve the usability of the platform.
To validate the ontology that has been developed, a
series of tests have been performed utilizing keyword
suggestion functionality. To carry out the validation, users of
the sustainable construction platform have been asked to
enter a predefined query which has been formulated by a
domain expert and were then asked to comment on the
relevant terms suggested thus indicating the percentage level
of accuracy of the ontology.
To conduct this experiment, ten pre-defined queries were
entered. Matching these queries to concepts in the ontology
produced a result set of 131 terms with 72% of these terms
being deemed accurate matches by the domain expert. Once
this initial mapping was produced, the accuracy of the
related
terms
was
also
examined.
To
conduct
this
experiment, each relationship relevant to the queries was
analyzed by a domain expert. In total, there were 242
relationships, 73% of which were deemed to be correct.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The Semantic Web, from a Web 3.0 perspective, relates
to
the
development
of
an
environment
where
data,
information and knowledge are inferred, processed, and
accessed: in a human friendly manner. The Semantic Web is
the
symbiosis
of
Web
technologies,
knowledge
representation
artificial
intelligence
concerned
with
constructing and maintaining (potentially complex) models
of the world. Beyond the potential for maintaining new
business models, such as online communities, online market
places and advertising supported site, new semantic web
paradigm promises to offer facilities for using user profiles
(including personal data) with a view of achieving a higher
order of knowledge integration and mining enabled by
ontology engineering [13]. As noted earlier, the innovative
dimension of the Script platform lies in its open, scalable
and polymorphic context-based widgets that reconfigure and
update themselves to respond to changing user context and
(sustainability related) queries, while enabling serendipitous
information and knowledge discovery. The authors believe
that the proposed web portal (a) has the potential to engage
further practitioners in delivering sustainable interventions
as inferred through our portal validation work, and (b)
contributes to the ongoing debate and shaping of Web 3.0
and beyond. In that respect, key features for a true Web 3.0
environment from our Script portal perspective include:

Machine processable contents supporting (user)
profile-based
searching
and
serendipitous
information
discovery across the sustainability domain.
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services


Sustainability
knowledge
appraisal,
nurturing,
validation
and
feedback
through
virtual
professional
communities. For instance, construction products with
defects or lack of performance can be quickly made known,
while best practice are shared.

Machine
generated
ontology
for
domain
conceptualization with potential for evolutionary refinement.
The Script ontology has been generated from a large
sustainability document corpus while requiring minimal
expert input / validation.

Plug and play capability of third party services that
exploit the Script ontology and user profiling. This provides
the advantage of widening the scope of users' accessible
knowledge
while exploiting
their profile
for filtering
information and avoiding information overload.

Regional
and
global
awareness
in
terms
of
sustainability related events, trainings, and continuous
professional development.

Strong sense of professional community belonging
with a shared sense of sustainability and social corporate
responsibility.

Management
of
virtual
and
physical
objects
through Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) and Internet
of things. For instance, through our Product database,
virtual products (such as a building product or equipment)
can be purchased, allocated an RFID tag, and then on
managed across its lifecycle from delivery, installation,
operation, to decommissioning / recycling.
This prompts a discussion on what could form evolutions
beyond Web 3.0. The Script platform is currently being
enhanced and further developed to embed the capability of
transforming buildings and their components / systems into
virtual objects with semantics and behavior which can be
queried, managed remotely, and operated at optimum
performance levels. Moreover, given that Semantic Web
technologies are maturing as a means of describing tangible
artifacts, we could use their representational power to
describe things in the real world. One view is that the
physical objects will become Web-accessible in that they will
be able to be represented via metadata. Just like applying
semantic technologies to problems of interoperability in
ubiquitous computing environments, describing physical
things will expand our scope beyond the current Web. This
forms the focus of the authors’ ongoing work and planned
enhancements to the Script platform.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The European-wide study was funded by the European
Commission under the FP7 program (Contract number
SI2.CPROCE021853800). The initial Wales study and the
follow-up ‘Script’ project were funded by the Welsh
Government under the Academic Expertise for Business
(A4B) program. The authors would also like to acknowledge
the many industrial/stakeholder organizations (all listed in
http://sustainablebuildingportal.co.uk/about)
who
have
kindly taken part in the various studies.
REFERENCES
[1]
BERR, Digest of UK Energy Statistics. Department for
Business Enterprise and Regulatory Reform, 2007, London.
http://stats.berr.gov.uk/energystats/dukes07_c6.pdf (accessed:
20
June 2013).
[2]
European
Commission,
Challenging
and
Changing
Europe’s Built Environment: A Vision for a Sustainable and
Competitive Construction Sector by 2030, European Construction
Technology Platform, 2005 (accessed: October 2013)
[3]
J.A. Clarke, C.M. Johnstone, N.J. Kelly, P.A. Strachan,
and P. Tuohy, The role of built environment energy efficiency in a
sustainable UK energy economy, Energy Policy 36, 2008, pp.
4605–4609 (accessed: October 2013).
[4]
R. McLeod, C.J. Hopfe, and Y. Rezgui, An investigation
into recent proposals for a revised definition of zero carbon homes
in
the
UK,
Energy
Policy
46,
2012,
pp.
25-35.
(doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2012.02.066) (accessed: October 2013).
[5]
BSRIA, Zero carbon targets on the construction industry,
2009. http://www.bsria.co.uk/news/clean-home/ (accessed: 20 June
2013).
[6]
WG, Climate Change Strategy for Wales. Welsh
Government, 2010. ISBN 978 0 7504 5714 9
http://wales.gov.uk/docs/desh/publications/101006ccstratfinalen.pd
f (accessed: 30 July 2012).
[7]
Y. Rezgui, Knowledge systems and value creation: An
action research investigation, Industrial Management & Data
Systems 107 (2), 2007, pp. 166-182 (accessed: October 2013).
[8]
Y. Rezgui and J.C. Miles, Harvesting and Managing
Knowledge in Construction: From theoretical foundations to
business applications, Francis & Taylor, Spon Press, 2011.
ISBN/ISSN: 10:0415545951, 2011(accessed: October 2013).
[9]
J. Hendler, Web 3.0 Emerging, IEEE Computer, January
2009 (accessed: October 2013).
[10]
O. Lassila, and J. Hendler, Embracing "Web 3.0" IEEE
Internet Computing, May-June 2007. (accessed: October 2013)
[11]
T. O’Reilly, What is Web 2.0? Design patterns and
business models for the next generation of software, 2005. See
http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what
-is-web-20.html (accessed October 2013).
[12]
R. Haines, K. Khan, and J. Brooke, Bringing simulation
to engineers in the field: a web 2.0 approach, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A
(2009) 367, 2009, pp. 2635–2644. doi:10.1098/rsta.2009.0047
(accessed: October 2013).
[13]
T. Wachter and M. Schroeder, Semi-automated ontology
generation within OBO-Edit, Bioinformatics 26(12), 2010, pp. 88-
96 (accessed: October 2013).
[14]
S. T. Dumais, Latent semantic analysis. Annual Review
of Information Science and Technology 38, 2004, pp. 188–230.
(doi: 10.1002/aris.1440380105) (accessed: October 2013).
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

