Estimation of Body Part Acceleration While Walking Using Frequency Analysis 
Estimating head acceleration from movement of upper trunk 
 
Shohei Hontama, Kyoko Shibata, Yoshio Inoue 
Kochi University of Technology 
Miyanokuchi 185, Tosayamada, Kami, Kochi, Japan 
e-mail: hontama.kut@gmail.com 
e-mail: shibata.kyoko@kochi-tech.ac.jp 
e-mail: inoue.yoshio@kochi-tech.ac.jp 
Hironobu Satoh 
National Institute of Information and Communications 
Technology 
Nukui-kitamachi, Koganei, Tokyo, 187-8795, Japan 
e-mail: satoh.hironobu@nict.go.jp 
 
 
 
Abstract— This study group is developing a mobile system that 
can easily estimate the floor reaction force with a small 
number of wearable sensors for reduced user burden. In this 
study, we propose a method to measure accelerations by 
wearable inertial sensors and we estimate the floor reaction 
force based on these measurements. In previous works, the 
number of sensors was reduced from 15 body parts to 5 
selected body parts, in order to decrease burden on a user. 
However, the estimation accuracy also decreased. Therefore, in 
this paper, we consider reducing the number of sensors 
without sacrificing accuracy. In the previous report, the 
relations between the acceleration of each part of the body 
were quantified by analyzing the acceleration of each part in 
the Fourier analysis and expressing it in the frequency domain. 
This paper quantifies the relations between the accelerations of 
the head and the upper trunk using previously reported 
methods, then estimates the head acceleration from the upper 
trunk acceleration. As a result, it was possible to capture the 
characteristics of the head acceleration in two directions while 
walking and it was also possible to estimate it accurately. 
Keywords- Fourier analysis; gait analysis; motion mode 
function. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Walking is one of the most familiar activities performed 
by many people. Gait analysis data are important information 
in the fields of healthcare, clinical medicine and sports, so 
they are effective for health promotion, rehabilitation, 
improving athletic function in athletes, and so on. General 
gait analysis is performed by combining an optical Motion 
Capture (MC) system and force plates. The advantage of this 
measurement system is that it enables detailed analysis of 
gait, such as calculation of joint moments. However, this 
measurement system is very expensive, moreover there is a 
limit to the measurement range for using installation type 
equipment. To address this problem, our study group 
proposed a method for estimating floor reaction forces using 
wearable inertial sensors and succeeded in making it mobile 
[1]. This method divided the body into 15 parts, as reported 
by Ae et al. [2], then it was shown that the sum of the inertial 
forces and gravity obtained from each of these parts is 
balanced with the measured values of the force plate. To 
accurately estimate the floor reaction force, it is achievable 
to use each inertial force derived from the acceleration 
measured from 15 parts of the whole body. However, for a 
simple system to reduce the burden on the user, the idea is to 
reduce the number of sensors. Attempts to estimate using a 
small number of inertial sensors selected so far resulted in 
poor accuracy [1]. 
Therefore, in this paper, we consider reducing the 
number of sensors without sacrificing accuracy. One method 
is to estimate the acceleration at the unmeasured part from 
the measured part, which reduces the number of sensors and 
the loss of accuracy caused by the reduction in the number of 
sensors. For this purpose, it is necessary to understand the 
relation between the movement of the measured part and the 
unmeasured part. However, it is not easy to describe the 
relation quantitatively using the time history waveforms as 
they are. Hence, in the previous report [3], walking was 
regarded as a periodic motion and Fourier analysis was 
performed on the acceleration of each part. As a result, using 
the acceleration expressed in the frequency domain, it was 
possible to extract the characteristics of each part of the 
movement. Based on this, the unmeasured part was divided 
by the measured part for each frequency component. This is 
called “motion mode function” in this paper. This motion 
mode function enabled us to quantify the relation between 
the acceleration of the two target parts. In this paper, the 
acceleration at the unmeasured part is estimated in the 
frequency domain using the obtained motion mode function 
and is converted into an acceleration in the time domain by 
inverse Fourier analysis. The usefulness of the method is 
investigated by comparing the estimated acceleration with 
the measured acceleration. 
This report shows the estimation results of the 
acceleration in the vertical direction and walking direction, 
with the head and the upper trunk as target parts, where the 
difference in movement is relatively large. 
II. 
METHOD 
A. Method for obtaining acceleration data for Fourier 
analysis 
The development of a simple system using inertial 
sensors is our goal. However, in this paper, acceleration data 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

for analysis are acquired using MC as a basic study to 
estimate acceleration at the unmeasured part. 
In the experiment, MC (manufactured by Motion 
Analysis Co., Ltd.), force plate 3 units (manufactured by Tec 
Gihan Co., Ltd., TF-6090-C 1 unit, TF-4060-D 2 units), 
metronome were used. Force plates are strain-gauge 
transducer that can measure forces, moments, and centers of 
pressure. Acceleration is obtained by attaching recurrent 
markers to the head and upper trunk, as defined by Ae et al. 
[2], as shown in Figure 1.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Position of recursive markers. 
Two healthy subjects (male: age 22±0, height 1.75±0.05 
[m], weight 65±5 [kg]) are measured and 10 steps are taken 
from the start of walking. The acceleration data to be 
examined are for one gait cycle of two steps (1.2 seconds) of 
the fifth step and the sixth step, which are steady walking. 
The cadence is set to 100 BPM (0.6 seconds per walking 
cycle) with a metronome. Each subject measure 15 times of 
trial data, according to the rhythm of the metronome. The 
accuracy of the analysis is improved if both ends of the 
acceleration data of one gait cycle are the same. Therefore, 
measurements were taken after sufficient walking exercises 
by following per the metronome so that both ends of the data 
were aligned as much as possible. The acceleration data used 
for the analysis were obtained by sampling at a sampling 
frequency of 100 Hz and smoothed by low-pass processing 
with a cutoff frequency of 9 Hz. 
B. Estimation of acceleration at the unmeasured part 
First, the magnitude and phase of each frequency 
component are calculated by the Fourier analysis of the 
acceleration data of the head and the upper trunk, 
respectively. This result shows which frequency components 
are important in estimating the acceleration. 
Next, the motion mode function for estimating the 
acceleration of the unmeasured part is obtained. In this paper, 
the head acceleration is estimated from the upper trunk 
acceleration, assuming the upper trunk as the measured part 
and the head as the unmeasured part. The motion mode 
function is derived by dividing the head by the upper trunk 
for each frequency component using the Fourier analysis 
results of the head and the upper trunk. Finally, the head 
acceleration is estimated by multiplying the obtained motion 
mode function by the Fourier analysis result of the upper 
trunk. In this paper, the motion mode function is obtained as 
an average motion mode function using 14 times of trial data, 
and the head acceleration is estimated from the remaining 
one trial data. 
III. 
RESULT 
Since similar results were obtained in two subjects, only 
the results for subject A are shown. 
First, the acceleration data of the head and the upper 
trunk obtained from the experiment are shown. Figure 2 and 
Figure 3 show the vertical direction and the walking 
direction, respectively. The blue line is the head acceleration, 
and the orange line is the upper trunk acceleration. In the 
vertical direction shown in Figure 2, the acceleration 
waveform showed a similar trend. In the walking direction 
shown in Figure 3, the upper trunk acceleration was higher 
than the head acceleration. However, the relation between 
the movement of the head and the upper trunk in both the 
vertical and walking directions could not be quantified, and it 
is not possible to estimate the head acceleration from the 
upper trunk acceleration by correcting the constants. 
Next, the acceleration data of the head and the upper 
trunk are decomposed into frequency components by a 
Fourier analysis, and the magnitude and phase are obtained 
for each direction. From the results, the important frequency 
bands for estimating the acceleration of the unmeasured part 
of the head were identified. The magnitude and phase in the 
vertical direction are shown in Figure 4 for the head and in 
Figure 5 for the upper trunk. The magnitude and phase in the 
walking direction are shown in Figure 6 for the head and in 
Figure 7 for the upper trunk. The magnitude and phase are 
shown as the mean and standard deviation calculated from 
14 times of trial data. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Acceleration data of the head and upper trunk in the vertical 
direction. 
 
Figure 3.  Acceleration data of the head and the upper trunk in the walking 
direction. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 4.  Result of frequency analysis of the head acceleration in the 
vertical direction.  
 
Figure 5.  Result of frequency analysis of the upper trunk acceleration in 
the vertical direction. 
 
Figure 6.  Result of frequency analysis of the head acceleration in the 
walking direction.  
 
Figure 7.  
Result of frequency analysis of the upper trunk 
acceleration in the walking direction.  
From Figure 4 to Figure 7, the gait frequency component 
(1.667Hz) and its integer multiple components have a 
magnitude in both the vertical direction and the walking 
direction. In particular, the magnitude of the gait frequency 
component is extremely large in the vertical direction. In the 
walking direction, there is a magnitude in the second-order 
component of the gait frequency in the upper trunk, and the 
magnitude in the head is small from the low-frequency bands 
to the high-frequency bands. 
Hence, the movement in the vertical direction was found 
to be highly dependent on the gait frequency component. In 
the walking direction, the movement of the head was small, 
and the movement of the upper trunk was found to be 
significantly involved up to the second-order component of 
the gait frequency. 
Next, the motion mode functions of the head and the 
upper trunk are obtained. The magnitude and phase 
difference of the calculated average motion mode function 
are shown in the vertical direction in Figure 8 and the 
walking direction in Figure 9. Gains and phase differences of 
the results are shown as means and standard deviations 
obtained from 14 times of trial data. 
Next, the motion mode functions of the head and the 
upper trunk are obtained. In this paper, the motion mode 
function is defined as the average of the motion mode 
functions of 14 times of trial data. The magnitude and phase 
difference of the calculated motion mode function are shown 
in the vertical direction in Figure 8 and the walking direction 
in Figure 9. Gains and phase differences of the results are 
shown as means and standard deviations obtained from 14 
times of trial data. 
 
 
Figure 8.  The average motion mode function in the vertical direction with 
the input as the upper trunk and the output as the head.  
 
Figure 9.  The average motion mode function in the walking direction with 
the input as the upper trunk and the output as the head.  
In this paper, the relation between the head acceleration 
and the upper trunk acceleration, focusing on the gait 
frequency component and its second-order component 
indicated. Figure 8 shows that the second-order component 
has a large gain, while the most important gait frequency 
component has gain around 1 and phase difference around 0. 
From this, it can be seen that in the vertical direction, the 
head and the upper trunk have similar movements in the 
most important gait frequency component. From Figure 9, it 
was found that in the walking direction, the gain was small 
and the amplitude of the head was smaller than that of the 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

upper trunk in the low order components, which are main 
components. 
Finally, using the motion mode function obtained from 
the 14 times of trial data shown in Figure 8 and Figure 9, the 
head acceleration was estimated from the measured upper 
trunk acceleration for the remaining one trial data. From the 
results in Figure 4 to Figure 7, it was found that the gait 
frequency (1.667Hz) and the second-order component are 
greatly involved in the movement. However, in this paper, 
we also focus on high-frequency components that are less 
involved in motion but have a magnitude. Therefore, the 
inverse Fourier transform is performed using a total of 5 
points of the gait frequency component and its integer 
multiple components to convert them into a waveform in the 
time domain. The measured and estimated head accelerations 
are shown in Figure 10 in the vertical direction and Figure 11 
in the traveling direction. The red line shows the estimated 
acceleration and the blue line shows the measured 
acceleration. 
Since similar results were obtained in two subjects, only 
the results for subject A are shown. The estimation accuracy 
of the estimated acceleration compared to the measured 
acceleration was considered using the correlation coefficient, 
and the results are shown in TABLE Ⅰ. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Comparison of head vertical acceleration estimated using the 
mean vertical motion mode function with measured values.  
 
Figure 11.  Comparison of head acceleration in the walking direction 
estimated using the mean vertical motion mode function with measured 
values.  
TABLE I.  
CORRELATION COEFFICIENT BETWEEN ESTIMATED 
ACCELERATION AND MEASURED ACCELERATION 
 
Vertical direction 
Walking direction 
Correlation 
Coefficient 
0.961 
0.822 
It can be seen from TABLE Ⅰ that the correlation is 
strong in the vertical direction and that the estimation can be 
performed with high accuracy. In the walking direction, the 
correlation coefficient is smaller than that in the vertical 
direction, but the correlation is stronger. Consequently, it is 
found that the estimated the head acceleration derived from 
the average motion mode function shows the same tendency 
as the measured acceleration. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, as a basic study to reduce the number of 
sensors used in estimating the floor reaction force, the 
acceleration at the unmeasured part was estimated using a 
motion mode function that describes the relation between the 
motion of each part. In this paper, the head acceleration is 
estimated from the upper trunk acceleration, with the upper 
trunk as the measured part and the head as the unmeasured 
part. As a result of Fourier analysis of the head acceleration 
and the upper trunk acceleration, it was found that the gait 
frequency and its integer multiple components have 
magnitude and are important for estimating the acceleration. 
Therefore, the inverse Fourier transform is performed using a 
total of 5 points of the gait frequency component and its 
integer multiple components to estimate the waveform of the 
head in the time domain. As a result, the correlation between 
the measured acceleration and the estimated acceleration at 
the head was high in both the vertical direction and the 
walking direction, and it was possible to make an accurate 
estimation. 
In this paper, the acceleration of the head is estimated 
from the upper part of the trunk as an example to 
demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed method. In the 
future, by applying the proposed method to the entire body, 
the number of sensors used to accurately estimate the floor 
reaction force will be reduced. This will build a mobile 
system for healthcare wearable sensing. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number JP18K11106. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Isshiki, Y. Inoue, K. Shibata, and M. Sonobe, “Estimation 
of Floor reaction force during walking using physical Inertial 
force by Wireless motion sensor,” 19th International 
Conference 
on 
Human-Computer 
Interaction, 
HCI 
International 2017, Communications in Computer and 
Information Science, vol. 714, pp. 249-254, doi:10.1007/978-
3-319-58753-0_37, 2017, pp.22-33, ISSN:1348-7116. 
[2] M. Ae, H. Tang, and T. Yokoi, ”Estimation of Inertia 
properties of the Body Segments in Japanese Athletes,” Soc. 
Biomechanisms Jpn., vol. 11, 1992, pp. 22-33 (in Japanese).  
[3] S. Hontama, Y. Inoue, and K. Shibata,” Characteristics of 
walking motion by using Frequency analysis: Transfer 
function for Upper body,” The Japan Society of Mechanical 
Engineers Chugoku-Shikoku Bracch , The 50th Student 
Graduation Research Presentation Lecture, No.06b3, 2020 (in 
Japanese). 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

