Towards an Integration of Process Modeling and GDSS for Crisis Management 
Heiko Thimm 
School of Engineering, Pforzheim University 
75175 Pforzheim, Germany 
e-mail: heiko.thimm@hs-pforzheim.de 
Robert Katura 
School of Engineering, Pforzheim University 
75175 Pforzheim, Germany 
e-mail: robert.katura@hs-pforzheim.de 
 
 
Abstract—Crisis situations impose a number of special 
challenges for group decisions including separation of decision 
participants by time and/or location, difficulties in obtaining 
and maintaining a proper understanding of the crisis situation, 
time pressure, and a high workload. Based on predefined 
process templates for group decision making Group Decision 
Support Systems (GDSS) can effectively support crisis 
management teams. The GDSS can, for example, bridge the 
separation of the decision participants, perform information 
management and information sharing tasks, and even 
automate specific group moderation activities. In this article, 
first results of a research project that targets a combined use of 
process modeling technology and enhanced GDSS are 
described. A new general feedback-driven and iterative process 
pattern for group decision making is proposed. When a 
prompt decision is not required, several group decision cycles 
can occur and every cycle may benefit from better information 
quality, as well as training and learning effects. 
Keywords-Crisis Management; Process Modelling; Process 
Automation; Group Decision Support Systems 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Collaborative work processes are common in crises 
management situations.  Typically the members are drawn 
from disciplines such as fire, police, health, and hazardous 
materials management. The members of the group are 
expected to complete actions together. For example, the team 
members need to collaboratively keep track of the crisis 
situation and assess the severity of the crisis, make 
recommendations to others, find different courses of actions 
to handle crisis issues, and to solve problems. From the 
actors it is expected that they make and communicate 
decisions 
together. 
Two 
important 
types 
of 
crisis 
management decisions are selection decisions (e.g., selection 
of the best fitting response plan from a set of predefined 
plans) and allocation decisions (e.g., determination of 
resources to be sent to the crisis scene).   
The design and use of Group Decision Support Systems 
(GDSS) as a decision making aid for crisis management 
organizations has been investigated by several research 
groups [2][5] [10][13]. Crisis management teams can obtain 
a number of benefits from GDSS including an instant access 
to shared information, support of remote members, support 
of crisis communication plans,  and coordination support for  
group decision making processes. 
The still ongoing research that is described in this article 
is focused on asynchronous group decisions in crisis 
situations.  A novel general decision pattern is proposed that 
can help to overcome the spatial and temporal separation of 
crisis management actors. The proposed iterative adaptive 
group decision pattern especially targets crisis situations that 
do not require a prompt decision. In each process iteration 
cycle, the group decision is obtained based on a revised 
decision model and/or a revised set of process execution 
steps. The revisions are driven by feedback that is gathered 
from the participants. A human moderator based on the 
feedback determines if a further process re-iteration should 
be completed or if the process should terminate. This 
approach can lead to better decision results because iterations 
will be performed based upon a broader information base 
with an improved information quality. Also learning and 
training effects can contribute to better results. 
In the next section, different general patterns of group 
decision making and especially the adaptive group decision 
pattern are described. It is then exemplified through 
corresponding models how such patterns can be encapsulated 
as process models using the BPMN standard [7]. Following 
that, how these models can be used in combination with an 
enhanced GDSS in crisis management scenarios is described. 
The current status of the ongoing research and concluding 
remarks are contained in the last section. 
II. 
CRISIS MANAGEMENT AND GROUP DECISIONS  
Crisis management often involves the use of crisis 
management plans. These plans describe the actions and 
considerations to be followed by the crisis management 
organization [8]. This can include the action to set up an 
infrastructure that is needed by the crisis management team 
such as a stationary or mobile control center, Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT) equipment, or 
unmanned aerial systems. It is often the case that in different 
crisis management plans identical actions and even identical 
arrangements of multiple actions can be found. Our research 
is focused on decision patterns where several different 
courses of actions and criteria to evaluate these alternatives 
are defined in a corresponding decision model. 
Multi-criteria decision models based on the Analytic 
Hierarchy Process (AHP) of Thomas Saaty [9] are often 
considered for solving complex selection problems [10]. The 
decision model serves as basis for the selection of the best 
alternative by the completion of a multi-person decision 
process. It is expected from the participants that they score 
the available alternatives in terms of given evaluation 
criteria. The total score corresponds to the group decision 
result. One major advantage of group decisions over single 
person decisions is the fact that group decisions are based on 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

a broader expertise and also a broader information base. 
Another advantage is that group decisions impose a lower 
risk for a bad decision due to human factors (e.g. the 
responsible decider can be over-challenged by the decision 
problem). Of course, there exist also drawbacks of group 
decisions such as the needed extra time, a relatively large 
coordination effort, and the demand for a professional 
moderator. Furthermore, group decisions can be biased by 
so-called Group Think Effects [3], such as a lower attention 
to risks as compared to single person decisions.  
Crisis management plans can include the pattern of a 
synchronous group decision which requires a face-to-face 
meeting. They can also include an asynchronous group 
decision in which some participants are separated by time 
and/or location from other participants. For example, in crisis 
situations, it can be required that some of the group members 
have to stay where they are due to legal regulations or 
because they are indispensable somewhere else. Sometimes 
even in crisis situations time and/or budget restrictions may 
not allow a personal meeting. For some group decisions, it 
can be a rather natural approach to use an asynchronous 
decision process in order to adequately cope with a crisis 
situation. In general, the consideration of remote participants 
can lead to more complete and accurate information and, 
henceforth, to a better decision. For example, first-hand 
information and impressions of the crisis status can be 
gained through dislocated decision participants that are 
situated close to the crisis scene and that are equipped with 
mobile communication devices [6]. 
Group decisions to select the best course of action for 
crisis handling are an interesting subject of research 
especially when focusing on groups where participants are 
separated by both location and time. For these cases that we 
refer to as “complete asynchronous group decisions” – the 
word “complete” is used to signify that the focus is on a dual 
separation (time and location) and not on a partial separation 
– special novel ICT solutions are required.  
The pattern of complete asynchronous group decisions is 
certainly not applicable to all crisis situations. Apart from the 
dual separation of the group participants at the time and 
space dimension, the time pressure is another major criterion 
to be considered. When a prompt decision is demanded and 
the actions are to be carried out right away then the pattern is 
not applicable. However, when neither a prompt decision nor 
directly following actions are required the pattern can prove 
to be useful. The decision can be post-phoned and other tasks 
can be completed in the meantime. Instead of just shifting 
the (start) of the decision process to a future point in time, 
for certain situations another approach can be more suitable. 
To start the decision process and to iteratively obtain 
decision results in which changes of the situations are 
considered can lead to certain benefits. Because of the longer 
time spend on the decision process and other advantages it is 
more likely that the best choice will be made. We refer to a 
correspondingly refined process pattern as “adaptive 
complete asynchronous group decision”.   
Through an iterative adaptive process approach it is 
possible to improve the probability that a group decision will 
lead to a well-fitting choice. By “iterative approach” in this 
context it is meant that a group decision process is repeated 
several times. The process repetition terminates when the 
crisis situation demands a prompt action. The re-iteration can 
contribute to training effects in the form of faster iteration 
times for the group decision making process. Learning 
effects are another type of effects that can be obtained from 
the process repetitions. It can be assumed that these effects 
promote improved decision results as compared to non-
iterative decision processes. It is the underlying idea of the 
iterative approach to not just repeat the same group decision 
process as completed earlier. It is expected that specific 
adaptations that will presumably improve the result are 
applied before a next iteration is completed. One possible 
adaptation is the use of a richer information basis that 
includes additional new information found in the previous 
iteration. Further modifications can be a more accurate 
process model and more accurate decision model. In our 
approach, the particular set of modifications to be considered 
is driven by feedback obtained from the previously 
performed process iterations. Among others, the feedback 
from the participants can include important background 
information, background knowledge, opinions, judgments, 
additional decision alternatives, new evaluation criteria, or a 
proposal for additional group members. The participants’ 
feedback can be the result of learning progress, new insights, 
new ideas inspired by shared information, and other 
intellectual effects of re-considering a decision problem.  
III. 
PROCESS MODELS FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENT UNDER 
CONSIDERATION OF ENHANCED GDSS  
To demonstrate the general approach of adaptive 
complete asynchronous group decisions two corresponding 
generic process models (i.e., process templates) are described 
in this section. The models are given in the popular BPMN 
standard modeling notation [7]. A possible organizational 
context for these crisis management models is a chemical 
plant in which a too high concentration of hazardous 
particles has been detected in a production hall. A more 
complete description of this case study is available in an 
earlier article [12]. The templates may also be helpful in 
river flood situations where crisis managers need to decide 
about the evacuation of river regions. Apparently, there 
exists a good fit between the typical characteristics of such 
evacuation decision and the properties of the proposed 
adaptive group decision patter.  
Crisis management organizations typically include a 
crisis incident manager, further crisis management staff with 
specific roles, and specific ICT equipment. The process 
templates prescribe the flow of actions to be performed by 
the crisis management organization in order to effectively 
cope with the crisis situation. Furthermore, the templates 
supply a decision model to support needed group decisions.  
Through a description of the generic process models not 
only the modelling approach for the proposed adaptive group 
decision pattern is exemplified in this article. Especially the 
description of the second process model provides insights 
into the GDSS enhancements that are targeted in our 
research. It is assumed that the GDSS is able to create and 
manage individual process instances (proxies for real world 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

group decision processes) from process templates. Managing 
the execution of individual process instances involves GDSS 
actions, such as the notification of participants, the collection 
of the participants’ decisions, the aggregation of the single 
decisions to a corresponding group decision, and also central 
data management and group moderation tasks (e.g. sending 
reminders). An example of such an enhanced GDSS is the 
GRUPO-MOD system [11]. 
Note the connection between the two models. The on 
duty crisis incident manager of the first model initiates an 
adaptive complete group decision process as given in the 
second model. Depending on the process template database 
other kinds of processes with other, group decision patterns 
can also be initiated by the crisis incident manager. 
Crisis incident management. The outer frame of the 
BPMN diagram in Figure 1 (called pool) represents the crisis 
management organization which consists of two actors 
(called lanes). There is first of all a human on duty incident 
manager. The second actor is a GDSS system with the above 
described enhancements. This includes a template database 
that stores templates for crisis management processes and 
templates for group decision models. In case of an unknown 
incident, the template database services as a repository from 
which a best-fitting process model and decision model is 
obtained as starting point. In a subsequent second further 
step, the models are refined and adapted in order to reflect 
the conditions of the given crisis situation. The model 
database of the GDSS stores ready to use process and 
decision models for known crisis situations.   
In the initial activities of the process model in Figure 1, 
the fitting templates for the group decision process and the 
group decision model are determined. When the incident is 
not known the best fitting process template and best fitting 
decision template are selected from the template database. 
This selection task can for example be supported by a proper 
decision tree. After the process model and decision model 
are selected, the incident manager starts a partially 
automated execution of the asynchronous group decision 
process. The GDSS plays an active role in this process 
execution by performing the activities defined in the process 
model (blue rounded boxes positioned in the lane “GDSS”) 
labeled Prepare Process, Execute Decision Making Process 
(this activity is modeled as a BPMN sub-process), Complete 
Post Processing, and Notify Incident Manager.  
During the GDSS-based execution of the decision 
process, the incident manager supervises the process and 
performs actions that cannot be handled by the GDSS. Also, 
the process completion is confirmed and the incident actions 
Figure 2. BPMN Process model of an adaptive complete asynchronous group decision. 
Figure 1. BPMN Model of a crisis incident management process. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

are completed by this person.  
Adaptive complete asynchronous group decision making. 
The process model of Figure 1 contains an activity labeled 
“Execute decision making process”. The little plus sign as 
part of the graphical symbol marks this elements as a so-
called sub-process. In general, the details of sub-processes 
are modeled in separate self-contained process models. 
Figure 2 contains the process model of the mentioned sub-
process 
and 
it 
exemplifies 
an 
adaptive 
complete 
asynchronous group decision process. The two activities of 
the decision moderator reflect the aspect of adaptation that 
can contribute to the earlier described advantages of the 
proposed new adaptive group decision pattern.  
The pool consists of three lanes referred to as Decision 
Moderator (not necessarily the same person as the Incident 
Manager), GDSS, and Participants. Note that the latter lane 
does not mean that there is only one participant involved. 
The GDSS distributes the relevant information and decision 
tasks to the participants. It also collects the decision results 
and feedback, applies respective analysis such as consistency 
checks on the results, and prepares the group result through 
an aggregation of the individual decision results.  
The participants check the information and decision tasks 
assigned to them by the GDSS. Following that they complete 
the decision tasks, prepare feedback, and return all results 
(such as judgments of the decision alternatives) to the GDSS 
for further processing. Recall that the participants’ feedback 
will influence the further process continuation. The next 
steps of the decision process are performed by the GDSS. 
Following the collection of the participants’ tasks results and 
feedback an analysis of the now available information base is 
performed. The analysis result is used to compute the group 
decision and corresponding feedback information for the 
group members. The sub-process “Prepare group decision 
and group feedback” subsumes that the GDSS distributes the 
group decision and feedback information to the participants 
who are called to give further feedback. The system collects 
and checks the participants’ feedback and uses the further 
updated information base in order to prepare the iteration 
decision. It is the decision manager’s responsibility to decide 
if the process is terminated or if it is re-iterated again. 
IV. 
CURRENT STATUS AND CONCLUSIONS 
The research focus has, so far, been on a high-level 
integration framework for the combined use of process 
modeling techniques and GDSS. In the next steps, the 
framework will be refined especially in two directions. First, 
the BPMN standard will be investigated. It will be studied if 
group decision processes in the crisis management domain 
can be properly modelled based on BPMN. For this purpose 
international crisis management studies will be considered, 
by including the Deepwater Horizon case [1] and the Elb 
River Flood [4] of the year 2002. Also, the possibility to 
combine BPMN-based process models with other modeling 
concepts such as decision trees will be evaluated. The 
possibility to include domain specific modeling primitives 
will be an area of the intended study, too. 
Another direction of future refinements will address 
technical integration issues and novel enhancements of 
GDSS systems. New concepts are required that will enable 
GDSS systems to act like process execution engines. This 
includes the GDSS capabilities to perform information 
distribution activities, domain-specific feedback gathering 
and processing activities, and group moderation activities. In 
this context we will investigate if the GDSS enhancements 
can be achieved through the common approach to map 
BPMN models into the execution oriented BPEL language.  
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Anastas, C. Sonich-Mullin, B. Fried, “Designing Science in 
a Crisis: The Deepwater Horizon oil spill”. Environmental 
Science and Technology, vol. 44(24), July 2011, pp. 9250–
9251, DOI: 10.1021/es200963x 
[2] T. Comes, M. Hiete, N. Wijngaards, and F. Schultmann, 
“Decision maps: A framework for multi-criteria decision 
support under severe uncertainty,” Decision Support Systems, 
vol. 53, Elsevier, 2011, pp. 108-118  
[3] J. K. Esser, “Alive and Well after 25 Years: A Review of 
Groupthink Research”, Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, vol. 73, nos. 2/3, February 1998, pp. 116–
141,  DOI: 10.1006/obhd.1998.2758. 
[4] German Committee for Disaster Reduction, „Flood Risk 
Reduction in Germany - Lessons Learned from the 2002 
Disaster in the Elbe Region”, Bonn, February 2004, ISBN: 3-
933181-34-8 
[5] N. Kapucu and V. Garayev, “Collaborative Decision-Making 
in Emergency and Disaster Management,” International 
Journal of Public Administration, vol. 34, Taylor & Francis 
Group, 
May 
2011, 
pp. 
366–375, 
DOI: 
10.1080/01900692.2011.561477. 
[6] D. Mendonça, R. Rush, and W. A. Wallace, “Timely 
knowledge elicitation from geographically separate mobile 
experts during emergency response,” Safety Science, vol. 35,  
Elsevier 
Science, 
June 
2000, 
pp. 
193-208, 
DOI: 
10.1016/S0925-7535(00)00031-X. 
[7] Object Management Group. Business Process Model and 
Notation (BPMN): Version 2.0. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0   
[8] A. Harand, G. Peinel, and T. Rose, “Process Structures in 
Crisis Management”, Proc. of the 6th Conference on Future 
Security, Berlin, September 2011, ISBN 978-3-8396-0295-9 
[9] T. L. Saaty, “The Analytic Hierarchy Process: Planning, 
Priority Setting, Resource Allocation,” New York: McGraw 
Hill, April 1980, ISBN 0-07-054371-2 
[10] Y. Song and Y. Hu, “Group Decision-Making Method in the 
Field of Coal Mine Safety Management Based on AHP with 
Clustering,” in Proceeding of the 6th International ISCRAM 
Conference, J. Landgren and S. Jul, Eds. Gothenburg, 
Sweden, May 2009,  ISBN - 978-91-633-4715-3 
[11] H. Thimm, “Cloud-Based Collaborative Decision Making: 
Design Considerations and Architecture of the GRUPO-MOD 
System,” in International Journal of Decision Support System 
Technology, vol. 4, 2012, pp. 39-59, DOI: 10.4018/IJDSST. 
[12] H. Thimm and R. Katura, “An adaptive group decision pattern 
and its use for industrial security management”, American 
Journal of Environmental Protection, vol. 1 (1), Science 
Publishing 
Group, 
December 
2012, 
pp. 
1-8, 
DOI: 
10.11648/j.ajep.20120101.11 
[13] M. Turoff, M. Chumer, B. Van de Walle, and X. Yao, “The 
Design of a Dynamic Emergency Response Management 
Information System,” in Journal of Information Technology 
Theory and Application (JITTA), vol. 5, January 2004, pp. 1-
36. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

