Hedonic Motivation of Chatbot Usage
Wizard-of-Oz Study based on Face Analysis and User Self-Assessment
Judith Eisser and Stephan B¨ohm
CAEBUS Center of Advanced E-Business Studies
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences
Wiesbaden, Germany
Email: {judith.eisser, stephan.boehm}@hs-rm.de
Abstract—Ever since, the Internet enabled conversations by
supporting interactive features and the presentation of product-
or service-related information accumulated on websites, micro
pages or portals. More recently, especially user groups of younger
generations turn towards messaging applications for commu-
nication. Companies adjust to this trend of more messaging-
oriented forms of interaction by implementing new channels
of customer communication such as chatbots. In this work, a
comparative analysis is conducted to uncover the impact of
using traditional websites or chatbots for promoting a product in
an impulse purchase situation with special attention to hedonic
motivation. The aim is to measure the impact of the information
delivery option (website or chatbot) on the customers’ emotions as
expression of hedonic motivation. More speciﬁcally, this paper is
addressed to answering the question whether chatbot utilization
result in a different hedonic motivation and in turn a higher
manifestation of positive emotions than tradition website usage.
The chatbot-based scenario is implemented by using a Wizard-
of-Oz (WOz) experimental approach. The results provide ﬁrst
insights on the effects of chatbot usage on emotions in electronic
commerce environments: while the chatbot users showed slightly
higher happiness scores, no statistically signiﬁcant impact could
be discovered and there does not seem to be a statistically
signiﬁcant inﬂuence of chatbot usage on the purchase decision.
Keywords–Chatbots; Conversational Commerce; Comparative
Analysis; Wizard-of-Oz; Emotion Recognition; Hedonic Motivation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, online communication has shifted from a
one-way to a conversational approach [1]. Internet users do
not only receive information but also generate content them-
selves and interact in networks, e.g., via online communication
applications. In this network environment, information is not
only pushed, but also actively pulled by the users suited to
their speciﬁc requirements [2]. In doing so, they expect to be
treated individually and to be singularly addressed while their
questions are adequately answered [3]. Hence, it can be said
that the common website behavior of searching and ﬁnding
transforms into a process of asking and receiving answers.
Companies are adapting to this transformation by increasingly
offering and sharing information, as well as promotions in
online channels allowing for two-way conversations. A current
trend is the implementation of chatbots. According to Mittal
et al., chatbots are conversational programs for question-and-
answer processes, which interact with the users in the form of
ever-present assistants. Such systems can be based on pattern
matching and natural language processing methods or artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) techniques [4]. These days, big global play-
ers, such as Google and Microsoft are conducting extensive
research in order to advance this technology [5], which shows
the current interest and importance of the technology.
Within e-business, chatbots can not only be used for
focused product inquiries but also for product comparison or
to assist users within the product decision-making processes
[6]. Currently, more than a hundred thousand unique chatbots
are being offered (with the Facebook messenger being the
most popular implementation platform) [7]. As reported in [8],
more than one ﬁfth of the population in the US has used such
chatbots offerings already. According to a study by Oracle and
Coleman Parks, 80 percent of the queried companies either
already have implemented or plan to implement a chatbot into
their marketing strategy in order to improve their customer
experience by 2020 [9]. Thus, the relevancy of the topic
becomes apparent.
In ligth of the above, this article is about the assessment
of hedonic motivation within impulse purchase situations fo-
cusing on chatbot and website utilization. It proceeds with
a research background where conversational commerce and
chatbot utilization are examined as well as the according
role of hedonic motivation. In Section III, our approach on
measuring hedonic motivation based on a Wizard-of-Oz testing
scenario is presented. Section IV contains details concerning
the experimental study while the results are presented in
Section V. There, we discuss general ﬁndings, the differences
between emotion self-assessment and face analysis, as well as
the analysis concerning hedonic motivation. In the last section,
a conclusion is given concerning the study at hand.
II.
RESEARCH BACKGROUND
The analysis of the hedonic motivation of chatbot usage
requires a more comprehensive understanding of the principles
of the emerging conversational commerce and the concept of
hedonic motivation. For this reason, we will provide a more
detailed background on the related fundamentals and related
scientifc work for these two topics in the following.
A. Chatbot Usage and Conversational Commerce
Chatbots are dialogue programs in the form of composed
pattern matching and natural language processes or artiﬁcial
intelligence techniques [4], which can effectively be used for
interactive question answer processes [10]. There are early
examples of such systems that date back into the mid-1960s
such as the popular ELIZA system and many more systems that
have been discussed in literature (e.g., Albert One, ALICE)
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[11]. Pattern matching or rule-based processing of chatbots
are searches for key words, word roots and synonyms for
example. They are noted in code in order to predeﬁne possible
conversation ﬂows to generate answers to questions [11]–[13].
In this so-called retrieval-based approach, the chatbot produces
answers from a predeﬁned database according to rules. Artiﬁ-
cial intelligence techniques in the form of generative models
go beyond this logic of predeﬁnition by allowing for learning
processes where the bot program generates unique answers via
knowledge assembly and by analyzing the current context [14].
Tailored to interaction with humans –consumers in this case–,
they produce and understand written input in natural language.
This human interface offers an interesting alternative compared
to the traditional information architecture, where information
is structured and formatted to interact with screens. Without
particular setup requirements, it can be easily interacted with
and utilized [15]. Application ﬁelds for chatbots can be educa-
tional, customer service or e-commerce scenarios for example
[16].
Within e-commerce, one trend gaining interest is con-
versational commerce [17]. Chris Messina, chatbot industry
expert and trend watcher, created the industry-wide accepted
deﬁnition (e.g., [18][19]) for conversational commerce, which
is about ”utilizing chat, messaging, or other natural language
interfaces (i.e., voice) to interact with people, brands, or
services and bots that heretofore have had no real place in the
bidirectional, asynchronous messaging context” [20]. Commer-
cial chatbot conversation can be seen as a part of conversational
commerce, as the latter can be seen as a combination of
messaging apps or rather human-bot chatting and shopping in
the form of conversational customer interaction [17]. As such,
chatbots transport the previously mentioned idea of asking and
and receiving answers into e-commerce allowing consumers to
naturally engage with companies in a commercial context like
they are used to through common interpersonal conversation.
This rather natural engagement capability can be seen as one
of the main advantages of conversational commerce alongside
the easy accessibility and the already familiar interface within
messaging apps [17]. Utilized in such an e-commerce context,
chatbots can also improve customer satisfaction [21].
B. Hedonic Motivation in Conversational Commerce
Hedonic shopping can be operationalized through several
items, such as joy, excitement, arousal, festive, escapism,
fantasy, and adventure, as stated for example in [22]–[26]. A
value for the total hedonic motivation can be calculated as the
sum of positive and negative emotions [27]. This value is a key
element of the consumer experience [28][29]. Emotions are
a signiﬁcant part of the Stimulus-Organism-Response (SOR)
process [30][31], which is used in marketing science or to
measure hedonic beneﬁts [32][33]. The aim of the consumer
is to select hedonic experiences, which maximize positive
emotions [34]. The emotional aspect of hedonism can be
seen as essential for user satisfaction in information systems
[35]. Deﬁned as wish to satisfy a need, hedonic motivation
can be speciﬁed as emotional experience [31][36], which
has been found to directly inﬂuence the consumers’ positive
emotional responses [31]. Further studies examined the aspects
of emotions within chatbot usage in general (e.g., [37][38])
or the inﬂuence of hedonic values for e-service quality [39]
for example. To the authors knowledge, there is no existing
study combining these aspects by analyzing emotions and
chatbot utilization in an e-shopping situation. In our study, the
multidimensional construct emotion is operationalized solely
as a physically measurable expression based on the seven
basic universal emotions as discovered by Ekman and Heider
[40]: Anger, fear, sadness, disgust, surprise, contempt and
happiness. Happiness, as emotional aspect, will be focused
on in our study. This is because, as per deﬁnition, within
hedonic motivation positive emotions shall be maximized from
consumer side and thus represent an important part of the
consumers’ hedonic motivation [31].
Impulse purchasing can be seen as hedonic purchase be-
havior and consumer emotions have been found to inﬂuence
impulse buying behavior – happiness or excitement being a
positive inﬂuence [31]. Hence, this study examines the impact
of chatbot usage in an impulse purchase situation. For this
purpose, a comparative study based on a traditional webpage-
based e-shopping scenario and a chatbot enhanced variant is
used to analyze for differences in the resulting customers’
hedonic motivation.
Different digital offers such as social network sites, social
media in general, shopping sites or dialogue systems inherit
different content and are set up differently as well thus can
be examined individually concerning the inﬂuence of hedo-
nic aspects (e.g., [35][41]). In light of the current trend of
implementing conversational offers into commerce contexts,
we expect diverging manifestations of happiness. Thus, we
think that there are different levels of hedonic motivation
when consumers interact solely with product webpages or
get assistance from chatbots. While previous research already
integrated hedonic motivation into impulse buying behavior
research and chatbot research in the form of chatbot metrics
frameworks (e.g., [31][42]), there is a research gap concerning
the combination of these aspects, which this study aims to
bridge. Hence, the purpose of this study is to explore the dif-
ferences in hedonic motivation in the form of happiness scores
between traditional product websites and chatbot enhanced
customer interaction in an impulse purchase situation. More
speciﬁcally, the aim of our experimental study is to empirically
validate the following research questions:
1)
Which levels of hedonic motivation do consumers
have when interacting with a chatbot or browsing a
website for product information?
2)
Can happiness as an operationalization of hedonic
motivation be consistently measured by face analysis
and self-assessment?
3)
To what extent does the use of chatbots as a way to
enhance product websites have a measurable impact
on hedonic motivation in impulse purchase situa-
tions?
III.
APPROACH
The study at hand uses a Wizard-of-Oz testing approach
to simulate the integration of an advanced chatbot system on
an e-commerce website. Emotional self-assessment and a face
analysis software for video ﬁles are used to measure the user’s
state of happiness in our experimental scenario. Before we
describe the conﬁguration of the study in more detail, some
methodological details of our approach will be described in
this section.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

A. Wizard-of-Oz (WOz) Testing in Chatbot Research
The WOz method does not only represent a way to in-
vestigate immature technology in a prototypical manner but
it is also a way to avoid prohibitively high costs and time
efforts [43] and to enable a testing environment without the
need of coding is the utilization of a Wizard-of-Oz approach.
The approach is deﬁned as a kind of simulation where re-
searchers ”conceal themselves from research participants and
use communications technology to pretend that a prototype
or incomplete computer-based conversational system is fully
functioning” [43].
In order to conduct a WOz-study, several aspects can be
taken into consideration according to Eynon et al. [43]:
•
Prototype functionality and ﬁdelity of the prototype,
•
technical handling of the prototype by the wizard,
•
wizard visibility and control,
•
user knowledge concerning the WOz setup,
•
research design (Controlled experiment vs. uncon-
trolled exploration).
Wizard-of-Oz dialogues as utilized for chatbot examina-
tions hold the advantage of resembling realistic behavior,
which can appear to be more capable than already existing
dialogue systems [6]. They can be seen as a feasible way
to cope with the lack of technological advantage in order to
assess chatbots as a suitable way of product promotion [10].
They become relevant because rule-based Chatbot dialogue
systems as developed until today are limited in functionality
since they are bound to a pre-deﬁned database [14] and not able
to learn. AI-based chatbot solutions are in an early stage [14]
and the implementation of such systems can be a challenging
task requiring comprehensive technical knowledge. Hence, this
study made use of a WOz approach to simulate an advanced
chatbot solution without the need for a complex technical
implementation.
Commonly used in chatbot research, for example when
setting up interactive question answering systems in the form
of a chatbot [10], when examining the role of memory in goal-
oriented dialogue systems [6] and when studying non-verbal
processing in general [44], the method is being utilized for
the study at hand as well. According to the components by
Eynon et al., the prototype is set up as a fully functional web-
based chatbot with a trained wizard controlling the prototype,
who is hidden from the participants in an environment of tight
experiment control [43].
B. Measuring Hedonic Motivation
Two methods of hedonic motivation measurement are uti-
lized in this study: emotion self-assessment by the participants
and face analysis via a cloud-based face analysis tool. Both
practices are being explained in the following.
1) Emotion Self-Assessment: Hedonic motivation can be
measured on the basis of different aspects such as the levels
of excitement, arousal or escapism (e.g., [22]–[26]). For the
study at hand, emotions and within this construct happiness
in particular is the relevant aspect to consider. One way of
assessing emotions within a research study is the distribution of
suitable questionnaires before, during and/or after the session
[45]. This written-down method of emotion self-assessment is
applied in this study in order to control for possible mismatches
Figure 1. Exemplary Microsoft Emotion API face analysis result. Reprinted
from Kearn [49]. Copyright by Microsoft [2016].
in comparison to the face analysis results – the participants
conducted it prior to the session and immediately after pre-
deﬁned stimuli or impulses. The individual manifestations of
the basic emotions as deﬁned by Ekman and Heider [40] were
requested via a ten-stage rating scale before converting them
to values between zero and one. This was necessary in order to
be consistent with the value range of the emotion data derived
from the face analysis tool.
2) Emotion Tracking and Face Analysis: On a physical
level, the emotions as the individual manifestations of the
different emotional values according to Ekman and Heider
[40], can be assessed via face analysis. On basis of this
emotion classiﬁcation, the face muscles and the according
mimic manifestations are being analyzed and categorized into
the seven distinct emotions [46]. Such an analysis can be
conducted based on video material of the participants’ faces
recorded during experimental sessions where individuals are
exposed to deﬁned impulses to stimulate the expected reaction
or emotion. Face analysis requires complex algorithms and
massive data processing but is also available by cloud-based
services like the Microsoft Cognitive Services. The service
used in this paper is the Microsoft Emotion API, which
provides emotional scores based on the seven basic emotions
fear, anger, sadness, disgust, surprise, contempt and happiness.
Additionally, the service calculates a neutral score indicating
an absence of the other seven emotions within the measurement
out of face recordings of the participants. The scores are to
be interpreted as normalized scores ranging from zero to one
– thus, the program shows the relative scores of the eight
different emotional states indicating the predominant ones.
This information is not to be confused with emotion intensity,
which no information is given for within the tool results
[47]. According to Microsoft, the two emotions contempt and
disgust are only experimental for now [48]. Since neutral can
be seen as the absence of the other emotional scores, the focus
will be on those other scores rather than on neutral.
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL STUDY
Based on the theoretical and methodological foundation
above, an experimental study on the hedonic motivation of
chatbot usage is presented in this section. The study is a work-
in-progress and was based on an experimental setup with a
convenience sample. Besides validating the research questions
presented in Section II, the aim of the study is to derive some
more insights on the applicability of the discussed test setups
and tools for chatbot prototyping and emotion measurement.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

A. Wizard-of-Oz Setup
Starting point of the experimental study was the devel-
opment of a chatbot concept. The utilized chatbot prototype
for our WOz study has been designed as a web-based bot.
This means that it searches for key words in the form of
full words, their lemmas, roots and synonyms. The according
information needs to be fed into the chatbots database prior
to utilization. Based on this data and the deﬁned rules, the
chatbot responds with a preset answer. A fallback answer has
been deﬁned to handle questions new to the chatbot to ensure
consistency concerning the user experience (”Unfortunately, I
did not entirely understand you. How exactly can I help you?”).
This inquisitive aspect can be built in in case of insufﬁcient
information in order to be able to give an adequate answer
[12]. Such a response does not only inform the user that the
system cannot process his question but also prompts the user
to rephrase or state his question more clearly. Figure 2 shows
an exemplary chat snippet from the study, which has been
translated from German into English language.
Figure 2. Exemplary chatbot dialogue snippet
For reasons of simpliﬁcation, our concept does not adapt its
behavior and answers based on previous customer input. This
means that there are no adaptable templates deﬁned but a static
set of predeﬁned responses. Based on the concept above, the
chatbot was set up with the Wizard-of-Oz method, where no
program converses with the user. The response is controlled by
a human counterpart —the wizard—, who applies pre-set rules
implemented prior to application. The WOz setup of this study
is an own web solution running via the chatserver Arrowchat
[50] ﬁlled with predeﬁned JavaScript commands, which are
elicited by a human via a control board. The wizard can
respond to the participants interaction by selecting pre-deﬁned
phrases from this control board. According to these commands,
answer sentences are being shown to the participant through
a chat interface. The wizard could also type in text as a fall-
back feature if the set of predeﬁned phrases is not sufﬁcient.
However, this option was only used as an exception to cope
with unpredicted user behavior.
The experimental setup of the study is shown in Figure 3.
Two separated rooms were used. The survey, brieﬁng of the
participant on the course of the study, as well as an interview
were conducted in room 1. After the study preparation the
wizard left room 1 to operate the control panel and supervise
the experiment from room 2. The participants were left unat-
tended to complete the deﬁned task the chatbot system. They
were not informed to participate in a WOz scenario and did
not know that they interact with the wizard in room 2. Two
Figure 3. Wizard-of-Oz experiment setup
laptops have been utilized – all participants were positioned
in front of the ﬁrst to be recorded and to interact with the
chatbot or the product webpage under the same conditions.
The second laptop has been used by one of the authors to act
as the chatbot wizard.
B. Study Procedure
For the laboratory situation, the participants were randomly
assigned to conduct a product information process either via
chatbot (UCHAT) or via a product information detail page
(UPAGE). The sessions were divided into ﬁve procedural steps:
1)
Introduction to the study with its purpose and signing
of the consent form concerning the recording and data
processing method via the utilized cloud-based face
analysis tool.
2)
Questionnaire with socio-demographic aspects such
as age, job position and education as well as personal-
ity traits according to the Big Five approach (the ﬁve
dimensions of personality: openness, conscientious-
ness, extraversion, agreeableness and neuroticism) by
Rammstedt et al. [51].
3)
Screen capturing and emotion tracking while accom-
plishing the task of browsing a product overview
website for a speciﬁc product (digital cameras).
4)
Simulation of an impulse purchase situation by dis-
playing a product promotion in a pop-up window on
the webpage.
5)
Structured interview with detailed questions concern-
ing the experience during the session.
Steps two to four were time-constraint by preset appearance
times set on the utilized laptop for comparability. The simula-
tion of the impulse purchase situation by the pop-up windows
consisted of two deﬁned stimuli or impulses that initiated and
ended this phase of the experiment:
•
Impulse 1 (I1): Overlay of a speciﬁc product pro-
motion (SD card) via a pop-up or product overview
website ﬁve seconds after accessing the site. Showing
an instruction to open the product detail page or
the chatbot respectively according to their afﬁliation
(UCHAT or UPAGE).
•
Impulse 2 (I2): Exposure to a purchase solicita-
tion with question concerning the purchase decision.
Showing an instruction to answer to the according
question of the chatbot (UCHAT) or click accordingly
within the appearing pop-up (UPAGE).
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

The participants were not informed about the precise time
constraints in order to simulate a natural product information
process situation. Since neutral can be seen as the absence of
the other emotional scores, the emotion assessment focus was
on those other scores rather than on neutral.
For the analysis of the data, videos, audio ﬁles as well
as questionnaire responses, several steps were necessary: The
video preparation consisted in a (1) systematic ﬁling of the two
videos per participant (screen capturing and face recording),
(2) the cutting according to the two impulses I1 and I2, thus
creation of two 20-second videos per testing person, (3) the
appropriate formatting and labeling of the video ﬁles for the
cloud-based analysis, (4) the retrieval of the emotion data
by processing the video ﬁles through the Microsoft Emotion
API and (5) the transferral of the raw analysis data into the
data processing program and statistical analysis. For the audio
interviews, the data was transcripted and analyzed. Alongside
with the quantitative survey data, the material was statistically
analyzed and descriptively evaluated as stated in the following
sections.
C. Sample Description
Among the 57 participants, the chatbot was used by 28 (=
UCHAT group) while 29 formed the control (UPAGE) group
by using the unassisted product webpage only. Table I gives
an overview of the demographics of the sample. The sum of
the ﬁgures does not always add up to 57 because of missing
values in the datasets.
TABLE I. DEMOGRAPHIC SAMPLE DESCRIPTION
T otal
UCHAT
UP AGE
Gender
Female
39
38
21
Male
16
9
7
Mean age (in years)
25.4
24.6
26.1
Educational level
Student
35
19
16
Pupil
5
1
4
Other
15
7
8
Highest educational degree
University level
15
7
8
A-Level
37
17
20
High School
3
1
2
Chatbot experience
No
37
14
23
Yes
19
14
6
Most of the participants are female, in their mid-twenties,
A-level (university entry qualiﬁcation) university students and
do not have prior chatbot experiences yet. This is due to
the fact that this experiment was conducted in an university
environment based on a convenience sample. This has to be
considered with regard to the generalizability of the ﬁndings.
However, as this pre-study focuses more on the general mea-
surability of effects and the applicability of the suggested
approach, the composition of the groups is not an issue here.
V.
RESULTS
The experimental study generated data that required further
analysis to answer the research questions and aims that have
been deﬁned above. Before the according results on emotion
measurement and chatbot impact are presented, we introduce
this section with some more general ﬁndings for the UCHAT
and UPAGE groups in the sample.
A. General ﬁndings
During the session, much information has been obtained
concerning the participants’ experience with online shopping
in general (frequency of online product information searches
and purchases) as well as with chatbot dialogues, their opinion
on the product search conducted during the session (purchase
decision, inﬂuencing factors on the decision, their feeling
during the conduct, their own preferred way of informing
themselves online) and their emotional states prior to the
session and after impulses I1 and I2.
Table II shows the manifestations of the aspects stated
above for the two groups UCHAT and UPAGE. It can be seen
that most are experienced and active e-commerce users. Most
of the users in both groups are using the Internet for searching
product information more than once a week. The participants
are even more active in purchasing online as the majority in
both groups purchases products online at least one a week.
TABLE II. UCHAT AND UPAGE ONLINE EXPERIENCE
Aspect
UP AGE
UCHAT
Frequency of
Fewer than once a month
5
3
online product search
1-2 times a month
11
4
At least once a week
8
7
Daily
5
3
Frequency of
Fewer than once a month
0
2
online purchases
1-2 times a month
8
5
At least once a week
18
18
Daily
3
1
Missing values occur due to not mentioned aspects within
the structured interviews at the end of the session. It can be
seen that according to the Spearman correlation analysis, the
two differences in online experience between the two groups
are not signiﬁcant (p = .179 for the frequency of online
information and p = .864 for the frequency of online purchases)
meaning that both groups did not differ concerning online
expertise.
Other interesting aspects seemingly diverging are presented
in Table III. It can be seen that differences occured between the
two groups with regards to chatbot experience, the perceived
feeling of being well-informed, having missed information
within the information process, the inﬂuence of the received
information on the purchase decision and the individual pur-
chase decision.
TABLE III. SELECTED UCHAT AND UPAGE EXPERIMENT RESULTS
Aspect
UP AGE
UCHAT
Existing chatbot experience
No
23
14
Yes
6
13
Feeling of being well-informed
No
3
6
Yes
26
19
Feeling of having missed information
No
23
15
Yes
6
12
Feeling of a good experience
No
13
7
Yes
12
19
Positive purchase decision
No
20
16
Yes
9
12
Decision inﬂuenced by information
No
14
9
Yes
12
12
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

The differences in feeling of having missed information and
the inﬂuence of the given information on the purchase decision
seem ample – however, none of the differences are statistically
signiﬁcant (Pearson Chi square p-values higher than 0.01).
B. Self-Assessment and Face Analysis
The face analysis of the video material generated time-
coded emotion values. We focused the data analysis on 10
seconds before and after the deﬁned impulses I1 and I2. Figure
4 shows an exemplary data ﬂow from the Microsoft Emotion
API tool. In this study, this data is compared to the self
assessed emotional manifestations of the participants.
Figure 4. Exemplary happiness score ﬂow around impulse I1
The scores for the happiness value were extracted from
the data and mean values for the scores have been calculated
to represent the observation time frame for each participant
and the respective two stimuli. This data is then compared to
the self-assessed emotion manifestations. Table IV shows the
speciﬁc happiness scores the participants possessed during I1
and I2 of the online face analysis tool and the self-assessment
in order to assess the differences the tool measured and
perceived hedonic motivation of the participants.
TABLE IV. HAPPINESS SCORES VIA FACE ANALYSIS (FA) AND
SELF-ASSESSMENT (SA)
Stimulus
F A
SA
Impulse 1 (I1)
Mean
0.234
0.272
SD
0.353
1.698
Impulse 2 (I2)
Mean
0.278
0.354
SD
0.382
1.984
The happiness score means presented in table IV are shown
as calculated means over the whole timespan across either
I1 or I2 and are displayed as values between 0 and 1. SD,
the standard deviation, is displayed as percentage points. Both
kinds of assessment show signiﬁcant differences (p lower than
.001 for both I1 and I2). Thus, the results of online face
analysis and emotion self-assessment diverge. This is a prelim-
inary result and needs more investigation. However, it might
give some indication that the self-assessed emotion cannot be
represented by a mean value of an emotional status measured
over time, additional factors forming the emotional status after
the stimulus or different value interpretations (predominance
vs. intensity).
C. Hedonic Motivation Analysis
Table V shows the happiness scores the participants pos-
sessed during I1 and I2 in order to assess the differences in he-
donic motivation of the participants concerning their afﬁliation
to the UCHAT and UPAGE groups. The self-assessed scores
have been taken for analysis because of the diverging results
as discovered in sub section B and the resulting decision to
focus on one of the two methods. When comparing the mean
values, the happiness scores are slightly higher in the group of
the sample that was assisted by the chatbot. This could indicate
that the usage of chatbots has a positive impact on customers’
hedonic motivation. However, a more comprehensive analysis
reveals, that the difference is not statistically signiﬁcant (p =
.55 for I1, p = .148 for I2).
TABLE V. HAPPINESS SCORES OF UCHAT AND UPAGE
Stimulus
UCHAT
UP AGE
Impulse 1 (I1)
Mean
0.286
0.258
SD
0.146
0.192
Impulse 2 (I2)
Mean
0.314
0.238
SD
0.184
0.208
In Table VI, the happiness scores for the groups of buyers
and non-buyers can be seen. From a purely descriptive per-
spective it is interesting, that we could observe (1) a slightly
higher increase of happiness within the group of buyers and
(2) a higher mean score for happiness of the buyers compared
to the non-buyers for I2 (purchase question).
TABLE VI. HAPPINESS SCORES OF BUYERS AND NON-BUYERS
Stimulus
Buyer
Non-buyer
Impulse 1 (I1)
Mean
0.333
0.236
SD
0.185
0.151
Impulse 2 (I2)
Mean
0.338
0.239
SD
0.201
0.190
However, also for the purchase decision there is no sig-
niﬁcant difference concerning the means when statistically
analyzed (p = .036 for I1 and p = .068 for I2).
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The study applied WOz testing to analyze the impact of
chatbot usage on hedonic motivation. Data on the emotional
status of the participants was acquired based on face analysis
and self-assessment. Levels of hedonic motivation could be
measured but the data revealed no statistically signiﬁcant dif-
ferences for users with and without chatbot support. Moreover,
there was no statistical signiﬁcant difference between those
groups with regard to the purchase decision in a simulated
impulse purchase situation.
This does not mean that chatbots do not have an impact on
purchase behavior as our observations depend very much on
the study sample and setup. However, our results could give
some ﬁrst indication, that the value add generated by imple-
menting chatbots must address aspects beyond pure enjoyment
or producing ”happier” customers. Another interesting ﬁnding
of the study is that measures of happiness as operationalization
of hedonic motivation by face analysis and self-assessment
did not produce consistent results. As mentioned before, the
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

reasons can be manifold. Obviously, there is a difference
between the analysis of facial expressions within a speciﬁc
time-frame and self-assessments that are based on perceptions
and experiences. Additionally, commercially available tools are
somehow ”black boxes” with regard to the algorithms involved
or the calculation and interpretation of resulting scores. Thus,
researchers must be careful when using an appropriate ap-
proach for emotion detection and measurement.
The study exhibits several limitations. The results may
not be generalizable as the study was conducted based on
a convenience sample as mentioned before. Furthermore, the
impulse purchase situation was simulated with preselected
products and deﬁned impulses, which might have inﬂuenced
the participants’ emotional states. Their opinion of the product
might have overshadowed the potential impact they might
have been exposed to when being assigned to the UCHAT
or UPAGE group. Being limited to the emotional state of
happiness as representative of the aspect of joy as deﬁned
by [22] for example, future research might investigate other
aspects of hedonic motivation in online shopping such as
arousal or escapism.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Rowley, “Just another channel? Marketing communication in e-
business,” Marketing Intelligence & Planning, vol. 17, no. 4, 2006, pp.
332–351.
[2]
C. Gurau, “Integrated online marketing communication: implementation
and Management,” Journal of Communication Management, vol. 12,
no. 2, 2008, pp. 169–184.
[3]
S. Holtz, Public Relations on the Net: Winning Strategies to Inform and
Inﬂuence the Media, the Investment Community, the Government, the
Public, and More!
New York: AMACOM, 2002.
[4]
A. Mittal, A. Agrawal, A. Chouksey, R. Shriwas, and S. Agrawal,
“A comparative study of chatbots and humans,” International Journal
of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication Engineering,
vol. 6, no. 6, 2016, pp. 1055–1057.
[5]
J. G¨unther, “Digitalisation in purchasing - technological and organiza-
tional trends,” Elektrotechnik & Informationstechnik, vol. 134, no. 3-4,
2017, pp. 287–289.
[6]
L. El Asri and et al., “Frames: A corpus for adding memory to goal-
oriented dialogue systems,” in Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2017 Con-
ference, Association for Computational Linguistics, Ed. Stroudsbourg:
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2017, pp. 207–219.
[7]
K.
Johnson,
“Facebook
messenger
hits
100,000
bots,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://venturebeat.com/2017/04/18/facebook-
messenger-hits-100000-bots/ 2017.08.28
[8]
eMarketer, “Alexa, Say What?! Voice-Enabled Speaker Usage to
grow
Nearly
130%
This
Year:
Amazon
controls
70%
of
the
voice-enabled speaker device market,” 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.emarketer.com/Article/Alexa-Say-What-Voice-Enabled-
Speaker-Usage-Grow-Nearly-130-This-Year/1015812 2017.08.28
[9]
Oracle
and
C.
Parkes,
“Can
Virtual
Experiences
Replace
Reality?
The
future
role
for
humans
in
delivering
customer
experience,”
Redwood
Shores.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://blogs.oracle.com/emeapartnercx/can-virtual-experiences-
replace-reality 2017.08.28
[10]
S. Quarteroni and S. Mandandhar, “A chatbot-based interactive question
answering system,” in Proceedings of the 11th Workshop on the
Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue, R. Artstein and L. Vieu, Eds.
Decalog, 2007, pp. 83–90.
[11]
O. V. Deryugina, “Chatterbots,” Scientiﬁc and Technical Information
Processing, vol. 37, no. 2, 2010, pp. 143–147.
[12]
S. Reshmi and K. Balakrishnan, “Implementation of an inquisitive
chatbot for database supported knowledge bases,” Sadhana, 2016, pp.
1173–1178.
[13]
N. Dahlbaeck, A. Joensson, and L. Ahrenberg, “Wizard of oz studies
- why and how,” in Proceedings of the 1st international conference on
Intelligent user interfaces, W. D. Gray, E. Heﬂey, and D. Murray, Eds.
New York: ACM, 1993, pp. 193–200.
[14]
F. Guerin, “Learning like a baby: A survey of artiﬁcial intelligence
approaches,” The Knowledge Engineering Review, vol. 24, no. 2, 2011,
pp. 209–236.
[15]
K. Panetta, “The ABC Technologies Will Change Future Customer
Experience: Today is all about digital business, but CIOs should
look
beyond
it
to
three
transformative
technologies,”
2006.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/the-
abc-technologies-will-change-future-customer-experience/ 2017.08.28
[16]
A. Deshpande, A. Shahane, D. Gadre, M. Deshpande, and P. M. Joshi,
“A survey of various chatbot implementation techniques,” International
Journal of Computer Engineering and Applications, vol. 11, no. 6, 2017,
p. unknown.
[17]
N. Piyush, T. Choudhury, and P. Kumar, “Conversational commerce
a new area of e-business,” in SMART 2016, R. K. Dwivedi, Ed.
Moradabad: Excel India Publishers, 2016, pp. 322–327.
[18]
EY, “Listen closely: your customers are trying to text you something.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.ey.com/gl/en/services/advisory/ey-
listen-closely-customers-are-trying-to-text-you 2017.08.29
[19]
J.
Bruner,
“Chris
Messina
on
conversational
commerce:
The
O’Reilly
Bots
Podcast:
The
2017
bot
outlook
with
one
of
the
ﬁeld’s
early
adopters,”
2017.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.oreilly.com/ideas/chris-messina-on-conversational-
commerce 2017.08.29
[20]
C. Messina, “2016 will be the year of conversational commerce,” 2016.
[Online].
Available:
https://medium.com/chris-messina/2016-will-be-
the-year-of-conversational-commerce-1586e85e3991 2017.08.28
[21]
A. Horzyk, S. Magierski, and G. Miklaszewski, “An intelligent internet
shop-assistant recognizing a customer personality for improving man-
machine interactions,” Recent Advances in Intelligent Information Sys-
tems, 2009, pp. 13–26.
[22]
E. C. Hirschman, “Predictors of self-projection, fantasy fulﬁllment, and
escapism,” Journal of Social Psychology, vol. 120, no. June, 1983, pp.
63–76.
[23]
P. H. Bloch and M. L. Richins, “Shopping without purchase: An
investigation of consumer browsing behavior,” Advances in Consumer
Research, vol. 10, 1983, pp. 389–393.
[24]
J. R. J. Sherry, “A sociocultural analysis of a midwestern American
ﬂea market,” Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 17, no. 4, 1990, pp.
13–30.
[25]
E. Fischer and S. J. Arnold, “More than a labor of love: Gender roles
and christmas shopping,” Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 17, 1990,
pp. 333–345.
[26]
B. J. Babin, W. R. Darden, and M. Grifﬁn, “Work and/or fun: Measuring
hedonic and utilitarian shopping value,” The Journal of Consumer
Research, vol. 20, no. 4, 1994, pp. 644–656.
[27]
J. Kanow and J. Earley, “The hedonistic paradox: Is homo economicus
happier?” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 92, no. 1, 2008, pp. 1–33.
[28]
A. F. Firat, N. Dholaki, and A. Venkatesh, “Marketing in a postmodern
world,” European Journal of Marketing, vol. 29, no. 1, 1995, pp. 40–56.
[29]
B. Schmitt, Experimental Marketing: How to Get Customers to Sense,
Feel, Think, Act, and Relate to Your Company and Brands. New York:
Free Press, 1999.
[30]
K. Scherer, “Emotions as a proceess: Functions, origin and regulation,”
Social science Information, vol. 21, no. 4/5, 1982, pp. 555–570.
[31]
H.-J. Chang, M. Eckman, and R.-N. Yan, “Application of the stimulus-
organism-response model to the retail environment: the role of hedonic
motivation in impulse buying behavior,” The International Review of
Retail, Distribution and Consumer Research, vol. 21, no. 3, 2011, pp.
233–249.
[32]
D. Kahneman, “Objective happiness,” in Well-Being, D. Kahneman,
E. Diener, and N. Schwarz, Eds.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation,
1999, pp. 3–25.
[33]
Kahneman, “Experienced utility and objective happiness: A moment-
based approach,” in Choices, Values and Frames, A. Tversky and
D. Kahneman, Eds.
Cambrigde: Cambridge University Press, 2000,
pp. 673–692.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[34]
N. Frijda, “The laws of emotion,” American Psychologist, vol. 43, no. 5,
1988, pp. 349–358.
[35]
A. Zainal, G. H. Sagala, and R. Muhamad, “The interchanges of
hedonic-utilitarian values toward information system-users satisfaction:
A case of social media users,” Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Contemporary
Education and Comunication Technology, vol. 1, no. 1, 2015, pp. 167–
178.
[36]
M. R. Solomon, Consumer behavior: Buying, having and being. Upper
Saddle River: Pearson and Prentice Hall, 2007.
[37]
E. Cerezo, S. Baldassarri, and F. Seron, “Interactive agents for mul-
timodal emotional user interaction,” in Proc. of IADIS International
Conference Interfaces and Human Computer Interaction, 2007, pp. 35–
42.
[38]
S. Etlinger and A. Altimeter, “The Conversational Business,” Altimeter,
a Prophet Company, Tech. Rep., 06 2017.
[39]
R. Etemad-Sajadi and L. Ghachem, “The impact of hedonic and
utilitarian value of online avatars on e-service quality,” Computers in
Human Behavior, vol. 52, 2015, pp. 81–86.
[40]
P. Ekman and K. G. Heider, “The universality of a contempt expression:
A replication,” Motivation and Emotion, vol. 12, no. 3, 1972, pp. 303–
308.
[41]
C.-P. H. Ernst, J. Pfeiffer, and F. Rothlauf, “Hedonic and utilitarian mo-
tivations of socialnetwork site adoption,” Working papers in Information
Systems and Business Administration, 2013, pp. 1–14.
[42]
M. Kaleem, O. Alobadi, J. O’Shea, and K. Crockett, “Framework for
the formulation of metrics for conversational agent evaluation,” in RE-
WOCHAT, R. E. Banchs, R. Higashinaka, W. Minker, J. Mariani, and
D. Traum, Eds., 2016, pp. 20–23.
[43]
R. Eynon, C. Davies, and W. Holmes, “Supporting older adults in
using technology for lifelong learning: The methodological and con-
ceptual value of Wizard of Oz simulations,” in Proceedings of the 8th
International Confrence on Networked Learning, V. Hodgson, C. Jones,
M. de Laat, D. McConnell, T. Rynerg, and P. Sloep, Eds.
Lancaster:
Lancaster University, 2012, pp. 66–74.
[44]
L. D. Riek, “Wizard of Oz Studies in HRI: A Systematic Review and
New Reporting Guidelines,” Journal of Juman-Robot Interaction, vol. 1,
no. 1, 2012, pp. 119–136.
[45]
G. Buscher and R. Biedert, “Usability testing: Affective interfaces,”
Informatik-Spektrum, vol. 33, 2010, pp. 499–503.
[46]
P. Ekman and W. Friesen, “Measuring facial movement,” Environmental
Psychology and Nonverbal Behavior, vol. 1, 1976, pp. 56–75.
[47]
Microsoft.,
“Documentation:
Emotion
API,”
2017.
[On-
line].
Available:
https://www.microsoft.com/cognitive-services/en-
us/emotion-api/documentation 2017.09.12
[48]
Microsoft,
“Cognitive
Services:
Emo-
tion
API,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://westus.dev.cognitive.microsoft.com/docs/services/5639d931ca73-
072154c1ce89/operations/563b31ea778daf121cc3a5fa 2017.09.12
[49]
M.
Kearn,
“The
many
features
of
Cognitive
Servies
-
Part
1
-
Vision,”
2016.
[Online].
Available:
ttps://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/martinkearn/2016/
06/06/the-many-
features-of-cognitive-services-part-1-vision/ 2017.09.14
[50]
Arrowchat,
“ArrowChat:
JQery/PHP
Chat
Software
and
Face-
book
chat
plugin
for
websites,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.arrowchat.com/ 2017.08.31
[51]
B. Rammstedt, C. J. Kemper, M. C. Klein, C. Beierlein, and A. Loval-
eva, “A short scale for assessing the big ﬁve dimensions of personality,”
Methoden, Daten, Analysen, vol. 7, no. 2, 2013, pp. 233–249.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

