Motivational Features in an Application for Presenting Dysfunctional Movement 
Patterns and for Providing Support in Conducting Exercises 
Marie Sjölinder, Anneli Avatare Nöu 
RISE, Research institutes of Sweden 
Stockholm, Sweden 
e-mail: marie.sjolinder@ri.se, anneli.nou@ri.se 
Vasiliki Mylonopoulou, Olli Korhonen 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: Vasiliki.Mylo@oulu.fi,  Olli.Korhonen@oulu.fi 
Abstract— This paper describes motivational features in a 
mobile application for physiotherapy related exercises. The 
features support goal setting, possibilities to follow progress, 
personalization and possibilities to compare own progress or 
performance 
with 
other 
users. 
During 
the 
iterative 
development of the application, an explorative study was 
conducted where the participants were interviewed about the 
motivational aspects described above. The respondents 
emphasized the importance of goal setting together with the 
physiotherapist and being able to follow progress. With respect 
to being able to compare performance or progress with other 
users, the outcome of our work is in line with previous research 
where comparisons have been rejected. However, people may 
be more positive if the comparison is disguised as a 
gamification element, for example, as a part of a competition 
or in terms of contributing to a group. 
Keywords-movement related disorders; mobile application for 
conduction exercises; motivational theories; social comparison; 
personalization. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Movement related disorders is a common occupational 
disease in the European Union and workers in all sectors and 
occupations are affected [1]. This is an increasing problem 
and one of the most important causes of long-term sickness 
absences. Early detection and early intervention could reduce 
the number of serious movement related problems. By 
gathering and analyzing movement data from large groups of 
people over a long period of time, categorization of different 
movement related patterns can be made. Based on this 
categorization, one person’s movement pattern can be placed 
into one cluster and early signs of problems and movement 
related disorders can be detected before it has started to 
cause problems or pain. Depending on this knowledge, 
relevant and individualized support and exercises can be 
suggested using smartphone applications. However, the 
challenge is to motivate the users to conduct the suggested 
exercises based on individual recommendations from the 
physiotherapist, and to comply with training programs aimed 
at solving possible future problems. 
In this work motivational features were applied in a 
mobile application for physiotherapy related exercises. The 
features were related to goal setting, providing support in 
follow progress, personalization and possibilities to compare 
own performance with others. Interviews and gaining feed-
back from users were conducted as a part of a larger work 
where the application was developed in an iterative way with 
different user groups. The aim with interviews was to gain a 
deeper understanding of how to apply motivational features 
and personalization when developing applications based on 
large amounts of aggregated movement related data. The 
work does not claim to investigate different motivational 
models in a systematic way. Instead, it was an explorative 
study highlighting the use of different social motivational 
aspects in developing an application providing support in 
conducting exercises. In the following text, section 2 
describes the project and the concept that the developed 
application was a part of. Section 3 gives a short overview of 
motivational theories. The categories of motivational 
theories and the concepts that are described are central and 
discussed in terms of possibilities to be applied in the context 
of the developed application. Section 4 presents the outcome 
of the explorative study that was conducted as a part of the 
iterative development. Based on the study, Section 5 
suggests design implications and also gives examples of how 
these features were implemented within the developed 
application. Finally, section 6 discusses the work conducted 
and suggests possible future work. 
II.
AN APPLICATION FOR SUPPORTING PHYSIOTHERAPY 
RELATED EXERCISES
The application, developed as a part of this work, was 
based on the company Qinematic’s software service that 
record and analyze body movements using 3D digital video. 
The users are standing in front of a Kinect sensor and follow 
instructions about movements to conduct. Based on these 
sessions, 3D-data is gathered and stored. As an extension to 
this service a research project was conducted that had two 
aims. The first aim was to develop machine learning 
algorithms to analyze gathered movement data, and the 
second aim was to develop user applications to provide 
information 
about 
dysfunctional 
movement 
patterns, 
facilitate contact with healthcare providers, make it possible 
for physiotherapists to suggest exercises and for the users to 
set goals and follow their progress (Figure 1). Via the 
application, the healthcare provider also had the possibility 
to gather further information by asking health related 
questions to the users. This was done to offer a better and 
more personalized care. As mentioned, the entire 
concept/system consisted of several parts, including 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

machine learning and categorization of dysfunctional 
movement patterns. The work presented here focuses on the 
development of motivational features in the application 
targeted 
towards 
users 
with 
possible 
dysfunctional 
movement patterns. However, the larger concept around the 
application placed other demands related to motivational 
features than when developing applications that only 
support users to be more physically active or conduct 
exercises. 
Figure 1. Application for health providers to the left and to their clients to 
the right.
III.
MOTIVATIONAL THEORIES
This section describes central motivational theories and 
the choices that were made regarding applying some of 
them in the application developed. Theories not applied in 
the application are also described below since they are 
relevant to this domain when the presuppositions for 
developing are different.  
A.
General and Intrinsic Motivational Theories 
Health Belief Model is a psychological model that 
attempts to provide an explanation of health behavior where 
the focus is the individual's beliefs and attitudes. It is based 
on the belief that the individual's perception determines 
his/her success in conducting a behavioral change [2][3]. In 
order for the health-promoting behavior to trigger, there must 
be a stimuli or cue action present. Important factors are: 
readiness to act, severity, barriers, and self-efficacy.  
Self-Determination 
Theory 
(SDT) 
is 
a 
general 
motivational theory. With intrinsic user motivation, it is 
believed that humans by nature show positive qualities, 
effort and dedication. People’s self-motivation and personal 
integrity are innate needs (psychological), but they do not 
happen automatically. There are three needs that have to be 
met for the intrinsic user motivation to be high: autonomy, 
competence and psychological relatedness [4].  
There are also theories that categorize people in different 
stages, like Transtheoretical model (TTM) and Precaution 
Adoption Process Model (PAM). These theories can be used 
to understand the readiness to change of a person. The TTM 
[5] has six stages of change based on how long the person 
sustained the new behavior. On the other hand, PAM [6] has 
seven stages of change based on the psychological state of 
the person. 
B.
Social Motivational Theories 
Bandura's social cognitive theory refers to people 
learning from each other, for example through modelling, 
observation and imitation [7]. The theory has often been 
defined as a bridge between behaviorism (Behaviorism is a 
scientific psychological focus focusing on behavior and 
learning) and cognitive learning theories since it comprises 
motivation, memory and attention. 
Social comparison theory supports that people, in lack of 
standard measurements, compare to others for self-
evaluation [8], self-enhancement [9], self-projection [10], 
and coping [11][12]. However, the relation between 
comparison and competition is rarely studied [13]. 
Regardless the positive results from psychological studies on 
social comparison [11][12], often people refuse engaging in 
comparisons due to social norms [14] or due to different 
perception of the term ”comparison” [15]. 
C.
Goal setting 
Goal setting has proven to be an effective strategy for 
encouraging behavioral change [16]. Locke and Latham [17] 
identify three types of goals: (1) self-set, (2) assigned, and 
(3) participative set. In terms of self-set goals, the individual 
is expected to set goals that are realistic to achieve. These 
type of goals usually have personal significance for the 
individual since it is related to self-efficacy. 
If an assigned goal (a goal set for the individual by 
someone else) is perceived as motivating, the level of 
achievement is comparable to a participatory set goal (a goal 
that the individual has contributed to define). If a goal 
assigned to the individual does not have a clear motivation, it 
leads to lower level of achievement. 
D.
Applying motivational features in a mobile application 
for physiotherapy 
In this work motivational features were applied in a 
mobile application for physiotherapy related exercises. The 
overall aim with the project and the entire system was to 
gather, analyze and visualize large amounts of movement 
related user data. The analyses provided clusters of users 
with similar movement patterns, where the users could see 
which cluster they belonged to. 
Motivational features were applied based on existing 
models of motivation. The intrinsic motivational theories 
described above were difficult to apply within this context 
since data providing information about internal drivers were 
not gathered within this framework. Models related to 
readiness to change could neither be applied in this context. 
These models demand long-term data related to the user’s 
progress towards an actual behavior change. 
Based on the analysis of possible theories to apply, the 
application developed is focused on features based on social 
cognitive theory and goal setting with possibilities to set 
short-term and long-term goals. Features based on social 
comparison theory were also applied, making it possible to 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

relate own performance with performance of other users. The 
social comparison was used to see which cluster a user was 
categorized in, and how many other people that were in the 
same cluster. Social comparison can also be applied in terms 
of possibilities for users in the same clusters to exercise 
together and to support and motivate each other to follow the 
healthcare 
professional's 
exercise 
recommendations. 
However, this feature was not implemented in this first 
version of the application. 
As described previously, the features selected and 
developed were based on practical aspects such as access to 
data and project duration. 
IV.
EXPLORATIVE USER STUDY
As a part of the iterative development, a number of user 
tests were conducted. One of these tests focused on 
motivational features and personalization. It was an 
explorative study where we wanted to get feedback from 
possible users about how we could integrate motivational 
features in a meaningful way.  
There were seven participants in the test, five men and 
two women, in an age range between 33 and 52 years. All 
participants had an education from a university in terms of a 
Master of Science degree or higher.  
The material used were a digital mock-up prototype 
designed in Figma [18] and a scenario description (Figure 2).  
Scenario: You have done the scan and discussed your result with your 
physiotherapist. Imagine that a hip problem has been detected (or another 
problem that you want to choose). You have got a training program from 
the physiotherapist to improve the hip problem and to prevent from hip 
pain. In the web app you can see what exercises to do and how often as 
well as the number of repetitions. You can also see the results of the 
scans. 
Figure 2. The scenario presented to the participants. 
Semi-structured interviews were conducted, and during 
the interview questions were asked about motivational 
features and about personalization. The questions about 
motivation included questions about what kind of features 
that would motivate the participants to use the system and 
what they thought was needed to find motivation to follow 
the exercise plan. The interview also consisted of questions 
about getting feedback about progress and about being able 
to see the progress of other users. Further questions that were 
given 
to 
the 
participants 
were 
questions 
about 
personalization and to which extent they wanted the system 
to be adapted to their preferences and needs. Finally, the 
participants were asked how they expected the system to 
support the individualized treatment in physiotherapy. Each 
interview lasted about an hour. The interviews were 
recorded, and the data collected was transcribed and 
thematically analyzed. 
A.
General motivation 
Being able to see progress: The participants described 
the possibility to be able to see improvement as the most 
motivating feature, for example by comparing their past scan 
data with the results from the latest scan or being able to see 
progress with respect to goals or in terms of reduced pain. 
Being able to follow the progress was described as one of the 
most important features, since the lack of progress could be 
demotivating. In that case, the user could get the feeling of 
doing something wrong and stop doing the exercises. 
Feedback to the user from the physiotherapist: The users 
had full confidence in the physiotherapist when it came to 
planning/rehabilitation, but there was a desire to make the 
planning together with the physiotherapist. The participants 
thought that frequent interaction with the physiotherapist 
would increase motivation to continue doing exercises, 
answer questionnaires and report pain. 
Sharing health related information: From a data sharing 
perspective it was described as important to understand how 
the system used information provided by the user, for 
example answers to health related questions. The participants 
pointed out the importance of a clear connection between 
questions asked by the system and the feedback that was 
given. The participants said that if they could not understand 
this connection, they would hesitate to answer health related 
questions. Being able to report pain and to get feedback 
based on pain level was a described as important. This, since 
one of the main goals for the users is to get rid of the pain. 
Reminders: The possibility to get reminders was also 
described as important among the participants. Especially 
since it is easy to start to forget doing the exercises when 
starting to feel better. However, this feature needs to be 
optional and it has to be possible to enable/disable the 
reminders. 
B.
Goal setting 
Goal setting was perceived as positive among the 
participants. However, they were hesitant towards setting 
their own goals. They perceived the physiotherapists as 
experts and were expecting them to set the goals. 
C.
Social comparison 
Sharing progress with other users is a feature that some 
people like and others strongly dislike. For some, it might be 
too personal to share health related aspects, but for others it 
is a way of sharing experiences and motivate each other. 
In this part, participants were asked to report how it 
would influence their motivation to see other people’s data 
on their persistence in following the physiotherapist’s advice 
(do the exercises regularly) and in terms of filling in 
personalized health related questionnaires. Most of the 
participants (6 out of 7) thought that we asked them to 
compare their health progress, but it was clarified that we 
were asking only about their persistence on sticking to the 
training program or to fill in the health related 
questionnaires. Their reply was generally that they were 
uninterested to know about how persistent other users were 
in following their training programs or filling in their health 
related questions. However, the participants pointed out that 
gamification features in the application could make it more 
interesting to relate to other people’s data. An example 
would be the data used for contributing to a group target or 
used in competing about being the most persistent user. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Table 1 shows some of the comments the participants 
shared about their persistence on sticking to the training 
program or to fill in the health related questionnaires. 
TABLE I. 
COMMENTS FROM THE PARTICIPANTS ABOUT SOCIAL 
COMPAIRISON
Comments about comparing exercise persistence 
A. “If I could see how much I contributed to the group, in a gamified 
group goal” 
B. “So as to get the feeling that you are in this together” 
C. “If we collect points together I would be more interested than 
competing. If other people are persistent then I would be more 
persistence” 
D. “I would be more motivated by competing against the others in the 
group and try to beat them” 
E. “Competition is sometimes good but not here, if you put it closer 
to collaboration” 
F. “It matters more to me if I am doing it than if other people doing 
it”
Comments 
about 
comparing 
questionnaire 
completion 
persistence 
G. “If I was the only one did not fill them in, it would have motivated 
me to fill them in”
Other insights 
H. One participant would be compared only to a standard value or a 
value close to a standard based on a statistical average 
I. One participant compared the results of the scan to a colleague to 
understand how their bodies were crooked, but this was perceived as 
a comparison promoting awareness, and the participant perceived 
their reaction to be influenced by the novelty effect with no value to 
continue comparing future data. 
D.
Personalization 
For the participants, personalization was mainly the same 
as individualized treatment and not related to interaction with 
application. The interpretation of personalization in this case 
was an application that generates data to be used to make 
care related decisions based on the individual’s condition and 
preferences. The users expected the data generation to 
support the physiotherapist in prescribing the most optimal 
exercises or treatment for each specific user, and to monitor 
the rehabilitation progress. In the study, some of the users 
expected an application like this to enable advanced forms of 
personalized feedback from the physiotherapist in terms of 
care progress and potential improvement in condition. Other 
participants expected that an application like this would 
generate data in a way that could trigger a personalized 
intervention based on an input from the user. For example, if 
the user reports increased pain level, the physiotherapist was 
expected to react with a personalized intervention in terms of 
an adjusted treatment plan or with supportive exercise 
guidance. 
V.
INSIGHTS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT
Below we present insights from the work in terms of 
suggestions for development of motivational features for 
applications in the domain. We also give examples of how 
we implemented some of the features. 
Support communication with the physiotherapist: It is 
important that the users get individualized feedback based on 
his/her particular situation. The physiotherapist should 
monitor progress and make the user aware of that his/her 
efforts are seen and contribute to the progress. For this 
application it was considered important to be able to report 
pain so that the physiotherapist could provide feedback based 
on the pain level. The implementation of the pain reporting 
was conducted using a representation of a body and of a pain 
scale (Figure 3). 
Figure 3. Possibilities to provide the physiotherapist with information 
about pain level. 
Provide feedback about progress: Information about 
progress is one of the most important features. This can be 
done by showing improvements in terms of comparing past 
data with present performance, or in relationship to the goals 
that have been set. In this application we implemented and 
visualized the progress of the pain scores (Figure 4). For this 
user group it was important to follow their progress, and also 
hopefully be able to see that the pain decreased. 
Figure 4. History of the user’s pain score. 
Support in setting the goals: Goal setting theory has been 
taken into account in different levels of the application. The
goals need to be realistic and have to be based on domain 
knowledge. Therefore, the goals should be set together with 
the physiotherapist. Besides being realistic, goals need to be 
concreate and measurable, and the users could benefit from 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

having explanations to the goals. Finally, it could be 
motivating to be able to see goals that have been reached. In 
our application we applied the goal setting features at a high 
level in terms of self-defined long-term goals (Figure 5), and 
in terms of possibilities to follow progress in relationship to 
the goals that have been set (Figure 6). We also applied 
gamification for short-term goal setting using medals based 
on the user’s compliance in terms of consistency in 
following the physiotherapist’s advices and in doing the 
exercises (Figure 7). 
Figure 5. Possibilities to set own goals. 
Figure 6. Possibilities to see progress in relationship to the goals that have 
been set. 
Figure 7. Reward for conduction the exercises every day for a week. 
Support from other users: Some users could benefit from 
sharing experiences with people in the same situation and 
being able to hear information about other’s progress. Users 
who are unable to keep up with their new exercise routines 
could benefit from having the possibility to ask for support 
from people that have managed to engage in new routines 
[19]. This without triggering competition if that is unwanted. 
On the other hand, competition might be considered as 
positive in this case. 
Feedback based on data from other users: If the users are 
categorized into different groups, it could be shown which 
group the user belongs to and how many people that are in 
the 
same 
cluster. 
This 
could 
provide 
support 
in 
understanding that there are other people struggling with 
similar issues. Progress could also be based on reported data 
from other users. For example, it could be shown how 
successful the suggested exercises are in terms of fast 
progress. 
Comparison in compliance: Comparison can be used for 
compliance in conducting exercise and in answering health 
related questions. This can be done regardless of progress 
and without users sharing sensitive information about their 
health. For example, rewards for conducting exercises can be 
given and compared. Another comparable measurement is 
“number of days after each other that the exercises have been 
conducted”, this shows the user’s compliance on a daily 
basis. Compliance is also a usable motivation aspect when 
there has been no progress, since it will still be possible to 
give rewards [20]. 
Reminders: Motivational messages and reminders can 
reduce the risk of that exercises will be forgotten when the 
health improves and the pain has vanished. The motivational 
messages should be based on the user’s actions, for example 
when reporting that they had conducted an exercise. 
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Due to the nature of the application, motivational aspects 
related to goal setting and social motivational theories were 
the most relevant ones to apply in the development of the 
application. Goal setting and being able to follow progress 
were important features to include. It was also shown that the 
goals for the user’s exercises needed to be realistic and set 
together with the physiotherapist. This was explained in 
terms of that the physiotherapists were experts in the 
physiotherapy domain and therefore could estimate true 
progress. However, it was important that the goals were 
meaningful and motivating for the user, otherwise it could 
affect compliance and performance [17]. 
With respect to being able to compare performance or 
progress with other users, our results were in line with the 
research done in the psychological field regarding the 
rejection of comparison [14][15]. However, if the 
comparison is disguised as a gamification element, the 
participants thought that people would be more willing to 
compare to others for competing, for feeling a part of a 
group or for contributing to a team. Due to the rejection of 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

comparison in this work, it was impossible to get detailed 
user specification about design of social comparison 
features. For example, if they would like to compare to 
specific individuals, random users of the application or with 
statistics created by all the users. More research is needed to 
understand how we can make the users comfortable to talk 
about comparisons they engage in. 
The need for personalization was mainly related to 
getting qualified feedback from the physiotherapist in terms 
of him/her following care progress and providing an 
updated exercise plan. The frequent communication and 
interaction with the physiotherapist and the individualized 
exercise plan based on input from the users was described as 
an import aspect for sharing health related data with the 
system. The users in our study were willing to provide a 
variety of personal information, as long as it was used in a 
meaningful way that supported their progress and their care 
related decision-making. Other studies have also shown the 
importance of social interaction and of being seen by the 
physiotherapist. For some users this social aspect might be 
the most important motivational feature [20]. 
Finally, one motivational feature that was not initially 
discussed with the participants but came up during the 
interviews was awareness of body posture, and that the 
visualization of the body in itself could be a motivating 
feature. This could provide the user with feedback about 
existing posture and goals showing what to strive for [20]. 
To summarize, this work conveys insights and 
suggestions for developing motivational features in 
applications that supports conducting exercises based on 
recommendations from a physiotherapist. We have not 
investigated the use of different motivational theories in a 
systematic way and do not suggest which motivational 
theories are most successful to apply in this context. In an 
exploratory way and for this particular application, practical 
combinations of different theories were applied. Future 
work needs to be conducted, both in terms of applying other 
motivational theories and in terms of evaluating the applied 
motivational features. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank EIT Digital that funded 
the project that this work was conducted within. Further, we 
would like to thank the participants provided us with 
valuable information during the interviews. 
REFERENCES
[1]
EUMSUC (2008-2013) Musculoskeletal Health in Europe Report 
v5.0. EUMSUC, Executive Agency for Health and Consumers. 
EUMUSC.Net is an information and surveillance network of 22 
institutions across 17 countries, supported by the European 
Community (EC Community Action in the Field of Health 2008-
2013) and EULAR. 
[2]
N. K. Janz and M. H. Becker, “The Health Belief Model: A Decade 
Later,” Health Education Quarterly, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1-47, 1984.
[3]
M. Becker, “The health belief model and personal health behavior,” 
Slack, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 324-508, 1974.
[4]
S. Asimakopoulos et al., “Motivation and User Engagement in Fitness 
Tracking: Heuristics for Mobile Healthcare Wearables,” Informatics, 
vol. 4, no. 1, p. 5,  2017.
[5]
J. O. Prochaska and W. F. Velicer, “The Transtheoretical Change 
Model of Health Behavior,” American Journal of Health Promotion, 
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 38–48, 1997.
[6]
N. D. Weinstein, and P. M. Sandman, “The precaution adoption 
process model and its application,” Emerging theories in health 
promotion practice and research, Jossey-Bass,  pp. 16–39, 2002.
[7]
A. Bandura, “Health promotion from the perspective of social 
cognitive theory,” Psychology and Health, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 623–
649, 1998.
[8]
L. Festinger, “A Theory of Social Comparison Processes,” Human 
Relations, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 117–140, 1954, doi:10.1177/0018-
72675400700202. 
[9]
R. L. Collins, “For better or worse: The impact of upward social 
comparison on self-evaluations,” Psychological Bulletin, vol. 119, no. 
1, pp. 51-69, 1996, doi:10.1037/0033-2909.119.1.51. 
[10] J. Suls, R. Martin, and L. Wheeler, “Social comparison: Why, with 
whom, and with what effect?,” Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 159–163, 2002, doi:10.1111/1467-
8721.00191.
[11] S. E. Taylor, J. V. Wood, and R. R. Lichtman, “It Could Be Worse: 
Selective Evaluation as a Response to Victimization,” Journal of 
Social Issues, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 19–40, 1983.
[12] J. V. Wood, S. E. Taylor, and R. R. Lichtman, “Social Comparison in 
Adjustment to Breast Cancer,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1169–1183, 1985, doi:10.1037/0022-
3514.49.5.1169. 
[13] S. M. Garcia, A. Tor, and T. M. Schiff, “The Psychology of 
Competition: A Social Comparison Perspective,” Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 634–650, 2013, 
doi:10.1177/1745691613504114.
[14] K. J. Hemphill and D. R Lehman, “Social Comparison and Their 
Affective Consequences : the Importance of Comparison Dimension 
and Individual Difference Variables,” Journal of Social and Clinical 
Psychology, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 372–395, 1991.
[15] F. X. Gibbons and B. P. Buunk, “Individual Differences in Social 
Comparison: Development of a Scale of Social Comparison 
Orientation,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 76, 
no. 1, pp. 129–142, 1999, doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.76.1.129. 
[16] S. Consolvo, P. Klasnja, D. W. Mcdonald, and J. A. Landay, “Goal-
Setting Considerations for Persuasive Technologies that Encourage 
Physical Activity,” Persuasive’09, Article 8, 8pgs, 2009.
[17] E. A. Locke and G. P. Latham, “Building a Practically Useful Theory 
of Goal Setting and Task Motivation: A 35-Year Odyssey,” American 
Psychologist 57, pp. 705–717, 2002. 
[18] “Figma: the collaborative interface design tool,” [Online]. Available 
from: https://www.figma.com/ 2018.12.18. 
[19] V. Mylonopoulou, “Design for Health Behavior Change Supportive 
Technology: Healthcare Professionals’ Perspective,” NordiCHI '18, 
pp. 82-92, 2018. 
[20] M. Sjölinder et al., “Perspectives on Design of Sensor Based 
Exergames Targeted Towards Older Adults,” In: Zhou J., Salvendy 
G. (eds) Human Aspects of IT for the Aged Population, Applications 
in Health, Assistance, and Entertainment, ITAP 2018. Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science, vol 10927, Springer, Cham, pp. 395-414, 2018,  
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-92037-5_29. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

