A Simulation System for Tsunami Evacuation Behavior 
in the JR Osaka Station Area 
 
Ryo Ishida 
Graduate School of Science and 
Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
is003082@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Tomoko Izumi 
College of Information Science and 
Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
izumi-t@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Yoshio Nakatani 
College of Information Science and 
Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
nakatani@is.ritsumei.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— In response to an estimation of the likelihood of 
occurrence of the Tonankai and Nankai earthquakes, it is 
predicted that tsunami damage will occur in the JR Osaka 
Station area, the third biggest business center in Japan. The 
purpose of this study is to propose a system that evaluates   
the effectiveness of tsunami evacuation guidance and tsunami 
countermeasures, based on computer simulation of behavior of 
evacuees. There are many companies, department stores, 
hotels, large underground shopping centers and railway/ 
subway stations in this area. Various kinds of elements must be 
considered in order to plan safe evacuation. For example, there 
must be major disruptions between people who try to evacuate 
from buildings and people who try to get out of the 
underground shopping center and buildings. In this paper, the 
first step of the study is reported, that is an evacuation 
simulator to collect data fundamental for devising a method 
for inducing evacuation. 
Keywords-Tsunami; earthquake; simulation; multi-agent 
system; Osaka City; evacuation. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Earthquakes occur so often in Japan that it is particularly 
well known as an earthquake-prone country. At present, 
there are four major earthquakes predicted to occur in Japan 
in the near future: the Tokai earthquake, the Tonankai 
earthquake, the Nankai earthquake, and the Tokyo 
Metropolitan earthquake. In particular, the probability of 
occurrence of the Tokai earthquake in the next 30 years is 
estimated to be 87%, and those of the Tonankai and Tokai 
earthquakes are also estimated to be greater than 60% [1]. If 
these earthquakes actually occur, there must be massive 
damage and many stranded people unable to return home. 
In the Tohoku Great Earthquake in 2011, there was a 
major disruption by over 5 million stranded people in Tokyo 
and the surrounding areas. The same situation is predicted in 
Osaka City, the second largest city in Japan, which would be 
greatly affected by the Nankai and Tonakai earthquake. JR 
Osaka Station, Midosuji (a main street in the city), Osaka 
City Hall, etc., are located in Osaka City. These are specified 
as being within the predicted tsunami flood region, and it has 
been predicted that massive damage to the municipal 
subways and underground shopping centers will occur. 
There are many people, particularly tourists, shoppers and 
commuters, in the area of JR Osaka Station, and there is the 
possibility of about 420,000 people being trapped; 
widespread confusion may occur as they take refuge from a 
tsunami during an earthquake disaster [2]. In addition, 
secondary and tertiary disasters may result from the original 
disaster. They are the disasters that occur subsequent to when 
a disaster occurs. Therefore, there is a need to conduct quick 
and precise evacuation guidance in the context of reviewing 
prevention measures to reduce major damage in Osaka City. 
Evacuation simulation by computer is thought to be effective 
because it is difficult to conduct an experiment of evacuation 
guidance on a real-life scale in the JR Osaka Station area, 
which may result in major traffic congestion and disruption. 
 In order to solve these problems, this research aims to 
construct a working environment that can evaluate the 
evacuation guidance and tsunami countermeasures by 
simulating the behavior of disaster victims on a computer, 
targeting JR Osaka Station and its surrounding areas. 
II. RELATED WORK 
A. Evacuation Simulation: State of the Art 
Various research and development of crowd evacuation 
behavior simulations have been conducted in relation to fire 
and tsunami situations [3][4]. In order to develop a method 
for predicting evacuation behavior that incorporates panic 
conditions, we will examine the state of the art in terms of 
numerical analysis methods. 
1) Physical Model Method 
The physical model method [3] assumes that a crowd will 
take action following specific physical laws. 
This commonly used method regards crowds as fluid, and 
calculates the number of people per speed and space by 
design of the line of flow in buildings, which is called the 
fluid model. In cases when the crowd acts smoothly, this 
method is effective and highly reliable. It is capable of 
simulating situations where the flow of people is blocked, 
by setting the proper parameters using calcuation, but it is 
also necessary to set parameters considering the structure of 
buildings. 
An individual member of the crowd is regarded as a 
single rigid body, and the grains model [3] has been used to 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

model their movement in situations where they move while 
interacting with each other. Compared with the fluid model, 
this is capable of expressing detailed movement, but the 
calculation costs higher. 
Over the past few years, several studies have been 
conducted on simulation models using the potential model 
as a highly physical model [3]. It is possible to simulate 
various evacuation behaviors including blockades by setting 
appropriate potential to the spatial properties of route, 
individuality of evacuees, and the disaster situation, etc., but 
the reliability of results depends on the quality of the set 
potential. It is capable of simulating situations, but there are 
no principles or methods of determining potential 
objectively, so it is not suitable for predicting emergency 
evacuation behavior, where ensuring reliability is important. 
2) Cellular Automaton Method 
The cellular automaton method [3] is used to calculate the 
movement of crowds as a state transition between cells, 
following a simple rule using probability by dealing with 
time and space discretely. Although the rule is simple, it is 
possible to form a complex transition pattern by splitting 
time and space among a large number of cells. In the case of 
evacuation behavior, if state transition between cells is 
modeled as the ensemble behavior of each pedestrian, it is 
possible to implement various patterns of behavior by 
including or ignoring various elements of the determined 
behavioral rules of each evacuee. As a consequence, it is 
capable of reproducing complex state transition. The degree 
of freedom in setting the form of walking space and 
positioning facilities is high, and it is possible to easily 
program and to calculate complex boundary conditions, 
such as smoothly flowing evacuation patterns and blocked 
evacuation patterns. 
This method is suitable for classifying qualitative patterns 
of state transition, but the quantitative prediction is limited. 
It is capable of predicting quantitatively by increasing the 
complexity of the rule, but this is not a strong point of this 
method. 
3) Multi-agent Simulation 
The multi-agent method “constructs a system bottom-up 
from the behavior of many autonomous agents” [4]. It 
regards individual elements constituting the system as 
agents, makes them act autonomously and simulates the 
behavior of the system. This method is sometimes described 
as an advanced type of the cellular automaton method, but it 
is notable for modeling decision-making and actions of 
individual evacuees, and has been practiced in the field of 
artificial intelligence since the late 1980s. 
At present, it is possible to obtain reliable results through 
designing suitable agents, and various kinds of multi-agent 
simulation have been researched. For example, multi-agent 
simulations of evacuation behavior in fire emergencies have 
been developed, and it is planned to diversify to other 
disaster situations. In social technology, multi-agent 
simulations of risk management in nuclear power plants 
have been developed. For earthquake disasters, multi-agent 
simulations have also been used to predict fire suppression 
and the actions of the police, etc. 
B. Related Research 
Various research and development of crowd evacuation 
behavior simulations have been conducted in relation to fire 
and tsunami situations. For example, Hori et al. conducted 
evacuation behavior simulations in underground spaces [3]. 
They 
experimented 
with 
multi-agent 
simulation 
on 
evacuation behavior from a subway station with five 
underground levels to the ground during an earthquake. 
Consequently, they were able to analyze evaluation findings 
such that the evacuation time of individual evacuees is 
uneven and increases according to the number of people. 
 In addition, Watanabe et al. developed an evacuation 
simulation model for tsunami situations using multi-agent 
simulation. During planning of community development of 
disaster prevention for tsunami situations, this research can 
examine both maintenance of material aspects and policy 
[5]; for instance, questions such as what kind of maintenance 
will enable all evacuees to escape within a set period of time. 
III. OUTLINE OF PROPOSED SYSTEM 
A. Current Problems 
Until now, many studies have been made on simulations 
of human behavior using computers [6], [7]. In a 
conventional simulator, the principal purpose is to model the 
actions of evacuees simply as fluid and to simulate this 
movement, but simulators of not only physical interaction 
among evacuees but also social interaction have been 
developed recently. Fundamental questions still remain 
unanswered. As mentioned in Section II, there have been 
many simulations such as those targeting the damaged region, 
those conducted in internal spaces such as tower buildings, 
department stores, underground shopping centers, etc.; but 
there are not many simulators that model evacuation in 
metropolises such as Tokyo and Osaka, in which there are 
many large buildings and various groups of people. In 
addition, large-scale and large-area simulations of evacuation 
behavior which consider evacuee inflow to buildings do not 
exist. For this reason, it is not possible to predict what 
situations will occur in Osaka City during an earthquake in 
terms of collisions between people who try to evacuate to 
buildings and people who try to get out of the underground 
shopping center and buildings. 
Furthermore, there is an immediate need to reconsider 
planning of disaster prevention related to the Nankai 
earthquake affecting Osaka City in the wake of the 2011 
Tohoku Great Earthquake and Tsunami. In particular, 
measures in relation to tsunami resulting from an earthquake 
are a main object to be reconsidered. As the Yodo River is 
located close to JR Osaka Station and Hankyu Umeda station, 
it is predicted that widespread damage and confusion will 
occur in the event of a tsunami. In order to reduce such a 
damage, it is necessary to consider effective tsunami 
countermeasures. Currently, quick and precise evacuation 
guidance within the limited time period before a tsunami 
occurs is effective. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

However, 
private 
companies 
and 
Osaka 
City 
administration do not share a specific control strategy for 
tsunami occurrence. For this reason, it can be assumed that 
firstly, the information needed to formulate a tsunami 
evacuation manual is lacking, and secondly, even if such 
information exists, it is not shared. As a result, individual 
company or institution is making a separate guidance manual 
for evacuation. In the case of actually basing evacuation 
guidance on such manuals, it is not clear whether these 
constitute effective guidance for a particular region. For 
instance, even if tsunami refuge buildings are capable of 
accommodating stranded people, they have a psychological 
resistance to moving higher than the third floor in buildings 
when elevators and escalators make emergency stops after an 
earthquake. In consequence, widespread confusion may 
occur in the case of many people remaining on lower floors 
while further evacuees enter the building. The same collision 
may occur on both the ground and underground levels. In 
order to resolve such problems, it is necessary to make a 
system that is capable of inspecting how evacuees will 
behave considering various evacuation situations. 
 
B. Proposed System 
The purpose of this study is to develop a computing 
system that simulates evacuation behavior of people at the 
time of tsunami precaution in major cities, including in the 
ground and the underground, and buildings. Furthermore, it 
is our goal to provide fundamental data for specifying 
tsunami refuge buildings and selecting the evacuation 
guidance method and system, the guiding location, etc. This 
paper is the first step in this objective, and thus we have 
developed a simulator of evacuation behavior which targets 
people located only on the ground level. Using this, we 
conducted a simulation targeting the area around JR Osaka 
Station and Umeda Station in various situations. 
The following functions are considered in the system. 
1) Functions 
a) Target area: The target area is defined as the area 
within a kilometer radius of JR Osaka Station. 
b) Evacuation route: The evacuation route used by 
evacuees is the shortest distance on the road network to JR 
Osaka Station. Further, it assumes that there are no obstacles 
such as cars on the road. In this research, we used Dijkstra’s 
algorithm [8] to measure the fastest time to finish taking 
refuge, and it is set so that the evacuees do not take any 
detours even if the walking speed decreases due to dense 
crowding. We plan to consider the influence of road traffic  
and some disaster's phychological reaction in future 
research. 
c) Walking speed: The speed used as a standard is 
considered to be 66.6m/min per one person/square meter 
from the relationship between crowd density and speed of 
the evacuees on the evacuation route. It is set so that the 
speed decreases as the congestion of people increases. 
d) Tsunami refuge buildings: In order for evacuees to 
take refuge in places other than the goal, buildings in which 
large numbers of evacuees, such as Umeda Station, 
department stores, and tower buildings etc. are designated. 
As such, buildings specified as tsunami refuge buildings are 
designated as buildings for emergency evacuation. 
e) Evacuee limit: A control panel can be created so 
that the number of evacuees who can be accommodated in 
those buildings can be adjusted, and it can be set up with 
various values. 
f) Graphical representation: The X-axis indicates 
lapsed time and the Y-axis shows the number of evacuees 
who have taken refuge in each building on the time series 
graph of the evacuee number. 
IV. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
A. Development Environment 
This research implements “artisoc 3.0”, a multi-agent 
simulator developed by KOZO KEIKAKU ENGINEERING 
Inc. The rule description language is mainly Microsoft’s 
Visual Basic. Artisoc 3.0 can graphically capture the motion 
of agents with numeric output, a 2D map and a 3D map. 
 The program construction of artisoc is a stepwise 
structure, as shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Artisoc program structure 
 
B. Simulation Flow 
The simulation flow of this system appears in Figure 2. 
Each step is explained below. 
1) The evacuation route calculation agent calculates the 
shortest route to the goal using Dijkstra’s algorithm and 
saves the data file.  
2) The evacuee agents located at each intersection take 
the shortest route from each position to the goal based on 
this data. When all evacuees have finished taking the route, 
they are indicated on the map of the intersections by a green 
circle. 
3) As shown in Figure 3, we set the evacuee limit for 
each emergency refuge building using a control panel. The 
slide bar is capable of adjusting the number of evacuees  by 
units of 100 persons. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

4) The evacuees start to take refuge at the goal. This 
simulation continues to run until all evacuees finish their 
journey, and it automatically finishes when all have 
completed refuge. 
 
Figure 2. Simulation flow 
 
 
Figure 3. Control panel 
 
C. Evacuee Behavior during Simulation 
When we execute this simulation, the evacuee agent is 
displayed with a green circle and positioned at each 
intersection. Each green circle represents a group of 100 
evacuees. In this experiment, this system only simulated the 
behavior of evacuees on the ground, so their numbers were 
set at approximately 200,000 persons. 
In addition to this, this simulation assumed a situation 
where all evacuees would go to JR Osaka Station when an 
earthquake occurs. Therefore, JR Osaka Station is designated 
as the goal, which forms the basis of their behavior. The 
evacuation routes are shown in Figure 4, where green lines 
indicate roads, and the evacuees walk to the goal by the 
shortest route as calculated by Dijkstra’s algorithm. In 
addition, as shown in Figure 5, when evacuees find 
emergency refuge buildings within 3 units around them, they 
do not go to JR Osaka Station but take refuge in these 
emergency buildings. However, if the number of evacuees 
that can be accommodated in each of these buildings reaches 
the established limit, they cannot enter, and thus return to the 
route going toward JR Osaka Station. 
 
 
Figure 4. Evacuation routes and interactions 
 
Figure 5. Range of evacuees’ view 
 
In general, walking speed is said to be 66.6 meters per 
minute to population density of 1 person per square meter. 
However, each evacuee agent is assigned a group of 100 
persons in this simulation, so it is predicted that their 
movement will be slow compared with typical walking speed. 
Accordingly, this was set to 40 meters per minute by 
considering such factors as the various physical constraints 
of group movement and the Fruin’s Level of Service [9], etc. 
Furthermore, we set the speed to fluctuate according to the 
congestion situation on the evacuation routes. Table 1 
summarizes the numerical values of these fluctuations. 
 
TABLE 1. WALKING SPEED 
 
Congestion factor 
0-2 
3-4 
5- 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Speed[m/min] 
40 
30 
20 
D. Designation of tsunami refuge buildings 
In this simulation, the evacuees take refuge not only at JR 
Osaka Station but also in surrounding buildings. As shown in 
Figure 3, a control panel can be created so that the number of 
evacuees that can be accommodated in those buildings can 
be adjusted, and it can be set up with various values. Table 2 
summarizes the names of the tsunami refuge buildings and 
the number of evacuees that can be accommodated within. 
 
TABLE 2. BUILDING NAMES AND ACCOMMODATED 
NUMBER OF PERSONS 
 
Color 
Accommodated 
number(persons) 
Umeda Station 
Blue 
0-20000 
Yodobashi_Camera 
Red 
0-5000 
Osaka_Nakanoshima common 
building 
Grayish blue 
0-3000 
Daimaru_Department Store 
Pea Green 
0-3000 
Hanshin_Department Store 
Orange 
0-3000 
Umeda_Sky Building 
Purple 
0-3000 
DOJIMA_AVANZA 
Pink 
0-4000 
Osaka_Ekimae_1st_building 
Green 
0-4000 
Osaka_Ekimae_2nd_buildin
g 
Sky Blue 
0-4000 
Osaka_Ekimae_3rd_building 
Light purple 
0-4000 
Osaka_Ekimae_4th_building 
Brown 
0-3000 
Ritz_Carlton_Osaka 
Bright yellow 
0-2000 
 
E. Execution Screen 
The execution screen of this simulation is shown in 
Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6. Execution Screen 
 
V. 
RESULTS 
A. Case Study 
In this simulation, we can set the maximum possible 
number of accommodated evacuees in each emergency 
refuge building using a control panel. In this research, the 
simulation was conducted using various proportions of 
evacuees accommodated in the refuge buildings, as 
described in the conditions listed below. 
1) When the proportion of evaacuees who can be 
accommodated is 0%. 
2) When the proportion of evaacuees who can be 
accommodated is 20%. 
3) When the proportion of evaacuees who can be 
accommodated is 50%. 
4) When the proportion of evaacuees who can be 
accommodated is 80%. 
5) When the proportion of evaacuees who can be 
accommodated is 100%. 
 
The data obtained by using the above proportions in 
shown in Figure 7. The transition of evacuees unable to find 
refuge each time is shown by a time series graph.  
 
 
Figure 7. Transition of evacuees unable to find refuge 
 
B. Discussion 
In the case of Condition 1, Figure 7 shows that it takes a 
maximum time of 520 minutes until completion of refuge. 
Although evacuees go only to JR Osaka Station, it became 
apparent that it will take a considerable length of time for a 
group of 100,000 people to converge. Furthermore, the 
simulation result clearly shows that the time taken to 
complete refuge becomes shorter as the proportion of 
evacuees accommodated in the refuge buildings becomes 
higher. As a result, in this paper it can be concluded that 
designating tsunami refuge buildings such as stations, 
department stores, tower buildings, etc. enables evacuees to 
take refuge effectively and quickly in cases where they 
converge on one location. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

However, the predicted time period for a tsunami to hit 
Osaka City is about 140 minutes after an earthquake, so the 
time calculated by the simulation exceeds the tsunami 
warning time, even with a crowd of 100,000 people. In this 
simulation, although there is the time lag before evacuees 
reach to JR Osaka Station, so many people actually aim at it. 
100,000 people is said to be not few, but further more people 
have to be considered in the simulation. 
Further, evacuees can cross the road in front of the 
station in this simulation, but it is predicted that the street 
will be clogged with traffic and they will be difficult to do so 
freely. Although there are foot bridges, it is predicted that 
their utilization will be limited because of dangers due to use 
by large numbers of people. A large group of over 400,000 
persons is thought to converge in JR Osaka Station area, and 
a large crowd will remain in this area for a long period of 
time. 
In the future, it is necessary to improve the system so that 
it can consider factors such as what is the best way to 
accommodate crowds of evacuees, and how many buildings 
are required as evacuation base facilities, etc. on the 
assumption that a situation like the one described in this 
paper occurs. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The purpose of this research is to develop an evacuation 
guidance method for the area around JR Osaka Station, and 
we have proposed a system that is able to simulate how 
evacuees will act in this area as the first step towards that 
purpose. So far, we have developed a simulator of 
evacuation behavior which targets only the people on the 
ground level. Using this, we conducted a simulation 
targeting the area around JR Osaka Station and Umeda 
Station in various situations. It is predicted that evacuation 
simulation using computer is effective because it is 
problematic to conduct an experiment of evacuation 
guidance on a real-life scale in the crowded JR Osaka Station 
area. 
In this simulation, we did not deal with the interaction 
between people trying to evacuate from buildings, the 
subway and the underground shopping center to the outside 
and people who are already outside. In cases where large 
crowds stay on the ground, it is predicted that evacuees will 
not be able to go easily outside from buildings and the 
underground shopping area. Therefore, it is predicted that 
many will stay in the places around the station. At the same 
time, it is possible that the psychological pressure caused by 
the short time period until a tsunami hits will cause panic. 
Therefore, we plan to expand the functions of this system in 
order to be able to simulate cases where evacuees will go out 
from buildings to take refuge at ground level, as the next step 
in our research, and we consider the function of some 
disaster's phychological reaction in this simulation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to extend our sincere thanks to KOZO 
KEIKAKU ENGINEERING Inc.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Cabinet Office, Government of Japan. White Paper on 
Disaster Management 2010. Tokyo:2010. 
[2] Office of Emergency Management. What to do in an 
Emergency(Living Information). Osaka:2011 
[3] M. Hori, Y. Inukai, K. Oguni, and T. Ichimura, “Study on 
developing simulation method for prediction of evacuation 
processes after earthquake,” SOCIO TECHNICA, Tokyo, 
Japan. 2005, vol. 3, pp. 138-145,  
[4] A. Ouchi, H. Kawamura, and M. Yamamoto, The foundation 
and application of multi agent system, Calculation paradigm 
of the complex system engineering., Tokyo, Japan. Corona, 
2002. 
[5] K. Watanabe and A. Kondo, “Development of Tsunami 
evacuation simulation model to support community planning 
for Tsunami disaster mitigation,” J.Archit.Plann, AIJ, Tokyo 
Japan, 2009, vol. 74, No. 637, pp. 627-634. 
[6] B. Maury and J. Venel, “Handling of contacts in crowd 
motion simulations,” University of Paris, in Press, Orsay 
Cedex, France. 
[7] A. Kirchner and A. Schadshneider, “Simulation of evacuation 
processes using a bionics-inspired cellular automaton model 
for pedestrian dynamics,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics 
and its Applications, Germany, 2002, vol. 312, pp. 260-276. 
[8] E.W. Dijkstra, “A note on two problems in  connection with 
graphs,” Numer. Math., 1959, vol. 1, pp. 269-271 
[9] J.J. Fruin, “Pedestrian planning and design,” Trans. 
Masamitsu Nagashima, Tokyo, Kashima, 1974. 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

