Light Reflection Spectrum Comparison of Pesticides Free Foods, Organic Foods and 
Conventional Farming Foods for VIS NIR Filter Creation 
 
Oumy Diop 
Antibes, France,  
Email : diop.oumydiop@gmail.com 
Umberto Cerasani 
CERAGOS Electronics and Nature 
Sophia Antipolis, France 
Email: cerasani@ceragos.org 
 
 
Abstract— A method for determination of food contaminants, 
including pesticides, is described in this document. Using Visible 
Near InfraRed spectroscopy results obtained from food samples 
with different levels of pollution, the creation of pesticides free 
food filters were realized.  Methodology and data extraction are 
meticulously addressed. Finally, implementation of these filters in 
an 
embedded 
device, 
communicating 
with 
smartphone 
application is discussed allowing users to monitor food 
contaminants. 
Keywords—pesticides; organic farming; Vis NIR spectroscopy; 
filter creation; data collection and analysis 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Pesticides are widely used in agriculture to protect crops 
and seeds and may have contributed to improvement in society 
health and economy. At the same time, widespread use of 
pesticides has led to serious harm on the environment and 
human health [1]. With the increasing demand for a high 
quality agricultural products, new quality and safety control 
devices are being investigated. Because pesticides damaging 
effects are invisible and cannot be directly warned by visible 
observation or simple testing, pesticides estimation in soil or 
in foods prior to their consumption, requires complex 
techniques and remains very challenging [2]. 
A number of analytical methods, including mass 
spectroscopy 
gas 
and 
liquid 
chromatography 
gas 
chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC-MS), have been 
reported to detect various pesticides contamination in foods 
and these methods are very sensitive and reliable [2]. 
However, these classical analytical approaches are usually 
confined to a laboratory environment and require costly, long 
sample preparation time, solvent wasting, and hazardous 
samples contact [2] [4]. Additional disadvantages of these 
methods include the restricted database mapping of pesticides 
analysis and the possibility of false negatives in the results [5]. 
Biosensors provides a promising alternative for the 
detection of pesticides. Biosensors convert the signal produced 
by the immobilized biological element that detect the analyte 
into an electrically detectable signal and can be classified from 
their signal transduction techniques into electrochemical, 
optical, piezoelectric and mechanical biosensors [6]. Many 
biosensors designed for pesticides detection are based on the 
inhibition reaction or catalytic activity of several enzymes 
after pesticides contact [7]. Electrochemical transducers are 
usually simple to design, small and affordable making them 
candidate of choices for portable pesticides detection [6]. For 
instance, Enzyme-Linked ImmunoSorbent Assays (ELISA) 
have grown rapidly as tools for pesticide measurement, 
although still challenged [7]. Since a number of pesticides 
have a similar mode of action affecting the activity of the 
same enzyme, most of ELISA based biosensors suffer poor 
individual pesticide specificity although improper to detect 
total pesticide content. On the other hand, immunosensors are 
biosensors that senses specific pesticides using antibodies 
(Ab) or antigens (Ag) taking advantage of the newest 
development of Ab technologies, targeted against pesticide 
molecules. Immunosensors are therefore able to provide 
concentration-dependent results in a certain range [7][8] . For 
instance in [9], Triazines were assayed using florescent 
antibodies (conjugated with with fluoresceine isothiocyanate 
binding to the fibre surface). After contact with the pesticide 
Triazines the fluorescence signal decreased since less 
antibodies were binding to the fibre. The detection limit using 
this immunosensor was very satisfying (around 0.1 ng/ml) [9]. 
However, there is a time gap between current status in the 
field and the most recent created immunosensors [7]. In 
addition, immunosensors usually requires specific testing 
procedures and have low reusability capacity without loss of 
sensitivity for most of them [10][11][12].  
Due to the great amount of pesticides currently being used, 
there is an augmented concern in the investigation and 
creation of rapid and non-destructive methods for pesticides 
detection [13]. In the last few years, advanced in optical 
instruments allowed the residuals of insecticides detection 
from agricultural samples [5]. Detection of hydrophobic 
organic pollutants via UV, Raman, and IR spectroscopic 
methods directly at solid sorbent phases are usually reported to 
be less sensitive than conventional chromatographic analysis, 
but permit on-site pollution measurements [4]. 
Near Infrared spectroscopy (NIR) is a well described 
method to assess the composition and quality of products in 
the food industry, since it has the capability to analyze organic 
substances rapidly and cost‐effectively, although suffering of 
low spectral resolution for samples in aqueous solutions due to 
strong water infrared absorption. As an example, a model for 
the quality control of herbicide Diuron in intact olives with 
85.9% of accuracy using reflectance NIR spectroscopy is 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

presented in [14]. Peppers are a frequent object of food safety 
alerts in various member states of the European Union since 
they frequently contain unauthorised pesticide residues. Near 
Infrared 
Reflectance 
Spectroscopy 
(NIRS) 
for 
the 
measurement of pesticide residues in peppers using 
commercially available spectrophotometers and demonstrating 
satisfying results is proposed in [15]. Spectral information in 
the ranges 1644–1772 and 2014–2607 nm without baseline 
correction and Partial Least Square (PLS) model interpretation 
were used to detect Buprofezin, Diuron and Daminozide 
without any sample pre-treatment and sample destruction in 
[16]. 
Diuron determination in pesticide formulations was also 
analyzed after its extraction with acetonitrile and subsequent 
transmittance NIR measurements (2021 and 2047 nm). Diuron 
limit of detection reached 0.013 mg.g−1 with this methodology 
which was 10 times higher than that the results obtained by 
Liquid Chromatography (LC), making NIR vibrational method 
appropriate for the quality control of pesticide commercial 
formulations [17]. Fourier transform near infrared (FT-NIR) 
spectroscopy is also of value for the determination of 
pesticides in agrochemicals. Following previous extraction of 
the active principles and transmission measurements were 
performed 
on 
Chlorsulfuron, 
Metamitron, 
Iprodione, 
Pirimicarb, Procymidone and Tricyclazole, leading to 
detection values limits ranging from 0.004 to 0.17 mg.g−1 , 10 
times faster than chromatography analysis [18]. Chlopyrifos 
residue detection in white radish, based on NIR spectroscopy 
and PLS regression is proposed in [20]. PLS was mainly 
permitted the determination of the optimum wave number 
range.  
Field portable NIR spectrometer (from 360 to 1690 nm) 
was able to determine nutrient composition of beef feedlot 
manure in [19]. On the basis of analysis of dried mannure 
samples, the field‐portable NIR spectrometer allowed fast 
determination of Carbon, Nitrates, and several other 
parameters. [19]. Field portable pesticides detectors, based on 
NIR spectrometry could be therefore considered for pesticides 
detection using a similar procedure. 
Infrared (IR) spectroscopy provides a rapid, low cost and 
highly reproducible diagnostic screening tool. IR spectroscopy 
is currently employed for soil surveillance systems, crops 
health and water quality assessment. [22]. For instance, soil 
absorption 
over 
the 
Visible/Near-InfraRed 
(Vis/NIR) 
wavelength regions (350–2500 nm) is mostly associated with 
(1) the vibrational energy transitions of the dominant 
molecular bonds of Fe-oxides (which have absorptions over 
the visible (350–780 nm) and short-wave NIR (780–1100 nm) 
spectral regions), (2) clay minerals (which have absorption 
over the long-wave NIR (1100–2500 nm) regions), (3) water 
(which has strong absorption features over Vis/NIR regions, 
most visibly near 1400 and 1900 nm), and (4) organic matter 
(which has distinct absorption features over the Vis/NIR, due 
to the various complex chemical bonds) [21]. Under certain 
conditions, such as very high concentration in soil, some 
transition elements (including Ni, Cu, Co) may also exhibit 
absorption features in the Vis/NIR spectral regions [21], 
permitting direct soil characterization and estimation of 
pesticides utilization in fields. A Vis/NIR mobile soil sensor 
was developed in [24] composed by optical unit to detect soil 
extractable phosphorous  (305 and 1711 nm in reflectance 
mode). 
Vis/NIR spectroscopy also permits pesticides and other 
food contaminants detection. It may be particularly suited for 
free space measurement and field studies. Internal and external 
pesticides damage detection of various fruits in Korea and 
Japan were detected using non damaging methods, such as 
Vis/NIR Spectroscopy [23]. 
Many aromatic pesticides are either naturally fluorescent 
or photodegrade into fluorescent byproducts and are hence 
suited for fluorescent spectroscopy detection [25]. For 
example, 
Polycyclic 
Aromatic 
Hydrocarbons 
(PAHs), 
pesticides are naturally fluorescent in aqueous solutions and 
allows for trace elements detection without previous pesticides 
concentration procedures [25]. Portable fluorometers are now 
available on market in a single portative device and with fiber-
optic probes that permit remote observations [25].  
Progress in Raman spectroscopes and in embedded 
computation equipment have enabled Raman spectroscopy to 
be used as an analytical tool for both solid samples and 
aqueous solutions, offering information permitting to 
determine the internal content in samples [2]. Because Raman 
spectrum of compound can furnish narrow and highly resolved 
bands it contains more complete vibrational information than 
IR spectrum. It may not require stabilizing materials and needs 
no chemical or mechanical pretreatment and allows 
nondestructive extraction of physical information [2][5].  
Raman spectroscopic techniques mostly gathers dispersive 
Raman spectroscopy, Fourier transform Raman spectroscopy 
and Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) [2]. 
Because conventional Raman spectroscopy is limited to a 
small scattering cross section and requires large amount of 
specimen and strong incident light, the employment of SERS 
greatly enhances the sensitivity of the conventional Raman 
spectroscopy and offers more elevated measurement speed and 
sensitivity [5]. 
In food industry, spectroscopy has been satisfactorily used 
to monitor food quality and safety. For instance Raman 
spectroscopy was applied to discriminate between transgenic 
and normal crops in various breeding such as tobacco. 
Different Raman spectrum were obtained between the 
transgenic tobacco and the wild type, since for transgenic 
tobacco, the expression of cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase 
was 
greatly 
depleted 
after 
cinnamaldehyde 
lignin 
incorporation [2]. In addition, Raman spectroscopy was 
successfully used to distinguish the Brassica napus ‘Drakkar’ 
from the new genetically modified line [2]. 
Furthermore, the use of Raman spectroscopy permitted 
carotenoids content quantification in fruits and vegetables [2]. 
Other antioxidant quantification such as lycopene could be 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

obtained by NIR-FT-Raman spectroscopy method [2]. FT-
Raman spectroscopy method in conjunction with Hierarchical 
Cluster Analysis (HCA) may accurately assess the energetic 
value and total carbohydrates, protein, and fat of powdered 
milk infant formulas [2]. 
Raman spectroscopic techniques are not only applied in 
quality control but also in safety control of various beverages, 
most specifically for microorganisms contamination and 
adulterants adjunction. The identification of oil adulteration is 
of great importance from both market and health perspectives 
in the olive oil industry. Unsaturation of oil Free Fatty Acids 
(FFA) and total degree of unsaturation could be estimated 
using spectroscopy measures [2]. Since Raman spectroscopy 
has been successfully applied to organic compounds detection 
in food and beverage, its employment for pesticides detection 
is particularly adequate. Most particularly identification and 
detection of large family of sulfur-containing pesticide 
residues at various fruit peels was performed utilizing the shell 
thickness-dependent Raman enhancement of silver-coated 
gold nanoparticles [26]. 
Transmittance spectroscopy is particularly suited for free 
space measurements without sample preparation and may be 
applied to pesticides detection. For example, using a 
transmittance spectroscopy (in the 550 and 980 nm region), 
insect infested cherries within a tart cherry fruit were detected 
with accuracy varying from 82% to 87% [27]. 
Data clustering analysis following spectroscopy data is 
often required to distinguish food contaminants. Spectroscopy 
such as SERS coupled with clustering analysis has been 
shown to enable the trace-level detection of various pesticides 
[28]. For instance, cluster analysis, following Wavelength 
Dispersive X Rays Fluorescence Spectroscopy may permit 
classification of black tea and green tea from tea mineral 
elements [29]. Clustering algorithms often requires variable 
fitting or selection methods. Most commonly employed 
methods are: Stepwise Regression Analysis, Uninformative 
Variable Elimination, Interval Partial Least Squares (IPLS) 
regression, Clonal Selection Feature Selection algorithm [13]. 
As an example improving PLS regression models, used in 
spectrum data post-processing, may hence result in more 
specific database inquiries and sample chemical identification. 
In this paper, we studied the spectral characteristic of 
pesticides 
contamination 
using 
Vis-NIR 
reflectance 
spectroscopy. Since there are several thousand of different 
active pesticide molecules reported [30][31], current pesticides 
detection is limited to few types of pesticides chemical and 
does not ascertain pesticides free products. We worked from 
another perspective by comparing the spectral information 
obtained from pesticides free and pesticides contaminated 
foods, irrespective of the pesticide types. We searched for 
particular traces in the spectroscopy spectrum that could be 
characteristic of pesticides contamination. Mostly two cases 
could be found: (1) the pesticides grown foods spectra 
contains additional traces which could be related with 
pesticides 
own 
spectral 
characteristics 
or 
modified 
endogenous food proteins [32][34], (2) oppositely the absence 
of spectral components in particular wavelength in pesticides 
contaminated foods compared to organic or totally natural 
foods (grown without pesticides addition) may also be used as 
a spectral indicator of food purity since certain food proteins 
may not be expressed when pesticides are utilized [35][38]. 
Further database characterization of these specific spectral 
components may permit chemical characterization and 
possibly lead to the creation of a new biomarker for pesticides 
detection. 
Finally, algorithm implementation inside a portative device 
with an embedded spectrometer, as depicted in Figure 1, 
permits user centered device for pesticide estimation. For 
easier user data reading, a wireless communication device 
(such as WIFI module) is integrated in the embedded system 
for user’s smartphone communication. A specific smartphone 
application is created for embedded spectrometer results 
monitoring. To diminish the costs of the overall device, 
sunlight is used as spectroscopic light source, limiting device 
utilization in bright areas.  
Our document will be organized into 3 main sections: first, 
the methodology of our experiment will be introduced with the 
devices used, then, the Vis-NIR spectroscopy results are 
reported and analyzed, finally a conclusion is drawn with 
possible future work direction propositions. 
 
 
Figure 1. User centric based device for food pesticides monitoring 
 
II. METHODS 
Measurements detailed information and equipment used 
are presented in this Section. 
 
 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

A. Food samples variety 
TABLE I. VEGETABLE TYPES AND VARIETIES USED FOR THE 
EXERIMENT 
Food 
Variety 
(botanical 
name) 
Food suppliers 
Market 
gardener 
(pesticides 
free) 
Organic 
shop 
Supermar
ket 1 
Supermarket 
2 
Poataoes 
Solanum 
tuberosum 
´Charlotte´ 
(yellow),  
Solanum 
tuberosum 
´Desiree´ 
(red), 
Solanum 
tuberosum 
´Charlotte´ 
(yellow) 
‘Cherie’ 
‘Cherie’ 
Zucchini 
Cucurbita 
moschata, 
Cucurbita 
pepo ’De 
Nice à fruit 
ronds´ 
Cucurbita 
pepo ´Verte 
non 
coureuse´ 
Cucurbita 
pepo ´Verte 
non 
coureuse´ 
Cucurbita 
pepo ´Verte 
non coureuse´ 
Tomatoes 
Lycopersic
on 
escubentum 
Lycopersicon 
escubentum, 
Solanum 
lycopersicum 
Lycopersic
on 
escubentum 
Lycopersic
on 
esculentum 
Lycopersicon 
escubentum 
Lycopersicon 
esculentum 
 
 
 We tested 3 different food categories: tomatoes, zucchini 
and potatoes. The precise variety of vegetable tested is 
reported in Table I. Food were bought directly from (1) a 
market gardener that did not used any pesticides or chemical 
contaminant, (2) an organic store and from 2 famous French 
supermarket brands, where we assumed that plants were 
grown using pesticides ((3) and (4)). Although several 
pesticides are contained in the vegetable peel, we decided to 
perform the measure on the decorticated vegetable to avoid 
peel color bias. Each vegetable was tested in 3 different areas.  
B. Test system description: 
 
 
Figure 2. Test bench diagram used for Vis-NIR spectroscopy 
measurements in various vegetables 
Reflectance spectroscopy measures were performed using 
the test bench described in Figure 2. We used the Ocean Optics 
kit including the ECOVIS Krypton Lightsource, the USB-650 
Red Tide Spectrometer (preconfigured in the 350-1000 nm 
wavelength range), a 200 um Bifurcated Fiber (Vis-NIR) and 
the OceanView software. The results were then extracted and 
manipulated with Matlab software. The distance between the 
bifurcated fiber and the sample to measure was fixed to 5mm, 
and the reflectance robe was positioned at an angle of 90° to 
the flat surface of the sample to analyze. 
C. Data analysis: 
 
The data were analyzed using Matlab software. First, 
correction of the light intensity was performed by dividing 
each sample with its respective Area Under Curve value. Then, 
we computed the mean value associated with one food type and 
origin. Mean values of the pesticides free foods spectral data 
were used to create filters in order to highlight the particular 
wavelength associated with food pesticides addition. 
III. RESULTS 
Tomatoes spectroscopy measures from different supplier’s 
origin are presented in Figure 3, after division by their 
respective Area Under Curve, to remove the measures light 
intensity drift. Pesticides free tomatoes spectral data mean 
value is reported in thick blue line for initial comparison. Each 
subfigure represents the spectral measurements realized on 
tomatoes from a market gardener that did not used any 
pesticides or chemical contaminant (top left subfigure), an 
organic store (top right subfigure) and from 2 famous French 
supermarket brands, where we assumed that plants were 
grown using pesticides (bottom left and bottom right 
subfigures). For each different tomatoes supplier, measures 
were performed on several vegetable samples to decrease the 
samples intervariability bias and were reported in different 
color thin lines in each subfigure. As an example, the top right 
subfigure of Figure 4 green thin line outlines the relative light 
intensity of the first pesticide free tomato analyzed and the 
magenta thin lines outlines the relative light intensity of the 
third pesticide free tomatoes analyzed. 
Figure 4 and Figure 5 depict the spectral measures 
associated with zucchini and potatoes from different food 
supplier’s origin respectively. For easier data interpretation, 
light intensity drift is removed by similar integral division. 
The mean relative light intensity values of the pesticides free 
zucchini and potatoes are both reported in blue thick lines in 
each figure. Similarly to the previous figure results, subfigures 
describe the spectral measurements associated with the 4 
different vegetables origin (from pesticide free market 
gardener, organic store, supermarket 1 and supermarket 2). In 
each subfigure, the colored thin lines, outline the relative light 
intensity associated with a specific vegetable sample but from 
the same supplier origin. 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 3. Tomatoes spectral analysis comparison. The samples data are 
displayed by the colored thin lines and the mean value (only associated with 
the pesticides free spectrum) is depicted with the thick blue line. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Zucchini spectral data comparison. The sample data are 
displayed by the colored thin lines and the mean value (only associated with 
the pesticides free spectrum) is depicted with the thick blue line. 
 
 
Figure 5. Potatoes spectral data comparison. The sample data are 
displayed by the colored thin lines and the mean value (only associated with 
the pesticides free spectrum) is depicted with the thick blue line. 
 
Spectral filtration of mean spectral data from organic shop 
(blue line), supermarket 1 (green line) and supermarker 2 (red 
line) with tomatoes, zucchini and potatoes pesticides free 
mean value are respectively presented in Figure 6, Figure 7 
and in Figure 8. 
Figure 6 shows that spectral relative intensity in the 350 
nm – 400 nm region is particularly characteristic of the 
tomatoes added chemicals. Other spectral rays (435 nm, 587 
nm, 672 nm, 781nm, 791 nm, etc.) deserve extended analysis 
and database characterization. 
Although characterization of food additives or pesticides 
contaminants for zucchini seems straightforward with two 
large peaks at 374 nm and 570 nm compared to pesticides free 
zucchini (Figure 7), the analysis may be more complex. In 
fact, as presented in Table I, the zucchini variety of the 
organic shop, supermarket 1 and supermarket 2 (Cucurbita 
pepo ‘Verte non coureuse’) is not exactly the same as the one 
proposed by the pesticide free market gardener (Cucurbita 
moschata and Cucurbita pepo ‘De Nice à fruit ronds’). 
Modification in chromophore molecules between these two 
varieties of zucchini may explain the large results variation. 
For more conclusive analysis, data obtained from organic 
zucchini should be used for spectral filter construction, 
although we further noted that in these wavelength areas, data 
obtained from organic stores also differ from the ones 
associated from the two supermarkets. Of particular interest 
seems to be the spectral rays of 715 nm, 774 nm, 450 - 456 nm 
area and need deeper investigation. 
Spectral filtration of mean spectral data from organic shop 
(blue line), supermarket 1 (green line) and supermarket 2 (red 
line) with potatoes pesticides free mean value is described in 
Figure 8. Except in the 350 nm - 450 nm region, spectral data 
obtained from the two supermarkets (green and red curves) 
seems to be closer to the pesticide free spectrum. Several 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

explanations may exist. Like for zucchini, not the same potato 
varieties were compared, explaining the discrepancies between 
results. A second explanation is the presence of specific food 
additional substances, possibly pollutants, in organic food 
compared to supermarket ones (organic foods are not entirely 
devoid of pesticides [39]). 
 
 
Figure 6. Additional relative light intensity compared to pesticides free 
tomatoes spectral data 
 
 
Figure 7. Additional relative light intensity compared to pesticides free 
zucchini spectral data 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Additional relative light intensity compared to pesticides free 
potatoes spectral data 
 
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Although 
insufficiently 
characterized 
and 
currently 
incomplete, spectroscopic analysis of food in the Vis-NIR 
wavelength range, seems to permit food quality estimation. 
We propose an innovative method based on Vis-NIR 
spectroscopy for detecting food contaminants using spectral 
filters constructed from pesticides free food samples data. Our 
methodology choices was mainly dictated by the countless 
number of food contaminants, which are currently limiting the 
detection to only a restricted number of well-known 
contaminants spectrum traces for filters creation. In contrast 
we used the Vis-NIR spectral trace of pesticides free foods for 
filter creation. 
From early conclusion, our methods seems promising and 
easy to implement. However very meticulous data should be 
obtained first for each pesticides free food variety studied. 
Modification of the internal food coloration including food 
maturity levels, seeds number, etc. can lead to different light 
intensity 
spectral 
analysis, 
generating 
important 
unpredictability in the reference spectral data. 
Once extracted the particular wavelength associated with 
food pollutants, such as pesticides, database search may 
further permit pollutants chemical characterization.  
Moreover, because of the access difficulties to many 
varieties of pesticides free grown foods, organic foods may be 
used in first approximation although not always devoid of 
contaminants. 
Finally, the implementation of such algorithm in an 
embedded platform with a microspectrometer module may 
allow device user estimation of foods chemical contaminants. 
 
 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
D. Pimentel, "Environmental and economic costs of the application 
of pesticides primarily in the United States," Environment, 
development and sustainability, vol. 7, pp. 229-252, 2005. 
[2] 
D. Yang and Y. Ying, "Applications of Raman spectroscopy in 
agricultural products and food analysis: A review," Applied 
Spectroscopy Reviews, vol. 46, pp. 539-560, 2011. 
[3] 
D. Lee, S. Lee, et al., "Quantitative analysis of methyl parathion 
pesticides in a polydimethylsiloxane microfluidic channel using 
confocal 
surface-enhanced 
Raman 
spectroscopy," 
Applied 
spectroscopy, vol. 60, pp. 373-377, 2006. 
[4] 
M. Karlowatz, M. Kraft, and B. Mizaikoff, "Simultaneous 
quantitative determination of benzene, toluene, and xylenes in 
water 
using 
mid-infrared 
evanescent 
field 
spectroscopy," 
Analytical chemistry, vol. 76, pp. 2643-2648, 2004. 
[5] 
K. 
Wong-Ek, et al., "Portable surface-enhanced Raman 
spectroscopy for insecticide detection using silver nanorod film 
fabricated by magnetron sputtering," in SPIE BiOS, 2011, pp. 
791108-791108-11. 
[6] 
A. Sassolas, B. Prieto-Simón, and  J.-L.Marty, "Biosensors for 
Pesticide Detection: New Trends," American Journal of Analytical 
Chemistry, pp. 210-232, 2012. 
[7] 
X. Jiang, et al., "Immunosensors for detection of pesticide 
residues," Biosensors and Bioelectronics, vol. 23, pp. 1577-1587, 
2008. 
[8] 
C. R. Suri, M. Raje, and G. C. Varshney, "Immunosensors for 
pesticide analysis: antibody production and sensor development," 
Critical reviews in biotechnology, vol. 22, pp. 15-32, 2002. 
[9] 
F. Bier, W. Stöcklein, M. Böcher, U. Bilitewski, and R. Schmid, 
"Use of a fibre optic immunosensor for the detection of 
pesticides," Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 7, pp. 509-
512, 1992. 
[10] 
M.-I. Baraton, Sensors for Environment, Health and Security: 
Advanced Materials and Technologies: Springer Science & 
Business Media, 2008. 
[11] 
M. Ferrari, M. Ozkan, and M. Heller, BioMEMS and Biomedical 
Nanotechnology: Volume II: Micro/Nano Technologies for 
Genomics and Proteomics vol. 2: Springer Science & Business 
Media, 2007. 
[12] 
O. Tigli, Novel SAW devices in CMOS for biosensor applications: 
design, modeling, fabrication and characterization: ProQuest, 
2007. 
[13] 
L. Xue, J. Cai, J. Li, and M. Liu, "Application of particle swarm 
optimization (PSO) algorithm to determine dichlorvos residue on 
the surface of navel orange with Vis-NIR spectroscopy," Procedia 
Engineering, vol. 29, pp. 4124-4128, 2012. 
[14] 
L. Salguero-Chaparro, A. J. Gaitán-Jurado, V. Ortiz-Somovilla, 
and F. Peña-Rodríguez, "Feasibility of using NIR spectroscopy to 
detect herbicide residues in intact olives," Food control, vol. 30, 
pp. 504-509, 2013. 
[15] 
M. T. Sánchez, K. Flores‐Rojas, J. E. Guerrero, A. Garrido‐Varo, 
and D. Pérez‐Marín, "Measurement of pesticide residues in 
peppers 
by 
near‐infrared 
reflectance 
spectroscopy," 
Pest 
management science, vol. 66, pp. 580-586, 2010. 
[16] 
S. Armenta, S. Garrigues, and M. de la Guardia, "Partial least 
squares-near infrared determination of pesticides in commercial 
formulations," Vibrational Spectroscopy, vol. 44, pp. 273-278, 
2007. 
[17] 
J. Moros, S. Armenta, S. Garrigues, and M. de la Guardia, "Near 
infrared determination of Diuron in pesticide formulations," 
Analytica chimica acta, vol. 543, pp. 124-129, 2005. 
[18] 
J. Moros, S. Armenta, S. Garrigues, and M. de la Guardia, 
"Univariate near infrared methods for determination of pesticides 
in agrochemicals," Analytica chimica acta, vol. 579, pp. 17-24, 
2006. 
[19] 
D. Malley, C. McClure, P. Martin, K. Buckley, and W. 
McCaughey, "Compositional analysis of cattle manure during 
composting using a field‐portable near‐infrared spectrometer," 
Communications in Soil Science and Plant Analysis, vol. 36, pp. 
455-475, 2005. 
[20] 
Y. Zhou, B. Xiang, Z. Wang, and C. Chen, "Determination of 
chlorpyrifos residue by near-infrared spectroscopy in white radish 
based on interval partial least square (iPLS) model," Analytical 
Letters, vol. 42, pp. 1518-1526, 2009. 
[21] 
T. Shi, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, and G. Wu, "Visible and near-infrared 
reflectance spectroscopy—An alternative for monitoring soil 
contamination by heavy metals," Journal of hazardous materials, 
vol. 265, pp. 166-176, 2014. 
[22] 
K. D. Shepherd and M. G. Walsh, "Infrared spectroscopy—
enabling an evidence-based diagnostic surveillance approach to 
agricultural and environmental management in developing 
countries," Journal of Near Infrared Spectroscopy, vol. 15, pp. 1-
19, 2007. 
[23] 
S.-H. Noh and K.-H. Choi, "Nondestructive quality evaluation 
technology for fruits and vegetables," in International Seminar on 
Enhancing Export Competitiveness of Asian Fruits, Bangkok, 
Thailand, pp. 1-15, 2006. 
[24] 
M. Maleki, A. Mouazen, H. Ramon, and J. De Baerdemaeker, 
"Optimisation of soil VIS–NIR sensor-based variable rate 
application system of soil phosphorus," Soil and Tillage Research, 
vol. 94, pp. 239-250, 2007. 
[25] 
R. D. JiJi, G. A. Cooper, and K. S. Booksh, "Excitation-emission 
matrix fluorescence based determination of carbamate pesticides 
and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons," Analytica Chimica Acta, 
vol. 397, pp. 61-72, 1999. 
[26] 
B. Liu, et al., "Shell thickness-dependent Raman enhancement for 
rapid identification and detection of pesticide residues at fruit 
peels," Analytical chemistry, vol. 84, pp. 255-261, 2011. 
[27] 
J. Xing and D. Guyer, "Detecting internal insect infestation in tart 
cherry using transmittance spectroscopy," Postharvest biology and 
technology, vol. 49, pp. 411-416, 2008. 
[28] 
B. Saute, R. Premasiri, L. Ziegler, and R. Narayanan, "Gold 
nanorods as surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy substrates for 
sensitive and selective detection of ultra-low levels of 
dithiocarbamate pesticides," Analyst, vol. 137, pp. 5082-5087, 
2012. 
[29] 
G. Chunhui, Z. Guoqiang, G. Liangquan, L. Jun, and W. Ziqiang, 
"Determination of trace elements in tea by wavelength dispersive 
X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy," Nuclear Techniques, vol. 36, 
2013. 
[30] 
L. R. Goldman, "Managing pesticide chronic health risks: US 
policies," Journal of agromedicine, vol. 12, pp. 67-75, 2007. 
[31] 
C. f. D. C. a. Prevention. (2013). CDC - Pesticide Illness & Injury 
Surveillance - NIOSH Workplace Safety and Health Topic.  
[32] 
S. Parvez and S. Raisuddin, "Protein carbonyls: novel biomarkers 
of exposure to oxidative stress-inducing pesticides in freshwater 
fish Channa punctata (Bloch)," Environmental Toxicology and 
Pharmacology, vol. 20, pp. 112-117, 2005. 
[33] 
J. Dorts, et al., "Oxidative stress, protein carbonylation and heat 
shock proteins in the black tiger shrimp, Penaeus monodon, 
following 
exposure 
to 
endosulfan 
and 
deltamethrin," 
Environmental toxicology and pharmacology, vol. 28, pp. 302-310, 
2009. 
[34] 
J. J. Fortunato, et al., "Malathion-induced oxidative stress in rat 
brain regions," Neurochemical research, vol. 31, pp. 671-678, 
2006. 
[35] 
S. B. Ceyhun, et al., "Deltamethrin attenuates antioxidant defense 
system and induces the expression of heat shock protein 70 in 
rainbow trout," Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology Part C: 
Toxicology & Pharmacology, vol. 152, pp. 215-223, 2010. 
[36] 
R. M. Johnson, J. D. Evans, G. E. Robinson, and M. R. 
Berenbaum, "Changes in transcript abundance relating to colony 
collapse disorder in honey bees (Apis mellifera)," Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 106, pp. 14790-14795, 
2009. 
[37] 
H. T. Hogberg, A. Kinsner-Ovaskainen, T. Hartung, S. Coecke, 
and A. K. Bal-Price, "Gene expression as a sensitive endpoint to 
evaluate cell differentiation and maturation of the developing 
central nervous system in primary cultures of rat cerebellar granule 
cells (CGCs) exposed to pesticides," Toxicology and applied 
pharmacology, vol. 235, pp. 268-286, 2009. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[38] 
M. Collotta, P. Bertazzi, and V. Bollati, "Epigenetics and 
pesticides," Toxicology, vol. 307, pp. 35-41, 2013. 
[39] 
B. P. Baker, C. M. Benbrook, E. G. III, and K. L. Benbrook, 
"Pesticide residues in conventional, integrated pest management 
(IPM)-grown and organic foods: insights from three US data sets," 
Food Additives & Contaminants, vol. 19, pp. 427-446, 2002. 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

