Gender Differences in Gesture-based Interaction 
User Studies and Perception of Information Technology 
 
Manolya Kavakli              Yan Ling Chen 
Department of Computing 
Macquarie University 
Sydney, Australia 
Manolya.Kavakli@mq.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents an empirical study 
investigating the gender differences in basic hand 
gestures for the design of user-centric and adaptive 
systems. Our goal is to target personalization of gesture-
based interaction, devices and applications, using this 
feedback. First, we focus on gender differences in the 
perception of technology as well as the externalization of 
thoughts using natural hand gestures. We commence 
with an overview of what type of gestures are used and 
how they are defined in a gesture recognition system. In 
the empirical studies, we use both video analysis and 
surveys as the methodologies. We conducted a survey 
regarding the perception of Information Technology 
(IT) with 20 male and 20 female participants. Second, we 
focus on gender differences in gestures. We conducted  
an experiment involving 10 male and 10 female 
Australian adults whose age range between 25 to 30. In 
the experiment, they describe an object using hand 
gestures and speech. We analysed the results of both 
survey and experiments. In this paper, we point out the 
gender differences in the perception of IT, as well as 
gesture types, frequency and occurrences. Drawing 
conclusions from these comparisons, we discuss the 
potential effects of gender differences in the design of 
multimodal interfaces.  
 
Keywords-gesture analysis; gender differences; human 
computer interaction; consumer research; perception of 
technology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Human Computer Interaction (HCI) is a discipline 
concerned with the design, evaluation and implementation of 
interactive computing systems for human use. One of the 
primary goals of HCI is to target the design of user-centric 
and adaptive systems as well as personalization of devices 
and applications. Adaptive systems refer to interactive 
systems adapting their behavior to individual users based on 
information acquired about users, the context of use and the 
environment. Therefore, personalization of devices and 
applications requires a careful analysis of gender differences. 
The evolution of HCI has evolved significantly starting 
from the use of mouse input [1] to multimodal systems 
including speech, head and eye-tracking, using both static 
and dynamic hand gestures. Gestures are considered as sign 
languages to externalize the human thoughts. Humans have 
an inherent need to use gestures; they complement our ideas. 
To such an extent that humans are known to gesture even 
when on the phone. The level of communication between 
users and their electronic devices has been largely limited to 
a pointing interface. As computers and technologies become 
increasingly integrated into our lives, the demand of 
technology has increased and expanding into new sectors, as 
seen with the new apps and wider use of the smart phones 
and tablets. This brings the emphasis on the richness 
conveyed by gestures as the new media of interaction. 
Computer vision techniques have improved exponentially: 
from only detecting simple features like the user’s fingers 
and thumb, to recognizing and responding to the whole body 
contour, since the first VideoDesk [2]. Hand posture 
detection has been used to give commands, and hand rotation 
and movement to indicate the parameters of these 
commands. Investigation of tangible and proximity based 
HCI suggested that it is important to be cognisant of gender 
with respect to the interactions they facilitate [3].  
As shown by Nasser and Kavakli [4] culture has an 
impact on gestures, but does gender have an impact? The 
goal of this paper is to define the variances in gestures 
between males and females in order to develop personalized 
interfaces. Gender differences have been studied by many 
researchers, leaving much unclear regarding the science 
behind stereotypes. Our intention is to identify, if there are 
any gender differences in the perception of technology as 
well as hand gestures used to explain an object. We defined 
two hypotheses to test. (1) The experience of using a 
computer as well as the gender of the user has a significant 
effect on the perception of the gender of the technology. The 
objective of the survey in this study is to investigate this 
research question. (2) Gender differences in gestures have a 
significant influence on human performance. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section II reviews 
summary of related works regarding gestures and gender 
differences. Section III describes the methodologies used in 
the project. Section IV addresses the survey and the 
experiment. Section V goes into finer details with respect to 
analysis of the data collected. Section VI presents the 
findings. The acknowledgement and conclusions close the 
article. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

II. 
GENDER DIFFERENCES 
Regarding the individual diﬀerences in cognitive 
processing, controversial views exist. Some studies state that 
there are gender diﬀerences in verbal, quantitative and visuo- 
spatial ability in human cognition [5]. A general view is that 
men outperform women on visuospatial tasks and women 
outperform men on verbal ﬂuency. Males show signiﬁcantly 
higher mean scores on the arithmetical computations, 
arithmetical reasoning, and spatial cognition [6]. However, 
some researchers believe that although there are gender 
diﬀerences in our cognitive abilities (verbal, quantitative, 
visuospatial)  these are quite small, and therefore,  
insigniﬁcant [7]. How small are these gender differences in 
terms of gesture recognition in multimodal system design? 
It was suggested by Kramer [8] that women more often 
use facial expression and hand gestures to express their 
thoughts than men. Regarding nonverbal communication, 
there are differences between females and males. Women 
use more expressions and nonverbal behaviors than men. 
Women are more skilled at sending and receiving nonverbal 
messages [9]. Men are louder and more interruptive and 
display more nervous, deﬂuent behaviors. The diﬀerences in 
the mean use of hand gestures was statistically signiﬁcant in 
a social bar setting [10]. 
Men are likely to use their hands to express themselves 
and they rely on more obvious gestures. Women, on the 
other hand, present more subtle gestures and they restrain 
and exhibit deferential gestures [11]. No specific studies 
address whether any gender diﬀerences present in use of 
gestures while people communicate with computer systems. 
Saucier and Elias [12] reveals that the number of gestures 
made with the right hand during speech is signiﬁcantly 
higher for males, while during listening the number of 
gestures made with left hand is signiﬁcantly higher. We have 
no results regarding the females left or right handed gestures. 
However some other studies state that their results did not 
reveal any diﬀerences in the degree of hand preference 
between pointing gestures produced along with speech and 
gestures produced on their own [13]. 
Studies on the perception of IT showed that although 
males and females in the United States have similar 
experiences with computers, females have an advantage in 
typing [14]. Workers in general state that they have more 
experience with computers than non-workers, and, in 
particular, working females have been using computers for 
more years than working men. Nonworking females state 
that they have less experience with computers than working 
females. However, this perception for the other gender is not 
verified and there seems to be no perceived difference in the 
use of computers between nonworking and working men.  
A. Use of Internet 
In USA, Internet use at various locations increased over 
time among women relative to men. In 1997 and 1998, 
women were less likely to use the Internet anywhere or at 
home than men, but they were more likely to do so by 2001 
[15]. Among those who work, women remained less likely 
than men to use the Internet at work, but the gender gap 
narrowed over time. People who are employed are more 
likely than the non-employed to use the Internet at home or 
anywhere, else with nonworking women the least likely to 
use the Internet. This is also consistent with our findings in 
this paper. 
B. Use of Social Networks 
Tüfekçi [16] found significant differences between males 
and females on the usage of social networks that females are 
more likely to use social networks to keep in touch with 
friends either living nearby or in other schools, while males 
are more likely to use social networks to find potential 
friends and find people with have similar interests [17]. 
However, males tend to make new relationship in social 
network environments more than females do. On the other 
hand, Tüfekçi found that females’ communication skills are 
more positive than males’ and suggested that females are 
more social than males. Females state that they use social 
networks, such as Facebook for maintaining existing 
relationships, academic purposes and following agenda more 
than males, while males use facebook for making new 
relationships at a rate higher than females. 
III. 
GESTURE CLASSIFICATION 
The most recognized gesture classification and the one 
referred to from now on is the one established by McNeill in 
[18]. He classifies gestures as seen in Table 1. Gestures have 
also been classified according to their purpose. They could 
be goal-oriented (change of position, shape), indirect 
manipulation (set, stop), empty handed gestures (wave, snap, 
point, take), and haptic exploration (touch, stoke, knock).  
A. Gesture Types 
McNeill [1] identified the gestures types as  summarized 
in Table I:  
Iconic. Iconic gestures were identified as actual 
picturing, as if drawing. Therefore, if a participant mentioned 
the word “square” and drew a square, it was considered an 
iconic gesture. 
Beat. Beat gestures were generated by context and 
marked a gesture or transition. A beat gesture was identified, 
for example, if a person described the back of a chair and 
stressed staying back and the hands were put a bit forwards. 
These were mainly low energy low kinetic gestures. 
Repetition. Repetition gestures are part of beat gestures, 
but for the purpose of the experiment, they were counted 
separately.  
Deictic. Deictic gestures correspond to pointing, but they 
do not include gestures performed purely with the index 
fingers. This pointing gestures are normally accompanied by 
words like “there” or “left” for example.  
Metaphoric. Metaphoric gestures represent conceptual 
subjects. In the experiment they represent an abstract concept 
like “old” or “retro”. A user would not use these as an actual 
depiction, but they may use them to supplement a word or 
enhance the meaning of another gesture.. 
Junk. Junk gestures were identified as gestures without a 
particular meaning. This could be a gesture that the user 
takes back (a “mistake”) or some transition movements.  
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
TABLE I. CLASSIFICATION OF GESTURE TYPES 
 
B. Gesture Segmentation 
 
      The technique mostly used for gesture analysis is gesture 
and speech alignment. In practice, gestures are identified as 
atomic parts, or, as a sequence of hand shape [19] the latter 
being harder to measure. Normally the gesture coders are 
guided by the endpoint localization to perform the 
segmentation and recognition. The reality is that the spatio-
temporal variation comes from the fact that not only do 
different people move in different ways, but also even 
repeated motions by the same subject may vary [20]. The 
issues here are speed and endpoints, making it challenging 
to know when a gesture ends and when another begins. 
Within different technologies, there are different methods 
for detecting a candidate cut. For example, in video games 
they are based on three criteria: abnormal velocity, a static 
gesture, and sever curvature [21]. Li and Greenspan [20] 
focus on how the endpoints are located. They had 
participants repeat various actions several times in order to 
document the variances, these variances, they claim, are 
useful for identifying the range of a given gesture, and 
therefore a better identification. This way, to build a gesture 
model, a gesture representation, repeated at a single 
moderate speed, does not have to be perfect. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
This 
section 
covers 
the 
explanations 
of 
the 
methodologies we used in the project. In this section, we will 
have a discussion regarding the purpose and the advantage of 
each methodology. 
A. Survey 
The goal of the survey is to explore the gender 
differences in the perception of Information Technology 
(IT). This survey was carried out in the early stages of the 
project to help us understand the general perception of males 
and females regarding IT. 20 participants joined our survey 
the perception of IT. The age range of participants is 25-30 
years old. They come from  Asian and Australian 
backgrounds. They are either professional or university 
students.  For the purpose of this survey, we collected the 
results from the participants based on 21 questions regarding 
their perception of using electronic devices in their daily 
lives as well as  internet usage. 
B. Video Analysis 
We used the video annotation tool ANVIL [23] for video 
analysis. ANVIL offers multi-layered annotation based on a 
user-defined coding scheme (Figure 1). Special features 
offered by ANVIL are the tracks for time stamp, coding 
facilities on video footages and a project tool for managing a 
collection of annotation files. The gestures are separated by 
pauses. A pause is defined as a temporary stop in action or 
speech. The purpose of this pause is to eliminate the period 
of inactivity from the actual gesture time. This pause could 
appear at the beginning of a video, when the participant 
explains what he or she might do, or when the participant 
states that he or she has ended the action. ANVIL permits the 
creation of a track on the time line where gestures are 
segmented and coded. 
. 
Figure 1: ANVIL annotation track 
C. Experiments 
18 participants including 8 males and 10 females joined 
our experiment. The participants were divided into two 
groups. The participants were the ones who did the survey 
before the experiment. Their age range was 25-30 years old. 
They were either Australian or Asian. The participants were 
either employed or unemployed.  We have chosen a group 
of males and females with English as their native language. 
Firstly, we explained the task to the participants. They 
were asked to describe a particular object (Figure 2). We 
used a camera to record each participant. During the 
experiment, all participants were given the task to describe a 
chair, the participants were also instructed to describe the 
chair as if they were describing the object to someone who 
cannot see in a videoconferencing session. They were 
encouraged to use both hands and as many gestures as 
possible. All participants used words to accompany their 
gestures, even  they were not instructed to do so. 
 
Figure 2: A snapshot from the experiments 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

D. Video Analysis 
 
In video analysis, we used the gesture classification 
defined by McNeill [1] and Table I. We considered the 
gesture type Repetition, as a factor potentially reflecting the 
culture of the participant, as uncertainty in the language or 
description could be channelized this way using Hofstede’s  
cultural dimensions [22].  
 
V. 
RESULTS 
This section covers the results of survey and experiments. 
A. Survey Results and Demographics 
The Analysing the survey, we found that all male 
participants perceive themselves as having more experience 
with computers than female participants. According to Table 
2, 80% of male participants state that they have more than 10 
years of experience in using IT, while the rest opts for 6-9 
years. The trend is reverse in females with 86% stating that 
they have 6-9 years of experience in using IT and 13% with 
more than 10 years. According to Table 2, either male 
participants start using technological devices perhaps earlier 
than females or they consider themselves having higher level 
of computer experience than females. 
 
TABLE II. PERCEIVED COMPUTER EXPERIENCE 
 
 
As seen in Table 3, most females consider themselves as 
beginners in computer use (92%), which indicates that they 
use computers at a basic level, such as internet browsing, 
typing etc. However, most males (92%) consider themselves 
as intermediate or professional users of computer.  
.   
TABLE III. PERCEIVED COMPUTER SKILLS 
 
 
According to Table 4, 53.3% of males spend more than  6 
hours on a computer each day; however none of the females 
opts for that. At most, 33.3% of females spend 4-6 hours on 
a computer each day. This daily experience of using 
computers seems to have a significant influence on the 
perception of IT. Perhaps, as a result of this, males feel more 
confident in using computers than females or at least they 
state that it is the case. 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE IV. TIME SPENT ON COMPUTER 
 
More interestingly, we asked participants in the survey 
what the gender of their IT device is (i.e., desktop, mobile, 
laptop or tablet, and the internet) and compared the responses 
of females to males. Table 5 demonsrates the perceived 
gender of IT device overall including males and females. 
According to this table while desktop computers seem to be 
perceived as a more masculine technology (43.3%), mobile 
phones are perceived more feminine (50%). Laptops have no 
gender (68%), neither does the Internet (73%). 
 
TABLE V. PERCEIVED GENDER OF IT DEVICE OVERALL 
 
However, when comparisons are drawn between males 
and females as in Table 6 and Table 7, we found that there 
are gender differences in the perception of the gender of 
technology. We found that all male participants consider the 
internet with no gender at all. Majority of males think that 
their IT device has no gender. Still, if there is a gender 
associated with it, desktop is masculine (40%), mobile phone 
(20%) and laptop are feminine technologies (14.2%). 
 
TABLE VI. PERCEIVED GENDER OF IT DEVICE BY MALES 
 
More than 86.6% of females think that their desktop has 
a gender (while more than half of these think that their 
desktop is masculine, the other half think that it is feminine).  
Their perception of mobile technology is primarily feminine 
(80%), but their laptop (36.3%) and Internet (33.3%) are 
partially feminine, while majority of them think that their 
laptop and internet has no gender . 
 
TABLE VII. PERCEIVED GENDER OF IT DEVICE BY FEMALES 
  
These findings imply that while males show a tendency 
to objectify the technology, they do not seem to see the 
personality or gender behind their IT device. For them, an IT 
device is an object and nothing more than that, whereas a 
large proportion of females seem to perceive a personality 
and gender associated with their IT device. These differences 
between males and females may be the driving force behind 
their use of technology. 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

B. Video Analysis Results 
We used the video annotation to analyse the video 
records of the experiments. We used seconds as the 
measuring unit for time. In total, we collected 8 males and 10 
females’ gestures, but only the ones with better expression 
and comprehension of the task were chosen for analysis. 
Therefore, the final selection was 5 for each gender group. 
There are a total of 157 gestures.  
In 5 male participants, the average duration of video is 
1min 28 sec and the longest video footage is 1:50 minutes.  
The total number of gestures in the video records is 72. Male 
participants used only 4 gesture types in the description of 
the chair in our experiment. According to the Figure 3, the 
use of iconic gesture type is 50%, then followed by deictic, 
junk and beat gesture types. We found higher number of 
deictic and junk gestures 17% each in males video protocols. 
We also found male participants did not use metaphoric 
gestures during the description, and only 3 males performed 
a metaphoric gesture. 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Gesture types used by males 
 
In 5 female participants, the average duration of video is 
1 min 48 sec and the longest video is 2:10 minutes. The total 
number of gestures in the video is 84. Female participants 
used all 7 types of gestures in the description of the chair in 
our experiment. According to the Figure 4, the iconic 
gestures were more than 50% in the all video records, 
followed by deictic, junk metaphoric, repetition and junk 
gestures. The beat gestures are used the least by females. 
Both males and females use plenty of junk gestures but the 
portion of junk gestures is smaller in females (11% vs 17%) .  
 
 
Figure 4: Gesture types used by females 
 
Comparing Figure 3 and Figure 4, we found male 
participants only use 4 types’ gestures out of 7. However, 
females make use of all 7 types. Some female participants 
would even use metaphoric gestures. We found that females 
are more diversified compared to males in their gesture types. 
Analysing the results in Table 8, we found that females 
use more gestures in a longer period (84 vs 72 gestures and 
1:48 vs 1:28 seconds on average). We found that frequency 
of gestures is higher in females (2.39 vs 1.78). On the other 
hand, males perform less number of gestures in a shorter 
time frame (25.6 sec vs 40.2sec).  
 
TABLE VIII: COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS 
 
 
The total duration of video is larger in female participants. 
The video records comprise both gestures and speech. 
Females’ descriptions are longer. The total gesture time is 
nearly as twice as male participants in females.  
The most significant finding in both genders for a gesture 
based interface design is the ratio of iconic gestures as these 
are the most frequent gesture types in both protocols (50% 
for males and 56% for females).  
Detailed description of the abbreviations defined in Table 
6 can be listed as follows as in Nasser and Kavakli [4]: 
Total video duration: The total video duration is 
measured as the sum of total duration of each participant. 
Average video duration: The average video duration is 
measured as the number of total video duration divided by 
the number of the participants.   
Total number of gestures: The total number of gestures 
is measured as the sum of the total gestures of each 
participant used in the video.  
Average gestures per participant: The average gesture 
per participants is measured as the number of total gestures 
performed by the participants divided by the number of the 
participants. This way we get the average gestures 
performance for each gender. 
Total gesture time: The total gesture time in the video 
records. 
Average gesture time: The average gesture time is 
measured as the number of total gesture time divided by the 
number of the participants.  
Frequency: The frequency is measured as the number of 
gestures performed by a participant divided by the gesture 
time period of the same participant. This way we get the 
gestures per second and it will help assess speed of gesture 
performance and point out what gestures are most significant 
for the gesture recognition system 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

C. Structural Analysis Results 
To analyse gender differences in the functional description 
of a chair, we divided the sample chair into different parts 
(Figure 5): seat, back, bars and legs. Each part is connected 
to another part. In Figure 6, we found gender differences in 
the functional description of a chair . Females tend to 
describe the chair following a part based description. For 
example,  first they tend to describe the leg followed by the 
other legs, then they start pointing out the rungs. Then 
follow by the seat and back of the chair. Females’ seem to 
refer to a structural description in their description. 
However, males description of these functional parts is 
random.  
 
 
Figure 5: Parts of a chair [24] 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Number of participants and functional parts of a chair  
 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our motivation to examine gender diﬀerences originates 
from ubiquitous system development for gesture recognition 
[25] suggesting to use multimodal input for adaptive system 
design [26]. Gender diﬀerences found in psychology, 
computer science, marketing, neuroscience, education, and 
economics that strongly suggest that males and females solve 
problems, communicate, and process information diﬀerently.  
We defined two hypotheses to test: (1) The experience of 
using a computer as well as the gender of the user has a 
significant effect on the perception of the gender of the 
technology. The objective of the survey in this study is to 
investigate this research question. (2) Gender differences in 
gestures have a significant influence on human performance. 
Regarding Hypothesis 1, there are gender differences in 
the perception of the gender of technology. While desktop 
computers seem to be perceived as a more masculine 
technology (43.3%), mobile phones are perceived more 
feminine (50%). Laptops have no gender (68%), neither does 
the Internet (73%). When comparisons are drawn between 
males and females, all male participants consider the Internet 
with no gender at all. Majority of males think that their IT 
device has no gender. Still, if there is a gender associated 
with it, desktop is masculine (40%), mobile phone (20%) and 
laptop are feminine technologies (14.2%). More than 86.6% 
of females think that their desktop has a gender. Their 
perception of mobile technology is primarily feminine (80%) 
but their laptop (36.3%) and internet (33.3%) are partially 
feminine, while majority of them think that their laptop and 
internet has no gender. These findings imply that while 
males show a tendency to objectify the technology, they do 
not seem to see the personality or gender behind their IT 
device, whereas a large proportion of females seem to 
perceive a personality and gender associated with their IT 
device. These differences between males and females may be 
the driving force behind their willingness of the use of IT.  
We also found that 53.3% of males spend more than  6 hours 
on a computer each day, however only 33.3% of females 
spend 4- 6 hours on a computer each day. Perhaps, as a result 
of this, most females consider themselves as beginners in 
computer use (92%), however most males (92%) consider 
themselves as intermediate or professional users of computer. 
Regarding Hypothesis 2, there are gender differences in 
the use of gestures. We found male participants only use 4 
types’ gestures out of 7. However females make use of all 7 
types. Females seem to be  more diversified compared to 
males in their gesture types. We found higher number of 
deictic and junk gestures 17% each in males’ video 
protocols, as well as no use of metaphoric gestures. Iconic 
gestures are the most frequently used gestures in both 
protocols (50% for males and 56% for females). The beat 
gestures are used the least by females. Both males and 
females use plenty of junk gestures but the portion of junk 
gestures is smaller in females (11% vs 17%). Females use 
more gestures in a longer period (84 vs 72 gestures and 1:48 
vs 1:28 seconds on average). Frequency of gestures is higher 
in females (2.39 vs 1.78). We also found gender differences 
in the functional description of a chair. This implies that 
males and females may employ different cognitive 
processing methods. Females tend to describe the chair 
following a part based description and referring to a 
structural description. However, males’ description of these 
functional parts seem to be random.  
It is important to state that these are only some pilot 
studies. Future studies require a larger sample size  and must 
focus on the consistency of the annotations using 
independent coders. It would be useful to collect some 
psycho-physiological feedback to verify these results. 
Further, research may also investigate the combined effects 
of gender and culture on gesture performance. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the Australian Research 
Council Discovery grant titled “Gesture Recognition in 
Virtual Reality”.  Also, the experiment on which this project 
was inspired by Jing Liu’s PhD topic and her previous work 
titled “Temporal Relation between speech and co-verbal 
iconic gestures in multimodal interface design”. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Gullberg, ‘Methodological reflections on gesture analysis 
in second language acquisition and bilingualism research’. 
Second Language Research 26,1; 2010, pp. 75–102.  
[2] M. W. Kruger, ‘Environmental technology: Making the real 
world virtual’, Commun.ACM 36, 7 (July), 1993, pp. 36 –37. 
[3] J. Brewer, A. Bassoli, ‘Reﬂections of gender, reﬂections on 
gender: Designing ubiquitous computing technologies’. In 
Gender & Interaction: Real and Virtual Women in a Male 
World, Workshop at AVI, 2006, pp .9–12. 
[4] K. Nasser, M. Kavakli, ‘Influence of Culture in Multimodal 
Interfaces: Differences in Gesture behavior between Anglo-
Celtic and Latin Americans’, the International Journal On 
Advances in Life Sciences, v 4 n 3&4, 2012, pp. 1-10. 
[5] A. Herlitz, L.G. Nilsson, and L. Backman, ‘Gender 
diﬀerences in episodic memory’. Memory & cognition 25(6), 
1997, pp. 801. 
[6] D. C. Geary, S. J. Saults, F. Liu, and M. K. Hoard, ‘Sex 
diﬀerences in spatial cognition, computational ﬂuency, and 
arithmetical reasoning’. Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology 77(4), 2000, pp. 337. 
[7] J. S. Hyde, E. Fennema, and S .J. Lamon, ‘Gender diﬀerences 
in mathematics performance: a meta-analysis’. Psychological 
bulletin 107(2), 1990, pp. 139. 
[8] C. Kramer, ‘Perceptions of female and male speech’. 
Language and Speech 20 (2), 1977, pp. 151. 
[9] N. Briton and J. Hall, ‘Beliefs about female and male 
nonverbal communication’. Sex Roles 32(1), 1995, pp. 79. 
[10] E. 
V. 
College, 
‘Gender 
difference 
in 
nonverbal 
communication’, 
2014, 
http://evc-
cit.info/psych018/observation_samples/observation9028.pdf 
[Online; accessed August 2014]. 
[11] J. Freeman. ‘Women: A feminist perspective’, (4th ed) 
Mountain View, CA: Mayfield Publishing Company, 1992, 
pp. 329–46. 
[12] D. M. Saucier and L. J. Elias. ‘Lateral and sex diﬀerences in 
manual gesture during conversation’. Laterality: Asymmetries 
of Body, Brain and Cognition 6 (3), 2001, pp. 239. 
[13] H. Cochet and J. Vauclair. ‘Hand preferences in human 
adults: Non-communicative actions versus communicative 
gestures’. Cortex 48(8), 2012, pp. 1017. 
[14] D. Gefen, and D. Straub, ‘Gender Differences in the 
Perception and Use of E-mail: An Extension to the 
Technology Acceptance Model’. MIS Quarterly, 1997 pp. 
389-400. 
[15] M. Volman, E. Eck, I. Heemskerk, E. Kuiper, ‘New 
technologies, new differences’. Gender and ethnic differences 
in pupils’ use of ICT in primary and secondary education. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.compedu.2004.03.001, 2004. 
[16] S.G. Mazman & Y. Usluel, ‘Gender differences in using 
social networks’. The Turkish Online Journal of Educational 
Technology, April 2011, Vol.10 Issue 2, (2011). 
[17] H. Ono, M. Zavodny, ‘Gender differences in information 
technology usage: A U.S – Japan comparison’. Sociological 
Perspectives, Vol.48 Issue 1, 2005. 
[18] D.McNeill. Hand and Mind: what Gestures Reveal about 
Thought, University of Chicago Press, 1992. 
[19] W. Fikkert, P. Van der Vet, G. Van der Ver, A. Nijholt, 
‘Gestures for large display control . Computer Interaction’: 
8th International Gesture Workshop, Revised Selected Papers. 
Germany: Springer, 2009, pp. 245-256.   
[20] H. Li, M. Greenspan, ‘Model-based segmentation and 
recognition of dynamic gestures in continuous video streams’. 
Pattern Recognition, 44, 2011, pp. 1614-1628 Retrieved from 
ScienceDirect Database. 
[21] H. Kang, C. Lee, & K. Jung, ‘Recognition-based gesture 
spotting in video games’. Pattern Recognition Letters 25, 15, 
pp. 1701-1714. DOI:10.1016/j.patrec.2004.06.016, 2004. 
[22] Hofstede G. H.,  Hofstede G. J,  Minkov Michael () Cultures 
and organizations: software of the mind : intercultural 
cooperation and its importance for survival. (3rd ed) 
McGraw-Hill 
Professional 
ISBN 
0071664181, 
9780071664189, 2010. 
[23] Anvil, 
http://www.anvil-software.org/, 
2014 
[Online;accessedAugust-2014]. 
[24] M. Kavakli, S.A.R. Scrivener, L.J. Ball, ‘Structure in idea 
sketching behaviour’, Design Studies: The International 
Journal for Design Research in Engineering, Architecture, 
Products and Systems, ELSEVIER, 19(4), 1998, 485-517. 
[25] M. Kavakli, ‘Gesture Recognition in Virtual Reality’, Special 
Issue on: "Immersive Virtual, Mixed, or Augmented Reality 
Art" 
of 
The 
International 
Journal 
of 
Arts 
and 
Technology  (IJART), Vol 1, No 2, 2008, pp. 215-229. 
[26] J. Liu, , M. Kavakli, Towards Accommodating Gender 
Differences in Speech-Gesture Based Multimodal Interfaces 
Design, ICITA 2013, 8th International Conference on 
Information Technology and Applications, Sydney, Australia, 
1 - 4 July, pp.1-6, 2013. 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

