A Route Recommendation System in Disaster-Struck Areas 
with Consideration for Preferences of Affected Drivers 
Kazuki Ono 
Graduate School of Science and 
Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
is011089@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp 
 
Tomoko Izumi 
College of Information Science and 
Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
izumi-t@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp 
 
Yoshio Nakatani 
College of Information Science and 
Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
nakatani@is.ritsumei.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— This paper proposes a route recommendation 
system in disaster-struck areas with consideration for the 
preferences of affected drivers. Although routes to a 
destination and traffic information such as congestion can be 
obtained easily, there are routes which disaster victims will 
wish to avoid. For example, when a tsunami warning has been 
made, it is necessary to avoid routes near the sea, and to take a 
safe route which is higher in elevation than the height of the 
tsunami. Accordingly, our proposed system searches for routes 
in consideration of the psychology of affected drivers. By 
searching for an appropriate route for affected drivers, it is 
expected that smooth road traffic can become a reality without 
causing road congestion. 
Keywords- traffic information; disaster prevention; route 
recommendation; navigation system 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This paper proposes a route recommendation system for 
disaster situations with consideration for the preferences of 
victims. There are routes which disaster victims will wish to 
avoid. For example, when a tsunami warning has been made, 
it is necessary to avoid routes near the sea, and to take a safe 
route which is higher in elevation than the height of the 
tsunami. It is possible to position this study as the field 
amalgamated by ITS and disaster prevention. The paper 
organized as follows. In this section we present the 
relationship between earthquakes and roads, and briefly 
introduces ITS. In the next section we present related work. 
System overview is presented in Section 3, and the results 
of the comparison with other systems are presented in 
Section 4. Section 5 presents a conclusion and future work. 
A. Earthquakes and Road Traffic 
Japan is a country of frequent earthquakes, with many 
earthquakes occurring every year. The Great Hanshin Awaji 
Earthquake of 1995 recorded a seismic intensity of 7.3 in 
Kobe, killing 6,434 people. The Great East Japan 
Earthquake in 2011 recorded a magnitude of 9.0. This 
earthquake was a plate earthquake, thus causing major 
damage by the resulting tsunami, which had a recorded 
maximum height of 15.8m in Iwate Prefecture. The disaster 
caused the confirmed deaths of 15,616 people, with a further 
4,949 people recorded as missing. The tsunami reached 5 
kilometers inland along the coastline and swept away 
houses, roads, railroads, bridges and even reinforced 
concrete buildings. Cars, large ships, and airplanes were 
also carried by the waves, becoming the cause of further 
damage to buildings.  
Seismic intensity is classified as follows in Japan. 
 
i. Seismic intensity of 1-2: the quake is perceptible by 
humans. 
ii. Seismic intensity of 3-4: Buildings are shaken. 
iii. Seismic intensity of 5-6: Buildings start collapse and 
landslides occur. 
iv. Seismic intensity of 7+: Many buildings completely 
collapse and major damage occurs. 
 
Earthquakes of a seismic intensity of 5 or greater have 
occurred more than 100 times in Japan since the year 2000. 
An earthquake damages buildings, traffic networks, and 
lifelines. Particularly, the traffic network is often greatly 
damaged due to earthquakes, which prevents the delivery of 
relief goods.  
In 2004, the Mid Niigata Prefecture Earthquake occurred, 
causing railways, such as the Joetsu Shinkansen line, and 
roads to close. Among major roads, the Hokuriku 
Expressway, the Kan-etsu Expressway, and National Routes 
8, 17, and 116 were closed, causing the transport of goods to 
be suspended. However, the road network played an 
important role in the transport of relief goods by ensuring 
access to alternative routes, as shown in Figure 1[1]. In this 
figure, the Kan-etsu Expressway (blue line) was out of use, 
and two detours (red lines) were alternatively used. 
The same situation was found in the Tokachi-Oki 
Earthquake occurred in 2003, also causing major damage by 
tsunami [2]. 
A peculiar driver psychology can be observed in 
disaster-struck areas. During the Great East Japan 
Earthquake in 2011, many drivers avoided routes near the 
sea in fear of being killed by the approaching tsunami. As a 
result, heavy traffic occurred due to the increase in cars on 
mountain roads where traffic is usually light. 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

This paper proposes a route recommendation system in 
disaster-struck areas, targeting affected drivers with 
consideration for this kind of psychology of victims. 
 
 
Figure 1.   Ensuring alternative routes (map data provided by Yahoo Maps) 
B. Intelligent Transport Systems : ITS 
ITS have the purpose of improving the efficiency, safety 
and serviceability of automobile traffic. As ITS technology 
progresses, many benefits can be obtained in various areas. 
Among these, the field of automotive navigation systems is 
notable. Automotive navigation systems provide traffic 
information containing traffic congestion information, and 
search for the most suitable route to the destination. Such 
technology is already a feature of many people’s daily lives.  
However, there are only a few opportunities to apply this 
technology to traffic problems in disaster situations. These 
support by ITS elicit an effect to solve the problem in 
unusual situation. In the next section, such trials are 
introduced and problems to be solved about road traffic in 
disaster-struck areas are revealed. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Various studies have been conducted on navigation 
systems. Especially, the NAVITIME and MapFanWeb 
systems are very famous in Japan for providing traffic 
updates, enabling drivers to get the route to their destination 
easily. NAVITIME provided by NAVITIME JAPAN is the 
Total Navigation solution that allows users to plan travel 
routes from various transportation methods - including 
trains, subways, buses and taxis. MapFanWeb is same 
services, map retrieval, route research, transfer guidance. 
These services, however, are useful in everyday use and 
special functions are required in disaster situations. 
 
Figure 2.   Google’s Map of Automobile Traffic Performance 
A. Map of Automobile Traffic Performance 
Google 
provided 
maps 
of 
Automobile 
Traffic 
Performance during the 2011 earthquake and tsunami 
disaster [3] (Figure 2). Using these maps, many drivers were 
able to travel easily in the disaster area. This service 
displays roads which were accessible between 0:00 and 
24:00 of the previous day in blue, and roads which were 
inaccessible during the same time period in gray. The 
service is renewed every 24 hours.  
 
B. Probe Car System 
Probe car systems, which regard individual vehicles as 
moving sensors and provide traffic, weather information, etc. 
generated from vehicles, are attracting much attention. 
Among the systems realized are primarily probe traffic 
congestion information systems based on vehicle positions, 
time stamps, etc. [4]. For example, such systems can obtain 
local weather information from combination of the GPS 
data and activation of windshield wipers. These systems are 
also able to get traffic congestion information by using the 
information of the car’s speed. While having the advantage 
of collecting local data, probe car systems have the 
disadvantage of only being able to collect data when the car 
is actually running.  
 
C. Route Preference During Disasters 
Figure 3 shows a map of Tagajo, Miyagi Prefecture, 
which was hit by the tsunami in the Great East Japan 
Earthquake of 2011. National Route 45 and Prefectural 
Roads 23 and 10, principle roads in Miyagi, all became 
inaccessible due to tsunami damage (circled in red on Figure 
3). These roads were restored after one month, but many 
drivers, afraid of further tsunami damage, continued to take 
the Rifu Bypass Highway (circled in blue on Figure 3) 
which is 3 kilometers inland instead of the coastal roads. As 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

a result, major traffic congestion occurred on the highway 
due to the increase in cars. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Map of Tagajo (map data provided by Google Maps) 
Even when drivers in disaster situations use navigation 
systems to search for their destination, navigation cannot 
fulfill its role, if there are roads rendered inaccessible by 
damage. Thus, it is expected that the drivers in the disaster 
situations uses the navigation systems by combining the 
information about road condition they know. To solve this 
problem, in this paper, we propose a navigation system that 
reflects the results of road condition detection. Furthermore, 
the system recommends roads based on the psychological 
analysis of drivers in disaster situations. That is, roads 
which is preferred by the drivers are predicted by the 
systems and proposed to the drivers. 
III. 
SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
This study proposes a navigation system which combines 
the results of road condition detection. 
A. Fundamental Policy of Proposed System 
i. 
Ignore inaccessible roads when searching for the 
route to destination. 
 
Ordinarily, when a route to destination is searched for 
in a navigation system, it recommends the route in 
consideration of shortest journey time and traffic conditions, 
but this is for non-disaster situations. In fact, there is no 
guarantee that the roads can be used normally after a 
disaster. Maps of performance of automobile traffic display 
such information, as stated above. In this study, the 
proposed system searches for the route to a destination 
containing no inaccessible roads. 
 
ii. 
Recommend appropriate routes according to the 
type of disaster. 
 
There are various types of disaster (landslides, tsunami, 
floods, etc.), and drivers may need to use different roads 
according to the type of disaster. For example, when a 
landslide occurs, this system displays safe roads, ignoring 
roads near mountains and other places where landslides are 
likely to happen. When a tsunami occurs, this system 
displays safe roads which are higher in elevation than the 
predicted height of the tsunami. Thus, this system selects 
the route in consideration of elevation and distance from the 
sea and mountains. Because of this, it is expected that the 
driver can arrive to the destination safety. Further, if there 
are any roads that the driver does not want to take, the 
system can search for the route after the driver has 
deselected such roads. 
 
iii. Display the optimal alternative route for the driver 
 
If all drivers take the route recommended by the 
system to avoid the tsunami, too many cars will concentrate 
on the road and there will be danger of traffic congestion. 
However, traffic congestion must be avoided in order to 
ensure smooth access for emergency vehicles. Therefore, it 
is necessary to propose a route which enables emergency 
vehicles to arrive at their destination safely, and as quickly 
as possible.  
Also, as cars exist in different sizes (large, medium, 
and small), in order for each size to drive safely, it is 
important to ensure sufficient road width in the route to the 
destination. For example, when the system proposes a safe 
road to drivers of large cars, they may not be able to pass if 
the road is too narrow, which would waste time 
unnecessarily. Thus, avoidance of traffic congestion and 
realization of smooth road traffic can be attained by 
proposing the optimal route separately to drivers of each 
size of vehicle. 
 
B. Use of  Floating Car Data 
Floating car data are driving data used by the Internavi-a 
Floating Car System provided by the Honda Motor 
Company to drivers in Japan [5]. Internavi recommends 
routes and allows display of the newest road information by 
using detailed road information from cars equipped with the 
system, in addition to information about trunk roads and 
highways via VICS. Furthermore, it is possible to generate 
traffic information from floating car data. It can be expected 
that smooth road traffic which avoids congestion can be 
realized by using floating car data. 
 
C. Details of System 
The proposed system is implemented in a Windows 
environment, using Java as the development language and 
JavaScript to display the route on a map (provided by 
Google Maps). Although the system can be applied to any 
location, we used the area shown in Figure 4 as a model area 
to investigate the necessary functions of the system. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

We can retrieve the route to the destination in the target 
area. In this system, the user selects a point of departure, 
destination, and the disaster (tsunami, landslide, or flood) 
that the user needs to avoid, and the system proposes the 
optimal route in consideration of these terms. 
For example, if the selected disaster is a tsunami, the 
system will propose a route which has sufficient distance 
from the coastline. To be specific, the system targets routes 
which are predicted not to be damaged by the tsunami on 
the hazard map provided by the Ministry of Land, 
Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism. Furthermore, the 
system proposes the shortest route among the roads 
unaffected by tsunami, because if the proposed route is too 
far from the coastline, the driver will take too much time. 
The information related to the proposed route is 
recorded as XML data, and the system displays the safe 
route on a Google Map based on this XML data. 
If there are any roads that the user wants to avoid, the 
system will propose a route excluding these. For example, 
the system proposes a route which will not be affected by 
tsunami according to the hazard map, but the user is worried 
that this road may be dangerous. In such cases, the user can 
deselect the route they do not want to use, and search for the 
route again in consideration of this. 
 
Figure 4.  Target area, Yokkaichi. (map data provided by Google Maps) 
All intersections within the target area are assigned a 
number, and the road is modeled as connecting these 
intersections. Suppose the target area in Figure 5, composed 
of 5 intersections and 5 roads. Intersection 2 is linked to 
Intersections 1 and 3. Each intersection has data of the 
longitude and latitude. The intersections where cars can pass 
safely are recorded as XML data. 
 
 
Figure 5.    Example of road formation. 
This system consists of 5 Java classes. XML data is 
produced by executing these, and displayed on a Google 
Map using JavaScript. A diagram of the system process is 
shown in Figure 6. 
 
D. System Target Area 
Although the proposed system can target any area, in the 
evaluation of this paper, we targets part of Yokkaichi, Mie 
Prefecture, as follows. The area is 7 kilometers from north 
to south, where north is the point where National Route 23 
and a Prefectural Road 502 cross, and south is the point 
where National Route 23 and Prefectural Road 401 cross. 
This system targets national roads and prefectural roads in 
this area, shown in yellow on Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 6.    System process. 
Tokai, 
Tonankai, 
and 
Nankai 
earthquakes 
occur 
periodically every 100-150 years, so it is predicted that one 
will strike without fail in the first half of this century. 
Regarding the Tokai earthquake, it it possible that one may 
happen at any moment, as none have occurred since 1854. 
Furthermore, these earthquakes have often occurred at the 
same time or in close succession. There are predictions of 
major damage due to these earthquakes in Yokkaichi. This 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

area has the sea in the east, so there is a danger of tsunami 
damage similar to the Great East Japan Earthquake. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS OF COMPARISON WITH OTHER SYSTEMS 
A. Results of Each Navigation System   
The same departure and destination were set in 
NAVITIME, MapFanWeb, and the proposed system. Figure 
7 shows the route recommendation results by these systems. 
A recommendation result by NAVITIME is indicated in 
blue, MapFanWeb in red, and the proposed system in green. 
NAVITIME and MapFanWeb recommended National 
Route 23, along the sea, while the proposed system selected 
National Route 1, which is further inland than National 
Route 23.  
 
 
Figure 7.  Recommendation results (map data provided by Google Maps). 
B. Comparision with Hazard Map 
A hazard map is a map that highlights areas that are 
affected by or vulnerable to a particular hazard. They are 
typically created for natural hazards such as earthquakes, 
volcano eruptions, landslides, flooding, and tsunami. Hazard 
maps help prevent serious damage and deaths, and help 
victims to take refuge quickly and precisely. Figure 8 shows 
a hazard map of Yokkaichi [6]. This map data provided by 
the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Hazard map of Yokkaichi(map data provided by the Ministry of 
Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism ) 
 
The proposed route of NAVITIME and MapFanWeb 
passed through the area which is colored yellow on the 
hazard map. This area will be affected by tsunami. However, 
one of our system only passes the uncolored area, so it may 
be said that drivers will be more likely to reach their 
destination safely in comparison to the other recommended 
routes. 
National Route 1 is recommended as an alternative route 
instead of National Route 23, in the route proposed by our  
system. 
When 
the 
authors 
confirmed 
our 
system’s 
recommendation with a student from Yokkaichi, we were 
told that National Route 1 has two lanes each way and a 
wide lane, meaning it will be easy to drive, so it is no 
problem as an alternative route. However it is prone to 
heavy traffic on a routine basis, so if traffic from National 
Route 23 is diverted to National Route 1, it has the potential 
to cause a traffic jam. Thus, we received advice that our 
system should disperse cars to several other safe roads. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed a route recommendation 
system for disaster situations which considers the 
preferences of victims. We demonstrated the effectiveness 
of our system, which proposes a safe alternative route, 
avoiding places known to be dangerous according to a 
hazard map.  
The proposed system uses a hazard map provided by the 
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism to 
target roads which will not be affected by disasters. 
However it is not always true that the effects of a disaster 
will spread exactly as indicated on a hazard map. 
Accordingly, some effects may occur in places which are 
predicted not to be affected on the hazard map after an 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

actual disaster. In order to avoid such problems, a system 
which constantly renews information relating to traffic flow, 
as in Google’s map of performance of automobile traffic 
described above, will be necessary.  
In additional, the proposed system does not consider the 
amount of traffic, including traffic jams, that will be 
generated by diverting a large number of cars to alternative 
routes. Thus, there is a possibility that traffic jams will 
occur if all drivers take the route recommended by this 
system. Therefore, an area for improvement would be to 
ensure that the system recommends the route in response to 
the amount of traffic, and attempts to avoid traffic jams. 
In the future, we aim to improve the system so that it can 
recommend a route in consideration of the amount of real-
time traffic, and renew real-time road information regarding 
routes which have recently become inaccessible due to 
disaster or construction works. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Y. Kumagai, J. Y. Choe, and T. Nakano, “Road 
communication at the time of disaster”, 2005,  Prevention 
Times 220, pp. 64-69. 
[2] Y. Tanioka, Y. Nishimura, K.Hirakawa, F. Imamura, I. Abe, 
Y. Abe, K. Shindou, H. Matsutomi, T. Takahashi, K. Imai, K. 
Harada, Y. Namegawa, Y. Hasegawa, Y. Hayashi, F. 
Nanayama, T. Kamataki, Y. Kawata, Y. Fukasawa, S. 
Koshimura, Y.Hada, Y. Azumai, K. Hirata, A. Kamikawa, A. 
Yoshikawa, T. Shiga, M.Kobayashi, and S. Masaka, 
“Tsunami 
run-up 
heights 
of 
the 
2003 
Tokachi-oki 
earthquake”, Earty Planets Space, 56, pp. 359-365, 2004. 
[3] Map of performance of automobile traffic, provided by 
Google Crisis Response. 
http://www.google.com/intl/ja/crisisresponse/japanquake2011
_traffic.html  Accessed on 2012/7/4  
[4] Y. Hada, T. Suzuki, H. Shimora, K. Meguro, and N. Kodama, 
“Issues and Future Prospect on Practical Use of Probe Vehicle 
Data for Disaster Reduction: Provision of the Vehicle 
Tracking Map in the 2007 Niigataken Chuetsu-oki 
Earthquake,” 2nd Ed.,Vol. 9. (Special Edition) pp.148-159.  
[5] Probe-Car Information System ITS Center, Japan Automobile 
Research Institute 
http://www.jari.or.jp/resource/pdf/research-
testing/kenkyu3_03.pdf  Accessed on 2012/7/4 
[6] Hazard 
map of 
Yokkaichi, the Ministry of 
Land, 
Infrastructure, 
Transport 
and 
Tourism. 
http://bousai2.city.yokkaichi.mie.jp/home/02_hazard_map_hinanjyo/
01_hazard_map/pdf/0402.pdf  Accessed on 2012/7/4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

