A Survey of the Effectiveness of Automated Revenue Collection Systems in County 
Governments in Kenya 
A Case Study of Kiambu and Taita Taveta County Governments 
Margaret N. Njenga -Author 
Project Coordinator,  
@iLabAfrica, Strathmore University, 
Nairobi, Kenya 
mnjenga@strathmore.edu 
Joseph Sevilla-Author 
Director, 
@iLabAfrica, Strathmore University, 
Nairobi, Kenya 
jsevilla@strathmore.edu 
Abstract—This paper examines the effectiveness of using an 
automated revenue collection system in two counties in Kenya: 
Taita Taveta and Kiambu County Governments. County 
governments in Kenya have recently adopted the automated 
revenue collection systems in order to aid in transparency and 
accountability of citizens’ taxes. @iLabAfrica –Strathmore 
University provided the solution - CountyPro as a revenue 
collection system in both counties. The online system has a 
citizen portal and a government staff portal. This study focuses 
on the effectiveness of CountyPro system on the backend (staff) 
portal. A descriptive research design was adopted in order to 
provide answers to who, what, where, when and how. 
Questionnaires and interviews were used as the main tool for 
data collection. The strengths and weaknesses of both systems 
were also analyzed and also how they work together to bring 
out efficiency and effectiveness in the day to day operations of 
county governments. In general all county staff interviewed 
welcome the idea of an automated revenue collection system 
with Kiambu County recording a 60 percent increase in 
revenue as a result of using CountyPro. It is the perception of 
most county officials that the Point of Sale Terminal is the tool 
that is used to determine the revenue collected. However, this 
system by itself is not very effective. It has to be supported by 
an online system that will give a breakdown of all the kind of 
revenue that is collected. Counties should ensure that they have 
laid out proper infrastructure, trained its employees before 
rolling out of I.T projects. County management should also act 
as champions for change to help their employees transition 
from one system to another. Insights to this study will be used 
to improve on the current system and also help other counties 
in following the correct guidelines when coming up with a 
revenue collection system. 
Keywords— 
e-governance; 
revenue; 
management; 
effectiveness;  system. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
E-government is a generic term for web-based services 
from agencies of local, state and federal governments. In e-
government, the government uses information technology 
and particularly the Internet to support government 
operations, engage citizens, and provide government 
services. The interaction may be in the form of obtaining 
information, filings, or making payments and a host of other 
activities via the World Wide Web [9]. Kenya’s e-
Government 
program 
was 
meant 
to 
address 
two 
impediments to development faced by many countries: 
endemic corruption and inefficiency [14].  
Kenya has recently adopted a decentralized form of 
government. In the year 2010, Kenyans passed a new 
Constitution into place. One of the pillars of this new law is 
Devolution. Devolution refers to the transfer of decision-
making capacity from higher levels in an organization to 
lower levels [4]. When governments devolve functions, they 
transfer authority for decision-making, finance, and 
management to quasi-autonomous units of local government 
with corporate status [2]. In Kenya, this meant that there 
was to be a national government and also the country was 
subdivided into forty seven counties. Each of these counties 
would have their own small governments and would each be 
headed by a governor. These counties generate their own 
revenue in addition to a percentage released by the national 
government. These small governments have also embraced 
incorporation of e-governance in their counties.  
According to Heeks [6], e-government initiatives are 
important to governments in the following ways: they 
improve government processes or e-administration, help cut 
time and financial costs, manage employee and financial 
performance and create empowerment. They also help in 
connecting citizens to help improve the relationship between 
the government and its people. Citizens can hold public 
servants accountable for their decisions and actions. In turn 
public services are improved. Citizens’ voices can also be 
heard and hence improved participation, and building 
external relations with members of the private sector 
through establishing meaningful partnerships.  
As part of the devolution process, county governments 
are mandated to provide the essential services to its citizens 
such as good education, health care and good roads. Each 
county receives a percentage of funds from the national 
government depending on some factors such as poverty 
level index. This amount received from the central 
government is not sufficient to provide these services. To 
ensure sustainability, counties are expected to generate their 
own income. It is therefore very necessary to have a good 
and strong foundation of an automated revenue collection 
management system.  
With this in mind, @iLabAfrica Strathmore University in 
partnership with Namu Health and iPay developed a 
software solution for County Revenue management. System 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

requirements were discussed with Kiambu and Taita Taveta 
county governments and an agreement was reached to 
develop a citizen centric e-governance and revenue 
management solution. The system has a front end portal for 
the citizens and a backend portal for the county staff. The 
back end portal has various functionalities that include: 
permit and licenses processing, billing, property rates 
payment, enforcement functionality, ability to generate 
reports and grievances management. This study will focus on 
the effectiveness of the back end system to the county staff.  
The reasons behind the development of this solution were 
to have a system that would enhance transparency and 
accountability of those in power. It is a tool that is used to 
aid those in government to use their instruments of power 
efficiently and effectively. Though it has several components 
to it, it works as a unified system. In addition to this, it is also 
expected to work optimally, have minimal errors, easy to use 
and seal loopholes that could have existed in the old Local 
Authorities Integrated Financial Operations Management 
System (LAIFOMS).  
Below are the objectives of the research: 
1. To determine if county employees understand the 
usefulness of a revenue collection system.  
2. To determine the perception of county staff on County 
Pro Revenue Collection System.  
3. To determine the strengths and weaknesses County Pro 
Automated Revenue Collection System.  
4. To continually improve the revenue collection system as 
a whole based on the results of the research.  
To examine the above requirements, a study was 
performed. The paper is structured as follows below. Section 
2 outlines literature gathered on previous systems from 
books, journals and online research comparing automated 
revenue collection systems in other countries with 
CountyPro system deployed in Kenya.  Section 3 describes 
the methodology used to collect and gather data and as well 
as how the sample size was reached and how the data was 
obtained. Section 4 interprets and discusses the significance 
of the findings of the research. Section 5 – Conclusion 
summarizes 
the 
findings 
of 
the 
research 
giving 
recommendations for future improvements. 
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Automation is a set of technologies that results in 
operation of machines and systems without significant 
human intervention and achieves performance superior to 
manual operation [1].  
For government to match in performance with the growth 
and expectations of its constituents, it must dramatically 
increase its fiscal depth without incurring costly recurring 
overheads. Automated systems have been proven to be 
capable of introducing massive efficiencies to business 
processes that can result in increased revenue [8]. 
According to Sani [7], By automating revenue collection, 
service providers have better audit trail since all transactions 
captured can be detailed by time, whom and where. This 
prevents revenue loss through abuses as all moves are 
recorded electronically. 
Problems such as high costs for collection, fraud, 
underpayment and leakages in revenue could be made worse 
by massively expanding the current taxable base without the 
use of adequate computerized solutions. The problems of 
tracking and identifying fraud or rogue revenue collectors are 
only compounded by the usage of manual or centralized 
systems due to the resources and overheads needed to 
monitor and control such problems. A decentralized, 
automated revenue collection system allows for increased 
and timely access to information that would otherwise take 
too much time and effort to generate from the available hard 
copy records [8].  
Various scholars have analyzed several revenue 
collection systems. Gidisu [10] studied the automation 
system procedures of the Ghana customs division. A survey 
of 40 officials from the Customs Division with specific 
duties and responsibilities in automation system management 
at the Ghana Revenue Authority (GRA) was conducted. 
After this survey, it can be said that the automation is a 
powerful monitoring tool for GRA. It was realized that there 
was a positive impact of automation system usage and the 
cost of tax administration, automation and effectiveness of 
revenue collection. 
According to Mitullah et al. [13], from a survey of 175 
local authorities in Kenya, it was discovered that most of 
these local authorities had a lot of challenges in realizing 
their mandate for instance delivery of services. This was 
attributed to poor revenue management systems. The study 
concluded that information system was instrumental in 
enhancing and proper management of resources at the local 
authorities. 
A study was conducted by Justus [3] to determine the 
effects of an integrated revenue collection system in 
Machakos County, as well as challenges facing its 
implementation. The study established that implementation 
of integrated revenue collection system influenced revenue 
collection positively. Challenges that were identified to 
influence implementation of integrated revenue collection 
system 
included 
resources, 
staff 
capacity, 
political 
interference and remoteness among others. 
III.
METHODOLOGY 
A Descriptive Research Design approach was used for 
this study. This kind of study enabled the researcher provide 
answers to the questions of who, what, when, where, and 
how effective the automated revenue collection system has 
been in Kiambu and Taita Taveta counties. Quantitative and 
qualitative 
survey 
approaches 
were 
used 
where 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

questionnaires and interviews were administered to county 
staff members. The respondents for this study included: 
billing officers, revenue officers, cashiers and parking 
attendants. 
Both primary and secondary data sources were used to 
gather information. Literature was extracted from books, 
journals and online research by scholars.  
County governments are further divided into sub 
counties, which are smaller divisions of the counties. 
Judgmental sampling was used in selecting two (2) sub 
counties from Kiambu County and two (2) sub counties 
from Taita Taveta County. This decision was reached by 
determining the sub counties in which there is the most 
activity while operating County Pro system.  
Slovin’s formula was used to determine the sample size 
from each of these counties.  
Where n=Sample size, N=Total population e= Desired 
Margin of error, that is 0.05% based on a 95% confidence 
level. The study included a total population of 150 staff 
members from Kiambu County. n=150/ (1+150(0.05)2) = 
109. This generated a sample size of 109.  
The same formula (Slovin’s formula) was used to 
determine the sample size for staff of Taita Taveta County, 
where N = total population with a 95% confidence level. 
This generated n=100/ (1+100(0.05)2) = 80.  
IV.
DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS 
The study sought to find out the effectiveness of a 
revenue collection system in both Kiambu and Taita Taveta 
Counties.  
To perform this survey, 65% of the interviewees from 
Kiambu were male and 35% were female. In Taita Taveta 
County, 55% were male while 45% interviewees were 
female. In both counties, the male gender was more 
represented. 
The study revealed that 2% of the respondents were 
below the age of 25 years, while 52% were between the age 
of 25 and 35 years. 32% were between ages 36 to 45 years. 
Only 10% of the respondents were above the age of 45. This 
shows that majority of the county staff are young, energetic 
and productive individuals.  
Sixty seven (67%) percent of both the population 
selected in Taita Taveta and Kiambu Counties had been 
working in the county or the defunct local authority for 
more than ten (10) years while twenty eight (28%) percent 
had been working for between five and ten years. Thirty 
nine percent (39%) of the population had been working in 
the county government for less than five (5) years. This data 
shows the respondents’ ability to compare the past and 
present systems and hence shows appropriateness to answer 
survey questions.  
Fifty percent (50%) of the population from both counties 
agreed that they think about an online system when they 
hear about an automated revenue collection system, thirty 
percent (30%) think of a point of sale terminal while the rest 
of the population think of both. This is an indication that a 
significant number of the population still views the POS 
terminal as the main revenue collection system. The 
respondents further added that the reason behind this is that 
the POS was a tangible device. This made them feel as if 
they had shifted systems. 
Below is a breakdown of some of the findings from the 
questionnaires issued to the county staff of Kiambu County. 
TABLE I. 
KIAMBU COUNTY RESPONSES 
Kiambu County 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagre
e 
Neut
ral 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
System 
was easy 
to learn 
0 
0 
10 
(9.2
%) 
19 
(17.4%) 
80 
(73.3%) 
System is 
Easy to 
use 
0 
0 
4 
(3.7
%) 
30 
(27.5%) 
75 
(68.8%) 
Time 
based 
efficiency 
0 
7 
(6.4%) 
8 
(7.3
%) 
40 
(36.7%) 
54 
(49.5%) 
System 
has low 
downtime 
0 
0 
1 
(0.9
%) 
6 
(5.5%) 
102 
(93.6%) 
Reports 
are easy 
to 
generate 
0 
8 
(7.3%) 
4 
(3.7
%) 
56 
(51.4%) 
41 
(37.6%) 
Reports 
are easy 
to 
understan
d 
0 
0 
2 
(1.8
%) 
15 
(13.8%) 
92 
(84.4%) 
CountyPr
o serves 
better 
than old 
system  
0 
6 
(5.5%) 
15 
(13.8
%) 
70 
(64.2%) 
18 
(16.5%) 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Below is a breakdown of some of the findings from the 
questionnaires issued to the county staff of Taita Taveta 
County. 
TABLE II. 
TAITA TAVETA COUNTY RESPONSES 
Taita Taveta County 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neutral 
Agree 
Strong
ly 
Agree 
System 
was easy 
to learn 
0 
1 
(1.25%) 
15 
(18.8%) 
4 
(5%) 
60 
(75%) 
System is 
Easy to 
use 
0 
2 
(2.5%) 
5 
(6.25%) 
20 
(25%) 
53 
(66.25
%) 
Time 
based 
efficiency 
0 
12 
(15%) 
5 
(6.25%) 
3 
(3.75
%) 
60 
(75%) 
System 
has low 
downtime 
0 
0 
3 
(3.75%) 
6 
(7.5%) 
71 
(88.75
%) 
Reports 
are easy 
to 
generate 
0 
0 
4 
(5%) 
40 
(50%) 
36 
(45%) 
Reports 
are easy 
to 
understan
d 
0 
0 
5 
(6.25%) 
20 
(25%) 
55 
(68.75
%) 
CountyPr
o serves 
better 
than old 
system  
0 
5 
(6.25%) 
11 
(13.75
%) 
30 
(37.5
%) 
34 
(42.5
%) 
73.3% from Kiambu County and 75% of the respondents 
from Taita Taveta County Strongly agreed that the system 
was easy to learn. These strong percentages from users from 
both counties are an indicator that the system satisfies the 
simplification of the system to basic users. 
A notable 49.5% of respondents from Kiambu County 
and 75% of respondents from Taita Taveta County strongly 
agreed that the system is efficient in terms of helping them 
save time. This was done in comparison to the older system.  
93.6% of Kiambu County employees indicated that the 
system experienced low downtime while 88.75% of the 
employees from Taita Taveta County indicated that the 
system had experienced low downtime while operating it. 
They also added that the only times when there was a lag 
with the system was during the deadline for renewal of the 
yearly permits. This is during the 31st day of March of every 
year.  
16.5% of respondents from Kiambu County strongly 
agreed that reports generated from CountyPro system are 
easy to understand while 68.75% of the respondents from 
Taita Taveta County agreed that the reports are easy to 
understand. The reason for this difference was attributed to 
the little amount of training that had been conducted to the 
employees of Kiambu County at that time as compared to 
Taita Taveta County. Also, most of the trainees introduced 
to these new systems were not technologically savvy. 
Eighty percent (80%) of the population from both 
counties agreed that the CountyPro online system has 
facilitated an increase in revenues.  
When asked about effect of the system on corruption, 
the respondents stated that the system had sealed some 
loopholes in terms of county employees not handling money 
physically. They further stated that the use of mobile 
money, VISA and MasterCard options helped to seal some 
of these loopholes. 
 On the other hand, Taita Taveta County interviewees 
stated that, ethics, good leadership and enforcement is what 
had contributed to the reduction. 
 80 percent agreed that the new system served them 
better than the old system – LAIFOMS system while 20 
percent thought that it did not serve them better than the 
previous system.  
The researcher further sought to find out if the previous 
LAIFOMS system had any drawbacks. It was pointed out 
that it had several major challenges. These included: 
1.
LAIFOMS was a standalone system that only 
catered for the backend operations, leaving citizens 
with inaccessibility problems, with nowhere to get 
information on county rates and charges, the finance 
act etc. This made them constantly visit the county 
offices which took a lot of time. 
2.
Money could not be tracked to the LAIFOMS 
system as bank slips were not posted to the system. 
Instead the banking slips were recorded manually in 
a register outside the system. 
3.
Collection of rates and money was done using 
physical receipts hence making the systems 
vulnerable to corrupt practices by county officials.  
  The researcher also sought to find out the advantages of 
the new automated system by the county employees. 
 One major advantage of this system was the ability of 
county employees to access data from anywhere as the 
system was online. With the system, citizens could access 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

information on procedures and services with the availability 
of documents online such as the Public Finance Act. It also 
incorporated various modes of payment as opposed to only 
cash option which was in the old system. With the new 
automated system, citizens could apply for permits and 
download them online once they are processed by county 
officials on the back end system. Below are some of the 
other benefits of CountyPro that were pointed out by the 
county officials:  
1.
It helped to stamp out bureaucracy and endless 
procedures as in the old system.  
2.
The system helped reduce paper work. 
3.
Reports in the system could be accessed at any 
time. 
4.
The 
reports 
showed 
best 
and 
worst 
performances in revenue and hence knew 
where to put in more resources. This helped in 
decision making by the policy makers. 
5.
Anytime anywhere access to the Government, 
24 hours a day 365 days a year. Even those 
living in the diaspora could make payments for 
fees and licences owed online. 
6.
Efficient delivery of government services to 
citizens, and reduced dependence on human 
interactions. 
7.
Reduced cost in terms of time and resources in 
processing 
transactions/applications 
and 
delivering citizen services. 
8.
Increased citizen participation/empowerment 
through 
transparency, 
and 
access 
to 
information. 
9.
Citizens felt a form of participation in the 
county government as the system sent them 
alerts whenever their permit was ready for 
collection at the county offices. It also alerted 
them whenever there were any waivers or 
balances in revenues. 
10. Upsurge in revenues. 
The respondents were asked whether they thought the 
system had brought about an increase in revenue in their 
counties and why. They stated that the increase in revenue 
was facilitated in the following ways: 
1.
Monitoring and management of cash flow. All 
the sources of revenue are centrally located 
and are therefore easy to monitor. 
2.
Helped to recover lost revenues. After using 
the system, the county officials could more 
easily identify the customers who owed the 
county and were able to claim it. 
3.
Citizens 
could 
process 
their 
payments 
themselves without having to be followed up 
hence increased revenues.  
4.
The ability to monitor revenue trends through 
specific and detailed reports. It became 
possible to make projections and come up with 
attainable targets. This in turn helped boost the 
morale of the employees. 
When asked what they would have liked to see different 
with the system, the respondents suggested that the training 
time for the system be increased to help them fully 
understand and internalize the system.  
The respondents further added that there was need to 
have civic education, in order to educate citizens on the new 
way of doing things. This is because they had faced some 
resistance during the introduction of the system, as a result 
of introduction of new fees and charges. 
Intensive ICT education needed to be conducted on the 
county employees in order for them to adapt as fast as 
possible. Most of the employees were 30 years old and 
above and were not ICT savvy. 
The POS gadgets were being acquired from different 
suppliers and some of them would turn out faulty. This 
resulted into lags in revenue collection and overworking of 
county employees. 
The most common problems reported with the new 
system is inadequate Internet connection and poor network 
connectivity. Another challenge that was encountered is the 
lack of automation of all modules in the system. For 
example, considering health is a devolved unit, the health 
module in County Pro system should be integrated with all 
County Hospitals. This is to ensure that all the revenue that 
all the revenue is collected through a single system. The 
respondents further suggested that this kind of integration 
would lead to more transparency and accountability. 
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Most of the respondents’ years of service was between 
five to 10 years and hence were familiar with most of the 
operations at the county offices and the different kinds of 
revenue collected. The whole population interviewed shows 
that the new automated system was accepted by the county 
officials. Most of the respondents recommended County Pro 
system for its robustness, ease of learning, friendliness, 
effectiveness, ability to make work easier and facilitating an 
increase in revenues.  
An increase in revenue in both Kiambu and Taita Taveta 
counties was realized out of the adoption of the automated 
revenue 
collection 
systems. 
A 
report 
released 
by 
Commission on Revenue Allocation (CRA) that reviewed 
counties indicated that Kiambu was among top five 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

devolved units that made great improvements in revenue 
collection. Strathmore University carried out extensive 
research in the county on how we have collected revenue, 
gave us a raft of recommendations before deploying our 
new County Pro System that is helping seal loop holes. 
Kiambu County government has praised its partnership with 
Strathmore University on revenue collection automation, 
saying the deal had contributed to success of financial 
reforms being witnessed in the county [12]. County 
employees 
including 
county 
management 
have 
the 
perception that an automated system for revenue collection 
is a point of sale terminal. This therefore leads to too much 
concentration on only the Point of Sale gadget hence the 
flopping of the online system. County management should 
focus on both the point of sale gadget as well as the online 
system as both will in the end work together to achieve the 
success of the project.  
County governments should work to ensure that there 
are the necessary resources and infrastructure before the 
rolling out of automation projects. Internet connectivity 
should also be ensured for smooth flow of work. A lot of 
training for the county officials should be conducted before 
the roll out of such projects. County governments should 
also ensure that all employees who will participate in an 
automation project are Tech Savvy. This will reduce 
training time, and in turn further reduce support costs.  
In order to realize maximum benefits and revenue from 
the system, county management should look towards 
automating all modules. For example, the Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries module, Liquor licence and health 
modules. 
The transition to the new automated system was a step 
by step process. The county government management as 
well as the employees needed to identify other revenue 
streams that were not captured in the system to ensure that 
they are also automated. 
In as much as the system was functioning optimally, 
there was still need to catch up with technology. This would 
involve the speeding up of cashless solutions in all the 
county regions such as payment via mobile money. This 
would solve the problem of failure of some POS gadgets.  
REFERENCES 
[1] IIT. Kharagpur, Power Electronic. [Online], 2nd Ed., India: 
Aldipdg. [Retrieved: November, 2015], from:  
[2] J. Litvack, What is Decentralization. [Retrieved: August, 2016] 
from 
http://www.ciesin.org/decentralization/English/General/Different_f
orms.html
[3] M. Justus, Effects of an Integrated Revenue Collection System 
and Challenges Facing Its Implementation in Machakos County, 
Unpublished MBA Thesis, University of Nairobi, Kenya, 2014. 
[4] MAB/MIAC, Devolution of Corporate Services, No. 6, April 
1992, pp. 3. 
[5] R. Babbie, The Practice of Social Research. 12th ed. Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth Cengage, 2010. 
[6] R. Heeks, eGovernment for Development. Success and Failure 
in eGovernment Projects. [Retrieved: August, 2015], from 
http://www.egov4dev.org/success/definitions.shtml
[7] R. Sani, Automating revenue collection New Straits Times, 
Mar 30, 2009(pp. 49– 88), in S. Cnossen & H-W. Sinn (eds) Public 
Finance and Public Policy in the New Century (Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press), 2009. 
[8] S. Guido, Community Revenue Collection System. Journal of 
Community Informatics, vol 4, no. 3, pp. 2-3, 2008. 
[9] S. Sharma, Assessing E-government Implementations, 
Electronic Government Journal, vol 1 no 2, 2004, pp. 198-212, 
2004. 
[10] T. Gidisu, Automation System Procedure of the Ghana 
Revenue Authority on the Effectiveness of Revenue Collection: A 
Case Study of Customs Division, Unpublished MBA Thesis, 
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, 2012.  
 [11] University of Southern California, Organizing your Social 
Sciences Research Paper. Types of Research Designs. [Retrieved 
November, 
2015] 
from 
http://libguides.usc.edu/writingguide/researchdesigns
[12] J. Wanzala, Kiambu County lauds Strathmore’s IT Solution. 
Standard 
Digital. 
[Retrieved: 
August, 
2015] 
from 
http://www.standardmedia.co.ke/business/article/2000173952/kia
mbu-county-lauds-strathmore-s-it-
solution?articleID=2000173952&story_title=kiambu-county-
lauds-strathmore-s-it-solution&pageNo=1
[13] W. Mitullah, MO. Akivaga, Management of resources by 
local authorities: The case of Local Authority Transfer Fund. 
Nairobi: CLARIPRESS, 2005.  
[14] W. Mwololo, T, and M. Winnie, Kenya E-Government. 
[Retrieved: 
November, 
2015], 
from 
https://newmediadev2009.wikischolars.columbia.edu/Kenya 
E-
Government,
2009
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/Webcourse-contents/ 
IIT%20Kharagpur/Industrial%20Automation%20control/ 
pdf/L-01(SM)(IA&C)%20((EE)NPTEL).pdf
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-592-0
CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

