Components Interconnection Consideration
In Multi Metrics Approach
Seraj Fayyad
University of Oslo/UNIK
Oslo, Norway
Email: seraj@unik.no
Josef Noll
University of Oslo/UNIK
Oslo, Norway
Email: josef@unik.no
Abstract—Internet of Things, People and Services (IoTPS)
systems have become increasingly popular in modern times.
And this popularity increases the importance of measurable
Security, Privacy, and Dependability (SPD). One of the crucial
aspects for system SPD enhancement is reliable evaluation for
system SPD level. The evaluation of SPD level for IoTPS system
has many challenges, such as the heterogeneity among the
components. Considering the challenges of IoTPS system, several
approaches are proposed to evaluate system SPD level. One
of these approaches, is Multi Metrics (MM) approach. This
approach is considered as comprehensive approach, because of its
features. Some of MM approach features target the scalability
and applicability within the architecture of unlike systems. To
enhance the comprehensiveness of MM approach, we propose an
extension for the approach to consider the impact of components
interconnection on SPD level.
Index Terms—components interconnection; interconnection
weighting equation; mHealth system; IoTPS; Multi-Metrics;
security level; privacy level; dependability level.
I. INTRODUCTION
Internet is transforming from communication highway be-
tween computers into a backend system connecting hybrid
networks. Within these hybrid networks, people, services,
things (sensors, actuators) and computers are connected as
one. A good example for IoTPS systems is smart grid system,
which consists of diversity subsystems. The interaction of Sub-
systems provides powerful services, such as grid monitoring
and remote controlling.
Another kind of IoTPS systems is mHealth systems. This
type of system deﬁned by Adibi as the practice of eHealth
assisted by smartphones, which are used to capture, analyze,
process, and transmit health-based information from sensors
and other biomedical systems [1]. Some of provided services
by this kind of systems are regular monitoring, real time ad-
vising, auto-notiﬁcation in emergency cases and also affection
of emotional states as stated by Cipresso et al. [2].
Eloff et al. envisaged that an IoTPS system will require
focus on security and privacy [3]. Despite of many advantages
of IoTPS systems, these systems arise new security, privacy
and dependability concerns. One of these concerns, is the
heterogeneity among subsystems, which complicates system
SPD evaluation and satisfaction. Another concern, is the new
open area for exploitation of the system, such as the mobile
of the patient in mHealth systems.
Garitano et al. propose a Multi Metrics (MM) approach, be-
ing a comprehensive and dynamic approach for the evaluation
of SPD level for a given IoTPS system [4]. They demonstrate
the MM approach applicability by performing it on the smart
vehicle IoTPS system. Noll et al. demonstrate more features
of the MM approach, such as applicability on huge IoTPS
system (e.g smart grid) and scalability [5].
This paper enhances the MM approach, by considering
the impact of interconnection on the SPD level. The paper
is organized as follows: In Section II, we give an overview
of related work. In Section III, we elaborate the proposed
extension for MM approach. In Section IV, we demonstrate
proposed extension, by applying it on mHealth system as use
case. In Section V, we present our conclusion.
II. RELATED WORK
Different approaches have been developed for analyzing of
IT system risks. Based on the envisaged focus, Manadhata
and Wing classiﬁed these approaches into attacker-centric
approaches and design or system-centric approaches [6].
Attacker-centric approaches, are based mainly on the knowl-
edge about the system attacks. Usually, these approaches
collect and analyze attacks-related data, such as; system vul-
nerabilities, goals of system attackers and detected malicious
activities. For the collection of attacks-related data different
resources could be used, such as; Intrusion Detection Sys-
tem (IDS) and National Vulnerabilities Database (NVD) [7].
Based on collected data, these approaches build system-attacks
model, to analyze the risks of IT system.
The most popular attack models are: attack graph [2], [8],
attack trees [9] and Bayesian network [10]. Wang et al. pro-
pose an attack graph-based probabilistic model, to quantify the
security of IT system network [11], [12]. Wang et al. propose
attack graph analysis to be used as a knowledge base for
correlating IDS received Alerts, hypothesizing missing alerts,
and predicting future alerts [13]. Xie et al. use Bayesian
networks incorporated with IDS alerts to analyze the security
risks of the IT system [10]. Schneier proposes the analysis
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

of system risks using knowledge about attackers coupled with
attack trees [14]. Dantu et al. propose the usage of attack graph
coupled with the behavior of attacker to analyze the risks of
IT system [15].
System-centric approaches concentrate on system design
and architecture for risk analysis. Manadhata and Wing pro-
pose methodology for software system’s attack surface mea-
surement [6]. The concept of proposed methodology considers
attack surface comparable to system security level (the smaller
the surface, the more secure the system)
Howard et al. propose attackability metric to measure sys-
tem security level, through the measurement of system attack
surface from three dimensions [16]. These dimensions are:
targets and enablers, channels and protocols, and access rights.
Howard et al. refer to the increasing of attack surface and
reduction of security level, caused by increasing of targets,
channels, and generosity of access rights.
Garitano et al. propose MM approach for the evaluation
of SPD level for a given IoTPS system [4]. One of the
important MM approach features is the comprehensiveness. It
starts with component evaluation, then sub-systems evaluation
and ends up with the entire system evaluation. Garitano et
al. demonstrate that, different conﬁgurations cause different
SPD level. Which demonstrate the possibility for SPD level
enhancement, through changes in system conﬁgurations. Noll
et al. demonstrate the scalality and applicability of MM
approach, by applying it on large and complex system, such
as smart grid [5].
Interconnection has a general impact on system SPD and
component SPD, in particular. For instance, a successful attack
on the monitoring compontent of a smart vehicle will exploit
the privacy of the vehicle rider. Fayyad and Noll state some
examples, which reﬂect the impact of interconnection on the
SPD level [17]. The evaluation of the MM approach was not
sensitive to interconnection, thus the failure of components
with high interconnection is not appropriately considered. In
this paper, we introduce an extension for MM approach, which
addresses interconnection impacts. We demonstrate proposed
extension by applying it on mHealth system. Which shows,
that similar SPD level for a given components could vary based
on the interconnection of these components.
III. MULTI METRICS APPROACH EXTENSION
A. Multi Metrics Approach
The MM approach is system-centric approach for the eval-
uation of SPD level for a given system. As Garitano et al. [4]
and Noll et al. [5] have given comprehensive overviews on
the MM approach, this paper concentrates on the effect of
interconnections of components.
A security evaluation using the MM approach assumes a
hierachical architecture for the system of systems. As shown
in Figure 1; the evaluation starts at component level, then eval-
uates the subsystem and ﬁnally addresses the entire system,
resulting in a system SPD level.
sub-system 2
(s,p,d)
Comp. 1
Comp. 2
Comp. 3
Multi-Metrics
MM
M
sub-system 1
(s,p,d)
system
(s,p,d)
Multi-Metrics (weighted subsystems)
Fig. 1. MM evaluation hierarchical levels, with M indicating a Metrics
analysis
In the MM evaluation, the SPD level for an evaluated
entity is represented as a triple (S, P, D). Each element of
the triple should be described by a value range from 0
to 100. Although, the evaluation ends up with SPD level,
SPD criticality is used during the whole evaluation process.
From a technological point of view, criticality of a system
or a component is more easy to address. SPD criticalities or
(Criticality of Security, Criticality of Privacy, and Criticality
of Dependibility) (Cs, Cp, Cd) reﬂect the operation condition
like ideal, good, acceptable, or failure. SPD criticalities are
deﬁned as complement to SPD triple,
(Cs, Cp, Cd) = (100, 100, 100) − (S, P, D).
(1)
At the components level, the SPD level for a given compo-
nent is evaluated using a set of metrics. The identiﬁcation
of metrics is performed based on the expected impact of
components on a given service. At a later stage, we foresee
a framework of metrics being used for evaluations following
the MM approach. The ﬁnal goal is an integrated evaluation
for a system, consisting of sub-systems and components.
The MM approach combines the sub-systems using Root
Mean Square Weighted Data (RMSWD)(2). The RMSWD
formula consists of two parameters, a weight parameter w
and a criticality parameter x. Parameters values are within
the (0-100) range. In the MM approach, the weight parameter
represents the signiﬁcance of the component or a subsystem
on the behaviour of the total system. The criticality param-
eter represents the operation condition of a component of a
subsystem, being e.g. ideal, good, critical or failure.
C =
sX
i
 x2
i wi
Pn
i wi

(2)
To summarize the MM approach; the evaluations of metrics
for a component are integrated to ﬁnd the criticality of a com-
ponent, expressed in terms of security, privacy and dependabil-
ity. Later, the SPD criticalities of components for a subsystem
are integrated using RMSWD and result in a subsystem SPD
criticality. Lastly, SPD criticalities of subsystems are integrated
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

using RMSWD to produce the criticality of a system. The
(S, P, D) of a system is then calculated using equation (1).
B. Interconnection Consideration and Positioning
Component interconnection causes reduced security, privacy
or dependability, as the failure of one component will not
only affects the respective sub-systems, but all sub-systems
connected to the component. Let us consider the case of three
components (A, B, C) and their interactions. For instance,
a body sensor C, which send data to mobile application
A, over a Bluetooth connection B. Successful attack on A
authentication could enable attacker to reveal the transmitted
data conﬁdentiality over B, although it is fully conﬁdential
during transmission. Also, a successful attack on A authenti-
cation, could enable attackers to inject some malicious scripts,
impacting the transmission protocol, which make B or C
unavailable. Thus, the SPD of component A impacts the SPD
of components B and C and vise versa.
To consider the impact of interconnection on SPD levels,
we propose a default metric for interconnection evaluation.
The proposed metric is positioned on a level between compo-
nent and subsystem in MM architecture. Figure 2 shows the
proposed positioning of interconnection metric as part of the
MM approach.
 
Fig. 2. Interconnection metric positioning within MM
The reason of positioning the interconnection metric in a
higher level is, that interconnections impact all components
and their SPD parameters. Thus, the evaluation of intercon-
nection for a given component is integrated with component
SPD level, where, Formula (2) is used as integration operator.
C. Interconnection Metric
Fayyad and Noll consider system, as a set of interconnected
components interact through message passing and/or control-
ling [17]. Based on this consideration, Fayyad and Noll deﬁne
an interconnection graph for system components (Deﬁnition
1), which model the interconnection and interaction of system
components.
Deﬁnition 1: Given a set of Components C, having a set
of control relations, Rc ⊆ C × C, and a set of data relation
Rd ⊆ C × C, then the components interconnection graph G
is the directed graph G(C, Rc∪Rd) (C is the vertices set and
Rc ∪ Rd the edge set).
Directed graph meant, that the relations or edges between
components have a direction associated with them. This direc-
tion could be in two way or one way, such as relation between
control unit and actuator, which has one way direction from
control unit to actuator.
By analyzing of interconnection graph for system compo-
nents, Fayyad and Noll propose interconnection-based weight-
ing algorithm [17]. The proposed algorithm ends up with a
weighting equation (3), which weights the interconnection for
speciﬁc component.
W(c) = S+R+2CT +D+A+(
X
v=0
1
DIST(c, v))+VR (3)
• c: targeted component for weighting, where c ∈ C and
C, is set of all components in the system.
• R: number of sub/system components reachable from
weighted component c.
• S: number of components reachable from weighted com-
ponent c through one edge within system interconnection
graph. In other words, surrounded component for com-
ponent c is a component, which interact directly with c
without any intermediate component.
• VR: number of system valuable or key components,
reachable from c.
• CT : number of control relation or edges between
weighted component c and other system components.
• D: number of data relation between weighted component
c and other system components.
• A: component c activation rate.
• v: valuable component within the system.
• DIST: number of components between c and v compo-
nents.
Activation rate is considered as the frequency of component
activation per time unit. Where, activation rate value ranges
from 0 to 1. The higher the value the more active the
component. Thus, 0 is when, the component is totally inactive,
and 1 when, the component is continuously active. When the
component is not active, the SPD level of the component does
not impact the SPD levels of interconnected components. On
other hand, if component is continuously active, then, its SPD
level is continuously impacts the SPD level of interconnected
components. This mean, activation rate for a given component
inﬂuences the impact of other parameters in equation (4) on
the SPD level of interconnected components. Thus, we propose
new optimization for equation (3) for the use in proposed
extension. The optimization is represented in equation (4), in
which, activation rate is considered as multiplication factor,
instead of summation factors. Interconnection metric based
on equation (4) to measure interconnection weight for a given
component.
W(c) = A(S +R+2CT +D+(
X
v=0
1
DIST(c, v))+VR) (4)
Based on the need, for equal evaluation of components
activation rate, evaluation rate for all components should be
evaluated to the same time unit. Thus, a system engineer
should evaluate activation rate of component to the smallest
time unit. For instance, Let us consider the case of a system
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

with two components c1 and c2. c1 activation rate is 60/h
and c2 activation rate is 5/min. For equal interconnection
evaluation, activation rate for c1 should be used as 1/min
and for c2 as 5/min.
D. Interconnection Metric Calibration
In MM approach, the SPD level for a given component
is represented with a value range from 0 to 100. On the
other hand, interconnection metric based on equation (4)
resulted value, could vary based on system architect out of
(0 to 100) range. Thus, for the integration of the result from
interconnection metric with component SPD level, equation
(4) result should be calibrated to (0 to 100) range.
To calibrate equation (4) resulted value to (0-100) range,
we deﬁne architecture-based reference value, as representing
maximum weight of interconnection for a component within
given system. Let us consider m as a component within given
system, and its interconnection weight is the maximum weight.
Then, the values of its parameters in equation (4) will be as
follow:
• A = 1.
• R = number of all system components(max number of
components reachable from m).
• S = number of all system components(max number of
components surrounded m).
• CT = number of all control edges within system inter-
connection graph.
• D = number of all data edges within system interconnec-
tion graph.
• VR = number of all valuable components within the
system.
By having maximum weight of interconnection, the weight
of component ‘c‘ could be calibrated to (0-100) range, as
shown in equation (5).
Weightc(c) = Weight(c)
Weight(m)
(5)
Where:
c: given component within the system.
m: most interconnected component within the system.
Weightc(c): calibrated weight for a value within (0 - 100).
Weight(c): component evaluated weight using equation (4).
Weight(m): system maximum weight of interconnection.
IV. USE CASE
This section demonstrates the proposed extension for MM
approach, using the evaluation of Privacy level SPDp as one
of the SPD triple for two selected components. At the start,
it gives an overview about Gravid+ system. subsequently, it
performs high level analysis for Gravid+ system based on
MM approach with concentration on two components. Later,
it measures the interconnection of the two components using
interconnection metric. Lastly, it evaluates SPDp level for the
two components under different conﬁgurations based on MM
approach and proposed extension.
A. Gravid+ System:
Gravid+ system elaborated by Garnweidner et al. aims to
monitor blood sugar levels in pregnant women with gestational
diabetes and assists them with follow up care, such as; diet
and exercise [18]. The architecture of Gravid+ system shown
in Figure 3 consists mainly of glucometer device interacts
with mobile device over Bluetooth connection. The mobile
device, host mobile app, which processes and saves glucometer
submitted measurements.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internet 
Gluco-meter 
Mobile OS 
Other Apps 
Bluetooth 
Connection 
GravidPluss 
app 
Wireless  
Connection 
Fig. 3. Gravid+ architecture.
Sub/systems or components, such as other mobile apps
hosted on the patient mobile may impact the SPD level of
the system, although its not apart of the system. For instance,
from privacy perspective, through internet, an attacker could
violate one of the mobile apps vulnerabilities and gain access
to mobile device. By gaining access to the mobile device, the
attacker could violate Gravid+ data conﬁdentiality. Thus, for
the analysis of system SPD level, all sub/systems impact the
SPD level of the system should be included in analysis.
B. System Components and Metrics
To simplify the demonstration of proposed extension for
MM approach, we apply high-level analysis of Gravid+ sys-
tem. In this analysis, each illustrated nodes within Figure 3 is
considered as component. For each of these components a set
of metrics are deﬁned as shown in table I. To concentrate on
the impact of proposed extension on SPD level, we concentrate
on two components (Mobile OS and Gravid+ app), which have
different interconnection within Gravid+ system. Where, we
assume the performing of similar metrics (authentication and
encryption) on the two components,
The analysis of the two components considering SPDp only.
As already stated, MM approach concludes with the SPD level,
but SPD criticality is used during the entire evaluation process,
as it is shown within tables II to V. The metrics which used
in the analysis are:
• Gravid+ app metrics
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

TABLE I. SYSTEM COMPONENT MAXIMUM POSSIBLE WEIGHT.
Component
Metrics
Glucometer
Authentication pairing metric
Bluetooth connection
Encryption metric
Mobile device OS
Encryption metric, Authentication metric
Other apps
number of apps metric
Gravid+ app
Encryption metric, Authentication metric
– Authentication metric(w=40): evaluates the Cp re-
sulted from authentication activation by accessing of
Gravid+ app or not (Evaluation is shown in Table
II).
TABLE II. GRAVID+ APP AUTHENTICATION METRIC.
Parameters
Authentication ON
Authentication OFF
Cp
30
70
– Encryption metric (w=30): evaluates the Cp resulted
from having App data ciphered or not (evaluation is
shown in Table III).
TABLE III. GRAVID+ APP ENCRYPTION METRIC.
Parameters
Encryption ON
Encryption OFF
Cp
10
60
• Mobile OS metrics
– Authentication metric(w=40): evaluates the Cp re-
sulted from having authentication activated to access
the mobile device or not (evaluation is shown in
Table IV).
TABLE IV. MOBILE OS AUTHENTICATION METRIC.
Parameters
Authentication ON
Authentication OFF
Cp
30
70
– Encryption metric(w=30): evaluates Cp of having
data ciphered by Mobile OS or not, using service,
such as encryptdevice service in Android OS. One
of such service beneﬁts is data protection from
ofﬂine revealing. (evaluation is shown in Table V)
C. Performing of Interconnection Metrics
To weight the interconnection for a component, using equa-
tion (4), the interconnection graph for system components
should be initiated. Based on this graph, the values of pa-
rameters in equation (4) are driven. Figure 4 shows initiated
interconnection graph for Gravid+ system.
Based on the interconnection graph of Gravid+ system,
values of interconnection parameters for mobile OS are driven.
(shown in Table VI), based on these values, interconnection
weight of mobile OS is 23.5.
Parameters of Gravid+ app and their values, are shown in Table
VII, based on these values, interconnection weight of Gravid+
app is 12.
TABLE V. MOBILE OS ENCRYPTION METRIC.
Parameters
Encryption ON
Encryption OFF
Cp
10
60
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GravidPluss 
app 
Bluetooth 
Connection 
 
Gluco-
meter 
 
Other 
apps 
Internet 
 
Wireless  
Connection 
 
D 
C/D 
C/D 
C/D 
C/D 
D 
C: Control relation  
D: Data exchange relation 
C/D: Control or Data relation 
Mobile 
OS 
Fig. 4. Gravid+ interconnection graph.
For the calibration of Weight(c) for a given component
‘c‘, system maximum weight of interconnection should be
calculated. Table VIII shows parameters of maximum weight
and their values in Gravid+ system, based on these values,
maximum weight is 28.
By performing equation (5), mobile OS Weightc is 84 and
Gravid+ app Weightc is 43.
D. Evaluation
Table IX and table X respectively show the evaluation of
Gravid+ app Cp and mobile OS Cp under different con-
ﬁgurations. Cp1 represents the evaluation of conﬁgurations
based on MM approach. Cp2 represents the evaluation of con-
TABLE VI. MOBILE OS INTERCONNECTION PARAMETERS.
Parameters
Value
Note
S
4
Mobile OS surrounded by 4 components
R
6
Mobile OS has 6 reachable component
VR
1
Valuable component is only Gravid+ app
CT
4
Mobile OS has 4 control relations or edges
D
4
Mobile OS receives and sends data
from/to 4 components
A
1
Assumption it is continuously active
DIST
2
The distance to the (Gravid + app)
is 2 two components (Mobile OS, Gravid+ app)
TABLE VII. GRAVID+ APP INTERCONNECTION PARAMETERS.
Parameters
Value
Note
S
1
Gravid+ app surrounded by Mobile OS
R
6
Gravid+ app has 6 reachable component
VR
1
The component is Valuable itself
CT
1
has one control relation with Mobile OS
D
1
Gravid+ app receives and sends
data through Mobile OS
A
1
Assumption it is continuously active
DIST
1
Min distance to the app itself
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

TABLE VIII. SYSTEM COMPONENT MAXIMUM POSSIBLE WEIGHT.
Parameters
Value
Note
S
6
Supposing that all system components
within system surround objective component
R
6
Reachable component in two way from
objective component.
VR
1
Valuable component is only Gravid+ app
CT
4
Number of control edges within,
interconnection graph are 4
.
D
6
Number of data edges within,
interconnection graph
.
A
1
Component is continuously active
DIST
1
Component is valuable by itself
ﬁgurations based on MM approach enhanced with proposed
extension. Thus, Cp2 values resulted from the integration
of Cp1 with the output of interconnection metric for the
component (Weightc). Where, for the two components, the
weight of interconnection metric is considered as 30, and the
weight of component (Cp1) as 70.
TABLE IX. GRAVID+ APP EVALUATION
Encrypt-/Auth-
M1
M2
Cp1
Cp2
PL
Conf.(ON,ON)
10
30
24
31
69
Conf.(ON,OFF)
10
70
53
50
50
Conf.(OFF,ON)
60
30
45
44
66
Conf.(OFF,OFF)
60
70
66
60
40
TABLE X. MOBILE OS EVALUATION
Encrypt-/Auth-
M1
M2
Cp1
Cp2
PL
Conf.(ON,ON)
10
30
24
50
50
Conf.(ON,OFF)
10
70
53
64
36
Conf.(OFF,ON)
60
30
45
59
41
Conf.(OFF,OFF)
60
70
66
72
28
As shown in Table IX and Table X, the Cp1 results, of an
evaluation of two components lead to the same value. On other
hand, Cp2 are differentiated based on the interconnections of
each components. Thus, the SPDp will differ. This lead to
system SPD level differentiation based on internal intercon-
nection of this system.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper considers systems of systems in the Internet of
People, Things and Services (IoPTS). It provides an extension
of the Multi Metrics approach including interconnections of
components in the system. The Multi Metrics (MM) approach
assesses the security, privacy and dependability (SPD) triplet
of a component, a sub-system and the total system.
The speciﬁc use case analysed is the privacy analysis of
a medical system for diabetes measurements. The system
consists of a glucometer interacting with a mobile device
over Bluetooth, and a host application for mointoring of the
application. The example is based on two metrics, authenti-
cation and encryption, being applied both for the application
and the mobile operating system. The result of applying the
MM method leads to privacy levels of the system, providing
a privacy level between 40 and 70 for the application.
The proposed extension considers interconnections between
components. In the envisaged use case, the interconnection
is explicitly dominant for the mobile operating system (OS).
The OS is surrounded by 4 components, and has 6 reachable
components. The analysis using the interconnection extension
of the MM approach leads to a reduced privacy level being
between 28 and 50 for the Mobile OS.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thanks the JU Artemis nSHIELD
project for the development of the methodology, and the use
cases showing the applicability of the approach. We would also
like to thank Movation and the Research Council of Norway
for enabling and supporting the PhD work.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Adibi, Ed., Mobile health.
Springer, 2015, ISBN:9783319128160.
[2] P. Cipresso, S. Serino, D. Villani, C. Repetto, L. Sellitti, G. Albani,
A. Mauro, A. Gaggioli, and G. Riva, “Is your phone so smart to
affect your state? An exploratory study based on psychophysiological
measures,” Neurocomputing, vol. 84, pp. 23–30, 2012.
[3] J. Eloff, M. Eloff, M. Dlamini, and M. Zielinski, “Internet of People ,
Things and Services - The Convergence of Security, Trust and Privacy,”
Proceedings of the third International CompanionAble Workshop IoPTS,
Brussels, 2009.
[4] I. Garitano, S. Fayyad, and J. Noll, “Multi-metrics approach for security,
privacy and dependability in embedded systems,” Wireless Personal
Communications, vol. 81, no. 4, pp. 1359–1376, 2015.
[5] J. Noll, I. Garitano, S. Fayyad, E. ˚Asberg, and H. Abie, “Measurable
Security, Privacy and Dependability in Smart Grids,” Journal of Cyber
Security and Mobility, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 371–398, 2015.
[6] P. K. Manadhata and J. M. Wing, “An attack surface metric,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 371–386, 2011.
[7] “National Vulnerability Data Base,” 2015, URL: https://nvd.nist.gov/
[accessed: 2015-09-21].
[8] P. Ammann, D. Wijesekera, and S. Kaushik, “Scalable, graph-based
network vulnerability analysis,” Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference
on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 217–224, 2002.
[9] J. Dawkins, C. Campbell, and J. Hale, “Modeling network attacks: Ex-
tending the attack tree paradigm,” Workshop on Statistical and Machine
Learning Techniques in Computer Intrusion Detection, pp. 75–86, 2002.
[10] P. Xie, J. H. Li, X. Ou, P. Liu, and R. Levy, “Using bayesian networks
for cyber security analysis,” Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN),
2010 IEEE/IFIP International Conference on, pp. 211–220, 2010.
[11] L. Wang, T. Islam, T. Long, A. Singhal, and S. Jajodia, “An attack graph-
based probabilistic security metric,” Data and applications security
XXII, pp. 283–296, 2008.
[12] L. Wang, A. Singhal, and S. Jajodia, “Measuring the overall security
of network conﬁgurations using attack graphs,” Proceedings of the 21st
annual IFIP WG 11.3 working conference on Data and applications
security, pp. 98–112, 2007.
[13] L. Wang, A. Liu, and S. Jajodia, “Using attack graphs for correlating,
hypothesizing, and predicting intrusion alerts,” Computer communica-
tions, vol. 29, no. 15, pp. 2917–2933, 2006.
[14] B. Schneier, “Attack trees,” Dr. Dobb’s journal, vol. 24, no. 12, pp.
21–29, 1999.
[15] R. Dantu, K. Loper, and P. Kolan, “Risk management using behavior
based attack graphs,” Information Technology: Coding and Computing,
2004. Proceedings. ITCC 2004. International Conference on, vol. 1, pp.
445–449, 2004.
[16] M. Howard, J. Pincus, and J. M. Wing, Eds., Measuring relative attack
surfaces.
Springer, 2005, pages:112-140.
[17] S. Fayyad and J. Noll, “Security and Safety Composition Methodology,”
CENTRIC 2014, pp. 60–65, 2014.
[18] L. Garnweidner, I. Borgen, I. n. Garitano, J. Noll, and M. Lukasse, “De-
signing and Developing a Mobile Smartphone Application for Women
with Gestational Diabetes Mellitus Followed-Up at Diabetes Outpatient
Clinics in Norway,” Healthcare, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 310–323, 2015.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

