Communication Support System Between Persons with Dementia and Family 
Caregivers using Memories 
 
Kazuhiro Yamasaki 
Graduate School of Information 
Science and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, Japan 
is043081@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Tomoko Izumi 
College of Information Science 
and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, Japan 
izumi-t@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Yoshio Nakatani 
College of Information Science 
and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, Japan 
nakatani@is.ritsumei.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Persons with dementia have lost important 
memories, and their caregivers are exhausted by caring for 
them, especially family caregivers. We aim to support 
persons with dementia recall memory by talking about their 
memories together, place them in their life history, and 
communicate with their caregivers. The proposed system 
uses photographs as triggers for memory recollection. The 
demonstration verified that recollection support of memory 
using photographs is promising as triggers for conversation 
and organization of memory, while further revisions are 
required.  
Keywords-Persons with dementia; caregivers; recall; 
photograph; memory; communication.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, Japan has progressed into an aging society, 
resulting in an increase of persons with dementia [1] [2]. 
Although the symptoms of dementia change depending on 
the type of disease, the main symptoms can be divided 
into core symptoms and BPSD (Behavioral and 
Psychological Symptoms of Dementia). The core 
symptoms are the decline of aspects of intelligence 
function, such as defects of memory and impaired 
orientation. BPSD include wandering and hallucinations, 
which become a heavy burden for care workers. For the 
family members and other relatives it seems that persons 
with dementia cannot understand anything. A decline in 
emotional function, however, does not always accompany 
the decline in intelligence function. Therefore, sufficient 
consideration is needed when caring for dementia patients. 
In Japan, family caregivers often support persons with 
dementia in addition to using day-care facilities, but their 
circumstances are deeply stressful, because they often do 
not have sufficient knowledge of dementia and so give 
care to them by trial and error, and they cannot take their 
eyes off their patient. It is also often hard to obtain 
cooperation with surrounding communities, due to the 
negative image of dementia and low social recognition. 
In this study, we aim to support the recall of memories 
of a patient and his or her family, the most familiar 
presence for persons with dementia. Family caregivers 
talk together about their memory. This is not an act of the 
caregiver taking care of the patient alone, but one which 
creates a good environment in order to help each other. 
Also, if neither the person with dementia nor the family 
can recall the memories, we provide a trigger for 
recollection by presenting social events and information 
similar to the lost memory. As a result, persons with 
dementia can recall memories about their family, and 
family caregivers are able to actively communicate with 
other members including the person with dementia. 
A brief outline of this paper follows. In chapter 2, we 
describe the significance and role of memory, which is 
lost by dementia. Chapter 3 describes research trends of 
persons with dementia and caregivers. Chapter 4 and 5 
describe system proposal and system functions, which is 
based on the consideration in chapter 3. Finally, chapter 6 
describes evaluation of the system. 
II. 
FUNCTION OF MEMORY 
This section describes the significance and role of 
memory, which is lost by dementia.  
Memories are our own private episodes, formed from an 
individual person’s experiences in the past. Even if people 
experienced the same episode, how they feel about it may 
differ from person to person [3]. Moreover, our present 
“egos” has been formed by the accumulation of our own 
episodes. Memories are fully private unless we talk to 
someone about them. Thus, memory has the role of 
reminding us of our consciousness of self. 
Viewed from another side, people talk about their 
memories to prompt mutual understanding. Talking 
together on the pasts means exchanging a part of their egos. 
As a result, people are able to prompt mutual 
understanding. Therefore, memory has a role of building 
and maintaining human relationships. 
However, people forget memories as time goes on. 
People find it hard to recall memories which they have not 
recalled for a long time, and thus triggers are required to 
recall them. Examples of triggers include seeing a 
photograph, reading a diary, talking with family and 
friends, hearing a long-forgotten tune, and smelling an old 
familiar perfume. In particular, photographs hold a variety 
of types of information. They are associated with a 
specific annotation, such as date and time, place, and 
events. A photograph helps people indulge in reminiscence 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

alone and share their memories with others, led by various 
annotations involved in it. 
A. Memory Communication 
Memory has two roles: first one is to remind us of our 
past experiences, and second is to build and maintain 
human relationships, as stated above. In addition, having a 
conversation with others promotes memory sharing and 
increasing our memories. Normal actions such as talking 
with family and friends are communication carried out 
unconsciously; but can be characterized as memory 
exchanging or ‘Memory Communication’ [4]. 
Memory Communication requires the following three 
elements. 
a) 
The communication methods and partner(s). 
b) 
The memory and a related episode. 
c) 
Something that acts as the trigger to recall the 
memory. 
Many elderly persons talk with family and friends on a 
regular basis. Talking about memories is an effective way 
to communicate with a stranger in nursing care homes or 
hospitals. Communication methods are to meet and talk in 
person, and bring photographs. Further, recently cell 
phones and the Internet have been developed, allowing 
people to communicate with others even if they are far 
away. It can be predicted that triggers will be different for 
each elderly person, but looking at photographs of past 
eras and listening to old popular songs certainly promote 
remembering. 
We have described the significance and role of memory 
in this section. Memory belongs to each individual person 
and is an important element for expressing one’s 
personality. However, persons with dementia gradually 
lose their memory, thus losing proof of their existences. 
III. 
RESEARCH TRENDS 
A. Support Systems for Persons with Dementia 
Recently, widespread use of cell phones and the 
Internet is progressing. As a result, support systems which 
utilize such equipment have been rapidly increasing, such 
as, a movement navigation system using photographs [5], 
and a remote interactive support system [6].  
 
a) 
Movement navigation system using photographs. 
Traditional map-based movement support systems are 
not effective for persons with dementia because it is 
difficult for them to learn the route and recognize 
landmarks. Consider this problem and developed a system 
which encourages understanding of the route by using 
photographs and animations on a cell phone. It shows a 
direction to turn at a junction and indicates important signs 
which show the correct route to a destination, as shown in 
Fig.1. 
 
b) 
Remote interactive support system. 
This system uses a videophone, and is able to show 
photographs and videos about memorable episodes even 
from a distance (Fig.2). Persons with dementia and their 
caregivers can reminisce and share memories at home, 
looking at the same photos and videos, without going to a 
public institution. As a result, persons with dementia can 
obtain some stabilization of their mental state, and this 
system can reduce the burden on the caregiver. 
B. Organization Support for Caregivers 
There have been only a few attempts to support in-home 
care. Examples of support services for caregivers include 
the use of nursing home care and care helpers. However, 
these services cannot sufficiently reduce the burdens on 
family caregivers, because the use of nursing home care is 
expensive and the utility time is limited. 
Under this situation, there have been some movements 
in which caregivers have taken the initiative to confront 
the difficulties of care. For example, the Male Caregiver 
Network is an organization of which the members 
comprise of male caregivers [7]. The activities of the 
organization include holding exchange parties and lectures 
for male caregivers. Many of the participants include both 
veteran caregivers and beginners. These events are a great 
reassurance to beginners because they can consult with 
caregivers in similar circumstances. Conversely, veteran 
caregivers can reflect on their care history through 
communication with the participants. The members can 
generate motivation to continue care. In this way, the 
organization aims to provide a place to talk about and 
share the worries of care between caregivers. 
C. Consideration 
Researches which use information technology to 
support persons with dementia share the aim to enable 
them to live an independent life. If they can lead as 
independent a life as possible in their home, this will 
reduce the burden of caregivers. Most researches do not 
aim to target caregivers directly.  
However, providing support for caregivers, not only for 
persons with dementia, is necessary because if persons 
with dementia live in their own homes, they need help 
from their family caregivers. They need plenty of nursing 
care time, and as a result, the burden on caregivers 
increases and they become exhausted. An environment 
which supports the caregiver and listens to their troubles is 
required. Caregivers are taking initiatives themselves such 
as in the ‘Caregivers Male Network’, but not every 
caregiver can participate in these activities. Furthermore, 
previous research focuses on only negative aspects of 
home care [8]. The burden of care of persons with 
dementia has been found to be greater than care of persons 
without dementia. However, recent studies have identified 
a need to approach the positive aspects of home care [9]. 
Although caring for family members is recognized as a 
road which everyone must eventually take, on the other 
hand, it is difficult to continue due to the heavy burden. 
Therefore it is necessary to develop a support system for 
in-home care as part of the social system. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 1. Movement navigation system. 
 
 
Figure 2. Remote interactive support system. 
 
IV. SYSTEM PROPOSAL 
A. System Summary 
In this study, photographs are used as a trigger to recall 
memory. People can extract rich information from 
photographs because they have variety of visual cues 
about their contents. People have a tendency to promote 
their bonding by confirming the shared experiences and 
photographs 
provide 
an 
opportunity 
to 
start 
a 
conversation about shared memories of the family. 
Furthermore, most families have kept photographs in the 
family album for many generations.  
Rich information of photographs can be classified as 
follows: 
a) 
Date and time, location when the photo was 
taken. 
b) 
Reason why the photo was taken at that place 
c) 
Relationships with person(s) in the photo. 
d) 
Feelings about the scenery and objects in the 
photo. 
Thus, the information obtained from one single 
photograph can be abundant. In this system, we register 
the event, location, and date and time as information 
about each photograph. As many photographs simply 
show daily life spent with family, these photographs are 
useful for recalling memories of happy past days and 
promoting bonding of family through communication of 
shared happiness. 
B. Proposed Method 
Users (persons with dementia, family, and family 
caregivers) register annotation of each photograph - event, 
location, and date - as a set into the photo information 
database. Then, when a photograph is selected, the system 
displays the event, the location, and the day, in that order. 
This is because the event, which we place first, is 
considered as an experienced and repeated memory. 
Experienced and repeated memory is comparatively well 
retained. 
However, it is difficult for persons with dementia to 
recall a detailed memory just by looking the registered 
information of the photograph. Furthermore, the family 
caregiver may not always remember the event shown in 
the photograph. Therefore, as information to aid memory 
recollection, the system shows another photograph 
registered with similar information or associated social 
events. The content in the social events database stores 
effective information for recollection, such as social 
events which occurred during the same period or 
information associated with the dementia patient’s hobby.  
In addition, by registering and displaying the life story 
of the person with dementia that are recalled, they are 
able to look back on their own history and place each 
episode in order on the timeline. 
The following steps indicate how to use the system and 
Fig. 3 shows a graphical representation of the system 
process. 
a) 
Register the photograph information: the location, 
the date, and the event. 
b) 
Show the information of the selected photograph. If 
only using registration information is not enough to 
trigger recollection, show another photograph with 
similar information.  
c) 
If both the dementia patient and the family caregiver 
do not remember the photograph, and effective 
content which is judged to help recollection exists in 
the social events database, the system refers to the 
social events database. 
d) 
Show the result of the inquiry. 
e) 
The family members share the recalled memories 
through conversation about the period, the location, 
or the event of the photograph. Then, if a new 
memory is recalled, the content is added to the 
photograph database. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 3.  Graphical representation of the system process. 
V. SYSTEM FUNCTIONS 
A. Registration Function 
Using the registration function, the system registers a 
photograph, the photograph information, social events 
information, and life story information. Photographs are 
stored one by one in a special folder, and photograph 
information, social events information, and life story 
information are stored in a corresponding database 
respectively. Fig. 4 shows an example of the photograph 
information registration screen. The photograph name is 
set to the photo’s date and time of registration to aid 
smooth use of the system. The reason why the system uses 
the date and time of registration as the photo name is that 
it would be difficult for persons with dementia to decide 
and input names for photos. In addition, the reason why 
the system registers the photographs one by one is that 
users are expected to recall some related memories by 
looking at each photograph. 
 
Figure 4. Example of photograph information registration screen. 
B. Recollection Support Function 
 The recollection support function is described below. 
a) 
Fig. 5 shows another registered photograph taken 
during the same period and its photograph 
information. 
b) 
Fig. 6 shows the social events of a similar time, 
taken from the social database 
c) 
Fig. 7 shows the dementia patient’s life story. 
 
Figure 5. Example of a photograph taken at a similar time 
 
 
Figure 6. Example of photograph of events of a similar time 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 7. Example of dementia patient’s life story 
 
The 
registered 
photographs 
are 
displayed 
in 
chronological order and when a photograph is selected, its 
information is shown. When the system shows the selected 
photograph’s information, it displays the event, the 
location, and the date in that order, as stated above. 
Afterwards, it shows the associated social events, the 
registered photographs with similar information, and the 
dementia patient’s life story. The reason why the system 
shows photograph information taken during the same 
period is that photographs of the same period have some 
kind of relationship with the selected photograph, and 
users may recall the memory even if they do not remember 
the details of the photograph. In this system, “same 
period” is defined as when the registration year is the same. 
In addition, the system shows the life story of the person 
with dementia in order to support recollection. The life 
story information is not always shown, however. Users can 
show or hide the life story information optionally. The 
system supports recollection by using life story, enabling 
dementia patients to look back on their lives. 
VI. EVALUATION 
A. Evaluation Summary 
An evaluation experiment was conducted with the 
cooperation of four participants, A and B were family 
caregivers, C and D were veteran caregivers. The 
evaluation method was to ask them to use the system and 
discuss on the information of each registration, then 
afterwards, to answer a questionnaire on a 4-point scale. In 
addition to the questionnaire, we asked them to write free 
comments about the system. 
B. Evaluation Results 
Table I shows the questionnaire items, and Table II 
shows the evaluation results. In Table II, 1-point means 
that it’s difficult and there are many works, and 4-point 
means that it’s appropriate. 
As is evident from the results in Table II, there was 
variation in the answers about inputting the information 
into each database. This was largely dependent on the 
user’s experience level of personal computers. In fact, one 
of the evaluation participants had never used a personal 
computer before, and answered that it was hard to input 
the information into each database. Therefore it is 
necessary to develop the man-machine interface to 
improve ease of input for people who have never used a 
personal computer. 
Regarding the efficiency of using memories, we 
obtained feedback that “memories are useful for 
supporting elderly persons, because they often talk about 
old times”. In addition to this feedback, another feedback 
was obtained that the recollection stories might be 
different depending on the user’s gender. For example, in 
the man's case, he would talk about his acts of heroism and 
events of the days of working. But in the woman’s case, 
she would talk about child-rearing. Furthermore, the users 
suggested the opportunities to communicate with persons 
with dementia during the registration process. However, 
there was the negative opinion that the system will be 
difficult for persons with dementia to use, because 
usefulness of the system will be influenced by their mental 
state at the time of use. If their state is unbalanced, they 
will be unable to use the system. Another negative 
feedback indicated that the system may not be useful for 
all persons with dementia, because there may be memories 
that they do not want to recall. Such situations should be 
considered in using this system for persons with dementia. 
Regarding the recollection support function, the opinion 
was obtained that the system encouraged recollection of 
memory that preserves the user’s uniqueness. The 
information which is registered in each database depends 
on the individual. Furthermore, the life story is useful for 
the recollection of old memories, because it represents 
one’s own history. Talking about old memories and one’s 
life story is effective communication. However, the life 
story function is still poor in this system. The life story 
function needs to be improved to efficiently aid memory 
recollection and sharing. 
The responses to Questions 9 and 10 suggest that this 
system has the ability to aid recollection of memory and 
better communication with others. If a new memory is 
recalled, it becomes a common memory, and the users can 
talk about it and communicate with each other. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

TABLE I.  QUESTIONNAIRE CONTENT  
Q1 
Photograph information DB: 
Can you input smoothly?  
Q2 
Photograph information DB: 
Does it take a lot of work to use? 
Q3 
Social events DB: 
Can you input smoothly? 
Q4 
Social events DB: 
Does it take a lot of work to use? 
Q5 
Life story information DB: 
Can you input smoothly? 
Q6 
Life story information DB: 
Does it take a lot of work to use? 
Q7 
Life story: 
Do you feel the life story is useful for recall? 
Q8 
Life story: 
Were you able to visualize or recall that time?  
Q9 
Effectiveness: 
Did you recall anything other than the 
information which was displayed by the system? 
Q10 
Effectiveness: 
Could you communicate with your partner well? 
 
TABLE II.  EVALUATION RESULTS 
 
Q
1 
Q
2 
Q
3 
Q
4 
Q
5 
Q
6 
Q
7 
Q
8 
Q
9 
Q
10 
A 
3 
2 
3 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
B 
1 
3 
1 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2 
3 
4 
C 
3 
2 
3 
2 
3 
2 
3 
2 
3 
3 
D 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
2 
3 
3 
3 
4 
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this study, a support system was proposed to aid 
memory recollection for persons with dementia and 
family caregivers by using photographs and associated 
information. The system supports the recollection of 
memory via information about the selected photograph 
and related social events. Therefore, by talking about 
these, we aimed to intensify the activation of family 
communication. 
The next step of this study is to improve this system 
through consulting with persons with dementia. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Cabinet Office, “White Paper on Aging Society”, 2010, 
pp.2-3 (in Japanese). 
[2] H.Shimokata, “Epidemiological Statistics in Japan”, 
Special Edition of Japan Clinical, 4th-Ed, Vol.62, 2010, 
pp.121-126 (in Japanese). 
[3] R.C.Shank, “Dynamic Memory: A Theory of Learning in 
Computers and People”, New York Cambridge University 
Press, 1982. 
[4] K. Yamasita and H. Nojima, “Portable Personal Memory 
for Communication”, HCI2001: Symposium on Human 
Interface, 2001, pp.503-506. 
[5] H. Kaminoyama, T. Matsuo, F. Hattori, K. Susami, N. 
Kuwabara, and Shinji Abe, “Walk Navigation System 
Using Photographs for People with Dementia”, HCI2007: 
Symposium on Human Interface, 2007, pp.1039-1049. 
[6] N. Kuwabara, S. Abe, K. Yasuda, and K. Kuwabara, 
“Networked Reminiscence Therapy for Individuals with 
Dementia by using Photo and Video Sharing”, ASSETS 06: 
The 8th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on 
Computers and Accessibility, 2006, pp.125-132. 
[7] M. Saito, “Fragile love? male caregivers in Japan”, The 
18th Annual Conference on Men and Masculinities, 2010. 
[8] K. Sugiura, M. Ito, and H. Mikami, “Family caregiver 
burden caused by behavioral and psychological symptoms 
of dementia: Measurement with a new original scale”, 
Nippon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. Japanese Journal of 
Geriatrics, Vol. 44, 2007, pp.717–725 (in Japanese). 
[9] E. Saito, T. Kunisaki, and Y. Kanegawa, “Study on the 
positive intention and continuity aspects of care for family 
caregivers”, Japanese Society of Public Health, 3rd-Ed, Vol. 
48, 2001, pp.180–188 (in Japanese). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

