Designing Effective Advergame for Purchase Intention: A View of Game Design and 
Psychological State 
Wei-Hung Hsiao 
Department of Distribution Management 
National Taichung University of Science & Tech. 
Taichung, Taiwan 
e-mail: weihung@nutc.edu.tw 
Shwu-Ming Wu 
Department of Human Resource Management, 
National Kaohsiung University of Science & Tech. 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan 
e-mail: mingwu@cc.kuas.edu.tw 
Ing-Long Wu 
Department of Information Management 
National Chung Cheng University 
Chia-Yi, Taiwan 
e-mail: ilwu@mis.ccu.edu.tw 
Abstract-Advergame has increasingly been used for a new 
marketing campaign.  This study defines a new research model 
with a relationship structure of advergame design and 
individual psychological state as antecedents for advergame 
attitude, brand attitude, and purchase intention, based on the 
hierarchy of effects theory.  An empirical study for online survey 
collects 522 consumers who have recent experience of 
advergame.  The results found that game-brand fit, perceived 
interactivity, and involvement are the key drivers of advergame 
attitude.  Further, advergame attitude and brand attitude were 
found to be two important mediators of purchase intention.  
Implications for marketers and scholars are further discussed. 
Keywords-Advergame; advergame design; advergame attitude; 
brand attitude; purchase intention. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Advergame is a particular form of branded entertainment 
that the brands, along with related messages, logos, and 
trademarked characters, are included in a game, and such 
promotional tools are usually accessed via the parent 
companies or brand websites [27].  Advergame has 
increasingly become one of the most promising areas of 
Internet advertising in recent years [33].  Many companies 
have tried advergame as part of their marketing strategies, 
such as Coca-Cola, Toyota, Michelin, and McDonald. 
Most studies have focused on the issues related to 
advertising effectiveness, such as brand/product recognition 
or attitude [11] and advergame design [6][14].  However, an 
important role of advergame in marketing is persuasive 
purchase behavior, which remains relatively under-explored 
and this is one gap in the literature that the current work aims 
to address.  Moreover, researchers noted that advertising is 
generally seen as a means of communicating persuasively 
with consumers [26] and that if it is successful, it will 
ultimately result in consumers purchasing the focal branded 
items.  It is imperative to examine the issue of purchase 
intention in relation to advergame to assess marketing 
effectiveness. 
Lavidge and Steiner [19] proposed the hierarchy of effects 
theory for predicting advertising effectiveness, and its basic 
premise is that advertising moves people up a series of steps 
toward an actual purchase behavior.  These steps can be 
further classified as three functions related to a classic 
psychological model, that is, cognitive, affective, and 
conative [1].  Many studies on Internet advertising have 
proposed a similar stage-based structure based on this theory, 
that is, belief, attitude, and behavior, to examine different 
forms of advertising effectiveness, such as brand loyalty and 
sale promotion [2].  Many studies have extended this 
structure with attitude in terms of defining two components, 
media attitude and brand/produce attitude [33].  Accordingly, 
this theory and its extension provide an overarching 
theoretical basis to better understand the relationship structure 
of how advergame influences players’ purchase decisions.   
However, the hierarchy of effects theory fails to stipulate 
what a consumer's cognitive beliefs would affect attitude 
toward brands/products or subsequent purchase intention.  
Many studies have argued consumer’s beliefs as important 
concerns for using advertising media from an expanded 
perspective, generally comprising both rational and emotional.  
The rational belief indicates a design of game for how a brand 
is placed in the advertising media [37] as the emotional belief 
shows a psychological state for how a player is motivated 
with a game context [32]. 
For advergame design, researchers noted the importance 
of placing particular forms of brand communication in 
advertising media for building attitude toward brand, that is, 
game-brand fit [3].  Furthermore, perceived interactivity is 
important for the quality of website design as it plays a key 
role in enabling players to have better communication, self-
control of experience, and response to websites [31][34].  
Accordingly, we consider game-brand fit and perceived 
interactivity for this issue.  For individual psychological state, 
prior studies have noted that two psychological states, 
involvement and escapism, that consumers find, when 
processing advertising messages, can impact affective state 
(e.g., brand attitude) [32].  Grounding on the arguments, this 
study proposes a relationship structure for predicting 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

purchase intention, including four components, belief 
structure, advergame attitude, brand attitude, and purchase 
intention.   
Moreover, this study considers two control variables, 
gender and prior experience, to control extraneous sources of 
variance and to maximize explanatory power.  Mehta [26] 
argued that advertising effectiveness for purchase behavior 
should allow for gender difference.  A person’s game 
experience may influence the link for attitude to purchase 
intention [11][17].  The following shows the rest of the 
content.  In Section 2, a literature review with hypothesis 
development for the research model is presented.  In Section 
3, the related works include scale definition, sampling design, 
and measurement model.  In Section 4: using PLS tool 
conducts hypothesis testing for estimating path and 
determination coefficients.  In Section 5, the findings are 
presented with the discussions for the reasons behind them.  
In Section 6, conclusions are discussed with practical and 
academic implications. 
II.
LITERATURE AND HYPOTHESIS 
Based on the above discussion, Figure 1 provides a 
pictorial depiction of this research model.  The proposed 
model is consistent with the basic logic of the hierarchy of 
effects theory, cognitive, affective, and conative, when often 
applied in the advertising.  Relevant literature and hypotheses 
are discussed below. 
Advergame design
Game-brand fit
Perceived
Interactivity
Individual
psychological state
Involvement
Excapiam
Attitude toward
advergame
Attitude toward
brand
Purchence 
intention
Control variables
- Gender
- Prior experience
H5
H6
H1
H2
H3
H4
Fig. 1. Research Model
A.
Game-Brand Fit and Advergame Attitude 
Researchers have argued that while playing an online 
advergame, players would assess whether the nature of the 
game matches the brand, which tries to relate features of the 
game to the presence of a brand logo, trademark, product, or 
spokesperson [27].  A good game-brand fit should generally 
induce more positive affective responses, such as favorability 
toward advergame [3].  Gross [11] explored the influence of 
game-branded product congruity on brand memory and 
attitude toward branded items placement in games, and 
reported that this has a significant effect on both brand 
memory and attitude toward the game.  Wise et al. [39] 
contended that the thematic connection between an 
advergame and the brand it represents directly affects 
consumer’s information processing, and thus has implications 
for their attitude toward advergame.  Based on this, it is 
hypothesized:
Hypothesis 1: Game-brand fit positively affects attitude 
toward advergame. 
B.
Perceived Interactivity and Advergame Attitude 
Perceived interactivity is an important determinant for 
game design as it plays a key role in enabling players to have 
better communication, self-control, and response with game 
[35].  Several studies on advertising conducted an experiment 
by manipulating the design of various interactive levels to 
customers in order to understand their differences [10].  The 
results indicated that perceived interactivity is a strong 
predictor of attitude toward advertising.  For website design, 
researchers attempted to identify the relationship between 
perceived interactivity and attitude toward the website [20], 
and they found that perceived interactivity is highly 
correlated with attitude toward the website.  Hence, it is 
hypothesized: 
Hypothesis 2: Interactivity positively affects attitude 
toward advergame. 
C.
Involvement and Advergame Attitude 
Involvement typically amounts to a positive subjective 
experience/state of an individual toward online activities [32].  
When consumer's involvement comes to forming positive 
attitude toward online advertising, it has a direct impact on 
attitude toward online advertising [38].  Further studies 
classified prior empirical studies for finding relationships 
between involvement and affective responses and user 
attitude toward IS adoption is affected by the level of 
involvement [24].  Santosa et al. [32] designed an online 
information-seeking activity to examine the relationship 
between personal involvement and user satisfaction and 
showed that involvement positively affects satisfaction level 
with this activity.  Accordingly, it is hypothesized: 
Hypothesis 3: Involvement positively affects attitude 
toward advergame. 
D.
Escapism and Advergame Attitude 
Youn and Lee [40] applied a uses-and-gratifications 
approach to examine the motivations of playing advergame 
for college students.  Open-ended questions were used to 
collect a list of motivations for playing advergame online.  
After completing the frequency analysis, the results showed 
that escapism is one of the major motivations for playing 
such games.  They also found a strong positive relationship 
between 
escapism 
and 
attitude 
toward 
advergame.  
Hernandez [12] examined the factors contributing to positive 
attitude toward advergame among students in Mexico.  She 
also argued that a high level of escapism has a positive 
relationship with attitude toward advergame, as seen in prior 
studies.  Hence, it is hypothesized: 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Hypothesis 4: Escapism positively affects attitude toward 
advergame. 
E.
Advergame Attitude and Brand Attitude 
Researchers on advertising value have demonstrated 
consistent 
relationships 
between 
attitude 
toward 
advertisement and attitude toward brand in both traditional 
and online advertising [2][8].  Mackenzie et al. [22] also 
reported that attitude toward advertising is a causal mediating 
variable in the process through which an advertisement 
influences attitude toward brand and purchase intention.  
Wise et al. [39] showed stronger support for the effect of 
attitude toward advergame on attitude toward brand in a 
condition of a high thematic connection.  Hence, it is 
hypothesized: 
Hypothesis 5: Attitude toward advergame positively affects 
attitude toward brand. 
F.
Brand Attitude and Purchase Intention 
According to the hierarchy of effects theory, cognitive 
belief precedes affective response (e.g., attitude), which in 
turn precedes conative behavior (e.g., purchase intention) [36].  
Attitude is a predisposition to react favorably or unfavorably 
toward a particular object [22].  Intention is people’s 
prediction about their own behavior, and is influenced by 
attitude [28].  Several studies have identified attitude toward 
brand as an important determinant of purchase intention in 
the traditional advertising [5][23] and Internet advertising [15] 
[16].  Hence it is hypothesized: 
Hypothesis 6: Attitude toward brand positively affects 
purchase intention. 
III.
RESEARCH DESIGN 
This part is for defining data collection procedure, 
including scale design, sampling design, and scale validation. 
A.
Instrumentation 
The instrument used to gather data was a five-part 
questionnaire.  The first part uses a nominal scale and the 
others use a 7-point Likert scale.   
1) Basic information: We collected basic information about 
the characteristics of the respondents, including gender, age, 
education, occupation, types of advergame, number of 
advergame played before, and frequency of playing 
advergame. 
2) Antecedents of attitude toward advergame: We examined 
four antecedents of attitude toward advergame.  The three 
items for measuring game-brand fit were adapted from the 
instruments developed by [13][27].  The three items for 
measuring perceived interactivity were adapted from the 
instruments developed by [21][34].  The three items for 
measuring involvement were adapted from the instruments 
developed by [32].  The three items for measuring escapism 
were adapted from those developed by [12][25]. 
3) Attitude toward advergame: The three items for 
measuring attitude toward advergame were adapted from the 
instruments developed by Hernandez [11][12].   
4) Attitude toward brand: The three items for measuring 
attitude toward brand were adapted from the instruments 
developed by [3].   
5) Purchase intention: The three items for measuring 
purchase intention were adapted from the instruments 
developed by [18]. 
B.
Sample Design 
This study primarily explores consumer's purchase 
intention in terms of the promotional approach of advergame.  
It would be better to define the qualified respondents in this 
setting.  They were asked to reflect on a recent playing 
experience of advergame (within the past three months).  This 
manipulation would assure that all respondents are in a 
consistent manner to recall their experience across all 
constructs.  This manipulation could avoid a bias in the data 
collection process.  Prior research has proposed a similar 
approach online shopping context [24].  An online survey 
was placed in online communities to seek players of 
advergame as potential respondents.  Online survey is not 
also consistent with the context of online game, but also 
geographically unlimited [7].  
A wide variety of data sources was included for survey, 
allowing the responses to be more representative of the 
population.  Public notices about the survey were posted on a 
number of bulletin board systems and forums.  A reward 
system was also provided for the respondents.  At least 30 
participants were drawn from the response sample, with a 
reward of 5 US dollars being paid to each of them.  
C.
Scale Validation 
A pretest was conducted for the scale with practitioners to 
guarantee 
acceptable 
initial 
reliability 
and 
validity.  
Afterwards, online survey was performed for the above 
procedure. A total of 453 responses were received with a 
certain level of experience in playing advergame.  After 108 
invalid responses with incomplete information were deleted, 
the final sample size was 345.  Common method variance 
(CMV) was examined with Harman’s single factor test [30].  
We included all items for analysis to determine whether the 
majority of variance could be accounted for by one general 
factor, that is, more than 50% variance accounted for.  As no 
single factor accounted for the bulk of covariance (less than 
50% variance accounted for), meaning there was no CMV.   
D.
Measurement Model 
This study employed structural equation modeling (SEM) 
with PLS software to test this proposed model.  SEM-PLS 
allows latent variables to be modeled as either formative or 
reflective constructs, and places minimal demands on sample 
size and residual distribution [4].  First, a measurement model 
was built for scale validation and then a structural model was 
developed for path analysis. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

First, reliability is assessed by the criterion: Cronbach’s α 
larger than 0.7 [4].  Convergent validity is assessed by three 
criteria: (1) item loading (λ) larger than 0.70, (2) composite 
construct reliability larger than 0.80, and (3) average variance 
extracted (AVE) larger than 0.50 [9].  Next, discriminant 
validity is assessed using the criterion: the square root of 
AVE for each construct larger than its correlations with all 
other constructs [9].  All constructs are satisfactory with the 
criteria of convergent and discriminant validity. 
IV.
HYPOTHESIS TESTING 
Using SEM-PLS tool conducts hypothesis testing.  We 
present the following testing results.  First, there is a 
requirement to estimate path coefficients and statistical 
significance for this model.  Next, determination coefficient 
(R2) is computed for endogenous variables to indicate their 
predictive power.  Determination coefficient found in the 
analysis is similar to the procedure of multiple regression 
analysis.  SEM-PLS does not provide significance tests or 
interval estimations and a bootstrapping procedure is used 
with generating 1000 subsamples to estimate path coefficients 
and their significance.  Figure 2 presents the results of the 
structural model. 
For game design aspect, game-brand fit has a positive 
impact on attitude toward advergame at 0.05 level (β=0.25), 
supporting Hypothesis 1.  Perceived interactivity is a 
significant predictor of attitude toward advergame at 0.05 
level (β=0.23), supporting Hypothesis 2.  For psychological 
state aspect, involvement is important in affecting attitude 
toward advergame at 0.05 level (β=0.22), while escapism is 
not significant for its influence (β=-0.05).  Hypothesis 3 is 
supported but Hypothesis 4 is not.  Further, the two aspects 
jointly explain 55% of variance in attitude toward advergame.  
Next, attitude toward advergame was found to be a notable 
predictor of attitude toward brand at 0.01 level (β=0.52), 
supporting Hypothesis 5 with explaining 46% of variance.  In 
turn, attitude toward brand is an important precursor of 
purchase intention at 0.01 level (β=0.47), supporting 
Hypothesis 6 with explaining 42% of variance.  Finally, 
regarding the two specified control variables, gender and 
prior experience are not significantly associated with 
purchase intention (β=0.01 and 0.01). 
Advergame design
Game-brand fit
Perceived
Interactivity
Individual
Psychological state
Involvement
Excapiam
Attitude toward
advergame
Attitude toward
brand
Purchence 
intention
Control variables
- Gender .01
- Prior experience .01
.52**
.47**
.25*
.23*
.22*
-.05
R2=.55
R2=.46
R2=.42
Fig. 2. Structural Model 
Value on path: Standardized coefficients, 
2
R : Coefficient of determination, **: p<0.01, *: p<0.05 
V. FINDINGS AND DISCUSSIONS 
The findings are indicated in Table 1.  First, we discuss 
the possible reasons behind these findings for practice.  Next, 
their importance and contribution could be indicated in 
literature.  In particular, the possible similarities with 
literature are also discussed. 
TABLE I. HYPOTHETICAL TESTING 
Hypothetical Links 
Results 
Game-brand fit->Avergame attitude 
Support 
Perceived interactivity->Avergame attitude 
Support 
Involvement->Avergame attitude 
Support 
Escapism->Avergame attitude 
No support 
Avergame attitude->Brand attitude 
Support 
Brand attitude->Purchase intention 
Support 
A.
Influence of Advergame Design  
Game-brand fit and perceived interactivity indicate the 
importance in the design of the advergame.  Advergame 
design is rather different from other games in terms of their 
main purpose and motivation.  Advergame is usually initiated 
by a brand owner, which uses gaming technology to deliver 
embedded advertising messages to the audience.  It attempts 
to convey brand images and ideas behind a game-playing 
situation.  Thus, when people are playing advergame, they 
first assess the extent to which brand and game seem to be 
well matched.  If they perceive that brand-game fit is good, 
they will have positive affective responses [27]. 
Next, game is in its nature an interactive activity between 
game and players.  Appropriate interactivity as a self-control 
mechanism can enhance marketing campaigns in an online 
context [31].  The findings are similar to prior studies in 
traditional advertising, which indicates that perceived 
interactivity will influence consumer’s attitude toward 
commercial 
messages 
and 
online 
advertising 
[10].  
Accordingly, advergame attitude could be positively 
impacted by game-brand fit and perceived interactivity. 
B.
 Influence of Psychological State 
When involvement is important for consumer’s attitude, 
this indicates that different people perceive the same 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

advergame differently, and hence respond to it with different 
affective states.  In terms of high- and low-involvement, high-
involvement subjects usually believe that the communicated 
message affects their cognition and attitude, while low-
involvement ones do not believe that the communicated 
message has any important, meaningful, or personally 
relevant effects.  Marketers should place greater emphasis on 
the issue of involvement to improve player attitudes toward 
advergame.  The role of involvement that we found in this 
study is consistent with the findings of some prior studies 
[38].   
In contrast, escapism shows an insignificant impact on 
consumer’s attitude and this finding should be quite 
interesting to marketers.  Hernandez [12] concluded that 
online games allow a player to escape into an alternative 
reality that may not be stable in all contexts.  Advergame 
neither causes people to put off things they should do, nor 
makes them get away from their responsibilities.  This may 
be because most people understand that procrastination will 
only lead to the tasks at hand to be completed later than 
would be otherwise possible.  Playing advergame is thus 
unlikely to make players feel like that they are in another 
world, or keep them in a flow state for a long time.  
C.
Influence of Advergame and Brand Attitude 
Advergame attitude is useful in evaluating advertising 
value and is a key precursor of brand attitude when playing 
an advergame.  Advergame attitude is important for 
advertising value and needs to be carefully nurtured from 
major concerns of players when playing advergame.  For 
example, when players do not have enough or any affective 
response to brand, an advergame can be an important medium 
for them to connect with brand.  Marketers must work to 
make players feel that an advergame is good, likable, and 
refreshing, and thus lead to them have positive attitude 
toward brand.  The findings are consistent with previous 
studies, highlighting the fact for an important antecedent for 
positive brand attitude [22].   
Further, brand attitude should be considered as an 
important affective criterion for consumers when developing 
an effective advergame mechanism.  Branded entertainment 
mechanisms are highly penetrable with regard to their target 
audiences, thus enabling them to accept and understand brand 
advertising, such as advergame.  In turn, this would be further 
reflected in purchase behavior.  Marketers should work on 
attracting players to stay or feel enjoyment with advergame to 
have their brand seen favorably by the players, and thus 
increase consumer buying behavior.  The findings are 
consistent with previous studies on traditional advertising 
[16]. 
D.
Influence of Control Variables 
Gender and prior experience are not correlated with 
purchase intention.  One ultimate goal of advertising is to 
persuade the audience to buy branded items.  Advertising 
may be targeted to sex-specific groups, although shoppers are 
not limited to one gender.  Next, consumers have different 
degrees of playing experience, which may greatly depend on 
individual traits (e.g., interests, preferences, and needs), even 
though advergame is becoming more popular and can easily 
be found online.  Accordingly, neither type of purchases is 
associated with player’s prior game-playing experience.   
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS 
This part shows the research findings for their practical 
and academic implications as well as the research limitations. 
A.
 Practical Implications 
In terms of game-brand fit, marketers must better 
understand brand since each brand has its story, essence, 
idealized community, and paradox and then achieve effective 
communication with game developers to ensure that brands 
and game features have similar images.  For perceived 
interactivity, marketers and game developers should ensure 
that advergame is enabled by two-way and synchronous 
communications as this can then increase positive advergame 
attitude.  Regarding psychological state, marketers need to 
ensure that advergame reflects personal involvement, that is, 
what consumers perceive to be important and means a lot to 
them.  Moreover, it may be more effective to target an 
advergame to consumers of a specific background or age, so 
that it can be made more relevant to them.  Such practices 
will increase the level of personal involvement, and thus 
improve positive advergame attitude.   
B.
Academic Implications 
To the best of our knowledge, few previous studies have 
investigated consumer's purchase intentions in relation to 
advergame value.  This study has successfully extended the 
hierarchy of effects theory, as well as provided a better way 
of exploring advergame value.  This particular approach 
focuses on two aspects, advergame design and psychological 
state, for driving advergame attitude, brand attitude, and 
purchase intention. 
C.
Research Limitations 
First, there is a wide range of brands, and each brand has a 
lot of its own advergame.  Moreover, in terms of the fields of 
applications, advergame can be used by marketers with 
various branded products and services.  However, this study 
did not focus on any specific brand (e.g., McDonald, Nissan), 
any specific field (e.g., food, car), and any specific appeals 
(e.g., humor vs. fear).  Hence, these concerns may have 
affected the generalization of the results and have made it 
hard to identify different routes to attitudinal change.  Next, 
according to basic demographic information, the majority of 
respondents are students.  However, research has shown that 
students are the chief players of advergame and are mostly 
trained to value rationalism, and as a result, may reject an 
emotional appeal more than other populations.  Thus, this 
group is highly representative of the target population. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

D.
Future research 
Further research can be extended to include content 
design for an entertainment purpose to increase flow state of 
consumers.  Next, a concern of cross-cultural differences may 
be included to understand consumer behavior.  Further, 
personal IT skills is an important determinant for consumers 
to be willing to involve in this game playing since it is 
created by an IT-based form. 
REFERENCES 
[1]
T. E. Barry, “In defense of the hierarchy of effects: A rejoinder 
to Weilbacher,” Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 42, no. 
3, pp. 44-47, 2002. 
[2]
I. Buil, L. de Chernatony, and E. Martínez, “Examining the 
role of advertising and sales promotions in brand equity 
creation,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 
115-122, 2013. 
[3]
V. Cauberghe and P. D. Pelsmacker, “Advergames: The 
impact of brand prominence and game repetition on brand 
responses,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 5-18, 
2010. 
[4]
W. W. Chin, B. L. Marcolin, and P. R. Newstead, “A partial 
least squares latent variable modeling approach for measuring 
interaction effects: Results from a Monte Carlo simulation 
study and an electronic-mail emotion/adoption study,” 
Information Systems Research, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 189-217, 
2003. 
[5]
S. Chow, R. L. Rose, and D. G. Clarke, “Sequence: Structural 
equations estimation of new copy effectiveness,” Journal of 
Advertising Research, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 60-72, 1992. 
[6]
J. Culp, R. A. Bell, and D. Cassady, “Characteristics of food 
industry web sites and advergames targeting children,” 
Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, vol. 42, no. 3, 
pp.197-201, 2010. 
[7]
M. Denscombe, “Web-based questionnaires and the mode 
effect: An evaluation based on completion rates and data 
contents of near-identical questionnaires delivered in different 
modes,” Social Science Computer Review, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 
246-254, 2006. 
[8]
C. M. Derbaix, “The impact of affective reactions on attitudes 
toward the advertisement and the brand: A step toward 
ecological validity,” Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 32, 
no. 4, pp. 470-479, 1995. 
[9]
C. Fornell, and D. F. Larcker, “Structural equation models 
with unobservable variables and measurement error: Algebra 
and statistics,” Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 18, no. 3, 
pp. 382-388, 1981. 
[10] Q. Gao, P. L. Rau, and G. Salvendy, “Perception of 
interactivity: Affects of four key variables in mobile 
advertising,” International Journal of Human-Computer 
Interaction, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 479-505, 2009. 
[11] M. L. Gross, “Advergames and the effects of game-product 
congruity,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 
1259-1265, 2010. 
[12] M. D. Hernandez, “Determinants of children’s attitudes 
towards 
advergames: 
The 
case 
of 
Mexico,” 
Young 
Consumers, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 112-120, 2008. 
[13] M. D. Hernandez, and M. S. Minor, “Investigating the effect 
of arousal on brand memory in advergames: Comparing 
qualitative and quantitative approaches,” Qualitative Market 
Research: An International Journal, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 207-
217, 2011. 
[14] Á. Hofmeister-Tóth, and P. Nagy, “The content analysis of 
advergames in Hungary,” Qualitative Market Research: An 
International Journal, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 289-303, 2011. 
[15]  C. D. Hopkins, M. A. Raymond, and A. Mitra, “Consumer 
responses to perceived telepresence in the online advertising 
environment: 
The 
moderating 
role 
of 
involvement,” 
Marketing Theory, vol. 4, no. 1-2, pp. 137-162, 2004. 
[16] J. Hwang, Y. S. Yoon, and N. H. Park, “Structural effects of 
cognitive and affective responses to web advertisements, 
website and brand attitudes, and purchase intentions: The case 
of casual-dining restaurants,” International Journal of 
Hospitality Management, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 897-907, 2011. 
[17] P. Ing, “The impact of advertising position and games 
experience 
on 
purchase 
intention 
in 
advergaming,” 
Interdisciplinary Journal of Contemporary Research in 
Business, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 40-53, 2009. 
[18] M. Lai, and Y. S. Huang, “Can learning theoretical approaches 
illuminate the ways in which advertising games effect 
attitude, recall, and purchase intention,” International Journal 
of Electronic Business Management, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 368-
380, 2011. 
[19] R. J. Lavidge, and G. A. Steiner, “A model for predictive 
measurements of advertising effectiveness,” Journal of 
Marketing, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 59-62, 1961. 
[20] J. Lee, and W. N. Lee, “Antecedents and consequences of 
perceived interactivity: An exploratory study,” Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 34-45, 2002. 
[21] Y. Liu, and L. J. Shrum, “What is interactivity and is it always 
such a good thing? implications of definition, person, and 
situation for the influence of interactivity on advertising 
effectiveness,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 53-
64, 2002. 
[22] S. B. Mackenzie, R. L. Lutz , and G. E. Belch, “The role of 
attitude toward the ad as a mediator of advertising 
effectiveness: A test of competing explanations,” Journal of 
Marketing Research, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 130-143, 1986. 
[23] S. B. Mackenzie, and R. A. Spreng, “How does motivation 
moderate the impact of central and peripheral processing on 
brand attitudes and intentions?,” Journal of Consumer 
Research, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 519-529, 1992. 
[24] M. A. Mahmood, J. M. Burn, L. A. Gemoets, and C.  Jacqqez, 
“Variables 
affecting 
information 
technology 
end-user 
satisfaction: A meta-analysis of the empirical literature,” 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 52, 
no. 4, pp. 751-771, 2000. 
[25] C. Mathwick, “Understanding the online consumer: A 
typology of online relational norms and behavior,” Journal of 
Interactive Marketing, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 40-55, 2002. 
[26] A. 
Mehta, 
“Advertising 
attitudes 
and 
advertising 
effectiveness,” Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 40, no. 
3, pp. 67-72, 2000. 
[27] S. Okazaki, and M. J. Yagüe, “Responses to an advergaming 
campaign on a mobile social networking site: An initial 
research report,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 28, no. 
1, pp. 78-86, 2012. 
[28] R. E. Petty, R. H. Unnava, and A. J. Strrathman, “Theories of 
attitude change,” Handbook of Consumer Behavior, pp. 241-
279, 1991. 
[29] C. Pizzutti & D. Fernandes, “Effect of recovery efforts on 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

consumer trust and loyalty in e-tail: A contingency model,” 
International Journal of Electronic Commerce, vol. 14, no. 4, 
pp. 127-160, 2010. 
[30] P. M. Podsakoff, S. B. Mackenzie, J. Y. Lee, and N. P. 
Podsakoff, “Common method biases in behavioral research: 
A critical review of the literature and recommended 
remedies,” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 88, no. 5, pp. 
879-903, 2003. 
[31] G. Rosenkrans, “Maximizing user interactivity through banner 
Ad design,” Journal of Promotion Management, vol. 16, no. 
3, pp. 265-287, 2010. 
[32] P. I. Santosa, K. K. Wei, and H. C. Chan, “User involvement 
and user satisfaction with information-seeking activity,” 
European Journal of Information Systems, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 
361-370, 2005. 
[33] B. M. Sukoco, and W. Y. Wu, “The effects of advergames on 
consumer telepresence and attitudes: A comparison of 
products with search and experience attributes.” Expert 
Systems with Applications, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 7396-7406, 
2011. 
[34] S. S. Sundar, and J. Kim, “Interactivity and persuasion: 
Influencing attitudes with information and involvement,” 
Journal of interactive advertising, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 5-18, 
2005. 
[35] C. Tangmanee, and J. Rustanavibul, “Product placement in 
online games: An exploration into Thai gamers’ attitude,” The 
Journal of American Academy of Business, Cambridge, vol. 
17, no. 2, pp. 92-98, 2012. 
[36] D. Vakratsas, and T. Ambler, “How advertising works: What 
do we really know?.” Journal of Marketing, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 
26-43, 1999. 
[37] E. A. van Reijmersdal, J. Jansz, O. Peters, and G. Van Noort, 
“The effects of interactive brand placements in online games 
on children’s cognitive, affective, and conative brand 
responses,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 
1787-1794, 2010. 
[38] E. Wang, “Forming positive advertising and product attitude: 
The role of product involvement,” International Journal of 
Technology Marketing, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 259-271, 2011. 
[39] K. Wise, P. Bolls, H. Kim, “Venkataraman, A., and Meyer, R. 
Enjoyment of advergames and brand attitudes: The impact of 
thematic relevance,” Journal of Interactive Advertising, vol. 
9, no. 1, pp. 27-36, 2008. 
[40] S. Youn, and M. Lee, “Advergame playing motivations and 
effectiveness: A uses and gratifications perspective,” In: 
Advertising, Promotion, and New Media, M. R. Stafford and 
R. J. Faber (eds.), New York: Sharpe, pp. 320-347, 2005. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

