Towards Participatory Methods to Take into Account Future Users and Future 
Usages of Hydrogen Energy: a Prospective Ergonomics Approach. 
Robin Vivian, Eric Brangier, Corinne Bornet, Benoit Roussel, Javier Barcenilla, Amelie Bost 
Perseus laboratory 
Lorraine University 
Metz, France 
{firstname.name}@univ-lorraine.fr 
 
Abstract - The energetics transition will be a major challenge in 
the next years. Today, we must imagine needs and uses of 
alternative energy such as hydrogen. But how can we evaluate 
the technological acceptance of products and services where 
they do not yet exist? In this presentation, we introduce our 
theoretical approach of Prospective Cognitive Ergonomics, our 
methodology and the results obtained through the Hydrogen 
project, a research for exploring what might be the future use 
of this energy. For collecting data, we created three staffs of 
professionals (production, transport and energy distribution) 
and we analyzed their conversations (lexical analysis). This 
paper presents the entire process of this lexical analysis, which 
enabled us to validate four user models and to position them 
along two axes.  
Keywords - prospective; ergonomics; energy; user-centred 
concept.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Trying to understand how an object (a phone, a watch, a 
car) or a computer application will be accepted by users is 
relatively simple. We can create specific groups, asking 
people to manipulate objects and analyse the strengths and 
weaknesses. What can we do when the object does not exist 
and when the concept is very fussy? 
As Gibson stated [1], “to see things is to see how to get 
about among them and what to do or not do with them”. This 
seems obvious because as we move around our environment 
we learn and become conscious of its possibilities. The 
question is can we perceive things that do not exist and their 
possibilities.  
On one hand, traditional points of view about creativity 
and problem solving, as gestalt theorists, assume that a new 
idea or creative act must be preceded by a period of 
incubation, before the idea appears by an unconscious 
mechanism called illumination. On the other hand, 
researches in the Ergonomics field consider that we can 
foster creativity and generate knowledge about the present 
or future use of a product by applying adequate methods, 
such as « scenarios based reasoning », [2], « personas 
creativity » [3], « analogy based approaches » [4] or 
« counterfactual reasoning » [5]. 
The objective of this work is to anticipate the hydrogen 
uses and identify the bottlenecks that constrain energetic 
transition. Since the use of hydrogen as energy is still 
anecdotal, it is a complex matter to require users to respond 
how they feel about it. This paper proposes a method called 
“Staffs of experts”, based on the participation of 
professionals from three areas: production, transport and 
storage of hydrogen. We asked them to imagine the uses, the 
barriers and the behaviour of future users. After this 
introduction, we give the theoretical background. We 
describe in section 3, the method used for this study. The 
first results are given in Section 4. The last part is a 
conclusion. 
II. 
THEORITICAL BACKGROUND: PROSPECTIVE 
ERGONOMICS APPROACH 
Prospective ergonomics is defined as being an ergonomic 
intervention mode which on one hand identifies current 
needs, foresees changes and anticipates future users, and on 
the other hand, it creates systems, products or services which 
meet those needs according to health and safety, comfort and 
well-being, performance and satisfaction criteria [6]. 
Prospective ergonomic intervention is therefore speculative 
and inventive. Prospective ergonomics place the human in 
the central position in new practices, behaviour, and 
organization. Focusing on changes in human activity, the 
ergonomist takes on the role of a pilot who initiates, defines 
and manages the project from beginning to end, bringing in 
other actors to implement, or execute his/her plans. To 
achieve these aims, prospective ergonomics must fulfil three 
kinds of tasks: 
• 
Identify current needs, understand their changes over the 
long term, anticipate future needs, define, reference, 
validate and asses them, put them in order of priority, and 
carry out simulations; 
• 
Study technological, social, cultural, and economic 
factors which accelerate changes in human activity 
situations to which humans are required to adapt; 
• 
Imagine, invent, create and build systems, products and 
services beneficial to humans, providing comfort, well-
being, allowing for personal progress and a better quality 
of life in general. 
Based on the same principles as corrective and 
preventive 
ergonomics, 
prospective 
ergonomics 
will 
complete the scope of ergonomic intervention modes by 
taking the future into account. This will enrich its 
relationship with other fields, not only psychology, 
biomechanics, physiology, cognitive sciences, scientific 
engineering, but also with sociology, anthropology, design, 
marketing and business management.  
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

A. The part played by prospective ergonomics 
Let us start from a widely shared definition (European 
Commission, 2002): «The prospective approach is a 
participatory process to design possible futures in the 
medium or long term, with the aim of shedding light on 
decisions made in the present and mobilizing the necessary 
means for a common commitment to action. It is above all a 
state of mind (anticipate and wish for) and behaviour (create 
and hope) in the service of present and future existence». Let 
us then observe all the fields involved in the prospective 
approach. Medicine, particularly epidemiology, has been 
using a prospective approach for a long time. The same goes 
for 
economics, 
marketing, 
demographics, 
business 
management, and even work organisation, etc. What 
motivated a prospective approach being integrated into these 
fields is simple and pragmatic: the prospective approach 
offers tools and methods which enable professionals to focus 
on the right questions and reduce inconsistency in reasoning 
for developments in the future. However, ergonomics has 
delayed integrating this forward looking perspective. 
Our research project aims to address this delay. Applying 
a prospective approach in other fields will undoubtedly cause 
changes in our vision for the future. It broadens the 
perception of the problem by including demographic, 
economic, social, cultural, technological, historical, and legal 
data that highlight changes in future, trends. It keeps a watch 
on technologies, checks patent deposits and seeks to identify 
tomorrow’s technologies. The prospective approach enables 
forecasting (often statistical but not only) related to «what 
will be done» from «what is being done» and «what has been 
done». It establishes data on changes in behaviour, 
consumption patterns, lifestyles, etc., and seeks to 
understand trends through curve models. In short, the 
prospective approach presents two major advantages: 
• Enrichment of multi-disciplinary content: An interest in 
data from fields which study population, population trends 
and behaviour patterns (sociology, history, demographic, 
etc); 
• Improved methods: An interest in statistics relating to large 
workforces over greater periods and data on the creativity 
of the actors involved. 
 
B. Prospective ergonomics approach 
Prospective ergonomics' aim is to develop prospective 
schemas by mobilizing a body of knowledge relative to the 
human and capable of describing needs, products, services 
and future systems. Through its focus and objectives, 
prospective ergonomics clearly differs from corrective and 
preventive ergonomics while being complementary. It adds 
little explored dimensions, including knowledge (methods, 
concepts and processes) that will enhance traditional 
approaches such as: 
• Producing knowledge about future users: These are 
techniques that are able to understand future clients, such 
as the technique using personas [7][8], and scenarios. The 
scenario technique enables the pre-testing of new concepts 
and evaluation of their impact on target users. 
• Stimulating creativity and organisation in innovative 
projects. This includes various techniques of constraint 
management [9] or social development of future needs 
[10][11] which will support user creativity. 
• Previewing artefacts so as to tailor product use or future 
services. This involves not only making models, and 
prototypes, but also system simulation in immersive 
environments. 
• Understanding forms of appropriation of artefacts, beyond 
the functional approach which limits usage to realizing the 
system's functionality. Artefacts are designed for users who 
in turn redesign them. Understanding this to-ing and fro-
ing between the artefact and the human enables us to 
understand the particular sleights of hand, misuse, usage 
deflection, and users' creativity, which not only shows 
appropriation of the technology, but also sources of 
innovation of unprecedented usage. Exploring hitherto 
unseen usages is in fact an important source of innovation. 
• A priori identification of errors, drop in user rates, 
performance reduction and other unfortunate experiences. 
Understanding 
unfortunate 
experiences 
provides 
suggestions for improvement while estimating performance 
for the future use of the artefact. 
• Studying products and services successes and failures 
comparable to the ones we wish to create or belonging to 
the same technological ecosystems, in order to learn more 
about functionalities connectivity, mobility, user interfaces, 
aesthetics, etc. 
• Using trends to define the direction innovation needs 
taking.  
• Taking into account specific problems, this involves 
developing trend statistics, (demographics, sociology, 
ethnology, and economy), listing technological possibilities 
(patents, 
intellectual 
and 
industrial 
copyrights, 
development opportunities) to try and foresee market 
changes (sales, consumption, buying patterns). This 
process of putting trends, industrial and marketing data 
face to face serves to hone and assess prospective 
scenarios. In doing so, prospective ergonomics includes 
trends, statistical projections and market data in its 
reasoning, these aspects were not previously taken into 
consideration in the field. 
III. 
METHOD 
In the framework of the Hydrogen project, our objectives 
were to understand how the experts perceive the possible, the 
acceptable, the potential and the uses of hydrogen 
technology in the near or more distant future. We have used 
a variety of methodologies and analysis techniques. 
To do so, we have adopted a step-by-step approach, 
where we have used and analysis techniques linked together 
in this order: 1-staffs of experts, 2- card sorting, 3-,thematic 
analysis of content 4- personas and 5- lexical automated 
analysis. 
 
A community of expert staff is a group of experts 
[10][12] representing actors directly or indirectly involved in 
a community project. The experts were welcomed under the 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

responsibility of animators in a controlled, scripted and 
filmed situation. 
The main goal of those staffs of experts was to collect data 
that could enable us to use the other methods for finally, 
define scenarios of future use for a technology, product or 
service. 
The role of the animators (2 or 3 in our case) is, for 
example, to create a dialogue between the experts, to react on 
existing products and services, to express the needs, 
expectations and requirements of target users, and to explain 
useful knowledge necessary for the use. 
For our study, we created three staffs of professionals on 
three themes: 1-Transportation (2 + 2 experts animators), 2- 
Producing (4 + 3 expert animators), and 3- Energy 
distribution (3 + 2 experts animators). Each session lasted 
three hours. The process of each expert staff was done in 
four phases: 
1- Each participant's presentation, 
2- Knowledge generation and discussion about needs 
on hydrogen and its use, 
3- Presentation of a movie on the discussed theme 
and experts reactions/discussions on it, 
4- Organization of knowledge about hydrogen and 
its use (card sorting method). 
 
Discussions and interactions were filmed using the living 
lab of our laboratory Perseus / UL. The different groups 
watched videos and reacted over the content (Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Powertech Hydrogen Fueling Station Overview for Fuel Cell 
Cars 
A focus group lasted three hours. At the end of the 
meeting, one main question was asked: 
• 
What is the most important ingredient for 
success in energy transition to hydrogen? 
 
IV. 
RESULTATS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Lexical Analysis 
We have chosen to make a lexical analysis of all 
conversations. The objective was to find the significant 
words, to build thematic classes and find patterns to 
understand the blocking points of the acceptance of an 
energy transition. In addition, the analysis of the 
conversations was used to validate four user models and to 
position them along two axes.  
 
For the lexical analysis, we started by faithfully 
transcribing 9 hours of recording that resulted in a text of 
160 pages. After cleaning all unnecessary words, repetitions, 
hesitations, errors, etc., the document was still 157 pages. 
To analyse the document, we used the Iramuteq software. 
Iramuteq stands for "Interface de R pour les Analyses 
Multidimensionnelles de Textes et de Questionnaires", in 
English, "interface of R for multi-dimensional text and 
questionnaire analysis". Iramuteq is built on top of R. This 
software allows analysing documents that are segmented into 
chunks. Input documents are plain text files that contains 
simple mark-up that identifies variables and topics. This 
allows distinguishing between: 
• 
A text 
• 
A text segment 
• 
A combination of text segments 
 
Analysing a text with Iramuteq require introducing 
different tags in the text. A tag is a string beginning with an * 
(eg *firstexpert). These tags allow cutting the corpus 
produced, for example, by speakers or expert. 
 
Iramuteq analyses verbs, words, adjectives and carry out 
a top-down hierarchical classification. For this, it is 
necessary beforehand to define different parameters like 
number of classes or the minimal size of segment (of text).  
From this analysis, Iramuteq builds a dendrogram 
(hierarchical tree, see Figure 2).    
For our study, the software generated 8 classes. The 
percentage for each class indicates the proportion of the class 
in the text. Each class contains a set of words. The first 
words are the most representative of the class, those that 
were more frequently reported. 
 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 2.  Our 8 classes from analysis 
We can read on the first line different words like battery, 
energy, heat, safe, thinking, vehicle, and petrol station.  The 
next step was to group these different classes which covered 
three main topics (Figure 3) 
The main topics found are: 
• 
Benefits of hydrogen and the multiplication of 
energies 
• 
Choices and improvements to make in the future 
• 
Desires of politicians and consumers 
 
 
Figure 3.  8 classes grouped into three themes 
In a bi-dimensional graph that resulted from a factorial 
analysis of morphological variables, we obtained a clear 
differentiation between four variables. The first two are on 
the X-axis (Figure 4). On the left, we can find a set of 
references to a social logical with words like “concern”, 
“charge”, “effort”, “communication”, “trust”. On the right 
we read more technical terms like “engine”, “fuel cell, 
energy, gas, heat, produce electricity”. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Factorial analysis and axes categorization of thematic content 
On the Y-axis we have a comparison between what is 
done today in other countries and questions about what will 
happen in France in a more or less near future. At the bottom 
of the axis we find a "political concerns” with the words like  
"states directive, national, Tokyo, unite, etc.". At the top the 
preoccupation there are more individual terms like : 
"consumer, financial, complicated change, worry, to evolve 
..." 
This factorial analysis enables us to categorize future users. 
By placing on the axis the characteristics of a person (more 
individual, more social, more technical) we can find the 
words that characterize the potential user in terms of their 
expectations, needs and fears. This characterization of users 
can help to find for each of them the best solutions in an 
energy transition.  
 
B. The elaboration of “Personas” 
 
The concept of the personas was defined by Cooper [2] 
(and used by Brangier [7]) who based his facts on the notion 
that a user was too confusing to serve as a reference within a 
product team.  The notion of a user was a too generic 
concept leading designers to develop products, which were 
designed for everybody but which finally, did not suit 
anybody. Another idea of the personas is that the necessity of 
adapting the product to each person will provide designers 
with an essential guide for a product for everybody.  The 
persona can also serve as a communication tool, for all the 
stakeholders involved in the product development process.  
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

The lexical analysis had two major impacts on the 
elaboration of user models, or personas. Firstly, the analysis 
enabled us to validate four profiles of users that had emerged 
from a thematic analysis of content  
• 
Cécile sees hydrogen as a new constraint. For her 
nothing must change. She is a passive consumer 
• 
Pierre is an active consumer. He compares, changes, 
manages. He likes new technologies and wants to 
use them to manage their energy ration. 
• 
Laurent works in a company specialized in 
hydrogen. For him, the future of hydrogen depends 
on political decisions. For him, consumer is not 
important today.   
• 
Martin’s company is also specialized in energy. He 
thinks that hydrogen is an interesting approach but 
raises questions about the attitude of future 
consumers. 
The attitudes, values and behaviors of these personas 
were in line with the classifications.  
Secondly, personas were positioned along two axes 
(Figure 5): Individual perspective versus political perspective 
and social logic versus technical logic. Indeed, even if they 
share common lexical fields, each of them points out a major 
concern: 
• 
Cécile : time required for energy management and 
safety 
• 
Pierre : new opportunities in every day life 
• 
Laurent : technological issues 
• 
Martin : technological acceptance from users. 
The lexical field at the lower left corner of the graph has 
not been purposely illustrated by the four personas. It is 
made up mostly of comparisons between countries, although 
personas, as prospective users are future orientated. 
 
Figure 5.  Positionning personas on factorial analysis graph of discourse.  
Laurent is a technician. It is not concerned by the daily 
use difficulties. He thinks that Hydrogen is the solution to 
the problem of declining fossil fuels. For him, there is no 
alternative. He thinks the change is also a political will. 
Martin is a professional too. But he thinks that using 
hydrogen will impact the lives of people (price, constraints, 
etc.). For him customer perception and opinion are 
important. Pierre is the example of the optimist user. He 
enjoys new technologies. He expects to manage its energy 
with automation tools. This is an optimistic environmentalist. 
Cécile is a dubious user. She does not want changing her 
habits. She knows that the ecological factor is important and 
she wants to make an effort but she refuse to be impacted by 
technical constraints.    
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Our work presents a perspective design method based on 
lexical analysis from speech of professionals of hydrogen. 
We categorized into 8 classes major areas of inquiry. From 
classes we built a model on essential needs. We identify 
three major themes  
• 
Benefits of hydrogen  
• 
Making in the future 
• 
Desires of politicians and consumers 
 
The most reported words in the lists are: "battery, energy, 
heat, safe, thinking, vehicle, petrol station". From this, it is 
possible to construct a sentence that summarizes all the 
speech:  
• 
“The batteries are sources of energies of tomorrow. 
They can generate heat, they are safe.” 
• 
“I think that vehicles in the future will be self-
sufficient and hydrogen stations will be easily 
found”.  
The “persona based” method proposes that one fictitious 
character can individually represent a whole category of 
likely future consumers (4 personas in this study). To 
summarise, on the one hand, the persona’s features enable 
professionals of hydrogen to create scenarios for the use of 
products or services and on the other hand, they enable 
distributers to develop a marketing strategy for the same 
product or service. This work shows also that the persona 
based method can be enriched by a lexical analysis and it 
contributes to construct representations of hydrogen uses: 
• 
In the stationary area 
• 
In the mobility area 
• 
In the distribution and petrol station.   
This work is the beginning of a larger project. Our future 
works will be: 
• 
Through a European project, we will be 
working on theperception of hydrogen as 
alternative energy. The main idea of this project 
will be to build information environments for 
specialists but also for novices. We want to 
develop different applications for daily users or 
occasional users. For example we want to build 
a series of online training courses for young 
learners (hydrogen sensitization) as well as 
technical training for professionals of hydrogen 
as the heating engineers, electricians or garage 
mechanics. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

• 
Build Living Lab (two hydrogen pumps for cars 
and trucks) will study the behavior of future 
users. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Many 
thanks 
to 
the 
laboratory 
LEMTA 
(http://lemta.univ-lorraine.fr) for all the work done for this 
project on energy transition. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Gibson(1986). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, 
Hillsadle, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
[2] A. Cooper 1999. The inmates are running the asylum – Why 
High-Tech Products Drive Us Crazy and How to Restore the 
Sanity. Indianapolis: Sams Publishing. 
[3] C. Bornet, E. Brangier, J. Barcenilla, PH. Deck (2013). 
Enrichir la créativité des ingénieurs avec l’analyse de 
l’activité et les personas : le cas d’un projet d’ergonomie 
prospective In F. Hubault (Eds). Ergonomie et Société : 
quelles attentes, quelles réponses ? SELF’2013, Congrès 
International d’Ergonomie. Paris, France. 
[4] C. Tijus, & P. Brezillon, (2006). Problem solving and 
Creativity for Decision Support Systems. In Creativity and 
Innovation in Decision Making and Decision Support, Vol 1, 
F. Adam, P. Brezillon, S. Carlsson, and P. Humphreys (eds.). 
Ludic Publishing Ltd. 277-293. 
[5] C. Tijus, J. Barcenilla, M. Rougeaux, & F. Jouen (2014). 
Open innovation and prospective ergonomics for smart 
clothes.  In Marcelo Soares and Francisco Rebelo (Eds.): 
Advances in Ergonomics In Design, Usability & Special 
Populations: Part III, pp. 583-591, AHFE Conference 2014. 
ISBN : 978-1-4951-2108-1 
[6] E. Brangier, & JM. Robert (2014). L’ergonomie prospective : 
fondements et enjeux. Le Travail Humain. Vol 77, n°1, 1-20. 
[7] E. Brangier, & C. Bornet (2011). Persona: A method to 
produce representations focused on consumers’ needs. In W. 
Karwowski, M. Soares & N. Stanton (Eds). Human Factors 
and ergonomics in Consumer Product Design: methods and 
techniques. 37-61. Taylor and Francis. 
[8] E. Brangier, C. Bornet, C. Bastien, G. Michel, R. Vivian, 
(2012). Effets des personas et contraintes fonctionnelles sur 
l’idéation dans la conception d’une bibliothèque numérique. 
Le Travail Humain, tome 75, n°2, 121-145. 
[9] N. Bonnardel (2006). Créativité et conception – Approches 
cognitives et ergonomiques. Marseille : Solal Editeurs. 
[10] E. Brangier, J. Dinet, C. Bastien, (2009). La méthode des 
staffs d'experts de communautés. Orientation théorique, 
démarche méthodologique et application pratique. Document 
numérique, 12(2), 111-132. 
[11] E. Brangier, J. Barcenilla, C. Bastien, J. Dinet. G. Michel.  & 
R. Vivian (2009). The Expert Community Staff: An 
innovative method for capturing end-users’ needs. ECCE 
Helsinki. 
[12] E. Brangier, J. Dinet, L. Eilrich, (2009). The 7 basic functions 
of a digital library: Analysis of 14 focus groups about the 
usefulness of a digital library on the history of European 
construction. In M.J. Smith and G. Salvendy (Eds.): Human 
Interface 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

