A Citizen-centric Public Sector 
Why citizen centricity matters and how to obtain it 
Lasse Berntzen, Marius Rode Johannessen and Ansgar Ødegård 
Department of Business and Management 
University College of Southeast Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
emails: {lasse.berntzen, marius.johannessen, ansgar.odegard}@hbv.no 
 
 
Abstract—The paper discusses the concept of a citizen-centric 
public sector. Citizen centricity is often promoted in policy 
papers and political speeches, but is often overlooked in 
practice. Reasons are discussed, and practical examples are 
shown, to show failures and success stories. Information and 
communication technology may be a significant measure to 
enhance citizen centricity. The latest digital agenda of the 
Norwegian government emphasizes the use of information and 
communication technology to make a simpler everyday life and 
increase productivity. The agenda is ambitious, and the paper 
discusses some possible pitfalls and how to overcome them. 
Keywords - citizen centricity; eGovernement; digital agenda; 
organizational identity. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper discusses citizen centricity in the public sector. 
A citizen-centric public sector implies putting the citizens in 
the center and building services around the citizen. Now, some 
readers would think “This is obvious, why write a paper about 
it”? But the fact is that the public sector is often implementing 
services that are not favorable to the citizens. Some reasons 
are: 
• 
The public sector thinks about its internal efficiency, not 
taking into account the additional effort required by the 
users to achieve this efficiency. 
• 
The public sector is complex and it is not able simplify 
the complexity for its users. The citizens see a lot of 
disconnected government entities and have to navigate by 
themselves. 
Berntzen [1] showed the increasing government 
awareness of citizen centricity rooted in “New Public 
Management”. The government should see citizens as 
customers and provide the same service level as experienced 
when dealing with private companies.  
In November 2005, the UK Presidency of EU held a 
Ministerial Conference in Manchester. The adopted 
declaration from the conference [2] moved citizen centricity 
high on the political agenda. Based on the declaration, 
Blakemore et al. [3] were asked by the European Commission 
eGovernment Unit to do a two-year study on citizen-centric 
eGovernment. The project, called cc:eGov, conducted a 
number of workshops and produced a set of “think papers” to 
discuss different aspects of citizen-centric eGovernment. The 
final outcome of the project was a handbook [4]. The study 
did not emphasize user involvement in the development of 
services, but was more concerned with transformation of 
government to be more attentive to the needs and wishes of 
the citizens. 
The European Commission also initiated other projects to 
explore citizen-centric eGovernment, e.g., OneStopGov [5]. 
The project was started in January 2006, and was a three year 
EU-funded research and development project that aimed at 
specifying, developing and evaluating a life-event oriented, 
all-inclusive, integrated, interoperable platform for online 
one-stop government. 
The next Ministerial Conference on e-Government held in 
Lisbon, September 2007 declared that member states should 
“deliver eGovernment services that are easier to use and of 
benefit to all citizens by increasing user centricity, improving 
accessibility, convenience and user experience” [6]. 
User involvement in the whole lifecycle of eGovernment 
services received focus in 2010, with the establishment of the 
NET-EUCEN thematic network [7]. One of the activities of 
this network was to develop a framework for measuring user-
centricity at all stages of the service lifecycle. 
In spite of this increasing awareness, we experience that 
citizen centricity is more often talked about than implemented. 
Citizen centricity is not primarily about technology, but 
technology can help building better services. Later we will 
show some examples of how government on different levels 
failed to consider the needs and wishes of citizens, but we will 
also show some success stories. Our examples are from 
Norway, and are partly based on our own experiences and 
discussions about citizen centricity. Our ambition was to find 
examples that are easy to explain and understand. We will 
then discuss the role of ICT in citizen centricity, and provide 
some guidance on how to use ICT in a meaningful way. We 
argue that citizen centricity is about mindset; public decision 
makers on all levels need to understand the importance of 
including citizens when developing services and products. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
The study was conducted following a qualitative research 
design and an interpretive epistemology. The objective of 
qualitative research is “understanding…by investigating the 
perspectives and behaviour of the people in these situations 
and the context within which they act” [8]. This fits well with 
our objective of discussing citizen centricity, as citizen 
centricity requires a thorough understanding of citizen needs 
and contexts. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

The case study research design is suited for research on 
phenomena where the experiences and interpretations of the 
actors and the wider context are important factors [9].  Thus, 
we use example cases from Norwegian public sector as the 
empirical basis of our paper. We have chosen the cases as 
representative examples of the citizen-related challenges 
facing public sector modernization.  
Data is analyzed using a model developed by Ødegård [10] 
– “a learning model” and shows how public organizations 
might respond to increasingly need for developing citizen-
centric services. The model shows that decisions are often 
made and carried out because they provide legitimacy for the 
decision maker rather than effective solutions benefitting the 
citizens. Thus, effectiveness and efficiency are secondary 
factors when decisions are made. On the other hand, decision 
makers also tend to make decisions based solely on 
organizational culture hindering the organization members in 
realizing the «changing citizens need» – the focus of the 
culture is primarily on internal needs and professional 
technical service standards without paying particularly 
attention to changing external (citizens) needs without paying 
attention to changing stakeholder demands and expectations, 
like changing citizen needs. Thus, organizations seem 
captured by the culture and past traditions without paying 
sufficient attention to future needs and expectations from the 
citizens. In other words, the organizations might make 
decisions regarding citizen centricity within the cultural frame 
“the way we have always done things around here”. We apply 
this model in order to test if this could be the reason why 
Norwegian public sector still struggles to become citizen-
centric, even though several plans exist that state this as a 
primary objective. 
III. 
ORGANIZATIONAL IDENTITY ON THE MOVE IN PUBLIC 
SECTOR ORGANIZATIONS 
The concept of organizational identity has received 
increased attention in the past decades.  Albert and Whetten’s 
[11] classical definition of organizational identity focuses on 
features such as central, distinctive and enduring as key 
elements of organizational identity. However, a more dynamic 
perspective on organizational identity is increasingly 
common. Organizational identity consists of an ongoing 
dynamics between culture and image [12] and thus 
emphasizing agency and the possibility for organizations to 
reconstruct their identity. However, this demands a long-term 
perspective and involvement of both internal and external 
stakeholders.  Schultz and Hernes [13] offer a framework for 
how the past traditions connect to future aspirations and thus 
influencing identity construction – a temporal perspective on 
organizational identity. Accordingly, the time – the past, 
present and the future – constitutes organizational identity 
through tangled processes evolving in time. 
Organizational identity is constructed through four 
processes of mirroring (in the mirror of others), reflecting 
(culture, embedded in history and traditions, meanings and 
understandings), expressing (the way culture is being 
expressed) and impressing (leave impression on others) [12]. 
Accordingly, organizational identity consists of the two 
concepts of image and culture. Culture represents the past, the 
roots and thus the core identity.  Osborne [14] describes 
culture as the DNA (Deoxyribonucleic acid) of an 
organization. Radical organization transformation requires 
cultural change through behaviors, values and basic 
assumptions [15]. We consider culture change as crucial in 
order to develop an organization culture in accordance with a 
citizen-centric public sector culture in which the citizens are 
in the center of all activities. 
Due to demands for transparency, the introduction of New 
Public Management and increasing stakeholder expectations 
there seems to be a need for public organizations to work 
purposely on the matter of reconstructing their identity. 
Organizations express themselves through identity claims, 
telling “who they are”, “where they come from” and “who 
they are going to be” in the future. Thus, the past and the future 
are closely interconnected. However, as the cases reveal, there 
seem to be a lack of connection between the culture part of 
public organizational identity and the image part. It seems that 
public organizations give great attention to different activities 
and projects which are nearly exclusively connected to the 
past and existing culture. This is done without having taken 
into account how a citizen-centric organization ought to be 
organized in order to fulfil the increasing expectations from 
the citizens. On the other hand, the cases expose the opposite 
tendency of uncritical focus on legitimacy and image without 
necessarily connect the projects through involvement and 
engagement with the existing culture. 
Two dysfunctions might occur when culture and images 
become disassociated [12]. When organizational identity is 
rooted nearly exclusively within the culture, a type of 
organizational narcissism might evolve, losing interest and 
support from external stakeholders. Accordingly, as shown in 
the cases, efforts of citizen centricity might fail due to 
overemphasizing of the past traditions and culture of the 
organization without really paying attention to the need and 
expectations of the citizens.  On the other hand, when identity 
primarily is occupied with external stakeholder images and 
legitimacy, ignoring cultural heritage and the past, the risk of 
losing the sense of “who we are” and “where we come from” 
emerge. According to Hatch and Shultz [12], this is called 
hyper-adaption, or “loss of culture‟. As shown in the cases, 
the efforts of citizen centricity might also fail due to 
overemphasizing on external stakeholder images and 
legitimacy. Thus, the organizations are occupied with gaining 
legitimacy, making an impression of being a citizen-centric 
public 
organization 
without 
necessarily 
emphasizing 
effectiveness, the needs and the expectations of the citizens. 
Organizational culture is a conservative force within 
organizations, developed over time ensuring stability [15]. 
Thus, strong cultures seem hard to change. In an increasingly 
more turbulent and complex world there seems to be a need 
for organizations to develop flexibility and learning 
capabilities. Hence, a learning culture characterized by a 
stabilized flexibility seems crucial. A learning culture featured 
by processes of learning, adaption and flexibility might be a 
key for public organizations to meet increased complexity, 
transparency and expectations from both internal and external 
stakeholders. In order for public organizations to succeed in 
being a citizen-centric organization, we claim that developing 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

a learning culture seems necessary. Otherwise a tendency of 
failures and lack of citizen centricity, which is showed in this 
paper probably, still will appear.  We suggest that a strong 
learning culture will foster innovation and adaption to an 
increasingly more complex and dynamic world of 
stakeholders for public organizations.  
IV. 
EXAMPLES OF BEING NON-CITIZEN-CENTRIC 
The following examples illustrate some of the typical 
problems of forgetting about the needs and wants of citizens. 
Each case illustrates a specific problem, and it has been the 
intention not to find pure information technology related 
examples, just because citizen centricity is relevant to all 
products and services delivered by the government. 
A. The train sets the customers did not want. 
In 2012, NSB, the Norwegian railroad operator 
(government owned) put 23 new train sets into service. The 
next day, customers started complaining about the seats being 
too narrow and uncomfortable. Due to massive complaints, 
NSB decided to change the seats for a cost of 51 million 
Norwegian crowns (almost 5 million Euro). The upgrade of 
the seats was finished in 2014 [16]. 
 
 
Figure 1. The Flirt train 
 
The initial seat configuration was chosen to get maximum 
number of seats in each wagon. In a citizen-centric approach, 
the seat configuration would have been tested with real users.  
This case illustrates how important it is to involve users in the 
design and development of products and services. 
B. Why do we need a driving license? 
As a proof that you have passed the necessary test to show 
that you are a competent driver one needs a driver license. But, 
the driving license is a physical card, and you need to bring it 
with you. If you cannot produce your driving license while 
driving, you can get fined. But, when you produce the driving 
license, it is checked towards a database for validity.  In fact, 
the driving license is just an ID, so why not accept any valid 
ID when in fact the validity is not in the card, but in the 
database. Fines bring money to the government, at the cost of 
irritated drivers that have to pay because they left their driving 
license at home or in their second car.  
This example above shows how the governments, 
sometimes, are locking up in old ways of thinking, without 
taking into account the real needs and wants of the citizens. 
United Kingdom had a driving license consisting of a 
photo card and a paper counterpart. The paper counterpart was 
abolished June 8th 2015 to save motorists’ money, reduce red 
tape, and make sure that employers are not relying on 
potentially out-of-date paper [17]. The information is now 
stored online, and the holder may share this online 
information, e.g., with car rental companies that requires 
information about driving history [17]. 
C. The parking ticket machine 
One of the authors was about to pay for parking in a 
municipal parking space, when he discovered a credit card left 
in the payment station. This payment station used the 
following routine: You put in the credit card, select parking 
time, get the parking ticket, and then remove the credit card. 
The card was returned to the unfortunate citizen. But, in later 
discussion we found that many users had the same experience. 
You are most concerned about getting the parking ticket, and 
therefore, it is easy to forget the card. In other parking stations, 
the sequence is different, you insert the card, select parking 
time, retrieve the credit card and then you get the ticket. 
Again, user testing with real users would have exposed this 
problem. In this case, it was not about internal efficiency or 
old ways, it was just about bad design. 
The user experience (UX) of parking ticket machines has 
also been discussed by several bloggers on the Internet, e.g., 
[18]. 
 
There are probably enough other examples to prove the 
point that not all products and services are citizen-centric. The 
examples are just examples of what happens when citizen 
centricity is not taken seriously, and show the importance of 
involving citizen, not only when new services or products are 
planned, designed and developed, but also to accept that “what 
we always have done” is not necessarily in line with the needs 
of the users. 
V. 
EXAMPLES OF “BEST PRACTICE” 
While there are many examples of lacking citizen-
centricity, we have also seen several examples of services that 
are truly citizen-centric. Again, we have tried to find examples 
that are not technology-oriented: 
A. Cancer Treatment Coordinator 
One vulnerable group is patients diagnosed with cancer. 
Earlier, patients had to relate to many different persons and 
institutions.  This may not be a big problem under normal 
circumstances, but when you get a possible terminal 
diagnosis, you may not be able to carry out the tasks you are 
expected to. The Special Health Services Act imposes a duty 
to appoint a coordinator for patients requiring “complex or 
long-term and coordinated services” [19]. Many hospitals 
have created designated cancer coordinator positions. The 
coordinators are responsible for coordinating the fastest 
possible assessment and treatment for patients, ensuring the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

provision of information about the treatment process for the 
patient and relatives at an early stage [19]. 
 
 
Figure 2. The coordinator hides the complex organization behind 
 
Outside the hospitals, many municipalities have created 
their own designated cancer coordinators. The patient now 
only needs to relate to one single person who knows the 
system, the processes, and what needs to be done. The 
municipal coordinators collaborate with the hospital 
coordinator but also with other stakeholders to provide the 
best possible services for the patient [19]. 
B. User-Controlled Personal Assistant 
Citizens with physical disabilities often need support to 
get around. The non-user centric approach is to tell the citizen 
that he/her will get help at certain times. “Lisa” is offered a 
walk in the park in the middle of the day, but what she really 
wants is to be with friend in a café on Friday evening. The 
user-managed personal assistant is the citizen-centric answer 
to such problems. The patient is given a certain number of 
hours a week, but the patient is in charge of how and when the 
hours are used. This empowers the patient. 
Many municipalities have implemented user-controlled 
personal assistants as a service. In their political platform 
established on October 7th, 2013, the two parties of the current 
government agreed to establish access to user-controlled 
personal assistance as a right [20]. This was implemented in 
the Health and Rights Act on January 1st, 2015 [21]. 
 
These are two real life examples on citizen-centric 
approaches to service provision.  What conclusions can we 
draw from these examples? 
• 
The service is built around the user 
• 
The user is empowered, and gets more control 
 
We have chosen these examples on purpose. They are not 
related to ICT, and they show that citizen-centric is more than 
making better ICT solutions. 
VI. 
CITIZEN CENTRICITY 
It is now time to discuss the concept of citizen centricity 
in more detail. As we have already seen, citizen centricity is 
not obvious. The main idea is to learn from the users of 
products and services in order to make them better. This 
involves the users in design, development and implementation 
of the products and services. In order to do that, systematic 
collection of user input is needed. Users may and should be 
co-creators of the products and services, not just consumers. 
They may add their wishes and expectations, but also their 
competence. 
We argue that citizen centricity is mainly about the 
collective mindset of public sector employees and decision 
makers. Citizens should be involved in all phases of product 
or service development. The user involvement should be 
sufficient, not superficial. It is necessary to pay close attention 
to wants and wishes in order to succeed. 
Citizens can be involved on different levels. On the policy 
level, user organizations can speak on behalf of the users. At 
system level, some users can speak for the rest. And on the 
individual level each user speaks for him/herself. On this level 
we talk about customization of products and services. 
A. ICT and Citizen Centricity 
Most services provided by government on different levels 
are depending on human resources. Teachers teach our 
children, healthcare personnel take care of those with medical 
problems, and manual work is needed to maintain roads.  But, 
ICT plays an increasing role in the service provision. The 
teachers are using ICT to communicate with parents, those 
with medical problems may book consultations online. 
Prescriptions are sent from the general practitioner (GP) to the 
pharmacy through electronic communication. Drivers may get 
updated information on road construction work through the 
Internet. Therefore, it is fair to say that electronic services play 
an important role in public service provision. 
B. Digital Agenda Norway 
In April 2016, the Norwegian government issued a white 
paper “Digital Agenda for Norway – ICT for a simpler 
everyday” [22]. One of the two key objectives of the white 
paper is a citizen-centric and effective public sector. It would 
be reasonable to say that the ambitions of the government are 
high.  
The users (citizens, public and private entities and the 
voluntary sector), and their needs shall be the central starting 
point. Public services shall be seen as coordinated and 
complete, independent of which public sector entities are 
providing the services. The public sector should reuse 
information instead of asking users for information already 
acquired. 
The government wants (among other things): 
• 
Real user participation to ensure that users views and 
needs is taken care of in development of digital services. 
• 
Stimulate more trials by using service design to 
contribute to more good user centric services. 
VII. BARRIERS TO CITIZEN-CENTRICITY 
Studies of barriers to eGovernment adoption often take a 
very broad or high level approach, by examining policy 
documents, interviewing project managers etc. While citizens 
are in focus, and citizen-centricity is promoted as a principle, 
existing research has put too little emphasis on the individual 
citizens’ needs [23].  
One exception is the study by Van Veenstra, Klievink and 
Janssen [24], who performed a literature review and also 
examined barriers in three case studies of eGovernment. They 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

found barriers to be related to three broad areas: Governance, 
organizational issues and technical issues. Several of these are 
relevant when discussing citizen-centric government. Table 1 
lists these issues, explains their relevance and their 
resolutions. 
 
TABLE 1.  BARRIERS TO EGOVERNMENT IMPLEMENTATION 
Issue 
Relevance 
Resolution 
Public sector 
structure, 
Fragmentation in 
service areas and/or 
decision-making 
responsibility 
 
 
Public sector often 
structured so that 
responsibility for a 
specific area is 
scattered across 
several departments 
and government 
levels. This makes 
collaboration 
difficult.  
Identify citizen needs 
in key areas, for 
example following life-
cycle logic: “As a 
graduating student I 
need the following 
services” 
Lack of 
communication/ 
collaboration/ 
coordination 
Related to previous 
issue 
Using citizen needs, 
identify which areas 
need collaboration 
No relation/ 
alignment between 
organization and 
technology 
 
Organization and IT 
areas are not 
cooperating fully, 
creating a gap 
between what is 
needed and what is 
possible.  
Project teams should 
have at least one 
person who is equally 
proficient in 
technology and 
organization, acting as 
a bridge between the 
two. 
Insufficient 
understanding of 
users 
 
User needs are 
inferred, IT follows 
internal government 
logic rather than 
focusing on citizen 
needs 
Involvement of 
citizens in planning, 
life-cycle based 
scenario planning. 
Searchable web sites. 
Security and privacy 
not addressed 
 
Lack of security and 
privacy makes many 
citizens hesitate to 
use the online 
service, and can lead 
to lack of trust in 
government, 
especially in 
countries where 
trust is low from 
before.  
National eID-solutions 
needs to be in place, 
as well as clear and 
understandable 
privacy policies. 
Lack of standards, 
Complexity and 
interoperability of 
legacy systems, 
Basic infrastructure 
underdeveloped 
Legacy systems, 
different system 
vendors and a 
missing common 
infrastructure for 
eGovernment makes 
it difficult to create 
services that work 
across organizational 
silos, and also makes 
user interfaces 
complex and 
changing between 
one service and the 
next.  
While difficult, 
government should 
strive for a common 
eGovernment 
infrastructure, life-
cycle based services 
and a common, 
standardized user 
interface across all 
services.  
 
While Table 1 lists important barriers, we need to extend 
this list with some observations from our own work on 
eGovernment projects.   
A. Data quality and open data 
Public sector managers are not very eager to share data, 
since they also feel responsible for the quality of the data 
shared. Government data has been collected over many years, 
and old data often has some quality issues. While the Agency 
for Public Management and eGovernment (DIFI) has set up a 
good portal for open data, the available data sets are often 
outdated or incomplete. In many cases, one or two 
municipalities will upload something that could be interesting 
if you had access to the same data from all the municipalities, 
but which is useless as long as only one or two municipalities 
have uploaded it. 
B. Benchmarking using non-citizen-centric indicators 
Web sites of Norwegian municipalities are rated every 
year according to a set of indicators created by DIFI. While 
the indicator set is tweaked every year, and constantly 
improving, it still relies heavily on technical indicators, 
ignoring or downplaying the actual usefulness of the site for 
citizens. The municipality who was rated top in 2011 is a good 
example of this. Technically, the site is flawless, but within 
the Norwegian user experience community it is a running 
joke, as the site has very poor usability. When one attempts to 
search or browse for something (for example building 
permits), you are led through a loop of pages suggesting to 
click for more information. None of the pages actually contain 
useful information about what one is looking for; at best, one 
can find the phone number of someone they can call to get 
more information. This does not translate only into a waste of 
citizens' time, but also into lost opportunities for the 
municipality to get businesses to relocate in the area or new 
business to start. Even municipalities that are good at 
publishing content tend to do so following a public sector 
logic. In order to find documents related to a case, you need 
to know the case number, the committee(s) that have handled 
the case etc. 
C. Public sector autonomy 
Norway has 428 municipalities, all with their own web 
site. The quality of the web sites varies. The Norwegian 
Agency for Public Management and eGovernment (DIFI) has 
done yearly assessments of municipality web sites, awarding 
grades. The maximum is six stars; the minimum is one star.  
The yearly assessment shows big differences in the quality. 
Citizens, at least in the more densely populated areas, often 
live in one municipality, work in another, shop in a third and 
attend cultural events in a forth. In practice, the citizen must 
relate to four web sites with different structure and content. 
D. Lack of semantic interoperability 
Public administration is not very good at integration across 
institutional borders. Even if we have had projects addressing 
semantic interoperability, it will still be years to handle the 
complexity. This is because words have different semantic 
meaning in different areas. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

While we outline some possible resolutions, none of these 
barriers are easy to overcome. Technical barriers such as 
infrastructure, legacy systems and security are very 
challenging. Creating a common basic infrastructure has been 
on the agenda in Norway for years, but is still not in place as 
this is a complex technical issue. The cost of development is 
also a barrier in some cases. However, these barriers are not 
impossible to overcome as long as the organizational barriers 
are addressed first. Public agencies need to collaborate and 
coordinate their efforts, and involve citizens in the process 
using the tools of user-centric design.  
VIII. SUGGESTIONS TO IMPROVE CITIZEN CENTRICITY 
The following suggestions are based on our own 
experience with the development of eGovernment solutions: 
A. Build organizational identity 
It seems that public organizations are struggling in 
developing a core organizational identity grounded in both the 
culture and the traditions from the past and the future 
aspirations and expectations from both internal and external 
stakeholders. We suggest a strategy balancing the past and the 
future – the culture and the image part of organizational 
identity. The past plays a crucial role in bridging the history, 
competence and tradition in the past to the future aspirations 
for public organizations. Hence, the past representing the 
culture and the future representing the image are connected in 
a constructive relation in which a citizen-centric public 
organization may prosper.  
B. Involve the citizens 
Citizens should be involved at all stages of design, 
development and assessment of services. The citizens may 
contribute to better solutions, by providing their needs and 
wants. Widespread adoption is probably the best measure of 
success. Citizen involvement may secure the construction of 
services that will be used by the target group. 
C. Share data 
Data should be shared with other public sector entities, but 
it should also include the necessary information about the 
quality of the data. This will help other public sector entities 
to assess if data can be used or not. Semantic information 
should be added to make linking of data easier. 
When privacy is not at stake, data can be released as open 
data sets. This will bring opportunities for third parties to 
develop new innovative applications that may serve citizens 
better. 
D. Reuse data 
Reuse data whenever possible. Citizens should not be 
required to fill in data that government already possess. With 
an electronic identity infrastructure, it is possible to connect 
the citizen to his/her personal profile. 
E. Collaborate on web site structure and content 
For the citizen, different web site structure and content is 
a source of confusion. Therefore, efforts should be made to at 
least provide some common elements on public sector web 
sites. 
F. Spend less time on web site structure 
Do not be too concerned about web site structure, but 
make efforts to make the web sites searchable. Most citizens 
get frustrated when navigating a complex web site without 
knowing the structure of the municipality or government 
entity. Citizens use Google and other search engines. Efforts 
should be made match the user requests. “I want to build an 
annex to my house” should be recognized and the citizens 
should be directed to the relevant web page providing the 
requested information. This is one reason to work on semantic 
interoperability. 
G. Improve readability 
Improve the readability of public sector web sites. 
Actually, the government has established a program to make 
content more readable, but still, many government web pages 
are referring to regulations and rules that can be hard to be 
understood by most citizens. Make easy-to-understand 
introductions, and include links to the actual regulations or 
rules. 
H. Protect privacy 
Protect the privacy of the citizen. Privacy is important for 
trust. Privacy statements are common in the private sector.  
The public sector should explain what the data will be used 
for, and if it can be shared with other entities. Regulations and 
procedures should be easily accessible, and appropriate 
technology should be used to protect the data.   
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have discussed the concept of citizen-
centricity in a public sector context. We have shown that being 
citizen-centric has been an objective for governments for 
some time, but that in most cases public services are still 
designed from the point of view of the government entity 
providing the service, following the logic of government 
operations and processes. We have discussed how 
organizational identity can act as a barrier for government 
becoming truly citizen-centric. We have presented examples 
from several cases, which show some of the consequences of 
this failure to be citizen centric. Through the examples of 
cancer treatment coordinator and user-controlled Pas, we have 
shown the benefits for society if government is able to become 
more citizen centric when designing services. Finally, we 
have presented a set of suggestions that could help 
government to become citizen centric.  
Citizen centricity is not obvious, as shown in several 
examples in this paper. But there is hope. The examples of 
cancer coordinators and personal user managed assistants 
show best practice from the public sector service delivery. The 
cancer coordinator relieves the patient of the burden of 
keeping track of all facets of the medical system, and reduces 
the patient’s perception of the complexity of the public sector. 
The personal user managed assistant provides freedom of 
choice and empowerment for citizens with impairments. ICT 
provides great opportunities for creating citizen-centric 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

services. We have provided some suggestions to improve the 
citizen centricity such services. This paper opens up several 
new possibilities for research. While we have shown how 
organizational culture might help explain the lack of citizen-
centricity, there is a need for further research in the form of 
in-depth case studies and action research to uncover exactly 
how this affects change, and how to change cultures. Further, 
there is a need for more research, preferably action and/or 
design-based, in order to create a more comprehensive set of 
guidelines for citizen-centric government. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by a grant from Iceland, 
Liechtenstein and Norway, contract type “small size bilateral 
cooperation projects”, “Scholarships and inter-institutional 
cooperation” program - EEA Financial Mechanism 2009-
2014, project number RO15-0059 “Public Sector Renewal 
Through ICT, A Life-long Learning Approach”. 
 
 REFERENCES 
[1] L. Berntzen, “'Citizen-centric eGovernment Services”, in The 
Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human 
oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and 
Services (CENTRIC 2013), Venice, Italy, October 27-
November 1, pp. 132-136, 2013 [Online]. Available: 
http://www.thinkmind.org/download_full.php?instance= 
CENTRIC+2013, [Accessed: June, 2016]. 
[2] UK Precidency of the European Council, “Ministerial 
Declaration”, 
Manchester, 
2005. 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://www.umic.pt/images/stories/noticias/051124declaration
.pdf, [Accessed: June, 2016]. 
[3] M. Blakemore, N. McDonald, N. Hall, and R. Jucuite, 
“Delivering citizen-centric public services through technology 
facilitated organizational change”. In Understanding e-
Government in Europe – Issues and Challenges, P.G. Nixon, 
V.N. Koutrakou and R. Rawal, Eds. Routledge, 2010, pp. 19-
37. 
[4] T.A. Undheim and M. Blakemore (Eds.), “A Handbook for 
Citizen-centric eGovernment”, 2007, [Online]. Available: 
https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/files_epractice/si
tes/media/media1781.pdf, [Accessed: June, 2016]. 
[5] E. Tambouris and K. Tarabanis, “A dialogue-based, life-event 
oriented, active portal for online one-stop government: The 
OneStopGov platform”, In dg.o ´08 Proceedings of the 2008 
International Conference on Digital Government Research, 
Digital Government Society of North America, 2008, pp. 405-
406. 
[6] Portugese Precidency of the European Council, “Ministerial 
Declaration” 
Lisbon, 
2007. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.dematerialisedid.com/PDFs/Ministerial_Declarati
on_Final_Version_120907.pdf, [Accessed: June, 2016]. 
[7] NET-EUCEN, “What is user-centricity?” (no date) [Online]. 
Available: http://www.net-eucen.org/usercentric.html, 
[Accessed: June, 2016]. 
[8] B. Kaplan and J. Maxwell, “Evaluating the Organizational 
Impact of Healthcare Information Systems”, In Qualitative 
Research Methods for Evaluating Computer Information 
Systems, J. Anderson and C. Aydin , Eds. Ney York: Springer, 
2005, pp. 30-55. 
[9] J.W. Cresswell, "Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, 
and Mixed Methods Approach", Sage, Los Angeles, 2009. 
[10] A. Ødegård, "Mellom myter, moter, legitimitet og identitet - et 
studie av norske energiverks  læringsroller på reisen fra 
forvaltning til forretning", Magma, to be published. 
[11] S. Albert and D.A. Whetten, “Organizational identity”. Res. 
Organ. Behavior 7, 1985, pp. 263-295.  
[12] M.J. Hatch and M. Schultz, "The dynamics of organizational 
identity", Human Relations, 2002, 55(8), p. 989.  
[13] M. Schultz and T. Hernes, "A temporal perspective on 
organizational identity", Organization Science, 2013, 24(1), 
pp. 1-21. doi: 10.1287/orsc.1110.0731. 
[14] D. Osborne, "Reinventing Government: What a Difference a 
Strategy Makes", 7th Global Forum on Reinventing Trust in 
Government. June 26-29, 2009, Vienna, Austria. 
[15] E.H. Schein, "Organizational culture and leadership", fourth 
edition (4th ed ed.), 2010, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco. 
[16] Teknisk Ukeblad, "Snart vil alle setene på Flirt-togene være 
komfortseter", 2014, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.tu.no/artikler/snart-vil-alle-setene-pa-flirt-togene-
vaere-komfortseter/232023, [Accessed: June, 2016]. 
[17] GOV.UK, "Driving licence counterpart abolished: changes 
you need to know", 2015, [Online]. Available: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/driving-licence-
changes, [Accessed: June, 2016]. 
[18] D. Travis, "What car park payment machines can teach us 
about usability", 2014, Userfocus. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.userfocus.co.uk/articles/car-park-payment-
machines.html, [Accessed: June, 2016]. 
[19] Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, "Together - 
against cancer", National Cancer Strategy 2013-2017, 2013, 
[Online]. Available: 
https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/07cd14ff763444a39
97de1570b85fad1/i-1158_together-against_cancer_web.pdf, 
[Accessed: June, 2016]. 
[20] The Office of the Prime Minister, "Political platform for a 
government formed by the Conservative Party and the 
Progress Party", 2013, [Online]. Available: 
https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/a93b067d9b604c5a
82bd3b5590096f74/politisk_platform_eng.pdf, [Accessed: 
June, 2016]. 
[21] Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, "The Health 
and Rights Act", 1999, [Online]. Available: 
https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/1999-07-02-
63#KAPITTEL_2. , [Accessed: June, 2016]. 
[22] Norwegian Ministry of Local Government and 
Modernisation, "Digital Agenda for Norway in brief", 2016, 
[Online]. Available: 
https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/07b212c03fee4d0a9
4234b101c5b8ef0/en-gb/pdfs/digital_agenda_for_norway_in 
_brief.pdf, [Accessed: June, 2016]. 
[23] J. Pfister and G. Schwabe, "Electronic Data Safes as an 
Infrastructure for Transformational Government? A Case 
Study". In Electronic Government: Proceedings of the 14th 
IFIP WG 8.5 International Conference, EGOV 2015, 
Thessaloniki, Greece, August 30 - September 2, 2015, E. 
Tambouris, M. Janssen, J. H. Scholl, A. M. Wimmer, K. 
Tarabanis, M. Gascó, B. Klievink, I. Lindgren, and P. 
Parycek, Eds. Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 
246-257. 
[24] A.F. Van Veenstra, B. Klievink, and M. Janssen, (2011). 
“Barriers and impediments to transformational government: 
insights from literature and practice”. Electronic Government, 
An International Journal, 8(2/3), pp. 226–241.
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-502-9
CENTRIC 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

