Low Cost Domotic System based on Open Hardware and Software 
 
 
Valentim Realinho 
Polytechnic Institute of Portalegre 
Portalegre, Portugal 
e-mail: vrealinho@estgp.pt 
 
 
Abstract—With the proliferation of wireless networks and their 
integration in electrical equipment, the possibilities for 
monitoring and control of electrical devices increased a lot 
expecting with this an increased usage of home automation 
systems. Nowadays, there are in the market several 
manufacturers that provide fairly comprehensive domotic 
solutions. However, these solutions are proprietary and have 
very high costs making it difficult to adopt. In this work, it is 
presented a low cost home automation system based on open 
hardware and software with support for a wide range of 
equipment. The system is based on a Raspberry Pi network 
and can be easily controlled via a mobile device. It is also 
possible to configure alerts that notify users when certain 
events occur and monitor the power consumption. 
Keywords-Domotic; home automation; smart home; mobile 
device; Raspberry Pi; low cost; open. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The word domotic is frequently associated with the 
concept of smart home technology while allowing the 
management of electrical devices in a space in order to 
increase comfort, energy efficiency or safety. This word is 
the result of the junction of the word domus (house) with 
telematics (telecommunications and computing), assuming 
these concepts the existence of computer systems that 
monitor and control the set of existing electrical equipment. 
Despite home automation systems exist for more than 30 
years, its adoption has been rather slow. Among the main 
barriers for this low adoption, stands out: (i) the high cost, 
(ii) the lack of flexibility to interconnect multi-vendor 
equipment, (iii) management skills and limited or difficult 
configuration, and (iv) the difficulty in ensuring security 
mechanisms [1]. 
Many of the facilities are made by users themselves [1] 
with DIY (Do It Yourself) equipment, and correspond in 
most cases to simple systems that enable remote control of 
equipment, task scheduling or security systems. Other 
equipment or systems imply the need for structural changes 
to be installed and its installation by skilled professionals 
increasing therefore costs. 
There are plenty of cases of use of home automation 
systems. Lighting systems can be programmed to turn off 
under certain conditions or to automatically turn on when a 
person enters a dimly lit room. Shutters, HVAC (Heating, 
Ventilation, and Air Conditioning) equipment or central 
heating can be controlled according to information collected 
by various sensors that are monitoring parameters such as 
temperature, humidity, light or the presence of people in the 
room division. The use of sensors, such as smoke detectors, 
motion or breaking glass, allow to detect possible risk 
situations and initiate appropriate actions. Automated home 
entertainment systems allow users to predefine favorite 
settings, remove the need for multiple remote controls and 
listen to music, news or podcasts in any room of the house. 
The home automation systems have a great application in 
the elderly population range in terms of comfort, 
convenience and safety. The increase in life expectancy has 
brought enormous challenges to many aspects of human life, 
especially in the welfare and health care of the elderly. Some 
problems associated with reduced mobility and dementia can 
be minimized through the use of remote control of a home 
automation system while the use of sensors can alert 
potential hazards. 
Often, the concept of smart home is confused with home 
automation. The concept of smart home is usually used to 
define a housing which integrates technology and services in 
order to increase energy efficiency and improve the quality 
of life [3]. 
In this work, it is presented a low cost domotic system 
based on open hardware and software with support for a 
wide range of equipment. The system is based on a mini 
computer Raspberry Pi network that can scale according to 
the number of devices to be controlled. The system enables 
the control of these devices with a mobile device, and also 
allows the definition of if-then rules to automate certain 
types of tasks. It is even possible to configure alerts that 
warn users when certain events occur. The system also 
include a consumption register module that provides analysis 
mechanisms to allow a more rational use of energy. 
In addition to this introductory section, this paper is 
organized as follows: Section 2 presents a summary of key 
technologies and projects in the field of home automation. 
Section 3 presents the proposed solution for a home 
automation system and Section 4 deals with the evaluation 
performed. Finally in Section 5 we present the conclusions 
and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Communication protocols are the language that allows 
the sensors and actuators of a home automation system 
communicate with each other. Of all, the X10 protocol is the 
most popular. It was created in the mid-70s, and uses the 
electric network to send data between devices, which makes 
the installation of these devices easier without the need to 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

pass any cables. There are a number of compatible devices 
with this protocol and its main drawback is the lack of 
robustness, because it is unidirectional and does not include a 
verification mechanism of sent commands. Nevertheless, its 
popularity led the adoption to work through radio frequency 
(X10 RF), and it is actually, the most widely used protocol in 
the world of home automation with numerous devices that 
support this protocol. 
In recent years, there has been a proliferation of the use 
of wireless networks to control devices, which has facilitated 
the installation without much intervention on existing 
infrastructure. These systems, called Wireless Home 
Automation Networks (WHANs), include built-in sensors 
and wireless actuators that enable monitoring and control 
applications for home user comfort and efficient home 
management [2]. The main solutions of WHANs are based 
on X10 RF, ZigBee, Z-Wave, INSTEON and Wavenis 
networks. Those protocols differ in terms of the frequency 
used, range (indoors and outdoors), speed and costs. Gomez 
and Paradells [2], presents a survey of WHANs architectures 
and technologies detailing the main features of those 
protocols. 
One of the most popular open source projects for general 
home automation is MisterHouse that is customizable, very 
flexible and fully compatible with most existing technologies 
[4]. A major problem of this system is it require good Perl 
programming skills to set it up and run it. 
The Node-RED [5] project of IBM, allows to connect 
electrical devices, APIs and services online using a visual 
editor to build all logic and system behavior. Links are 
programmed as a flow chart in a very simple way, according 
to a targeted approach to the data flow. In fact, the Node-
RED is more than a home automation system being 
considered by IBM a visual tool for wiring the Internet of 
Things (IoT). 
pilight [6] is an open source domotic solution that 
runs on mini computers like the Raspberry Pi, the 
HummingBoard, the BananaPi, but also in various Linux 
distributions such as Arch, Ubuntu or Debian. The great 
advantage of pilight is the support for a wide variety of 
WHAN devices from different manufacturers, provided that 
they are compatible with the X10 protocol over RF (either 
315 MHz or 433 MHz). pilight has a web interface that 
allows the control of the equipment through any browser and 
there are also several native applications for Android and 
iOS operating system. Since version 6 that pilight 
provides an if-then rule engine that allows the automation 
of tasks. All the configuration of pilight is made through a 
set of JSON files, which includes among others, the available 
devices, home divisions and rules. 
Baraka et al. [7] present a solution similar to the solution 
presented in this paper but based on an Arduino and with 
fewer features or expansion possibilities. 
In this work, we use open hardware and software with the 
module that allows the configuration and management of the 
system developed from scratch. We use pilight described 
above, and tested the system with the objectives of assessing 
system performance, test the system features in real 
situations and evaluate the system architecture. 
III. 
PROPOSED SOLUTION 
Fernandez and Losada [8] present a set of requirements 
quite common and discussed in the literature that aim to 
guide the design of home automation solutions. These 
requirements are summarized next, which were considered in 
the architecture solution proposed here and to which was 
added the low cost requirement. 
1. Low Cost. The solution should have a low cost using 
inexpensive and modular equipment in order to grow 
with the user needs. 
2. Interoperability. The central control system must be 
open and able to communicate with all sensors and 
actuators, in order to connect to various types of devices. 
Although some standards were adopted, there must be 
especially careful when purchasing new devices to ensure 
compatibility with the existing home automation system. 
3. Control and Remote Access. The ability to control and 
communicate remotely with the system, is one of the 
most popular features. This feature allows users to 
monitor the home environment and also change the 
settings of lights, thermostats and other equipment, from 
a laptop, personal computer, smartphone or any mobile 
device. 
4. Scalability. The system chance to expand its capacity 
according the needs and the evolution of technology 
itself. 
5. Flexibility. The system must provide tools to customize 
the system to specific requirements. 
6. Robustness. The system must be able to handle the most 
common problems, such as power failures, data 
persistence and adequate reporting mechanisms. 
7. Energy Saving. The system should have the ability to 
help save energy by automatically turning off electrical 
devices, as well as providing the user with information 
that assists in decision-making for a more rational use of 
energy. 
A. Solution Architecture 
The proposed solution is based on the architecture 
illustrated in Figure 1, which consists of the modules 
described next: the Central Module, the Management 
Module, the Control Module, the X10 RF Devices and also 
the X10 RF Power Consumption Measuring Devices. The 
system enables the control of home automation devices 
compatible with the X10 RF protocol, thereby providing 
support for a large number of multi-vendor equipment.  
 
Figure 1.  System architecture. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

1) Central Module 
The Central Module is responsible for maintaining the 
configuration and control of the home automation system. It 
is the component which communicates with home 
automation devices sending and receiving commands that 
allow a rational management of the system, such as turn 
on/off or adjust the lighting, opening or closing the shutters, 
turn on the washing machine at a desired time, among others. 
This module comprises a Raspberry Pi with a 433 MHz RF 
transceiver for a maximum range of 150 meters. The 
Raspberry Pi is a low-cost computer (from 20 €) with a size 
of a deck of cards. It runs Linux (Debian, Fedora or Arch) 
and has capabilities to interact with the outside world via 
programmable General Purpose Input / Output (GPIO) ports. 
The Raspberry Pi runs the pilight mentioned above and 
can be configured with the Management Module described 
next. 
 
2) Management Module 
The management module is a web application developed 
with jQuery Mobile that allows the management and the 
configuration of the entire system. pilight does not have 
this module, which was developed as part of the system here 
presented. This module is a web editor for the configuration 
files of pilight which maintains all the settings in JSON 
files. Figure 2 shows an example with the interface of the 
configured room devices with the corresponding devices 
(Figure 2a) and the created rules (Figure 2b).  
A pilight rule is composed by a condition and an 
action. The condition defines the triggers that allow the 
execution of the action associated with the rule when the 
condition is verified.  
The pilight rules module is very expressive and the 
management module allow the creation of conditions, like: 
"If it is 23h then turn on the washing machine"  
"If it is time for sunset then close the shutters"  
"If the room temperature is greater than 25 degrees then 
turn on air conditioning" 
"If it is 23h of Tuesday or Friday then turn on the 
washing machine" 
 
 
a) Room divisions 
b) Rules 
Figure 2.  Management module interface. 
3) Control Module 
pilight provides a web interface (Figure 3a) for the 
control through a mobile device. In addition to the web 
interface there are also available several native applications 
for Android (Figure 3b) and iOS that allow the same control. 
Those interfaces organizes information by the house division 
that are defined in the Management Module and within each 
division includes the devices to control. In addition to the 
domotic devices, it is possible to include information about 
the weather forecast gathered from available APIs like 
Weather Underground or Open Weather Map. 
 
 
 
a) Web interface 
b) Android app (illumina) 
Figure 3.  Control module. 
4) X10 RF devices  
The solution is based on the use of X10 RF devices. We 
have used D.IO Chacon devices whose unit price starts at 7€. 
The D.IO product catalog includes sockets, switches, on/off 
modules, flood detectors, temperature sensors, humidity and 
motion, among many others.  
 
5) X10 RF Power Consumption Measuring Devices  
This is a functional module separated from the previous 
one, but which also use the X10 RF protocol to communicate 
with the Central Module. The use of power consumption 
measuring devices provides information that can be used for 
a more rational use of energy. This information includes 
current and historic consumption per equipment or room. 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
The system was tested in a house with about 150m2 and 
domotic devices installed in three divisions of the house: the 
living room, the kitchen and one bedroom. Was used a total 
of 12 actuators from DI.O Chacon (9 switches and 3 
dimmers) and 1 sensor (the AM2302/DHT22) which read the 
temperature and humidity of the living room. 
For the Central Module was used one Raspberry Pi 
version B which has a 700 MHz ARM processor and 512MB 
of RAM. The DHT22 sensor and the RF 433 MHz 
transceiver was mounted on a breadboard according with the 
instructions available at the support site of pilight.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

The Management Module was used to configure all the 
system including the divisions of the house and the installed 
devices (Figure 2a), and also the rules used to perform 
automatically some predefined tasks (Figure 2b).  
For the Control Module, was mainly used the Android 
app illumina (Figure 3b) and less frequently the pilight 
web interface (Figure 3a). 
The tests were conducted for a month by the inhabitants 
of the house (one adult with 48 years old and two young 
people with 13 and 16 years old) on a regular daily basis 
with the objectives of (i) assessing the capacity and system 
performance, (ii) test the system features in real situations, 
and (iii) to evaluate the system architecture. 
A. Results 
With the test conditions described above the CPU usage 
is about 21-33% which is quite acceptable. This use 
corresponds mainly to decoding the RF signals and filtering 
and also the pilight rules engine that makes more use of 
CPU. As a result, system load largely depends on the rules 
and also the sensors used which broadcast RF signals from 
time to time forcing the use of CPU to decode these signals.  
The distributed and scalable architecture of pilight 
allows easily add new Central Modules operating in a 
master-slave philosophy thus distributing the load of CPU  
and obtaining a higher range of the system than the 150 
meters of the RF transceivers used. 
During the tests, the system proved its reliability running 
without the need for intervention. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents a low cost system based on open 
hardware and software that enables the remote control of 
devices compatible with the X10 RF protocol. The system 
can also automate tasks through an if-then rule engine and 
allow the measuring of power consumption. 
Each Central Module in prototype version as the tested 
here, costs about 50 €. 
The use of pilight as middleware platform for home 
automation devices, allow to address the interoperability for 
a wide range of equipment from various manufacturers.  
The performed tests allowed to validate the system 
architecture and has proven to function well in a house of 
about 150 m2. However, it is desirable to perform larger 
scale tests especially with the use of more home automation 
devices from various manufacturers and an enlarged 
Raspberry Pi network. 
An important issue that will be considered in future, is 
the security of the system and also tests with the power 
consumption module. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. J. B. Brush, B. Lee, R. Mahajan, S. Agarwal, S. Saroiu, 
and C. Dixon, “Home automation in the wild: challenges and 
opportunities,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '11), May 2011, 
pp. 2115-2124, doi: 10.1145/1978942.1979249. 
[2] C. Gomez and J. Paradells, “Wireless home automation 
networks: a survey of architectures and technologies,” IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 92-101, Jun. 
2010, doi: 10.1109/MCOM.2010.5473869. 
[3] M. A. E. L. Mowad, A. Fathy, and A. Hafez, “Smart home 
automated control system using Android application and 
microcontroller,” International Journal of Scientific & 
Engineering Research - IJSER, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 935-939,May 
2014, ISSN: 2229-5518. 
[4] M. Ali, J. H. A. Vlaskamp, N. N. Eddin, B. Falconer, and C. 
Oram, 
“Technical 
development 
and 
socioeconomic 
implications of the Raspberry Pi as a learning tool in 
developing countries,” in 2013 5th Computer Science and 
Electronic Engineering Conference (CEEC), IEEE Press, Sep. 
2013, pp. 103-108, doi:10.1109/CEEC.2013.6659454. 
[5] IBM. Node-RED: A visual tool for wiring the Internet of 
Things. [Online]. Available from: http://nodered.org/. 
[6] pilight - Open Source Domotic Solution. [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.pilight.org/ 
[7] K. Baraka, M. Ghobril, S. Malek, R. Kanj, and A. Kayssi, 
“Low cost Arduino/Android-based energy-efficient home 
automation 
system 
with 
smart 
task 
scheduling,” 
in 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on 
Computational Intelligence, Communication Systems and 
Networks (CICSYN '13), IEEE Press, Jun. 2013, pp. 296-301, 
doi:10.1109/CICSYN.2013.47.   
[8] J. L. Fernandez and D. P. Losada, “An integrated and low cost 
home automation system with flexible task scheduling,” in 
15th Workshop on Physical Agents, Jun. 2014, pp. 70-79, 
ISBN: 978-84-9773-681-7. 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

