Development of a Real-Time Assist System Increasing Walking Efficiency 
 
Shotaro Murakami 
Intelligent Mechanical Systems Engineering Course  
Kochi University of Technology  
Kami, Japan  
e-mail: 185055r@ugs.kochi-tech.ac.jp 
 Yoshio Inoue 
Research Institute of KUT 
Kochi University of Technology  
Kami, Japan  
 e-mail: Inoue.yoshio@kochi-tech.ac.jp 
 Kyoko Shibata 
School of systems engineering  
Kochi University of Technology  
Kami, Japan  
e-mail: shibata.kyoko@kochi-tech.ac.jp 
Kunihiko Tachibana 
School of systems engineering  
Kochi University of Technology  
Kami, Japan  
e-mail: tachibana.kunihiko@kochi-tech.ac.jp 
Abstract— The aim of this study is to develop a gait assist 
system to lead users to energy-efficient walking. Energy 
consumption of walking is estimated by measuring both step 
length and stride frequency. Thus, in this paper, a test model 
to assist users based on measured step length and stride 
frequency in real-time is developed. Walking experiment is 
carried out and the validity of the proposed measurement 
method is confirmed. 
 
Keywords-energy comsumption; step length; acceleration 
sensor;  gyroscope; potentiometer . 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Walking is the most important means of migration and is 
subjected to study from many different perspectives for 
years. In particular, a large number of articles on energy 
consumption of walking are published in the world, some of 
which are included in [1] to [3]. In addition, Farris et al. [4] 
and Kobetic et al. [5] explain that walking assist devices are 
being developed. Most of these devices are still in the 
research phase, but some of them are in practical use; for 
example [6] introduces “Walking Assist Device with Stride 
Management system”, which is an assist device to reduce 
energy consumption. However, there still remains a difficult 
problem and that is the limitation on the gait of the user in 
calculating the step length only by hip joint angle. 
In this paper, we present an assist system using an inertial 
sensor in order to develop an assist device that can be 
adapted to a wide range of the gaits. 
In Sections 2 and 3, we explain the most appropriate 
relationship between step length and stride frequency, and 
present the method to measure them. After that, we present 
the test model that measures step length and stride 
frequency and could assist users in real-time in Section 4. 
Finally, in Section 5, we report the results of the verification 
of accuracy calculation method and measurement by test 
model.  
II. ENERGY CONSUMPTION OF WALKING 
Diedrich and Warren [1] and Molen et al. [2] show in 
Figure 1 that the energy consumption of walking is 
estimated by measuring step length and stride frequency. 
The most appropriate relationship between step length and 
stride frequency is computed from the following equation: 
n
s
 .0 0063
                                    (1) 
where s (m) is step length and n (steps/min) is stride 
frequency.  
Measurement tests were conducted using expiration gas 
analyser (PG-240) in order to determine the validity of the 
findings of [1] and [2]. Energy consumption of walking is 
measured changing stride frequency in different conditions: 
1. The subject walks at 3.0 (km/h), 2. The subject walks at 
6.0 (km/h). In addition, gait speed and stride frequency were 
determined by a treadmill and a metronome.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Verification of accuracy of  the findings of [1] and [2] 
 
In Figure 1, the green solid line indicates the most 
appropriate relationship between step length and stride 
frequency, 
and 
the 
red 
diamonds 
indicate 
energy 
consumption per unit distance (cal/kg/m). We can also see 
that the energy consumption of walking decrease when the 
relationship between step length and stride frequency is 
close to the green solid line. 
 
77
Copyright (c) The Government of Spain, 2015. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

III. MEASUREMENT OF STEP LENGTH AND STRIDE 
FREQUENCY 
In this study, step length and stride frequency are 
determined by joint angles while walking, and joint angles 
are measured by potentiometers and encoders (Figure 2). 
The model of lower limb and variables in calculation are 
shown in Figure 2.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Variables in calculating step length 
 
Walking cycle T(s) is easily determined because walking 
is a cyclic movement. Therefore, stride frequency is 
computed from the following equation: 
T
f
1
                                        (2) 
Right stride is computed from the following equation: 
)
sin(
sin
1
1
2
1
1
1
b
a
l
a
l
s



                     (3) 
where 1l (m) is thigh length, 2l (m) is lower length, 
1
a (rad) 
is hip joint angle, and 
1b (rad) is knee joint angle. In 
addition, left stride is computed in a similar way. Then, an 
effect of twisting of the lower back is added. Finally, the 
step length is computed from the following equation:  
     
1
2
1
e
s
s
S



                              (4) 
In addition, foot contact, which decides the timing of the 
calculation, stride frequency and an effect of twisting of the 
lower back can be determined by an inertial sensor on the 
lower back. 
IV. MECHANISM OF TEST MODEL 
Figure 3 is the test model that measures step length and 
stride frequency and could assist users in real-time.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Test model 
 
Motors with encoders were positioned on the axis of the 
hip joints for the purpose of measuring hip joint angles. 
Two potentiometers were positioned on the axis of the ankle 
joints for the purpose of measuring hip joint angles. An 
inertial sensor that has an acceleration sensor and a gyro 
sensor were positioned on lower back for purpose of 
measuring a longitudinal-direction acceleration value and an 
effect 
of 
twisting 
of 
the 
lower 
back. 
 
Figure 4.  Real-time control system using dSPACE 
 
Figure 4 shows the real-time control system. A PC is 
loaded 
with 
MATLAB/Simulink, 
a 
dSPACE 
data 
acquisition and real-time control system. The controller is 
designed in MATLAB/Simulink. Command torque is given 
to motor driver as analog signal. This system could measure 
step length and stride frequency and assist users in real-time. 
V. 
VERIFICATION OF ACCURACY OF CALCULATION 
METHOD AND MEASUREMENT BY TEST MODEL 
In order to confirm the validity of the proposed method in 
section 3, the accuracy of measurement was verified by 
using 3D motion analysis (Hawk Digital Real-Time 
System：Motion analysis). The results of the calculations 
and 3D motion analysis are compared. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Step length 
 
Figure 5 shows that the measurement error is 2.57(%) and 
standard deviation is 1.54(mm). The method that proposed 
had limitation of measurement accuracy. However, the 
results of calculation could be corrected by using the 
decided correction coefficient because standard deviation is 
very small. 
Measurement tests were conducted using the test model. 
First, the floor was marked at 1 meter intervals. Second, the 
subject walked using regular steps using the markers as a 
guide. The subject was asked to walk 5 meters in 5 steps. 
Third, the result of calculation was compared to the actual 
walking distance. 
 
78
Copyright (c) The Government of Spain, 2015. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 6.  Step length measurements by test model and tape pith 
 
Figure 6 shows that the measurement error is 12.4(%) and 
standard deviation is 12.6(mm). A main error source may be 
the 
walking 
movement 
misalignment 
between 
the 
potentiometers and legs. However, this result is positive 
because improvement of accuracy is expected by 
multiplying calculation result by calibration coefficient. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, a method for measuring step length and 
stride frequency was proposed and the test model that could 
measure step length and stride frequency, and assist users in 
real-time was developed. In addition, verification of 
measurement accuracy was conducted using the test model. 
The results show that the proposed method to determine 
walking efficiency was reasonable. In order to find out the 
optimal assist timing and the size of motors torque of this 
assist method, future experiments with the test model need 
to be conducted. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
F. J. Diedrich, and W. H. Jr. Warren, “Why Change Gaits? 
Dynamics of the Walk-Run Transition,” Journal of 
Experimental 
Psychology: 
Human 
Perception 
and 
Performance, Feb. 1995, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 183-202. 
[2] 
N. H. Molen, R. H. Rozendal, and, W. Boon, “Graphic 
representation 
of 
the 
relationship 
between 
oxygen-
consumption and characteristics of normal gait of the human 
male,” Proceedings Koninklijke Nederlandse Academie van 
Wetenschappen, 1972, C-75, pp. 305-314. 
[3] 
C. H. Wyndhan, W. H. Vander Walt, A. J. Van  Rensburg, G. 
G. Rogers, and N. B. Strydom, “The Influence of Body 
Weight on Energy Expenditure during Walking on a Road 
and on a Treadmill,” Int. Z. angew. Physiol. 29, 1971, pp. 
285-292. 
[4] 
R. J. Farris, H. A. Quintero, S. A. Murray, K. H. Ha, C. 
Hartigan, and M. Goldfarb, “A Preliminary Assessment of 
Legged Mobility Provided by a Lower Limb Exoskeleton for 
Persons With Paraplegia.” IEEE Transactions on Neural 
Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, MAY 2014, VOL. 
22, NO. 3. 
[5] 
R. Kobetic, M. L. Audu, G. Pinault, and R. J. Triolo, 
“Development of hybrid orthosis for standing, walking, and 
stair climbing after spinal cord injury,” Journal of 
Rehabilitation Research & Development, Number 3, 2009, 
Volume 46, pp. 447–462. 
[6] 
K. Yasuhara, K. Shimada, T. Koyama, T. Ido, K. Kikuchi, 
and Y. Endo, “Walking Assist Device with Stride 
Management System,” Honda R&D Technical Review, 
October 2009. 
79
Copyright (c) The Government of Spain, 2015. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

