A Sightseeing Navigation System without Route Information 
 
Shuichi Takagi 
Graduate School of Information 
Science and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
is023087@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Tomoko Izumi 
College of Information Science and 
Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
izumi-t@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Yoshio Nakatani 
College of Information Science and 
Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
nakatani@is.ritsumei.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—A novel sightseeing navigation system that does not 
show route information is proposed. Most existing navigation 
systems support efficient sightseeing by giving users the 
detailed route information such as the shortest route. However, 
casual sightseeing by foot in which tourists can freely choose 
time and place is a major trend in Japanese tourism in recent 
years. Therefore, a sightseeing navigation system that does not 
show a map was designed, based on the “Benefit of 
Inconvenience,” which is the novel concept that inconvenient 
things can have a positive effect on people. This approach is 
expected to prompt users to interact with their surrounding 
environment. Two evaluation experiments were conducted in 
Kyoto, and it was proved that the proposed method can 
increase opportunities for new discoveries and chance 
encounters during sightseeing. 
Keywords-Navigation System; Benefit of Inconvenience; 
Landmark; Preferences.component. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the current information society, a wealth of 
information makes our lives comfortable and convenient. It 
has become natural to cut out wasted time from our lives and 
to demand 
efficiency. Moreover, 
various types of 
information device which increase efficiency have been 
developed or researched. In today’s capitalism society, a 
cognizance that time is limited and it is essential for us to use 
it effectively is expanding widely. On the other hand, there 
are benefits which have been overlooked in the pursuit of 
efficiency. These benefits have been regarded as a minor 
factor in trends of recent years, but are now beginning to 
gain attention as the “Benefit of Inconvenience” [1]. Using a 
somehow inconvenient system enables the user to obtain 
benefits which are easily hidden, more than an existing 
convenient system which demands efficiency. 
While the systems which are considered to have the 
“Benefit of Inconvenience” are gaining attention in this way, 
the sightseeing style of recent years is also changing. 
Traditionally, the package tour has been the most popular 
sightseeing style in Japan. The package tour is a travel 
product wherein the entire process, from departure to 
destination, is managed by a tour company. Common 
practice is for the tour company to determine the route and 
time schedule for sightseeing and then let the participants 
enjoy their sightseeing following the instruction of a tour 
guide. However, another sightseeing style has come into use 
significantly in recent years. This is a style wherein tourists 
determine the process of their sightseeing themselves and 
enjoy their trip without using a package tour. Ishimori [2] 
describes this as “autonomous tourism.” In addition, 
“Travelers Trends 2010”, published by the Japan Travel 
Bureau Foundation [3], calculated that the number of people 
who were interested in gourmet food, history, urban tourism, 
and strolling had increased by 10% in 2009 compared to 
2007. All these factors indicate that tourists expand their 
interest to various things and want experiences of various 
types. Therefore, just as Ishimori points out, the sightseeing 
style in Japan is changing from moving efficiently along a 
predetermined route to freely visiting places of interest 
anywhere, anytime. Tourists are looking for new discoveries 
and chance encounters. 
However, most sightseeing navigation systems used by 
tourists during sightseeing are adapting the algorithms used 
in car navigation systems. These navigation systems 
recommend the shortest route and methods of transport from 
a departure place to a destination, and attach a high value to 
the efficiency of user movement. For example, NAVITIME 
[4] is a famous application. This enables users to go to their 
destination in the shortest time without getting lost the way. 
In fact, an efficient sightseeing route scheduled by a 
navigation system is an effective way for people who do not 
have much time. However, considering the recent 
sightseeing trends in Japanese, such methods are not 
effective for increasing number of tourists who demand fun 
and memorable sightseeing, even if they need to spend a 
little more time. Emphasis on efficiency will restrict the 
user's area of activity and opportunities for new discoveries 
and chance encounters that may happen during sightseeing. 
A new approach is required to support tourists for enjoying 
their sightseeing opportunistically and fortuitously. 
This paper proposes a novel approach to sightseeing 
support which targets tourists who are carrying out casual 
sightseeing on foot. More concretely, adapting the idea of 
“Benefit of Inconvenience”, the proposed system does not 
provide the detailed route information in a sightseeing area 
but only landmarks on the way to a destination. As a result, it 
promotes interaction with the environment surrounding the 
users which was previously unnoticed, and fosters new 
discoveries and chance encounters. In this research, two 
evaluation experiments were conducted with two types of 
prototype system. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

In the next section,  the proposed method is described. In 
Section 3, we present the evaluation experiment, then the 
problem of the proposed method. Then this paper moves to 
another proposed method, and its evaluation experiment. 
Finally, a discussion and a conclusion are described. 
II. 
PROPOSED METHOD 1 
A. Skil-tronics 
The concept of skil-tronics exists in the field of “Benefit 
of Inconvenience”. This is a system design model proposed 
by Nishino [5] that requires some skills from its users in 
order to use the designed equipment. The proposal of skil-
tronics does not compensate for high-technology by skill or 
extend skill by high-technology, but prompts creation by the 
combination of high-technology and skill. Therefore, users 
are able to gain benefit by manipulating on their own skill 
instead of relying on a machine to do everything. 
Our proposed sightseeing navigation system is innovated 
by utilizing the concepts of skil-tronics and “Benefit of 
Inconvenience.” 
B. Proposed Method 
1. Without Route Information 
The proposed sightseeing navigation system does not 
provide users with the detailed route information but with a 
point of departure, a destination and landmarks on the way. 
Therefore, users are not able to see the route or the city 
district. In this way, their attention is naturally drawn to their 
surrounding environment. 
Cases in which users get lost may happen, because the 
system does not show a map. However, they look around 
themselves more than usual when they get lost. As a result, 
they are able to experience a special kind of sightseeing 
which is different from existing navigation systems which 
suggest the shortest route. In response to this system, they 
are prompted to pay attention to their surrounding 
environment, and it can be expected that opportunities for 
new discovery and chance encounters will increase during 
their casual walking sightseeing. 
2. Guidance to Landmarks Using Photos 
This system shows landmarks of some points on the way 
to a destination. Each landmark is given a landmark number 
(1-6), a landmark name and a photo. The landmarks involve 
alleyways, historic buildings, distinguishing objects and so 
on. The users stroll around looking for them in numerical 
order and reach the destination. Moreover, some landmarks 
are located in hard-to-find places, and some pictures were 
taken from the opposite side of the traveling direction. These 
are contrivances designed to entertain the users. 
C. System Fuctions 
The proposed system is an application for Apple Inc.’s 
iPhone, written in a programming language Objective-C. It 
is equipped with the Global Positioning System (GPS) and 
users are able to use it anytime, anywhere. Fig. 1 shows the 
main screen of the system. Users embark on casual walking 
sightseeing while relying on this screen. The pins on the 
screen indicate the landmarks predetermined by this system. 
  
 
Figure 1.  System Main Screen     
  Figure 2. History Screen 
The numbered buttons on the bottom part of the screen are 
linked with the landmark number. When the users tap the 
numbered button, the landmark designated with that number 
is shown on the main screen. 
In addition, this system has the functions of taking and 
recording photos, using the camera mounted on the iPhone. 
Users can use these functions by tapping the camera button 
on the upper right of the screen. By doing so, users are able 
to take photos of surroundings that they like during 
sightseeing, and then to save them with the location 
information 
which is obtained from GPS (Global 
Positioning System). They are called “Memories of 
Sightseeing.” Moreover, this system has the function of 
recording the user’s traveling history. This is called “History 
of Sightseeing.” (Fig. 2). 
By using these two functions, users are able to review 
their data after casual walking sightseeing, and reflect on 
their sightseeing easily. 
III. 
EVALUATION EXPERIMENT 1 
A. Experiment Method 
An evaluation experiment with 8 human evaluators was 
conducted in order to verify the effectiveness of this 
navigation system. The experiment was conducted with 
Kyoto as the experiment area, and subjects strolled from 
Kyoto station to Kiyomizu-dera temple. The reasons why 
Kyoto was chosen as the evaluation experiment area are 
given below. The experiment was carried out in January 
2011. 
1. The area is suitable for casual sightseeing by foot, 
because there are various famous spots including 
historical places, cultural places and so on. 
2. Tourists are able to enjoy the streetscape of Kyoto, which 
has many Japanese old-style houses along with narrow 
and winding alleyways. 
The evaluators in the experiment were 4 men and 4 
women in their twenties who live in the Kansai area. They 
were assigned randomly to three groups without considering 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

their gender, age, previous experience of sightseeing in 
Kyoto, and so on. 
The evaluators were asked to answer two types of 
questionnaire in order to gather evaluation data on the 
usefulness of the system. 
1. Questionnaire before the experiment 
The purpose of this questionnaire was to investigate the 
evaluators’ attributes. The specific contents were their 
gender, number of previous sightseeing trips in Kyoto, 
whether they had previously experienced walking to 
Kiyomizu-dera from Kyoto Station, and the purpose of their 
usual sightseeing. 
2. Questionnaire after the experiment 
The purpose of this questionnaire was to inquire into the 
evaluators’ opinions and reflect on this experiment. During 
the questionnaire, they used the “Memories of Sightseeing” 
and “History of Sightseeing” functions for reference. 
B. Results by Group 
Group A: This group got lost frequently. Therefore, they 
were not able to find one of the landmarks. A key factor for 
this was assumed that the system does not show detailed 
route information. Indeed, the evaluators in Group A 
explained in the questionnaire after the experiment that “it 
was difficult for us because we did not know our current 
position.” On the other hand, they described that “the 
opportunity to take small roads rather than taking the main 
street increased. As a result, we were able to enjoy a 
townscape of Kyoto that we usually do not experience.” 
Therefore, Group A was able to make a new discovery and 
chance encounter. 
Group B: This group’s evaluators commented that “we 
had a conversation different from the usual kind during 
sightseeing.” A factor in this was that since this system did 
not show the map, they frequently consulted each other 
about how to reach the destination. 
Group C: This group paid close attention to their 
surrounding environment by looking at the landmark photos. 
As a result, they answered that they “felt like detectives.” In 
addition, they happened to visit a temple that they had never 
known about before. 
Fig. 3 shows the required time for each group. Google 
Maps calculates a walking time of 40 minutes from Kyoto 
Station to Kiyomizu-dera. So they took double to three times 
longer. 
C. Validity of Not Displaing Route Information 
From the questionnaire after the experiment, the gaze of 
the evaluators was raised and they paid more attention to 
their surroundings by not showing route information. In 
addition, they answered that they were able to find some 
spots which they had never known about, and they took 
rarely-used routes. From these results, it was verified that not 
showing the detailed route information induced opportunities 
for new discoveries and chance encounters. This is also an 
effect of the “Benefit of Inconvenience.” 
 
 
Figure 3.  Required Time of Experiment 1 by Group 
D. Differences from Existing Navigation System 
In answer to the question “How did you enjoy this 
sightseeing trip compare to the usual?” all evaluators replied 
that they had enjoyed it. One of the evaluators told us: “I 
usually consider getting to the destination in the shortest time 
when I do ordinary sightseeing. But, this system made me 
enjoy the spots on the way, and they stood out in my 
memory strongly.” Thus, the effectiveness of our proposal 
for a new sightseeing navigation system was verified. 
IV. 
PROBLEMS 
From the results of the evaluation experiment, 
opportunities for new discoveries and chance encounters 
were increased by not showing the detailed route information. 
This trip, however, was not a completely free trip. The 
landmarks had been predetermined by the system and 
evaluators were not able to select the landmarks which they 
wanted to visit. Therefore, the three evaluator groups 
followed almost the same route. This suggests a major 
problem that users are not able to visit spots of interest freely 
anywhere, anytime, which is the main concept of casual 
walking sightseeing. In fact, some evaluators remarked that 
“the landmarks which we visited were not attractive for me” 
in the questionnaire after the experiment. 
On the other hand, evaluators answered that they enjoyed 
looking for the landmarks, as if they were doing 
“orienteering.” Key factors accounting for this are that the 
system’s navigating method is completely different from that 
of existing systems, and that they felt a game element in 
which they cooperate to look for the landmarks. However, 
one group lost their way because the clue to find the 
landmark exists only in photos. Therefore, they were not able 
to find one of the landmarks, and that caused a point of 
dissatisfaction with the system. 
In addition, some subjects answered that they had wanted 
to visit famous spots in Kyoto. Therefore, it is important for 
the system to recommend not only spots on the way to the 
destination, but also some famous sights. This relates to the 
fact that they were not able to select their preferred 
landmarks. 
In the next section, a second sightseeing navigation 
system is proposed in order to resolve these problems. 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

V. 
PROPOSED METHOD 2 
A. Approach 
The second sightseeing system has a function to 
recommend the landmarks which are considered preferences 
of users (tourists who are carrying out casual sightseeing by 
foot) in order to resolve the problems of the previous system, 
in which the users were not able to select the landmarks they 
like and sometimes got lost. This new system will allow the 
users to experience a different, personalized route. As 
before, it does not provide detailed route information, since 
not showing the map was proven to be effective by the 
experiment on the first system. However, this system has 
added improvements. The detail of two new functions is 
described below. 
B. Landmark Recommendation Based on Personal 
Preferences 
The degree of enjoyment of sightseeing depends on how 
much the tour experience differs from everyday life, and 
how much it coincides with the interests of the tourist [6]. 
Therefore, the purposes of sightseeing vary greatly from 
person to person. The first system, however, predetermined 
the landmarks which are recommended to users. Therefore, 
the users were not able to select the landmarks that they 
wanted to visit. To solve these problems, the new system 
recommends plural landmarks to the users during the casual 
walking sightseeing based on personal preferences. To 
consider 
personal 
preferences 
is 
megatrend 
in 
a 
recommendation system. For example, Amazon [7] is known 
to collaborative filtering and it has proved effective [8, 9]. 
Personal preferences in the second system are grouped into 
three kinds:  “Landscape,” ”History” and “Gourmet Food 
and Shopping.” Users select the preference that coincides 
with their preference on the welcome screen of this system.  
C. Navigation Using Direction Information 
When people are casually sightseeing by foot in an 
unfamiliar city, they generally feel anxious or excited 
because they cannot know what lies ahead on the road.  This 
    
 
Figure 4.  New System Main Screen Figure 5. New System Photo Screen 
factor is the “difficulty of prediction” [6]. If this acts on 
people’s psychological state, a feeling of anxiousness of not 
knowing what will happen next induces a feeling of 
expectation. Ultimately, it remains strong in the memory 
even after the issue is solved. 
The second proposed navigation system uses information 
relating to current position, direction, distance, and photos of 
landmarks based on the preferences of users, which are 
recommended automatically by the system. It does not 
provide users with the detailed routes to destinations, in 
common with the first system. This concept is also based on 
the “Benefit of Inconvenience.” By hiding information in 
this way, users feel anxious or excited, which results in being 
even more satisfied with the sightseeing experience. 
Furthermore, afterwards the experience becomes a good 
memory. 
D. Function of Second System 
The improved system also uses Apple Inc.’s iPhone and 
the development language is Objective-C. The iPhone is 
used for the same reasons as stated for the first system. 
First, the user is asked to input a destination and the 
purpose of the tour, with choices selectable from among 
“Landscape,” “History” and “Gourmet Food and Shopping” 
on the welcome screen of the system. The purpose is to 
consider the preference of the user. Then the system 
recommends to the user four or five landmarks that match 
their preferences, near to their current position (within 300 
meters). These landmarks include at least one landmark that 
does not match the user’s purpose, for the sake of variety of 
landmarks. The user selects one of the proposed landmarks 
based on their photos and other information, and walks 
around the city to find it. 
Fig. 4 shows the main screen of the second system. This 
improved system recommends four or five landmarks in 
addition to not showing route information, so that the user 
can select the landmark which they want to visit. Those 
landmarks are based on the user’s personal preferences. 
The arrow in the center of Fig. 4 is an electronic compass 
that constantly points to the north. It appears when the user 
taps the “NORTH” button shown in Fig. 4. The user checks 
the direction to the landmarks in a method that is similar to 
using a magnetic compass, and recognizes the approximate 
direction to get there. 
Fig. 5 shows landmark photo information. These photos 
were taken in advance using the iPhone camera. In addition, 
they were chosen as being attractive landscapes or historic 
buildings on the basis of our subjective viewpoint. Finally, 
the information is saved in the landmark database as one set 
comprised of the photographic information, location, and 
genre of preferences. 
In addition, the second system has the function of 
updating landmarks. When the system detects that a user has 
entered within a 30 meter radius of a recommended 
landmark, the user can update the landmarks. When the user 
updates the landmarks, a new set of four or five landmarks in 
that area are recommended to the user. At that time, the 
current position is set as the updated landmark. 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

VI. 
EVALUATION EXPERIMENT 2 
A. Experiment Method 
A second evaluation experiment was carried out in 
Higashiyama, Kyoto. The point of departure was Kyoto City 
Hall and the destination was Yasaka Shrine. The reasons 
why this area was chosen as the evaluation experiment area 
are that it is easy for tourists to understand the direction 
because Kyoto streets area laid out in a grid pattern, in 
addition to the reasons given for the first evaluation 
experiment. The experiment was carried out in January 2012. 
The evaluators in the experiment were 9 people in their 
twenties who live in the Kansai area. They were divided into 
three groups on the basis of the objects of their personal 
preferences, and how frequently they had visited Kyoto. 
In addition, they were divided in consideration of 
whether or not they were able to go to Yasaka Shrine from 
Kyoto City Hall without consulting a map. Options for the 
preferences were “Landscape”, “History” and “Gourmet 
Food and Shopping.” Table 1 shows the group composition 
of the evaluators. 
The evaluators were asked to walk freely to the 
destination of Yasaka shrine from the departure point of 
Kyoto City Hall using the second navigation system. After 
the explanation of how to use the system and the 
experimental procedure, each group was provided with one 
iPhone equipped with the system. The experimental 
procedure is described below. 
First, the evaluators selected one landmark from the 
landmarks that are recommended by this system. Then, they 
walked freely using the system. Finally, they arrived at the 
destination by repeating this procedure several times. 
Moreover, they were asked to answer three types of 
questionnaires in order to gather evaluation data on the 
usefulness of the system. 
1. Questionnaire before the experiment 
The purpose of this questionnaire was to inquire into the 
evaluators’ personal preferences and to divide the groups. 
2. Questionnaire during the experiment 
This questionnaire was conducted each time the 
evaluators reached a landmark. The purpose of this 
questionnaire was to inquire into their opinion on the 
selected landmark, and reflect on the route to the landmark.  
3. Questionnaire after the experiment 
The purpose of this questionnaire was to obtain feedback 
from the evaluators about the experiment. 
TABLE I.  
EVALUATOR GROUP COMPOSITION 
 
Group A 
Group B 
Group C 
Preference 
Landscape 
Gourmet food 
Gourmet food 
Kyoto sightseeing 
experience 
1-2 times 
More than 3 
times 
More than 3 
times 
Go without 
consulting map 
Can 
Cannot 
Cannot 
B. Results by Group 
Group A: This group selected “Landscape” as their 
personal preference. It took the group an hour and a half to 
walk to the destination from the point of departure. The 
landmarks that they visited during the experiment were three 
in total. It is notable that they were all interested in 
“Landscape” at first. However, they selected different genres 
for landmarks. 
Group B: This group selected “Gourmet Food and 
Shopping.” It took the group an hour and forty minutes to 
walk to the destination. The landmarks that they visited were 
five in total. The notable point of Group B is that they 
selected the gourmet food landmarks that coincide with their 
preferences five times. The reason why they selected these 
was in a large part due to the time when the experiment was 
conducted (from 12:00 to 14:00). 
Group C: This group used a method consisting of 
receiving recommendations for landmarks in all of the 
genres without considering their personal preferences. This 
was done in order to observe the effect of the personal 
preferences on selection of landmarks. It took the group an 
hour and fifty minutes to stroll to the destination, and they 
visited four landmarks in total. The standout point of this 
group is that they lost their way several times because they 
were not familiar with the experiment location, and because 
they were confused about how to use the system. On the 
other hand, they were able to travel via traditional Kyoto-
style alleyways that are generally not passed through on the 
way to the landmark. 
   Moreover, they were able to see the famous maiko of 
Kyoto. At the end, they answered that they had a fun time. 
Fig. 6 shows the required time for each group in the second 
experiment. Google Maps calculates a walking time of 20 
minutes from Kyoto City Hall to Yasaka Shrine.  
Figure 6.  Required Time of Experiment 2 by Group 
TABLE II.  
DISTANCE TO THE DESTINATION 
 
Group A 
Group B 
Group C 
Sum 
Near 
5 
6 
4 
15 
Suitable 
4 
9 
5 
18 
Far 
0 
0 
3 
3 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

C. Validity of the Landmark Recommendation Based on 
Personal Preferences 
The improved system is designed so that users are able to 
choose landmarks freely in order to resolve the problems of 
the first system. As a result, some evaluators recounted in the 
questionnaire after the experiment that they enjoyed the 
process of selecting the landmarks in consultation with each 
other. Moreover, although the second system recommends 
landmarks based on the personal preferences of the users, the 
evaluators mainly selected the landmarks from the 
perspective of whether or not the photo was attractive. 
Therefore, it was established that they do not select 
landmarks that coincide with their personal preferences, but 
they select the landmark with the most attractive photo. As a 
result, it is highly important to show “attractive photos” in 
order for users to select the landmark.  
D. New Discovery 
Evaluators were asked, “Did you feel that the distance to 
the landmark was ‘far’?” in the questionnaire conducted 
during the experiment. Almost all evaluators answered 
“Near” or “Suitable” to this question. Table 2 shows the 
detailed results for that question (Subjects were asked to 
answer each time they visit a landmark). Regarding this, it is 
thought that the evaluators purposely avoided selecting 
landmarks that were located far away from their current 
position, and that they already knew the route to the 
landmarks because some subjects were familiar with the 
evaluation experiment location. This system has a function 
that recommends landmarks within approximately 300 
meters from the current position when landmarks are 
updated. Therefore, the efficacy of the function that limits 
the range of the recommended landmarks was verified. 
Next, the case in which the evaluators felt the distance to 
the landmark was “Far” is explained. Group C was the only 
group to answer “Far” in the entire experiment. The reason 
given by all who answered “Far” was, “because we lost our 
way.” Reasons for Group C getting lost are suggested below. 
1. They were not familiar with the experiment area. 
2. They did not know how to use the system appropriately. 
3. They did not pay enough attention to the landscape 
around them. 
In other words, the landmark that they selected was not so 
far away, but they felt exhausted due to the extra walking 
time from losing their way. In addition, they felt anxiety 
because they did not know where the recommended 
landmark was. these negative effects made them feel that the 
distance was “Far.” 
VII. FUTURE WORKS 
The required time to walk to Kiyomizu-dera from Kyoto 
Station is about 40 minutes according to the calculation of 
Google Maps. However, it took an average of about 90 
minutes using the old system in the first experiment. 
Likewise, the required time to walk to Yasaka Shrine from 
Kyoto City Hall is about 20 minutes. However, it took over 
90 minutes for all groups in the second experiment. Both 
systems target casual walking sightseeing, in which tourists 
visit anywhere, anytime. Therefore, neither of our systems 
take account of the sightseeing time. However, spending too 
much time makes users exhausted, and they might not go to 
the places they wanted to. Therefore, we need to consider the 
sightseeing time in this system. 
The second system set the genre of the recommended 
landmarks based on users’ preferences. However, it could 
also be said that it is important for users to receive 
recommendation for many attractive landmarks without 
considering their preferences. Therefore, other methods of 
recommendation need to be incorporated in order to 
recommend a wider array of landmarks. 
The second system attached photo information only. 
However, some evaluators stated that, “we wanted other 
information about the landmark,” in the questionnaire given 
after the experiment. For example, they requested 
information on topics including shop business hours and 
history. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, the focus is on casual walking sightseeing 
in which tourists can visit anywhere at anytime freely, 
without being pressed for time. Moreover, our proposal of a 
novel sightseeing navigation system aims to increase 
opportunities for new discoveries and chance encounters. 
Therefore, neither of our systems show detailed route 
information, with the purpose of the “Benefit of 
Inconvenience.” As a result, it was established that such an 
approach can make users pay more attention to their 
surrounding environment. In addition, from our evaluation 
experiments on two types of prototype system, the 
effectiveness of not showing the map, and how to 
recommend the landmarks to attract users, were verified. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Kawakami, “System Design based on Benefit of 
Inconvenience and Emotion,” ICCAS-SICE, pp. 1184-1188, 
2009. 
[2] S. Ishimori, “The Potentialities of Autonomous Tourism in 
the Twenty-first Century,” Senri Ethnological Reports, Vol. 
23, pp. 5-14, 2001 (in Japanese). 
[3] Japan Trabel Breau Foundation, “Travelers Trends 2010,” pp. 
34, 2010. 
[4] NAVITIME JAPAN, NAVITIME, http://www.navitime.co.jp, 
2012. 
[5] J. Nishino, “Skil-tronics design,” SICE Symposium on 
System and Information 2009, pp. 554-557, 2009 (in 
Japanese). 
[6] I. Maeda, T. Sasaki and T. Oguchi, “Kankou no Shakai 
Shinrigaku (Social psychology of Sightseeing),” Kitaoji 
Shobou, Kyoto, 2006. 
[7] Amazon.com, amazon, http://www.amazon.com, 2012. 
[8] Y. Hijikata, “Techniques of Preference Extraction for 
Information Recommendation (<Special Features> Exploiting, 
Customer Preferences: The Leading Edge of User Profiling 
Technique),” IPSJ Magazine, Vol. 48, No. 9, pp. 957-965, 
2007 (in Japanese). 
[9] Y. Hijikata, T. Shimizu, S. Nishida, “Discovery-oriented 
Collaborative Filtering for Improving User Satisfaction,” 
Proceedings of the 14th international conference on 
Intelligent user interfaces, pp. 67-76, 2009. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

