Control Method of Power Seat Motor for Comfort of Automobile Driver 
 
Myungjin Chung 
Department of Mechatronics Engineering 
Korea Polytechnic University 
Siheung, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: mjchung@kpu.ac.kr 
Sangyeon Hwang 
Department of Research and Development 
TSA Co., Ltd. 
Siheung, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: sangyeonh@hanmail.net
 
 
Abstract—Automobile seats must provide comfort to drivers 
and passengers while driving. Drivers should feel comfortable 
with the seat that has the smooth motion. This can be acquired 
through the control of seat motor. In this paper, a control 
method profiling start and stop current is proposed. The soft-
start current profile is achieved by increasing the voltage to the 
motor. With the soft-start current profile, the slow-start 
motion is possible. The experimental test shows that the 
proposed control method reduced the reflection sound 
pressure by 14.3% and the shock acceleration by 85.7%, 
respectively. 
Keywords-control; power seat; automobile; soft-start; soft-
stop; current profile. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The seat of an automobile must support the comfort to 
the driver and passenger while driving. The control method 
of the seat position is changed from manual type to power 
type, which means using the motor to increase the comfort of 
the driver as proposed by Lahiry [1] and Kovener  [2]. 
Lahiry and Kovener used the motor to move the seat from 
one position to the other position. The seat using the motor is 
called power seat and that is classified as two-way or four-
way power seat according to a number of control direction. 
By using the motor, several problems, such as vibration, 
noise, and overcurrent, appear. Researches for the evaluation 
of these problems are conducted. Cho [3] visualized the 
automotive power seat slide motor noise, Han [4] suggested 
the method for automatic measurement of noise and 
vibration for power seat DC motor in the vehicle, and Seo [5] 
evaluated the vibration and sound quality according to 
battery voltage change while moving a power seat in an 
automobile 
forward 
or 
backward. Those researches 
suggested the method for measurement and analysis of the 
noise and vibration generated by the power seat DC motor, 
which is controlled by step voltage to move the seat. In this 
study, the method for suppression of the noise and vibration 
is proposed. The driver should feel comfortable with the seat 
that has smooth motion, which can be achieved through the 
proposed method. 
In Section II, configuration of the power seat is presented. 
Then, the control method of the motor for generation of the 
current profile, such as soft-start and soft-stop, is proposed in 
Section III. DC motor driver having the proposed control 
function is developed and experimental test is conducted 
with the DC motor and the power seat in Section IV. 
II. 
CONFIGURATION OF POWER SEAT 
The power seat is classified as two-way power seat or 
four-way power seat according to the number of control 
direction. The power seat consists of seat body, motor, motor 
driver, and actuating mechanism. The motor used in the 
power seat is classified as recline motor conducting the 
rotating function of seat back, tilt motor conducting the 
tilting function of seat base, slide motor conducting the 
moving function of seat base horizontally, and height motor 
conducting the moving function of seat base vertically 
according to function as shown in Figure 1. The DC motor, 
having properties such as high starting torque, good output 
efficiency for input current, and easy rotating control, is used 
for the power seat. The motor driver adopts the electric 
driving type using the electric switching device. 
III. 
CONTROL METHOD 
The driver should feel comfortable with the seat that has 
smooth motion, which can be acquired through DC motor 
control having soft-start and soft-stop current profile as 
shown in Figure 2. In this figure, current profile by proposed 
control method is smooth compared to current profile due to 
step input voltage. By the adoption of soft-start and soft-stop 
current profile to DC motor control, the power seat can be 
moved smoothly. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Configuratin of power seat having recline motor, tilt motor, 
slide motor, and height motor. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 2.  DC motor control method having soft-start and soft-stop current 
profile. 
The soft-start current profile can be achieved by 
increasing the voltage applied to the DC motor as shown in 
Figure 3. The shape of the soft-start current profile can be 
controlled according to increasing time (Ti), which is 
changed according to the friction force of guide rail in the 
power seat. The control block diagram of DC motor driver, 
which is using the electric switching device, is shown in 
Figure 4. The gate signal is generated by controller according 
to current flowing to the DC motor. The soft-start current 
profile is controlled by the gate signal. The increasing time 
(Ti) for soft-start and decreasing time (Td) for soft-stop can 
be controlled in the microprocessor. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Applying voltage to DC motor for the generation of the soft-
start current profile. 
 
Figure 4.  Control block diagram of DC motor driver. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
DC motor driver having functions shown in Figure 4 is 
developed as shown in Figure 5. The developed motor driver 
circuit consisted of control circuit for control of motor by 
microprocessor and power circuit for generating the current. 
Figure 6 shows the experimental setup for the performance 
test of developed DC motor driver. In this setup, power 
supply, current probe, and digital oscilloscope are used to 
measure the driving voltage, current, soft-start time, and soft-
stop time.  
Figure 7 (a) shows the measured motor current profile 
without control of voltage to DC motor in case of motor 
start. The seat has the sudden-start motion through the 
current profile shown in Figure 7 (a). The driver may feel 
discomfort from the sudden-start motion of the seat. Figure 
7 (b) shows the measured motor current profile with control 
of voltage to DC motor in case of motor start. The soft-start 
time is measured as 0.226sec, and this time can be 
controlled in the microprocessor. The seat has the slow-start 
motion through the current profile shown in Figure 7 (b). 
The driver may feel comfort from the slow-start motion of 
the seat. Figure 8 shows the measured motor control signal 
and current profile generated by the developed motor driver 
in case of soft-start and soft-stop.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Developed DC motor driver having the functions of soft-start 
and soft-stop. 
 
Figure 6.  Experimental setup for the performance test of developed DC 
motor driver. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 7.  Measured motor current profile (a) without control of voltage 
and (b) with control of voltage to DC motor. 
 
Figure 8.  Measured motor control signal and current profile generated by 
control of voltage to DC motor with the developed motor driver. 
Table I lists the performance of the developed motor 
driver. The soft-start and stop-time can be controlled from 
0.02sec to 2sec. This time duration is determined according 
to properties such as friction force between guide rail of seat. 
Figure 9 shows the experimental setup for the 
performance test of seat motion by applying the proposed 
control method in the dead sound chamber. Pressure meter 
is used to measure the reflection sound pressure and the 
accelerometer is used to measure the shock acceleration. 
Figure 10 shows the measured reflection sound pressure 
and shock acceleration according to the absence and 
presence of soft-start and soft-stop control method.  
TABLE I.  
PERFORMANCE OF DEVELOPED DC MOTOR DRIVER 
Parameter 
Value 
Unit 
Driving voltage 
6-24 
V 
Driving current 
20 
A 
Soft start time 
0.02-2 
sec 
Soft stop time 
0.02-2 
sec 
 
 
Figure 9.  Experimental setup for the performance test of seat motion by 
applying the proposed control method in the dead sound chamber. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 10.  Measured (a) reflection sound pressure  and (b) shock 
acceleration. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

In Figure 10 (a), the reflection sound pressure of non-
controlled motor is 160mPa and the reflection sound 
pressure of controlled motor is 140mPa. In Figure 10 (b), 
the shock acceleration of non-controlled motor is 14m/sec2 
and the shock acceleration of controlled motor is 2m/sec2. 
From the verification test, the reflection sound pressure is 
reduced by 14.3% and the shock acceleration is reduced by 
85.7% by applying the proposed control method. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, the control method of the motor for the 
generation of current profile, such as soft-start and soft-stop, 
is proposed. The soft-start and soft-stop current profiles are 
achieved through the voltage control applied to the DC 
motor. DC motor driver is developed, and experimental test 
using the developed motor driver is conducted to verify the 
proposed control method. From the verification test, the 
reflection sound pressure is reduced by 14.3% and the shock 
acceleration is reduced by 85.7% by applying the proposed 
control method. From the study, we expect that the driver 
can experience comfort upon applying the proposed control 
method.  
In the future, we will evaluate the comfort level of 
drivers, when the control method is applied to an automobile. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Following are results of a study on the “Leaders Industry-
university Cooperation” Project, supported by the Ministry 
of Education, Science & Technology (MEST). 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Lahiry, S. Chanana, and S. Kwnwar, “Automation in 
automobiles: 
power 
seat,” 
The 
Second 
International 
Conference on Machine Vision (ICMV 2009) IEEE, Dec. 
2009, pp. 158-160. 
[2] R. W. Kovener, “Power seat with memory,” International 
Journal of Vehicle Design, vol. 2, pp. 111-117, 1981. 
[3]  Y. T. Cho and J. S. Bolton, “Visualization of automotive 
power seat slide motor noise,” National Conference on Noise 
control engineering (Noise-Con 14) INCE, Sep. 2014, pp. 
181–188. 
[4] H. S. Han, B. W. Jeong, G. H. Kim, and D. H. Song, 
“Automatic measurement of noise and vibration for power 
seat DC motor in the vehicle,” The Spring Conference on The 
Korean Society for Noise and Vibration Engineering 
(SCKSNVE 2002) KSNVE, May 2002, pp. 1142-1147. 
[5] K. S. Seo, D. S. Choi, and K. S. Kim,  “Evaluation of 
vibration and sound quality according to battery voltage 
change while moving a power seat in an automobile forward 
or backward,” Journal of Central South University, vol. 21, pp. 
3844-3849, 2014. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

