User Sentiments Towards Smart Grid Flexibility 
A survey of early adopters' attitude towards allowing third parties to control electricity use in households 
Marius Rohde Johannessen  
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: marius.johannessen@usn.no 
Lasse Berntzen 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: lasse.berntzen@usn.no 
Boban Vesin  
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: boban.vesin@usn.no 
Qian Meng  
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: qian.meng@usn.no 
 
Thomas Brekke  
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: thomas.brekke@usn.no 
Inessa Laur 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: inessa.laur@usn.no 
Abstract—In this paper, we present the findings from a pilot 
survey on attitudes towards incentives for allowing third parties 
to control electricity use in households as part of the change to 
smart, green, and sustainable power grids. The survey was 
aimed at early adopters of smart home technology and shows 
that for this group, there is significant resistance towards 
allowing a third party to control household electricity use, at 
least unless the monetary incentive is high. However, early 
adopters are positive towards using smart home technology to 
lower their electricity bill if they stay in control. 
Keywords-smart grid; user sentiment; adoption; smart home; 
incentives; Smart-MLA. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The energy market in Europe is in a state of change. The 
transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy, new 
industries such as hydrogen, electric vehicle batteries, data 
centers, and green shift in existing industries require 
electricity. The change demands an increased focus on 
effectiveness and smart utilization of energy resources and 
the power grid. In 2019 alone, Europe installed 30 GW of 
renewable energy production, cutting emissions by 12% 
compared to the year before [1]. Fighting climate change 
means the matter is becoming more urgent, and the European 
Union has set a target of 55% emissions cuts by 2030 [2], 
which means European energy markets need to speed up their 
work on smart grids, as the transition to renewables means 
less oil and gas and more electricity [1]. 
Smart grids, allowing bidirectional power flow, two-way 
communication, and control functions, are essential to this 
transition to handle the increased need [3]. Smart grids 
provide consumers with the information and tools needed to 
adjust their energy usage and may contribute to savings for 
the consumers and reduced needs for electricity in 
households [4]. However, changing consumers' behavior 
requires action, and there are several possible strategies, such 
as policy change, working to change consumer perceptions 
and attitudes, and material incentives [5].   
The transition to renewable smart grids might increase the 
need for flexibility from consumers, as renewables such as 
wind and solar do not produce the same amount of electricity 
throughout the day. The transition makes grid balancing more 
of a challenge. The solution is either to have backup power 
(battery storage, coal, gas, hydropower) to meet excess 
demand or control demand at peak hours [6]. While Norway 
already produces most of its electricity using renewable 
hydropower, it is still affected through participation in the 
European markets. It can play a role in balancing the grid as 
hydropower can be switched on and off using water as a 
"battery" [1].  
Vrain and Wilson [7] show significant potential for 
energy saving and CO2 cuts through smart home technology. 
Still, Hargreaves and co-authors point out some challenges 
for adoption: Smart home technology is seen as complicated, 
time-consuming, and disruptive [8]. Sanguinetti, Karlin, and 
Ford point out that cost and savings are essential for adopting 
smart home technology [9]. Hence, there is a need for 
research on incentives for the adoption and efficient use of 
smart home technology.  
The main scope of the ERA-NET project Smart-MLA 
(Multi-Layer Aggregator) [10] is to develop cloud-based 
multi-layer aggregator ICT solutions to facilitate optimum 
Demand Response (DR) and grid flexibility to energy 
systems to utilize up to 100% renewable energy. The project 
includes research on smart grid flexibility and possible 
barriers to adoption. 
Thus, the objective of this paper is to examine incentives 
for smart home technology, as seen by early adopters. We 
focus on early adopters because this is the consumer group 
currently purchasing smart home technology [11], and we 
want to hear the opinions of actual users. Further, we are 
focusing on incentives that allow third parties to control 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-896-9
CENTRIC 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

household consumption, as this might be necessary at certain 
times to balance a renewable-driven power grid [6] properly.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: The 
following section contains a literature review. Section III 
discusses the research approach, followed by Section IV 
presenting the findings. The last section contains the 
conclusion and ideas for further research. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
This section provides a literature review, first on smart 
grids and smart homes, then on adoption, use, and diffusion. 
A. Smart grids and smart homes 
As defined in the introduction, smart grids are about 
control, 
balance, 
and 
increased 
efficiency 
through 
communication, allowing users to save energy [4]. Smart 
grids need to respond to varying supply and demand [12] and 
rely on smart meters providing real-time consumption data 
and the possibility to regulate power consumption. Smart 
grids also include communication technologies such as 
4G/5G and smart home protocols (Zigbee, Z-wave, 
Bluetooth, etc.) for data exchange. 
Smart home technology mixes artificial intelligence, 
communication, monitoring, and control of household 
appliances [13]. A smart home consists of the external 
network linking home and grid, a household hub for 
connecting 
components, 
and 
the 
individual 
smart/controllable devices in the house (sensors, thermostats, 
heating, ventilation, air conditioning, lighting, etc.) [14]. The 
combination of smart homes and grids allows for dynamic 
pricing and load-shifting programs for managing demand and 
supply of electricity [15]. The International Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) estimates a 70% decrease in energy demand 
from lighting alone if people optimize lighting at home [16].  
There are also different approaches to control. Some 
vendors leave it up to the user to set up automation, turn 
appliances on and off, etc. In contrast, others apply advanced 
algorithms attempting to optimize power consumption within 
the boundaries set by the user – such as needing a full charge 
on your electric vehicle by 8 am or not allowing the 
temperature to sink below a certain threshold [15]. A third 
option is to allow a third party to control some electricity use, 
or a combination of the above such as outlined by the Smart-
MLA project (see Section I).   
B. Adoption, ease of use, and diffusion 
One challenge with home automation and grid 
optimization lies in this tension between control, what we are 
willing to sacrifice, and use complexity. There is some 
emerging research into this area of home automation 
usability, such as the paper by Stojkoska and Trivodaliec, 
which proposes a framework for smart home management 
[17].  
Other studies point to specific challenges in various user 
contexts. Coughlin and co-authors, for example, have 
examined the older population's user experience with health-
related smart home technology and found that older people 
tend to see the benefits of technology but still find it 
challenging to use. There is no comprehensive or integrated 
market for these things, meaning users have to work with 
many different user interfaces [18]. Yang, Lee, and Zo also 
find challenges for user acceptance related to mobility, 
security, privacy, and trust, suggesting unmet design needs in 
these systems [19]. 
Nikou [20] has researched the adoption of smart home 
technology and found support for an extended technology 
acceptance model: Perceived usefulness and ease of use were 
important determinants for adoption, as were compatibility 
with existing hardware. The cost of systems had a significant 
negative effect, and men and women have different attitudes 
towards smart home technology. Shin, Park, and Lee [10] 
found that the younger age group was more likely to be 
concerned with usability, while those over 40 were slightly 
more concerned with usefulness. Those with higher 
education were, in general, more positive towards smart 
home technology. 
Sanguinetti, Karlin, and Ford applied diffusion of 
innovation theory to examine smart home energy 
management adoption and found four clusters of consumer 
segments: Those unfamiliar with the technology, those who 
were unpersuaded or persuaded, and finally, owners. Those 
who owned or planned to purchase smart home technology 
were, in general, more positive towards and informed about 
technology. They also had higher incomes and were more 
likely to own their own home. Those who were less positive 
pointed to barriers such as the difficulty of setup/use and 
concerns with the cost of purchase [9]. 
III. 
 RESEARCH APPROACH 
The study was conducted as a pilot survey study [21]. The 
study was conducted in Norway, so respondents replied with 
the Norwegian context in mind, which means high 
consumption due to long and cold winters; users being used 
to low-moderate prices; and seeing electricity as a shared 
social good rather than a market commodity, even though the 
energy sector has been deregulated since the Energy Act of 
June 1990. 
In "The Lean Startup," Ries advocates testing ideas with 
early adopters [22]. The sample is not representative of the 
population but is focused on early adopters only since they 
will provide more valuable responses in the context of this 
paper. 
As we were interested in the attitudes of early adopters, 
we reached out to two online discussion forums (for smart 
home automation and electric vehicle enthusiasts) and four 
Facebook groups (for electric vehicle enthusiasts, two 
different smart home groups, and a group for electricity 
pricing). As participation was by self-selection within these 
groups, we do not claim the findings are representative. 
However, they still present the sentiment potential early 
adopters show towards giving up flexibility to gain 
advantages (rewards or lower bills). The survey was left open 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-896-9
CENTRIC 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

for five days, and in this period, we received 209 answers and 
several comments to the post where we invited people to 
participate. 
In the survey, we asked about the demographic 
background, existing smart home technology in use, and 
acceptable incentives for allowing outside control of 
appliances, using a four-point Likert scale. In addition, we 
had an open-ended question where respondents could 
elaborate on their answers, which 52 of the respondents chose 
to do.  
As this is an exploratory pilot survey, we chose not to 
apply a specific model such as the Technology Acceptance 
Model (TAM). However, we did include some questions 
from TAM and related models. At this stage, we are more 
interested in descriptive statistics of the incentives required 
for consumers to allow outside control of their electricity use. 
A more structured model-based survey approach, based on 
this pilot's answers, is the next step in our research.   
IV. 
FINDINGS  
This section discusses findings related to demographic 
characteristics of respondents and their attitude towards 
technology, and what they think of incentives and motivation 
to provide flexibility. 
A. Demographic characteristics of early adopters 
A vast majority of our respondents were male – 95 %. 
This is perhaps somewhat skewed due to the self-selection of 
respondents, but other studies of adoption show similar 
results. Men are more likely to adopt smart home technology, 
meaning current marketing only reaches half the population. 
Age-wise, our respondents are mainly in the 30-60 age group, 
with equal distribution for each decade. This is not surprising 
as most of them own houses (75%, vs. 12% for apartments 
and 13% for other housing types). Most Norwegians own 
their home and typically buy their first home when they get 
their first job and settle down with a partner in their middle-  
to late twenties or early thirties.  
Further, we see that smart home early adopters are 
relatively affluent, but not extensively so. According to 
Statistics Norway, the median income for all households in 
Norway is € 68,600, for households with no children € 
86,000, and € 117,000 for couples with children aged 0-
17.  In our survey, only 6% have a household income below 
€ 60,000, and 77% earn more than € 100,000. This would put 
most respondents in a comfortable financial position, with 
two adults in the household having well-paid jobs, indicating 
that investment in smart home technology is a surplus 
phenomenon. 
B. Attitudes towards technology, existing smart technology 
Here, we asked respondents about their attitudes towards 
technology and technology adoption to examine if they had 
early adopters' characteristics. Table 1 shows that a vast 
majority of respondents are positive towards technology and 
that friends and family will consult them in technical matters. 
This indicates that we were indeed able to capture the 
sentiment of early adopters.  
TABLE I. 
ADOPTION OF TECHNOLOGY. RESPONSES IN PERCENT 
"I adopt new 
technology…" 
Fully 
agree 
Somewhat 
agree 
Somewhat 
disagree 
Disagree 
quickly 
58.4 
38.8 
2.4 
0.5 
if it is easy to 
use 
59.1 
33.2 
6.7 
1.0 
if it is useful to 
me 
79.9 
20.1 
0.0 
0.0 
if the price is 
right 
71.8 
25.4 
2.9 
0.0 
Friends and 
family ask my 
advice about 
technology 
57.2 
36.1 
5.3 
1.4 
 
We also asked the respondents about their preferred smart 
home setup (Fig. 1). As early adopters, more than 70% prefer 
to tinker with advanced settings or custom build their own 
system.  
 
 
Figure 1. Preferred smart home setup 
In Fig. 2, we show the smart home products owned by 
respondents. We see that the most common are off-the-shelf 
technology such as electric vehicle charging, smart plugs, and 
thermostats. 15.5% have installed solar panels, which is quite 
a bit higher than the national average. 14% report other 
technology such as Heating, Ventilation, Air-Condition 
(HVAC), heat pump, sunscreens, alarm systems, and door 
locks. Two of the respondents have installed battery packs for 
energy storage.  
Only 2.4% report having solar capture technology 
(storing solar energy as warm water), even though solar 
capture makes sense in the cold Norwegian climate.  
C. Incentives and motivation 
Here, we asked specifically about incentives for allowing 
the Distribution System Operator (DSO) or other external 
parties to regulate different areas of people's homes. The 
responses are listed in Table 2. In short, we see that 
significant incentives are needed, and the respondents are 
0
10
20
30
40
50
Buy an off-the-shelf
solution, no setup required
Buy an off-the-shelf
solution, some setup…
Buy an off-the-shelf solution
and do advanced setup
Purchase individual
components and build my…
Preferred smart home setup
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-896-9
CENTRIC 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

generally negative towards allowing others to control their 
homes' electricity use. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Smart home products owned 
They far prefer being in control themselves and setting up 
automation within the boundaries they find acceptable, such 
as the electric vehicle having a full charge by a specific time, 
lowering temperatures when rooms are not in use, etc. There 
is some interest in allowing outside parties to control electric 
vehicle charging or the house's water heater, but only if the 
savings exceed €150 a/year in each case.  
TABLE II. 
INCENTIVES FOR ALLOWING CONTROL TO THIRD-
PARTIES 
I am willing to 
let outsiders 
Annual savings 
 
Less 
than 
€30 
€30-
79 
€80-
119 
€120-
149 
€150 
or 
more 
Not 
at all 
Use my EV's 
battery to 
balance the 
grid 
2.9 
4.3 
10.1 
5.3 
39.9 
37.5 
Control 
charging of 
my EV 
10.6 
9.7 
14.0 
6.3 
31.4 
28.0 
Control 
heating in 
rarely used 
rooms 
11.1 
7.7 
13.0 
5.3 
16.8 
46.2 
Control 
heating in 
frequently 
used rooms 
4.8 
4.8 
7.7 
3.8 
19.2 
59.6 
Control my 
water heater 
12 
4.3 
16.7 
5.3 
26.3 
35.4 
  
Further, 97% report that good statistics and visualizations 
of energy use and savings are important or somewhat 
important for their motivation to use smart home technology 
(Fig. 3).   
We also asked about other incentives for energy saving in 
general. It seems that while early adopters are reluctant to 
release control to others, they are concerned with societal 
issues. Keeping costs down for everyone via energy-saving 
and better utilization of the national grid and contributing to 
phasing out fossil fuel energy in Europe is seen as important 
or somewhat important for 70 – 90% of the respondents.  
D. Qualitative concerns 
Summing up the findings, we see that while users are 
happy to contribute to a more sustainable future and invest in 
smart home technology to cut costs, monetary incentives 
need to be significant for users to allow outside control of 
their home's energy use. The free text answers supplement 
the survey questions, with 52 of 207 respondents choosing to 
comment. The following categories emerge from the free 
text-answers and are candidates for future research: 
 
 
Figure 3.  The importance of statistics and visualization 
1) The cost of grid access and use is a barrier 
In Norway, electricity customers pay a fixed rate plus a 
certain amount per kWh to access and use the power grid. The 
sums are set via a complex set of regulations and meant for 
grid maintenance and updates. This means that the total 
electricity bill comprises the cost of electricity and the grid 
access tariffs (plus taxes). There are currently proposals to 
change this tariff to save on investments in the grid. Several 
respondents claim that the way this cost is structured, as well 
as suggestions for tariff changes such as paying for delivering 
excess solar power to the grid or raising the tariff based on 
maximum electricity use, take away the monetary incentives 
for investing in smart home equipment:  
"The grid tariff in its current and planned form is the 
major obstacle to a more aggressive approach to cutting 
electricity consumption." 
"I can easily upgrade my home, so I can charge my two 
electric vehicles with a total of 14 kW during the two 
hours at night when the grid is least used, but I have no 
incentives for that [with a tariff based on maximum kWh 
used]." 
"Now we are threatened we might have to pay the DSO 
for the electricity we supply to the grid from our solar 
panels."  
2) Money first, ideology second 
We also see several comments showing that monetary 
incentives and the total cost of electricity weighs heavier than 
0
20
40
60
80
Control of heating/water…
Smart lighting
Smart EV charger
Solar panels with grid…
Solar capture technology
Other electricity…
Smart home products
73 % 
24 % 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-896-9
CENTRIC 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

social or ideological reasons for power saving and 
investment, and there are some calls for increased support for 
the installation and upgrade of solar panels, heat pumps to 
replace regular heaters, etc. Several mention home 
installation of solar as an option, but one that is currently too 
expensive. This is in line with findings from other surveys, 
such as the Norwegian electric vehicle user survey [23], 
showing that clean air and fighting climate change are 
important reasons for adoption, but the monetary savings 
from electric vehicles are still the most important reason why 
people buy electric cars.  
"The choices in the survey are way too low. I'd need to 
save a lot more than 150 Euros if I were to release 
control to the DSO." 
"I'd need to save a lot more than what the questions in 
this survey suggest for the investment in smart home 
equipment to pay off." 
"There should be better incentives for a gradual 
replacement of old technology…such as better grid 
tariffs." 
Storage capacity is also mentioned as important: 
"Cheaper solar and maybe battery storage would make 
this a priority, but without the possibility to store 
generated electricity for later use yourself, it is too 
costly… Or maybe the DSO "borrowing" your solar 
energy [when generated in the summer] and delivering it 
back to you for free later [in winter, when needs and 
prices are higher] could work" 
Others point out that that smart home technology is too 
expensive for some (as reflected in the income question in the 
survey):  
"Those with a lot of money can afford to do all kinds of 
things and are rewarded with money for doing it, but 
others can't afford to invest in power-saving technology. 
So this pricing of maximum effect used will hit the poor 
hardest." 
3) Users are happy to invest in power saving smart homes 
but prefer to be in control 
This is by far the topic most commented on, which is not 
surprising given that we asked about incentives for allowing 
others to control the use of electricity in people's homes. The 
conclusion seems quite clear, both from the free text answers 
and the survey: Most users are interested in lowering their 
electricity use and keeping costs down, but they are not 
comfortable allowing the DSO or other parties to control this. 
They list several reasons:   
Lack of trust is a recurring issue. In Norway, cheap 
electricity used to be seen as a common good, where prices 
were kept low so people could stay warm in the cold winter. 
After deregulation in the 90's/00's and the establishment of 
the Nordpool electricity market, however, prices have 
fluctuated a lot more, and the media covers every price raise. 
This seems to have led to a lack of trust in the market and 
Transmission System Operators (TSOs) in particular:  
"Energy companies will never be allowed to control 
anything in my house. They have shown time and time 
again they can't be trusted, with their hidden terms and 
conditions." 
"The DSOs…have neglected investing in the grid for the 
past 25 years while paying out hundreds of millions to 
shareholders. It's time they step up, without shoving the 
[financial] burden on to consumers." 
"I don't trust them. What if something goes wrong?... and 
if the system is able to cut costs, that won't get back to 
consumers." 
Privacy and security issues are also mentioned as reasons for 
not allowing outside control.   
"privacy issues…if something is to be controlled, or data 
stored, who has access and for what purpose? How are 
data kept?" 
"I don't want anything in the cloud or stored on external 
servers. (there is no Cloud - it's just someone else's 
computer)." 
Technology not perceived as mature. Some raise concerns 
that the technology just isn't ready yet, or not stable enough.  
"What happens when the DSO system suddenly crashes, 
and you have no electricity in your car, no hot water, no 
heating?" 
"I have tried to turn control over to a third party but 
found the technology was just not mature yet." 
"I have the hub from [producer name], and while it is ok 
to use, it is a bit complicated. I think regular users with 
little interest in technology would struggle with setting 
up conditions and rules".  
4) Social aspects.  
Finally, we see some comments regarding social and 
societal aspects. One respondent says, "this is mostly for 
people with interest in technology. There's no way I can get 
my family on board with these things" – a statement 
supported by the fact that 95% of the survey respondents are 
male. Others are concerned with sustainability and are 
positive towards efforts that visualize their carbon footprint:  
"It is just as important to inform and visualize the greater 
good, for example, by creating a community for those 
who allow the DSO to take control and show what this 
effort does in terms of energy-saving." 
"I would like to see my carbon footprint and how [smart 
technology] contributes to a more green and sustainable 
consumption of electricity." 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-896-9
CENTRIC 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
In this paper, we have reported the findings of a survey 
on incentives for allowing the DSO or other third parties to 
control household electricity use through smart grid/smart 
home technology. The survey was aimed at early adopters of 
technology, as this is the group who so far seems to have 
invested the most in this kind of technology, and also are 
more reflecting on issues related to electricity use.  
The responses show there is a lot of interest in this issue, 
with more than 200 replies in just a few days, and over 50 
free text comments elaborating on the answers, as well as 
comments directly in the forums and Facebook posts used to 
recruit respondents. The main finding is that smart home 
users are interested in saving money by controlling household 
energy use, but they are unwilling to allow third parties to 
take control. Monetary incentives seem to be the most 
important, with most saying they need to save more than € 
150 a/year for each of the categories listed in the survey.  
For practitioners, our survey shows that to make the grid 
smarter and control household consumption in peak hours, 
the consumer needs to be rewarded enough to offset the 
resulting lack of flexibility. Trust seems to be a barrier, so 
there is a need to address this by clearly showing how and 
how much households benefit. Finally, we see a great deal of 
interest in this area. It seems many consumers (at least in the 
demographics who responded to the survey) are willing and 
eager to save on their electricity bills through smart home 
technology.  
For researchers, the free text answers and comments 
reveal some emerging themes, which should be topics of 
future research on smart grids and user acceptance:  
• 
The cost of grid access, use, and smart home 
technology is a barrier to investment 
• 
Ideology and sustainability are important, but money 
comes first 
• 
Users are happy to invest in power-saving smart homes 
but prefer to be in control 
• 
The technology is not yet perceived as mature.  
• 
Social aspects, including sustainability and gender 
differences, are important 
The lack of trust and reluctance to surrender control and 
flexibility to the DSO could perhaps be offset by more 
localized initiatives, such as the neighborhood approach 
proposed by the Smart-MLA project, where an aggregator 
acts as a broker between consumers and DSO. Figuring out 
how to organize this is also a topic for future research. 
Finally, the responses are skewed towards males with a 
relatively high income and deliberately aimed at early 
adopters. Future research should aim to examine the views of 
the wider population, including the late majority attitudes 
towards ease of use. While our early adopter sample prefers 
to build their smart home systems or tinker with complex 
settings and adjustments, user research has shown this is not 
the case for most users.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work was supported under the ERA-Net Smart Grids Plus 
scheme Grant number 89029 and funded through the Research 
Council of Norway Grant number 295750 with the project title 
"Multi-layer aggregator solutions to facilitate optimum demand 
response and grid flexibility." 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
 The Norwegian Water Resources and Energy Directorate (NVE), 
"Langsiktig kraftmarkedsanalyse 2020-2040," 2020.  
[2] 
European Commission, "Forging a climate-resilient Europe - the new 
EU Strategy on Adaptation to Climate Change," Communication from 
the commission to the European parliament, the council, the European 
economic and social committee and the committee of the regions, 
COM(2021)82 final, 2021 . 
[3] 
R. Bayindir, I. Colak, G. Fulli, and K. Demirtas, "Smart grid 
technologies and applications," Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, vol. 66, pp. 499–516, 2016. 
[4] 
U. Shahzad, "Significance of Smart Grids in Electric Power Systems: 
A Brief Overview," Journal of Electrical, Electronics, Control and 
Computer Science, 6(19), pp. 7-12, 2020.  
[5] 
P. C. Stern, "Information, Incentives, and Proenvironmental Consumer 
Behavior," Journal of Consumer Policy, 22, pp. 461-478, 1999.  
[6] 
L. Bird, M. Milligan and D. Lew, "Integrating Variable Renewable 
Energy: Challenges and Solutions," National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory (NREL), 2013.  
[7] 
E. Vrain and C. Wilson, "Social networks and communication 
behaviour underlying smart home adoption in the UK," Environmental 
Innovation and Societal Transitions, 38, pp. 82–97, 2021.  
[8] 
T. Hargreaves, C. Wilson, and R. Hauxwell-Baldwin, "Learning to live 
in a smart home," Building Research & Information, 46(1), pp. 127–
139, 2018.  
[9] 
A. Sanguinetti, B. Karlin, and R. Ford, "Understanding the path to 
smart home adoption: Segmenting and describing consumers across the 
innovation-decision process," Energy Research & Social Science, 46,. 
pp. 274–283, 2018.  
[10] Smart-MLA, "Project Fact Sheet," [Online] Avaliable from  
http://smart-
mla.stimasoft.com/wpcontent/uploads/2020/02/ERANetSES_SMAR
T_MLA.docx, 2021.08.14. 
[11] J. Shin, Y. Park, and D. Lee, "Who will be smart home users? An 
analysis of adoption and diffusion of smart homes," Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, 134, pp. 246–253, 2018. 
 
[12] J. N. Bharothu, M. Sridhar, and R. S. Rao, "A literature survey report 
on Smart Grid technologies," in 2014 International Conference on 
Smart Electric Grid (ISEG), 2015. 
 
[13] M. R. Alam, M. B. I. Reaz, and M. A. M. Ali, "A review of smart 
homes - Past, present, and future," IEEE Transactions on Systems, 
Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), 42(6), pp. 
1190–1203, 2012. 
 
[14] M. A. Al-QUtayri and J. S. Jeedella, "Integrated Wireless Technologies 
for Smart Homes Applications," In: Smart Home Systems, InTech, 
2010. 
 
[15] G. Lobaccaro, S. Carlucci, and E. Löfström, "A Review of Systems and 
Technologies for Smart Homes and Smart Grids," Energies, 9(5), 348, 
2016. 
 
[16] IPCC, "Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change," in Climate 
Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change, New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2014. 
[17] B. L. R. Stojkoska and K. V. Trivodaliev, "A review of Internet of 
Things for smart home: Challenges and solutions," Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 140(3), pp. 1454–1464, 2017. 
 
[18] J. F. Coughlin, L. A. D'Ambrosio, B. Reimer, and M. R. Pratt, "Older 
adult perceptions of smart home technologies: Implications for 
research, policy & market innovations in healthcare," in Proceedings 
29th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society, pp. 1810–1815, 2007. 
[19] H. Yang, H. Lee, and H. Zo, "User acceptance of smart home services: 
An extension of the theory of planned behavior," Industrial 
Management and Data Systems, 117(1), pp. 68-89, 2017 
 
[20] S. Nikou, "Factors driving the adoption of smart home technology: An 
empirical assessment," Telematics and Informatics, 45, 101283, 2019. 
[21] B. Pikkemaat and M. Peters, "Towards the measurement of innovation- 
a pilot study in the small and medium sized hotel industry," In 
Innovation in Hospitality and Tourism, Routledge, pp. 89–112, 2006. 
[22] E. Ries, "The Lean Startup: How Today's Entrepreneurs Use 
Continuous Innovation to Create Radically Successful Businesses," 
Vikin, 2011. 
[23] Elbilforeningen [Online] Available from https://elbil.no/elbilisten/, 
2021.08.21 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-896-9
CENTRIC 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

