Emergency Phone Call Alternatives: a Review 
 
João Mendes 
Polytechnic Institute of Castelo 
Branco 
6000-767 Castelo Branco, Portugal 
email:joao.mendes2@ipcbcampus.pt 
 
 
Filipe Fidalgo 
R&D Unit in Digital Services, 
Applications and Content, 
Polytechnic Institute of Castelo 
Branco,  
6000-767 Castelo Branco, Portugal 
email: ffidalgo@ipcb.pt 
Ângela Oliveira 
R&D Unit in Digital Services, 
Applications and Content, 
Polytechnic Institute of Castelo 
Branco, 
6000-767 Castelo Branco, Portugal 
email: angelaoliveira@ipcb.pt
Abstract— Emergency calls usually made over a telephone line 
may have limitations, such as: speech or hearing difficulties of 
the speaker; impossible verbal communication due to the 
circumstance (aggression, threat, etc.); difficulty of the call to be 
established due to location or lack of signal. To overcome these 
limitations, alternatives must be found. The alternatives have 
several advantages over the emergency telephone line since they 
use newer technology and have the advantage that they can 
adapt to the various circumstances in which the emergency call 
is made, as well as to the difficulties of the callers. With 
emergency phone call alternatives, it is possible to address issues 
such as: sending the exact and up-to-date location of the 
emergency call as well as sending all necessary information, 
avoiding the time-consuming questions that telephone operators 
have to ask, which is crucial for responding to the emergency; 
carrying out an emergency call discreetly; facilitating the call 
for help for people with communication difficulties or when 
verbal communication is not possible; sending information via 
audio, video, and text. These alternatives have the disadvantage 
of depending on the use of the Internet for their operation, 
which with technological advances, tends to be a mitigated 
problem. A systematic review has been conducted based on 
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Re-views and Meta-
Analyses (PRISMA) methodology and the studies address some 
consistent evidence about emergency telephone line alternatives 
and how these are an asset to emergency requests and responses, 
creating knowledge for the development of a digital solution.  
Keywords- Emergency; Application; Mobile; Help; Telephone 
Line. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Generally, requests for help are made only using an 
emergency telephone line. Because it is a telephone call, it is 
necessary to have a verbal communication between the caller 
and the operator, which sometimes becomes a problem due to 
several factors, such as the circumstances or weaknesses of 
the caller [1]-[3]. 
Examples of difficulties in the call for help are: during a 
robbery, when the robber is nearby; a pursuit; domestic 
violence or direct aggression; a person with communication 
difficulties; or others. In these cases, the possibility to verbally 
communicate with the operator is limited, making the call for 
help difficult or even impossible. What often happens in these 
circumstances in a call to the emergency telephone line is that 
nobody speaks, and the operator is unable to assess the 
situation and its location, two of the most important pieces of 
information to send the appropriate help. Another example 
where the emergency telephone line cannot be used is when 
dealing with deaf and/or people with disabilities, as they are 
not able to communicate verbally with the operator, thus 
always depending on others, if it is necessary to make a call 
for help. An application where users can make distress calls in 
situations where verbal communication is not possible or 
when the conditions for indicating the location are not met, for 
example, would be the most appropriate solution. 
The approach to supporting the development of an 
efficient solution for the calls for help in these contexts is to 
carry out a systematic review of scientific studies where the 
state of the art can be assessed regarding aspects such as: 
forms of communication in the context of the call for help; 
information sent; mechanisms and/or computer solutions used 
and their advantages over the emergency telephone line used 
in order to support the development of a user-centric system. 
However, this approach also has some limitations. The 
literature search was performed only in three scientific 
databases. This decision may have influenced the number of 
relevant studies obtained. The use of other databases could 
possibly have increased the number of studies analyzed and 
contributed to improving the general analysis, as well as the 
search strategy, which had restricted the number of non-
relevant studies (studies published many years ago, very 
general studies, studies that do not focus on the research 
objectives, or studies not written in English). However, these 
restrictions did not have a significant effect on the discussion 
and conclusions. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the 
details of the methodology of the systematic literature review. 
Section 3 describes the strengths and limitations of this work. 
Finally, Section 4 presents the conclusions and directions for 
future work. 
II. METHODOLOGY 
The objective of this work is to analyze scientific articles 
that contain supporting information for the development of 
an emergency system as an alternative to the telephone line. 
The review is reported according to the PRISMA [4]. 
 
A. 
Research questions 
Our work aims to address the following research 
questions. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-999-7
CENTRIC 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Question_1: What are the alternatives to the emergency 
line/other solutions for emergency calls? 
Question_2: What mechanisms/computer solutions are 
necessary or can be used to create an alternative system for 
emergency calls? 
Question_3: What information can/should be transmitted in 
emergency calls? 
Question_4: What are the advantages of alternatives to the 
emergency phone line? 
 
B. 
Inclusion criteria 
The literature studies are selected according to the 
following criteria. 
Criterion_1: Studies between 2016 and 2021. 
Criterion_2: Studies written in English. 
Criterion_3: Studies in which the full text is available. 
Criterion_4: Systems that respond to help requests. 
Criterion_5: Systems that use mobile applications, desktop 
applications and different telephone line technologies for 
emergency calls. 
 
C. 
Search Strategy 
In this the research, the databases IEEEXplore, ACM 
Digital and ScienceDirect were used to identify the articles. 
The set of search terms were: "Emergency Application" AND 
"Mobile", "Emergency System" AND "Mobile". The 
research was conducted between November and December 
2021. 
III. 
RESULTS 
As presented in Figure 1, after the research was 
performed and criteria 1 was applied, 142 scientific studies 
were found, 4 from the IEEEXplore database, 10 from the 
ACM Digital database and 128 from ScienceDirect. 
Applying criteria 2, as well as the removal of duplicates, 
resulted in the exclusion of 2 studies.  Thus, 140 studies were 
analyzed based on the title and the abstract, 124 being 
excluded based on criteria 4 and 5. The full text analysis of 
the 16 resulting studies was performed and criteria 3, 4 and 5 
were applied. The remaining 14 studies were included for 
review. Data were extracted from all studies identified using 
a predefined format. Data extracted included: study; year of 
publication; alternatives to the emergency line; information 
transmitted; advantages. Table I identifies the extracted data 
of the included studies. The characteristics of the included 
studies have been summarized in the following text.  
In [5], the authors developed a mobile application that 
allows making distress calls without looking at the screen 
phone. The request is made by holding rhythm patterns, such 
as taps on the screen with the phone, that can be in the pocket, 
and thus a distress call can be made without others noticing 
that it has been made. The application allows three features: 
send an SOS request to a person elsewhere, audio or video 
recording, and an SOS function that alerts people near you to 
get help. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Flow diagram for new systematic reviews (adapted from [4]) 
TABLE I. EXTRACTED DATA. 
Article 
Year Publication 
Alternatives to 
the emergency 
line 
Information 
transmitted 
Advantages 
An Emergency Application
 for Smartphones Based on 
Rhythm Pattern 
Recognition [5] 
2016 
Mobile app 
enabled by 
touch 
patterns on 
your 
smartphone 
Location, 
audio, video, 
text 
Sending 
discreet and 
fast distress 
calls 
A cloud-based architecture 
for emergency management 
and first responders’ 
localization in smart city 
environments [6] 
2016 
IOT e cloud 
Location 
Easier to locate 
Information visualization 
for emergency 
management: A systematic 
mapping study [7] 
2016 
Computer 
system 
Text 
Improves 
emergency 
management 
Dynamic LTE resource 
reservation for critical 
M2M deployments [8] 
2017 
 LTE mobile 
networks 
Text 
Receiving data 
without human 
intervention 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Studies identified in: 
IEEE Xplore = 4 
ACM Digital = 10 
Science Direct = 128 
(n = 142) 
Studies removed before screening: 
Duplicate studies (n = 2) 
Studies not written in English (n = 0) 
Analyzed Studies 
(Title and abstract) 
 
(n = 140) 
Excluded Records 
Different context: 
  Foco on network technologies (14) 
  Foco on IOT not directed to SOS 
(28) 
  Foco on Non-vehicular ad-hoc 
networks (10) 
  Foco on disasters and rescues (18) 
  Foco on medicine (19) 
  Foco on others (35) 
(n = 124) 
Exclusions after full texto 
analysis: 
   Error opening (1) 
   Not a SOS application (1) 
    
(n = 2) 
Studies evaluated for 
inclusion 
(full-text analysis) 
(n = 16) 
Studies included for 
the review 
(n = 14) 
Identification 
Eligibility 
Included 
Selection 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-999-7
CENTRIC 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Article 
Year Publication 
Alternatives to 
the emergency 
line 
Information 
transmitted 
Advantages 
Bangladesh Emergency 
Services: 
A Mobile Application to 
Provide 911-Like Service 
in Bangladesh [9] 
2018 
Mobile app 
List with 
emergency 
services 
Allows to 
consult the 
available 
emergency 
services, their 
location, and 
contacts 
OpenAlerts: A Software 
System to Evaluate Smart 
Emergency Alerts and 
Notifications [10] 
2018 
Mobile app 
Text, 
images, 
location 
Allows to 
inform users 
that there is an 
occurrence 
nearby 
Towards a next generation 
112 testbed: The EMYNOS 
ESInet [11] 
2018 
Emergency 
calls from 
the internet 
Audio, 
video, and 
instant 
messaging 
Allows to make 
emergency 
calls over the 
internet 
Modern Mobile Emergency 
Applications: Fact or 
Fiction? [12] 
2019 
Mobile app 
Location 
Easier to locate 
help request 
Client-based Total 
Conversation Solution to 
Support People with 
Hearing Impairment in 
Medical Emergency [13] 
2020 
Mobile 
application 
for video-
conference 
Audio, video 
Distress calls 
from people 
with hearing 
impairments 
Design and implementation 
of a Vision Stick with 
Outdoor/Indoor Guiding 
Systems and Smart 
Detection and Emergency 
Features [14] 
2020 
Mobile app 
connected to 
a cane 
Location, 
text, audio 
Guide 
individuals 
with visual 
impairments, 
and call for 
help through 
the cane 
Highly-efficient fog-based 
deep learning AAL fall 
detection system [15] 
2020 
IOT and 
mobile app 
Text, 
location 
Allows to alert 
a care giver that 
elderly person 
has fallen 
Why do people want to use 
location-based application 
for emergency situations? 
The extension of UTAUT 
perspectives [16] 
2021 
Mobile app 
Text 
Higher 
performance, 
more reliable 
service 
Increasing disaster victim 
survival rate: SaveMyLife 
Mobile Application 
development [17] 
2021 
Mobile app 
Location, 
text, 
Allows to 
visualize 
disasters on a 
map in real 
time and call 
for help  
Crowdsourcing to save 
lives: A scoping review of 
bystander alert 
technologies for out-of-
hospital cardiac arrest [18] 
2021 
Mobile app 
Location, 
text 
Faster 
assistance in 
the event of a 
heart attack 
 
In [6], the authors present an emergency management 
service that uses IoT services and hybrid cloud architecture, 
the location, and orientation of first responders in 
emergencies. The service also provides functions for 
obtaining, storing, and processing various information that is 
extremely useful for decision-making in emergency response 
situations. One is the deployment of devices in reference 
points of an occurrence. Using the rescuers' mobile devices, 
the system can draw an approximate map of the location, 
which can be used to identify the space in which the rescuer 
is moving, supporting movements in unknown rescue 
locations. 
In [7], the authors did a systematic analysis of how 
researchers use information visualization systems for 
emergency management. This analysis had important 
conclusions to be used by researchers, who can then analyze 
and develop new emergency management systems. The main 
conclusion was that: map-based visualization is the most used 
visual tool; emergency response is the phase of emergency 
management is the most dynamic phase because the tasks 
performed in this phase are sensitive and executed quickly 
and the one with the greatest potential to receive 
technological innovations; databases are the most used data 
source; and real data, are used more than simulated data. The 
results of the study thus provide insight into the area studies 
what helps in the development of technologies to help in the 
management phases of an emergency. Moreover, knowing 
the current trends, for example the forms of visualization and 
interaction in emergency management can be studied and 
verify if they are the best for the scenarios where they are 
used. As for the gaps found, such as the authors' proposing 
not 
very 
wide-ranging 
approaches 
to 
emergency 
management, these are important to help researchers improve 
them. 
The study in [8] presents Machine to Machine (M2M) 
communications as a technology of high importance in 
distress calls. Through devices in areas where help is needed, 
data can be exchanged to respond to the rescue, but to have 
this sending and receiving of data in M2M communications, 
they mainly use mobile communications standards where 
Long-Term Evolution (LTE) is the most used. To use these 
technologies in emergency environments, it is necessary to 
ensure that communications are reliable and uninterrupted. 
So, in this study some techniques (probabilistic resource 
reservation and prediction-based resource reservation) are 
needed to dynamically allocate part of the LTE resources for 
emergencies to ensure that there is no competition in the use 
of communication resources by the rest of the network and 
that there is an isolated network part to ensure secure 
communications. 
In the study from [9], the authors describe a mobile 
emergency application that provides emergency line-like 
services (991) in Bangladesh. The system provides a 
dynamic, up-to-date list of all emergency services in 
Bangladesh. Using Google Maps, users can scan for the 
location of nearby emergency services, as well as the 
directions to them. Calls can be relaunched without having to 
fix the numbers, as these are available in the app. 
In [10], the authors present a system for testing 
emergency notifications. The system allows the creation and 
testing of sophisticated emergency alert notifications, which 
can contain various types of information, such as a map with 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-999-7
CENTRIC 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

the affected area and the exact location of the user or text 
informing of an event. This is useful, for example, to notify 
users that an emergency is occurring in a nearby area. 
In [11], the EMYNOS - nExt generation eMergencY 
commuNicatiOnS project is described, which is an Internet 
Protocol (IP) address-based platform for emergency services, 
and the project is funded by the European Commission. This 
study presents the introduction of IP in emergency systems in 
Europe, thus will be possible emergency calls, which include 
audio, video, and instant messaging. This solution is based on 
the Emergency Services Internet Protocol Network, which is 
an internal IP-based network and can be shared by all Public 
Safety Answering Points. With the development of the 
platform, it is now possible for citizens to make emergency 
calls from the internet. 
The authors of [12] have conducted a study to compare 
the current emergency applications and emergency phone 
lines. They described some difficulties and problems of 
emergency calls. One of the main difficulties identified was 
a call location and reporting it so a mobile application can 
solve that problem. They also mention that emergency 
applications face several problems and some of them can be 
solved with 5G technology. Finally, they present a developed 
application, when 112 was dialing a trigger was activated that 
using the Pan-European Mobile Emergency Application 
architecture allows sending an emergency message 
containing the precise location and citizen information. Even 
if the user is in a different country, the application sends the 
information to the correct emergency response point. 
The authors of [13] present a system that allows people 
with hearing impairment to request help. The system allows 
a specialist in communication with people with these 
limitations, as an intermediary of the conversation having 
audio and video support to communicate with the person who 
makes the request, but only provides audio to the emergency 
center person. This system helps both the person making the 
request and the person responding to it, to communicate with 
each other using a specialist in communication with people 
with hearing difficulties. 
In [14], a walking stick is described for visually impaired 
individuals. This cane allows guiding the individual to 
defined locations through voice commands and connects to a 
mobile application using google maps. The walking stick also 
has a system to monitor obstacles around the individual and 
provides information on how to avoid them. In addition, it 
also has an SOS button that, through a Global System for 
Mobile (GSM) module, sends an SMS to family members or 
friends with the exact location of the individual if there is no 
response from any of them, the system calls the authorities 
through the GSM module. 
In [15], a system for fall detection especially suitable for 
the elderly, is presented. This system is based on Deep 
Learning and IoT, where there is no button to be pressed in 
case of a fall but a set of sensors on the users' clothes. When 
a fall is detected, an alert is sent to the elderly caregiver's cell 
phone through the application associated with the sensors.  
In [16], the authors studied the intentions of the 
population to use a mobile emergency app in developing 
countries such as Indonesia. An existing emergency app was 
used to distribute questionnaires and allowed to analyze some 
determinants in the use of the app for calling for help, such 
as performance, trust in the service, social influence, fear of 
criminal activities, and privacy issues. This study concluded 
that trust has the most significant impact on the population's 
intention to use an emergency app. It is since the population 
believes, in the ability of the app to send the distress message 
quickly, accurately, and reliably. The concern about personal 
data collection is the factor that most negatively influences 
the population to use an emergency app. 
The authors of [17] present an Indonesian emergency 
mobile application for disasters, with a special focus on 
earthquakes. Disasters in real-time appear in map. For 
example, in the case of earthquakes, the location and 
magnitude are indicated. The application has an SOS button 
that can be pressed by users to call for help. After the user 
presses the button, the request and its location are sent to the 
rescuers. The rescuer has a map with the locations of the 
various distress calls then the system helps to prioritize the 
calls based on four variables: age, distance to the point of 
safety, health status, and regional disaster risk. 
The authors in [18], conducted a study on applications and 
systems for alerting of a cardiac arrest. The systems focused 
on issuing an alert, sending a notification to nearby devices, 
so that someone who is nearby, and has first aid training, can 
perform resuscitation maneuvers until medical help arrives 
on the scene. Some of the systems studied also alerted those 
who did not have first aid training because even if they did 
not have such training, they could follow some instructions 
in the applications or by calling for help. In this study, they 
tried to identify and characterize these systems, where most 
are mobile applications that send push notifications to people 
within a certain radius of the occurrence and through GPS 
directions guide them to the occurrence. The authors also try 
to summarize the literature and look for gaps in it, 
identifying, for example, difficulties in recruiting people to 
use these applications, because there are still concerns about 
security and responsibility when responding to these alerts. 
They also identify the existence of a problem in many 
countries, related to the guarantee of protection to the citizen 
volunteers who respond to the alerts, namely in issues related 
to injuries, or even death resulting from the rescue provided. 
IV. DISCUSSION 
Based on the results presented in Figure 2, the articles 
analysed were published between 2016 and March 2021, 
three articles in 2021 (21.4%), three articles in 2020 (7.1%), 
one article in 2019 (7.1%), three articles in 2018 (21.4%), one 
article in 2017 (7.1%), three articles in 2016 (21.4%). Figure 
2 shows the number of analyzed articles per year.  
Regarding alternatives to the emergency line, in the 
analyzed studies, mobile applications are the most used for 
developing alternatives, as illustrated in Figure 3. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-999-7
CENTRIC 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Regarding the information transmitted in the alternative 
systems to the emergency line, the one that stands out the 
most is the "text" where 11 studies use it for information 
communication. Next, "location information" is the most 
used and the least used, nonetheless, are "images". This 
analysis is set out in in the graph in Figure 4. 
According to the analysis of the 14 studies, it can be 
concluded that new ways to make emergency requests and 
new systems to respond to emergencies have been developed. 
Although there are still several difficulties and setbacks in 
these new systems, more technological, and that use the 
internet instead of the telephone line, it is expected that, with 
the evolution of mobile networks, namely the appearance of 
5G, some of these difficulties will be solved. It is also 
possible to conclude that several emergency systems have 
been developed focused on responding to specific problems 
and difficulties that exist in the current emergency phone line, 
for example, the difficulty in making requests for help by 
people with verbal or auditory communication difficulties, 
with visual difficulties, in situations where verbal 
communication is not possible or in situations where it is 
necessary to make the request without anyone else noticing 
that it was made. There is also a search for computer solutions 
at the technical level, for these systems where there is a focus 
on the use of the internet of things and cloud computing. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Information transmitted 
Thus, from the fourteen articles analyzed, the main 
conclusions were: 
(Q1) What are the alternatives to the emergency 
line/other solutions for emergency calls?   
     Mobile applications and computer systems are a great 
alternative to the current emergency line. These solutions 
have the advantage of allowing many features, such as: 
sending the exact and updated location in the distress call; 
sending distress calls discreetly; sending distress calls 
facilitated by people with disabilities; and sending 
information through audio, video, and text - which phone 
calls do not allow, becoming an asset for the calls and 
consequent response to them, [5]-[18]. 
(Q2) What mechanisms/computer solutions are necessary 
or can be used to create an alternative system for 
emergency calls? 
     With the evolution of technology, there is a focus on 
mobile devices use,  the internet of things, and cloud 
computing systems to create alternative systems for distress 
calls, [5][6][11]-[13][15][17]. 
(Q3) What information can/should be transmitted in 
emergency calls? 
     With today's technology it is possible to transmit any 
information needed in a distress call, e.g. audio, video, 
images, exact location, text, etc., [5][11]-[15][17][18]. 
(Q4) What are the advantages of alternatives to the 
emergency phone line? 
     These new alternatives to the emergency telephone line, 
by using newer technologies, have the advantage that they 
can adapt to the various circumstances in which the 
emergency call is made and to the difficulties of the person 
making it. Thus, new functionalities are possible, such as  
• sending the exact and up-to-date location of the 
distress call, which avoids the many questions that 
must be asked over the emergency phone line, which 
takes essential time for the rescue.  
• sending distress calls discreetly, which in certain 
circumstances is critical, as verbal communication 
may not be possible or help may be needed without 
anyone noticing. 
• the sending of distress calls made easy for people with 
disabilities, 
which 
prevents 
them 
from 
communicating. 
• sending information via audio, video, and text.  
In other words, new ways are provided to make requests 
for help with greater accuracy, detail and speed that were not 
possible with the emergency telephone line possible [5]-[18]. 
V. CONCLUSION 
With the performed analysis it is possible to conclude that 
several studies have been conducted to find alternative and 
viable solutions to distress calls. There are some systems 
developed however each one has its characteristics and 
focuses on a particular context.  
New technologies have also given an impulse to the 
development of these new systems because they allow the 
 
Figure 2. Studies per year 
 
3
1
3
1
3
3
0
1
2
3
4
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
 
Figure 3. Emergency phone line alternatives 
1
2
2
10
0
5
10
15
Desktop…
Networks
IOT and Cloud
Mobile Application
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-999-7
CENTRIC 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

improvement of the current emergency systems and make 
them even faster, more accurate, and more accessible to 
everyone. This presents a benefit to improving emergency 
response and saving lives. The need to connect to the internet 
is the major obstacle to these new alternatives, but 5G tends 
to tackle the problem. 
There is a need for systems that allow the communication 
of distress messages discretely, as well as tracking the route 
or location of the victim, but no information was found on 
systems with these characteristics, which shows a research 
opportunity. Based on the analysis made, the lack of 
information and support systems for victims would be 
beneficial to analyze and develop a system that solves this gap 
for future work. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]   “INEM,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.inem.pt/2017/05/30/ligue-112/. [Accessed 07 
05 2022]. 
[2]   “Emergency Contacts in Portugal,” [Online]. Available: 
https://eportugal.gov.pt/cidadaos-europeus-viajar-viver-e-
fazer-negocios-em-portugal/cuidados-de-saude-em-
portugal/contactos-de-emergencia-em-portugal. [Accessed 
07 05 2022]. 
[3]   “Netflights,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.netflights.com/blog/global-emergency-
numbers/. [Accessed 15 07 2022]. 
[4]   M. J. Page et al., “PRISMA 2020 explanation and 
elaboration: Updated guidance and exemplars for reporting 
systematic 
reviews”, 
BMJ, 
vol. 
372, 
 
doi: 
10.1136/BMJ.N160, 2021.  
[5]   Y. Niwa, M. Inamura and K. Kaji, “An Emergency 
Application for Smartphones Based on Rhythm Pattern 
Recognition”, In Adjunct Proceedings of the 13th 
International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous 
Systems: 
Computing 
Networking 
and 
Services 
(MOBIQUITOUS 2016), 2016.  
[6]   F. Palmieri, M. Ficco, S. Pardi and A. Castiglione, “A cloud-
based architecture for emergency management and first 
responders localization in smart city environments, 
Computers & Electrical Engineering”, vol. 56, pp. 810-830, 
ISS, 2016.  
[7]   F. Dusse et al., “Information visualization for emergency 
management: A systematic mapping study, Expert Systems 
with Applications”, vol. 45, pp. 424-437, ISS, 2016.  
[8]   Y. Gadallah, M. H. Ahmed and E. Elalamy, “Dynamic LTE 
resource reservation for critical M2M deployments”, 
Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 40, pp. 541-555, 
ISSN 1574-1192, 2017.  
[9]   M. M. Hossain, M. Sharmin and S. Ahmed., “Bangladesh 
Emergency Services: A Mobile Application to Provide 911-
Like Service in Bangladesh”, In Proceedings of the 1st ACM 
SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable 
Societies (COMPASS '18), 2018.  
[10]   J. D. Falcão, J. Krebs, S. Kumar and H. Erdogmus, 
“OpenAlerts: A Software System to Evaluate Smart 
Emergency Alerts and Notifications”, In Proceedings of the 
2018 ACM International Joint Conference and 2018 
International Symposium on Pervasive and Ubiquitous 
Computing and Wearable Computers (UbiComp '18), 2018.  
[11]   Y. Rebahi et al., “Towards a next generation 112 testbed: 
The EMYNOS ESInet”, International Journal of Critical 
Infrastructure Protection, vol. 22, pp. 39-50, ISSN 1874-
5482, 2018.  
[12]   U. Sedlar, L. Koršič, J. Sterle, J. Cijan and M. Volk, 
“Modern Mobile Emergency Applications: Fact or 
Fiction?”, 
15th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Telecommunications 
(ConTEL), 
pp. 
1-6, 
doi: 
10.1109/ConTEL.2019.8848551, 2019.  
[13]   M. Ongtang and N. Thatphithakkul, “Client-based Total 
Conversation Solution to Support People with Hearing 
Impairment in Medical Emergency”, In Proceedings of the 
8th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Computer 
and 
Communications Management (ICCCM'20), 2020.  
[14]   M. M. Bastaki, A. A. Sobuh, N. F. Suhaiban and E. R. 
Almajali, “Design and implementation of a Vision Stick 
with Outdoor/Indoor Guiding Systems and Smart Detection 
and Emergency Features”, Advances in Science and 
Engineering Technology International, 2020.  
[15]   Sarabia-Jácome, D., Usach, R., Palau, C. E., and Esteve, M., 
"Highly-efficient fog-based deep learning AAL fall 
detection system. Internet of Things", pp. 11, 100185. 2020 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2020.100185.  
[16]   N. F. A. Budi et al., “Why do people want to use location-
based application for emergency situations?”, Technology in 
Society, vol. 65, 101480, ISSN 0160-791X, 2021.  
[17]   M. A. Berawi et al., “Increasing disaster victim survival rate: 
SaveMyLife 
Mobile 
Application 
development”, 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, Volume 
60, 102290, ISSN 2212-4209, 2021.  
[18]   A. Valeriano, S. V. Heer, F. d. Champlain and S. C. Brooks, 
“Crowdsourcing to save lives: A scoping review of 
bystander alert technologies for out-of-hospital cardiac 
arrest, Resuscitation”, vol. 158, pp. 94-121, ISSN 0300-
9572, 2021.  
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-999-7
CENTRIC 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

