Study of Cochlear Implants Electrodes Stimulation Based on the Physics of the Ear for 
Audio Signal Integrity Improvement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract – Cochlear implants are neuro-stimulating devices 
helping severely deaf people to perceive sounds. This work 
proposes two models for the optimization of electrodes array 
stimulation in cochlear implants. The first model was developed 
according to wave propagation theory applied to the cochlea. 
The second one consisted on data processing using a Short Time 
Fourier Transform (STFT) in order to remedy to the first model 
limitations. The models were tested with an acoustic signal, 
which frequency belongs to the human hearing frequency range. 
Frequency and transient representations of the reconstructed 
signals were compared, emphasizing the better linearity of the 
STFT model. 
 
 Keywords- cochlear implants; physics of the ear; audio signal 
processing 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
As electronic technology is getting smaller, more accurate 
and low power, embedded processing solutions are nowadays 
available to encapsulate in biomedical applications. Among 
the disability remedy devices, cochlear implants are used to 
remedy partial or complete hearing loss. They allow direct 
stimulation of the auditory fibers with an electrodes array 
designed to reproduce the stimulus that would be generated 
by a healthy cochlea (Fig. 1). 
To do so, an external part of the hearing devices is located 
within the outer ear and contains a microphone that captures 
the acoustic waves and transforms them into an electrical 
signal. Then, this signal is up-converted from baseband 
(audio signal from 20Hz to 20kHz) to the transmit frequency 
defined by the chosen ISM standard (13,56MHz, 433MHz, 
866MHz or 2.45GHz). The corresponding receiver is located 
within the patient’s head, close to the skull. It is composed of 
a demodulator, a data processing unit and a set of electrodes 
driven by electrical signals that will contract the cochlea and 
stimulate the auditory nerve [1][2]. 
However, the reconstructed signal is far from being the 
same as the original sound due to the fact that the number of 
electrodes is limited (around 20 depending on the type of 
implants) and the total contact area between the cochlea and 
the electrodes is small compared to the total cochlea length, 
resulting in signal distortion. As stated in [3] patient speech 
recognition is mainly influenced by the audio signal (80% of 
speech recognition is achieved using only auditory 
indications, 40% using only lip reading and 90% using both). 
As a consequence, signal integrity has to be preserved 
through cochlear implant signal processing, to allow optimal 
patients hearing sensation. 
To improve the signal reconstruction with a limited 
number of electrodes, two models are compared: the first one 
using wave propagation theory within the cochlea and the 
other one using an ad hoc Fourier Transform (FT) to find the 
electrical stimulus of each electrode. This allows having a 
simple and yet accurate evaluation of the auditory nerve 
stimulation generated by a sound cochlea and comparing it 
with FT based electrodes stimulation. 
 
 
Figure 1: Ear anatomy and cochlear implant  [4] 
 
 
The second section gives an overview of the physics of 
the cochlea and how a cochlear implant can remedy a cochlea 
malfunction. In the third section, the theory of wave 
propagation is detailed in order to show how a sound cochlea 
model can be implemented. The fourth section aims to 
describe which frequencies are stimulated by cochlear 
implants. Finally, the last section gives a comparison between 
the signals obtained with a cochlear implant using the 
different electrode stimulations. 
 
U. Cerasani, W. Tatinian 
University Nice Sophia Antipolis 
LEAT UMR CNRS-UNS 6071 
Valbonne, France 
Email : umberto.cerasani@unice.fr ; william.tatinian@unice.fr  
  
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

II. 
COCHLEA PHYSICS 
When an acoustic wave traveling inside the outer ear 
channel strikes the eardrum, the ossicles located inside the 
middle ear amplify the sound intensity. This is achieved by 
producing a lever effect. The last ossicle (stirrup) hits the oval 
window of the cochlea. The fluid (perilymph) inside the scala 
vestibuli of the cochlea provides support for mechanical 
waves propagation. The amplification provided by the 
ossicles aims to correct the loss of energy associated with the 
impedance change at the air to liquid interface [5] (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2.a) ear schematic with inclusion of the electrodes array inside the 
cochlea. Figure 2.b) ear schematic and the wave propagation leading to a 
basilar membrane height change (h(x,t)) 
 
More precisely the cochlea works by converting a wave 
propagating inside the perilymph into nerve a stimulation 
using the complex organ of Corti structure. Inside the 
cochlea, the Outer Hair Cells (OHC) are stimulated by a soft 
membrane (Basilar Membrane: BM) vibrations and release 
chemical messengers which excite nerve cells.  
According to biophysical theories [6],[7] when a 
mechanical wave propagates inside the cochlea, the BM 
distorts to absorb the wave energy. In consequence, the height 
(denoted as h(x,t) in the following parts) of the BM 
excitement mainly depends on the sound intensity as well as 
the position along the x axis, which is the distance from base 
of the cochlea. The width, denoted as W(x), of the basilar 
membrane excitement around the resonance greatly depends 
on x as shown in the Section III. As the number of excited 
OHC depends on W(x) the number of auditory fibers excited 
is hence associated with the x variable.  
If one or many functions described above are not working 
properly, the patient may suffer from hearing loss or 
deafness. In this case, a cochlear implant may substitute to 
the natural sound processing to provide the auditory nerve 
stimulation via an electrodes array sunk inside the scala 
tympani (Figs. 1 and 2). 
The electrodes array (which is the connective link 
between the implant and the cochlea) is composed of a 
limited number of electrodes stimulated by an electric 
current. The electric current at proximity of the auditory 
fibers 
permits 
theirs 
direct 
stimulations 
even 
with 
nonfunctional OHC. 
We chose the device CI422 with Slim Half-Band Straight 
Electrode manufactured by Cochlear® [8], which is 
composed of 22 electrodes to implement our models. Then 
we compare the results with a FT approach, applied to only 
the frequencies stimulated by the electrodes, to select the 
electrodes. 
 
III. 
SOUND WAVE PROPAGATION AND BASILAR MEMBRANE 
DISPLACEMENT. 
The wave propagation theory is quickly reviewed in this 
section for a better understanding of the biophysics of hearing 
and for determining the characteristics of the basilar 
membrane resonance in terms of amplitude and width. This 
theory and the computations are extracted from [9] and [10], 
the main results are recalled here for the reader’s 
convenience. 
A sound wave φ1 propagating along the x axis is 
characterized by: 
,  	  
      
 
 (1) 
Where A1 is the sound amplitude, k1 is the wave number and 
ω is the pulsation. 
At the oval window interface, the mechanical wave is 
converted into a wave propagating in a viscous fluid, 
resulting in impedance mismatch. Therefore, the transmitted 
power from the mechanical wave into the liquid wave is 
damped by 29dB. 
As demonstrated by various authors, the main function of 
the ossicles in the middle ear is to reduce the power loss due 
to the impedance mismatch therefore the wave power at the 
oval window interface is equal to the power of the air wave 
minus 3dB  [11][12]. 
The wave propagating inside the scala vestibuli (φ3) is 
expressed as: 
3,  	 

2  exp       !
" exp       !
" exp       !
" exp        !#          
                                                                                     (2)  
Where A3 is the amplitude of the wave,  	 $ "  is the 
wave number and z the complex variable: z = x +iy. 
Mathematical equations developed in [9] lead to the 
following relation between membrane height displacement 
and auditory wave: 
%&, 
%
	  %, ', 
%'
                                             3 
Solving this equation permits to obtain the basilar 
membrane height displacement h(x,t) (spatial and transient 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

shape of the basilar membrane displacement is given in 
Figure 3) 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Basilar membrane displacement (µm) with respect of the distance 
from the cochlea base (x in µm) and time (ms) for a 600Hz input acoustic 
wave 
 
One can observe that the BM displacement is a function 
of the distance from the cochlea base and the amplitude of the 
auditory wave. The auditory nerve stimulation is proportional 
to the BM displacement and this phenomenon has to be 
recreated artificially with electrodes stimulation. 
 
IV. 
ELECTRODES ARRAY STIMULATION BASED ON THE 
COCHLEA PHYSICS 
The width of the BM displacement greatly depends the 
position x as shown in Fig. 4.a, when the BM is excited by a 
600Hz sound wave and by a 300Hz sound wave which make 
it to resonate at different places and with different widths. 
The detection of a BM displacement permits to obtain the 
width of this excitement: 
( 	 ) &, *      
+,
 
  -& ./  	 0 | 234&,  5 &64&78*9  4 
The basilar membrane movement compresses the organ of 
Corti resulting in a voltage variation in the corresponding 
auditory fiber. If this voltage variation is greater than a 
threshold voltage around 30mV for the human auditory nerve 
[13], the nerve fiber is excited. We implemented the 
mechanical model of the organ of Corti found in [14] (we 
simplified it by neglecting the Tectorial Membrane influence 
over the Reticular Lamina) and after converting the voltage 
threshold into the corresponding membrane height, we 
obtained the basilar height threshold value around 20µm. 
Extraction of the width W for acoustic waves of different 
frequencies varying from 60Hz to 20KHz (hence resulting in 
different place of excitation of the BM) is shown in Fig. 4.b. 
 
 
Figure 4.a: BM excitation. Figure 4.b: Width of the BM excitement. 
 
We use CI422 device characteristics with an insertion 
depth of 20-25mm, a mean diameter of the electrodes around 
0.35mm and a spacing between the electrodes around 
0.45mm. As explained in [8], the number of nerve fibers 
stimulated by an electrode is a function of the power 
magnitude as well as the proximity of the electrodes with the 
BM. In fact, the electrodes array is sunk inside the scala 
vestibuli and due to spatial inhomogeneity of the cochlea, the 
distance between the electrodes and the BM may be 
fluctuating. For simplification purposes we supposed that the 
electrodes array is very close to the BM resulting in a 
rectangular window-like stimulation of the nerve fibers by the 
electrodes (Himplants.) displayed in Fig. 5.a. The selection and 
the power sent to the electrodes depends on the function 
h(x,t) as depicted in Figs. 5.b. and 5.c 
The relation between the distance from the oval windows 
where the BM displacement is maximaland the frequency of 
the acoustic wave is given by the Greenwood function [15] 
and will be used thereafter in this paper to switch from the 
distance x where W(x) is maximal to the frequency of the 
input wave. 
. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
Figure 5.a: The auditory nerve fibers position stimulated by the electrodes 
array. 
5.b: BM displacement for a 1250Hz sine wave. 
5.c: Resulting electrodes stimulated by the 1250 Hz sine wave based on the 
BM displacement theory 
 
As can be seen on the figure, not all the frequencies can be 
stimulated by the electrodes and the main limitation of this 
model is that the input frequency must match with the 
frequencies coverage by the implant, which is rarely the case 
for high frequencies. In consequence, an alternative model 
has been developed 
V. 
COMPARAISON WITH THE FT BASED AUDITORY NERVES 
STIMULATION 
The function Himplants presented in Section IV selects the 
frequencies stimulated by the electrodes array. We chose to 
only compute the Fourier Transform on the frequencies 
which can be stimulated by the cochlear implants. Hence we 
obtain the following equations for the FT computation: 
 
. 	 ; <
=
<>?
 
@ABCDEFGHIJKF
L
 
And  
< 	 1
N
;
.
ODEFGHIJ=
ODEFGHIJ>?
 
@ABCDEFGHIJKF
L
          5 
 
Where Xk are normalized frequencies (the normalizing 
frequency is the sampling frequency chosen at 44KHz, 
similar to audio formats as .wav, .mp3, etc.) ,fcentral is the 
central frequency of each rectangular sub window of  
Himplants(f) as one electrode can only have one voltage value 
and N is the number of electrodes. As the sampled audio 
signal contains more than N points, the sampled audio signal 
was cut into many windows of N samples where the previous 
formula was applied (Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT) 
[16]). 
The corresponding results for a 1250 Hz sine wave 
stimulus is shown in Fig. 6.a.  
As the frequency of 1250Hz does not match with a frequency 
covered by one electrode, the signal power is distributed over 
the frequencies covered by the electrodes, causing distortion 
in the reconstructed signal.  
This test signal stimulates only two electrodes (in the 
actual physical model as presented figure 5.c) or all the 
electrodes (in the STFT model). Transient simulations were 
carried on and reconstructed signal from the STFT model was 
significantly less distorted than the other one (Fig. 6.c). 
However, when the frequency of the control signal was inside 
the frequency range corresponding to the electrodes position 
shown in Fig. 5.a, both models gave approaching results (not 
shown in this paper). In that case the most efficient model in 
terms of processing resources should be selected. 
    
 
 
 
Figure 6.a: Normalized voltage sent to the electrodes for a 1250Hz input 
auditory wave (using the SHFT model).  
6.b:Normalized voltage sent to the electrodes for a 1250Hz input auditory 
wave (using the BM displacement model).  
6.c: Comparison between transient simulations of the reference signal, the 
signal reconstructed using all the electrodes and the signal reconstructed 
using only 2 electrodes 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Testing this hypothesis may provide new insights of the 
hearing process. In fact if the combined models would give 
better results in person using cochlear implants than the 
algorithms implemented at present, this could mean that the 
brain could adapt to these new nerve stimulation. In that case 
our combined models, if utilized in very young patients 
(maximal brain plasticity and with extended learning 
process), could give better results than the algorithms used 
commercially. For instance the modification of the current 
algorithms to include our model is the first step, before its 
implementation on the cochlear implants microprocessor for 
real time data processing 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We proposed an electrodes stimulation optimization 
which resides on the complementary nature of physical and 
mathematical models, therefore, deserving further work and 
tests. The two models proposed in this paper (physical 
cochlea model and FT based model) have been compared 
theoretically and the corresponding results have been 
presented for a 1250Hz sine wave input signal. At present 
general knowledge in hearing processes is improving due to a 
large community of biomedical research, which should bring 
further development in the modeling of the cochlea and the 
mechanism of hearing. In this context the implementation of 
our model in upcoming cochlear implants may add hearing 
accuracy. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  J. K. Niparko, "Cochlear Implants: Principles and Practices (chapter 
7)", Philadelphia USA, 2009.  
[2]  G. Clark, "Cochlear Implants: Fundamentals and Applications (ch. 4-
8)", Springer-Verlag, 2003.  
[3]  J. Rouger et al., "Evidence that cochlear-implanted deaf patients are 
better multisensory integrators," 2007, vol. 104, no. 17, pp. 7295-7300, 
[4]  Shizao, "Cochlear Implant 1", July 2010, URL  
[5]  P. W. Alberti, «The anatomy and physiology of the ear and hearing». 
[6]  E.S. Olson, H.  Duifhuis, C. R. Steele, "Von Bekesy and cochlear 
mechanics", Hearing Research,  November 2012, Vol. 293, Issues 1–2, 
, pp. 31–43 
[7]  J. Ashmore et al., "The remarkable cochlear amplifier", Hearing 
Research, May 2010, Vol 266, pp.1-17 
 
[8]  Cochlear® ,"Delivering choice, cochlear’s electrodes portofolio-as 
unique as our customers", 2012, URL  
[9]  R. F. Lyon and C.A. Mead, "Cochlear hydrodynamics demystified", 
Vols. 1 sur 2 Caltech-CS-TR-88-4.  
[10] J. Whittaker, "Physics of the ear, Comps II presentation",  December 
2006. 
[11] "Sound pressure gain produced by the human middle ear", 1995, Vols. 
1 on 2 no: 113 (4), pp. 349-355 
[12] J. P. Wilson, "Mechanics of middle and inner ear", 1987, Vols. 1 on 2 
no: 43(4), pp. 821-837 
[13] C. K. Glass et al., "KCNQ4, a Novel Potassium Channel Expressed in 
Sensory Outer Hair Cells, Is Mutated in Dominant Deafness", Cell , 
February 1999, Volume 96, n° 1 Issue 3, pp. 437–446 
[14] S. Stephen and J Elliott, "The cochlea as a smart structure", Smart 
materials & structures,  vol. 21, n° 16, 2012.  
[15] D. D. Greenwood, "A cochlea frequency position function for several 
species – 29 years late" 1991.  
[16] E. Jacobsen and R. Lyons, "The sliding DFT", March 2003.  
[17] Rouger et al., "Evidence that cochlear-implanted deaf patients are 
better multisensory integrators," 2007, vol. 104, no. 17, pp. 7295-7300, 
 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

