Personalized Mobile Services Using Weighted Instance Based Learner for User
Proﬁling
Ayse Cufoglu, Mahi Lohi
Department of Electronics and Computer Science
University of Westminster
London, UK
a.cufoglu@ieee.org,lohim@wmin.ac.uk
Colin Everiss
Department of Business Information Systems
University of Westminster
London, UK
C.G.Everiss@westminster.ac.uk
Abstract—Today, mobile device users receive a variety of
services and information delivered to their mobile devices.
Many of these are irrelevant, far from the user’s satisfaction
level and may likely be regarded as spam messages by the user.
This results in the users to look for the relevant services by
themselves, which would be time consuming and may cause
inconvenience. User proﬁling has created opportunities for
mobile service providers to provide a channel for user aware-
ness as well as to achieve high user satisfaction. Apart from
traditional collaborative and content-based methods, a number
of classiﬁcation and clustering algorithms have been used for
user proﬁling. Instance Based Learner is a comprehensive form
of the Nearest Neighbour algorithm and it is suitable for user
proﬁling as users with similar proﬁles are likely to share similar
personal interests and preferences. In our previous work we
proposed a weighted classiﬁcation method, namely Weighted
Instance Based Learner, and evaluate its performance on user
proﬁling. According to the simulation results Weighted Instance
Based Learner, performs better than Instance Based Learner,
on user proﬁling by reducing the error up to 28% on the
selected dataset. In this paper, we aim to demonstrate how
Weighted Instance Based Learner algorithm can be used for
the user proﬁling for the provisioning of personalized mobile
services. For this purpose a scenario has been proposed and
implemented as a Java Mobile Application on NetBeans IDE
7.1.
Keywords-User Proﬁling; Personalization; Machine Learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
Many works in the literature show that mobile recom-
mendations have become very popular due to the growing
diversity, availability and use of mobile information services
[1]. Personalization of the mobile services is therefore an
opportunity to help to improve the quality of service. Per-
sonalized mobile services aim to match users’ requirements
by considering when, where and how the users require the
service to be delivered. The success of these applications
relies on how well the service provider knows the user
requirements and how well this can be satisﬁed. The user
proﬁle is the representation of the user and holds information
about the user such as personal proﬁle data (demographic
proﬁle data), interest proﬁle data and preference proﬁle data.
These proﬁles are the outcome of the user proﬁling. In
user proﬁling applications the major challenge is to build
and handle user proﬁles. In the literature two fundamental
user proﬁling methods have been proposed for this purpose.
These are the collaborative and the content-based methods.
It is also possible to use a hybrid of the two methods.
The collaborative method has been built on the assumption
that similar users, with respect to the age, sex, and social
class, behave similarly, and therefore have similar proﬁles
[2]. The content-based method, on the other hand, has
been built on the concept of content similarity and assumes
that users behave similarly under the same circumstances
[2]. For example, the moreTourism, mobile recommenda-
tions for tourism [3], uses a hybrid method. The proposed
recommendation system here takes into account the tags,
provided by the users, to provide tourist information proﬁled
for users with similar likes depending on the user proﬁle
(user tag cloud), location in time and space, and the nearby
context. For example, nearby historical places and museums.
Similarly in [4], Fernandez et al., proposed a tourism rec-
ommender system that offers tourist packages (i.e., include
tourist attractions and activities) that best matches the user’s
social network proﬁles. Different from [3], the proposed
hybrid system provides recommendations based on both the
user’s viewing histories (Digital Television (DTV) viewing
histories received from the user’s set-top boxes via a 2.5/3G
communication network) and the preferences in the social
network (i.e., preferences of the user’s friends). Apart from
the traditional proﬁling methods, a number of classiﬁcation
and clustering algorithms found applications within the user
proﬁling process in personalization. This paper aims to
show how the Weighted Instance Based Learner (WIBL) [5]
classiﬁcation algorithm can be used for the user proﬁling to
provide personalized mobile services.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
provides information about the WIBL. Section III presents
the scenario for this paper, while Section IV outlines a
detailed overview of the system. Implementation of the
scenario, is given in Section V. Finally Section VI concludes
this paper.
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 1.
Flowchart of the user learning and user proﬁling.
II. WEIGHTED INSTANCE BASED LEARNER (WIBL)
Instance Based Learner (IBL) is a comprehensive form of
the Nearest Neighbour (NN) algorithm; which normalizes
its attributes’ ranges, processes instances incrementally and
has a simple policy for tolerating missing values [6]. In
contrast to IBL, the WIBL assigns weights to the attributes
and considers the weighted distance of the instances for
classiﬁcation. Here, relevant attributes are aimed to have
more inﬂuence on classiﬁcation than irrelevant attributes. In
WIBL the function that calculates the distance between test
instance (new user) Xi and the training instance (existing
user) Yj is;
dist(Xi, Yj) =
v
u
u
t
A
X
k=1
wk,l(Cm) g(xi(k), yj(k)) ,
(1)
where
wk,l(Cm) = P(Cm|fk(l)) .
(2)
Here, l is equal to the value of the xi(k). Therefore, the se-
lection of which weight is to be used for a particular attribute
value is based on k and xi(k). Note that g(xi(k), yj(k)) is
evaluated as it is in IBL [6]. In [5], presented simulation
results illustrated that WIBL performs better than IBL on
user proﬁling by reducing the error up to 28% on the selected
dataset. For the simulations the dataset used was provided
in [7], named ’Adult Data Set’. This dataset was created
by Barry Becker via extracting information from the 1994
census database. From this dataset demographic information
of 6000 instances (5000 training and 1000 test) have been
adopted and used to create a complete dataset of user proﬁles
for the simulations.
The WIBL enables the use of a user proﬁle dataset of a
single service with other services too. This is archived by
feature weighting. Although the content of the dataset stays
the same, the weighting values will be recalculated/updated
when the dataset is used for another service.
III. PROPOSED SCENARIO
In this scenario, we focus on a mobile advertising service.
Here, we introduce a personalized mobile advertising ser-
vice called Discounts, Promotions and Deals (DPD). DPD
advertising service provides discount, promotion and deal
advertisements to the user according to the user’s proﬁle.
Furthermore, for this scenario, DPD is concerned with the
food industry, and a restaurant service called MyRestaurants,
has been chosen. MyRestaurants can be used by the reg-
istered users only. The following user is assumed for this
scenario.
Ren is a 30 years old Londoner. She is working as a
property adviser in a company located in central London.
She has got both an iPhone and a BlackBerry Smartphone,
which have been provided by the company. She uses her
BlackBerry for work related duties while her other mobile
phone is a part of her personal life. Ren decided to subscribe
for the personalized mobile advertising service, MyRestau-
rants. Through her mobile device, each of the advertisements
are presented with the link where a user can follow for
more information. Ren prefers to receive the advertisements
everyday and prefers to check these out in the morning time.
Subsequently, on Monday morning, around 9am on her way
to work, Ren signs into the MyRestaurants service through
her iPhone. She receives the advertisements. She is pleased
with the one of a meal deal offer as the restaurant is very
close to her work place and she has previously thought about
trying out its food. Ren follows the provided link to book a
table through the restaurant’s mobile-web.
IV. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
The following three subsections explain the user learn-
ing, user proﬁling and restaurant recommendation for this
scenario. Figure 1 shows the ﬂowchart of the user learning
and proﬁling. User learning process starts whenever the user
signs into to the MyRestaurants. Here, the system monitors
user’s feedback towards the given recommendations until
user signs out from the system (i.e., session terminates). Fol-
lowing this, the new information from the learning process
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 3.
Example of user proﬁle information and restaurant proﬁle information.
User Learning
User Profiling with 
WIBL
User 
Profiles
DB
Context 
Manager
Context
DB
Device 
Manager
Device 
Profiles
DB
Service 
Personalization
Privacy 
Manager
Service 
Retrieval 
Service 
Provider
M
O
B
I
L
E
D
E
V
I
C
E
User profiling Centre
Personalization & 
Recommendation centre
Personalized Mobile Service Provisioning
User
 
Figure 2.
Architecture of personalized mobile service provisioning.
is used for the user proﬁling. In this process, a classiﬁcation
algorithm WIBL will update the user’s proﬁle information in
the user proﬁle dataset with using the information from user
learning process. Following subsections give more detailed
information on the aforementioned processes. Moreover, it
was considered that an investigation of the user privacy
issues, device management and context management is out
of the scope of this paper.
A. User Learning
For this scenario, we assume that the information given
by the user during the subscription is to be used for the
initialization of the user’s proﬁle. Note that this corresponds
to the directly/explicitly information gathering. The user’s
response (user feedback) to the provided services will then
be used to update the user’s proﬁle implicitly. Each user
is represented with three sets of user proﬁle information
that are interest proﬁle, demographic proﬁle and preference
proﬁle. It is worth pointing out that the location preference
of the user will be kept in the user proﬁle. Each user will
have an identiﬁcation (i.e., user-id and password) for the
purpose of authentication for the service. Here, the system
will automatically assign user a user-id and a password
when she subscribes for the service. An initial password
can be changed by the user following ﬁrst sign in. After sub-
 
Figure 4.
User enters her user-id and password to sing-in.
scription and registration, the system continuously monitors
user’s feedback and behaviour towards the provided services
to learn more about her (i.e., what services she likes, when
and where). For example, monitoring Ren shows that she
prefers to receive the advertisements every morning while
travelling to work.
B. User Proﬁling
For this scenario, the WIBL [5] is used for the user
proﬁling. Here, WIBL will assign different weights to the
user’s user proﬁle attributes to increase the impact of relevant
attributes in classiﬁcation so as to deﬁne the user’s service
preferences more precisely. Which user receives what adver-
tisements is decided by making use of the user’s proﬁle in-
formation and the class that the user belongs to. In this way,
the same advertisements can be sent to the users that share
the same class and these users receive the advertisements
that most of the users in the same class showed a liking for.
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
Figure 5.
User’s daily restaurant deals and detailed deal information.
User’s location preference and user’s current location are
two important parameters for providing the right location
based advertisements. For example, when it comes to the
location based advertisements, Ren prefers the ones that are
close to her work place so her location preference is ’work’.
However, she is a property adviser and she needs to travel
to different UK cities very often. Hence, when Ren is away,
she will receive location based advertisements based on her
user proﬁle information and current location rather than her
preferred location. The current location can be extracted
from the GPS (Global Positioning System) information of
the user’s mobile device.
C. Restaurant Recommendation
For personalized mobile services, various architectures
have been proposed [1][8][9][11]. Here, personalized restau-
rant recommendations are the outcome of the personalization
process. In this scenario, the personalization process uses
user proﬁle information to personalize (ﬁlter) the restaurants
to be recommended to the user. In Figure 2, detailed
information of this process is shown. From this ﬁgure it
can be seen that there are three inputs to the ’service
personalization’: user proﬁle, service to be personalized,
and current context information. Context information (i.e.,
location) and device capabilities are obtained from the
mobile device. These are considered to be important for
accurate user interface adaptation and personalization. Here,
a privacy manager uses user’s sign in information and user
proﬁle information to decide who can use the user proﬁle
information for what purpose, who the user is and if they
have the right to use the provided service. It is worth pointing
out that, like each user, each restaurant has to subscribe to
MyRestaurants to be recommended to the users. This means
that service provider acts like a bridge between users and
restaurants.
Figure 3 is an example of some of the demographic,
interest and preference information of a user in user proﬁle
with the following order: Age, Annual Income, Sex, Sport
Interest, Music Interest, Book Interest, Leisure, Marital
Status, Employment, Education and Profession. The WIBL
uses this given data to predict the user’s cuisine prefer-
ences. Here, user’s cuisine preference is represented with
its probabilistic distribution function, which enables the
user to receive recommendations from different types of
restaurants. These probabilities can change, based on the
users feedback to the given recommendations. In this study,
the user’s clicks on the given recommendation is considered
as a positive feedback. Here, the system counts each click
on recommended restaurants and utilizes this information
to update the user’s cuisine preferences. Therefore, user’s
current information and new information are incorporated
together to update the user proﬁle information.
As mentioned previously, the user’s location preference
information (home, work or elsewhere) is also kept in
the user proﬁle and used for the location based restaurant
recommendations. Gasson et al. [10] shows what kind of
personal information can be obtained by monitoring a user’s
mobile device while in [1] it has been shown how the
GPS data can be converted into text format. This method
makes it possible to compare restaurants’ location and user’s
location preference (or user’s current location in case of
elsewhere) to provide accurate recommendations. Similar
to the user proﬁle dataset, restaurant information is kept
in the restaurants dataset. Figure 3 shows an example for
the restaurant proﬁle information. In this separate dataset,
each restaurant is represented with the following attributes:
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Name, Cuisine Type, Price, Deal Description and Location.
Here, each of these are used to classify restaurants based on
their cuisine types using IBL [6].
V. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROPOSED SCENARIO
This section implements the proposed scenario and
shows the usage of a DPD-Restaurant application, named
MyRestaurants, from the user’s point of view. The scenario
is implemented as a Java Mobile Application (Java ME) on
NetBeans IDE 7.1. Note that for this scenario we assumed
that user Ren is already subscribed for the service. Following
her subscription, Ren started using the service. To check
her restaurant recommendations she needs to sign into the
system using her user-id and password (see Figure 4). Here,
prompt information is compared with the information in the
user’s proﬁle for authentication. Ren’s successful sign in
redirects her to the MyRestaurants main page. This main
page displays two options: ’My Account’ and ’My Deals’.
The ﬁrst option, ’My Account’, redirects her to a new page
where she can change her password, location preference
and user-name. The user-name is different from the user-
id and it is used for display purposes. In this scenario
the user prefers her user name to be ’Ren’. ’My Deals’,
on the other hand, redirects her to a new page. This new
page includes daily restaurant recommendations (see Figure
5). Each recommendation has a link, which provides more
information about the deal and the restaurant (also see Figure
5). Here, if she wants, she can follow another provided link
to make a booking.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, a real life scenario for personalized mobile
services is presented. Here, the aim was to illustrate how
WIBL classiﬁer can be used for user proﬁling in mobile
environments so as to provide personalized mobile services.
The IBL classiﬁer is a comprehensive form of the NN
algorithm. WIBL is a modiﬁed version of the IBL, where
weights were assigned to the attribute values and classiﬁca-
tion of the users are done based on the weighted distances.
In our previous work we showed that WIBL decreases the
error rate of IBL up to 28% and therefore increases the
classiﬁcation accuracy performance on user proﬁling.
The proposed scenario provided for here, focuses on
the mobile advertising service, namely MyRestaurants. This
scenario is implemented as a Java ME on NetBeans IDE 7.1.
Here, each user is represented with three sets of user proﬁle
information that are interest proﬁle, demographic proﬁle
and preference proﬁle. Similarly, restaurant information is
also kept in the restaurants dataset. Detailed information
on both datasets together with user learning, user proﬁling,
restaurant recommendation and the implementation of the
scenario have also been provided in this paper. Based on
the work carried out here, it can be conclude the WIBL
for user proﬁling can be used to provide more accurate
personalized mobile services. In our future work, we would
like to test our proposed scenario with real users. It will be
also interesting to compare the performance of WIBL with
different personalized mobile services.
REFERENCES
[1] K. F. Yeung and Y. Yang. A proactive personalized mo-
bile news recommendation system, IEEE Developments in E-
systems Engineering, pp.207-212, 2010.
[2] G. Araniti, P. D. Meo, A. Iera, and D. Ursino. Adaptive con-
trolling the QoS of multimedia wireless applications through
user proﬁling techniques, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communication, 21(10), pp.1546-1556, 2003.
[3] M. R. Lopez, A. B. B. Martinez, A. Peleteiro, F. A. M. Fonte,
and J. C. Burguillo. MoreTourism:mobile recommendations for
tourism, IEEE International Conference on Consumer Elec-
tronics, pp.347-348, 2011.
[4] Y. B. Fernandez, M. L. Nores, J. J. P. Arias, J. G. Duque,
and M.I.M. Vicente. TripFromTV+:Exploiting social networks
to arrange cut-price touristic packages, IEEE International
Conference on Costumer Electronics, pp.223-224, 2011.
[5] A. Cufoglu, M. Lohi, and C. Everiss. Weighted instance
based learner (WIBL) for user proﬁling, IEEE International
Symposium on Applied Machine Intelligence and Informatics,
pp.201-205, 2012.
[6] D. W. Aha, D. Kibler, and M. K. Albert. Instance-based
learning algorithms, Machine Learning journal, 1(6), pp.37-66,
1991.
[7] A. Asuncian and D.J. Newman (Accessed: 2 July 2012),
UCI Machine Learning Repository, Irvine, CA: University of
California, School of Information and Computer Science, 2007.
[8] S. Loeb and E. Panagos. Information ﬁltering and per-
sonalization: context, serendipity and group proﬁle effects,
Annual IEEE Consumer Communications and Networking
Conference-Emerging and Innovative Consumer Technologies
and Applications, pp.393-398, 2011.
[9] T. D. Pessemier, T. Deryckere, K. Vanhecke, and L. Martens.
Proposed architecture and algorithm for personalized adver-
tising on iDTV and mobile devices, IEEE Transactions on
Consumer Electronics, 54(2),pp.709-713, 2008.
[10] M. N. Gasson, E. Kosta, D. Royer, M. Meints, and K. War-
wick. Normality mining: privacy implications of behavioural
proﬁles drawn from GPS enabled mobile phones, IEEE Trans-
actions on Systems, Man, and cybernetics-Part C: Applications
and Reviews, 41(2), pp.251-261, 2011.
[11] B. Mrohs and S. Steglich. Architectures of future services and
applications for mobile user, IEEE Symposium on Applications
and the Internet Workshops, pp.128-131, 2005.
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

