Difference in Attitudes Toward Suggestions Given by an Agent Using Impasse
Estimation
Yoshimasa Ohmoto
Department of Intelligence Science
and Technology
Graduate School of Informatics
Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan
Email: ohmoto@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Hanako Sonobe
Department of Intelligence Science
and Technology
Graduate School of Informatics
Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan
Email: sonobe@ii.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Toyoaki Nishida
Department of Intelligence Science
and Technology
Graduate School of Informatics
Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan
Email: nishida@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Abstract—When a human and a conversational agent cooperate
to perform a task, the agent may need to provide advice to the
human. In that case, the agent has to induce attitudes that ensure
the human accepts the advice of the agent in advance or through
the task. This study aimed to investigate whether the acceptance
of advice provided by an agent could be encouraged by controlling
the content and timing of advice presentation according to the
state of the participant. We focused on metacognitive suggestions
during insight problem solving as an example of advice that
was effective even if an agent performs it. We conducted an
experiment to investigate whether participants would be likely to
accept the suggestion based on the estimation of the inner state
of them even when the agent provided the suggestion. Based on
results from the analysis of operation history log, the acceptance
rate of suggestions in the participants interacting with the state-
considering-suggestion agent was signiﬁcantly higher than that in
the participants interacting with ﬁxed-interval-suggestion agent,
but the task performance was not high enough.
Keywords–Human-agent interaction; Metacognitive suggestion;
Insight problem solving
I.
INTRODUCTION
When people work collaboratively with others, they often
communicate their task status to each other and point out
problems. This kind of information sharing and advice can
be misunderstood or ignored unless people consider the state
of the person (e.g., thinking, confusing, busy and so on)
with whom they are communicating. For example, repeated
advice about what is not a problem leads to disregard of the
advice itself. These problems become more apparent when
the collaborating partner is an artiﬁcial agent. On the other
hand, the collaboration can facilitate problem-solving [1] [2],
so we want to realize the agent which collaboratively supports
problem-solving.
In order to avoid such a matter, the agent needs to
understand the human state and give advice; however, even a
human often fails to estimate the inner state of the other person.
When you have a trusting relationship with the communication
partner, it is often not a fatal problem. However, in the human-
agent interaction, the human often needs to infer the agent’s
behavior model from the case of a few interactions. Therefore,
it is expected that a small number of failures in interaction will
cause errors in the behavioral model of the agent constructed
by humans. For example, one approach to getting people
to accept an agent’s advice is to show that the agent has
expertise by providing the appropriate advice [3]. The human
often accepts the advice of the agent when the agent provides
appropriate advices depending on the task situation. However,
if it fails early in the interaction due to misunderstandings, it
may stop accepting further advice. In addition, it is often hard
to determine whether or not the advice is appropriate when it
is not the advice that leads to the correct answer for the task
being performed. In such instances, effective advice cannot be
given without considering the situation and intention of the
person performing the task.
Metacognitive suggestions are one of the useful suggestions
for problem solving, although it does not lead to the direct
outcome of the task being performed. Several previous studies
had attempted to improve task performance by pre-training to
induce meta-cognition. Patrick et al. [4] reported the impact of
general meta-cognitive training on performance. Metacognitive
suggestions may convey knowledge of how participants solve
problems and can facilitate changes in their way of thinking
during insight problem solving (e.g., [5]). In this study, we
consider metacognitive suggestions during insight problem
solving that is effective even if an agent performs it.
This study aimed to investigate whether the acceptance
of metacognitive suggestions provided by an agent could be
encouraged by controlling the content and timing of suggestion
presentation according to the state of the participant. Basically,
the timing of an agent’s advice with participants occurs in a
silence section of the conversation in many previous works
(e.g., [6], [7]). To make the agent a more powerful assistant,
content recognition was tried to be incorporate in many cases,
but it is difﬁcult. In this study, to provide acceptable agent’s
advice, we did not focus on the content of the solving prob-
lems, but on the thinking state and feeling of difﬁculty toward
the solving problems. The advantage of this research approach
is that it is possible to provide advice at an appropriate time
based on the difﬁculty of the task that the person feels, without
recognizing the content of the task or what the person is doing.
If the effectiveness of an agent’s advice depends on whether
the agent can give advice based on the state of the person,
it is expected that an inﬂuential suggestion can be given to
a person without building a certain trust relationship with the
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

agent through long-term interaction.
This paper adds details of the developed system, data of par-
ticipants and the analyses and discussions that were presented
as a Late Breaking paper at 6th international conference on
Human-Agent Interaction [8].
The present paper is organized as follows. Section II
contains an explanation of a system developed to give metacog-
nitive suggestions based on the estimated state of the person
performing the insight problem-solving task. Section III de-
scribes the results of an experiment to evaluate the system
implemented on the agent. In Section IV, the achievements
of this research and some future works are described. The
conclusions are presented in Section V.
II.
SUGGESTION SYSTEM USING IMPASSE ESTIMATION
Insight problem solving contains four steps: impasse, in-
cubation, illumination, and validation [9]. We focus on the
impasse step in which people repeatedly searches inappropriate
problem space that does not include a solution. In the impasse
step, advice from other perspectives is useful for constraint
relaxation and a switch of problem space. Metacognitive
suggestion is one method of providing acceptable advice for
the constraint relaxation [1], [10], [11]. The metacognitive
suggestion is conﬁrmed to be effective even if it is presented
at random timing. This is because the insight problem-solving
task is prone to fall into the impasse state, and therefore there
is a certain probability of being in the impasse state when
presented at random.
In order to conﬁrm the appropriate timing of advice in
an insight problem-solving task, we conducted a preliminary
experiment in which an experimenter determined the content
and timing of the agent’s metacognitive suggestions using
the Wizard of Oz (WoZ) and presented them to the person
performing the task. The task in the preliminary experiment
was an ”escape room game” in which players were often at a
stalemate because they were required to think from a different
perspective to win this game. In this game task, the participant
must escape from a virtual room using various game objects.
After this preliminary experiment, some participants reported
that they were ”given proper advice”, so we thought that the
advice of the agent by WoZ operation was accepted. When
we observed the behavior of the participants and advice of the
experimenter in the preliminary experiment, the experimenter
provided suggestions when the participant seemed to be at a
stalemate. We regarded this state of stalemate as an impasse.
We consider that the state of stalemate is one of the appropriate
clues to provide metacognitive suggestions. In accordance with
this concept, we developed a system to provide advice by
estimating whether the interaction partner is in an impasse
state while working on an insight problem-solving task.
A. Estimation of strategies to perform the insight problem
solving task
In order to ﬁnd typical strategies to perform the insight
problem-solving task, we observed the behavior of the par-
ticipants in the preliminary experiment. As a result, it was
expected that the participants switched two strategies: depth-
ﬁrst search and breadth-ﬁrst search. In the state of depth-ﬁrst
search, participants focused on a particular object and looked
for ways to use it successfully. In the state of breadth-ﬁrst
search, participants saw the overall situation of the task to
Impasse?
Yes / No
Task
Suggestion management
State estimation
SCR
Operation history
Breadth-first or 
Depth-first
Progressive or Impasse
Breadth-first
Depth-first
Progressive
waiting
waiting
Impasse
Convergent
Divergent
BDI-architecture
Figure 1. Outline of the agent design.
search whether there were any missing or untried methods.
Since it is conceivable that a stalemate may occur while
executing each strategy, human inner states in insight problem
solving can be classiﬁed into 4 states (table in Figure 1). In
the advice by the experimenter, there were many suggestions
that urged the participant to look for other ways to solve the
task in the depth-ﬁrst search, and there were many suggestions
that encouraged the participant to look back on his/her own
behavior and to focus on the speciﬁc object in the breadth-
ﬁrst search.
It is difﬁcult to infer the inner state of thinking from the
participant’s behavior, speciﬁcally the inner state of thinking
whether the participant is at a stalemate. To estimate this inner
state, we analyzed physiological indices obtained during the
preliminary experiment. In our previous work, we reported
to estimate the feeling of difﬁculty of the task by using
physiological indices [12]. As a result, it was frequently
observed that Skin Conductance Response (SCR) was often
activated, when the unfamiliar object was discovered during
the task and when the situation in the task was changed. In
addition, even when the situation did not change, the SCR was
often responsive when with repeated trial and error such as
looking for hints or checking previous information. Therefore,
we regard the state as a non-impasse state (the participant is
not at a stalemate) when the responses of SCR are frequently
observed, and we regard the state to have shifted to the impasse
state (the participant is at a stalemate) when the response of
SCR is not observed for a certain time.
We also measured the electrocardiogram. However, we
have not been able to obtain a useful feature for estimat-
ing task impasse from the electrocardiogram. Therefore, no
electrocardiogram data was input to the system. We used
electrocardiographic data to assess participant’s psychological
status to tasks.
B. The outline of the suggestion system using impasse estima-
tion
Figure 1 shows an outline of the agent design. This agent
basically decides own behavior based on the Belief-Desire-
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Intention (BDI) architecture. This agent estimates two kinds of
user states: a thinking mode (depth-ﬁrst or breadth-ﬁrst) and a
state of the stalemate (impasse or progressive). The user’s over-
all states are categorized into one of four combinations: depth-
ﬁrst/progressive, breadth-ﬁrst/progressive, depth-ﬁrst/impasse,
and breadth-ﬁrst/impasse. The agent provides a metacognitive
suggestion when the estimated user’s state includes ”impasse.”
A convergent suggestion is provided in the state of breadth-
ﬁrst/impasse. A divergent suggestion is provided in the state
of depth-ﬁrst/impasse.
The user’s physiological index and behavior are measured to
estimate the user’s state. The state of the stalemate is estimated
using the measured SCR. The agent estimates the user’s state
as impasse when the SCR does not respond during a deﬁned
time window. The time window and the threshold to estimate
the state of the stalemate are decided based on the measured
data for two minutes from the start of the task. To estimate the
thinking mode, the operation history log of the user is used.
When the user repeatedly operates a game object (such as, a
key, a scissors, a piece of paper, a door, a dial plate, a drawer
of a desk, a closet, a button and a safe) in high frequency, the
agent estimates the thinking mode to be depth-ﬁrst search.
Ten convergent and ten divergent suggestions were pre-
pared. The suggestions were not dependent on a particular
task because they were metacognitive suggestions. One of the
suggestions is selected randomly when the agent provides an
advice. In general situations, it is necessary to give advice
considering the context of the task though it is a metacognitive
suggestion. In this study, we focused on the effect of con-
trolling the timing of the metacognitive suggestions provided
based on the state of the user. Therefore, the agent advised only
considering whether the context was divergent or convergent
in our experiment.
III.
EXPERIMENT
When we try to intervene in the behavior or decision-
making of the other person by providing advice, especially
during interaction with a less socially related interaction part-
ner, it is important to provide appropriate advice based on
the estimation of the partner’s inner state. We considered the
metacognitive suggestion in the insight problem-solving task
as an example of the useful advice that the agent can provide,
and proposed the suggestion system based on the impasse state
estimation of the partner in order to accept the suggestion
by the agent. We used two types of suggestion agents in this
experiment. One was a state-considering agent that estimated
the user’s state before providing a metacognitive suggestion
(sc-group). Another was a ﬁxed-interval agent that provided a
metacognitive suggestion in three-minute intervals (ﬁ-group).
A. Task
Participants played an ”escape from the room” game. In
this game, players were often at a stalemate because they are
required to think from a different angle to escape from a virtual
room using various game objects. The participants are asked
to escape from three rooms. In order to gradually increase the
difﬁculty, the order of the rooms that the participant escaped
from was ﬁxed. There was a 15 minute time limit to escape
from each room. The suggestion agent explained the procedure
for escaping from the room when the participant exceeded this
time limit. After escaping from a room, the participant was
allowed to rest.
Task control PC
Operation data
Measured data
Display the game state
Measuring PC
Participant
Game object area
Suggestion area
Operation result 
area
Send Suggestion
Figure 2. The experimental setting.
B. Exprimental setting
Figure 2 shows the experimental setting. Each participant
sat in front of a 27-inch monitor that displayed the game.
A video camera was placed behind the participant to record
his/her behavior and the game playing screen. The participant’s
voice was recorded using microphones. Polymate was used to
measure SCR and the electrocardiogram (heart rate variability).
SCR was measured with electrodes attached to the ﬁrst and
third ﬁngers of the participant’s non-dominant hand. The
electrocardiogram was measured by connecting electrodes with
paste to the participant’s left side, the center of the chest, and
both ears for ground and reference. The experimenter sat out of
view of the participant and observed the participant’s behavior.
The suggestions by the agent were provided using audio and
text. The participants performed the task using a mouse.
C. Procedure
First, each participant was brieﬂy instructed on the ex-
perimental procedure. Electrodes for measuring SCR and the
LF/HF electrocardiogram values were then attached to the
participant’s left hand and chest. After the installation, each
participant played a practice game to conﬁrm the operating
method and basic ﬂow of the game. The experimenter in-
structed the participant on the basic operation method. In
addition, the participant was given an overview of the agent
providing metacognitive suggestions. After receiving questions
from the participant and conﬁrming his/her understanding, the
participant started the ”escape from the room” experiment.
After the experiment, the participant answered NASA-TLX to
measure the mental workload.
Forty-two undergraduate students, 27 males and 15 females,
participated in the experiment. The average age was 20.8 years
with a standard deviation of 1.9 years. We eliminated 13
participants because they did not need suggestions to escape
from one of the rooms. Therefore, we used data of 29 par-
ticipants (sc-group: 14 participants, ﬁ-group: 15 participants).
We conducted an additional experiment for ﬁve undergraduate
students (three males and two females) from [8], but one male
person did not come and three (two males and one female)
were eliminated. Added one female participant was ﬁ-group.
D. Results
1) The frequency of metacognitive suggestions : We an-
alyzed whether there was a difference in the frequency of
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
first room
second room
third room
sc-group
fi-group
Frequency of suggestion (/ min.)
*
Figure 3. The frequency of divergent metacognitive suggestions per minute.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
first room
second room
third room
sc-group
fi-group
Frequency of suggestion (/ min.)
*
Figure 4. The frequency of convergent metacognitive suggestions per minute.
metacognitive suggestions provided in the sc-group compared
with the ﬁ-group. There were two types of the metacognitive
suggestions (divergent and convergent), so we performed a 2
(group: state-considering or ﬁxed-interval) x 3 (room: ﬁrst,
second or third) analysis of variance (ANOVA) separately.
Since each participant spent different amounts of time in each
room, we compared the number of suggestions per minute.
Logit transformed values were used in ANOVA to test for
differences. The results are shown in Figure 3, Figure 4, Table
I and Table III.
In the divergent suggestions, there were signiﬁcant dif-
ferences between groups (sc-group < ﬁ-group) and between
rooms (ﬁrst and second > third). The interaction was also
signiﬁcant. When tested for simple main effects, there were
signiﬁcant differences between groups in second room and
third room (sc-group < ﬁ-group). There was also a signif-
icant difference between the rooms in the sc-group (ﬁrst >
second and third). This result indicates that, in the sc-group, a
relatively large amount of divergent suggestions was provided
in the ﬁrst room where the task execution method is unclear
for the participants, and that trial and error is encouraged. In
addition, in second room and third room where people seem
to be used to the task, suggestions were reduced.
In the convergence suggestions, there was no signiﬁcant
difference between groups, but there were signiﬁcant differ-
ences between rooms (ﬁrst and second < third). The interac-
tion was also signiﬁcant. A simple main effect test showed a
signiﬁcant difference between groups in ﬁrst room (sc-group
< ﬁ-group). It was also found that there were signiﬁcant
differences between the rooms in the sc-group (ﬁrst < second
and third). This result shows that the convergent suggestions in
the sc-group was reduced in ﬁrst room which was a relatively
TABLE I. RESULT OF THE ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE ON THE FREQUENCY
OF DIVERGENT METACOGNITIVE SUGGESTIONS.
source
SS
df
MS
F
p
A: group
6.50
1
6.50
14.83
<0.001 ****
error[S(A)]
11.84
27
0.44
B: room
1.81
2
0.90
5.13
0.0091 **
AB
1.17
2
0.58
3.32
0.044 *
error[BS(A)]
9.49
54
0.18
TABLE II. THE SIMPLE MAIN EFFECT OF THE ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE ON
THE FREQUENCY OF DIVERGENT METACOGNITIVE SUGGESTIONS.
effect
SS
df
MS
F
p
A(ﬁrst)
0.38
1
0.38
1.43
0.235
A(second)
4.32
1
4.32
16.39
<0.001 ****
A(third)
2.98
1
2.98
11.30
0.0012 ***
error
81
0.26
B(state-considering)
1.90
2
0.95
5.42
0.0072 **
B(ﬁxed-interval)
1.07
2
0.53
0.04
0.056 +
error
54
0.18
simple.
Overall, the control of metacognitive suggestions was
reasonable to some extent.
2) Operation history log: After the metacognitive sugges-
tion was provided, we analyzed from participants’ operation
history log to determine whether they were acting in line with
the suggestion. From the operation history log, we checked
whether the transition to another state occurred within 10
second after the suggestion was given. In divergent sugges-
tions, if a state transition was made, it was considered that the
suggestion was accepted. In convergent suggestions, if no state
transition was made, the suggestion was accepted. The result
is shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6. The chi-squared test was
applied to determine whether there was a difference between
the groups in the acceptance rate of divergent suggestions and
the acceptance rate of convergent suggestions.
We compared the acceptance rate of all suggestions be-
tween groups. As a result, the acceptance rate of all suggestions
in the sc-group was signiﬁcantly higher than that in the ﬁ-
group (p = 0.0013). We compared the acceptance rates of
divergent suggestions and convergent suggestions between
groups. Although there was no signiﬁcant difference in diver-
gent suggestions (p = 0.01), the acceptance rate of convergent
suggestions in the sc-group was signiﬁcantly higher than that
in the ﬁ-group (p = 0.0061). We compared the acceptance
rates of divergent suggestions and convergent suggestions in
each group between rooms. In third room, the acceptance rates
of both divergent suggestions and convergent suggestions in
the sc-group were signiﬁcantly higher than those in the ﬁ-
group (divergent: ﬁrst room p = 0.72, second room p = 0.16,
third room p = 0.005, convergent: ﬁrst room p = 0.44, second
room p = 0.36, third room p = 0.014). In addition, in the sc-
group, the acceptance rates in third room were higher than
those in ﬁrst room, and the acceptance rates seems to be
gradually increasing. It is not clear whether this is because the
difﬁculty of the room is increasing or because the reliability
of the agent’s suggestions is increasing. In any case, the
results showed that the participants were likely to accept the
metacognitive suggestions provided by the agent when the
suggestions were given based on the inner state estimation
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

TABLE III. RESULT OF THE ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE ON THE FREQUENCY
OF CONVERGENT METACOGNITIVE SUGGESTIONS.
source
SS
df
MS
F
p
A: group
0.77
1
0.77
2.03
0.165
error[S(A)]
10.21
27
0.38
B: room
1.15
2
0.57
4.10
0.022 *
AB
3.17
2
1.58
11.30
<0.001 ****
error[BS(A)]
7.57
54
0.14
TABLE IV. THE SIMPLE MAIN EFFECT OF THE ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE
ON THE FREQUENCY OF CONVERGENT METACOGNITIVE SUGGESTIONS.
effect
SS
df
MS
F
p
A(ﬁrst)
3.83
1
3.83
17.42
<0.001 ****
A(second)
0.015
1
0.015
0.067
0.796
A(third)
0.099
1
0.099
0.45
0.50
error
81
0.26
B(state-considering)
3.19
2
1.60
11.39
<0.001 ****
B(ﬁxed-interval)
1.12
2
0.56
4.01
0.024 *
error
54
0.14
of the participant.
3) LF/HF: LF/HF was calculated from heart rate variability
data. LF/HF can be used as an index of tension and stress state
of participants. The feeling of tension after the suggestions
shows that it is inﬂuenced by something such as thinking after
listening to the suggestions or feeling impatient. The rate of
suggestions with LF/HF responses during the 30 s after the
suggestion was calculated. Figure 7 shows the results. When
the chi-squared test was applied to each room and to the whole
data, the rate in the sc-group showed signiﬁcantly higher than
that in the ﬁ-group in third room and the total in the task
(third room: p=0.046, total: p=0.0060). There were marginal
signiﬁcant differences in ﬁrst room and second room (ﬁrst
room: p=0.054, second room: p=0.050). This suggests that the
metacognitive suggestions in the sc-group had a stronger effect
on the participants than those in the ﬁ-group.
4) Mental workload: We measured mental workload using
NASA-TLX. This is major method to measure the mental
workload. Figure 8 shows the results. With the exception of
”performance,” the sc-group reported an overall lower mental
workload than the ﬁ-group. We performed Welch’s t-test on the
total score between the two groups and there is no signiﬁcant
difference (p=0.17). We also performed Welch’s t-test on each
individual score between the sc-group and the ﬁ-group. There
was a signiﬁcant difference regarding the data of ”temporal
demand” (sc-group < ﬁ-group, p=0.038). The results suggest
that advice based on human internal state estimation reduces
some of the human mental workload. At the same time, it
shows that the overall effect is not signiﬁcant.
5) Task performance: We calculated success rates of es-
caping from the rooms. Figure 9 shows the results. In the
third room, the participants in the sc-group could not escape
from the room. The total success rate in the sc-group was
lower than that in the ﬁ-group. This was an unexpected result.
Although the participants started to accept the suggestions by
the agent, it is probable that the participants were confused
and distanced themselves from solving the task because they
were given suggestions that did not contribute to solving the
task.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
first room
second room
third room
sc-group
fi-group
Acceptance rate
*
Figure 5. Acceptance rates of
divergent metacognitive
suggestions.
Acceptance rate
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
first room
second room
third room
sc-group
fi-group
*
Figure 6. Acceptance rates of
convergent metacognitive
suggestions.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
first room
second room
third room
sc-group
fi-group
Response rate
*
Figure 7. Rates of suggestions with LF/HF responses during the 30 s after
the suggestion.
IV.
DISCUSSION
We hypothesized that participants would be likely to accept
the advice based on the estimation of the inner state of the
human even when the agent provided advice. In this research,
we focused on metacognitive suggestion in an insight problem-
solving task, which is one of the examples of useful advice that
the agent can provide. We investigated the effects of metacog-
nitive suggestion that controlled the timing of presentation
based on human inner state. We implemented an agent that
estimated two kinds of user states: a thinking mode (depth-ﬁrst
or breadth-ﬁrst) and a state of the stalemate (impasse or pro-
gressive). The agent categorized the participant’s overall state
as one of four combinations: depth-ﬁrst/progressive, breadth-
ﬁrst/progressive, depth-ﬁrst/impasse, and breadth-ﬁrst/impasse.
The agent provided a metacognitive suggestion with the goal
of getting humans out of the impasse state.
We conducted an experiment using two suggestion agents.
One was a state-considering agent that estimated the user’s
state before providing a metacognitive suggestion. Another was
a ﬁxed-interval agent that provided a metacognitive suggestion
in three-minute intervals. Based on results from the analysis
of operation history log, the acceptance rate of suggestions in
the sc-group was signiﬁcantly higher than that in the ﬁ-group.
In other words, the attitude to the metacognitive suggestions
given by the agent was different between the participants in
ﬁ-group and those in the sc-group. The participants in the sc-
group believed that the content of the suggestions given by the
agent should be considered. On the other hand, participants
in the ﬁ-group typically thought that the agent’s suggestions
presented general knowledge, and might accept useful ones
regardless of the task status. This is also suggested from
the fact that participants’ physiological index (LF/HF) were
often responsive to the agent’s metacognitive suggestions in
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Mental
demand
Physical
demand
Temporal
demand
Performance
Effort
Frustration
sc-group
fi-group
*
Score
Figure 8. Results of mental workload measurements.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
first room
second room
third room
sc-group
fi-group
*
Success rate
Figure 9. Results of success rates of escaping from the rooms.
the sc-group. The results of the mental workload suggest
that participants in the ﬁ-group might interpret the agent’s
suggestions as a kind of facilitation of the task execution rather
than human assistance.
There was an unexpected result. In the third room, the
participants in the sc-group could not escape from the room.
The total success rate in the sc-group was lower than that
in the ﬁ-group. We expect that one of the reasons is that
the search space of the third room was larger other rooms.
The third room included many game objects and the process
of problem solving was complex. Therefore, even when the
impasse estimation system judged that the breadth-ﬁrst search
state of the participants continued too long, the participant
often needed to continue to explore the search space to ﬁnd
a way to escape the room. Although it is not necessary to
understand the contents of the task in order to make appropriate
interventions by metacognitive suggestion, it is necessary to
decide whether to encourage divergence or convergence, taking
into consideration the size of the search space of the task. In
this study, we focused on the human inner state to decide the
content and timing of the suggestion. However, in a general
situation, it is necessary to consider a method of giving advice
by adding relatively abstract information that expresses the
feature of the task, such as the size of the search space. In
addition, because the agent’s suggestions were appropriate to
some extent until the second room, participants in the sc-group
might fall into an assistant dilemma [13].
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The aim of this study is to investigate whether the ac-
ceptance of metacognitive suggestions provided by an agent
could be encouraged by controlling the content and timing of
suggestion presentation according to the state of the partici-
pant. We implemented an agent that estimated two kinds of
user states: a thinking mode (depth-ﬁrst or breadth-ﬁrst) and
a state of the stalemate (impasse or progressive). From the
experiment using the two types of suggestion agents, we could
suggest that participants was likely to accept the metacognitive
suggestions provided by the agent when the suggestions were
given based on the inner state estimation of the participant.
However, the task performance decreased. We speculate that
this might have caused the agent to give inappropriate content
suggestions, and then causing confusion to the participant
because the participant was accepting the agent’s suggestions.
In a future work, we will improve the system to incorporate
the task feature estimation (this is not content recognition).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by Grant-in-Aid for Young
Scientists (B) (KAKENHI No. 16K21113), and Grant-in-Aid
for Scientiﬁc Research on Innovative Areas (KAKENHI No.
26118002) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology of Japan.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Okada and H. A. Simon, “Collaborative discovery in a scientiﬁc
domain,” Cognitive science, vol. 21, no. 2, 1997, pp. 109–146.
[2]
K. Ueda and K. Niwa, “Cognitive analysis of collaborative knowledge
creation in r&d teams,” in Innovation in Technology Management. The
Key to Global Leadership. PICMET’97.
IEEE, 1997, pp. 524–527.
[3]
R. G. Hass, “Effects of source characteristics on cognitive responses in
persuasion,” Cognitive responses in persuasion, 1981, pp. 141–172.
[4]
J. Patrick, A. Ahmed, V. Smy, H. Seeby, and K. Sambrooks, “A cog-
nitive procedure for representation change in verbal insight problems.”
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
vol. 41, no. 3, 2015, p. 746.
[5]
Y. Hayashi, “Social facilitation effects by pedagogical conversational
agent: Lexical network analysis in an online explanation task.” Interna-
tional Educational Data Mining Society, 2015.
[6]
S. T. Iqbal and B. P. Bailey, “Leveraging characteristics of task structure
to predict the cost of interruption,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human Factors in computing systems.
ACM, 2006,
pp. 741–750.
[7]
K. Isbister, H. Nakanishi, T. Ishida, and C. Nass, “Helper agent:
Designing an assistant for human-human interaction in a virtual meeting
space,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems.
ACM, 2000, pp. 57–64.
[8]
Y. Ohmoto, H. Sonobe, and T. Nishida, “Controlling the timing of
metacognitive suggestions using impasse estimation,” in Proceedings of
the 6th International Conference on Human-Agent Interaction.
ACM,
2018, pp. 353–355.
[9]
S. Ohlsson, “Information-processing explanations of insight and related
phenomena,” Advances in the psychology of thinking, vol. 1, 1992, pp.
1–44.
[10]
H. Shirouzu, N. Miyake, and H. Masukawa, “Cognitively active ex-
ternalization for situated reﬂection,” Cognitive science, vol. 26, no. 4,
2002, pp. 469–501.
[11]
Y. Hayashi, “Togetherness: Multiple pedagogical conversational agents
as companions in collaborative learning,” in International Conference
on Intelligent Tutoring Systems.
Springer, 2014, pp. 114–123.
[12]
Y. Ohmoto, T. Matsuda, and T. Nishida, “Experimentally analyzing
relationships between larner’s status in the skill acquisition process
and physiological indices.” International Journal on Advances in Life
Sciences, vol. 9, no. 3 and 4, 2017, pp. 127–136.
[13]
K. R. Koedinger and V. Aleven, “Exploring the assistance dilemma
in experiments with cognitive tutors,” Educational Psychology Review,
vol. 19, no. 3, 2007, pp. 239–264.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

