Personalized Shopping Experience with  
NFC Smartphone Apps and Electronic Shelf Label 
Project Y-Mart 
 
Chia-Chi Teng, Mark Bishop, Jarom Brown, Andrew Hansen, Reed Kleinman, Nigel Palmer 
School of Technology 
Brigham Young University 
Provo, UT, USA 
{ccteng@byu.edu, markjbishop@gmail.com, jarom.brown@gmail.com,  
andrewhansen0@gmail.com, reedkleinman@gmail.com, lightloch@gmail.com} 
 
 
Abstract—Near Field Communication (NFC) capability has 
become a standard feature in majority of smartphones on the 
market today. As more users have adopted NFC enabled 
smartphones, systems are developed to utilize the NFC 
protocol for electronic payment and other convenient functions 
to improve personalized shopping experiences. However, most 
of the NFC enabled functions available today interact with 
shoppers at point of sale (POS) which only provide limited 
fraction of the rich customer benefit promised by this new 
technology. 
By 
integrating 
NFC 
capable 
smartphone 
applications with NFC enabled electronic shelf labels (ESL) 
and back-end web services, we can provide a more interactive, 
informed, efficient, fun and personalized shopping experience 
at a variety of retail environments. 
Keywords-NFC; Smartphone; RFID; Electronic Shopping 
Label; ESL. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The retail industry has been advocating “smart shopping” 
for many years by adopting various technologies to enhance 
the shopping experience at the retail environment. The vision 
of smart shopping promises to provide on-the-spot 
production 
information 
at 
your 
fingertip 
such 
as 
specifications, 
reviews, 
promotions, 
recipes, 
related 
products, payment through the use of technologies. For 
example, some of the most recent attempts include the use of 
camera enabled smartphones and QR (Quick Response) code 
to provide on-the-spot information by visually scanning QR 
code which takes you to a website. However, the 
technologies have not quite lived up to the expectations and 
promises of the smart shopping vision. 
Some of the reasons why smart shopping has not been 
widely adopted relate to cost and ease of use. For example, 
while QR code can be an excellent way to bring online 
content to a smartphone, the scanning process can be 
cumbersome and unreliable. The Electronic Shelf Labels 
(ESL) can potentially improve the on-the-spot interactivity 
with the shoppers, but the higher cost and lack of 
standardization hinder the wide adoption and applications. 
As lower cost and NFC compliant ESL become available, it 
could conceivably make it easier for the retailers to justify 
the investment if it could deliver the real smart shopping 
benefits to the shoppers.   
Analysts have predicted that smartphones will play a 
bigger role in shopping [1]. As the use of NFC enabled 
smartphones become popular, the unique ID (UID) in each 
phone can become one’s personal identification. This feature 
can further enhance and personalize the smart shopping 
experience by providing purchasing history, targeted 
promotions, loyalty rewards, and much more.  
Project Y-Mart was designed and developed to leverage 
the latest NFC enabled smartphones and low cost ESL in 
conjunction with back-end web services to build a complete 
end-to-end prototype system. NFC enabled smartphone apps 
are developed on the Android and Windows Phone platform 
to demonstrate the working prototype. Web portal is also 
provided to allow retailers to manage and customize the 
system. 
Current state of ESL systems will be reviewed in Section 
2, followed by a system overview of Y-Mart in Section 3. 
The design detail and conclusion will be covered in Section 4 
and 5, respectively. 
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
The increasing use of smartphone with Internet data 
services [2] has made augmented reality a reality in many 
fields of research and application [3], such as travel, library, 
and in some cases the retail industry. We have seen many 
attempts by the researchers and retail industry to enhance the 
shopping experience through the use of technologies, such as 
RFID, camera phones, QR code, smartphones, ESL and now 
NFC [4-8]. However, none seem to have provided a solution 
that the retailers are willing to implement at scale. 
While NFC-based applications have come a long way 
and promised to enhance personal experience [9], the 
implementations at retail environment currently seem to be 
limited to electronic payment at the point of sale (POS). One 
of the main reasons is that the NFC enabled on-the-spot 
product information and smart shopping experience would 
require ESL to interact with the personal smartphones. The 
current state of the art of ESL systems are the commercial 
systems provided by Pricer and Store Electronic System [10-
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

11], which are too expansive and based on proprietary 
systems. While they were originally designed for store 
management and not for smart shopping, some have begun 
to advertise NFC capabilities in the new ESL products. A 
startup RFID/NFC vendor Jogtek Corp. has developed a new 
class of ESL that is low cost, battery-less, RFID ISO 15693 
and NFC compliant [12]. The Y-Mart system is designed and 
implemented based on the Jogtek ESL and standard RFID 
and NFC protocols in conjunction with NFC compliant 
Android [13] and Windows Phone [14] mobile devices. 
III. 
SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
In order to provide end-to-end solution in this prototype, 
the Y-Mart system includes the following components as 
shown in Fig. 1. 
• 
A back-end server with product database, smart 
shopping content (specification, promotion, recipe, 
etc.), user data (gender, age group, history, loyalty 
reward, etc.), RESTful web service interface, and 
web management portal. 
• 
Battery-less ESLs that contain NFC ID that can be 
mapped to product ID or SKU and product 
information in either hypertext or URL. The ESLs 
can be programmed through RFID ISO 15963 and 
read through NFC protocols. 
• 
RFID driver and antenna that programs the ESLs. 
• 
Mobile apps that run on NFC capable smartphones 
and tablets including Windows Phone 8 phone, 
Android phone, Android tablet. 
A. Retailers’ Perspective 
From the retailers’ perspective, the back-end server is the 
heart of the system which includes: 
• 
A typical e-commerce product database that supports 
all the traditional services such as inventory and 
pricing. 
 
Figure 1. Y-Mart System Overview Diagram 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

• 
A user database which may track users’ product 
queries and product purchases based on the 
smartphone NFC ID. For registered loyalty program 
customer, the database can potentially has more 
information, such as gender, age group, loyalty 
rewards, etc. The user information and/or history can 
be mined to provide targeted promotion, product 
suggestion, or advertisement through the smartphone 
apps. 
• 
A smart shopping database that contains the enriched 
smart shopping content such as product details, (user 
and expert) reviews, recipes (for food), and related 
products. The related products can be items in a 
recipe, accessories for electronics or many other 
scenarios. 
• 
RESTful web services that provide programming 
access to the data mentioned above. 
B. Shoppers’ perspective 
From the shoppers’ perspective, the smartphone (or 
tablet) app is the heart of the system that makes the shopping 
experience informative, personal, and fun. For the shoppers 
to enjoy the full benefit of personalized smart shopping, they 
simply need to install the apps for their smart mobile device. 
The apps are developed by the retailers and post on the app 
distribution service for the mobile platform. 
The common user scenario this system intends to address 
is when the shopper is at the product shelves in a retail store 
where they would simply need to tap the smartphone on the 
ESL to bring up the product information on the screen; any 
additional information, such as review and recipes, are just a 
finger tap away on the smartphone. The app will also inform 
shoppers of relevant products that are on sale based on user’s 
product query, history, and personal information. Fig. 2 
shows examples of screenshots from the current prototype 
Y-Mart app for Windows Phone 8 device, where special 
promotion is prompted when user scanned a product item. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
A complete end-to-end functioning prototype of the Y-
Mart system was implemented for proof of concept and 
feasibility. Implementation details for some of the 
components are described below. 
 
Figure 3. Jogtek Battery-less ESL Prototype 
  
  
 
Figure 2. Screenshots of current prototype Y-Mart Windows Phone app. (Xbox and Kinect are trademarks of Microsoft Corp.) 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

A. ESL 
The NFC enabled ESL is the component that facilitates 
the personal interaction at the product shelf, for large scale 
retailers that have tens or hundreds of thousands SKUs in a 
store. The cost and manageability of store ESLs are 
obviously major concerns. We prototyped the system based 
on a battery-less, low cost ESL technology (shown in Fig. 3) 
that can dramatically reduce the initial capital to install the 
ESLs on the product shelf. One additional benefit for the 
retailers is that an automated ESL update process can reflect 
more accurately the price labels, which can potentially lead 
to less overhead in regulatory compliance with consumer or 
government agencies. 
B. Back-end server 
The Y-Mart store back-end server is developed with the 
open-source PrestaShop e-commerce software [15] to 
provide a presentation and logic layer for the smartphone app 
and management web portal. The PrestaShop component 
represents an existing store platform, which most retailers 
would already have. The smart shopping system would 
simply be an extension to the existing system. An example 
screenshot of the currently running Y-Mart customized 
PrestaShop prototype server is shown in Fig. 4, where stores 
can manage the additional smart shopping content. 
RESTful web services were also developed as API 
(Application Programming Interface) for the management 
web portal and mobile apps to access product information, 
user data and smart shopping content. The web services are 
designed to be scalable in case of a large retail store where 
there could be hundreds of customer at a time.  
Each UID on the NFC ESL is stored in the database and 
linked to a product ID (or SKU). Each UID on the NFC 
smartphone is also stored and linked to a user. When a 
customer scans an ESL for a product, the smartphone app 
reads the UID and calls the web services to retrieve the 
product information. At the same time, the mobile app will 
also use the UID of the NFC smartphone to retrieve the user 
information. The server can then use the combination of the 
product and user to present personalized content on the 
smartphone. 
 
Figure 4. Y-Mart customized PrestaShop server example screenshot. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

C. Price update server 
The pricing data and smart shopping content on the ESL 
are updated wirelessly through RFID 15693 protocol. The Y-
Mart prototype consists of a small power RFID driver and 
antenna which is connected to a price update server via USB. 
The price update process will run periodically to check 
changes in the PrestaShop server and update the ESL 
through the driver. 
D. Mobile apps 
A few popular NFC capable mobile devices were chosen 
to develop prototype Y-Mart apps. 
• 
Nokia Windows Phone 8 phone 
• 
Google Nexus One Android phone 
• 
Google Nexus 7 Android tablet 
The apps use the standard NFC APIs provided by the 
operating systems to read the NFC tags and use the HTTP 
protocols to call the back-end web services. Some example 
screenshots are shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 5. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The Y-Mart project successfully implemented a 
personalized smart shopping experience with the latest NFC 
technologies. While only limited usability test were 
conducted, the preliminary result has shown that, comparing 
to scanning QR code, the users can more easily and reliably 
interact with the ESL through their smartphone to access the 
rich and personalized smart shopping content right at their 
fingertips.  
There are certainly many features that we would like to 
add to the system; for example, shopping list, shopping cart, 
integration with payment, etc.  Additional tests of usability 
and at scale are necessary as we continue to develop. As the 
ESL technology continues to advance, exciting personalized 
smart shopping experience could be here in the near future. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Hadley, “Smartphones to Play Bigger Role in Shopping,” 
USA Today, Nov. 15, 2012. 
[2] J. Wortham, “Cellphones Now Used More for Data than for 
Calls,” New York Times, May 13, 2010, B1. 
[3] H. Pense, “Smartphones, Smart Objects, and Augmented 
Reality,” The Reference Librian, vol. 52, pp. 136-145, 2011. 
[4] V. Nguyen, T. Le, Q. Bui, M. Tran, and A. Duong, “Smart 
Shopping Assistant: A Multimedia and Social Media 
Augmented System with Mobile Device to Enhance 
Customers’ Experience and Interaction,” Proc. Pacific Asia 
Conference on Information Systems (PACIS2012), Jul. 2012. 
[5] M. Schneider, “A Smart Shopping Assistant Utilising 
Adaptive Plan Recognition,” in A. Hoto & G. Stumme (Eds.), 
Lehren - Lernen - Wissen - Adaptivitdt (LLWA04), 2004, pp. 
331-334. 
[6] L. Fu, “Design of QR Code-based Mall Shopping Guide 
System,” Proc. International Conference on Information 
Science and Technology, Mar. 2011, pp. 450-453. 
[7] Y. Xu, M. Spasojevic, J. Gao, and M. Jacob, “Designing a 
Vision-based Mobile Interface for In-store Shopping,” Proc. 
ACM NordiCHI 2008, Oct. 2008, pp. 393-402. 
[8] B. Benyo, A. Vilmos, G. Fordos, B Sodor, and L Kovacs, 
“The StoLPan View of the NFC Ecosystem,” Proc. IEEE 
Wireless Telecommunication Symposium (WTS2009), Apr. 
2009, pp. 1-5. 
[9] V. Coskun, B. Ozdenizci, and K. Ok, “A Survey on Near 
Field Communication (NFC) Technology,” Wireless Personal 
Communications, Springer, doi:10.1007/s11277-012-0935-5. 
[10] Pricer, http://www.pricer.com/, retrieved: Oct. 2013. 
[11] Store Electornic Systems, http://www.ses-esl.com/, retrieved: 
Oct. 2013. 
[12] Jogtek Corp., http://jogtek.com/, retrieved: Oct. 2013. 
[13] Android, http://www.android.com/, retrieved: Oct. 2013. 
[14] Windows Phone, http://windowsphone.com/, retrieved: Oct.  
2013. 
[15] PrestaShop, http://www.prestashop.com/, 
retrieved: 
Oct.  
2013. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Example of Android app screenshot 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

