Student Driven Innovation: Designing University Library Services 
 
Alma Leora Culén  
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: almira@ifi.uio.no 
Andrea Alessandro Gasparini  
Department of Informatics and University Library 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: a.a.gasparini@ub.uio.no
 
 
Abstract— This paper addresses the question of how to engage 
students in design and innovation of library services. Student 
involvement in the design of the university library services is 
needed as they have distinct patterns of technology use: variety 
of platforms, nearly always including smart-phones and 
laptops, variety of social networks and often, a range of other 
digital tools. The involvement can take place in many different 
ways, e.g., participatory design projects, involvement through 
social media and others. In this paper, we describe our 
approach to innovation through student engagement in design 
of library services: innovation through an interaction design 
course and exposure to design thinking. Over a period of three 
years, our findings show that student projects have become 
increasingly original and creative. In addition, the level of 
engagement to produce finished products and services after 
taking the course has increased.  
Keywords- innovation; user-driven; design; service design; 
design thinking. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Innovation is as old as humankind, but where and how 
users could influence the path of innovation has changed 
significantly during the last decades [1]. Already in the 19th 
century a possibility was open to employees as domain 
experts or skilled labor, to influence processes and products 
within a company. Two types of internal innovator types 
arose: the core and the peripheral innovators [2], roughly 
indicating those who are paid to be creative and those who 
sit on the periphery but through their knowledge can 
participate and are interested in innovation processes [3], [4]. 
The third category of innovators includes everyone outside 
the company or organization and among them, includes users 
of products and services. When innovators build up their 
competence in the field of innovation, some problematic 
aspects may arise. One of them is related to the concept of 
“sticky” innovation, see [5], implying an accumulation of 
innovation forces, which are difficult to share afterwards. 
The consequence may be that other “innovation areas or 
problems” arise that always need to be delegated to the same 
group of innovators. 
Students, at all levels, are users of university libraries. 
Their potential as innovators within university libraries, see 
[3], [6] or [7] is starting to be recognized. In this paper, we 
describe the case of service innovation through design and 
design thinking. Design is increasingly viewed as an 
important resource [8] and consequently companies and 
organizations worldwide look at design as help to  innovate 
[9], [10]. Innovation through design, combined with user 
participation in all phases of the design process, was chosen 
in order to facilitate and research the potential of a student-
driven innovation in the context of the university library.  
The possibility to get engaged in a design of innovative 
services for the library was offered through a course in 
interaction design. Students were free to choose their 
projects and for the past three years, eight projects in total 
were concerned with innovation in the library, engaging over 
30 students in the design process as innovators.  
The following question was the bases for our research: 
what if students, who are learning to design services and 
who, in addition, have the ability to develop them, and need 
them as users, get interested in innovation? Perhaps classical 
designer/user /developer gaps could be bridged? 
The paper is structured as follows: we first describe the 
context for innovation within library services and why 
student driven, user centered view was chosen. In Section 3, 
we introduce the concept of the library living lab, describe 
projects related to innovation of library services and address 
the issue that our innovators are also developers, as well as 
the primary user group for the university library. 
Subsequently, in Section 4, we discuss findings from these 
projects and finally, draw conclusions and direction for the 
future work. 
II. 
THE CASE OF STUDENT-DRIVEN INNOVATION IN THE 
LIBRARY 
Libraries, in a world increasingly dominated by 
technology, are looking for ways to renew and re-invent 
themselves as service providers. The university library that 
we worked with was not an exception. In this case, a user 
centric perspective was a primary orientation of the library 
towards innovation and development of future services. 
Participatory design, user-centered design and co-design are 
all methods used in order to design systems, products or 
services that are more in tune with real user needs. These 
approaches also predict easier adoption of technologies 
designed with users for users [11].  
The Library has a long history of offering services to 
users. These services were often based on a librarian’s tacit 
knowledge and skills related to lending, searching for 
information and resource guidance. These skills, and the 
need for them, are now under discussion. The students are 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

efficient in searching the net, a lot of resources are available 
online, as is some form of guidance. Thus, library users are 
generally much more self-sufficient. Some of the services 
offered by the libraries are time constrained, e.g., how long 
one can keep a book, some are requiring services from 
multiple departments or organizational groups, such as 
negotiation of copy rights, or loan from another library. 
These services are tangible. Yet, other services are 
intangible, such as exchange of knowledge between a 
librarian and a user. With the introduction of a large number 
of digital services over the last decade, an important shift in 
how services and communication with users are organized 
has occurred. For instance, the transition from the paper 
book to e-book was a complex process [12], where the 
library paid attention to technology adoption, but had a 
tendency to forget the user perspective in relation to these 
new digital services and e-books. Another example of an 
important change in services is the migration of many 
traditional library services to the web. The library, as a 
service provider, must adapt to the development and 
requirement of the information [13] related to user 
expectations and new technologies.  
The university library also offers a range of services in 
situ, in the library building. These services are not always 
connected to lending out books, help from librarians with 
subject expertise and like. The library also provides services 
around facilities for users, such as rooms where they can 
read and work either alone or with others. The librarians 
could observe that the uses of these diverse library resources 
are changing, including the use of rooms in the building. 
One of the projects, described later, builds on this 
possibility, finding new ways of organizing the use of this 
space, enableing more democratic booking of rooms, as well 
as easier social and knowledge exchange. 
In order to capture all types of changes and how they are 
reflect on users, the library initiated several projects, all with 
user in focus. The largest user group of the university 
library consists of students, and our approach in this project 
was to allow students to innovate with and for students. The 
innovating students were taking an interaction design 
course. Their home base was a computer science 
department, a program for design, use and interaction. These 
students work with technology as a design material. They 
also have the skills needed to make functional prototypes of 
their designs themselves, thus wearing developers hats to 
some extent as well. In contrast to education programs 
offered by design schools, such as product design or 
architecture, they do not focus primarily on the form but on 
the functionality of products or services that they design. 
The design thinking is used to map the problems space 
broad and open enough to foster creativity, as the students 
need to focus away from the very concrete, problem solving 
approach that they often have. This phenomenon is also a 
trend in the whole field of human-computer interaction 
(HCI) design. From the first wave of HCI often described as 
an era of usability testing in 80´s, through the second wave 
with the “human” in the center, HCI is currently in its third 
wave with user experience design and situated use of 
technology in focus [14].  
In 2010, at the start of interaction design students’ 
involvement with library services, one could say that 
projects had the use of innovative technology in the library 
as a focus. The issues they investigated were related to 
digital content acquisition and use of these digital resources 
in course settings, using e-book readers and tablets. In 2011, 
students found the area of translation of web-services to 
mobile services to be of interest, in particular discussions 
such as should things be broken down into a series of apps 
or kept whole as accustomed. In the third year, 2012, real 
innovation started to happen. Students looked into what 
their own needs are, and there was no common denominator 
for the three projects other that they are all concerned with 
designing services that benefit students directly. We next 
describe the context and methodological tools that were 
used, and provide examples of projects that interaction 
design students were involved in. 
III. 
THE LIVING LAB PROJECTS 
The central research concept that we have used in the 
present work is that of a living lab. We consider the 
Wikipedia definition [15] of a living lab to be appropriate, 
even though our territorial context is narrowed to university 
libraries: “A living lab is a user-centred, open-innovation 
ecosystem,[1][2] often operating in a territorial context (e.g. 
city, 
agglomeration, 
region), 
integrating 
concurrent 
research and innovation processes[3] within a public-private-
people partnership.” The citations in the definition relate to 
highly relevant work of von Hippel, Cheesbrough and 
Bilgram et al. [16]–[18].   
A. 2010: Engaging with innovative technology 
Being the first year when the big educational disruptor, 
the iPad, came out, one of the projects was concerned with 
its implementation as a classroom tool, how digital books 
would replace the paper books etc. [19], [20]. Like many 
others, e.g. [21], we wondered if these new devices will 
deliver innovation, inclusion and transformation of  a range 
of  practices, from learning to communication. The second 
project was concerned with a much less successful e-book 
reader, Boox [22]. Neither the iPad nor the Boox project 
reported on enthusiasm and desire to innovate by the 
students attending classes that used these new tools. By 
innovate, in this context, we mean to find novel ways to 
organize class materials, communication with other students 
from the class, schedules, to use new apps or to suggest what 
could be cool to have in the future. It was clear that Boox 
does not offer a new or added value to students. The analysis 
with the iPad was not as clear, but in the class in which it 
was applied, there was no time spent with it, apart from the 
time that it was used for the course or pure entertainment. In 
other words, student did not attempt to organize their work in 
new ways, make new apps or even customizations. So, this 
first year, the design students mostly studied the use of 
tablets rather than innovating themselves. In the case of 
Boox, attempt was made to design a better interface, but it 
was half-hearted: the design students considered the tablet, 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

just like the class that used it, to be a rather lost cause in 
terms of design. 
B. 2011: web to mobile – app it or not? 
The next year’s generation of design students seemed to 
be missing more services made for mobile platforms as all 
three project teams have chosen the theme of transferring 
services from the web to mobile platforms, see [23], [24], 
and [25].  
 
 
Figure 1.  The students from a project [24], 2011, considering services 
within the library building. 
The main problem that two of the project groups wrestled 
with were related to whether the services should be 
organized as they were on the net, arguing that familiarity 
could aid adoption, or broken into meaningful small groups 
and published as apps. The third group focused on the library 
building and what users might want to have while in the 
library. The group, as shown in Fig. 1, made a small 
selection of already existing services into an app, usable 
while on the premises only: get to talk to the librarian, book 
a room, see the map of the library and tweets, events and 
news feed. 
C. 2012: services we did not have before! 
In 2012, the library related projects excelled in terms of 
innovativeness and creative thinking. All three projects were 
different, both in terms of approach and methods used in 
their work.  
 
 
Figure 2.  The students [26], 2012, implemented a syllabus search. 
One of the groups, see Fig. 2, addresses a real need that 
students have: a much better organized curriculum 
literature. They used a participatory design, and did not rely 
on only their own perceptions, but conducted surveys, user 
groups and included a small group of other stakeholders in 
the entire design process, in the Scandinavian spirit [27].  
The students paid attention to need finding at the start of the 
semester, and truly by understanding that need with other 
stakeholders, including administrators responsible for 
course listings, as well as BYBSYS, a library management 
system, currently in use by the library Another project 
group, see Fig. 3 and Fig. 5, was interested in physically 
finding a book in the library with aid of a smart phone. 
Librarians traditionally were in the library for this purpose. 
They are still there. This engagement clearly demonstrates 
larger and larger individuation and need for being able to 
complete a task through self-service. In addition, this team 
was going for what we call a design of techno-cools [28]. 
This is the kind of applications librarians would not need, 
but students think it is cool. 
 
 
Figure 3.  App for finding a book in the library, and on the shelf [29]. 
 The last project [30], combined value-based design, 
focusing on producing a democratic room booking system, 
with a fun social spin. Their storyboard motivated the 
design team, see Fig. 4.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Motivating the democratic booking system [30]. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

The social spin was based on the idea that one could join 
interesting conversation in the rooms if there was a free seat, 
by following social networks and finding out what is the 
basis for the conversation or discussion.  
The description of the projects provided here is minimal, 
more than be seen from the references provided. The 
purpose of presenting them briefly is to ground our findings 
from following the designers, by direct participation in their 
design meetings and by observing their actions during and 
after the course. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
From the library side, the support during all three years 
has been given in form of competence and knowledge 
related to services they provide, equipment, stuff, technical 
support, etc. During the 2012, a project team of three library 
employees was added. In addition, consultations with a 
professional user-experience consultancy company (Netlife 
Research) were added. The efforts invested in these projects 
were well worth it, according to one of the library 
employees and a library leadership, who were interviewed at 
the end of the spring semester 2013. More exciting projects 
are starting this fall, expanding to some new buildings. 
Increased resources are allocated to projects in terms of one 
more researcher and a high level management being 
involved in project leadership. Thus, through their actions, 
in addition to words, the library is expressing a very positive 
attitude towards results of student driven innovation. 
Seen through students’ words and actions, the library 
projects were very exciting. One student expressed it as 
follows: “I am so happy I chose this project! At the 
beginning of the semester, one does not know, so many 
things sounded so exciting, from designing automated rescue 
vehicles to designing interactive games for children. This 
sounded almost boring, but I trusted the others in the group. 
In retrospect, this was the most exciting project. I learned so 
much.” Again, seen through actions, in 2010 no projects 
went any further than the final delivery in class. In 2011, 
there was a lot of excitement around project [24] and 
students were given a possibility to, as paid employees 
continue the work on the app until it is published. Even when 
the director argued for a possible huge impact of their work 
on the new library the interest was only moderate, they 
responded negatively to the offer. The primary reason was 
that the most active member had a full time job in addition to 
the studies. In 2012, two groups got the offer to continue 
their work, the third group did not, as technical difficulties in 
connecting the app to the database required involvement that 
was not possible to make at that point. Both groups accepted 
the offer and the Bookworms, [29], app is now available 
from the Apple app store [31] and Google Play [32]. The 
Minesweeper [30] is scheduled for a test run in the Science 
Library during the fall semester. In conclusion, actions and 
words of both major stakeholders confirm that the 
experience with student-driven innovation is positive, and 
adds value for both the university library and students. 
In addition, further research into what are the motivating 
factors for a student innovator is well under way, using 
qualitative methods such as ethnography and in-depth 
interviews with participants. Some of the main factors that 
we have seen during the past three years are related to the 
clear definition of the context for design, time and finally, 
added value. 
The context for innovation through design may have a 
large impact in how innovators behave. The context is an 
occasional property of action whose features are defined 
dynamically. On the other hand, context is not a form of 
information. Context is produced, maintained and enacted 
during an activity. Dourish [33] argues for a close 
relationship between activity and practice. For innovation, 
the possibility to create an arena where innovators can 
produce new context in which they can be creative and 
cooperate to achieve common results is crucial. In the 
examples above, the library building itself has been used as 
one such context, social networks are another example of a 
context that was used in [30]. Even from the short 
presentation of the projects above, it may be seen that the 
projects ([29], [30]) that were having such a context were 
the most successful ones.  
Within both contexts, we as researchers are building the 
awareness that the library and the social networks connected 
to the library (Facebook, twitter and so on) are a living lab 
to be used by students to try their ideas, to experiment and 
to be creative.  
The time as a factor has several dimensions. The 
interesting one is what we would call a digestion time. That 
is the time it takes to accept concepts related to design and 
context. A concept, for example, such as that of a living lab 
takes time to understand, not only cognitively, but with the 
whole body, as a phenomenon. After all, it is living, 
dynamic, experimental environment. 
Time is also important in relation to co-creation through 
design methods involving users, such as participatory design 
or co-design. It takes time to shape and share design practice 
and space, even when designers are also users. Other 
students, who were not in the design course, were also 
involved. 
Last, but not least, the time switches from Chronos (the 
linear time that nobody has enough of) to Kairos (the 
perceived time) as the engagement increases. For example, a 
member of the innovation team [29], also has a full time job 
as a physician, alongside of full time studies. Part, or even 
full time work, in addition to classes, is not an exceptional 
occurrence. People dedicated their time to the projects, as 
they were perceived as both valuable and cool. Thus, the 
time and the value are also deeply connected. The higher the 
perceived value, the less importance is paid to time spent. 
The “added” value is interesting for us as a subjective 
perception of the worth of what we leave to the world, in 
this case the library, as a legacy. This same factor has 
motivated many hackers in hacker communities to achieve 
things believed to be impossible. The harder it is, the better. 
The members of both projects that are being implemented 
all believe that what they do has the possibility to be a 
success on one hand, and useful on the other. Another 
positive aspect of making something cool is kind of status 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

among students that is achieved. One not only makes cool 
things, but also becomes cool him/herself. 
Another finding worth mentioning is that student 
innovators focused on useful things rather than fun 
interactions. For example, they could choose to design a 
huge screen game, ambient art or something with near field 
interactions. But usefulness, at least throughout these first 
three years, has been important for student innovators.   
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we have addresses the question of how to 
engage students in design and innovation of library services. 
Our findings show that the library living lab provides a good 
context for developing new ideas. The time and the added 
value are both important factors supporting innovation 
through design. In addition, we could observe a clear 
progress in the quality of projects from year to year, 
attributing this to time it takes to embody the concepts 
innovators work with, such as for example, the concept of 
the living lab. The difficulty we have observed has to do 
with sharing and ownership issues regarding the results of 
innovation. 
As for the future research, we would like to take a deeper 
and longer look at motivation for participating in student-
driven innovation. There is a volume of work on this from 
many perspectives, but none covers the same context, at least 
to the best of our knowledge. In addition, we have seen in 
other areas of our work that gamification has a potential to 
form habits. It has not been used yet, but we are looking 
forward to exploring what gamification can do in forming 
new habits for students related to library services and new 
ways of acting and relating to library systems.  
Discussing the possible problem with innovation 
mentioned in the introduction around sharing and ownership 
of the results of the innovation and its “stickiness” is 
important. In our case, the transition of the ownership from 
innovators to the library is not entirely problem free. The 
reason for that is insufficient sense of ownership over these 
new services on the library side. It is, however, too early to 
draw any conclusions around this at this time. The librarians 
have been included in the innovation through design 
processes, and increased involvement is planned for the fall. 
This aspect will thus be considered in our future work more 
closely. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are indebted to all student participants and 
the university library employees for their involvement in, 
and support of the projects in diverse ways, most importantly 
by giving their time when needed and resources such as 
location for work, equipment etc. The National Library, in 
part, financed the project. 
 
REFERENCES 
 [1] E. von Hippel, “Democratizing innovation: The evolving 
phenomenon of user innovation,” J. Für Betriebswirtschaft, 
vol. 55, no. 1, Mar. 2005, pp. 63–78. 
[2] H. W. Chesbrough, Open Innovation: The New Imperative for 
Creating And Profiting from Technology. Harvard Business 
Press, 2006. 
[3] Z. E. Brinkman Dzwig, “Innovative collection development 
for e-books at the TU Delft Library,” Inf. Serv. Use, vol. 33, 
no. 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 37–39.  
[4] S. Thomke and E. von Hippel, “Customers as Innovators: A 
New Way to Create Value - Harvard Business Review,” 
Harvard Business Review, 2002. [Online]. Available: 
http://hbr.org/2002/04/customers-as-innovators-a-new-way-
to-create-value/ar/1.  
[5] E. von Hippel, “‘Sticky Information’ and the Locus of 
Problem Solving: Implications for Innovation,” Manag. Sci., 
vol. 40, no. 4,  Apr. 1994, pp. 429–439. 
[6] K. Rundblad, “The Academic Library Startup: UX, 
Innovation and Social Technologies,” AJCU Libr. Deans Dir. 
Conf., Apr. 2011. 
[7] J. McCleneghan Smith and K. Clark, “Dream catcher
[18] V. Bilgram, A. Brem, and K.-I. Voigt, “User-Centric 
Innovations In New Product Development — Systematic 
Identification Of Lead Users Harnessing Interactive And 
Collaborative Online-Tools,” Int. J. Innov. Manag. Ijim, vol. 
12, no. 03, 2008, pp. 419–458. 
[19] P. A. Ertmer, “Teacher pedagogical beliefs: The final frontier 
in our quest for technology integration?,” Educ. Technol. Res. 
Dev., vol. 53, no. 4, Dec. 2005, pp. 25–39. 
[20] A. Evenstuen, J. T. Dalen, and Ø. H. Midtbø, “Student 
Project: The Use of iPad as a learning tool,” 2010. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF 
4260/ h10/index.html. 
[21] J. Traxler, “Will Student Devices Deliver Innovation, 
Inclusion, and Transformation?,” J. Res. Cent. Educ. 
Technol., vol. 6, no. 1, Jan. 2010, pp. 3–15. 
[22] T. A. Nygaard, N. Raaum, N. Holte, and L. Andresen, “Boox 
as 
a 
Course 
Platform,” 
2010. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF4260/h10/stud
ent-projects/boox-readers-as-course-platform/. 
[23] S. Tomt, J. Walin, A. Kempton, and A. Rem, “Student 
project: Biblioteket On-the-Go,” 2011. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h11/inde
x.html.  
[24] S. Berge, F. Sørensen, and Z. Yang, “Student Project  Within 
RB 
with 
your 
phone.” 
2011. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h11/pros
jekter/Within%20RB%20with%20your%20phone.pdf.  
[25] I. Aspelien, A. Ballangrud, M. Frøyen, J. Mørkåas, and T.-M. 
Thomassen, “Student Project: Design for et modern bibliotek 
(Design for a A Modern Library),” 2011. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h11/pros
jekter/.  
[26] I. Arnesen, J. Børsting, M. Myrhstuen, L. Sun, and J. 
Gustavsen, “Student Project BibApp,” 2012. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF 
2260/h12/projects/library-projects/BibApp/final-report.pdf. 
[27] Routledge, 
“Routledge 
International 
Handbook 
of 
Participatory Design (Hardback) - Routledge.” [Online]. 
Available:http://www.routledge.com/books/details/97804156
94407/.  
[28] H. B. Reistad, J. Choi, L. Drevsjø, S. Imtiaz, and T. Slang, 
“Student Project Bookworms,” 2012. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h12/proj
ects/library-projects/Bookworms/. 
[29] A. L. Culén and A. Gasparini, “Situated Techno-Cools: 
factors that contribute to making technology cool and the 
study case of iPad in education,” PsycNology J., vol. 10, no. 
2, 2012, pp. 117–139. 
[30] A. B. Sætre, E. Litovchenco, M. G. Grina, R. Bjørneberg 
Castro, 
and 
S. 
Jongsathitsathian, 
“Student 
Project 
Minesweiper,” 
2012. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h12/proj
ects/library-projects/minesweeper/final-presentation-
03.12.2012.pdf. 
[31] “Realfagsbiblioteket,” 
App 
Store. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://itunes.apple.com/no/app/realfagsbiblioteket/id6685355
31?mt=8.  
[32] “Realfagsbiblioteket” - Android Apps on Google Play. 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=no.uio.ub.realfa
gsbiblioteket&hl=en. 
 [33]  P. Dourish, Where The Action Is: The Foundations Of 
Embodied Interaction. MIT Press, 2004. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  One of the features of Bookworms App is to show the shelf that the desired book is on, see [29]. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

