Citizen-centric eGovernment Services 
Use of indicators to measure degree of user involvement in eGovernment service development 
 
Lasse Berntzen 
Department of Business and Management 
Vestfold University College 
Tonsberg, Norway 
e-mail: lasse.berntzen@hive.no 
 
 
Abstract—Citizen-centric 
eGovernment 
is 
about 
user 
involvement in all stages of the lifecycle of an eGovernment 
service. The wishes and requirements of the citizens and the 
administration are not always aligned. User involvement is an 
important measure to make sure that services become citizen- 
centric. NET-EUCEN, a EU-supported thematic network on 
citizen-centric eGovernment, has proposed a framework with a 
set of indicators to measure user involvement in eGovernment 
service development and provision. The indicator set is 
presented and some limitations are discussed. 
Keywords 
– 
citizen-centric; 
user 
involvment, 
user 
participation; eGovernment; NET-EUCEN.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Citizen-centric 
eGovernment 
is 
about 
delivering 
electronic services focusing on the wishes and requirements 
of the end-users. In order to capture these requirements, it is 
important to involve users throughout the whole life cycle of 
the service. This paper discusses such user involvement and 
how to measure it using a set of indicators. 
User involvement in systems development has been 
discussed and practiced in the Scandinavian countries since 
1975 [1].  Bjørn-Andersen and Hedberg [2] gave the 
following reasons for involving users in the development of 
software systems: 
• 
improving the knowledge upon which systems are 
built,  
• 
enabling people to develop realistic expectations, 
and reducing resistance to change, and  
• 
increasing workplace democracy by giving the 
members of an organization the right to participate in 
decisions that are likely to affect their work.  
In a meta-analysis of 25 studies on user engagement, 
Hwang and Thorn [3] found user involvement beneficial, but 
the magnitude of the benefits depends on how involvement 
and its effect are defined. 
User involvement is not only important for system 
development projects. In his book “The Lean Startup”, Eric 
Ries [4] emphasizes the need to learn from customers in 
order to build products and services that will succeed in the 
market. He advocates the use of a build-measure-learn 
feedback loop, where products and services are continuously 
validated by real customers to find out if they are fulfilling 
the expectations of the customers or not. 
Also, eGovernment researchers have advocated user 
involvement in development of eGovernment researchers. 
Richard Heeks [5] remarks: “Of all the stakeholders, the 
users are those who tend to be most rooted in current system 
realities, and who best understand when technology-
/rationality-driven models will be inappropriate. Giving users 
a bigger say in systems development can therefore help 
guard against e-government failure.”  
In November 2005, the United Kingdom Presidency of 
the Council of the European Union held a Ministerial 
eGovernment Conference in Manchester. The ministers 
approved unanimously a declaration [6], which, among other 
items said: “During 2006 and 2007, Member States will, 
through the European Public Administration Network, 
exchange experiences in developing policies which are 
inclusive by design, for example, in citizen-centric service 
delivery or the use of multi-channel architectures”. 
Blakemore et al. [7] were asked by the European 
Commission eGovernment Unit to do a 24 months study on 
citizen-centric eGovernment. The project, called cc:eGov, 
held a number of workshops and produced a set of “Think 
papers” to discuss different aspects of citizen-centric 
eGovernment. The final outcome of the project was a 
handbook [8]. The study did not emphasize user involvement 
in the development of services, but were more concerned 
with transformation of government to be more attentive to 
the needs and wishes of the citizens. 
The European Commission also initiated other projects to 
explore citizen-centric eGovernment, e.g., “OneStopGov”. 
The project was started in January 2006, and was a thirty six 
month EU-funded research and development project that 
aimed at specifying, developing and evaluating a life-event 
oriented, all-inclusive, integrated, interoperable platform for 
online one-stop government [9]. 
User involvement in the whole lifecycle of eGovernment 
services received focus in 2010, with the establishment of the 
NET-EUCEN thematic network [13]. One of the activities of 
this network was to develop a framework for measuring 
user-centricity at all stages of the service lifecycle. This 
framework and its indicators will be discussed later. 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

II. 
PERSPECTIVES ON ELECTRONIC GOVERNMENT 
Electronic services are, under most circumstances, 
beneficial for the users. eGovernment services typically 
includes at least three categories of services: 
• 
Electronic access to government information, where 
citizens can service themselves (self-service). 
• 
Online transactions with the government through use 
of electronic forms. 
• 
Access to, and the ability to interact electronically 
with governmental officials, often through multiple 
channels (e-mail, chat, SMS). 
The two first categories are normally available at all 
times and from all geographic locations. The last category is 
limited by the availability of government staff. 
 
eGovernment services can be seen from two different 
perspectives: the administrative perspective and the citizen 
perspective. These two perspectives may be in conflict. 
Verdegem and Hauttekeete [10] argue that eGovernment 
development suffers from deterministic conceptions, and 
that, consequently the user seems to be neglected; only minor 
attention is given to the impact of the electronic service on 
the customer. 
A. Administrative perspective 
From the administrative perspective, electronic services 
can save both time and work for government staff. The City 
of Copenhagen [11] has calculated the average cost to the 
municipality for different types of contact with the general 
public. The cost of a visit by a person is estimated to be close 
to 10 Euro, while a telephone conversation costs close to 5 
Euro. Self-service through Internet costs only 0.40 Euro. 
These calculations indicate a potential for considerable 
savings by shifting the contact with the general public to the 
digital channel,  whenever appropriate. 
The success of an electronic service can be measured as 
the ratio between users of the service and the users making 
personal appearance or telephone calls. 
B. Citizen perspective 
Citizens want services that are efficient and easy to use. 
Bertot and Jaeger [12, p. 164] made the following 
observation: "While users may appreciate the cost savings to 
agencies for any number of reasons, their primary interest is 
in their ability to interact with eGovernment services with 
ease.” 
For citizens the main objective is to get information, 
submit forms, or interact with the administration with a 
minimum of trouble. Neither physical visits to government 
or municipal offices nor sending ordinary letters are 
considered efficient. 
C. Possible conflicts between the perspectives 
In practice, the two perspectives are not necessarily aligned. 
The following subsections will show some examples for 
each of the three categories of services mentioned above. 
1) Information retrieval 
For information retrieval, it is important that citizens can 
find the information they need. The web site structure must 
fit the perception of the users, and not the organizational 
structure of the administration.  But, too often, government 
organization is used as a model for the hierarchical structure 
of the web site.  A citizen may not know what department is 
handling his or her problem. An alternative solution is to fit 
the content to current life situation or the intentions of the 
citizens [9]. If you are a student, you look for certain services 
related to student loans, housing. etc. If you are a parent, you 
are more interested in kindergartens and schools, and if you 
are old, you may want information about care services. 
Government websites often use words and expressions that 
are not commonly used by the citizens. A good search 
mechanism with use of synonyms may help citizens to find 
what they are looking for. 
2) Submission of electronic forms 
For the administration, the use of electronic forms may 
be efficient, especially when the content of the form can be 
pipelined into back-office systems. But for the user, an 
electronic form may not be very efficient if the user has to 
type in information found in paper documents that could 
otherwise be copied and sent by mail. A user-centric solution 
would not ask for information the government already 
possesses.  It would also allow the user to save the current 
work and get back later.  If the form has multiple pages, it 
would allow the user to move back and forth. It would also 
provide help on how to fill in correct information, and 
validate this information to make sure that the user does not 
have to resubmit at later time. 
3) Interaction with the government 
For the administration, it could be efficient to limit the 
number of channels for communication. By providing more 
channels, it is possible to give the citizen options. The 
possibility to use chat when being in a public place is often 
preferable to the use of a phone, since chat provides more 
privacy. 
 
The above cases have shown some examples of 
misalignment between the administration perspective and the 
citizen perspective. In order to fit the eGovernment service to 
the needs of the users, user involvement should be present in 
the design phase, the development phase, and the assessment 
phase. 
III. 
NET-EUCEN 
NET-EUCEN [13] was a thematic network supported by 
the European Commission. The network started its activities 
in April 2010, and the final review meeting was held in May 
2013. The network had 23 initial partners, but the network 
grew to 231 members during the work period. 
NET-EUCEN focused on “user-driven services”. The 
involvement of users goes beyond consultations with users 
or user representation. Users and government staff work 
together to determine what services to provide and how to 
provide them. The perspectives, views and skills of the users 
are complementing the skills of the public service officials. 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

As part of the network activities, the network developed 
a framework to define and measure user-centric services. 
This framework builds on user involvement in all stages of 
the service lifecycle. 
• 
User involvement in the design stage. The users are 
involved in development of ideas and concepts. 
Focus is on needs and requirements of the users, not 
technological constraints. 
• 
User 
involvement 
in 
the 
development 
and 
implementation stages. Users are engaged in the 
initial implementation of the service in order to 
evaluate its features. Mock-ups and prototypes are 
used to continuously check that the service is aligned 
with user wishes and requirements. The aim of the 
user involvement is to improve the service and to 
optimize the outcome of the development and 
implementation. 
• 
User involvement in the deployment and running 
stages. Users validate the service through testing of 
flexibility and interoperability. Test results are used 
to improve and customize service according to 
changes 
in 
political, 
economic 
or 
social 
environment. 
Based on this definition, the network examined case 
descriptions submitted to the ePractice portal together with 
cases submitted by network partners. Most of the 
descriptions on the ePractice portal did not discuss user 
involvement at all, but case owners were requested to 
submit additional information. The findings of this study 
revealed that very few cases were fully aligned with the 
above definition. 
The next step was to construct an indicator set for 
measuring user-centricity.  
IV. 
INDICATORS FOR CITIZEN-CENTRICITY 
One of the aims of the NET-EUCEN network was to 
construct an indicator set to measure the user involvement in 
eGovernment projects. The indicator set was developed in 
workshops with NET-EUCEN partners and invited experts. 
The resulting indicator set [14] consists of three indicators 
for user involvement addressing different stages of the 
lifecycle of the service, and a fourth aggregate indicator to 
show total user involvement. In most cases, a service is 
improved during its lifetime through iterations. Figure 1 
shows the lifecycle model.  
The indicators measure user involvement in the 
development of a single service only. But, it would be easy 
to aggregate scores from several services to show how an 
organizational unit responsible for the services involves 
users in their portfolio of service development projects 
To decide on a set of indicators is not easy, since too 
many and too complex indicators will make it hard to use, 
while few and simple indicators may not produce correct 
measurements. The three first indicators are calculated from 
a set of binary variables (yes/no answers). The proposed 
indicator set focuses on user involvement only. The 
limitations of this rather narrow focus will be discussed later. 
 
Fig. 1. eGovernment service lifecycle model 
 
A. Indicator 1 - Definition (of the service) 
This indicator measures the actual user involvement in 
the definition of the service. 
 
TABLE 1. VARIABLES FOR INDICATOR 1 
Engagement of citizens/users in elicitation of needs 
Yes = 0.25  
No = 0.00 
Involvement of users in the service definition 
Yes = 0.25  
No = 0.00 
Involvement of users in functionalities definition 
Yes = 0.25  
No = 0.00 
Involvement of users in the complete interaction 
definition 
Yes = 0.25   
No = 0.00 
I1 
Max score is 1.0 
 
The first variable is addressing the involvement of users 
in processes being precursory to creation of lists of actual 
user needs. Such processes may address how to facilitate 
user involvement, and what additional user groups include. 
The second variable is about user involvement in the 
definition of the service. This is where the list of user needs 
is developed. The last two variables measure involvement of 
users in defining the functionality of the service, and the 
interaction between users and the service. 
B. Indicator 2 – Development (of the service) 
This indicator measures the involvement of users in the 
development process. 
 
TABLE 2. VARIABLES FOR INDICATOR 2 
Involvement of users/testers in common shared 
environment 
Yes: 0.20 
No: 0.00 
Involvement of user in interface test and refining 
Yes: 0.20 
No: 0.00 
Involvement of user in functionalities test and 
refining 
Yes: 0.20 
No: 0.00 
Involvement of user in check of documentation / 
guidelines 
Yes: 0.20 
No: 0.00 
Involvement of ALL user categories in the tests 
Yes: 0.20 
No: 0.00 
I2 
Max score is 1.0 
 
The first variable measures the availability of a common 
shared environment, where users can share and discuss their 
opinions related to design issues. The next three variables 
address user involvement related to different aspects of the 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

service 
itself: 
user 
interface, 
functionality, 
and 
documentation. The last variable emphasizes the importance 
to involve all user groups in the design process, since 
different user groups may have different perceptions on user 
interface, functionality and documentation. In such cases, 
user involvement may be an important driver for individual 
customization of the final service, e.g., the possibility to turn 
on additional functionality on demand. 
C. Indicator 3 – Assessment (of the service) 
This indicator measures the involvement of users in the 
(continuous) assessment of the service.  
 
TABLE 3. VARIABLES FOR INDICATOR 3 
Involvement of ALL user categories in the 
assessment 
Yes: 0.33 
No: 0.00 
Instrument used gather the users’ feedback: phone 
calls 
Yes: 0.0825 
No: 0.00 
Instrument used gather the users’ feedback: web 
modules 
Yes: 0.0825 
No: 0.00 
Instrument used gather the users’ feedback: 
consultations 
Yes: 0.0825 
No: 0.00 
Instrument used gather the users’ feedback: 
workshops 
Yes: 0.0825 
No: 0.00 
Scope: improvement of the service usability 
Yes: 0.165 
No: 0.00 
Scope: definition of new features 
Yes: 0.165 
No: 0.00 
I3 
Max score is 1.0 
 
At this stage, the service is up and running, and used by 
active users. The involvement of all categories of users 
counts for one third of the score. It is important to include 
all categories of users, since they may have different 
assessments and ideas for improvements. Another one third 
of the score is allocated to the use of four different 
instruments for data collection. In order to reach all user 
categories, it may be necessary to engage users by different 
means. The last one third of the score focuses on the use of 
the collected data, if data is used for improvement of the 
usability and if data is used for defining new features. 
D.  Indicator 4 – Aggregation of previous indicators 
The last indicator is an aggregate of the scores from the 
three previous indicators. These three indicators are weighted 
as equal, since user involvement at all stages is considered 
equally important. This aggregate score is computed as: 
 
I4 = I1/3 + I2/3 + I3/3 
E. User involvement in practice 
The indicators do not prescribe specific methods of user 
involvement. The actual involvement can be done in 
different ways.  Bertot and Jaeger [15] suggest the following 
range of tools and techniques: 
• 
Focus groups and interviews (with experts and 
users); 
• 
Usability, functionality, and accessibility testing 
throughout the design and development process; 
• 
Encouraging real-time comments and suggestions 
about the services being used; 
• 
Log file and transaction log analysis; 
• 
Providing interactive help screens or telephone 
assistance; and 
• 
Developing and adhering to measures and standards 
of service quality. 
User involvement may be done on different levels. On 
the political level user organizations may be involved as 
representatives for all users, on the system level, some users 
may speak for the rest, and on the individual level, the user 
him/herself may be involved in customization of the service. 
What methods to use, and which users to involve, will 
need to be decided for each development project based on 
the reach (number of users), size and other characteristics. 
V. 
WHAT THE  INDICATORS DO NOT MEASURE 
The indicators shown in the last section were developed 
in workshops with network partners and invited experts. 
The indicators focus on user involvement, and the scores are 
calculated from a set of binary values (yes/no).  
The problem with this “checklist” approach is that it 
neither quantifies the amount of user involvement, nor the 
quality of the involvement. The indicators may therefore not 
reflect the actual benefits received from the user 
involvement. 
 User involvement could be quantified by number of 
users participating and the time spent by the users. 
However, such quantifications may have limited value, 
since the optimal involvement will vary from project to 
project. 
Qualitative measures could be efficiency gains as 
experienced by the users, the usability of the service, the 
usefulness of the service and such things as availability and 
accessibility.  The users involved would be expected to 
address such issues, but these aspects themselves are not 
assessed. 
The indicators do not measure the actual depth of user 
involvement. The involvement can of course be minimal, 
and the score can still get high. 
The initial NET-EUCEN indicator set had some non-
binary variables, e.g., percentage of activities that included 
user involvement, and percentage of user categories 
involved. During the validation process, these were 
substituted with binary values, since it was difficult to 
establish correct values for these variables. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION 
The work of the NET-EUCEN network was normative. 
The network was committed to promote the idea of citizen-
centricity through user involvement. The indicator set was 
one of several measures to draw attention to how users can 
be involved in lifecycle of eGovernment services. The 
indicators were chosen to give a high score to those 
organizations involving users in all stages of the service 
development. 
Citizen-centricity is a mindset. It requires respect for the 
users as being experts on use. The whole idea of user 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

involvement is to listen to, understand and respect the 
opinions of the users. Collaboration and dialogue, even co-
production needs an environment of mutual respect and 
willingness to see the different perspectives. 
User involvement can lead to better services, and even 
more important, provide an insurance against failures. 
A new trend within eGovernment is the movement 
towards open data. Open data is about giving citizens access 
to government data through standardized formats and 
interfaces. Open data brings new opportunities for citizen- 
centricity. In the future, citizens may develop or orchestrate 
their own services by interconnecting building blocks with 
open data sources. The next step for citizen-centric 
government will then be to provide both data and relevant 
building blocks. Citizens may then be able to build services 
themselves. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The NET-EUCEN Thematic Network (Grant Agreement 
no. 250522) was co-funded by the European Commission, 
Information Society and Media Directorate-General, under 
the ICT Policy Support Program (ICT PSP) as part of the 
Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Program 
http://ec.europa.eu/ict_psp 
The author wants to thank NET-EUCEN partners for 
valuable and inspiring discussions on citizen-centric 
eGovernment. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Bjerknes and T. Bratteteig, “User Participation and 
Democracy: A Discussion of Scandinavian Research on 
System Development,” Scandinavian Journal of Information 
Systems, 1995, 7(1), pp. 73-98. 
[2] N. Bjørn-Andersen and N. Hedberg. Designing Information 
Systems in an Organizational Perspective, Studies in the 
Management Sciences Prescriptive Models of Organizations 
vol 5, 1977, pp. 125- 142 
[3] M.I. Hwang and R.G. Thorn. The effect of user engagement 
on system success: A meta-analytical integration of research 
findings. Information & Management 35 (1999) pp. 229-236. 
[4] E. Ries. The Lean Startup. Penguin, 2011 
[5] R. Heeks, Implementing and Managing eGovernment, 
London:Sage, 2006, pp, 3rd ed., vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon, 
1892, p.234 
[6] UK Precidency of the European Council. Manchester 
Ministerial 
Declaration 
2005. 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://m.epractice.eu/files/media/media2213.pdf;  
accessed: August 2013 
[7] M. Blakemore, N. McDonald, N. Hall and R. Jucuite. 
Delivering citizen-centric public services through technologu-
facilitated organizational change. In P.G. Nixon, V.N. 
Koutrakou and R. Rawal. Understanding e-Government in 
Europe – Issues and Challenges, Routledge, 2010, pp. 19-37. 
[8] T.A. Undheim and M. Blakemore. (Eds.). A Handbook for 
Citizen-centric 
eGovernment, 
2007, 
Retrieved 
from:  
http://www.epractice.eu/files/media/media1781.pdf;  
accessed: August 2013 
[9] E. Tambouris and K. Tarabanis. A dialogue-based, life-event 
oriented, active portal for online one-stop government: The 
OneStopGov platform. dg.o ´08 Proceedings of the 2008 
international conference on Digital Government research, 
Digital Government Society of North America, 2008, pp. 405-
406. 
[10] P. Verdegem and L. Hauttekeete. A User-Centric Approach in 
E-Government Policies – The Path to Effectiveness? In C.G. 
Reddick. Citizens and e-Government – Evaluating Policy and 
Management, IGI Global, 2010, pp.20-36. 
[11] Norwegian Ministries. Digitizing Public Sector Services – 
Norwegian eGovernment Program, 2013. Retrieved from: 
http://www.regjeringen.no/upload/FAD/Kampanje/DAN/Regj
eringensdigitaliseringsprogram/digit_prg_eng.pdf;  
accessed: August 2013 
[12] J. Bertot, and P.T. Jaeger, User-centered e-government: 
challenges 
and 
benefits 
for 
government 
web 
sites. 
Government Information Quarterly, 23(2), pp. 163-168. 
[13] NET-EUCEN. Deliverable 1.4 – Final Network Report. 2013. 
Retrieved from: 
http://95.110.228.151/elgg/file/download/3573;  
accessed: August 2013 
[14] NET-EUCEN. Indicators for User Centricity in Public 
Services, 2012. Retrieved from: 
http://95.110.228.151/elgg/file/download/2969;  
accessed: August 2013 
[15] P.T. Jaeger and J.C. Bertot. Designimg, Implementing and 
Evaluating 
User-Centered 
and 
Citizen-Centered 
E-
Government In C.G. Reddick. Citizens and e-Government – 
Evaluating Policy and Management, IGI Global, 2010, pp. 1-
19.
 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

