Modeling of the Organ of Corti Stimulated by Cochlear Implant Electrodes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract – Cochlear implants are used by deaf people to recover 
partial hearing. The electrode array inserted inside the cochlea is an 
extensive area of research. The aim of the electrodes array is to 
directly stimulate the nerve fibers inside the Organ of Corti. The 
electrical model of the physical system consisting of  Organ of Corti 
and the electrodes is presented in this paper. This model allowed to 
run Spice simulations in order to theoretically detect the minimal 
voltage sufficient for nerve fiber stimulation as well as the impact of 
the electrode voltage on the duration of  nerve fibers stimulation. 
Besides, the perturbations introduced by one electrode on the 
neighboring electrodes were theoretically studied. Finally, the study 
of power consumption was performed, which is of great importance 
in such embedded system. 
 
Keywords: cochlear implant, electrical analog, transient 
simulations 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Cochlear implants are an electrical device used by severely 
deaf people to gain or recover partial audition. They allow direct 
stimulation of  the auditory fibers using an electrodes array 
designed to reproduce the stimulus that would be generated by a 
healthy cochlea.  
To do so, an external part of the hearing devices is located 
outside the ear and contains a microphone that captures the 
acoustic waves and transforms them into an electrical signal used 
by the data processing unit. Then, this signal is transmitted to the 
receiver, located within the patient’s head, close the skull. The 
receiver is composed of a demodulator and a set of electrodes 
driven by electrical signals that will contract the cochlea and 
stimulate the auditory nerve [1] [2]. 
Cochlear implants directly stimulate the nerve fibers inside 
the cochlea, and requires surgery to pull the electrodes array 
inside the scala tympani (Figure 1). 
The connection between the electrodes in the scala tympani 
and the auditory nerve fibers is critical for efficient nerve fibers 
stimulation.  
In an healthy ear, when a sound wave is produced, it strikes 
the eardrum and this vibration is reported in the oval window 
using ossicles. The oval window is the very first part of the 
cochlea. This oval window vibration creates a wave propagating 
inside the scala vestibuli, which is filled with perilymph. 
Figure 1. Cochlear implant device [2] 
 
According to biophysical theories [3] [4] when a mechanical 
wave propagates inside the cochlea, the Basilar Membrane (BM) 
distorts to absorb the wave energy, resulting in a height variation 
of the BM which compresses the organ of Corti. As shown in 
Figure 2, the organ of Corti is composed of Hair Cells (HC) 
(Outer Hair Cells (OHC) and Inner Hair Cells (IHC)), which 
have stereocilia at their end. When BM vibrates, stereocilia 
position change allowing potassium channels to open [5] [6]. 
Opening of the potassium channels creates the depolarization of 
the HC allowing complex mechanisms to take place (reviewed in 
[7] [8] [9]), and finally, resulting in neurotransmitter released in 
the synapse. Once released, these neurotransmitters travel to the 
post synaptic cell (the nerve fiber) and creates the depolarization 
of the nerve fiber. This depolarization, if sufficiently important, 
generates an Action Potential (AP) running through the nerve cell 
membrane [10] [11]. 
U. Cerasani, W. Tatinian 
University Nice Sophia Antipolis 
LEAT UMR CNRS-UNS 6071 
Valbonne, France 
Email : 
umberto.cerasani@unice.fr william.tatinian@unice.fr 
  
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 2. Organ of Corti 
 
The aim of the electrodes array of the cochlear implant is to 
generate an AP once a sound is perceived. 
Consequently to obtain the same Action Potential at the nerve 
fiber using only electrode stimulation, two possibilities exist. 
First the direct nerve fiber stimulation can be made by changing 
the nerve membrane potential in order to produce a membrane 
depolarization above the threshold of Voltage Sensitive Na+ 
Channels (Nav) to create an AP [12]. The second solution 
consists in opening the potassium channels of the stereocilia to 
recreate the complete stimulation process. As HC or stereocilia 
are disfunctionning in the vast majority of implanted patients, 
only the first mechanism is considered in this paper.  
Electrical model of electrodes inserted within the cochlea 
have been proposed by Hartmann et al. [13], where the spatial 
distribution of electrical potential was measured for intracochlear 
stimulation.    In addition, electronic model of electrode/neuron 
coupling is available in [14] in order to reveal the most efficient 
coupling conditions. However, both models lack of physical 
connection with AP generation. In this paper, we present an 
electrical description of the electrode and organ of Corti in order 
to obtain theoretical minimal stimulation voltage sent to the 
electrodes for AP generation. Furthermore, this model allowed us  
to link the stimulation voltage with the duration of the nerve 
fibers stimulation. Finally the impact of surrounding electrodes 
were theoretically investigated. 
The next section presents the theoretical model developed for 
the Organ of Corti associated with the electrodes. Then, 
simulation results from Spice software are presented. Finally, the 
conclusion and future work direction are  presented. 
 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
The electrical equivalent circuit of human tissue used in this 
paper is the one presented in figure 3 and extracted from Cole 
and Cole impedance model [15], which has been shown to fit 
experimental data. The human tissues considered were the one 
present in Figure 2. The value of Rs, Rp and Cp were obtained 
using a gain response extraction over frequencies analysis. As the 
maximum hearing frequency is 22khz, it was considered in this 
paper that Rp could be neglected as it models the energy loss in 
high frequencies. 
 
Figure 3. Human tissue electrical analog [15] 
 
To obtain the numerical values for Rs and Cp for all the 
tissues or interfaces, we use the physical equations for the 
capacitance (parallel-plate capacitor) and for the resistance 
computation (cylindrical resistance model) [16] [17]. 
The values of the relative permeability and electrical 
conductivity for the nerves were extracted from [18] or from [19] 
for platinum as electrodes are mainly composed of it. However as 
far as the authors know, no relative permeability or electrical 
conductivity was available for Deiter cells or Basilar Membrane 
tissue. As Deiter cells are mainly composed of microtubules [20], 
which are involved in mechanical transport as actin proteins 
found in muscles cells and because the width of the BM is 
negligible compared to the Deiter cell height, we chose to take 
the relative permeability and electrical conductivity of muscle 
cells to characterize those two tissues.  
On the other hand, the computation of the capacitance and the 
resistances (Cpatch, Rppatch, Rspatch ) between two electrodes is 
more complex, as highlighted Figure 4, those variables depend on 
the distance between the two electrodes. The Cable Model 
Theory was used to compute those variables as the space between 
two electrodes is composed of various tissues rendering the Cole 
and Cole model implementation difficult. We simplified the 
tissue between two electrodes as only made of Deiter cells, then 
we implemented the Cable Model Theory in order to obtain a 
general impedance depending on the electrodes distance.  
 
 
Figure 4. Two surrounding electrodes influences the nerve fibers targeted.  
 
To compute Rspatch, the cylindrical model of resistance was 
considered. The cylinder going from the first electrode to the 
second electrode, as defined in Figure 5.a, was used to compute 
Rspatch (expressed in (1)): 
  1

 

 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

     
  


 
      

     
!"
#
$!"
#
 
#%

       1 
where Ytot is the distance between the two electrodes, X1 is the 
distance between one electrode and the corresponding nerve 
fibers. Those values were respectively extracted from [22] and 
[23]. y is the variable shown in Figures 5.a, 5.b and 5.c. σM is the 
electrical conductivity of  muscle cells. 
Rppatch models the resistance between the two longitudinal edges 
of the cylinder defined previously. Hence, this computation 
changes as expressed in (2), as it models all the losses through 
the ground from one electrode to another one. 
  1

 

 
     
&
'"

 
      
      
(

#%

       2 
where we supposed Z1 equal to X1 for simplification purposes. 
We defined Cppatch as a squared parallel plate capacity (Figure 
5.c) (developed in (3)): 
*  ++  ,

 
      &
'-

 
    ,   "
(

 
.
!-

               3 
where +M is the muscle relative permeability. 
For reader’s convenience, the value of the capacitance and 
resistance described previously are summarized in Table 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Physical model of Rspatch (5.a), Rppatch (5.b) and Cppatch (5.c) 
 
The electrical description containing only a single electrode is 
shown Figure 6.a. The input voltage generator is directly 
connected to the electrodes analog model (low frequencies 
model), which can be eventually considered as a perfect 
conductor compared to the other resistance values. Then the 
current can flow to the nerve cell or can go back to the ground. 
The current loss through the physical isolation between the 
electrode and the ground is neglected as the insulator has a low 
loss tangent (high resistivity). The membrane rest potential of a 
nerve cell is around -70mV, explaining the two -70mV voltage 
generators, in figure 6.a. We defined the analog equivalent circuit 
of a nerve cell using a resistance (Rn) in parallel with a capacitor 
(Cn) (this electrical description should not be confused with the 
Hodgkin-Huxley model [24], which is used to model ions flow 
through the nerve cell membrane and not the electron flow). 
In addition, the electrical description of the system starting 
from the nerve and going through all the body to the earth was 
not considered because very little electrical current is going 
through this pathway. 
 
TABLE 1. RESISTANCES AND CAPACITANCES USED IN THE 
ELECTRICAL MODEL 
Electrodes 
Re= 1.5 Ω, Ce=11 fF 
Basilar 
Membrane 
and 
Deiter  cells 
Rbc= 933 Ω, Cbc= 300 nF 
Nerve fibers 
Rn= 1076Ω, Cn= 3µF 
Cable Model Theory 
Rspatch= 8 MΩ, Rppatch= 1265 
Ω Cppatch= 92.6 nF 
 
Figure 6.b exhibits the electrical description of the overall system 
with two surrounding electrodes added. They are composed of a 
voltage generator, the platinum electrode equivalent circuit and 
the cable model (Rspatch, Rppatch and Cpatch), to connect the 
peripheral electrodes with the nerve fiber that we want to 
activate. 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Figure 6.a. Electrical analog of the electrode and nerve. 
Figure 6.b. Electrical analog with three electrodes
 
The main goal of the addition of the two 
electrodes was to study theoretically the influence of these on the 
stimulation of selected nerve fibers (or more precisely of the 
packet of nerve fibers that should only be stimulated by the 
central electrode). These perturbations, if signific
the sound reconstitution inaccurate. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
 
The membrane potential (Vm) (which 
difference of potential between point A and point B in figure 6.b) 
had to vary of 30mV to generate an AP. 
stimulation (Velec) was made using a DC source. 
effect of the capacitors, Vm varied linearly with Velec and the 
variation of 30mV was reached for an electrode stimulus around  
0.9V.  
When a nerve fiber is stimulated con
produce an AP indefinitely but rather produce a succession of 
randomly spaced AP called spike trains. The spike train length 
that could be produced by a sound of given intensity has to be 
reproduced with the electrodes of the cochlear implant. We 
performed transient simulation including the capacitors effects by 
injecting a square voltage with a period of 1
experiment was repeated for input square voltages varying from 
1V to 5V (Figure 7.a). The aim of this simulation was to study if 
the voltage amplitude sent to the electrode would affect the spike 
train duration and starting time. Figure 7.b reveals that the delays 
for Vm potential to reach its maximum value 
which were small compared to the duration of a nerve AP (few 
ms). This result pointed out that theoretically the electrode 
 
 
Electrical analog of the electrode and nerve.  
Electrical analog with three electrodes 
The main goal of the addition of the two surrounding 
electrodes was to study theoretically the influence of these on the 
stimulation of selected nerve fibers (or more precisely of the 
packet of nerve fibers that should only be stimulated by the 
central electrode). These perturbations, if significant, could make 
 
 corresponds to the 
A and point B in figure 6.b) 
had to vary of 30mV to generate an AP. The electrode 
was made using a DC source. Neglecting the 
varied linearly with Velec and the 
of 30mV was reached for an electrode stimulus around  
When a nerve fiber is stimulated constantly, it will not 
indefinitely but rather produce a succession of 
The spike train length 
that could be produced by a sound of given intensity has to be 
reproduced with the electrodes of the cochlear implant. We 
including the capacitors effects by 
with a period of 150ms.  This 
oltages varying from 
.a). The aim of this simulation was to study if 
to the electrode would affect the spike 
.b reveals that the delays 
for Vm potential to reach its maximum value were around 0.1µs, 
duration of a nerve AP (few 
out that theoretically the electrode 
voltage magnitude had a very insignificant effect on the spike 
train duration. In addition, the recreated spike train 
has negligible delay with the electrode stimulation starting time
Figure 7.a. Transient simulation with different electrode voltage as input and Vm 
voltage
Figure 7.b. Time before AP generation depending on the elctrode voltage
A general overview of the spike train related to th
amplitude is presented in F
obtained from basic mathematical functions in order to model 
nerve fiber AP created after square voltage electrode stimulation. 
The interspike time was taken randomly 
the amplitude of the stimulus 
presented in this paper does not account for this effect.
 
voltage magnitude had a very insignificant effect on the spike 
the recreated spike train starting time 
e electrode stimulation starting time. 
 
 
with different electrode voltage as input and Vm 
voltage as output. 
ime before AP generation depending on the elctrode voltage 
 
iew of the spike train related to the Vm 
amplitude is presented in Figure 8. The AP generated were 
obtained from basic mathematical functions in order to model the 
AP created after square voltage electrode stimulation. 
The interspike time was taken randomly and greatly depends on 
amplitude of the stimulus [25]. However, the electrical analog 
presented in this paper does not account for this effect. 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 8. Spike train generated by the electrode input voltage 
 
We performed also a parametric simulation using the 
electrical description of Figure 6.b, where the surrounding 
electrodes are added. The central electrode had a DC voltage of 
1V and we varied the voltage of the surrounding electrodes 
between 0.9 and 5V. According to RC values used in figure 6.b, 
analytical computation showed that when the voltage of the 
surrounding electrodes was maximum (5V), the nerve  fibers 
(above the central electrode) membrane potential Vm variation 
was 0.5mV, which was not high enough to stimulate these nerve 
fibers (the ones that should be stimulated only by the central 
electrode). 
The overall system consumption is a great significance as 
cochlear implants are not convenient for the user to recharge. The 
study of the power consumption is presented Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 9. Current consumption during one stimulation period 
 
The current peaks during each input signal transitions could reach 
1A. Consequently, the maximum power consumed during a 
square input signal generation by the electrodes was around 1W 
(peak value), whereas the mean power consumed per period was 
around 50mW. These results may be used for the electrode array 
design to define battery size as well as electrode minimum width. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
 
The theoretical electrical description presented in this paper 
was used to carry out simulations allowing the detection of the 
minimum voltage needed to ensure nerve fibers stimulation. This 
voltage was found around 0.9 V. Furthermore, the current peaks 
during each input signal transitions could reach 1A (peak value),  
and the mean power consumed per period was around 50mW. 
These results may be used as requirements for the electrode array 
design and corresponding control electronics. 
It has also been suggested that two consecutive electrodes 
were not disturbing one another and that the duration of the 
stimulation did not depend on the input electrode voltage. A more 
complex model, including the spike trains frequency (which is 
the number of spikes generated per second) related to the 
electrode input voltage is being currently developed. 
Besides physical tests are ongoing to ensure that the 
theoretical results obtained match the measurements. Deaf people 
using cochlear implants were asked to kindly submit themselves 
to cochlear implant reprogramming in order to test if the 
threshold of 0.9 V was sufficient; if not, it would greatly affect 
the perturbation between electrodes. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. K. Niparko, Cochlear Implants: Principles and Practice, ch. 7. 
2009. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 
[2] 
G. Clark, Cochlear Implants: Fundamentals and Application, ch. 
4-8, 2003, Springer-Verlag 
[3] 
G. Von Békésy, Experiments in Hearing, part 3. Chap 12-14, 
1989, Acoustical Society of Amer 
[4] 
F. Nobili and F. Mammano, "Biophysics of the cochlea: linear 
approximation," June 1993, 93(6), pp. 3320-32. 
[5] 
C. Kubisch et al., "KCNQ4, a Novel Potassium Channel 
Expressed in Sensory Outer Hair Cells, Is Mutated in Dominant 
Deafness", 5 February 1999, vol. 96, no 3, pp. 437-446. 
[6] 
L. Trussel, "Mutant ion channel in cochlear hair cells", April 11, 
2000, vol. 97, no. 8, pp. 3786 –3788 
[7] 
S.K.Griffiths, lecture: SPA 5102 entitled Auditory Anatomy and 
Physiology, 
inner 
ear, 
http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/ 
sgriff/A&P.html. 
[8] 
B. A. Hunter, M. Rick, S. Odland, and K. Juhn, "Blood-Labyrinth 
Barrier and Fluid Dynamics of the Inner Ear", Dec  2001, vol. 7, 
no. 2, pp. 78-83. 
[9] 
R.A Altschuler and R. Yehoash, "Structure and innervation of the 
cochlea", 15 January 2003, no. 60, pp. 397 - 422. 
[10] M. F. Bear, B. W. Connorsand, and Michael A. Paradiso, 
Neuroscience, Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2007. 
[11] A. Siegel and H. N. Sapru, Essential Neuroscience, Section II The 
Neuron, April 2010, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 
[12] K. X. Charand, HyperPhysics lecture, hosted by the depatment of 
Physics 
and 
Astronomy, 
Georgia 
State 
University, 
http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase /biology/actpot.html. 
[13] R. Hartmann, D. Mortazavi, R. Klinke, and A. Kral, "Spatial 
resolution of cochlear implants: the electrical field and excitation 
of auditory afferents", 1998, vol. 121(1-2), pp. 11-28. 
[14] L. Sileo et al., "Electrical coupling of mammalian neurons to 
microelectrodes with 3D nanoprotrusions", Microelectronic 
engineering, vol. 111, 2013, pp.384-390 
[15] Y. Ülgen and M. T. H. Solmaz, "Design of A Microcontroller 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Based Cole-Cole Impedance Meter for Testing Biological 
Tissues", September 7-12 2009, vol. 25/7, pp 488-491. 
[16] R. Nave. HyperPhysics lecture, hosted by the depatment of 
Physics 
and 
Astronomy, 
Georgia 
State 
University 
http://hyperphysics.phyastr.gsu.edu/hbase/electric/pplate.html. 
[17] V. S. Kumar, G. Kelekanjeri, and Rosario A. Gerhardt, 
"Computation of the Complex Impedance of a Cylindrical 
Conductor in an Ideal Two-Probe Configuration", in  Modeling 
and Simulation, ch. 6, June 2008, book edited by Giuseppe 
Petrone and Giuliano Cammarata 
[18] D. Miklavcic and F. X. Hart, The Electrical Conductivity of 
Tissues, in Wiley Encyclopedia of Biomedical Engineering,  2006, 
John Wiley & Sons 
[19] N. Ida, Electromagnetic properties of materials in Engineering 
Electromagnetics, 2003, Springer  
[20] Nature Scitable Journal, 2013 Nature Education, "Microtubules 
and 
filaments" 
http://www.nature.com 
/scitable/topicpage/microtubules-and-filaments-14052932. 
[21] Golowasch and Nadim, faculty members of the  
Department of Biological Sciences of Rutgers University-Newark, 
Linear 
Cable 
Theory, 
http://stg.rutgers.edu/courses/old/CompNeuro07/Handouts/Koch%
20chapter2sm.pdf 
[22] Cochlear® ,"Delivering choice, cochlear’s electrodes portofolio-as 
unique as our customers", 2012, URL 
[23] JB. Wang and J. Yang, "Morphological observation and 
electrophysiological properties of isolated Deiters' cells from 
guinea pig cochlea", January 2000, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 29-31 
[24] A. L. Huxley and A. F. Hodgkin, "A quantitative description of 
membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation 
in nerve", 1952, vol. 117, no. 4, pp. 500-544 
[25] X. Wang. "Neural representation of Sensory stimuli: Properties of 
Spike trains", Biosystems II: Neuroscience. Sensory Systems. 
Lecture 3, April 1998 
[26] J. K. Niparko, Cochlear Implants: Principles and Practices ,ch. 7, 
Philadelphia USA, 2009. 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

