User Modeling and Attention Support: Towards a Framework of Personalization 
Techniques  
 
 
Liana Razmerita  
Copenhagen Business School 
Frederiksberg, Denmark 
lr.ibc@cbs.dk 
 
Thierry Nabeth 
ORT France 
Paris, France 
thierry.nabeth@ort.asso.fr  
 
Kathrin Kirchner 
Universital Hospital Jena 
Jena, Germany 
kathrin.kirchner@uni-jena.de
 
 
Abstract— This paper aims to elaborate on the role of user 
modelling for personalization and enhanced attention support. 
User modelling is an important element in the management of 
personal profiles and identity of users, but also a key element 
for providing adaptive features and personalized interaction. 
In this paper, we present personalization as the process 
consisting on the customization, and the adaptation of the 
interaction along the structure, the content, the modality, the 
presentation and the level of attention required. The paper 
surveys personalization techniques and provides concrete 
examples of personalized interaction. In particular, the paper 
focuses on the role of user modeling for enhanced, personalized 
user support within interactive applications. The key 
contribution of the paper is to propose a framework of 
personalization techniques and to identify new forms of 
personalization that aim at taking into account human 
cognitive capabilities and emotions. 
Keywords personalization; user modeling; attention support; 
persuasion; social networks; personalization techniques. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
User modelling is a way to bypass the lack of 
information provided by the users and personalize the 
interaction with applications that adapt to their users’ needs 
and 
accommodate 
their 
preferences. 
Personalization, 
contextualization and more recently attention support [1, 2] 
represent key elements for achieving intelligent features in 
advanced interactive applications. Personalization will also 
be a defining characteristic for a next generation of web 
applications and services, a defining characteristic of a new 
generation of services and applications on the Web. Such 
applications develop deeper relationships with their users, 
provide more value to users who return more often and 
ultimately offer more targeted experiences for each user 
according to her/his personal need [3]. Personalization may 
be 
defined 
as 
the 
process 
that 
enables 
interface 
customization, adaptations of the functionality via the 
structure, content, modality and presentation in the 
interaction in order to increase its relevance for its individual 
users [4]. Personalization may also take into account the 
limited human cognitive capacities (e.g., quantity of 
information that the brain can process, or its limited 
multitasking capabilities), emotions and cultural differences 
to provide an interface that is more attention effective. 
 In general, the goal of personalization is to improve the 
efficiency of the interaction with users, to simplify the 
interaction, and to make complex systems more usable [5]. 
Personalization is a way to overcome “one size fits all” type 
of applications. Personalized recommendation systems will 
feed us with news, new music, new products, targeted 
advertisements, according to preferences, moods and 
interests of the users [6].  
A first step in achieving personalized interaction is the 
elicitation of the user model’s characteristics (preferences, 
habits, needs). User models data can be created either: (1) by 
people explicitly specifying it (setting their preferences); (2) 
by automatic extraction (profiling) or (3) through a 
combination of the two methods. User modeling processes 
are a complex task, and the whole process of collecting 
personal data is subject to legal regulations in many 
countries and states. Furthermore, users are more careful 
about the disclosure and use of their personal information. A 
number of issues including the lack of reliability of the 
information “declared” in the profile, or its incompleteness 
due to several reasons including privacy concerns have to be 
handled in the construction of the user profiles and the 
associated personalization techniques. Both user concerns 
about the use of personal data and privacy regulations 
frequently impact on what personalization methods can be 
used [7]. 
The paper surveys personalization techniques and 
provides concrete examples of personalized interaction. This 
paper aims to elaborate on the role of user modeling for 
personalization and enhanced attention support. In particular, 
the paper focuses on the role of user modeling for enhanced, 
personalized user support within interactive applications. 
This article argues that user modeling may represent a key 
component for providing attention support (e.g., in 
supporting users allocating and better focusing their 
cognitive resources in learning or working). The key 
contribution of the paper is to discuss the different types of 
personalization 
and 
to 
propose 
a 
framework 
of 
personalization techniques. Furthermore the framework 
includes attention support and persuasion as emerging new 
forms of personalization. 
The second section provides an overview of related work 
in the area of personalization and attention support. The third 
section is dedicated to the presentation of the different 
elements of the taxonomy. The fourth section gives real-case 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

usage scenarios and discusses future personalization 
mechanisms. The last section concludes and presents future 
related work. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
Personalization brings a utility as well as a conviviality 
function with “high-touch” impact for the users. From the 
utility perspective, personalization is important as significant 
differences between users can be observed and furthermore, 
users have different needs, goals and tasks at hand. An 
important form of personalization is interface customization, 
usually initiated by the user. However, studies conducted by 
Yahoo reveal that most often people do not take time to 
personalize or customize their experience [8]. Their study 
revealed that most often users use the default web page and 
mainstream users do not take time to customize or 
personalise their experience. Generally, users do not like to 
provide information and only the most experience users, “the 
power users”, take the time to personalise or customize and 
they can “do amazing things” that truly reflects their 
personal interests and are of great benefit for them. 
Furthermore, the study suggests that no matter how well 
designed a tool is, users may find unexpected ways to use it. 
User 
modeling 
associated 
with 
personalization 
techniques enable changes in the structure, content and 
modality of applications in order to match the needs and 
preferences of users. In contrast to customization, where 
users specify their preferences manually, personalization 
means automatic adaptation according to user profiles. 
Personalization can be seen as a prediction problem: the 
system tries to predict the user’s level of interest in, or the 
utility of, specific content categories, pages, or items, and 
rank these according to their predicted values [9]. A large 
variety of personalization techniques [10, 11] are proposed in 
the literature and automatic personalization can be classified 
as: content-based, collaborative filtering and rule-based 
filtering systems. A comprehensive overview of data mining 
algorithms for user modelling and personalization techniques 
can be found in [9, 12, 13]. Web mining, the application of 
data mining techniques to discover patterns from the Web, 
can help to define such user profiles on the basis of the 
history and current actions of the user and his/her 
interactions with the application or with other users [9]. 
While collecting large amount of data for analysing user 
profiles, privacy concerns have to be considered [6] and the 
field of privacy-enhanced personalization has recently 
developed [7]. Furthermore, user models can be mapped to 
the context and generate a personalized structure, content or 
modality according to the context. Contextualization refers to 
an adaptation of the interface taking into account the user’s 
context and thus creating context-aware systems [14]. 
Context-aware systems represent the type personalization 
that create an interaction that is relevant to user’s context, 
which can include their current work process (what there are 
working on), the current location, people personal 
preferences, type of device, or current activity. 
Personalization may take into account the cognitive 
capabilities of users, and address problems such as 
information overload, interaction "burnout", the difficulty to 
manage too many tasks at the same time, or other 
psychological aspects (e.g., boredom). In that case, the user 
model may incorporate elements such as mental states (e.g., 
bored, overwhelmed, aroused, etc.) that will be taken into 
account in the personalization for instance by "tuning" the 
cognitive effort required in the interaction (e.g., reducing the 
complexity of the interface and the flux of solicitations), or 
by providing stimulation to the user (for instance when an 
attention dropout has been identified). 
A number of taxonomies for personalization have already 
been proposed in literature [10, 15-17]; however they are 
neither complete, nor they reflect the current state of the art 
of actual applications. 
 
III. 
TOWARDS A CLASSIFICATION OF PERSONALIZATION 
TECHNIQUES 
As described in the previous section, personalization has 
many facets and uses many different techniques. These very 
different approaches of personalization techniques are 
classified in a taxonomy, which can guide both researchers 
and practitioners in future developments of personalization 
domain. 
Based on the literature review presented in the previous 
section, the article proposes a taxonomy of personalization 
techniques, extending the basic types of personalization 
presented in [10], that spans three dimensions, see Fig. 1: 
 
Types of personalization: What is personalized? 
 
Elements of personalization: Which elements are 
used for personalization? 
 
Methods of personalization: How the personalization 
is 
done? 
(customization 
or 
user-driven 
personalization, 
automatic 
or 
system-initiated 
personalization) 
Additionally to the four basic types of personalization 
(structure, content, modality and presentation) presented in 
[10], we added attention support and persuasion as new 
dimensions that have recently been discussed in the 
literature. Attention support considers the human cognitive 
limitations such as the human limited absorbing and 
processing capabilities. Persuasive personalization takes into 
account the time and strategies that are necessary for humans 
to change and adopt new behaviors or beliefs. In our 
framework, personalization or adaptation techniques can be 
therefore classified in six main categories: personalization of 
structure, content, modality, presentation, attention support 
and persuasion (see Fig. 1). 
According to the information used for personalization, 
one can distinguish the characteristics of the user and the 
context in which the user is situated. Furthermore, 
personalization can be classified in two ways: user-driven 
(customization), automatic or agent-based (semi-automatic). 
A. Types of Personalization 
1) 
Personalization of structure refers to the way in 
which the hypermedia space is structured and presented to 
the different groups of users. Personalization of the structure 
of an application or website means altering the location of 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

content including text, images and the location of available 
links. This aspect of personalization involves placing the 
links and content where they are more relevant for the user. 
Different users may see different layouts. This structuring 
can help the identification of the important information 
(putting important information at the top), but also can 
facilitate navigation through personalized navigation or 
“adaptive navigation support” [18] enabling a number of 
actions such as: creating shortcuts on more frequent actions, 
adaptive ordering, direct guidance or alternative actions). 
When a user navigates from one item to another, the system 
can manipulate the links (hide, sort, annotate) to provide 
adaptive navigation support [19]. 
The personalization of structure guides the user in his 
interactions in a non-intrusive manner by making more 
accessible the more likely actions to be followed or disables 
certain functions and therefore narrowing down the space of 
possibilities in order to increase efficiency and usability.  
2) 
Personalization of content refers to the process of 
dynamic tailoring the information that is presented to the 
different users according to their profiles (e.g., needs, 
interests, level of expertise, etc). The adaptation of content 
facilitates the process of filtering and retrieval of relevant 
information. The content can be selected to be relevant to 
the specific characteristics of users, and the location or 
context of the activities in which they are engaged at a given 
time. These techniques of adaptations enable users to spend 
less time to search and retrieve relevant knowledge/informa-
tion or products. On the web, personalized content can take 
the form of recommended links or products, targeted 
advertisements, or text and graphics according to the user’s 
preferences [11]. 
A traditional approach to personalization of content, 
especially in web applications, is collaborative filtering used 
by Amazon [20] or Google News [21]. The current user’s 
ratings of certain objects are matched with the ratings of 
similar users to give recommendations for objects the current 
user has not ranked. Another example of the personalization 
of content is personalized search. Personal preferences 
according search results that are stored over longer periods 
of time integrated into the search process [22]. Data about 
users search history have to be collected (e.g., with Google 
Web History or via cookies on the user's computer). The 
search history data are later used for ranking or filtering 
search results. The “filter bubble” [23] warns us about the 
potential downside of personalized search. It is argued that 
through personalized search we limit the exposure to new 
information, new points of view which could be detrimental 
for the users on long term.  
The personalization of content enables to select the 
content that is more likely to be relevant to the user and help 
users to deal with the information overload problem. 
3) 
Personalization of modality empowers the users to 
choose 
betweendifferent 
modalities 
of 
information 
visualization. New modalities of information visualization 
have recently emerged. These new forms of information 
visualization go beyond a text or tree based view of 
documents or information. Intelligent information portal 
bring a new designs of the user interface with a graphical 
view representation (e.g., Kartoo, Brain, ClusterMap, 3D 
representations). The personalization of modality enables 
changes from text to other types of media to present the 
information to the user (image, video, animations or audio) 
if they are available in the system based on various criteria 
such as: cognitive style, learning style, preferences, physical 
disabilities, type of display or device, etc. The selection of 
the modality can be done according to the user 
characteristics, culture, context, type of device in use but 
also according to the nature of the content (some modality 
can be more adapted to the delivery of some particular 
content). Numerous studies reported in [24] have 
emphasized that cultural differences are important for the 
selection of image modality, colour selection, and 
information presentation in general. 
4) 
Personalization of presentation empowers the users 
to choose between: different presentation styles such as: 
different layouts, skins or size of fonts. Other preferences 
can include the presence or absence of anthropomorphic 
interface agents, the preferred languages, etc. Different 
types of sortings, bookmarking, shortcuts can also be 
included in an advanced hypermedia system. Cultural 
adaptation is another element that differentiates the 
personalisation of presentation taking into consideration 
 
Figure 1.   A taxonomy of personalization techniques 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

significant cultural differences _(e.g. Western vesus Chinese 
style). Cultural differences are important for website design, 
visual representation and information organisation [24]. 
According to [25] personalization of appearance through 
customization gives the possibility to express oneself and is 
correlated with both cognitive and emotional effects. 
5) 
Personalization of attention (or attention supporting 
personalization) refers to the process aiming at making the 
interaction more attention effective, and in particular at 
reducing the cognitive effort. The support for the 
management of attention can be done at four levels: 
perceptual (filtering information); deliberative (help in 
reasoning and decision making); operative (reduce the 
cognitive effort necessary to complete a task); and 
metacognitive (learn how to be more effective at managing 
attention). Attention support is important because our 
attention can be easily diverged by various interruptions and 
because information of all types and qualities abounds [1]. 
Attention support is a particular form of personalization, 
aiming at personalizing the interaction in order to support 
users in being more effective and attentive on the main tasks 
or in relation with the tasks or goals they need to perform. In 
cognitive science, attention represents a very broad concept 
that includes a variety of aspects such as perception, 
information overload, and interruption, multi-tasking to 
name just a few. Attention can be supported both in the short 
term and in the long term. In the first case, it consists in 
helping reducing the cognitive load during human computer 
interaction, by reducing the amount of information 
displayed, by displaying it at a right level of prominence, or 
by notifying information (e.g., reminders) in a way that 
minimize the level of distraction. In the second case, it 
consists in assisting users in allocating their cognitive 
processes in a way that is the more effective over longer 
period of time. For instance, the support of long term 
attention may consist in helping users in allocating their 
time, and at selecting the types of actions that are the more 
effective so as to accomplish an objective. Attentive user 
interfaces [26] are designed to reduce the cognitive effort by 
reducing the amount of information presented to the user, by 
limiting the interruptions or by helping this user to recover 
after an interruption by restoring the previous context of his 
work [27]. 
The personalization of attention considers the human 
cognitive limitations such as the human limited absorbing 
and "processing" capabilities. This is in particular relevant 
for teaching and learning. Learning analytics is an area 
which has recently emerged that aims to manage the 
attention of learners based on their activities and interaction 
traces.   
6) 
Persuasion. Persuasive technologies aim to shape, 
reinforce or change the behavior, feelings or thoughts of 
users, e.g., to maintain a healthy lifestyle or to purchase 
products. Usually, persuasion is not tailored to specific user 
groups with wide-ranging goals and needs [28]. A fusion of 
personalization 
and 
persuasion, 
e.g., 
by 
providing 
personalized messages or adapting the user interface, 
leverages the effect of persuasion [29]. 
 
IV. 
ELEMENTS OF PERSONALIZATION 
Personalization is a data-intensive process and can be 
based on two main kinds of information that is evaluated: 
 
User modelling, the characteristics of the user (user 
data and usage data) 
 
The user’s context or state (e.g., location of the user, 
current activity) 
A. User modeling 
User models or user profiles include user related data 
such as user’s name, address, interests, preferences, skills, 
etc. This information can be collected explicitly via forms or 
questionnaires, but also implicitly via various user modeling 
techniques of usage data. The explicit data can be enriched/ 
complemented by usage data, directly observed or implicitly 
recorded from user actions. An overview of the various types 
user modeling techniques and characteristics of the models 
can be found in [6]. Usage data includes information about 
clicking on links, session length, or articles watched and 
purchased [30]. Usage information is available via the Web 
server logs, but is also increasingly made available by Web 
tools such as online social networking systems via the 
exportation of the activity streams. This information is then 
processed by applying data mining techniques such as 
clustering, association rules discovery, classification, and 
sequential pattern discovery, in order to reveal useful 
patterns that can be further analyzed and exploited in order to 
generate a more personalized experience. 
B.  User’s context 
Adaptation to context refers to the dynamic adaptation 
process to a changing environment in which the user 
operates or works. Context-aware systems represent the type 
of systems that create an interaction that is relevant to user’s 
context, e.g., location, current work process (what they are 
working on), the current organizational settings (culture of 
the organization), personal characteristics or mental states 
(e.g., boredom). Context aware systems have been proposed 
also for the design of more effective e-learning systems [31]. 
C.  Forms of personalization 
One can distinguish between different methods of 
personalization: 
 
Customization, initiated by the user who set up his 
own preferences 
 
System-initiated or automatic through adaptive 
interfaces, services, or more recently attentive user 
interfaces 
 
Proactive personalization via agent-based or semi-
automatic personalization through crawlers or 
anthropomorphic agents 
1) 
Personalization through customization: is 
the 
process of creating a customized user experience taking into 
account users preferences and/or specific characteristics of 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

the user. When customizing, the user is in control in 
specifying his own preferences and requirements manually, 
and is able to adapt the interface in a way that is the most 
fitted to his particular needs. At this level customization 
process may consist of setting preferences that will be taken 
into account to parameterize the interface, but it may also 
consist in allowing users to literally design the interface 
itself by assembling the different components. Examples of 
the latest category can be found in information portals such 
as: iGoogle, MyGoogle or NetVibes. 
2) 
Automatic 
personalization 
or 
system-initiated 
personalization: personalization can also be achieved in 
more 
sophisticated 
manner 
through 
automatic 
personalization or adaptive interfaces. In this later case, the 
interface and the interaction are dynamically generated, in a 
way that is expected to fit to each specific user. Practically, 
adaptive user interface rely of a user model that includes the 
most important characteristics of the user. Adaptive systems 
may make use of data from the user model/profile, his usage 
data and/or context. This data can be processed, analyzed 
and predictions about user’s future behavior, intentions or 
goals are made. Automatic personalization relies on various 
types of algorithms and in particular data-mining algorithms 
as presented in section II. 
3) 
Agent-based personalization: may include adaptive 
focused crawling [32] to help locate resources about 
particular topics of interest for a user or through the use of 
various agents including anthropomorphic characters [33]. 
Agents-based have been designed with the purpose of 
personalization of interaction or providing enhanced user 
support through a dialogue with the user in domains such e-
learning or e-commerce [32]. Anthropomorphic characters 
try to mimic and behave like a human and they can play 
different roles (e.g., guide a user is searching, help, discuss, 
entertain). 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND USE CASES OF PERSONALIZATION 
Online social networks provide a fast-developing 
application domain of different methods of personalization. 
The different personalization mechanisms contribute to 
improved effectiveness attention by reducing the amount of 
information processed and reducing the level of interruption 
and distraction. 
At the level of content personalization, a typical 
personalization 
mechanism 
consists 
of 
friends’ 
recommendations that are likely to be friends or 
acquaintances. These recommendations are typically done 
using collaboration filtering technique, and are inferred by 
mining the social network of the member. Furthermore, the 
disclosure of information can be parameterized taking into 
account the social proximity (close friends have access to 
more information than acquaintances or complete strangers). 
The social network is notified of changes of other members’ 
profile or with information that are relevant to a given 
member (such as common friends or groups affiliation). 
As an example of personalization of presentation, users 
can select the number of items to be displays in the 
suggestion box for possible new contacts and the location of 
this suggestion box in the web page. Users can select to have 
more or less information from a specific person in their list. 
A user can decide how to get informed about news in 
his/her network – via mail or via sms on the mobile phone. 
These mechanisms are a form of personalization of 
modality as described in the previous section. As web 
notification, suggestions boxes can provide a non-disruptive 
means of notifying users of an event or to indicate a 
suggestion what other people might be interesting. Social 
navigation is also a new form of navigation support that has 
developed with the context of social network applications. 
Few attention support mechanisms are also included. Such 
mechanisms include notifications of birthdays, applications 
advertisements or events that might be of interest. 
Personalization in online social networks makes use of 
both individual characteristics (e.g., all the personal 
information such as age, position) as well as of user-
generated content (list of favorites, ratings), the context (such 
as the recent activity of the members in his/her social 
network). Personalization in these systems is specified both 
explicitly by members (for instance when they select the 
level of notification or set their privacy preference) or 
automatically generated by the system (when they provide 
relevant recommendations). 
An analysis of common features and current limitations 
of social networks applications have been described in [34]. 
Such limitations can be addressed through advanced 
personalized features enabled by Semantic Web technology. 
Personalization in social networks using Semantic Web 
technologies will enable more up-to date and relevant 
content and stronger social connection through semantic 
browsers and semantic mashups [34]. Semantic Web 
technology and advanced data models will enable to 
integrate different data sources and facilitate dynamic data 
integration from different data sources through semantic 
mashups. Thus a busy user will spend less time to find 
relevant events and share them with his/her friends in case 
she /he wants to. 
Finally, attention-aware systems are taking into account 
the cognitive effort in the interaction for short term or for 
longer period of time. This is particularly relevant to 
application that support teaching, training and learning. More 
specifically, (short term) attentive user interfaces [24] are 
able to make the graphic user interaction more attention 
friendly, by displaying information at the right level of 
prominence, or by managing interruptions (e.g., prioritizing 
or delaying them). Long term attention management systems 
offer assisting users in managing their attention over longer 
period of time (weeks, or month), via the capture, analysis 
and visualization of activities and the provision of guidance. 
Such systems has been proposed in the context of online 
social interaction [2], learning [35] or work, and typically 
consists in providing an analytic component (e.g., learning 
analytics dashboard) and a recommendation system. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Personalization techniques represent a way to enhance 
the user experience, to help users cope with increased 
information overload, to support attention management with 
the ultimate scope of helping users to be more effective, help 
users in the decision making process or persuade the users 
and customers. However personalization is a challenging, 
broad area of research that overlaps several research fields 
and it poses a complex set of both usability studies [36], trust 
[23] 
and 
privacy 
concerns. 
With 
system-initiated 
personalization which is the more advanced form of 
personalization the users are less in control and therefore 
trust and privacy concerned are important.  
This 
paper 
examines 
the 
different 
forms 
of 
personalization and proposes a classification of the different 
existing personalization techniques according to three 
dimensions: 
types 
of 
personalization, 
elements 
of 
personalization and methods of personalization. In addition 
to the four forms of personalization (structure, content, 
modality, presentation) discussed in the literature, this article 
introduces two new forms of personalization: attention 
support and persuasion. In particular, we elaborate on the 
management of attention or attention support.  
This framework can be applied in the different 
application domains and it may be further developed and 
may enable researcher and practitioners achieve an overall 
understanding of personalization methods, techniques and 
elements. Further research on attention support, collective 
intelligence and personalization mechanisms will enable 
application to provide more value to the users who return 
more often or targeted experiences for each user according to 
his/her needs, capabilities, interests or preferences. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Roda, C. and T. Nabeth, Attention management in organizations: 
Four levels of support in information systems, in Organisational 
Capital Modelling, measuring and contextualising, A. Bonfour, 
Editor. 2008, Routledge. pp. 214-233. 
[2] 
Nabeth, T. and N. Maisonneuve, Managing Attention in the Social 
Web: The AtGentNet Approach, in Human Attention in Digital 
Environments, C. Roda, Editor. 2011, Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 281-310. 
[3] 
Alag, S., Collective Intelligence in Action, ed. G. Manning. 2009. 
[4] 
Razmerita, L., User Modeling and Personalization of Knowledge 
Management Systems, in Adaptable and Adaptive Hypermedia, S.Y. 
Chen and G.D. Magoulas, Editors. 2005, Idea Group Publishing. pp. 
225-245. 
[5] 
Fischer, G., User Modeling in Human-Computer Interaction. User 
Modeling and User Adaptive Interaction, 2001. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers: pp. 69-85. 
[6] 
Brun, A., A. Boyer, and L. Razmerita, Compass to Locate the User 
Model I need: Building the Bridge between Researchers and 
Practitioners in User Modeling, in User Modeling, Adaptation and 
Personalization (UMAP), 18th International Conference, UMAP 
2010, Hawaii, USA, P. De Bra, A. Kobsa, and Chin, D., Editors. 
2010, Springer-Verlag: Berlin-Heidelberg. pp. 303-314. 
[7] 
Kobsa, A., Privacy-Enhanced Web Personalization, in The Adaptive 
Web- Methods and Strategies of Web Personalisation, P. Brusilovsky, 
A. Kobsa, and W. Nejdl, Editors. 2007, Springer. pp. 628-670. 
[8] 
Manber, U., A. Patel, and J. Robison, Experience with personalization 
of Yahoo! Commun. ACM, 2000. 43(8): pp. 35-39. 
[9] 
Mobasher, B., Data Mining for Web Personalization, in Tha Adaptive 
Web, A.K. P. Brusilovsky, and W. Nejdl, Editor. 2007, Springer-
Verlag: Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 90-135. 
[10] Kobsa, A., J. Koenemann and W. Pohl, Personalised hypermedia 
presentation techniques for improving online customer relationships. 
The Knowledge Engineering Review, 2001. 16(02): pp. 111-155. 
[11] Mobasher, R. and R. Cooley, Automatic Personalization based on 
Web Usage Mining. Communications of the ACM, 2000. 43(8): pp. 
142-151. 
[12] Frias-Martinez, E., S.Y. Chen, and X. Liu, Survey of Data Mining 
Approaches to User Modeling for Adaptive Hypermedia. IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics - Part C: Applications 
and Reviews, 2006. 30(6): pp. 734-749. 
[13] Eirinaki, M. and M. Vazirgiannis, Web mining for web 
personalization. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, 2003. 
3(1): pp. 1-27. 
[14] Zimmermann, A., M. Specht, and A. Lorenz, Personalization and 
Context Management. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction: 
The Journal of Personalization Research, 2005. 15(3-4): pp. 275-302. 
[15] Wu, D., I. Im, M. Tremaine, K. Instone and M. Turoff, A Framework 
for Classifying Personalization Scheme Used on e-Commerce 
Websites. in Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 
2003. 36th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences (HICSS'03). 
[16] Correia, N. and M. Boavida. Towards an integrated Personalization 
Framework: A Taxonomy and Work Proposals. in Workshop on 
Personalization in Electronic Publishing. 2001. Malaga, Spain. 
[17] Blom, J. Personalization - a Taxonomy. in CHI'00 Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2000. The Hague, 
Netherlands. 
[18] Brusilovsky, P., Adaptive Navigation Support, in The Adaptive Web, 
P. Brusilovsky, Kobsa, A and Nejdl, W., Editor. 2007, Springer. pp. 
263-290. 
[19] Brusilovsky, P. and M. Maybury, T., , From adaptive Hypermedia to 
adaptive Web. Commun of the ACM, 2002. 45(5): pp. 30-33. 
[20] Linden, G., B. Smith, and J. York, Amazon.com recommendations: 
item-to-item collaborative filtering. IEEE Internet Computing, 2003. 
7(1): pp. 76-80. 
[21] Das, A., M. Datar and A. Garg, Google news personalization: 
scalable online collaborative filtering, in Proceedings of the 16th 
international conference on World Wide Web2007, ACM: Banff, 
Alberta, Canada. pp. 271-280. 
[22] Keenoy, K. and M. Levene, Personalisation of Web Search, in 
Intelligent Techniques for Web Personalization, B. Mobasher, Anand, 
S.S., Editor. 2005, Springer: Berlin. pp. 201-228. 
[23] Pariser, E., The filter bubble: What the Internet is hiding from you. 
2011: Penguin Press HC. 
[24] Callahan, E., Cultural Similarities and Differences in the Design of 
University 
Web 
sites. 
Journal 
of 
Computer-Mediated 
Communication, 2005. 11(1): pp. 239-273. 
[25] Monk, A., F. and J. O. Blom, A theory of personalisation of 
appearance: quantitative evaluation of qualitatively derived data. 
Behaviour & Information Technology, 2007. 26:3: pp. 237-246. 
[26] Vertegaal, R., Attentive User Interfaces. Commun. of the ACM, 
2003. 46(3): pp. 30-33. 
[27] Vertegaal, R., et al., Designing for augmented attention: Towards a 
framework for attentive user interfaces. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 2006. 22(4): pp. 771-789. 
[28] Berkovsky, S., J. Freyne, and H. Oinas-Kukkonen, Influencing 
individually: 
fusing 
personalization 
and 
persuasion. 
ACM 
Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS), 2012. 2(2): 
article no. 9. 
[29] Andrews, P.Y., System Personality and Persuasion in Human-
Computer Dialogue. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent 
Systems (TiiS), 2012. 2(2): article no. 12. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[30] Markellou, P., M. Rigou, and S. Sirmakessis, Minning for Web 
Personalization, in Personalized Information Retrieval and Access, N. 
Chen, Editor. 2008, IGI Global. pp. 77-97. 
[31] Nabeth, T., A. Angehrn, and R. Balakrishnan, Integrating ‘Context’ in 
e-Learning Systems Design, in Proceedings of the IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT 2004)2004: 
Joensuu, Finaland. pp. 355-359. 
[32] Micarelli, A. and F. Gasparetti, Adaptive focused crawling. Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, 2007. 4321: pp. 231-262. 
[33] Brna, P., B. Cooper, and L. Razmerita, Marching to the wrong distant 
drum: Pedagogic Agents, emotion and student modeling, in 
Workshop on Attitude, Personality and Emotions in User-Adapted 
Interaction in conjunction with User Modeling, Workshop on 
Attitude, Personality and Emotions in User-Adapted Interaction in 
conjunction with User Modeling Conference 2001: Sonthofen, Ger-
many. 
[34] Razmerita, L., R. Firantas, and M. Jusevičius. Towards a New 
Generation of Social Networks: Merging Social Web with Semantic 
Web. in 5th International Conference on Semantic Systems. 2009. 
Graz, Austria: Proceedings of I-KNOW'09 and I-SEMANTICS'09. 
[35] Duval, E. Attention Please! Learning Analytics for Visualization and 
Recommendation. . in 1st International Conference on Learning 
Analytics and Knowledge  (LAK). 2011. Banff, Alberta. 
[36] Jameson, A., Adaptive Interfaces and Agents, in Human-computer 
interaction handbook J.A. Jacko and A. Sears, Editors. 2003, 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. pp. 305-330. 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

