User-centric Recommendation Model for AAC based on Multi-criteria Planning
Sebasti´an Sastoque Hern´andez
and Daniela Mancilla Vald´es
Universidad Militar Nueva Granada
Bogot´a, Colombia
Email: sebsasto@gmail.com
Jes´us Mendoza Medina
Bogot´a, Colombia
Email: jsmendoza2010@gmail.com
Marcela Iregui Guerrero
Universidad Militar Nueva Granada
Bogot´a, Colombia
Email: marcelairegui@gmail.com
Abstract—Recommendation
algorithms
are
useful
to
fast
decision-making in complex scenarios. They are based in grasping
knowledge from the user and his environment to personalize
applications according to a speciﬁc domain. However, the
complexity of each domain and the dynamic relations between
different items and criteria can be challenging. In Alternative and
Augmentative Communication (AAC), assistive technologies have
been envisaged to help people with neuro-linguistic disorders in
stories construction. Nevertheless, there are still many problems
to overcome, related to the algorithms and their application. In
this work, we present an original approach based on knowledge
domain modelling, user archetypes, learning strategies and
multi-criteria planning to assist the user in managing a set of
decisions. The proposed algorithm was applied in the context of
AAC systems, aimed to help aphasic persons in the construction
of coherent and semantically correct stories about their daily
activities. The system was validated by an aphasic person and
several healthy individuals, in terms of the precision and efﬁciency
of the method, compared with other approaches. The results
demonstrate that the presented method has a good precision in
the recommendation, allows faster decisions and is well adapted
to AAC and can be extended to similar applications.
Keywords–Personalized recommendation; AAC; Multi-criteria;
Planning; Hybrid recommender; Phrase Prediction.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Communication
is
an
indispensable
factor
of
social
behavior. Many people are not able to communicate easily
because of different limitations in their intellectual and/or
physical abilities. Some disorders, like aphasia, limit the
comprehension, production and use of conventional human
communication (oral and/or written language) [1].
Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) is a
ﬁeld of assistive technologies which focuses on tools to help
people to communicate better. Commonly, computer-based
AAC systems are limited to communication boards, with
set of symbols or pictograms through navigation menus, for
composing messages and synthesizing them [2]. However,
computers can in principle do more than this. In fact, current
challenges of AAC systems are: ﬁrst, improving time to
generate a message; second, help in keeping a logical semantic
and syntactic order, given that people with neurolinguistic
disorders can not follow a syntactically correct word order,
neither select an exact number and arrangement of symbols
[3]; and third, providing support for applications in social
environments such as social networks, instant messaging,
emails and conversations person to person [4][5][6][7]. Some
projects have developed prototypes that attempt to address
these challenges. For example, Wiegand and Patel [8], in
the SymbolPath project, aimed to enhance the message
formulation ease and communication rate by selecting a set
of icons, without any speciﬁc order, following a path with
continuous motion. This system determines the most likely
subset of desired icons on the path and rearranges them to
form a meaningful sentence. Reiter et al. [9] built a system to
support social interaction, which uses external data, knowledge
sources, and domain and conversational models, to suggest
possible appropriate messages to conversations. Moreover, Ma
et al. [10] present a platform for aphasics to ﬁnd and share
information called W2ANE project. It uses an adaptive and
adaptable lexical structure, multimodal vocabulary, multimedia
content, concepts association and web interfaces.
Particularly, prediction models and recommender systems
have been proposed to enhance time generation of messages.
Thereby, Wiegand and Patel [11] describe an approach to
phrase prediction using semantic grams, which provides
relations between message components regardless its word
order. Vertanen and Kristensson [12] create a large corpus
of ﬁctional AAC messages to suggest phrases by using
crowdsourcing and training of language models. Also, Trinh
et al. [13] develop a phoneme-based predictive communication
system which uses a word auto-completion feature, predicting
the word being entered, based on the phoneme preﬁx and prior
words. Finally, Mitchell and Sproat [14] propose a method to
predict a whole response given features of previous utterance
using an entropy-based measure to ﬁnd possible phrases on a
large corpus of scripted dialogs.
Furthermore,
phrase
prediction
and
query
expansion
methods have been proposed for applications different from
AAC. For example, Nandi and Jagadish [15] use a FussyTree
structure within a probabilistically driven completion choice
model to predict a multi-word phrase. Also, Dong et al.
[16] propose an ontology graph based query expansion
scheme for biomedical information retrieval, which allows
to expand search queries using related specialized concepts.
According to Carpintero and Romano [17] those approaches
are mainly used in search engines to help users to complete
and reﬁne the search queries in order to get better results.
Nevertheless, these approaches, regardless of whether or not
they are conceived to AAC, are not suitable to withstand
the three challenges presented by Wiegand [3] mentioned
at the beginning of this introduction. For example, in [11],
although there is not an order preferred in input words to
guess a sentence, the prediction depends on the size of the
training set. In [8], the user does not depend on the selected
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

symbols, but the suggested sentences are incoherent. Word and
phone-based prediction models [13][15][16] guess terms by
assembling letters. This approach requires skills that people
with neurolinguistic disorders do not preserve. In addition
to the before mentioned, there are requirements of special
interest, such as: (1) ﬂexibility in the selection order of
different criteria, without affecting the message consistency;
(2) richness in the message speciﬁcity, (3) focus on social
applications and (4) phrase prediction and coherent messages
composition.
Accordingly, Mancilla et al. [18] presented a domain
ontology focused on AAC systems to manage knowledge
related to daily activities. Further, Sastoque et al. [19]
proposed
an
architecture
to
allow
the
development
of
user-centered applications by relating domain representations,
intelligent processes and multimedia content. As suggested
on [18][19][20] those works are intended to develop a
computer-based AAC system to assist the creation of semantic
coherent stories about routine activities. To do so, it is
fundamental to propose a user-centered recommender model
that improves message generation time. Thus, this work
presents a novel user-centric recommendation model, for an
AAC system, which relates a speciﬁc domain knowledge with
recommendation techniques, to enhance the communication by
allowing the composition of coherent sentences, regardless of
the word order and the syntactic structure of the message.
The main contribution of this work is the proposal of a
recommendation model that improves the time of message
generation, by suggesting and predicting the main components
of a phrase, based on the user behavior over the time, helping
aphasic people to enhance their communication process.
Tests were performed with 20 healthy people, measuring
user experience and particularly, efﬁciency in the message
composition, compared with traditional communication boards
and the word prediction approach, Assistive Express Spanish
(AES) [21]. Also, the model was validated through a case study
with an aphasic person.
This paper is organized as follows: the next section
presents a background for this work. Section III describes the
recommendation model with each of its components. Section
IV focuses on the case study, including the AAC framework
and its modules. Section V explains the tests performed
and their results. Finally, the last section corresponds to the
conclusion and the proposal for further studies to extend the
current work.
II.
BACKGROUND
A. Recommender Systems
Recommender Systems (RSs) are software tools and
techniques that aim to guide users by providing suggestions
in a personalized way to their “items” of interest in a large
space of possible options. Items is the general term used
to denote what the system recommends to users [22]. The
suggestions are related to various decision-making processes.
User preferences can be derived from implicit feedback, i.e.,
user behavior analysis over time, or explicit feedback, i.e.,
item rating and supplied information. So, RSs take advantage
of this, to calculate recommendations by comparing with
predeﬁned rules and previous items rates, (Content-based RSs),
or to other users preferences (Collaborative-based RSs) [23].
RSs have been classiﬁed in the literature according to the way
they perform the recommendation process as follows [22][23]:
Demographic RSs are based on the idea that people with
given demographic characteristics (age, sex, level of education,
residence) have similar preferences. Collaborative RSs exploit
collective intelligence by predicting the user ratings to an item,
based in those users with similar preferences. Content-based
RSs recommend based on the past ratings from the same
user to similar items. Knowledge-based RSs suggest items
based on speciﬁc knowledge domain, about how certain item
features meet user needs and preferences and how the item
is useful for the user. Community-based RSs follows the
aphorism “Tell me who your friends are, and I will tell you
who you are” to suggest items based on the preferences of the
user friends. Utility-based RSs model the user preferences
and items using a utility function to predict the user behavior
by matching similar utilities values. Memory-based RSs
continuously analyze changes over time of the user preferences
in past item selections. Critiquing RSs act like an artiﬁcial
salesperson which guide the user in the selection, by asking
and recommending speciﬁc item features. Conversational RSs
engage the user in an extended dialog, making suggestions
based on the users initial query and reﬁning them based on
their feedback. Hybrid RSs are based on the combination of
the RSs listed above, using their advantages to perform a robust
recommendation.
Finally, the techniques and algorithms used by RSs
depend on the speciﬁc recommendation need. They vary
from statistical data analytics to complex artiﬁcial intelligence
processes. In their survey, Ricci et al. [22] mention different
applications and methods, such as: modelling user patterns
in tree structures for predicting navigation criteria in the
web; representation of web page contents on a cellular
automaton using their information and structure to provide
recommendations; use of the Longest Common Subsequence
algorithm (LCS) in clustering web content to model web pages
as a graph; application of the nearest neighbors methodology
in collaborative ﬁltering techniques; and construction of two
clustering-based models using K-means algorithm and the
Term Frequency - Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF)
representation to calculate weights and domain knowledge
to each item of a recommendation model. These methods
have been widely used in recommendation apps for movies
and music, text classiﬁcation, prediction of the users web
surﬁng and for improvement of search engines, among others.
However, they are not suitable to solve the challenges
mentioned above in the introduction. That means, they
lack a strategy for item recommendation that consider
multidimensional criteria, to provide a good support on
scalability and adaptability over the time.
B. Planning
The deﬁnition of planning varies according to the context.
Commonly is deﬁned as the process of thinking about and
organizing the activities required to achieve a desired goal, or
as an abstract, explicit deliberation process that chooses and
organizes actions by anticipating their expected outcomes [24].
The basic elements of planning are [25]: a State that is the
current condition of the environment and captures all possible
situations that could arise; a Time which is the sequence
of decisions that must be applied over a temporal length to
achieve the goal; an Action that is the way to manipulate the
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

CONVERSATIONAL 
RECOMMENDER
RECOMMENDER
Dimension Features 
Extraction
Dialog Request 
Composition
MEMORY-BASED 
RECOMMENDER
RECOMMENDER
Past Behavior 
Analysis
Dimension Association
KNOWLEDGE-BASED 
RECOMMENDER
RECOMMENDER
Knowledge 
Reasoning
Knowledge Rules 
Application
HYBRID RECOMMENDER SYSTEM 
USER ARCHETYPE 
EXTRACTION
EXTRACTION
Preferences Extraction
Information Extraction
Background Extraction
Archetype Builder
KNOWLEDGE 
REPRESENTATION
ITEM 
RECOMMENDATION
User
Knowledge
Figure 1. User-centric hybrid recommendation model for AAC based on multi-criteria planning
current state to change it; an Initial and Target State which
is the starting point and the arriving point to accomplish a
goal; a Plan criterion which encodes the desired outcome of
a plan in terms of the state and actions that are executed; and a
Plan that imposes a speciﬁc strategy or behavior on a decision
maker, i.e., the sequence of action to be taken. Planning
algorithms have been applied to many problems as pathﬁnding,
motion planning, game solving, biological modelling, robotics
and scheduling. A clear example of planning in recommender
systems are the popular navigation systems which offer near
real-time trafﬁc information and routing. These systems use
different features like trafﬁc, user alerts, path planning and
time to reach a place in order to recommend and guide a user
to its destination.
C. Ontologies
In computer science, ontologies are the formal (machine
readable) modelling of knowledge, through the hierarchical
representation of relevant entities and their relations. In this
sense, an entity refers to anything that can be represented
(objects, ideas, processes, etc.) [26]. Gruber [27] deﬁned an
ontology as “an explicit speciﬁcation of a conceptualization”,
understanding by conceptualization a consensus of knowledge
and not a particular view. Thanks to this, an ontology is
meant to be reused, independently of its initial purpose,
by keeping some design criteria such as clarity, coherence,
extendibility, minimal encoding bias and minimal ontological
commitment [27]. Ontology engineering focuses on capturing
signiﬁcant information of a domain and seizing it to a
higher abstraction level, keeping clarity and expressiveness.
As a result, ontologies need to be formalized maintaining the
predicate logic that encloses semantic richness [26].
III.
USER-CENTRIC HYBRID RECOMMENDATION MODEL
The proposed recommendation model was designed and
evaluated for AAC applications where users are assisted to
accomplish efﬁcient and effective communication processes by
the composition of coherent messages. However, it could be
extensible to several contexts with similar conditions. Thus, the
proposed recommendation model is based on: (1) knowledge
representation of a speciﬁc domain, (2) user depiction through
an archetype and (3) a hybrid recommendation system made up
of knowledge-based, memory-based and conversational RSs,
as shown in Figure 1. In contrast to previous works, this
model overcomes different issues, such as: support to multiple
criteria recommendation; adaptive training over time; coherent
relations between criteria of choice, regardless the selection
order; and, uses a knowledge representation to add contextual
information to the recommendation.
A. User Archetype Extraction
The archetype represents behavior patterns, goals and user
needs by obtaining implicit and explicit information. The
purpose of the archetype extraction process is to obtain user
data related with her preferences, background and information.
The Preferences extraction component is related to get
user particular desires, as for example, displaying modes,
font sizes or colors and media settings. The background
extraction process retrieves information about the behaviour
and records of the user, which is used to help in prediction and
recommendation processes. Information extraction consists
in gathering user personal and environmental data, such as
relatives names, home address, etc. All this data could be
extracted by interviews or surveys and stored in specially
designed data structures, through an archetype builder process,
allowing user representation, tracking his evolution and
forecasting his behaviour.
B. Hybrid Recommender System
The
Hybrid
Recommender
System
consists
of
three
approaches based on Knowledge, Memory and Conversation
RSs, which allow: use of a domain knowledge (which in most
cases is multi-criteria), bidirectional dialogue with the user,
monitoring user behavior, and item suggestion. Each of the
recommender systems are described below.
1) Knowledge-based
RS:
The
use
of
knowledge
representation enables personalized and tailor made prediction
processes. This brings to recommendation the possibility
of applying rules and particular information of a speciﬁc
domain. Thus, the knowledge-based RS uses information
and rules of a domain, to relate different items, that will be
recommended in a logical and coherent way according to real
scenarios. Items with similar features are clustered in groups
(known as criteria or dimensions) and connected by relations
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

A DIMENSION
B DIMENSION
C DIMENSION
D DIMENSION
D DIME
E DIMENSION
Item A1
Item A2
Item A3
Item B1
Item B2
Item B3
Item C1
Item C2
Item C3
Item D1
Item D2
Item D3
Item E1
Item E2
Item E3
Figure 2. Example of set of rules to manage dimensionality
between different dimensions. The features and dimensions
extraction depends on the way knowledge is represented, e.g.,
using formal techniques for ontologies conceptualization to
model a speciﬁc domain. For example, in [18] the domain is
divided into several dimensions (aka classes) representing the
daily activities and their associated information, e.g., Place,
Activity, Feeling and Person, etc., using its own features,
i.e., the criteria of Place has features like address, city and
country, among others.
This system consists of two main processes, knowledge
reasoning
which
draws
inferences
and
generates
new
information from relations between criteria; and knowledge
rules application that organizes this information through a set
of predeﬁned steps and guidelines.
2) Conversational RS: In many cases, people have no
clarity about which item they want to select from a set of
possibilities, needing to be guided in the selection of the items
features that satisfy their desires. To allow this, conversational
RS uses a dialogue ﬂow with the user, employing the ask and
answer method, to guide through the selection process. This
system uses domain knowledge to extract the main features
of each dimension (Dimension Features Extraction) and use
them to pose speciﬁc questions for reﬁning those items to be
recommended (Dialog Request Composition).
3) Memory-Based RS:
User behavior is essential to
establish personalized recommendation processes. For this,
memory-based RS tracks users over time and thus suggest
the items that best meet their preferences. In this way,
the processes, Dimension Association and Past Behaviour
Analysis, use user archetypes in conjunction with artiﬁcial
intelligence and statistical methods, speciﬁcally a decision tree
and a probabilistic model, to predict and suggest items. To
overcome the problem raised by multi-dimensional criteria, in
this work it is proposed a set of rules (exempliﬁed in Figure
2) that permits efﬁciently manage dimensionality.
1)
The ﬁnal product of a recommendation consist of
a set of items, each from a different criterion
(dimension).
2)
A Connection is the relation between two items of
User Data 
Storage
Multimedia and 
Semantic Objects 
Storage
Multimedia Content 
Storage
SMART 
COMMUNICATION (SC)
DAILY ACTIVITIES
REPRESENTATION (DAR)
DATA RELATION 
AND STORAGE (DRS)
STORAGE
DAILY ACTIVITIES 
ONTOLOGY
INTELLIGENT USER 
INTERACTION (IUI)
Semantic Cohesion
IUI API
DAR API
DRS API
Time Improvement
Add User Context
Syntactic Consistency
Interactive Guidance
Speech Generation
Daily Activities 
Domain Reasoning
User Data 
Management
Semantic 
Multimedia Content
SC API
SC API
SC API
USERS
User Interfaces
Figure 3. Components of an Augmentative and Alternative Communication
System for generating syntactically and semantically coherent messages.
different dimensions. (Black straight line in Figure 2
- Items E3 and D3 )
3)
Two items of the same dimension are not connected.
4)
A connection deﬁnes a statistical weight to mean the
strength of a relation.
5)
A new connection could be created with the user
intervention.
6)
A Path is a set of connections (Pointed double green
line in Figure 2 - Items A1, B1 and C1).
7)
A Valid Path is one which has all of its items
interconnected (Dashed purple line in Fig 2. - Items
A2, B3, C1, D1 and E1).
8)
Valid paths are scored by an optimization criteria
based on the statistical weight of all their connections.
9)
The recommendation is performed by ordering valid
paths according with their strength, i.e., global scores.
4) Recommendation
Model
Operation:
The
recommendation
process
follows
a
planning
technique
with the next characteristics:
•
The goal is to sequentially selecting one or several
items among the set of criteria considered. However,
it is possible to skip any criteria.
•
A state is a situation in which the user has already
selected items, from some dimension, and is ready to
select a suggested item from an ordered list.
•
The initial state occurs when no selection has been
made.
•
The target state is when all dimensions have been
covered.
•
An action is the selection of an item by the user.
•
The plan criterion is that the user has selected at least
one item.
At the initial state, the recommendation system prompts
the user for a starting dimension. After this, the following
processes
are
accomplished
for
each
of
the
remaining
dimensions: ﬁrst, the system asks for the next dimension.
Second, the knowledge-based system uses the domain rules
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

...
Figure 4. Screenshots of the actions taken to create the sentence “In the morning to watch T.V. at lounge with son because to have desire and have fun”.
and inferences to send the items that are related to the other
two RSs. Third, the memory-based system carries out the
Dimensional Association process for retrieving all those items
that are in the current valid paths. Fourth, the items that
are not in the valid paths, are ordered by using the Past
Behavior Analysis and the Knowledge Rules Application. Fifth,
the recommender system suggests a list of items, ordering ﬁrst
those belonging to valid paths and then the remaining ones.
Sixth, the user selects an item and the recommender system
evolves the archetype by creating or updating user records. The
plan is repeated until the goal is achieved. Finally, the system
uses all the selected items to perform prediction operations.
IV.
CASE STUDY
For the recommendation model validation, a case study
based on a previous developed system was carried out, which
helps people with language impairments in telling stories
related with their daily activities [18]. The system is designed
under an ontology-based architecture [19], which consists of
the following components (Figure 3): The Intelligent User
Interaction (IUI) provides interactive assistance for message
construction; Smart Conversation (SC) drives the creation
of semantically coherent messages through recommendation
strategies; Daily Activities Representation (DAR) focuses
on the formalization of daily activities domain through
an ontology and its reasoning; and ﬁnally, Data Relation
and Storage (DRS) refers to user data storage related to
recommendation process and the management of textual, sound
and pictographic representations of concepts.
The recommendation model is related to three components
of the proposed AAC system. The Interactive Guidance leads
the user in the message construction by using questions as
“What activity did you do?” or “Who accompanied you to do
that activity?”. Also, the Daily Activities Domain Reasoning
and Semantic Cohesion processes infer information from the
ontology, e.g., if the user selects the activity watching tv
the system suggests only indoor places. Finally, The Time
Improvement process predicts user preferences and suggests
the most probable item, i.e., every time the user goes to
therapy uses a taxi as transportation.
Moreover, the system is aimed for Spanish speakers and
it is supported by the Google App Engine (GAE) platform.
The graphic user interfaces provide sequential guidance while
communicating, through color schemes that represent each
dimension. Also, the system predicts and composes telegraphic
sentences with the selected words, relating them by speciﬁc
connectors, as shown in Figure. 4.
V.
TESTS AND RESULTS
The
AAC
system
and
the
recommendation
model
were
validated,
regarding
prediction
times
and
user
experience factors. Three tests were performed: computational
experiments, veriﬁcation with healthy people and validation
with an aphasic person.
A. Computational Experiments
The accuracy of the recommender model was evaluated
by cross-validation and measurements of the Mean Reciprocal
Rank (MRR). MRR is the average of the reciprocal ranks of
results for a sample of queries, as shown in equation 1, where
Q is the number of queries and rank is the item position in
the order list.
MRR = 1
Q
Q
X
i=1
1
ranki
(1)
For this experiment, we used the corpus of daily activities
obtained by Sastoque et al. [28]. From this corpus, 400
phrases were extracted and translated into ontology concepts.
For cross-validation purposes, 300 sentences were randomly
selected for training and 100 for testing. For each sentence,
the MRR was calculated by querying for each word in a
phrase. The Prediction Rate (PR) was assessed by averaging
the MRR over the whole set of test sentences. The experiment
was conducted 30 times, the results are shown in Figure
5. The main prediction rate of the recommender system is
PR = 0.7687 with standard deviation, σ = 0.1372.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1 
1 
6 
11 
16 
21 
26 
Mean Reciprocal Rank 
Test Number 
Figure 5. Mean Reciprocal Rank average for each computational experiment.
B. Validation with healthy people
Some tests were performed for 20 people with higher
education (12 female, 8 male, aged from 21-35, M=27,
σ=3.66). All participants were Spanish native speakers without
speech,
physical,
perceptual
or
intellectual
impairments.
Also,
all
participants
have
standard
and
similar
skills
using computers. The study involved the comparison of
three different systems to create phrases, using: Traditional
Communication Boards (TCB), the AES application [21]
(word
prediction)
and
the
presented
application.
Three
different tests were performed in which participants were
inquired to: (1) transcribe ﬁve sentences, (2) create ﬁve
sentences from a speciﬁc set of words and (3) create ﬁve
sentences freely. The systems order was randomly set. The
time spent in creating a sentence was measured, the results
are shown in Fig 6. The time averages for each system are:
tT CB = 189s - σ = 15.75, tAES = 139s - σ = 14.43 and our
approach t = 95s with σ = 13.04.
C. Validation with an aphasic person
A case study was carried out with a 55-year-old woman,
who will be called “Katherine”, with a neuro-linguistic
disorder
characterized
by
Broca’s
aphasia.
Katherine
preserves comprehension skills and her biggest communication
difﬁculties are given by the impairment in the production of
oral and written language. For the purpose of this study, we
relied on the help of a Katherine’s relative, who provided
important information related to her common practices and
routines and gave us useful feedback about the validation
process. For over four years, Katherine has used AAC paper
books, mime and point out to tell a story. Currently, she takes
between 4 to 6 minutes approximately to pass a message
about her routine, in an effective way. Before this study,
Katherine was trained, during a week, in the use of the
proposed system. Setting up was performed with Katherine’s
most frequently activities.
Katherine’s daily activities were monitored during 15
days. At the end of each day, she was asked to use the system
to create ﬁve sentences corresponding to the most relevant
performed activities. Her relative followed the process and,
in a few cases, helped her in the message composition. For
the sake of validation, the efﬁcacy of the communication
0 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
Time of phrase construction (seconds) 
Number of Phrase 
Traditional Communication Board 
Assistive Express Spanish 
The proposed system 
Figure 6. Time taken for healthy people to create phrases with three
different AAC systems.
process was measured by validating the message content with
the Katherine’s relative and by asking to 20 receivers if they
could understand the messages. The efﬁciency was estimated
by gauging the time taken by Katherine to create an utterance;
and, the user experience was evaluated by asking to Katherine
her judgment about the application.
The study showed promising results considering that: (1)
the communication process could be established between
Katherine and other people through the system, the receivers
understood on average the 81% of the 75 sentences analyzed.
The main issues for the messages understanding were due
to their telegraphic structure. (2) The average time used by
Katherine was t = 3.11min - σ = 0.63min, revealing, a
signiﬁcant reduction in time spent on message composition,
achieving an effective and efﬁcient communication process. (3)
According to her own perception, conﬁrmed by her relative,
Katherine enjoyed the experience of using this technology,
considering that she could improved her communication
process and she was excited about the possibility to use this
system at home or to take it with her everywhere. Actually,
according to Katherine’s review, she said: “I liked how I
did it, it is great, I can talk better. Of course it is very
useful and very good. I want to use it. It is beautiful. I can
use it here or there and tell him or her. Thank you”. The
moments that she required help were due to problems related
with understanding words, which are typical limitations of
her disorder.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper proposed a novel approach about a user-centric
recommendation model for an AAC system, which improves
the message generation time by suggesting and predicting
the
main
components
of
a
phrase.
In
addition,
the
proposal can be adapted to other applications as it is
considered as a general recommendation model. The model
relates speciﬁc domain knowledge with recommendation
techniques to enhance communication process for people
with
language
disorders.
The
model
supports
multiple
criteria recommendation, adaptive training, coherent relations
between criteria, regardless the selection order; and it uses
knowledge representation to add contextual information to the
recommendation. Results of the veriﬁcation and validation test
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

demonstrated that the model led to signiﬁcant improvements
in user performance in terms of efﬁciency and effectiveness.
The prediction rate of 76.87% shows that the system has
good performance in recommendation processes. However,
the PR can be increased over time as the user uses the
system. Also, through the veriﬁcation with healthy people, it
is exposed that the proposed AAC system has the potential
to provide an effective mean of generating novel messages in
less time. In addition, the validation with the aphasic person
lets make evident promising results in the improvement of the
communication processes of people with language disorders.
From this work, it can be proposed the following studies
as future work: ﬁrst, the validation and veriﬁcation process
showed that the participants had difﬁculties at the interpretation
of the telegraphic style of the messages. Therefore, further
studies aims to create a method for language structuring
in order to improve syntactic coherency. Second, messages
created are very general and lack of speciﬁcity in the user’s
personal information. Hence, it is required to customize the
ontology to add speciﬁc information for each user. However,
this presents a major challenge in terms of the knowledge
domain scalability and information coupling. Finally, to
improve system usability, it is necessary to conduct user
experience studies to design and develop an adapted Graphical
User Interface (GUI) and multimedia content (animations,
pictures, videos, texts) to represent concepts of the ontology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors of this paper would like to thank the 21
participants who participated in the validation and veriﬁcation
testing. This work was developed in the framework of project
INV ING-1534 and funded by the Research Vice-Rectory
of the Universidad Militar Nueva Granada (UMNG), validity
period 2014.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Watzlawick, J. B. Bavelas, and D. D. Jackson, Pragmatics of human
communication: A study of interactional patterns, pathologies, and
paradoxes.
WW Norton and Company, 2011.
[2]
S. Baxter, P. Enderby, P. Evans, and S. Judge, “Barriers and
facilitators to the use of high-technology augmentative and alternative
communication devices: a systematic review and qualitative synthesis,”
International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders,
vol. 47, no. 2, 2012, pp. 115–129.
[3]
K. Wiegand, “Semantic disambiguation of non-syntactic and continuous
motion text entry for aac,” ACM SIGACCESS Accessibility and
Computing, no. 105, 2013, pp. 38–43.
[4]
J. Light and D. McNaughton, “The changing face of augmentative
and alternative communication: Past, present, and future challenges,”
Augmentative and Alternative Communication, vol. 28, no. 4, 2012,
pp. 197–204.
[5]
L. Janice and M. David, “Putting people ﬁrst: Re-thinking the
role of technology in augmentative and alternative communication
intervention,” Augmentative and Alternative Communication, vol. 29,
no. 4, 2013, pp. 299–309.
[6]
J. Light and D. McNaughton, “Communicative competence for
individuals who require augmentative and alternative communication:
A new deﬁnition for a new era of communication?” Augmentative and
Alternative Communication, vol. 30, no. 1, 2014, pp. 1–18.
[7]
A. Stent and S. Bangalore, Natural Language Generation in Interactive
Systems.
Cambridge University Press, 2014.
[8]
K. Wiegand and R. Patel, “Symbolpath: a continuous motion overlay
module for icon-based assistive communication,” in Proceedings of the
14th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and
accessibility.
ACM, 2012, pp. 209–210.
[9]
E. Reiter, R. Turner, N. Alm, R. Black, M. Dempster, and A. Waller,
“Using nlg to help language-impaired users tell stories and participate
in social dialogues,” in Proceedings of the 12th European Workshop
on Natural Language Generation.
Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2009, pp. 1–8.
[10]
X. Ma, S. Nikolova, and P. R. Cook, “W2ane: when words are
not enough: online multimedia language assistant for people with
aphasia,” in Proceedings of the 17th ACM international conference on
Multimedia.
ACM, 2009, pp. 749–752.
[11]
K. Wiegand and R. Patel, “Non-syntactic word prediction for aac,” in
Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Speech and Language Processing
for Assistive Technologies. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2012, pp. 28–36.
[12]
K. Vertanen and P. O. Kristensson, “The imagination of crowds:
conversational aac language modeling using crowdsourcing and large
data sources,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing.
Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2011, pp. 700–711.
[13]
H. Trinh, A. Waller, K. Vertanen, P. O. Kristensson, and V. L.
Hanson, “iscan: a phoneme-based predictive communication aid for
nonspeaking individuals,” in Proceedings of the 14th international ACM
SIGACCESS conference on Computers and accessibility. ACM, 2012,
pp. 57–64.
[14]
M. Mitchell and R. Sproat, “Discourse-based modeling for aac,” in
Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Speech and Language Processing
for Assistive Technologies. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2012, pp. 9–18.
[15]
A. Nandi and H. Jagadish, “Effective phrase prediction,” in Proceedings
of the 33rd international conference on Very large data bases.
VLDB
Endowment, 2007, pp. 219–230.
[16]
L. Dong, P. K. Srimani, and J. Z. Wang, “Ontology graph based query
expansion for biomedical information retrieval,” in Bioinformatics and
Biomedicine (BIBM), 2011 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE,
2011, pp. 488–493.
[17]
C. Carpineto and G. Romano, “A survey of automatic query expansion
in information retrieval,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 44,
no. 1, 2012, p. 1.
[18]
D. Mancilla, S. Sastoque, J. Mendoza, and M. Iregui, “Conceptualizing
a daily activities ontology for an augmentative and alternative
communication
system,”
in
5th
Latin
American
Conference
on
Networked and Electronic Media (LACNEM-2013).
Universidad
Nacional de Colombia - Sede Manizales, 2013.
[19]
S. Sastoque, C. Narv´aez, and M. Iregui, “Ontological knowledge based
model for personalizing multimedia applications,” Ventana Inform´atica,
no. 30, 2014, pp. 175–191.
[20]
S. Sastoque, D. Mancilla, C. Narv´aez, and M. Iregui, “Case study to
validate the knowledge representation in user-centric web applications
through multimedia enriched content,” in 8th research meeting.
Universidad Militar Nueva Granada, 2013.
[21]
“Assistive
Express
Spanish,”
https://itunes.apple.com/au/app/
assistive-express-spanish/id816122415?mt=8, 2010, [Online; accessed
June-2014].
[22]
F. Ricci, L. Rokach, and B. Shapira, Introduction to recommender
systems handbook.
Springer, 2011.
[23]
J. Bobadilla, F. Ortega, A. Hernando, and A. Guti´errez, “Recommender
systems survey,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 46, 2013, pp.
109–132.
[24]
M. Ghallab, D. Nau, and P. Traverso, Automated planning: theory and
practice.
Elsevier, 2004.
[25]
S. M. LaValle, Planning algorithms. Cambridge university press, 2006.
[26]
S. Staab and R. Studer, Handbook on ontologies.
Springer, 2010.
[27]
T. R. Gruber, “Toward principles for the design of ontologies used for
knowledge sharing?” International journal of human-computer studies,
vol. 43, no. 5, 1995, pp. 907–928.
[28]
S. Sastoque, D. Mancilla, and M. Iregui, “A bag of words based
method for information extraction in simple texts,” in 3rd International
Multimedia Congress.
Universidad Militar Nueva Granada, 2013.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

