 
 
 Interface Design Techniques for Electronic Nose Sensors:A Survey 
 
Saeed Samadi 
Dept. of Food Biotechnology 
Research Institute of Food Science & Technology (RIFST) 
 Mashhad, Iran 
s.samadi@rifst.ac.ir 
 
Abstract—Electronic nose systems comprise a more or less 
sophisticated hardware that is incorporated with sensors, 
electronics, pumps, and flow controller, where the software 
components 
ensure 
suitable 
technological 
hardware 
monitoring, data pre-processing, statistical analysis, and 
display of processed data. The current paper seeks to survey 
on interface design techniques for electronic nose sensors, with 
a specific focus on interface circuit design techniques for signal 
conditioning of electronic nose sensors. In addition, the paper 
classifies these circuits into two primary categories: integrated 
circuits and non-integrated circuits. Lastly, tables are provided 
to compare frequent methods used and specific application of 
the e-nose. 
 
Keywords- Electronic nose; Sensor; Interface; Circuit    
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Electronic noses incorporate an array of chemical sensors 
that have varied specificities. They simultaneously respond 
to the volatile chemicals present in a gas sample [1]. 
According to recent researches, these sensors have cognitive 
ability based on human-computer interaction by means of 
sensor information processing. This makes researches related 
to this technology to employ a convergence of electronic, 
mechanical, and chemical engineering research [2]. 
Therefore, the entire performance of an e-nose system 
largely 
relies 
on 
the 
individual 
effectiveness 
and 
performance of its constituent features [3]. This implies that 
careful selection and design of frontal nose signals at the 
posterior of the conditioning circuit is of critical significance 
if optimum performance of the artificial odor sensing system 
is to be realized [4]. For this reason, the current research 
paper aims to survey the interface circuit design for signal 
conditioning of electronic nose systems. The paper classifies 
these circuits into two primary categories, which include: 
integrated 
circuits 
(which 
use 
very-large-scale 
integration (VLSI) circuits and sensors both on a chip), and 
non-integrated circuits (which uses discrete electronic 
components, such as microcontrollers, field programmable 
gate arrays (FPGAs), programmable logic devices (PLDs), 
and operational amplifiers (Op-Amps). At the end, tables are 
provided to compare frequent methods used and specific 
application of the e-nose.  
The first section of this paper will discuss different types 
of integrated circuits as proposed by different experts. 
Besides, there will be a discussion on the different types of 
technologies employed in developing these circuits. This will 
provide the reader with a deeper understanding on how these 
circuits operate with their significance. Section two will 
discuss the various types of non-integrated circuits. Thereby, 
it will also help the reader to get a deeper meaning of these 
circuits. There will also be a discussion on applications of 
these circuits in this section using a wide range of examples. 
The last section of the paper will summarize the whole paper 
in a qualitative analysis format and will include comparison 
table for these methods and for the application of circuits. 
Also, the paper ends with a conclusion of the whole study. 
II. 
INTEGRATED APPROACH  
In the paper published by Koickal and colleagues [5], the 
authors have discussed extensively about VLSI circuit 
design and implementation of the components of an 
adaptive neuromorphic odor sensing chip. This integrated 
circuit system is composed of three systems, which include 
an on-chip adaptive neuromorphic olfactory model, on-chip 
sensor interface circuitry, and an on-chip chemosensor array. 
This system is fabricated on a single chip platform that 
utilizes the three component functional circuitry constituents. 
During the 2011 14th International Symposium on Olfaction 
and Electronic Nose, Aziz et al. [6] presented their findings, 
where they proposed a different VLSI model that integrates 
nine separate neuromorphic chips with an aim of creating a 
comprehensive signal conditioning circuit, which is also 
capable of solving extremely complex odor sensing 
problems. The typical circuit arrangement and functionality 
of the VLSI chip is shown in Fig. 1.  
Furthermore, an earlier dissertation presented by Kea-
Tiong [7], proposes integrated system capable of applying an 
interface circuit that is represented as an analogue signal that 
can be amplified, linearized, offset, altered and compensated 
for temperature by integrating multiple platform chips. In the 
circuit design process, the primary approach is to incorporate 
a power connecting source and field-effect transistors (FET) 
sensor arrays. This is integrated into a differential circuit 
used in the processing of signals accelerated from the 
difference between FET coated array and active FET sensor 
array. This allows existing common mode signal to be 
suppressed at the analogue signal input processing unit. At 
this stage, band-pass filtering is taken into consideration in 
removing high frequency signal interface and effects related 
to low frequency drift. Temperature variations introduced by 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
electronics, analyze mixture and air passed over sensors are 
detected by a chip diode at this point [8].  
 
 
Figure 1: Typical circuit arrangement and functionality of the VLSI chip 
On the other hand, the chemosensor arrays consist of 
diverse sensor types adjusted to react to different 
biochemical complexes. These heterogeneous arrays have 
the potential to proliferate selectivity in the artificial 
olfactory system recognition tasks while imitating the 
function of the mammalian olfactory structure [9]. The 
chemosensor array is used as a platform on which olfactory 
sensors are implemented where carbon black composites are 
used as a sensing material together with an incorporated 
signal processing circuit [10]. This sensor interface circuit, as 
described later, contains a cancellation dc circuit, which 
ameliorates the loss of measurement ranges linked to array 
sensors. The signal processing point is formed with spiking 
neuron design from the olfactory bulb architecture. In 
addition to this chemosensor array, an on-chip spike-time-
reliant conditioning-learning circuitry is incorporated to 
dynamically familiarize with weights needed in the 
classification and detection of odors [6].  
It is crucial to implement an on-chip learning program in 
the chemosensor array design, so as to enable the system to 
sense, recognize, and distinguish odors before passing them 
into the next sensor interface circuit [7]. Koickal et al. notes 
that this approach provides a compensation for the VLSI 
analog imperfections and enables it emulate plasticity 
function present in biological olfactory systems in line with 
the environment where the device must operate [5]. In most 
research works, the chemosensor arrays circuit elaborated 
above has been successfully fabricated and emulated in 
silicon [3-6].  
In the neuromorphic olfactory chip, the olfactory bulb 
circuit is fitted with an input that has chemosensors 
fabricated with a 0.6 μm Austria Micro System. Through 
chemoresistive arrays, a chemically sensitive film is fitted to 
measure sensor responses as a factor of change in resistance. 
Additionally, carbon black coating is used as a polymer 
material depending on the targeted odor employed in the 
pattern recognition task. Operatively, the materials work by 
merging carbon nanospheres with an insulation rubber that 
provide electrical conductivity to the final resultant mixture. 
However, individual chemoresistant sensors across the 
circuit can be achieved by depositing carbon black polymers 
between any two sensor conductors. Gatet, Tap, and Lescure 
[11] denote that every sensor along the circuit is usually 
fitted with a baseline cancellation circuit, sensor, and a 
source of current. Hsieh & Tang [12] use multiplex 
mechanisms with an aim of giving access to individual 
sensing arrays without any complex circuits. Nonetheless, in 
integrated circuit approach, the problem is creating a sensing 
array that has individual outputs directly fitted to signal 
conditioning so that there is a continuous sensor response 
that is interfaced to neuronal circuits short of complex 
connections in achieving optimal amplification.  
Once the chemosensor array is in place, the next stage is 
to design the sensor interface circuitry to mimic the 
neuromorphic model. Chible [9] recommends an active 
VLSI analogue input to ensure complexity and parameters of 
the model are quickly mapped to the VLSI environment. An 
undesirable characteristic associated with a heterogeneous 
chemosensor array is the large variation in baseline dc 
signals among the different sensors types in the array. Signal 
conditioning is aimed at performing a number of critical 
functions 
including 
noise 
cancelling, 
temperature 
compensation, offset control, amplification, linearization, 
multiplying array output signals, and sensor biasing [4].  
According to [5], circuit building is achieved through two 
approaches: focusing on sensory output and designing an 
adaptive 
neuromorphic 
olfaction 
chip. 
First, 
the 
neuromorphic olfaction chip is realized by implementing 
various chip cycles. On sensory approach, the primary 
challenge in designing circuits is to compensate large 
differences in baseline sensors in the chemosensor arrays that 
can result in unrecoverable loss of measurement ranges. This 
is achieved by implementing a dc cancellation on the chip so 
to 
annul 
variations 
in 
baseline 
sensors. 
Second, 
implementation of neuromorphic model is linked to 
designing a circuit that has large time constraints and at the 
same time maintaining the neuron structure simple while 
occupying a limited space in the silicon area [7].  A case by 
Koickal et al. [5], uses simple operational transconductance 
amplifier-capacitor (OTA-C) structures to design on-chip 
learning circuit, synapses and neurons. In addition, the need 
for large space capacitors can be eliminated through 
reduction of transconductance on the OTA-C stage in the 
300ms range. 
III. NON-INTEGRATED APPROACH 
A range of different circuit designs used in non-
integrated systems applies discrete electronic components, 
such as microcontrollers, FPGAs, PLDs and Op-Amps. First, 
in the Op-amp, is well designed to address a number of 
challenges; variance in baseline resistance, which can be 
fabricated easily into tens of ohms to infinity ohms when 
polymer based resistance sensors are used, and the Op-amp 
also 
address 
large 
coefficient 
in 
temperatures 
in 
chemosensors which can reach 10(-2) Cº [13]. A signal 
conditioning approach based on Op-amp can solve this 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
problem as it is based on a principle proposed by Hatfield 
[14]. Hence this has the capability to remove common mode 
effects. The approach has been proposed previously by Dyer 
and Gardner [15], and also reflected in the works by Hatfield 
and Chueh [16], who instigated for its need to be reserved as 
a circuit interface in polymer sensor conductors. The circuit 
is formed by using two identical chemo resistors as shown in 
Fig. 2, where Ri is passivized with an impervious coating. In 
this case, the Op-amp circuit can be grouped as an innovative 
technique of an active divider circuit. The first Op-amp 
senses the current from the virtual earth and modulated by 
the passivized chemosensor (Ri), when it is introduced into 
the sensor. This offsets the baseline voltage present in the 
Op-amp circuit and this sensitivity can be amplified through 
a high gain voltage amplifier. 
 
Figure 2: The ratio metric op-amp circuit 
 
The second approach applies the FPGA implementation, 
where its olfactory circuit is interconnected to multiple non-
integrated chipsets. The sensors employ chemo-sensor 
carbon black with a signal processor circuit. Various 
scholars, such as Sudalina and Nalini [17], who designed 
integrated sensor systems, have designed the circuit and 
technology using spike time linked neuromorphic model to 
mimic an e-nose system in FPGA. The circuit includes a 
chemical sensor with a dc cancellation and spiking neuronal 
network is merged to form a signal processor while the 
learning platform continuously weighs classification and 
detection [4]. 
Tan and Halim [18], based on data acquisition system 
shown in Fig. 3, have developed another non-integrated 
technology that runs on the FPGA platform but utilizes 
metal oxide technology. The technology is applied in 
identification of sulphate reducing bacteria that causes 
microbial corrosion in anaerobic environments. The sensor 
type is composed of an array of semiconductor metal oxides 
similar to one applied by Zhai et al. [19], an artificial neural 
network, and a data processing unit. The circuit architecture 
has two components: one between FPGA and the sensor, 
and another one between FPGA and the PC (Fig. 4). The 
first structure consists of the sensing oxide gas, which is 
designed to detect analog signal outputs so that the data can 
be processed at the FPGA interface, while the second 
component uses Quartus II software and Verilog language 
for learning the odor in the system. Modern approaches that 
have been developed are aimed at speeding or reducing the 
period taken to detect the presence of sulphate-reducing 
bacteria. 
      Another non-integrated system has been proposed by 
Tang et al. [20], where a portable e-nose system is built in 
printed circuit board (PCB) interface with 8 commercially 
available microprocessors, and a sensor array (Fig. 5.a). 
Through the circuit, there is a data acquisition card and a 
display implemented on LabVIEW program for certifying 
the e-nose system. It is designed to mimic an olfactory 
system that can test complex fruit odors including litech, 
banana, and lemon. The interface PCB comprises an 8-bit 
analog-to-digital converter (ADC), eight to one multiplexer 
(MUX), and an eight interface processing circuits (IPC). 
Eight sensors are connected to 8 interface processing units 
and this adapts actively to the baseline voltage circuit. The 
IPC operates on two modes; sensing mode and adaption 
mode. The principle works similar to that developed by 
Harun, Covington and Gardner [21], where in the adaption 
mode, the circuit regulates its operational point to a given 
baseline preset voltage while the sensing mode establishes 
gate voltage by using a negative loop on the odor passed 
across the system (Fig. 5.b).  
 
 
 
Figure 3:  Data acquisition system architecture 
 
 
 
Figure 4:  Signal circuit detection interface 
 
Based on Figaro sensor system, Mamat, Samad, and 
Hannan [22] implemented a technology for implementing 
and classifying beverages. Their circuit design incorporated 
temperature sensors and commercially available metal oxide 
gas sensors. The system uses Principal Component Analysis 
(PCA) and Multi-Layer Perception Neural Network (MLP) 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
platform and diverse sensor batches to authenticate the 
model’s reproducibility. For the circuit to work, the system 
requires a simple measuring and heating model. The two are 
built inside and require a 40 °C, which is realized through a 
constant voltage supply similar to work by Peris and Gilbert 
[23]. Here, two voltage inputs operate at 12 V and 5 V 
circuits (Fig. 6.a & 6.b). Units of 5 V are needed to stabilize 
the inner sensor circuit unit while the 12 V circuit is required 
in measuring the output sensor (Fig. 6.c). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: (a) Interface PCB, (b) Basic architecture of the processing circuit 
 
On their part Kim, Yang, Ha, Pyo, and Chang [24] have 
proposed a miniaturized e-nose system developed using 
personal digital assistant (PDA) and 8-channel vapor 
detection array. The technology is based on PCB interface 
circuit and it is used to successfully classify and distinguish 
between essential oils including eucalyptus plants, lavender, 
and mint. The circuit is made up of manually assembled 
material including processing program, data acquisition, 
sensor chip array, and test samples. The primary element of 
the circuit is the 8 channel array chip whose fabrication is 
achieved by the carbon-black polymer, established in a 
substrate flexible polyimide. Inside the 8-sensor chip, there is 
a voltage divider system that weights large standard voltage 
(Fig. 7). The system is applied in sensing a wide array of 
fruit odors such as oranges, mangoes, and black-current. 
Furthermore, Chiu, Tang, Chang, and Hsieh [25] have 
proposed a low power signal sensor technology based on a 
multi-walled nanotubes (MWNTs) circuitry interface, which 
is a polymer that swells reversibly upon exposure to 
chemicals. At low power, the sensor technology is 
formulated to identify 2-Butanone, chloroform, and carbon 
tetrachloride. The circuit chip is based on microprocessor 
embedded on pattern sensing algorithm, digital-analog 
converter, and interface circuit (Fig. 8). The adaptive 
interface circuitry has a sensing mode and an adaptive mode 
and the system works like the one proposed by Mamat, 
Samad, and Hannan [22] as previously discussed. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Figure 6: Interface circuits for (a) TGS8xx sensor, (b) TGS2xxx sensor, 
and  (c)  TGS6812 sensor   
 
Another low power identifier system has been proposed 
by Young et al. [26] to form an intelligent wireless e-nose 
network (WENN) based on microcontroller interface. The 
interface is designed to incorporate two sections: first, there 
is a saturator that mixes with the target gas before releasing 
to the testing chamber; two, the WENN measures periodical 
gas entry from a thermal modulated microarray and 
neuronal-fuzzy network. The WENN system is designed to 
identify two binary gases, which are H2S and NH3.  
 
 
Figure 7: PDA-based E-Nose system interface circuit 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Adaptive interface circuit in Low power e-nose chip 
 
In micro-electromechanical field, Stavrov et al. [27] have 
proposed a piezoresistive sensor technology centered on fast 
signal processing and parallel operation. The system is based 
on microcontroller circuit and mostly that of a silicon 
cantilever and Wheatstone bridge. The length of the 
cantilever is designed to avoid mechanical cross talk and to 
simplify resonance frequency. The system also incorporates 
4 input/output (I/O) to operate by deflecting self-sensing and 
in supplying power. It measures a resonance spectrum in 
mechanical checkups applied in e-nose during the 
identification and characterization of various analytes. This 
device can be produced from manufacturing technology, 
basing on micro-mechanical cantilevers. In such a case, it 
relies on the ability to implement a parallel operation and a 
faster signal processing.     
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Table I gives a comparative summary of technological 
sensors largely used, their applications, and their interface 
circuit and research references. From the above analysis, 
about sensor types and their application it is clear that 
interface circuitry is a very important factor in achieving an 
appropriate 
technology 
and 
circuit 
olfactory 
sensor 
sensitivity. Most sensitivity circuits used in inorganic sensors 
employ microcontrollers, while organic sensors are largely 
used in organic olfactory systems. Even if the circuit 
sensitivities may be elevated with amplification, this 
improvement may be marginal because of the baseline 
voltage component in the signal amplification.  On circuit 
interface and sensitivity application best circuit performance 
is achieved by eliminating sensor baseline voltage. 
The circuits discussed above use the simplest technique of 
counteracting the baseline voltage through its second 
potential divider. As deliberated previously, a signal 
conditioning 
circuit 
that 
has 
a 
linear 
productivity 
characteristic imparts itself to the role of odor classification 
and analysis. Therefore, it may seem from the analyzed 
circuits that the most suitable presentation, in terms of 
linearity and sensitivity is ratio metric op-amp and the 
constant current resistance interrogation circuits. The Op-
amp circuit interface has a large advantage of excluding the 
temperature effect from the baseline output signals through 
the application of a passivized active sensor copies.  
 
 
TABLE I: DIFFERENT TECHNOLOGICAL SENSORS, THEIR APPLICATION 
AND TYPE OF INTERFACE CIRCUITRY USED 
Technology/Sensor 
type 
Application 
Interface 
Circuitry 
Reference 
1. Data acquisition 
system 
Sulphate 
reducing 
bacteria 
FPGA 
[18] 
2. Portable e-nose 
Complex fruit 
odors e.g. 
lemon, banana, 
litech 
Interface PCB 
 (printed circuit 
board) 
[20] 
3. Figaro sensor-
Measurement and 
Classification 
Fruit sensor-
black current, 
mango, orange 
Microcontrollers 
PCA, and MLP 
[22] 
4. Miniaturized e-
nose 
Classification 
of essential oils 
eucalyptus, 
lavender, mint.  
PCB 
[24] 
5. Low power e-nose 
chip 
Sensing 2-
butanone, 
chloroform, 
carbon 
tetrachloride  
MWNTs 
[25] 
6. Intelligent wireless 
e-nose (WENN) 
Binary gas 
mixtures H2s, 
NH3 
Microcontrollers  
[26] 
7. Piezoresistive 
sensors 
Micro-electro-
mechanical 
system 
Microcontroller/ 
Wheatstone 
brdge 
[27] 
8. Frontal-end signal 
Odor sensing 
Ratio-metric Op-
amp 
[28] 
9. Analog circuit 
design 
Odor 
classification 
and detection  
Analog VLSI 
[5] 
    
It can be established that, among the signal-conditioning 
circuits examined, Op-amp circuits address majority of the 
issues that have been defined previously.     
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Individual e-nose performance relies on its performance 
and effectiveness and its constituent interface circuit. This 
survey paper has looked into various sensor technologies, 
their application and circuitry interfaces they use. It is clear 
that careful selection and design of frontal nose signals at the 
posterior of the conditioning circuit is of critical significance 
if optimum performance of the artificial odor sensing system 
is to be realized. However, most cases we have presented are 
proposals in theoretical works and studies that need to be 
developed further to determine their application in real-time 
odor sensing. Future technological aspects should address 
various challenges that are expected in the ultimate 
integration of a complete structure. This will require careful 
deposition of sensor material with wide diversity of chemical 
sensors that are needed together with screen process for 
every sensor, so as to ensure there is ideal chemical response 
recognition. Systems and circuit issues, such as the use of 
address event representation or spike output, layout 
optimization, component mismatch, and lasting weight 
storage also should be addressed.  
Most examples for integrated circuits presented in this 
paper have differential circuits with ability to process signals 
accelerated from the difference between FET coated array 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
and active FET sensor array. Thus, allowing existing 
common mode signal to be suppressed at the analogue signal 
input-processing unit. On the other hand, most non-
integrated circuits presented here have temperature sensors 
and commercially available metal oxide gas sensors. As 
evidenced from this paper, non-integrated circuits are 
characterized by change in resistance and low power 
consumption. From various findings in this paper, most of 
these circuits rely on Principal Component Analysis and 
Multi-Layer Perception Neural Network platforms and have 
diverse sensor batches for their systems authentication. 
Hence, this new technology is reliable for commercial 
purposes.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. J. Kwon, D. G. Kim, and K. S. Hong, “Multiple Odor 
Recognition and Source Direction Estimation with an 
Electronic Nose System,” International Journal of Distributed 
Sensor Networks, vol. 2013, 7 pages, 2013.  
[2] A.Z. Berna, A. R. Anderson, and S. C. Trowell, “Bio-
Benchmarking of Electronic Nose Sensors,” PLoSOne, vol. 4, 
no.7:e6406, 2009, doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0006406. 
[3] D. Jan, W. Hirnet, and S. Charpak,  “External tufted cells 
drive the output of olfactory bulb glomeruli,” J. Neurosci, vol. 
29, no.70, 2009, pp. 2043–2052. 
[4] J. Brader,W. Senn, and S. Fusi, “Learning real-world stimuli 
in a neural network with spike-driven synaptic dynamics. 
Neural Comput, vol.19, no.11, 2007, pp. 2881–2912. 
[5] T. Koickal, et al., “Analog VLSI Circuit Implementation of an 
Adaptive Neuromorphic Olfaction Chip,” Circuits and 
Systems I: Regular Papers, IEEE Transactions on, vol.54, 
no.1, 2007, pp.60-74. 
[6] A. Aziz, F. Muhammad, F. Harun, J. Covington, and J.  
Gardner, “Towards an analogue neuromorphic VLSI 
instrument for the sensing of complex odours,” 14th 
International Symposium on Olfaction and Electronic Nose, 
New York, 2011, pp. 223-224. 
[7] T. Kea-Tiong, “Neuromorphic VLSI circuits for an electronic 
nose chip,”  Dissertation, 2001, pp.2-7. 
[8] A. Wilson and M. Baietto, “Review: Applications and 
Advances in Electronic-Nose Technologies,” Sensors, vol.9, 
2009, pp.5099-5148. 
[9] H. Chible, “Analog Circuit for Synapse Neural Networks 
VLSI Implementation, Electronics, Circuits and Systems,” 7th 
IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Circuits and 
Systems, Jounieh, Lebanon: IEEE , 2000, pp. 1004-1007. 
[10] Y. S. Kim, et al. , “Portable Electronic Nose System Based on 
the Carbon Black-Polymer Composite Sensor Array,” Sens. 
Actuat. B-Chem, vol.108, 2005, pp.285-291. 
[11] L. Gatet, B. Tap, and M. Lescure, “Analog neural network 
implementation 
for 
a 
real-time 
surface 
classification 
application,” IEEE Sens J, vol.8, 2008, pp. 1413–1421. 
[12] H. Hsieh and K. Tang, ,“ VLSI implementation of a bio-
inspired olfactory spiking neural network,” IEEE Trans. 
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst, vol. 23, 2012, pp.1065–1073. 
[13] M. Bicego, G. Tessari, G. Tecchiolli, and M. Bettinelli, “A 
comparative analysis of basic pattern recognition techniques 
for the development of small size electronic nose,”  Sensors 
and Actuators B: Chemical,vol. 85, no. 1, 2002, pp. 137-144. 
[14] M. Cole, J. Gardner, and P. Bartlett, “Artifcial Chemical 
Sensing: Olfaction and the Electronic Nose,”  Electrochemical 
Society, 15, 2001, pp.117-120.  
[15] D. C. Dyer and J. W. Gardner. “High-precision intelligent 
interface for a hybrid electronic nose,”  Sensors and Actuators 
A: Physical ,vol.62, no.1, 1997, pp.724-728. 
[16] J. Hatfield and H. Chueh, “A real-time data acquisition 
system for a hand-held electronic nose,” Sensors and 
Actuators . B: Chemica, vol.83, no.1, 2002, pp.262-269. 
[17] D. Sudalina and J. Nalini,  “FPGA Implementation of a Bio 
inspired olfactory system for odor Identification and 
Classification using ANN Algorithm,” International Journal 
of Emerging Trends in Electrical and Electronics, vol.3, no.2, 
2013, pp.68-72. 
[18] T. Tan and A. Halim, “Data Acquisition system development 
of an electronic nose for sulphate-reducing bacteria 
detection,” 4th International Conference on Intelligent and 
Advanced Systems, Penang, Malaysia , 2012, pp. 567-571. 
[19] T. Zhai, et al., “A Comprehensive Review of One-
Dimensional Metal-Oxide Nanostructure Photodetectors,” 
Sensors, vol.9, 2009, pp.6504-6529. 
[20] K. T. Tang, et al., “Development of a Portable Electronic 
Nose System for the Detection and Classification of Fruity 
Odors,” Sensors, vol.10, 2010, pp. 9179-9193. 
[21] F. Harun, J. Covington, and J. Gardner, “ Portable e-Mucosa 
System: Mimicking the Biological Olfactory,” Procedia 
Chem, 2009, pp.991-994. 
[22] M. Mamat, S. Samad, and M. Hannan, “ An Electronic Nose 
for Reliable Measurement and Correct Classification of 
Beverages,”  Sensors, vol.11, 2011, pp. 6435-6453. 
[23] M. Peris and L. Gilabert, “A 21st century technique for food 
control: Electronic noses,” Anal. Chim. Acta, vol.638, 2009, 
pp.1-15. 
[24] Y. Kim,Y. Yang, S. C. Ha, H. B. Pyo, and  A. Chang, 
“Miniaturized Electronic Nose System Based on a Personal 
Digital Assistant,”  ETRI Journal, 2005, pp.586-593. 
[25] S. W. Chiu, K. T. Tang, M. F. Chang, and C. C. Hsieh, “A 
Low-Power Electronic Nose Signal-Processing Chip for a 
Portable Artificial Olfaction System,” IEEE Transactions on 
Biomedical Circuits and Systems, vol.5, no.4, 2011, pp.380-
389. 
[26] W.Young, H. Jung, and J. Jeon, “An Intelligent Wireless 
Electronic Nose Node for Monitoring Gas Mixtures Using,” 
CIMSA 
2007 
- 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Computational Intelligence for Measurement Systems and 
Applications ,Ostuni - Italy: IEEE, 2007, pp. 104-104. 
[27] V. Stavrov, E. Tomerov, G. Stavreva, V. Tsenev, and P. 
Philippov, “Novel MEMS Piezoresistive Sensor Array Cell,” 
In Electronics Technology, 30th International Spring Seminar 
on, IEEE, 2007, pp. 497-500. 
[28] K. Arshak, G. Lyons, L. Cavanagh, S. Clifford , “Front-end 
signal conditioning used for resistance-based sensors in 
electronic nose systems: a review,” Sensor Review, vol.23, 
no.3, 2003, pp.230-241. 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

