Design and Personalisation 
By a Person or for a Person? 
 
Iryna Kuksa 
School of Art and Design 
Nottingham Trent University 
 Nottingham, UK 
e-mail: iryna.kuksa@ntu.ac.uk 
Tom Fisher 
School of Art and Design 
Nottingham Trent University 
Nottingham, UK 
e-mail:tom.fisher@ntu.ac.uk 
 
Abstract: Personalisation permeates our everyday lives. From 
advertising to healthcare and from clothing to architecture – 
most services and products can be tailored to suit particular 
needs and preferences. This paper considers questions 
including: where does it leave designers when consumers 
specify their products? Do personalised health services deliver 
value to the tax-payer? Deriving from a symposium on the 
topic, it identifes the dimensions of the phenomenon and 
typologies within it by investigating specific instances of 
personalised designs, their consequences for users, and for 
society. The presentations to the symposium will be chapters in 
‘Design for Personalisation’ published by Gower in 2015. 
Keywords: Personalisation; inclusive design; design-led 
social innovation; mass customisation; co-creation; social policy.   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
To grasp the implications of the personalisation of 
objects, services and experiences, requires a clear 
understanding of both what we expect personhood’ to be, 
and 
of 
the 
potential 
enhancements, 
and 
threats, 
personalisation may bring to it. This is a matter of deciding 
the scope of the subject. Drawn narrowly personalisation 
appears to be a largely technical matter with instrumental 
objectives - to increase sales, to maximise clinical 
effectiveness; to give users a better experience. But the 
range of commercial, political and community interests that 
emerge around it, and the range of academic and 
professional disciplines to which it is relevant, indicates that 
if we are to fully acknowledge the implications of 
personalised designs, such a narrow scope will not do. 
Reviewing a number of current instances of personalisation 
[1] [3] [4] [5] [6] [11] [12], a principle emerges related to 
the relative agency of ‘persons’ in different scenarios of 
personalisation.  Broadly, personalisation is either done by a 
person, or for a person and through this distinction it is 
possible to delineate some of its implications. 
Co-production, co-research, co-design, co-creation are 
the buzz words of today, with communities and collective 
‘grass-roots’ 
informal 
engagement 
with 
technologies 
identified as crucial sources for innovation. The antecedents 
to this can be found in Pine’s work on ‘Mass 
Customization’ [24] that challenged the ‘one size fits all’ 
assumption of conventional mass production, emphasizing 
the importance of information for both businesses and 
consumers. Latterly, and coming from a different direction, 
Inclusive Design has made understanding and addressing 
the needs of all consumers increasingly mainstream [7].  
Although initially aimed at those excluded from a 
meaningful interaction with a product due to age or 
disability, it implies getting all users involved in all stages 
of the product development, prompting emerging business 
models that aim at meeting individual needs most 
effectively.  
Nowadays, Mass Customisation, Personalisation and Co-
creation (MCPC) strategies commonly aspire to turn 
customer heterogeneities into opportunities to profit, 
implying the question whether this ‘co-creation’, - open 
innovation and user innovation - should influence our view 
of mass customisation and personalisation. Many companies 
state that customers don’t just prefer a personalised 
experience - they expect it [8], which undoubtedly affects 
approaches to managing the design of both material and 
‘immaterial’ products, and therefore the use of information 
technologies and the data they collect.  
Our online identities, patterns of behaviour and 
purchasing history, our digital ‘fingerprints’, are easily 
traceable and may stay ‘out there’ forever. Targeted 
advertising 
and 
tailored 
‘smart’ 
content 
aims 
at 
personalising our experiences and while we are watching we 
are also watched by ‘smart’ spies that compromise our 
privacy. Personalised advertising stalks every Internet user, 
but the question of whether consumers really want to see it 
remains largely unanswered. Companies aim to reduce 
customers’ reactance to potentially intrusive marketing 
activities by improving perceived consumer control, 
allowing them to personalise the degree of intrusion.  
However, it remains to be seen whether, as consumers of 
information, we are actually in control of our privacy. 
The increasingly open sharing of personal data creates 
fears and uncertainties, which exist in tension with the 
concept of ‘personalising’ public service provision. In the 
context of neo-liberal assumptions about the virtue of 
marketising public services, public institutions face the 
impulse to both protect individuals’ sense of agency, and to 
share their data. The health information technology sector, 
for example, is being transformed by big data, aiming to 
tailor individual clinical programs for every patient and 
designing devices to create personalised fitness routines and 
treatment plans. However, the issue of data accessibility 
colours many such initiatives, raising questions about who 
should have the right of access to such sensitive information 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

(health providers, patients or all) and how it should be 
regulated. 
A full discussion of personalisation must include bottom 
up innovation by communities of practice that engage with 
technologies in new ways. It must acknowledge the 
commercial 
interests 
in 
play 
as 
the 
principle 
of 
personalisation plays out in public service provision, and the 
political background against which this takes place. It must 
recognise the implications for individuals’ sense of agency 
of the personalisation of virtual experiences. It must inspect 
the 
specifics 
of 
the 
technologies 
that 
can 
bring 
personalisation about – but a key point is that the 
personalisation phenomenon does not reduce to these 
technologies, or any of these other factors.  Its consequences 
exist in the relationships between them. This study therefore 
points to some of the challenges that arise in design for 
personalisation, looking into how organisations (and 
individuals) relate to their ‘target’ groups, examining how 
their ownership is designed, and exploring how design-led 
social 
innovation 
may 
influence 
our 
‘personalised’ 
experiences of the world around us.  
One might argue that all this innovation serves humanity 
and overlook other species. Recently, however, field 
biologists have alpstarted using ‘personalised’ electronic 
tracking devices to study the behaviour of wild, free-
ranging animals. Miniature tags containing video cameras, 
radio transmitters or physiological sensors are attached non-
permanently to the animal, to collect detailed biological 
data. For ethical reasons, and since the purpose of these 
technologies is to study natural, undisturbed behaviour, 
devices are manufactured to be as small and lightweight as 
possible. Pioneering efforts are being made in this field, to 
move away from a 'one-size-fits-all' strategy towards 
complete customisation [25] [26]. Researchers tailor units to 
suit every individual animal captured, ensuring that safe 
limits are never exceeded, and that data are strictly 
comparable across subjects. This is personalisation that goes 
beyond the human person. 
Now follows a discussion of Personalisation in relation 
to experiences and spaces, marketing and manufacture, 
provision and processes. 
II. 
DESIGNING EXPERIENCES AND SPACES 
An intersection is emerging between material spaces and 
immaterial technologies in the design of consumers’ 
experiences of retail where a range of technologies from 
internet to Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) are 
facilitating the personalisation of shopping [17].  Driven by 
consumer demand and competition, customisation and co-
creation have become increasingly significant to fashion 
brands not only through the personalisation of physical 
products, apparel, and accessories, but also through their 
distribution and the location of the customising activity 
[17]. This shift from mass to individual fashion means that 
nowadays any customer can not only borrow someone else’s 
personality (through, for example, customising a famous 
footballer’s T-shirt), they can also influence the perception 
of what constitutes fashion (or a particular brand or a 
product) by creating new personalised communication tools 
such as fashion blogs. Further, the concept stores of fashion 
brands have evolved from goods-centered to service-
centered locations focused on the experience of the brand. 
Their increasing use of interactive technologies, and 
omnichannel communication and distribution has led to a 
higher level of personalization. 
This movement of virtual and real fashion spaces towards 
personalisation resonates with recent art practice and 
research that focuses on how art interventions may 
potentially personalise, our engagement with public space 
and everyday objects. The works of Turner Prize-winning 
artist Mark Leckey is a good example of the artist’s 
reflection on the effects of personalisation brought by new 
technologies to inanimate objects [31]. Until recently, 
however, there has been little research done on, for example, 
measuring the impact public art has on various aspects of 
social life. According to Gheorghe [10], most previous 
studies were concerned with ‘local evaluations of effects on 
the participants in the reception of specific works of public 
art’ (p. 325). From the 2000s, however, the emphasis shifted 
towards the ‘new genre public art’ at the heart of which lays 
the 
participation 
and 
collaboration 
of 
community 
representatives in creating artworks [20] [21]. This approach 
to art-making aspires not only to facilitate ‘social change’ 
within participating communities, but also to influence and 
reconfigure public policies. Zebracki, Der Vaart and Van 
Aalst [30] synthesise  other studies [13] [14] to identify the 
following claims about the contribution made by public art to 
urban spaces: (1) physical-aesthetic: aimed at enhancing 
aesthetic quality and improving the attractiveness of a place 
to encourage better use of the public space; (2) economic: 
focused on providing marketing and place-promotion 
opportunities and encouraging public-private partnerships; 
(3) social: directed at addressing community needs and 
dealing with social exclusion by revealing fundamental 
social contradictions or undermining dominant meanings of 
urban space; and, finally, (4) cultural-symbolic: aimed at 
boosting awareness of local history, promoting cultural and 
civic identities, and at contributing to local distinctiveness 
(pp. 787-788). There is, however, little empirical evidence to 
support these claims [2] [13] [15] [30].  
The relevance of this analysis of public art to 
personalised design becomes clear when it is seen alongside 
design strategies that resemble those found in Fine Art.  
These are adopted in personalised retail spaces and some 
contemporary design professionals seek to use ‘critical 
design’ practice to raise the profile of current cultural, social 
and political issues, particularly those that derive from 
technologies. Critical design de-stabilises habitual ways of 
engaging with things, requiring any individual encountering 
such an object to ‘re-make’ it for themselves. Professionals, 
who use this design practice, frame it as ‘an affective and 
provocative agent and set out to ask more questions than they 
answer through design’, stimulating the production of 
knowledge [22]. Aligned to this, design-led social innovation 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

seeks to provide a set of skills, methods and tools for 
communities to address a variety of issues including crime, 
social exclusion and social inequalities. Public participation 
in such practices enables designers to produce solutions 
tailored to resolve issues that arise in a particular spatial or 
community setting.  
III. 
PERSONALISED MARKETING AND MANUFACTURE 
These developments imply a distinction in principle 
between instances when personalisation is done by an 
individual – where they are able to determine their 
relationship with a product or service – and cases where 
personalisation is in effect provided for an individual. This 
distinction between personalisation by and personalisation 
for a person has different permutations in different cases, but 
may be a useful way to move towards a typology of 
personalised design. 
New ‘smart’ technologies offer a dimension of 
personalisation in particular product types, especially in 
clothing.  Body scanning technology and seamless garment 
production techniques promise personalised garments in the 
near future. Initiatives that have already taken shape include 
Mi Adidas or Fila Adatto, where customers can personalise 
sports shoes in terms of colour, materials and even a personal 
logo or a name tag. These applications were introduced not 
only to test consumer demands, but also to experiment with 
new manufacturing processes. ‘Walk in, get scanned, learn 
about your feet and walk out with a pair of custom fit Fila 
Adatto shoes’ is the description of what a potential purchaser 
can achieve while using an interactive kiosk in Fila flagship 
stores [3] [32].   
Along with the benefits of personalisation, such 
innovations generate challenges in how consumers navigate 
knowledge to make informed and relatively quick decisions 
about what they want. Web 4.0 enthusiasts predict that 
intelligent software agents (such as Siri – an application for 
iPhone OS, or avatars) will be enhance the intuitiveness of 
navigation, 
acting 
as 
communication 
interfaces 
and 
providing active, personalised assistance. They will be able 
to learn a user’s preferences and interests, make suggestions, 
function with minimal supervision, customising their 
assistance to each participant [19]. Personalised applications 
for mobile phones are already pervasive, and many 
businesses endeavour to go mobile first, including the option 
of social media sharing. This inevitably raises the issue of 
privacy and personal data, an area in which legislation lags 
behind. Current research on privacy benchmarks in mobile 
application design seeks to promote responsible business 
practice by focusing on how to inform users whether an 
app’s developer has allowed it to use illegal personal data 
[18]. However, protection against this personalisation ‘for’ a 
user by an intelligent product, will take some time to 
implement.  
The emergence of smart technologies is transforming the 
approaches to design and manufacture of new products, in 
principle allowing personalisation by users/ consumers. 3D 
printing, for example, has enabled the ‘publishing’ not only 
of utility items, but also art and sculpture, changing the ways 
contemporary designers and artists conceive new ideas and 
think about future projects. Some futurists argue that 3D 
printing technology is moving towards desktop size, which 
may enable direct digital manufacturing from one’s home 
office. Others remain less optimistic [1]. Of course 
customisation is nothing new as people could always modify 
and personalise products they bought to serve their 
individual purposes. But the difference nowadays is that with 
access to the relevant technology people with no skills or 
specialised training [27] could make an utterly new product 
from scratch, market it and sell it, which could challenge 
existing business models. 
IV. 
PERSONALISED PROVISION AND PROCESSES 
Today, personalisation is placed firmly in the centre of 
social policy in the UK [12] and Europe. Its supporters 
assume that individuals are aware of their specific needs and 
being able to satisfy them brings a desirable autonomy – 
personalised clothing or footwear may indeed be more 
valuable to its owner than items that are just the same as all 
the others.  However, assuming that this principle applies in 
the same way to all instances of personalisation is 
contradicted by the example of the negative consequences of 
the ‘automatic’ personalisation of mobile apps above.  
Increasingly users of public services are treated as consumers 
and an assumption that personalising those services will 
therefore bring unalloyed benefit is evident in the design of 
some services – in healthcare for instance.  ‘Fetishising the 
‘personal’ or individual in a collectively funded service 
brings many risks and may further entrench undesirable 
inequalities’ [6]. This ‘fetishisation’ may derive more from 
political drives to marketise services than a concern for 
service users – in a medical setting they may not feel capable 
of making such choices.  
This is not to say, however, that particular treatments 
may not be usefully adapted to deal with variations in ability. 
Designing services and responsive modes for diverse 
populations with large in-group variation in terms of 
physical, cognitive and perceptual abilities [4] may bring 
direct benefit to individuals with particular personal needs, 
for example in teaching which is implemented according to 
the learners’ abilities. The aim here is to reverse the logic of 
the educational system from the disability point of view, 
balancing the level of challenge for each learner, to ensure a 
sense of achievement and progress [4] [28].  
The prevention of disease by predictive diagnosis 
emphasises the importance of risk stratification in order to 
personalise healthcare regimes on the basis of risk patterns 
[11]. While this approach is underpinned by a discourse of 
increased choice, empowerment and responsibility [9] it 
exists in a particular relationship to issues around the 
provision of personalised public health services.  Along with 
new technologies of healthcare such as antenatal imaging, 
this approach to personalising healthcare changes everyone 
into a potential patient – it pathologises states of health in 
which actual illness is absent. Just as predictive medicine in 
effect makes everybody a ‘medical case’ by definition, 
antenatal imaging ‘constitutes the fetus … as a patient’ [29] 
(p. 25). 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

However, alongside these consequences in healthcare, 
technology also facilitates production of language-using 
systems (e.g., smart trainers) that may communicate to users 
personally helping them to acquire new knowledge, or 
change their behaviour. Some researchers argue however, 
that if such systems are given personalities and human 
voices, there is a danger that users may start attributing 
social agency and moral qualities to them – relating to them 
and having feelings for them  [23]. It is entirely possible to 
have personalisation without personality.      
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Personalisation is now ubiquitous and we encounter it at 
some level on an everyday basis. What is crucial, however, 
is that we have enough knowledge of this new paradigm to 
understand it, to adjust to it, to make it serve us and to be 
aware of its potential consequences for our relationship with 
designed things, and each other. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank all speakers at the Design and 
Personalisation Symposium, who are also contributors to the 
forthcoming book commissioned by Gower: Christopher 
Barnatt, David Brown, David Burden, Katherine Checkland, 
Olga Golubnitschaja, Anthony Kent, George Kuk, Mathew 
Malpass, Jon Oberlander, and Matthew Sinclair. The 
Symposium was organised by the authors and took place at 
Nottingham Trent University, UK on 20 February 2014.   
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Barnatt, “3D Printing and Personalisation”, unpublished 
presentation at the Design and Personalisation Symposium, 
NTU, February 2014. 
[2] S. Bell, S. Morse, and Shah, “Understanding Stakeholder 
Participation 
in 
Research 
as 
Part 
of 
Sustainable 
Development”, Journal of Environmental Management 101, 
pp. 13-22, 2012 
[3] C. R. Boër, and S. Dulio, “Mass Customization and Footware: 
Myth, Salvation or Reality?”, London: Springer, 2007 
[4] D. Brown, “Design and Personalisation in the Context of 
Human Computer Interaction, Disability and Rehabilitation”, 
unpublished presentation at the Design and Personalisation 
Symposium, NTU, February 2014. 
[5] D. Burden, “Design, Personalisation and Privacy in Physical 
and Virtual Worlds”, unpublished presentation at the Design 
and Personalisation Symposium, NTU, February 2014. 
[6] K. Checkland, “Personalisation and Health: a Critical View”, 
unpublished presentation at the Design and Personalisation 
Symposium, NTU, February 2014. 
[7] P. J. Clarkson, R. Coleman, S. Keates, and C. Lebbon, 
Inclusive Design: Design for the Whole Population. London: 
Springer, 2003. 
[8] Deloitte Research The Changing Face of Retail, online, 
available 
at: 
http://www.deloitte.com/assets/Dcom-
Germany/Local%20Assets/Images/06_CBuT/2013/CB_R_sto
re_of_the_future_2013.pdf. 2014.04.05. 
[9] Department of Health (DoH) Putting People First. London: 
HMSO, 2007. 
[10] C. Gheorghe, “Theories and Uses in Common: Responses of 
Art in the Public Sphere”, META: Research in Hermeneutics, 
Phenomenology, and Practical Philosophy, 2/2, pp. 316-327, 
2010. 
[11] O. Golubnitschaja, “Advanced Healthcare Tailored to the 
Person: 
What 
is 
Beyond 
the 
Issue?”, 
Unpublished 
presentation at the Design and Personalisation Symposium, 
NTU, February 2014.  
[12] E. Hall, “Shopping for support: personalisation and the new 
spaces and relations of commodified care for people with 
learning disabilities”, Social & Cultural Geography, 12:6, pp. 
589-603, 2011 
[13] T. Hall, “Art and Urban Change. Public Art in Urban 
Regeneration”, In A. Blunt, P. Gruffudd, J. May, M. Ogborn, 
D. Pinder, (eds.) Cultural Geography in Practice. London: 
Arnold, pp. 221-234, 2003. 
[14] T. Hall,  “Opening up Public Art”s Spaces: Art, Regeneration 
and Audience”, In M. Miles, (ed.) Cultures and Settlements: 
Advances in Art and Urban Futures. Bristol: Intellect, pp. 49-
57, 2003 
[15] T. Hall, and I. Robertson, “Public Art and Urban 
Regeneration: Advocacy, Claims and Critical Debates”, 
Landscape Research 26/1, pp. 5-26, 2001. 
[16] L. Jancovich, “Great Art for Everyone?”, Engagement and 
Participation Policy in the Arts. Cultural Trends, Vol. 20, 
Nos. 3-4, pp. 271-279, 2011 
[17] A. Kent, “Personalisation, Customisation and Fashion”, 
unpublished presentation at the Design and Personalisation 
Symposium, NTU, February 2014. 
[18] G. Kuk, “Can Android Induce Responsible Practice in Privacy 
by 
Design 
through 
Featuring 
Apps?”, 
unpublished 
presentation at the Design and Personalisation Symposium, 
NTU, February 2014. 
[19] I. Kuksa, Making Sense of Space: The Design and Experience 
of Virtual Spaces as a Tool for Communication. Oxford: 
Chandos/Woodhead, 2014. 
[20] M. Kwon, Public Art as Publicity. In Sheikh, S. (ed.) In the 
Place of the Public Sphere? On the Establishment of Publics 
and Counter-publics. Berlin: b_books, 2005. 
[21] S. Lacy, (ed.) Mapping the Terrain: New Genre Public Art. 
Seattle: Bay Press, 1995. 
[22] M. Malpass, Critical design and a history of marginalised 
practice. Design History Society Annual Conference: Design 
Activism and Social Change. Barcelona: Universitat de 
Barcelona, 2011 
[23] J. Oberlander, Personalisation and Language: Whose Voice is 
it Anyway? Unpublished presentation at the Design and 
Personalisation Symposium, NTU, February 2014. 
[24] J. B. Pine II, Mass Customization: The New Frontier in 
Business Competition. Harvard Business School Press, 1993. 
[25] C. Rutz, L. A. Bluff, A. A. S. Weir and A. Kacelnik, “Video 
cameras on wild birds”. Science 318, p. 765, 2007. 
[26] C. Rutz, et al, “Automated mapping of social networks in 
wild birds”, Current Biology 22, R669–R671, 2012. 
[27] M. Sinclair, The (New Industrial) Revolution Will Not Be 
Televised, unpublished presentation at the Design and 
Personalisation Symposium, NTU, February 2014.   
[28] P. Standen, P. The ViPi Educational and Pedagogical 
Framework. Internal Project Report, 2014 
[29] P-P. Verbeek, Moralizing Technology: understanding and 
designing the morality of things, U. of Chicago Press, 2011 
[30] M. Zebracki, R. Van Der Vaart, and I. Van Aalst, 
Deconstructing Public Artopia: Situating Public-Art Claims 
within Practice. Geoforum 41, pp. 786-795, 2010 
[31] M. Leckey, The Universal Addressibility of Dumb Things, De La 
Warr 
Pavillion, 
2013, 
online, 
available 
at: 
http://www.dlwp.com/event/mark-leckey 2014.04.05. 
Firstborn, 
Fila 
Adatto 
Kiosk, 
available 
at: 
http://www.firstborn.com/work/68/fila-adatto-kiosk 2014.04.05. 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

