A Personalization Approach Based on Models Integration for a User Interface for 
Supervision in a Power Plant 
 
Victor Alvarez-Cortes 
Gerencia de Supervisión de Procesos 
Instituto de Investigaciones Eléctricas 
Cuernavaca, México 
vacortes@iie.org.mx 
Víctor H. Zárate Silva 
Depto. de Tecnologías de Información y Mecatrónica 
Instituto Tecnológico de Monterrey 
Cuernavaca, México 
 vzarate@itesm.mx 
Benjamín E. Zayas Pérez 
Gerencia de Supervisión de Procesos 
Instituto de Investigaciones Eléctricas 
Cuernavaca, México 
zayas@iie.org.mx 
Jorge A. Ramírez Uresti 
Depto. de Tecnologías de Información Computación 
Instituto Tecnológico de Monterrey  
Estado de México, México 
juresti@itesm.mx 
 
 
Abstract— In the operation of a power plant, the operator has 
to deal with a number of variables displayed in several 
windows, presented in different formats such as tabular, one-
line diagrams, process diagrams, etc. Under these conditions, 
the operator needs to locate data relevant to the current status 
of the plant and efficiently navigate a large number of screens 
within the user interface. This situation becomes critical for 
infrequent tasks within the plant such as the start-up, shut-
down or for abnormal operational conditions. In order to deal 
with the above situations, we propose a personalization 
mechanism based on models for adapting contents in a user 
interfaces for the operation of power plants. The model takes 
advantage of the integration of specific sub-models from 
artificial intelligence, user modeling and human-computer 
interaction.  A personalization approach is applied into an 
adaptive user interface prototype that is expected to improve 
the user-system interaction by reducing the time to complete 
the startup of a power plant.  For this purpose, contextual 
information of the power plant, user interaction logs, user’s 
preferences and experience are considered.  At this first stage, 
our prototype was evaluated in a simulated scenario with non 
power plant operators to investigate improvements of task 
performance for carrying out the procedure of the startup of a 
power plant process and to identify usability issues. Results 
from this initial evaluation show consistent time reductions 
and correct predictions of futures displayed variables for the 
adaptive user interface version despite the fact that 
participants in this evaluation had a lack of the domain 
knowledge. This results needs to be validated with further 
studies involving power plant operators, in order to compare 
the impact the domain knowledge plays in the time reductions.  
Keywords: personalization; user interface; user modeling; 
adaptive interaction;  user interface  evaluation. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The area of Intelligent User Interfaces (IUIs) is a 
specialized research field within the Human-Computer 
Interaction discipline (HCI), which pursues to overcome 
some of the limitations of traditional user interfaces.  
Traditional user interfaces for process supervision in power 
plants are comprised of a large number of displays such as 
tabular data, one-line diagrams, sequential diagram, historic 
trends, process diagrams, critical events logs, etc. The user 
needs to visualize information, analyze normal and failure 
situations, process changing data, understand the underlying 
process dynamics and finally take all this information into 
account to make a decision in a reduced time span. This 
amount of information represents a high cognitive load that 
the operator has to deal with and becomes critical for 
abnormal, failure or infrequent operations within the plant 
[1].  Established design process involves a user interfaces 
designer who establishes a priori the way each kind of data 
must be presented to the user and establishes a corresponding 
mapping between the processed information and the way to 
be displayed to the user. This mapping is achieved based on 
user interfaces guidelines, ergonomics studies, usability rules 
or accepted HCI standards; however, this mapping is static 
and the Graphic User Interface (GUI) is not designed for 
abnormal situations, where information flow is higher and 
operators have to face new situations [2]. 
II. 
PREVIOUS WORK 
Current research efforts attempting to use adaptive user 
interfaces for critical domains include IUIs based on 
models, knowledge, examples and demonstration, plan 
recognition, task recognition, agents as well as multi-modals 
interactions. The challenges faced by the IUI community are 
diverse and disciplines such as HCI, Artificial Intelligence 
78
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

(AI) and User Modeling (UM) have reported different 
research lines with specific approaches for IUIs.  
Likewise, the generation, maintenance and use of user 
models as a core adaptation element has been another 
explored approach in recent years [3]. A search for novels 
ways to represent the knowledge a system has about its 
users, their skills, preferences and goals is another promising 
research line. Taking advantage of these user models, an IUI 
attempts to adapt its contents, layouts or navigation elements 
to suite the user experience or preferences [4]. Mixed-
initiative interaction models have been developed to deal 
with the interruptions challenge and its timing while 
presenting information to the user [5]. Another approach 
followed in IUIs has been generating task models and use 
them as the central element of the adaptation strategy. The 
goal is to infer the next possible tasks and to anticipate 
actions the user is about to accomplish in order to find a way 
to assist her in the task at hand, or facilitate the use and 
learning of the user interface itself [6] [7]. 
Copious research efforts in the electrical domain have 
focused on the development of systems to help operators in 
fault situations [2], the design of intelligent systems to assist 
operators in normal power plant operation, and even more 
efforts in the development of complex systems to detect, 
predict and correct faults in real-time in power systems [8]. 
However, there is a clear lack of research in the area of 
adaptive user interfaces and personalization for critical 
domains, such as those found in power plants where 
unfrequented tasks and fault situations need to be handled 
by operators. This work is relevant since is one of the initial 
efforts where researchers adventure at proposing and 
applying an adaptive user interface beyond the laboratory 
prototype scope to handle real critical operations for process 
control. 
III. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
Context domain knowledge information is a valuable 
assessment that traditional direct manipulation interfaces do 
not take into account. Same situation applies to user 
experience and preferences; even though it is known 
empirically that these elements are important to operate a 
plant in a safety and optimal way [2]. It is our belief that in 
critical domains such as power generation plants, the use of 
the abundant existent contextual information and the user 
navigation history is valuable and its selective use in an 
adaptive user interface will improve the performance of 
human-computer interaction by means of personalization the 
variables displayed for infrequent or critical tasks. 
Contextual information includes operators’ preferences 
and domain knowledge, the tasks performed at the user 
interface, as well as the process information such as 
monitored variables, plant operation status and process stage, 
information already stored for process analysis purposes.  By 
improving the performances we mean the adaptive interface 
will allow the operator to achieve specific operational tasks 
within a pre-defined time frame by filtering out irrelevant 
information and personalizing contents and navigation. 
Infrequent tasks accomplished correctly in sequence and 
time have a relevant impact, particularly to the startup and 
shut-down stages of a power plant operation where a 
deviation in time from a pre-established sequence increases 
the gas consumption and shortens the expected life span of 
the power plant. 
IV. 
PERZONALIZATION APPROACH 
For personalization purposes, we propose the use and   
fusion of several sub-models integrated to create an adaptive 
user interface that will improve the plant operation by 
personalizing information screens taking into account 4 key 
elements: (1) context information of the power plant, (2) the 
user-system interaction history, (3) user preference, and (4) 
experience. 
The meta-model is composed of two set of models: (1) 
central models and (2) support models. 
A. Central Models 
These are the intelligent components that provide the 
adaptive behavior to the system by receiving and processing 
the information from the support models to provide adaptive 
information displays and navigation in a timely manner. To 
accomplish this goal, these components apply AI techniques 
to the collected information from support components. 
1) RECOGNIZER 
The RECOGNIZER model decides when to proceed to 
change the current interaction mode. Possible interaction 
modes includes: directed, initiated or controlled by the 
system, directed by the user or a combination of both. The 
RECOGNIZER uses a mixed-initiative approach and takes 
into account the interaction history and, by applying a utility-
based algorithm, analyze possible alternatives and take the 
highest ranked option available to keep, or change if 
required, the interaction mode. The expected utility approach 
permits to establish the most convenient interaction mode to 
the current situation. Therefore, it determines if it has to keep 
with the current interaction mode, change to another 
interaction mode or, ask the operator for further data and 
interrupts the interaction. This decision has to be made based 
on the evaluations of advantages and disadvantages when 
interrupting the operator, and the known history for handling 
similar situations in the past. The information to decide 
includes the willingness of the user to interact with the 
system in the past, the willingness to personalize in the 
beginning. Once an adaptation is detected and ready to be 
presented to the user, the RECOGNIZER decides if the cost 
is high enough to make it available to the user or if a switch 
in the interaction mode has a higher cost as a distraction or 
interruption for the user (ranked by the rule generator). The 
RECOGNIZER was developed following a utility-based 
approach adapted from the research presented by Fleming in 
his work [9]. 
 
79
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

 
 
Figure 1.  Central and support components for the proposed adaptive model 
 
 The 
costs 
of 
interruption 
computed 
in 
the 
RECOGNIZER are represented using a linear model, so the 
total cost is a weighted sum of any individual cost measures 
that have been identified for the application domain.  For 
example, the identified factors for the startup of a power 
plant are:  (1) user knowledge represented in the user model, 
(2) user willingness to interact determined by the initial 
personalization achieved by the user and the number of 
visited screens, (3) current context (current node for the task 
at hand), and (4) task performance expected due to 
interaction, provided by a domain expert. Each of these 
factors is normalized so that values range from 0 to 100. A 
cost of 0 indicates no cost for the interruption so the 
RECOGNIZER will allow to be presented the adapted 
content in the user interface. A cost of 100 is the maximum 
possible cost and in this situation the RECOGNIZER will 
not interfere to change the current presented content. 
 
2) ADAPTATOR 
This is a central component in charge of establishing the 
strategy for displaying contents and adapting the navigation 
to be presented to the operator. It determines what content 
will be presented as well as the way to be displayed. It also 
deals with data stored (history) for past interactions, contents 
and its presentation to the user along with the outcome of the 
prediction and the feedback received from the operator. We 
propose the use AI techniques, specifically applying 
Association Rules Mining (ARM) to generate a set of 
adaptation rules by borrowing some ideas from Bunt [7]. The 
ADAPTATOR was developed applying a modified AIS 
(Agrawal, Ieminski, Suami) algorithm using association rules 
mining techniques and extended the algorithm to support a 
meta-rule generator [10]. Rules are generated from process 
variables (i.e., pressure, temperature, gradient, dome level, 
etc.) correlated to previous interactions and the preferred 
variable presentations. A number of irrelevant and redundant 
rules are generated and in order to avoid its explosion we use 
domain expert knowledge to guide the meta-rule generation 
and to rank the generated association rules. 
We describe a simple example to illustrate the 
application of our ADAPTATOR model regarding adapting 
contents to the user.  The adaptive user interface has a set of 
default variables to be presented to the user for the current 
task. Data from support models such as user experience, 
display preferences, navigation traces, user willingness to 
interact and related plant process variables (i.e. temperature, 
dome pressure, temperature gradient, etc.) relevant to the 
current task are processed by the rule generator. Expert 
knowledge is used to eliminate redundant rules and also to 
guide the structure of the rules to be considered relevant. An 
example of a generated rule which includes experience level, 
visualization preference and process variable is presented in 
a simplified form as follows: IF Beginner AND Tabular 
AND Dome Temperature > 120 AND Dome Pressure Stable 
THEN Display = Set 3, where Set 3 is a predefined set of 
variables to be presented to the user.  Note that the 
ADAPTATOR does not generate adaptive displays on-the-
fly, but select one from a predefined pool of custom made 
sets.  When this rule is generated, the specific set of variables 
(Set 3) is ready to be presented on the adapted area of the 
user interface. 
B. Support Models 
These components provide the information related to the 
tasks under supervision or control, the field variables of the 
power plant correlated to the startup stages, the operator’s 
preferences and knowledge. These models are briefly 
described in the following sections. 
80
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

1) Task Model 
Its main function is to represent the tasks performed 
within the system considering its duration,   as well as, its 
sequences. The operative knowledge about the tasks that are 
required to operate the plant through the user interface can be 
found in the plant manufacturer operation manual, operator’s 
training manuals or can be extracted from observation of the 
user interface in action. 
2) Operator Model 
Based on an user overlay model, its main function is to 
manage and maintain the data associated to the operator 
characteristics, such as personal data, display and navigation 
information preferences, as well as her knowledge of the task 
to be performed. This model was developed with an overlay 
approach taking into account specified times for maximum, 
minimum and normal times for completing a task by a 
beginner, normal and expert operator during the startup of a 
power plant. 
3) Task recognizer 
It receives and integrates information regarding the task 
to be performed by the operator, and the possible available 
sequences. The task recognizer takes into account the 
operator’s knowledge about the task available at this time 
and additionally integrates the operator’s characteristics, 
which are retrieved from the operators sub-model. This 
module process the information to maintain a set of possible 
tasks similar to those proposed by Bunt [6]. These tasks are 
exchanged with the AST (Active Set Tasks) module as 
shown in Figure 1 above. 
4) Presentation module 
It is an isolated module separated from the central models 
that is constantly exchanging data with the central and 
support models. It is also perceived by the operator as the 
GUI (Graphical User Interface. A challenge for its design 
and implementation was the fact to be able to continuously 
logging navigation the traces during the interaction with the 
operator and save them to the knowledge database for its use 
by the rule generator. 
V. 
ADAPTIVE USER INTERFACE PROTOTYPE 
A prototype integrating the proposed models was 
developed. Due to the complexity of core components and 
the critical nature of supervision process of a power plant 
itself, the integration stage for this research project required 
unforeseen additional effort since different technologies and 
programming languages for different models were involved. 
Currently, we have finished the development of the 
ADAPTATOR and is also completed the testing of all the 
support 
models; 
however, 
the 
mixed-initiative 
RECOGNIZER is still under development, and its impact in 
the adaptive strategy is not researched in the evaluation 
presented in this paper. 
Integration of all involved models was essential to 
proceed to the evaluation stage since its is required to collect 
the entire context information and navigation traces in order 
to feed the ADAPTATOR mining algorithms and correlate 
attribute-value pairs from the different models. The proposed 
meta-rule generator was also finished and is the key element 
to disambiguate and control the explosion in the number of 
association rules generated. The prototype for the Adaptive 
User Interface for Power Plant Startup (AUI-PPS) was the 
mean to implement the proposed mixed-initiative adaptive 
user model and is shown in Figure 2. 
When operator uses the adaptive user interface prototype 
for the first time, it allows him to select his presentation 
preferences. Three GUI presentation modes are displayed for 
selection: minimalist, standard and graphical enhanced. 
These preferences are stored and updated in the operator 
model as nodes (tasks representation) of the startup process 
are completed.  
Suggested presentations are displayed in a specific area 
(right side), which will be changing according to inferred 
data by the ADAPTATOR model, see Figure 2. User 
navigation traces are stored in order to integrate it with past 
interactions and user preferences and eventually decide 
whether to change the presentation or keep it until the 
expected utility function from the interaction RECOGNIZER 
reach specified trigger from the user model. 
The selection of relevant variables to present, quantity 
and type of presentation for the task at hand are personalized 
constantly by the ADAPTATOR. These parameters are not 
changing all the time but when the RECOGNIZER 
algorithms evaluate to change the interaction mode as shown 
in Figure 3. The user can reject, at any given time, any of the 
suggested variables and its presentation, and his decisions 
are added into the navigation traces logger and feed backed 
to the mixed-initiative RECOGNIZER.  By clicking on the 
red cross icon on the variable presentation space, the content 
is diminished and the user model is updated. For the 
RECOGNIZER and the ADAPTATOR this represents, an 
inaccurate prediction and is fed back to the central models 
for future content predictions in a similar situation. 
VI. 
PROTOTYPE EVALUATION 
For our evaluation, we selected a critical domain 
represented by the startup of a power plant, which is a 
complex process that takes hours (6-8 hours) and involves 
carefully operation of surrounding subsystems. For initial 
evaluations a proprietary simulator was used along with 
ASPPO (Aid System for a Power Plant Operation) that 
provided guidance to the operators during the startup of a 
power plant. 
This initial evaluation was achieved with six users (non  
plant operators) with computer knowledge and related to the 
electrical domain, but without prior knowledge regarding 
the operation of a power plant.  
A. Participants 
The evaluation was carried out with a group of six 
subjects with different experience levels. For the evaluation, 
the participants had to visualize information and interact 
simultaneously with two LCD monitors: (1) to display the 
process diagrams of the plant simulator, where the user 
carried out the actions instructed by the adaptive and (2) a 
second monitor to display the adaptive interface with the 
81
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

instructions to guide the participant in order to complete the 
current task. 
Each participant had to evaluate both user interfaces 
(adaptive and non adaptive) with an assigned task of 
variable difficulty level.  
B. Evaluation Procedures 
A short introduction to the simulator and the startup 
process was given to the six participants. An introduction 
questionnaire was given to each participant in order to 
evaluate its domain knowledge and computational skills. At 
the end of the evaluation a final questionnaire was also 
applied to participants in order to capture the user’s 
perception about the system and their general final thoughts. 
All evaluation was achieved in an isolated room with 
two monitors: one for a simulator and another for the 
Adaptive User Interface Prototype for Power Plant Startup 
(AUI-PPS) in charge of displaying the recommended 
actions in order to achieve the task at hand required for 
completing the current procedure (node) of the startup stage.   
Five of the most representative tasks for the 
pressurization stage and steam generator heating procedure 
were given to the participants. Taking into account the 
average time for completing each node for this stage, the 5 
nodes should take 1 hour 43 minutes for an average user. 
Since this is a considerable time, it was harder than usual to 
find participants willing to spend so much time in an 
evaluation. The experiments followed an incremental 
approach (i.e., integrating additional models and evaluating 
its impact), so that the effectiveness and accuracy achieved 
by the adaptive user interface could be measured, isolated 
and attributed to specific models. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Adaptive user interface layout: adaptive content area on the right side  and standard display area separated to minimize impact on user 
 
Figure 3.  Adaptive user interface with recommendations presented in the lower right corner. 
82
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

 
C. Experimental Evaluation 
The experimental evaluation reported in this paper was 
achieved with six users using a prototype that integrated the 
operator model, the task model and the ADAPTATOR 
model. The Mixed-Initiative RECOGNIZER model was not 
included in this initial evaluation. The next step in this 
research work will include a greater number of participants, 
the inclusion of the RECOGNIZER and an evaluation with 
actual operators in a power plant in order to contrast and 
validate the initial results. 
This experiment also included data provided by the task 
model in charge of detecting the currents task to accomplish 
(node) and its associated variables to be processed by the 
ADAPTATOR. The idea behind this incremental approach 
is to research the operator’s behaviors and interactions 
improvements gained as each component is integrated into 
the adaptive model. 
We use usability techniques to evaluate the adaptive 
prototype of the user interface [11]. This assessment 
provided us the base parameters in terms of efficiency, 
effectiveness as well as the operator’s perception of the 
current non-adaptive user interface. A video recording and 
logging of interactions at the user interfaces level was 
achieved and analyzed. 
VII. RESULTS 
Results presented here are grouped in three key areas: 
efficiency (time, consumption), task completed and user’s 
perception. It is important to note that this evaluation was 
carried out with participants with knowledge about 
computers but a lack of knowledge about the operation of a 
power plant. The rationale behind this approach is to study  
and measure the degree of impact the domain knowledge has 
(if any) in the completion of the tasks and its contribution to 
the overall time reduction in order to isolate it from the 
contribution of  the adaptive user interface model itself. Our 
final goal will be, when finished the next evaluation stage 
with operators, to study the impact of the 2 different 
participants: (1) users with computational knowledge, 
associated with their ability and familiarity for handling a 
user interface and following the adaptive interface guidance 
to complete the task, regardless of their lack of domain 
knowledge and (2) participants (operators) with domain 
knowledge, associated with an in-depth knowledge of the 
start-up process and operation of a power plant. 
Results of the evaluation of the operator model provided 
information regarding the user preferences and knowledge 
(or lack of) about the processes required for the startup of 
the power plant. This knowledge is used to adapt the 
presentation of the elements to achieve the operations 
recommended by the AUI-PPS. The user follows these 
recommendations and she needs to explore and find those 
components by navigating the different screens of the 
simulator user interface. 
Figure 4 shows the times (in minutes) to complete the 
task assigned to the six participants, using the normal user 
interface, the adaptive user interface and the third bar shows 
the values predicted by the ADAPTATOR. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Time to complete the assigned tasks.  
For participants 1, 3 and 5 the non-adaptive user interface 
was first evaluated. Participants 2, 4 and 6 first evaluated the 
adapted version of the user interface. In eache one of the 
evaluations consistently the user with the adapted version 
took less time to complete the tasks. The maximum 
difference was 29 minutes, however this was an isolated 
case, since the global average was 5.8 minutes. 
Depending on his experience and knowledge so it is the 
time he takes to achieve the recommended task in the 
expected time. If the subject under evaluation follows the 
displayed recommendations and knows how to accomplish 
them on the simulator, he/she can finish the task on time, 
earlier, take longer or even abort the task by lack of 
knowledge or by misunderstanding the recommendations. 
The time to complete the task to startup the power plant 
(pre-heat and pressurization of the steam generator) had a 
direct impact in the gas required to operate the plant as it is 
summarized in table 1. 
 
TABLE I.  
GAS COMSUMPTION FOR BOTH USER INTERFACES 
Subject 
Non-adaptive  
User Interface
Adaptive 
 User Interface 
Predicted 
1 
9681.75 Kg. 
7653.5 Kg. 
7907.2 Kg. 
2 
7536.75 Kg. 
7615.25 Kg. 
7371 Kg. 
3 
7614.75 Kg. 
8053 Kg. 
7419.75 Kg. 
4 
8424.75 Kg. 
7624.45 Kg. 
6864 Kg. 
5 
8297.25 Kg. 
7673.25 Kg. 
7646 Kg. 
6 
7946.25 Kg. 
7829.25 Kg. 
7624.5 Kg. 
83
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

The results from the post-test questionnaire show the user 
perception while interacting with both interfaces. Usability 
issues included 3 questions to capture perception for ease of 
use and learn for each user interface.   
 
 
Figure 5.  Balanced usability overall user perception for standard user 
interface: 33% easy, 33% neutral, 33% hard. 
The adaptive user interface version is perceived more 
user friendly and easy to learn in general, however for some 
participants the user interfaces in both versions was 
perceived as “not easy” to learn. This perception was 
associated with the participant with less experience in both 
interfaces. 
 
Figure 6.  Usability overall user perception for adaptive user interface: 
83% (easy to use and learn) and 16.66% for neutral and hard 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
Current results shows a consistent advantage of the 
adaptive user interface, by presenting personalized contents 
(variables and recommendations) over the traditional user 
interface for the startup of a power plant. A reduction in time 
of an average of 5.8 minutes for a reduced portion of the test 
of just 1 hour and 44 minutes that took the evaluated nodes is 
a significant reduction. If we keep the same linear proportion 
in the time reductions it is reasonably to forecast a reduction 
of 27 minutes for the whole process for the startup of a 
power plant, taking into account that this process normally 
takes 8-9 hours approximately. Likewise, this advantage 
shown in raw data is also present in the user perception about 
the usability of the adaptive interface.  
These results seem to be promising for the adaptive user 
interface version versus the non adaptive version from the 
point of view of time reductions for this domain. However 
future work is required to include a greater number of 
participants in the next experiments and to carry out the 
evaluation with actual operators, so we expect that the 
difference in performance for both interfaces in the startup of 
a power plant might present different behavior. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Gianni Viano, Andrea Parodi, James Alty, Chris Khalil, Inaki 
Angulo, Daniele Biglino, Michel Crampes, Christophe 
Vaudry, Veronique Daurensan, and Philippe Lachaud. 2000. 
Adaptive user interface for process control based on multi-
agent approach. In AVI ’00: Proceedings of the working 
conference on Advanced visual interfaces, pages 201–204, 
New York, NY, USA. ACM Press. ISBN 1-58113-252-2. 
[2] Zita A. Vale, A. Machado e Moura, M. Fernanda Fernandes, 
Albino Marques, Couto Rosado, and Carlos Ramos. 1996. 
Sparse: An intelligent alarm processor and operator assistant. 
IEEE 
Expert: 
Intelligent 
Systems 
and 
Their 
Applications,12(3):86–93, 1997. ISSN 0885-9000. 
[3] Saleema Amershi and Cristina Conati., 2007. Unsupervised 
and supervised machine learning in user modeling for 
intelligent learning environments. Proceedings of the 12th 
international conference on Intelligent user interfaces, New 
York, NY, USA, ACM Press. ISBN 1-59593-481-2. 
[4] Krzysztof Gajos and Daniel S. Weld. 2005. Preference 
elicitation 
for 
interface 
optimization. 
In 
UIST 
’05: 
Proceedings of the 18th annual ACM symposium on User 
interface software and technology, pages 173–182, New 
York, NY, USA, ACM Press. ISBN 1-59593-271-2. 
[5] Marcelo Armentano, Daniela Godoy, and Analia Amandi., 
2006, Personal assistants: Direct manipulation vs. mixed 
initiatives 
interfaces.Int.J.Hum.-Comput.Stud.,64(1):27–35, 
2006.ISSN1071-5819. 
[6] Iain M. Begg, Joe Gnocato, and Wendy E. Moore.,1993. A 
prototype intelligent user interface for real-time supervisory 
control systems. In IUI ’93: Proceedings of the 1st 
international conference on Intelligent user interfaces, pages 
211–214, New York, NY, USA. ACM Press. ISBN 0-89791-
556-9. 
[7] Andrea Bunt, Cristina Conati, and Joanna McGrenere. 2007. 
Supporting interface customization using a mixed-initiative 
approach. In IUI ’07: Proceedings of the 12th international 
conference on Intelligent user interfaces, pages 92–101, New 
York, NY, USA. ACM Press. ISBN 1-59593-481-2. 
[8] Varanon 
Uraikul, 
Christine 
W. 
Chan, 
and 
Paitoon 
Tontiwachwuthikul. 
2007. 
Artificial 
intelligence 
for 
monitoring and supervisory control of process systems. Eng. 
Appl. Artif. Intell., 20(2):115–131. ISSN 0952-1976. 
[9] Michael Fleming and Robin Cohen. 2001. A utility-based 
theory of initiative in mixed-initiative systems. In Papers from 
the IJCAI-2001 Workshop on Delegation, Autonomy, and 
Control: Interacting with Autonomous Agents. 
[10] Rakesh Agrawal, Tomasz Imielinski and Arun Swami. 1993. 
Mining association rules between sets of items in large 
databases. Proceedings of the 1993 ACM SIGMOD 
International Conference on Management of Data, May 25-
28, ACM, New York, USA., pp: 207-216. ISBN:0-89791-
592-5 
[11] Janni Nielsen, Torkil Clemmensen, and Carsten Yssing. 2002. 
Getting access to what goes on in people’s heads?: reflections 
on the think-aloud technique. In NordiCHI ’02: Proceedings 
of the second Nordic conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction, pages 101–110, New York, NY, USA. ACM 
Press. ISBN 1-58113-616-1. 
 
 
84
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

