Process of Gamification 
From The Consideration of Gamification To Its Practical Implementation 
 
Cathie Marache-Francisco 
PErSEUs ; SAP France 
Lorraine University ; SAP 
Metz, France ; Levallois-Perret, France 
Cathie.Marache-Francisco@univ-lorraine.fr 
Eric Brangier 
PErSEUs (EA 7312) 
Université de Lorraine  
Metz, France 
Eric.Brangier@univ-lorraine.fr
 
 
Abstract— The trend toward software gamification is 
increasingly important. But, it often implies the modification of 
a 
few 
simplistic 
surface 
elements 
(colorful 
aesthetic, 
personalization, points, badges and leaderboards, etc.) without 
actually integrating gamification into the overall design. 
Gamification is often downgraded to interface look and feel 
and point systems without questioning design practices. This 
article proposes a design approach focused on gamification. 
This user-centered approach aims to identify the factors to be 
taken into account in gamification design (intention, situation, 
task, users). The authors introduce a design guide consisting of 
a design process and a toolbox. It aims at facilitating effective 
gamification design by providing the means to overcome the 
difficulties encountered with interaction design process. 
Keywords— Gamification; design process; user-centred design 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 
human-technology 
relationship 
has 
evolved 
dramatically in the last 50 years, as the designers develop 
systems that are not only usable, but also persuasive and 
funny. Recently, the term gamification appeared, defined by 
Deterding et al. [1] as “An informal umbrella term for the 
use of video game elements in nongaming systems to 
improve User Experience (UX) and user engagement” (p.2). 
Gamification aims at improving the technology use by 
applying in non-gaming or professional contexts video game 
techniques. Very often, these techniques are based on the 
concepts 
of 
motivation, 
enjoyment, 
engagement, 
commitment, attractiveness, emotion, etc., which, once 
implemented, are expected to improve user and business 
performance (e.g., Zichermann and Cunningham [2]; Kim 
[3]). According to Nicholson [4], meaningful gamification 
“is the integration of user-centered game design elements 
into non-game contexts”. 
However, the concepts used are rather vague and 
unorganized. Indeed, at the beginning, gamification was 
mostly 
communicated 
through 
what 
Robert 
called 
slideshareatture (live presentation or downloadable slides 
[5]). Those practices are evolving (e.g., Werback and 
Hunter [6]; Kumar and Herger [7]) and, following that 
trend, the objective of this paper is to brainstorm, rationalize 
and define a general process for gamification design. 
After defining gamification in section 2, the authors will 
present the gamification process in section 3 followed by a 
toolbox consisting of four elements in section 4. They will 
introduce gamification core-principles, a context analysis 
guide and user-centered principles (task support, motivation, 
attractiveness). These principles are illustrated with 
definitions, charts and examples. Finally, the authors will 
offer a decision tree to help determine if gamification can 
improve a project. They will discuss the quality of this 
approach by analyzing interface examples that implement 
gamification elements in section 5. In Section 6, the paper is 
concluded and future work is described. 
II. 
KEYS CONCEPTS RELATED TO GAMIFICATION 
The notion of the gamification loop developed by Liu et 
al. [8] introduces a design process that consists of a 
challenge with winning conditions, a point system, a leader 
board and rewards linked to sub-goal achievements (badges). 
The authors also mention the modification of the user’s 
social and network status as well as the need for a “game-
like” interface. 
Several authors have emphasized the importance of going 
further than this kind of gamification design. For example, 
Kim [3] explains gamification from a social game designer 
point of view. She states that adding points, badges and 
leader boards is not enough to create a game-like experience 
because they are only feedback elements. Game design is 
about relying on intrinsic motivation through autonomy, 
mastery and purpose. She insists that we need to understand 
the social style of the users and their level of expertise, as 
well design an engagement loop. She concludes that game 
elements are to be used according to specific user profiles. 
Three more articles can be mentioned for their interesting 
contribution to the gamification design definition. Werback 
and Hunter [6] introduce gamification concepts and provide 
a list of gamification elements (dynamics, mechanics and 
components). Gamification design is separated into six steps: 
“Define business objectives; Delineate target behaviors; 
Describe your players; Devise activity cycles; Don’t forget 
the fun!; Deploy the appropriate tools”. 
Kumar and Herger [7] call gamification design a "Player 
Centered Design" that involves five steps: “Know your 
player; Identify the mission; Understand human motivation; 
Apply mechanics; Manage, monitor and measure”. They 
define a template Persona, and game mechanics to be used. 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

They also insist on the need for ethical and legal 
considerations.  
Finally, Robinson and Bellotti [9] offer a taxonomy 
defining the gamification elements to be used depending on 
the level of anticipated user commitment. 
As mentioned before, gamification being a quite recent 
trend, we have tried to analyze it and contribute to the 
gamification field by developing a design process which can 
be easily applied by designers, and guide the selection of 
elements based on the context of use of their system. 
III. 
DESIGN PROCESS FOR GAMIFICATION 
A. Method 
This process has been designed based on two studies led 
by in Marache-Francisco and Brangier [10, 11]. It comprises 
an extensive literature review, which aimed at describing 
gamification [10], as well as an experiment led on 10 
designers [11]; the goal was to identify the dimensions 
through which gamification design was perceived.  
Based on this previous work, we have defined the 
gamification design process as consisting of two major steps 
(Figure 1): context analysis and iterative conception. We 
have also built several tools to guide the designers through 
gamification processes. We will describe our process and 
relate it to the literature which has led us to that design. 
B. First step : Context Analysis 
One concern is that gamification cannot be efficient if it 
is not designed based on a good understanding of the users 
and the context of use, as Nicholson [4] pointed out. A 
context analysis is thus a prerequisite; intentions must be 
analyzed and considered in the context of the situation, the 
task, as well as the user(s) profile(s). The toolbox provides a 
context analysis guide to help the designer during that phase 
(IV – B). It also provides gamification core principles (IV – 
A), which are to be considered during all the design phases. 
The User Centered Design Field comprises several 
methods, as described in the ISO/TR 16982 [12], which can 
be interesting to apply during that first phase of gamification 
design. 
For 
example, 
observations, 
interviews, 
questionnaires, diaries, focus groups or personas. The 
creation of gamified interfaces should be based on solidly 
established, real data, which can be collected directly from 
users, or through indirect sources. 
C. Second step : Iterative Conception 
The second phase is about the choice of the gamification 
experience to design for. We select first the elements using 
the conception grid (IV – C) and the decision tree (IV – D) 
and then plan the evolution of the interaction. Again, the 
gamification core principles (IV – A) provide additional 
elements to consider. 
Once this is defined, an iterative conception phase takes 
place. The concepts are materialized through mockups or 
prototypes, and tested on representative users until the 
system proves to be efficient. 
IV. 
TOOLS BOXES FOR GAMIFICATION:  INFORMATION TO 
BE INTEGRATED INTO THE GAMIFICATION DESIGN PROCESS  
A. Gamification core principles 
The first design tool – the gamification core principles – 
regulates the conception process. It comprises six principles: 
• Freedom of choice (Marache-Francisco and Brangier 
[11]): giving the user the freedom to exercise the user’s 
own will, for example being allowed to disable 
functionalities, or to opt out of the gamified system; 
• Benefits and meaningfulness (Deterding [13]): The 
gamification influences must be relevant both to the 
owners of the system, who expect positive consequences, 
and to the end users themselves. Otherwise, non-
meaningful elements will either have a bad influence on 
the perception of the system by the end users or be 
ignored by them; 
• Personalized experience (Nicholson [4]): Different user 
profiles can lead to several different designs. This is 
where the added value of gamification comes from, 
through tailored triggers; 
 
 
Figure 1: Gamification process principles. 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

• Long-term interaction (Kim [3]): Designing with the 
evolution of the interaction in mind, especially 
concerning the motivational elements; 
• Unwanted secondary effects anticipation: Unwanted 
effects can include stress induced by pressures from 
efficiency requirements (Apter [14]), loss of the feeling 
of privacy and credibility, gaming the rules of the system, 
or focus on quantity over quality to obtain some reward 
(Montola et al. [15]); 
• Legal and ethical matters (Werbach and Hunter [6]; 
Kumar and Herger [7]): They take into account the 
existing legal context, for example, data and privacy, and 
the interest of the end users. 
B. Context Analysis Guide 
The second tool indicates factors, which have an impact 
on the perception and the efficacy of the gamification 
elements. The guide advises on data collection and analysis. 
• Intent: (1) Goal (task or motivation-centered); (2) 
concrete actions targeted. Note: The initial intent evolves 
based on new parameters arising from the analysis; 
• Situation: (1) Context (for example, work or leisure); (2) 
Social Environment; (3) Motivators and Pain points; 
• Task: (1) Goal; (2) Structure; (3) Other actors involved; 
• User(s): (1) Characteristics (for example: gender, age); 
(2) 
Personality; 
(3) 
Culture 
(e.g., 
Khaled 
[16] 
investigated the differences between individualism vs 
collectivism); 
(4) 
Experience 
/ 
Competency 
/ 
Knowledge; (5) Motivators or Pain points. 
C. Conception Grid 
The conception grid consists of three categories of 
gamification design elements: task support, motivation and 
attractiveness.  
This has been defined based on a comprehensive 
literature review [10] combined with an experiment we have 
led on gamification perception by designers [11]. Indeed, the 
first classification has been refined based on a better 
understanding on how to teach gamification to fit at best 
designers’ perception of it.  
It is, thus, defined as follow: 
• Task support: adapting the interaction to a given user 
with game-like targeted communication (Järvinen [17)] 
in order to increase his knowledge and abilities; 
• Motivation: motivating the user through emotional and 
persuasive elements (accomplishment with self and social 
challenges and relevant feedbacks; self-expression and 
relationships mechanisms); 
• Attractiveness: elements designed to generate positive 
emotions with an immersive universe, appealing 
interactions and the use of surprise (e.g., Hohl et al. [18]). 
Below is an inventory of the main elements which can be 
integrated into the gamification proposal. Two display 
modes are created for this tool: cards summarizing the 
elements by category (Figure 2) and tables which describe 
each element and its use (Table 1). We have tried to be as 
comprehensive as possible when identifying the gamification 
elements, using the literature mentioned before as well as 
Antin and Churchill [19], the game mechanics playdeck by 
Schonfeld [20] and Graf et al. [21]. 
 
TABLE 1. CONCEPTION GRID: EXAMPLES OF DESCRIPTIONS 
Element 
Description 
Means Rhetoric 
Definition: Providing information about how to reach 
a goal. Example: Tips provided during splash screen 
Creating / 
Personalizing 
Definition: Allowing the user to express his 
individuality. Example: giving to option to personalize 
one’s avatar 
Sensory-Motor 
(Marache-
Francisco and 
Brangier [10]) 
Definition: Elements to communicate and interact with 
the user. Units (Fox [22]): sound effects, music, 
verbalization, vibration, shaking, animating the body, 
colors, 
images, 
metaphors, 
2D/3D, 
effects 
(e.g.,comics, round shapes), minimalistic interface, 
typography, animation through coding or movement. 
Composites (Dyck et al. [23]): Heads-Up display (data 
displayed on the screen to avoid having the user to 
look away from his focus of attention), Attention 
aware interface (elements changing their appearance 
depending on their relevancy for the user at a given 
moment), Context aware view behavior (dynamic 
adaptation of the screen with pan and zoom to display 
a relevant interface), Calm messaging (delivering 
information on a non-intrusive way without needing an 
explicit user action), Atmosphere / theme. Example: 
communicating an alert on a battlefield with sound and 
visual effects to attract the user attention 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Gamification elements cards 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

D. Decision tree : When and how is gamification an asset ? 
The last tool, i.e., the decision tree, consists of questions 
which guide the selection of the gamification elements. It 
offers recommendations of conception choices.  
First, the decision tree covers the choice of gamification 
elements categories to consider based on the design intent. 
The context analysis will influence this phase (Figure 3). The 
social engagement loop described by Kim [3] is a good 
example of a personalized experience definition (a 
gamification core principle), i.e., that the intent depends on 
the user profile. The novice users have to learn about the 
system (knowledge, competency), the regular users need new 
things to do to keep using the system (engagement), while 
the enthusiasts need recognition elements, such as exclusive 
features, to keep being interested (engagement).  
Second, the decision tree helps to analyze the task and 
suggests gamification elements based on its structure, the use 
and the importance of efficiency within the task’s context 
(Figure 4).  The elements will be communicated with the 
Communication and Universe (sensory-motor) categories. 
Third, the tree analyzes the motivation category of 
gamification elements. It first questions the motivators which 
will be meaningful for the end users and induce certain 
elements over others (Figure 5). Those categories can be 
combined if relevant.  
Figures 6 and 7 offer other parameters which help 
deciding whether to use social elements or not, and which 
accomplishment elements are relevant.  
According to Denny [24], the badges effect might only 
be observed if the behavior suggested is valuable for the end 
user. Regarding Accomplishment elements, leaderboards are 
to be designed with care to avoid demotivating. The end 
users should be compared with meaningful people and they 
should not be placed at the bottom of a ranking, but instead 
between other users (Zichermann and Cunningham [2]). 
The motivation elements should be displayed and 
supported with task support elements and a relevant 
communication with the Communication and Universe 
(sensory-motor) categories of gamification element. 
 
Figure 3: Decision tree: the intent 
Concerning 
Attractiveness, 
efficiency 
should 
be 
considered. Depending on the context or user profile, we 
should avoid – or give the possibility to turn off – elements 
which are not relevant to the task or are out of phase with the 
system (e.g., narration interfering with the evolution as 
mentioned by Langer et al. [25], Easter egg). According to 
Bowser et al. [26], experts prefer a direct interface, while 
casual users appreciate badges and achievements. 
Concerning 
the 
Universe 
sub-dimension 
of 
Attractiveness, the metaphor and its scope (punctual or wide-
spread) should be chosen depending on the population and 
the context (e.g., avoiding a childish look and feel for adults 
systems). Finally, randomness should be used with caution 
as it can demotivate the end users. 
 
Figure 4: Decision Tree: the task 
 
Figure 5: Decision tree: motivators 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 6: Decision tree: social elements 
 
Figure 7: Decision tree: accomplishment elements 
Finally, it is important that the core principles of 
gamification are paralleled with the use of the decision tree, 
for example: 
• 
Is it meaningful for the end-user?  
• 
Which secondary-effects can be triggered?  
• 
How to prevent it?  
• 
Could it lead to ethical or legal issues? 
V. 
EXAMPLES OF GAMIFIED SYSTEMS 
The following use cases illustrate the impact of context 
on the selection of gamification design elements. It 
highlights the need and relevancy of a guiding process. 
Healthy behaviors are promoted differently in Fitocracy 
[27] and Blues Buddies (Rao [28]) because of their context 
of use. Fitoracy aims at motivating people to exercise. They 
can monitor their progress, be rewarded, share information 
and tips, be part of relevant groups, and challenge each other. 
Blues Buddies game uses very different game elements as 
the end-users are depressed people who cannot be motivated 
through 
competition 
and 
comparison 
for 
obvious 
psychological reasons. Social relationships and attractiveness 
are thus used differently.  
A community system has been designed by Cheng and 
Vassileva [29], which aims at connecting students online so 
that they can share documents and insight about their classes. 
The reward system is interesting, as it is dynamically 
designed to shape the users’ behaviors. Their goal was, 
firstly, to motivate them to share information, and, secondly, 
to motivate them to rate those first elements to limit 
information overload. Thus, more points are rewarded for 
sharing at the beginning of the session, while the comments 
lead to more points after a while. 
The WantEat mobile phone application developed by 
Rapp et al. [30] aimed at motivating people to make the most 
of a Cheese trade fair. It consisted of missions such as tasting 
and commenting on cheeses, points, leaderboards and a gift 
(t-shirt). It is interesting to note that people liked the personal 
expression part (comments), but were not interested in the 
other users’ comments. We can infer that the social 
community aspect of that system was not meaningful to 
them, as it consisted of strangers not related to them. 
Finally, LinkedIn [31] as another example is described 
through the gamification elements categories defined in this 
document: 
• Task support: goal information, call-to-action, global 
task divided into sub-tasks displayed in an attractive list 
whose evolution is visually displayed; 
• Motivation: expression and relevance through a public 
profile, the use of a meaningful social community, a 
document sharing system, the possibility to join groups, 
comments and voting; 
• Attractiveness: the sensory-motor elements are used as 
the indicators, dialogues are visuals, and there are 
attractive metaphors, vocabulary, and colors. 
Besides, the users are free to dismiss suggested tasks and 
the elements are relevant depending on the goals of the users. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
As seen previously, creating gamified interactions is a 
particular 
design 
work 
that 
requires 
considering 
recommendations to produce relevant categorizations which 
offer effective interaction design. An effective gamification 
process can: 
• Guide design and decisions; 
• Provide a common representation within a collaborative 
project; 
• Keep designers focused on key-elements; 
• Establish functions, needs, desires and goals priorities; 
• Focus designers in a single direction and on the aims that 
are to be achieved; 
• Provide simplified, effective and useful descriptions to 
help understand complex gaming situations; 
• Indicate through guide cards the problems related to 
unclear a gamification proposal; 
• Highlight specific characteristics of interactions. 
Our gamification process promotes user-centered design, 
providing the means to overcome the difficulties encountered 
with interaction design process. 
The controversial aspect of the gamification method and 
tools comes from the fact that scientific studies are rare and 
experimentation is often impossible. We need more studies 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

to understand better how gamification can be successfully 
applied and to refine our process (e.g., adding factors on the 
decision tree). We also plan to test this process on a case 
study in order to demonstrate its usefulness. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank SAP and especially Steve 
KOPP, Christophe FAVART and Chahab NASTAR, Ph.D. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Deterding, M. Sicart, L. Nacke, K. O’Hara and D. Dixon, 
“Gamification: Using Game Design Elements in Non-Gaming 
Contexts,” Proceedings of CHI 2011 Workshop Gamification: Using 
Game Design Elements in Non-Game Contexts, May 2011, pp. 2-5. 
[2] G. Zichermann and C. Cunningham, Gamification by Design: 
Implementing Game Mechanics in Web and Mobile Apps. 
Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly Media, Inc., 2011. 
[3] A.J. Kim, “Smart Gamification: Seven Core Concepts for Creating 
Compelling Experiences”, 2011. Retrieved February 2, 2012 from 
http://casualconnect.org/lectures/business/smart-Gamification-seven-
core-concepts-for-creating-compelling-experiences-amy-jo-kim. 
[4] S. Nicholson, “A User-Centered Theoretical Framework for 
Meaningful Gamification”, Proceedings of Games+Learning+Society 
8.0, June 2012, pp. 223-229. 
[5] T. Robert, “Gamification: la slideshareatture”, 2011. Retreived 
February 
2, 
2012 
from: 
 
http://www.ludicite.ca/2011/10/ 
Gamification-la-slideshareatture. 
[6] K. Werbach and D. Hunter, For the Win. How game thinking can 
revolutionize your business. Philadelphia, PA: Wharton Digital Press, 
2012. 
[7] J.M. Kumar and Herger, M., Gamification at Work: Designing 
Engaging Business Software. Aarhus, Denmark: The Interaction 
Design Foundation, 2013. Retrieved June, 15, 2013 from 
http://www.interaction-design.org/books/Gamification_at_work.html. 
[8] Y. Liu, T. Alexandrova, and T. Nakajima, “Gamifying intelligent 
environments,” Proceedings of the 2011 international ACM workshop 
on Ubiquitous meta user interfaces, Ubi-MUI '11, December 2011, 
pp. 7-12. 
[9] D. Robinson and V. Bellotti, “A Preliminary Taxonomy of 
Gamification Elements for Varying Anticipated Commitment,” 
Proceedings of CHI 2013 Workshop Designing Gamification: 
Creating Gameful and Playful Experiences, April 2013, pp. 69-74. 
[10] C. Marache-Francisco and E. Brangier, “The Gamification 
Experience - UXD with a Gamification background” in Emerging 
Research and Trends in Interactivity and the Human-Computer 
Interface, K. Blashki and P. Isaias, Eds. IGI-Global, in press. 
[11] C. Marache-Francisco and E. Brangier, “Perception of Gamification: 
between Graphical Design and Persuasive Design,” Proceedings of 
DUXU/HCII 2013, Part II, LNCS 8013, July 2013, pp. 558–567. 
[12] ISO/TR 16982, Ergonomics of human-system interaction -- Usability 
methods supporting human-centred design, 2002. 
[13] S. Deterding, “Meaningful Play. Getting Gamification right”, 
Mountain View, CA, USA: Google Tech Talk, 2011. Retreived June 
15, 2013 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ZGCPap7GkY. 
[14] M.J. Apter, “A Structural-Phenomenology of Play”, in Adult Play. A 
Reversal Theory Approach, H.Kerr and M.J. Apter, Eds. Amsterdam: 
Swets & Zeitlinger, 1991, pp. 13-22. 
[15] M. Montola, T. Nummenmaa, A Lucero, M. Boberg, and H. 
Korhonen, H., “Applying game achievement systems to enhance user 
experience in a photo sharing service,” Proceedings of the 13th 
International MindTrek Conference: Everyday Life in the Ubiquitous 
Era on - MindTrek '09, 2009, pp. 94-97. 
[16] R. Khaled, “It’s not just  whether you win or lose: thoughts on 
Gamification and culture,” Proceedings of CHI 2011 Workshop 
Gamification: Using Game Design Elements in Non-Game Contexts, 
May 2011, pp. 64-67. 
[17] A. Järvinen, “Games without frontiers. Theories ans methods for 
game studies and design”, Doctoral dissertation, Finland: University 
of 
Tampere, 
2008. 
Retrieved 
April 
2, 
2012 
from 
http://ocw.metu.edu.tr/pluginfile.php/4468/mod_resource/content/0/c
eit706/week3_new/AkiJarvinen_Dissertation.pdf. 
[18] H. Hohl, K. Wissmann, and M. Burger, “The joy of telephony: 
designing appealing interactions” in Funology: From Usability to 
Enjoyment, M. A. Blythe, K. Overbeeke, A. F. Monk, and P. C. 
Wright, Eds. Norwell, MA, USA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
2005, pp. 205-211. 
[19] J. Antin and E.F. Churchill, “Badges in Social Media: A Social 
Psychological Perspective,” Proceedings of CHI 2011 Workshop 
Gamification: Using Game Design Elements in Non-Game Contexts, 
May 2011, pp. 10-13. 
[20] E. Schonfeld, “SCVNGR's Secret Game Mechanics Playdeck”, 2010. 
Retreived 
May, 
2 
2013 
from 
http://techcrunch.com/2010/08/25/scvngr-game-mechanics/. 
[21] C. Graf, S. Niebuhr, and K. Kohler, “Enhancing Business Software 
through Fun-of-Use: A Pattern-based Approach” in Emotion in HCI: 
Joint Proceedings of the 2005, 2006, and 2007 International 
Workshops, C. Peter, R. Beale, E. Crane, L. Axelrod, and G. Blyth, 
Eds. Stuttgart: Fraunhofer IRB Verlag, 2008, pp. 101-109. 
[22] B. Fox, Game Interface Design. Boston: Thomson Course 
Technology PTR, 2005. 
[23] J. Dyck, D. Pinelle, B. Brown, and C. Gutwin, “Learning from 
Games: HCI Design Innovations in Entertainment Software,” 
Proceedings of Graphics Interface, Feb 2003, pp. 237-246. 
[24] P. Denny, “The effect of virtual achievements on student 
engagement”, CHI '13 Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, April 2013, pp. 763-772. 
[25] R. Langer, M. Hancock, A.H. West, and N. Randall, “Applications as 
Stories,” 
Proceedings 
of 
CHI 
2013 
Workshop 
Designing 
Gamification: Creating Gameful and Playful Experiences, April 2013, 
pp. 36-39. 
[26] A. Bowser, D. Hansen, and J. Preece, “Gamifying Citizen Science: 
Lessons and Future Directions,” Proceedings of CHI 2013 Workshop 
Designing Gamification: Creating Gameful and Playful Experiences, 
April 2013, pp. 5-8. 
[27] https://www.fitocracy.com/ 14.08.2013. 
[28] V. Rao, “Challenges of Implementing Gamification for Behavior 
Change: Lessons Learned from the Design of Blues Buddies,” 
Proceedings of CHI 2013 Workshop Designing Gamification: 
Creating Gameful and Playful Experiences, April 2013, pp. 61-64. 
[29] R. Cheng and J. Vassileva, “Adaptive Reward Mechanism for 
Sustainable Online Learning Community” in Proceedings of the 2005 
conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education: Supporting 
Learning through Intelligent and Socially Informed Technology, C.-
K. Gord McCalla, B. Bredeweg, and J. Breuker, Eds. Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands, The Netherlands: IOS Press, 2005, pp. 152-159. 
[30] A. Rapp, A. Marcengo, R. Simeoni, and L. Console, “Playing while 
Testing: How to Gamify a User Field Evaluation,” Proceedings of 
CHI 2013 Workshop Designing Gamification: Creating Gameful and 
Playful Experiences, April 2013, pp. 65-68. 
[31] http://www.linkedin.com/ 09.12.2011. 
 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

