An Opportunistic Tourism Navigation System using 
Photography Location Recommendation 
 
Hiroya Sakaguchi 
Graduate School of Information 
Science and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
is0017re@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Tomoko Izumi 
College of Information Science and 
Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
izumi-t@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Yoshio Nakatani 
College of Information Science and 
Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
nakatani@is.ritsumei.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract— In recent years, a style of sightseeing, which is 
planned by individuals and focuses on strolling has become 
widespread, while sightseeing navigation systems have attracted 
attention. However, most existing navigation systems support 
efficient sightseeing by giving users information such as the 
shortest route to their destination. Accordingly in this research, 
we propose an opportunistic sightseeing navigation system, 
which navigates users to a destination while recommending 
some photography locations that exist on the way to the 
destination, and adapts to the users’ moods. An evaluation 
experiment conducted in Kyoto, Japan, demonstrated that 
conducting casual sightseeing on foot using this system enabled 
opportunistic sightseeing suited to the users’ moods, which led 
to user enjoyment.  
Keywords-Tourism 
Navigation 
System; 
Opportunistic 
Planning; Benefit of Inconvenient; Photography Location 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A. Background 
In previous tourism trends, many tourists participated in 
tourism where the destination, route, and time were all pre-
determined by a travel agency. However, in recent years, 
many tourists decide on their destination and route by 
themselves and enjoy their trip freely. Tourism conducted in 
this way is called “autonomous tourism”, whereby tourists 
design their own itineraries to their preference [1].  
In other words, the present trend is for tourists to visit 
their preferred places at their preferred times. However, 
many navigation systems for sightseeing that have been 
developed in recent years place a high value on efficiency, 
thus are not suitable for tourists who prefer to stroll casually. 
In this study, we focus on “Opportunistic Planning” [2], 
which is a plan based on the principle of flexibly adapting to 
opportunities at the place, situation, and time. We consider 
that these principles will be effective in supporting casual 
sightseeing on foot. We propose an opportunistic sightseeing 
navigation system for casual sightseeing on foot. The system 
recommends sightseeing spots according to the tourist’s 
situation (i.e., their available time for sightseeing or the 
distance to a destination) and interests. This system changes 
the photography locations opportunistically when the user’s 
interest changes or when the user happens to encounter 
another attractive photography location. Users can enjoy 
casual sightseeing on foot freely because sightseeing spots 
are recommended to them during sightseeing. We expect that 
adapting to the user’s situation and changes in interest will 
lead to discoveries of new attractions in sightseeing areas.  
B. Relationship between of Photography and Sightseeing 
In recent years, people who take photos in sightseeing 
areas have increased dramatically in comparison to the age 
when only analogue cameras were available. This is because 
camera functions in current mobile devices have increased 
in resolution and multi-functionality. Moreover, due to 
widespread Internet use, photography is now not only 
enjoyed by the photographers themselves. Especially, use of 
social media such as Twitter and Facebook has spread 
rapidly in recent years. Such sites include functions to 
contribute photos, by which users can enjoy sharing the 
pictures they have taken. Taking photos at sightseeing areas 
can be considered an effective means to record one’s 
memories of sightseeing. Moreover, by showing pictures 
taken at sightseeing areas to others, it is possible to 
recommend sightseeing areas to others. 
Panoramio is a service, which connects photographs to 
maps. Panoramio is one of several photo-sharing services 
with location information, by which the user is able to view 
photos shown on a map. Users can share their photos with 
other users and can view photos contributed by other users 
on a map. In this way, using photos can stimulate the users’ 
desire to go to the location. In this research, we focus on 
photography that is frequently carried out during sightseeing, 
and propose a system that navigates to sightseeing spots by 
recommending attractive photography locations. 
A brief outline of this paper follows. In Section 2, we 
introduce studies related to this study. Section 3 and 4 
describe system proposal and system function. Section 5 
describes evaluation of the system and consideration. 
Finally, Section 6 describes conclusion of this paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
A. Trends in Sightseeing Navigation 
With the advancement of mobile environments in recent 
years, many sightseeing navigation systems have been 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

developed for mobile devices. For example, NAVITIME [3] 
has functions such as searching for the shortest route by 
mixing train, bus and walking, and transport transfer guide 
information. As such, it is very convenient for sightseeing 
that places a high value on efficiency, but is not suitable for 
casual sightseeing on foot. 
In addition, a sightseeing navigation system for casual 
sightseeing on foot was proposed in a study by Takagi et al. 
[4]. The system recommends landmarks to the user based on 
individual preferences of food, history and landscape by 
presenting photos of landmarks. 
The user then chooses a landmark and heads for their 
destination. However, as recommendation of landmarks is 
only based on the user’s pre-input preferences, this system 
cannot adapt to changes in the user’s interest or situation 
during sightseeing. On the other hand, Takagi et al.’s study 
indicates that photos of landmarks have an impact on the 
user’s choices and interests. Figure 1 shows the main screen 
of this system and a photo of a landmark. 
 
 
                (a)Main Screen                          (b)Photo of a Landmark 
Figure 1. 
Previous System, Screen 
 
B. Benefit of Inconvenience 
In sightseeing, a person can feel a sense of uneasiness 
due to not knowing detailed routes and buildings, etc. of the 
places they are visiting for the first time. However, this 
uneasiness can be transformed into excited anticipation of 
what lies ahead. This kind of navigation is based on the 
theory of the “Benefit of Inconvenience” [5], which 
suggests that inconvenient things bring benefits. A 
navigation system that uses the “Benefit of Inconvenience” 
has the effect of providing opportunities to look around and 
discover new aspects of the sightseeing area without 
keeping the user glued to the system screen by not providing 
detailed route indications. In the study by Takagi et al. [4], 
the effect of the “Benefit of Inconvenience” was actually 
demonstrated.  
In the current study, we propose a system based on the 
theory of the “Benefit of Inconvenience” that shows map 
information via aerial photographs, whereby it is more 
difficult to understand route details than using a normal map. 
Moreover, the system can convey the ambience and scenery 
of the sightseeing area to the user using aerial photographs, 
and enables the user to discover photography locations and 
other spots suitable to their interests. Also, the navigation to 
these locations consists of showing the direction from the 
user’s position to the destination, without showing a 
detailed route. 
III. 
OUTLINE OF PROPOSAL 
A. Basic Policy of System 
In this study, we propose a tourism navigation system that 
supports users searching for sightseeing spots using 
photography locations that are adapted to the users’ interests. 
First, users input their destination and available time for 
sightseeing in the tourism area. The system recommends 
photography locations using photos from the information on 
the location, distance to destination and the user’s available 
time 
for 
sightseeing. 
The 
photography 
locations 
recommended by this system include rare sights, food, 
landscapes and other things associated with the tourism area. 
Moreover, the system recommends not only famous 
sightseeing spots introduced in guidebooks, but lesser-
known sightseeing spots. Therefore, the users are 
encouraged to go to the location by viewing attractive 
pictures. Users select a spot from a list of recommended 
spots, according to how they feel at that moment, and head 
for the spot based on the system’s navigation. 
As users of the system increase, we assume that in future, 
the data of photography locations can be collected from 
photos taken by general tourists. That is to say, users will 
upload picture data with location information as in 
Panoramio. However, in this system, data of photography 
location is registered in the system ahead of time. Based on 
the theory of “Benefit of Inconvenience”, the system limits 
the amount of information that is displayed when navigating 
to the photography locations. Specifically, the system 
navigates with only a map screen using aerial photographs, 
whereby it is difficult to understand route information and 
the direction to the photography location. Users head for the 
photography location and use the ambience near the 
photography location that they can perceive from the aerial 
photographs, and direction, as hints. The system aims to 
attract the users’ eyes to the surrounding landscapes, by 
comparing the aerial photographs and real landscapes and 
searching for the photography locations.  
In this study, we propose a sightseeing navigation system 
that changes photography locations opportunistically in 
response to users’ changeable feelings and supports more 
free casual sightseeing on foot. In sightseeing, there are 
many varieties of places that users want to visit and these 
depend on the user’s feelings at that time. This system 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

recommends destinations while repeating navigation in 
accordance with the user’s moods, for example when their 
feelings change and the user wants to visit other places. 
Specific to the situation, users choose photography locations 
that are recommended by the system and repeat the action of 
heading for the location as a way to move to destination. 
However, if while casually walking, the user’s interests 
change to other things - for example, they take a photo at 
another place and are satisfied - the system provides a new 
recommendation 
of 
other 
photography 
locations. 
Accordingly, users can change the next photography 
location, in consideration of their mood or the situation at 
any time. 
B. System Flow 
1) First, the user decides their destination and the target 
time for the destination. The system uses these to calculate 
which walking routes are possible, and recommends some 
photography locations. 
2) From the list of recommendations, the user chooses a 
photography location in accordance with their feelings at 
that time. 
3) The system shows a map screen with aerial 
photographs and directions to the destination calculated 
from the location information of the photography location 
and the user’s current location. 
4) The user strolls freely while searching for the 
photography location or other spots where they want to take 
photos. 
5) The user requests the system to recommend the next 
photography 
location 
when 
the 
user 
reaches 
the 
photography location, finds a favorite place or has a change 
in interest. 
6) The system calculates the remaining time and 
recommends new photography locations. 
7) The user heads for their destination, repeating Steps 
2~6. 
 
Figure 2. 
System Structure 
 
Figure 2 shows this systems’ structure. 
IV. 
OUTLINE OF SYSTEM 
A. Development Environment) 
The proposed system was developed as an application 
for mobile devices using the Android OS, for the following 
reasons. 
 
Android mobile devices can be carried and used at 
sightseeing areas. 
 
Android mobile devices can use GPS function to 
obtain location information. 
 
Android mobile devices can use Google Maps to 
obtain map information. 
The development environment was Eclipse, and the 
system was implemented in the Java programming language. 
B. System Functions 
In this system, we prepared photography locations 
between the vicinity of Yasaka Shrine and the vicinity of 
Kiyomizu Temple in Kyoto, Japan. The reasons for this 
choice are that there are many sightseeing spots such as 
historic buildings, appealing alleyways, souvenir shops and 
cafés, and Kyoto is suitable to casual sightseeing on foot. 
1) Initial screen 
First, the user inputs their destination and available time 
for sightseeing in minutes. The time is managed by the 
system and a navigation screen is shown with a countdown 
timer, which then starts. The system places a pin at the 
destination 
obtained 
from 
the 
previously 
inputted 
information. The user can confirm whether the location is 
correct or not by tapping the pin. 
2) Photography location recommendation screen 
The system shows photography location candidates by 
calculating possible routes from the inputted time and 
location information of the user’s position and destination. 
Figure 3 shows the recommendation screen. Photography 
locations are retained in a database, which stores location 
information and a photograph as data for each photography 
location. 
Next, the selection method of the photography locations 
will be explained. The system calculates the walking time 
from the user’s position to the photography location, and 
from the photography location to the destination. When the 
total time is shorter than the remaining time for sightseeing, 
the photography location is recommended. In this system, 
all spots that meet this condition are recommended to the 
user. The system places a pin at the photography locations, 
and the user can view a photo of the location by tapping the 
pin. The user selects their preferred place and decides on 
visiting a photography location. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 3. 
Photography Location Recommendation Screen 
 
3) Navigation screen 
After the user decides on the photography location, the 
system changes to the navigation screen, obtains the user’s 
location information, calculates the direction to the 
photography location and displays a compass. The system 
shows the map as an aerial photograph. The system starts 
measuring elapsed time as soon as the screen changes to the 
navigation screen. 
  The user searches for the photography location using the 
aerial photograph map and compass as clues. Figure 4 
shows the system’s navigation screen. 
 
 
Figure 4. 
Navigation Screen 
 
When the user touches the “Refresh” button, the map’s 
central position is refreshed to the user’s current location, 
and the new direction is calculated. There are two reasons 
for not renewing the user’s location at all times: 1) In order 
to make it easy to comprehend the ambience of the 
environment from the aerial photograph showing a 
stationary landscape; 2) So that the user can search for 
things that interest them and stroll freely without clinging to 
the map information.  
When the user touches the “Camera” button, the mobile 
device’s camera initiates and the user can take a photo when 
they have found a favorite spot. 
   When the user touches the “Next” button, the system 
recommends new photography locations. This button is used 
when the user has found the recommended photography 
location or the user wants to go to another location. The 
system recommends locations that are further from the 
destination than the user’s current location. Thus, the user 
can take a roundabout way and conduct casual sightseeing 
on foot freely. This enables opportunistic sightseeing in 
accordance with the user’s mood without being bound to the 
user’s location or the photography location. Furthermore, 
when there is little time remaining and no photography 
locations satisfy the conditions, the system starts to navigate 
to the destination. In this way, the user can go to their 
destination while changing the visited locations according to 
their feelings. 
V. 
EVALUATION EXPERIMENT 
A. Experiment Site 
In our evaluation experiment, we set the start point as 
Yasaka Shrine and the destination as Kiyomizu Temple in 
Kyoto, Japan. There are four reasons for conducting the 
experiment in Kyoto. 
 
Most streets between the two locations have few cars 
and are easy to walk in. 
 
Many streets or buildings are historic and appealing. 
 
There are many souvenir shops and restaurants. 
 
There are many narrow streets suitable for casual 
sightseeing on foot. 
B. Evaluators 
We conducted this experiment with the cooperation of 
seven students who live in the Kansai area, which includes 
Kyoto. The evaluators were separated into three groups 
based on a preliminary survey that asked how many times 
they had visited Kiyomizu Temple or Yasaka Shrine and 
what they want to see during sightseeing. The purpose of 
this group division was to investigate how the results of 
limiting the route information is affected by the number of 
visits. Moreover, the aim of separating three groups by their 
tourism preferences was to investigate how this affects 
users’ choices of photography locations or the type of 
photos they take. Table 1 shows the evaluator group 
composition. 
 
 
 
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

TABLE I. 
EVALUATOR GROUP COMPOSITION 
 
Group 1 
Group 2 
Group 3 
Number of 
People(Male：Female) 
2(1：1) 
3(3：0) 
2(0：2) 
Number of Previous 
Visits 
0 
Over 3 
1~2 
Want to See  
Streets  
History 
Food 
 
C. Experimental Procedure 
The experiment was conducted for each group with the 
start point of Yasaka Shrine and destination of Kiyomizu 
Temple. Each group set their available time for sightseeing 
freely and headed for Kiyomizu Temple using the system. 
The first author accompanied the evaluators and observed 
the circumstances of the experiment. After the experiment, 
the evaluators were asked to complete a questionnaire, via 
which we expected to examine the results and problems of 
this study. 
D. Purpose of Experiment 
In this experiment, we conducted evaluation by paying 
attention to the following points, in order to confirm this 
study’s outcome. 
1) Realization of opportunistic sightseeing, and its 
difference to regular sightseeing 
In this system, the users do not decide on the details of the 
route. They can stroll freely according to their mood and can 
choose photography locations that they want to visit, in 
contrast to conventional navigation systems that show the 
shortest route. We aimed to investigate how free situations 
like this affect the users’ actions and whether that effect 
gives users satisfaction in comparison to conventional 
navigation systems. 
2) Influence on sightseeing of photography location 
recommendation, and of addition of camera function  
We aimed to investigate whether the user’s eyes are 
attracted to the surrounding environment, not to the system 
screen, by “searching” for recommended photography 
locations.  
In addition to this, we aimed to evaluate whether the 
system prompts users to discover new attractions in the 
tourism area with the function of taking photos. 
3) Balance of anticipation and uneasiness with 
navigation using only aerial photograph maps and direction 
information 
In this system, users are navigated using only aerial 
photograph maps and direction information. This is more 
difficult and inconvenient than conventional navigation 
systems. The uneasiness that this navigation style, based on 
the “Benefit of Inconvenience”, inflicts on users is moderate. 
We aim to inspect whether the system can change this 
uneasiness into anticipation during sightseeing. 
E. Experiment Results 
1) Group 1 
For both of Group 1’s members, this was their first visit 
to Kyoto. Accordingly, they conducted sightseeing carefully 
by refreshing their location information frequently, and 
often got lost. From these points, we can consider that 
navigation using only aerial photograph maps and direction 
information inflicts uneasiness on people for whom it is 
their first visit. However, on the other hand, the Group 1 
members looked around well in order to search for the 
recommended 
photography 
location 
carefully. 
They 
initiated the camera function of the system and took photos 
five times. 
2) Group 2 
The photos chosen by Group 2’s members were 
inconsistent, and were a mixture of rare sights and streets. 
Since all three members had visited Kyoto several times, 
they were familiar with the surroundings, rarely updated 
their location information, and did not lose their way. 
Moreover, the photography locations chosen by Group 2 
did not approach Kiyomizu Temple; instead, they went 
around and sometimes left the Kiyomizu Temple area. The 
members conducted sightseeing opportunistically and freely, 
interrupting or diverting their route to go to photography 
locations. However, because they diverted so much there 
was no time, so they stopped in order to walk to Kiyomizu 
Temple. For this reason, they regretted their preset time. 
From this result, we determined that the system can support 
users in conducting sightseeing that matches their moods at 
that 
time 
by 
recommending 
photography 
locations 
regardless of the user’s position and the genre of sightseeing. 
On the other hand, we also discovered issues in the system, 
including that users could not change the destination or time. 
3) Group 3 
All of Group 3’s members had previously visited Kyoto, 
but they cautiously confirmed their position at the start of 
the experiment. 
However, they gradually decreased the frequency of 
refreshing their position while walking and searching for 
photography locations. In addition, although this group said 
that they wanted to visit locations focused on food, they did 
not choose a photography location related to food. They 
gave the reason that they wanted to visit photography 
locations recommended for other genres. However, as they 
stopped by a sweetshop and a café, they took actions that 
matched their feelings. This group used the camera function 
positively, taking over ten pictures. 
VI. 
CONSIDERATION 
1) Realization of opportunistic sightseeing, and its 
difference to regular sightseeing 
In this system, users do not only choose a photography 
location according to personal preference, and follow a 
route while looking for the place; they can also freely 
change the photography location according to their moods 
while they head for the photography location. In the 
evaluation 
experiment, 
users 
freely 
changed 
the 
photography location according to their feelings at that time, 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

decided on a course spontaneously, took very roundabout 
routes, and sometimes stopped or went away from the 
destination. Thus, they were able to conduct sightseeing 
freely. Moreover, they answered that they were able to 
enjoy sightseeing using this system more than sightseeing 
using a normal sightseeing navigation system, by always 
acting in accordance with their feelings. 
2) Influence on sightseeing of photography location 
recommendation, and of addition of camera function 
This system was able to prompt users to turn their 
attention to their surroundings by letting users look for the 
scenery in the photograph by recommending the photograph. 
From the fact that all groups used the camera function of the 
system and took pictures over five times, we can consider 
that the system allowed users to consciously discover new 
appeal of the sightseeing area. 
3) Balance of anticipation and uneasiness with 
navigation using only aerial photograph maps and direction 
information 
This system allows flexibility in the user’s route, by not 
assigning the route during navigation. Instead, the 
navigation uses only aerial photograph maps and direction 
information, which inflicts uneasiness to many users but 
also provides a further sense of anticipation. In addition to 
this, users were able to enjoy sightseeing by taking their 
favorite routes more than in regular sightseeing. However, 
problems arose, including that this style of navigation can 
inflict such uneasiness that it was easy for users visiting 
Kyoto for the first time to lose their way. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
A. Problems 
In this study, we proposed a sightseeing navigation 
method that adapts to users’ feelings opportunistically, and 
its efficacy was demonstrated. However, the system requires 
a function to change or extend the sightseeing time, because 
in the evaluation experiment there was a group that did not 
have enough time. Moreover, the navigation system needs 
to be developed in order to add a function that supports 
when users want to change their destination depending on 
their moods. In future, we will examine an even more 
opportunistic sightseeing navigation system. In addition to 
this, we will develop a sightseeing navigation system that 
can recommend photography locations that to some extent 
consider the weather or the user’s feelings, guessed 
according to the user’s selection of photography locations, 
not only using the available time for sightseeing. 
B. Conclusion 
In this research, we focused on photography that is 
frequently conducted in sightseeing and proposed an 
opportunistic sightseeing navigation system that navigates 
to the destination by recommending photography locations 
one by one. The method of navigation uses aerial maps and 
direction to photography locations based on the “Benefit of 
Inconvenience”, without showing or appointing a detailed 
route. It was demonstrated that the freeness of sightseeing 
using navigation that always follows the moods of the user, 
the recommendation method of photography locations and 
the display method of the navigation led to enjoyment of the 
sightseeing. Moreover, the system allows users to pay 
attention consciously to their surroundings by promoting 
searching for the photography locations and taking photos, 
and enables new discoveries in the sightseeing area. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Ishimori, “The Potentialities of Autonomous Tourism in the 
Twenty-first Century,” Senri Ethnological Reports, 2001, Vol.23, 
pp.5-14 (in Japanese). 
[2] E. Horvitz, P. Koch, and M. Subramani, “Mobile Opportunistic 
Planning: Methods and Models,” User Modeling 2007, 2007, pp.228-
237. 
[3] NAVITIME 
JAPAN, 
NAVITIME, 
http://www.navitime.co.jp, 
[retrieved: 8, 2013]. 
[4] S. Takagi, M. Masuda, T. Izumi, and Y. Nakatani, “Tour Navigation 
System Using Landmarks that Are Customized by Personal 
Preference”, Human Interface Symposium 2012, 2012, pp.393-398 
(in Japanese). 
[5] K. Kawakami, “Toward System Design based on the Benefit of 
Inconvenience,” Human Interface. Transaction of Human Interface 
Society, 2009, Vol.11, No.1, pp.123-134 (in Japanese). 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

