 
EEG Application for Human-Centered Experiments in Remote Ship Operations
Raheleh Kari  
Department of Ocean Operations 
and Civil Engineering  
Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology (NTNU)  
Ålesund, Norway 
e-mail: raheleh.kari@ntnu.no 
Martin Steinert 
Department of Mechanical and 
Industrial Engineering  
Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology (NTNU)  
Trondheim, Norway 
e-mail: martin.steinert@ntnu.no 
Henrique M.Gaspar 
Department of Ocean Operations 
and Civil Engineering  
Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology (NTNU)  
Ålesund, Norway 
e-mail: henrique.gaspar@ntnu.no
Abstract— Electroencephalography (EEG) is an exceptional 
technique in order to study human behavior via neurocognitive 
processes. EEG can be utilized in different domains to study 
the 
neurocognitive 
processes 
behind 
human-machine 
interactions. Furthermore, remote ship operations are an 
innovative approach in the maritime industry to improve the 
efficiency of operations. However, in the Shore Control Center 
(SCC), human-machine interactions are challenging and highly 
important in order to implement successful remote ship 
operations. In this respect, human operators are key 
components of the SCCs; performance and efficiency of their 
interactions directly affect remote monitoring and remote 
controls. Hence, the present study introduces the EEG EPOC 
Flex in order to objectively investigate human interactions. 
The current paper focuses on operator’s stress in different 
levels of workload within the SCC. In effect, EEG will facilitate 
investigating human factor issues that may affect operators’ 
interactions in the SCC. The result of this study can help SCC 
designers to design an efficient environment for SCC 
operators. 
Keywords-Remote 
operations; 
Ship; 
EEG; 
Human 
experiments 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Today, studying the underlying mechanisms of human 
behavior is the center of interest for many researchers in 
different fields, especially for automated environments and 
remote-controlled vessels. Thus, different types of Human 
Factor Engineering (HFE), Human-Computer Interaction 
(HCI), and affective engineering experiments have been 
performed [1], [2]. While the concept of remote-controlled 
vessels and remote ship operations are in their early stage, 
study the human interactions will significantly improve the 
functionality and value of remote ship operations. Although 
the autonomous vessel might be in the form of an unmanned 
vessel, human operators still play an important role in the 
unmanned systems [3] within the SCC. In this respect, 
operators’ stress due to information overload is one of the 
important identified human factor issues; because one SCC 
operator has to deal with several vessels at the same time [3], 
[4]. According to the communication requirements for an 
unmanned vessel, remote control and remote monitoring are 
two important control modes within the SCC [5] where 
humans play a critical role to monitor and control the vessels 
from distant locations.  
The concept of SCC relies on a manned shore-based 
control center which is responsible for the ship operation. In 
this scenario, difficult or critical remote ship operations will 
be conducted by the SCC [5]. However, in order to decrease 
the workload on the SCC operators, assure the safety, or in 
the case of the limited or loss of the communication between 
the vessel and SCC, the vessel must be able to perform the 
normal operation without human supervision. There are 
several fails to safe strategies that are programmed and 
updated by the SCC and the vessel can enter one of the 
possible strategies when SCC cannot respond [5].  
According to the concept of remote ship operation and 
SCC, the crew will be relocated from on board the vessel to 
shore-based control centers, and they will perform different 
tasks based on the organization and control modes of the 
SCC. This relocation does not mean the elimination of the 
human factors or solving all human errors; by contrast, more 
questions regarding human factors and human interactions 
will be raised, because SCC operators have to take the full 
control over the vessel at any time [4]. In addition, the SCC 
operator is defined as an Officer of Watch (OOW), who is 
responsible for monitoring the vessel at any time and 
interevent if needed [6]. This is highlighted in the remote 
monitoring mode of SCC as well [5]. 
Thus, human operators are key components of the SCC 
and their performance and efficiency directly affect remote 
ship operations. This implies that study the human-human 
and human-machine interactions are highly important in 
order to implement remote ship operations. In this respect, 
Electroencephalography (EEG) is a special tool that can be 
utilized for quantifying human interactions and study the 
neurocognitive processes underlying human behavior [7]. 
Although there are various studies that investigate the 
behavioral interactions in a qualitative manner, using 
physiological sensors especially EEG leads to quantify 
human interactions. EEG records brain waves and electrical 
activities by using electrodes on the scalp. Electrical 
activities of the brain indicate that how is the communication 
between different neurons in the brain network through 
electrical impulses [8].  
The current study presents the application of EEG EPOC 
Flex in order to objectively investigate human factor issues 
affecting SCC operators. According to [9], there are different 
types of issues that affect human interactions during the 
remote ship operations especially within the SCCs. For 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
example, a high level of mental workload and a lack of direct 
sensory. On the other hand,  the main hypothesis of the 
successful implementation of the Human-Machine Interface 
(HMI) within the SCC introduces an SCC operator as a 
person who has to be able to monitor and control up to six 
vessels at the same time [10]. In this respect, the current 
paper focuses on using EEG EPOC Flex for measuring the 
stress of SCC operators during the remote monitoring and 
remote ship operations in different levels of workload. The 
paper presents stress as a dependent variable and workload 
as an independent variable, which can be manipulated during 
an EEG experiment.  
Developing this type of human-centered experiment 
leads to the study of human interactions in a quantitative 
manner, which can boost the acceptability of results. But, the 
development process of a human-centered experiment 
requires fundamental knowledge in various domains, such as 
psychology, physiology, engineering design, electro-physics, 
and neuroscience [2]. This increases the complexity of the 
development process, especially when the experiment is to 
be designed from scratch and there is no clear experiment 
precedes for scenarios [2]. Thus, the current paper reviews 
some aspects of knowledge domains in order to build an 
EEG human-centered experiment within the SCC. In 
addition, an example case comprising a high workload and 
low workload scenarios is presented. The example case is 
developed based on the wayfaring model; this model 
supports the early concept creation stage of designing 
experiments including multi-disciplines and high levels of 
complexity [2].  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the 
definition of remote ship operations and SCC in section II. 
Electroencephalography (EEG) and its characteristics appear 
in section III; this section reviews how stress can be 
investigated by using brain frequencies. Wayfaring model 
and example case is presented in section IV. Section V 
discusses the objective and EEG as an explicit tool to design 
a human-centered experiment regarding the stress of SCC 
operators. Finally, section VI presents the conclusion and 
future works. 
II. 
REMOT SHIP OPERATIONS AND SCC 
Today, technology is generally available to operate a 
vessel 
without 
on 
board 
crew, 
however, 
several 
developments and validations are required [5]. According to 
the definition of remote operation, a machine is under the 
continuing and direct human control from a distant location 
[11]. This implies that the concept of unmanned vessels will 
rely on an SCC, which is responsible for the operation of the 
vessel based on the different types of vessel and SCC control 
modes [5]. 
According to the baseline case from Maritime Unmanned 
Navigation through Intelligence in Networks (MUNIN), the 
SCC contains all on land functions, remote bridge, and 
engine control modules that can be utilized to take the direct 
control over the vessel in specific cases [12]. Furthermore, 
the initial voyage planning will be conducted in SCC, and all 
the voice communication to the vessel will be relayed to the 
SCC in order to handle by the SCC operators [12].  
There are five main ship control modes for an onboard 
Autonomous Ship Controller (ASC) comprising autonomous 
execution, autonomous control, direct remote control, 
indirect remote control, and fail to safe mode [5]. According 
to different modes of ship control, it can be concluded that 
SCC will operate in various modes as well. Remote 
monitoring, remote operation, status investigation, ASC 
update, and intervention are the main SCC control modes 
[5]. Generally, the SCC will be in the remote monitoring 
mode, when all the ship status indicators are normal; in this 
case, no action will be taken from SCC. The ASC sends a set 
of ship status flags to SCC at short intervals (for example 
every 5 seconds). A set of ship status indicators are presented 
by [5] based on the hierarchical ship function decomposition 
[13] and the ship functional model [14]. Table I indicates 
ship status indicators which are critical parameters for the 
SCC operators in different SCC control modes. 
TABLE I.  
SHIP INDICATORS IN SCC [5] 
Indicator 
Detailed description elements 
Location 
Position, heading, speed, distance from planned 
position as well as position quality flag. 
Weather  
Wind speed/ direction, wave and swell hight/ 
length/ direction  
Visibility  
Visibility, radar range and culture. COLREG status 
of ship 
Collision  
Vectors to targets, status/heading/ speed of targets 
Grounding  
Depth measurement 
Communication  
Critical communication directly to ship, for example 
on VHF, GMDSS. 
Stability  
Trim, heel, draft, water tight integrity, void space, 
water ingress 
Environment  
Environmental performance and emission to air and 
sea 
Economy  
Fuel use and potential for late arrival/ off hire etc 
Hull propulsion  
Hull and equipment status, anchor, towing, ladders 
Propulsion  
Engine, auxiliaries, piping, fuel 
Electric  
Electric power systems, switch boards, emergency 
power 
Safety  
Fire, evacuation, extinguishing, escape 
Cargo  
Cargo status  
 
If one of the above indicators shows some abnormality, 
the SCC will enter to ASC update and investigation modes 
[5]. Remote ship operation mode is utilized to control the 
vessel manually when ASC cannot solve the problem in a 
certain situation. SCC will enter intervention mode when 
deeper interactions with onboard systems are necessary [5], 
[12]. 
III. 
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG) 
Electroencephalography in short EEG means recording 
the electric activity of the brain. Most cognitive processes 
happen within tens to hundreds of milliseconds, this is much 
faster than the blink of an eye. On the other hand, events, 
which trigger cognitive processes happen in time sequences 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
that span hundreds of million seconds to a few seconds [8]. 
EEG similar to a high-speed camera has a high time 
resolution; hence, it can capture the physiological changes 
of underlying cognitive processes better than other brain 
imaging 
techniques 
including 
Positron 
Emission 
Tomography (PET) scanners and Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging (MRI) [8].  
The brain is continually active and generates electrical 
activities that are significantly less than a 9v battery. EEG 
sensors can pick up weak signals from the surface of the 
scalp [8]. The international brain research has been gaining 
important findings regarding EEG and established theories 
which are well-accepted on how the EEG signals relate to 
attentional, affective or cognitive processing [8]. The 
current paper utilized the Emotiv EEG EPOC Flex 
containing 32 channels. Each sensor records five main brain 
band powers consisting Theta (4-8Hz), Alpha (8-12Hz), 
Low beta (12-16Hz), High beta (16-25Hz), and Gamma (25-
45Hz). EEG researchers record the brain’s electrical 
activities via sensors placed at the scalp surface; this applied 
first to humans by a German neurologist Hans Berger in the 
1920s [8]. As the electrical signals are very small, the data is 
digitized and sent to an amplifier. Then, the recorded data 
can be displayed as a time series of voltage values [8]. 
American Encephalographic society (1994) has been 
provided the most common system in order to define and 
name the electrode locations/positions on the scalp. This 
system is called the 10-20 system such that electrodes are 
placed at 10% and 20% points along lines of longitude and 
latitude. In the 10-20 system electrode names start with one 
or two letters showing the general brain region or lobes 
where the electrode is placed [8].  
Electrode’s name end with a letter or a number showing 
the distance to the midline. Even numbers in the right 
hemisphere, and odd numbers in the left hemisphere. Larger 
numbers refer to the greater distances from the midline [8]. 
Electrodes placed at the midline are labeled with “z”, which 
indicates zero distance from the midline. For instance, T7 is 
placed over the left temporal regions, Fp8 is placed over the 
right front-polar regions, and Cz is located over the midline 
central brain region [8]. 
A. EEG frequencies  
Brain oscillations with the 4-8 Hz frequency range are 
identified as theta band [15], [16]. Various studies highlight 
that frontal theta activities are correlated with the difficulty 
of mental operations; for instance, during learning, 
information takes up, focused attention or memory recall. In 
this respect, theta frequencies are more prominent when the 
task difficulty increase. Hence, theta is usually associated 
with the processes underlying working memory and mental 
workload [8], [17]–[19]. Workload refers to any cognitive 
process involving executive processes including problem-
solving, working memory and analytical reasoning. 
Workload which is associated with the theta band power, 
increases in the case of a higher level of task demand and 
working memory load [8]. Theta frequency can be recorded 
from all over the cortex, this indicates that it is generated via 
a wide network involving central, parental, prefrontal and 
temporal cortices [8]. On the other hand, there is an 
improvement of theta waves in the case of mental stress. 
This implies a good correlation between EEG signals and 
mental stress [20], [21]. Table II indicates a summary of 
studies on theta and other EEG bands focusing on stress and 
workload. 
Alpha band as a rhythmic oscillatory activity with the 
frequency range between 8–12 Hz was discovered by Hans 
Berger in 1929 [15] cited by [8]. The alpha band is 
generated in posterior cortical areas, comprising parietal, 
occipital and posterior temporal brain areas [8], however, it 
is more active in frontal and occipital regions of the brain 
[22]. Figure 1 indicates four main brain lobes and their 
responsibilities. In normal adults, alpha waves can be seen 
spontaneously during wakefulness and relaxed state [18]. 
The alpha band is correlated with sensory, memory, and 
motor functions. During the mental and physical relaxation 
with closed eyes, there is an increase in alpha band power. 
By contrast, alpha power is suppressed during mental and 
body activities with open eyes [8]. In other words, alpha 
suppression indicates that the brain is preparing to pick up 
information from different senses, focusing on what really 
matters in that specific moment, and coordinating 
attentional sources [8]. This implies that alpha suppression 
is a valid presentation of engagement and mental activities, 
for instance during focused attention to different types of the 
stimulus [23] cited by [8]. 
Importantly, in the case of no stress, when the brain is 
performing no activity alpha waves are dominant. In 
stressful conditions, the alpha power declines to indicate the 
change in the response under stress [21]. The power 
suppression of alpha band during the stressful situation is 
also highlighted by [24]. It is important to mention that in a 
study regarding functional roles of 10 Hz alpha band power, 
Magnetoencephalography (MEG) signals similar to EEG 
signals indicate that alpha oscillations are associated with 
semantic, spatial and social attention [25].  
 Oscillations within the range of 12-25 Hz are generally 
referred to as beta band activities [8], [16], [18]. Beta 
frequency is generated in both frontal and posterior regions 
of the brain. Higher beta power is generally correlated to 
active concentration and busy or anxious thinking [8], [32]. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
TABLE II.  
SUMMARY OF EEG STUDIES ON STRESS AND     
WORKLOAD 
Authors 
EEG 
band 
EEG 
sensors 
Results 
[26] 
Delta, 
Theta, 
Alpha, 
Beta, 
Gamma 
F3,FC5,T7,P
7,O1,O2, 
P8,T8,FC6,F
4,F8,AF3, 
F7, AF4 
The results indicate the 
feasibility of EEG in order to 
detect stress. The highest 
accuracy was obtained in the 
alpha band power. 
[27] 
Theta 
(fmq) 
Beta 
71 EEG 
electrodes 
Theta (fmq) increased 
consistently with memory 
load.  
[28] 
Beta 
FC5, FC6, 
O1, O2, 
Participants in the stress 
group had the highest level of 
Beta activity. 
[29] 
Theta 
The 
locations of 
48 
electrodes 
(out of 171) 
are shown 
in the study 
 
In more complex mazes there 
are more theta oscillations. 
Theta oscillations are more 
frequent through recall trials 
compare with learning trials. 
[20] 
Theta, 
Beta, 
Delta, 
Alpha, 
 
FP1,FP2, F3, 
F4,C3,C4,P3,
P4,O1,O2, 
F7,F8,T3,T4,
T5,T6,FZ,CZ,
PZ, OZ 
During the most complex 
task, delta power increased. 
Delta only increases when 
attention to internal 
processing is required. 
During the performance of a 
task, alpha activity was 
suppressed, but low theta 
increased. 
[23] 
Alpha 
C4-A2,C3 
A1,O2-
A2,O1-A1 
During the visual 
stimulation, a decreased in 
Rhythmic Activity within the 
Alpha Band (RAAB) 
happened in occipital 
regions. During the auditory 
stimulation, power declined 
in the central regions.  
[30] 
Alpha, 
Beta, 
Theta 
Fp1,AF3, 
F3,F7,FC5,
FC1,C3,T7, 
CP5, 
CP1,P3,P7,
PO3,O1, 
Oz,Pz,Fp2,
AF4,Fz,F4,
F8,FC6,FC
2,CZ,C4,T8,
Cp6,Cp2,P
4,P8,PO4, 
O2 
In the field of spectral 
centroids, 30 out of 32 
electrodes indicated 
increased centroid frequency 
during stress (without 
significant effect). It is 
argued that negative valence 
stimuli lead to an increase in 
the right frontal activities. 
Besides, left frontal activity 
indicates the EEG response 
to positive valence stimuli.  
[31] 
 
Theta, 
Alpha, 
Beta 
Fp1,Fp2, 
FpZ(prefro
ntal sites) 
Stressful subjects showed a 
higher level of EEG 
complexity. The group with 
chronic stress had higher left 
prefrontal power. There was 
a significant difference in 
relative power of alpha 
between the normal group 
and the stress group. 
[19] 
Theta, 
Alpha 
19 
electrodes 
based on 
the 10-20 
system 
(including 
O2, P4, F7) 
Upper Alpha is dominant 
during retention (increasing 
the memory load). Theta and 
upper Alpha play an 
important role during the 
retrieval.  
 
 Another study indicates that there is a high beta activity at 
the FC5 electrode during the stress situation [28]. This 
means that there is a meaningful correlation between beta 
frequencies and levels of stress.  
Oscillations above 25 Hz are referred to gamma 
frequencies 
which 
usually 
found 
during 
conscious 
perception. Due to high contamination by muscle artifacts 
and small amplitude [18]. Gamma frequencies are black 
holes of the EEG studies. Still, it is unclear that which parts 
of the brain generate gamma frequencies and what these 
frequencies reflect. Some studies argue that the gamma band 
is a by-product of other neural processes, hence, they do not 
reflect any cognitive processing at all [8]. Notably, high 
gamma activity in the temporal region is associated with 
memory processes [18]. Furthermore, some studies report 
that gamma activity is connected to attention, working 
memory and long-term memory processes [18], [33].  
IV. 
HUMAN-CENTERED EXPERIMENT IN THE EXAMPLE 
CASE 
This part presents an example of a human-centered 
experiment to study stress and workload within the SCC. 
The wayfaring approach is applied to the development of 
the experiment. The current example comprises two 
scenarios with different levels of workload. The research 
hypothesis is defined as follows:  
    H1: There is a significant difference in participant’s stress 
between high workload and low workload scenarios.   
A. Wayfaring approch 
Wayfaring model [34], [35] can be utilized as an 
exploration journey instead of a planning-based approach to 
discover innovative ideas. The wayfaring model describes 
that “an optimum new solution to a problem cannot be 
preconceived as we do not have empirical evidence for the 
outcome of something that has not previously been done” 
[2]. In this respect, the model provides a methodology for a 
Figure 1.    Brain lobes and their responsibilities 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
practical exploration of the problem and solution. According 
to [2], this methodology comprises four steps as follows:    
1. Probing ideas: the exploration of opportunities, 
sometimes this phase includes a low-resolution 
prototype in order to fail early and to abductive 
learning. 
2. Merging 
multidisciplinary: 
comprising 
all 
knowledge domains from the beginning to discover 
interdependencies 
and 
develop 
interrelated 
knowledge 
3. Speed: make a plan based on the short iteration 
timeframe to maximize the iteration numbers 
4. Agility: opportunistically select the next step and let 
the development process shape the outcome. This 
phase can be followed  in order to achieve 
serendipity findings and innovation outcomes 
B. Scenario 1 
This experiment uses EEG EPOC Flex to record the brain 
activity of a human operator while monitoring the vessel’s 
operation in the simulation environment. The task takes 10 
minutes due to limitations for using EEG EPOC Flex. The 
instructor room of the navigation simulators will be 
considered as an SCC and a ship bridge as a remote-
controlled vessel. As we can see in Figure 2,  the instructor 
room  is assumed as an SCC where one operator can 
monitor up to six vessels (SCC remote monitoring mode). In 
the current scenario, an SCC operator is defined as an 
OOW. As mentioned before, this person is responsible for 
monitoring the ship and intervening if required [6]; this 
means sending high-level commands in specific situations. 
The ship bridge will be operated by simulator assistants 
based on the predefined route. In this scenario, SCC 
operators will fill in a self-report stress survey after they 
finish the experiment. In addition, the paper-based NASA 
TLX forms will be used in order to assess the workload 
objectively.  
In scenario number 1, SCC operator will monitor one 
remotely operated vessel from the instructor room (based on 
the monitor mode of SCC), and there is a ship-ship 
communication between the bridge operators and SCC 
operators. SCC operator is responsible to send high-level 
commands if needed in the case of accidents, crossing other 
vessels or harsh weather. In addition, SCC operator has to 
monitor the radar data, heading, propeller revolution, rate of 
turn, rudder and speed of each vessel to ensure that all the 
vessels are in an appropriate status. Independent variable 
will be manipulated as follows: 
• 
Area: Kristiansund to Trondheim (low difficulty) 
• 
One container ship as the main vessel 
• 
5+ targets (traffic)  
• 
Good visibility in daylight  
• 
Moderated wind, calm sea-state  
• 
No accidental situation  
C. Scenario 2 
Actors, environment, and components of scenario number 
2 are the same as scenario number 1. The independent 
variable will be manipulated as follows: 
• 
Area: Vatlestraumen (moderate difficulty) 
• 
5 container ships as the main vessels  
• 
15+ targets (traffic) 
• 
Bad visibility, night time 
• 
Strong wind, wavy sea 
• 
Two accidental situation 
It is notable that in this experiment physiological baseline 
will be performed before scenario 1.   
V. 
DISCUSSION  
Remote monitoring and remote controls have been 
merged in different types of control modes of unmanned 
vessels and SCCs. In this respect, SCC appears as a black 
box comprising human, hardware, software and different 
types of human-machine interfaces. It is clear that by 
relocating crew from on board the vessel to SCC, we will 
face more human factor challenges such as stress and 
information overloading. Hence, study human interactions 
within the SCC leads to gain more knowledge about 
different aspects of remote ship operations and decoding the 
black box of the SCC. The current paper presented EEG as a 
remarkable method in order to investigate the stress of SCC 
operators during the different levels of workload.  
Moreover, the paper presented a very simple example 
case based on the wayfaring approach. The wayfaring model 
was an appropriate model in order to develop the 
experiment due to a lack of clear procedures and a high 
level of complexity. EEG EPOC Flex was defined as a tool 
to record the participant’s brain signals during the 
experiment. According to the various studies regarding the 
EEG signals and stress, we suggest theta and alpha 
frequencies as two important EEG frequencies which can be 
considered to study stress. During the stressful situation, the 
power of alpha frequencies falls down, however, the power 
Figure 2.   Simulator instructor room 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
of theta waves increases. In addition, EEG electrodes in the 
frontal region of the brain including Fp1, Fp2, FpZ 
(prefrontal site), FC5 and FC6 can be considered as effective 
electrodes during the stress evaluation. However, a 
comprehensive analysis of stress requires considering more 
EEG electrodes in addition to different band powers. 
Developing a human-centered experiment is a challenging 
task, as fundamental knowledge in the different domains is 
required. This implies one of the main challenges in 
developing human-centered experiments, especially in the 
field of EEG. Using a simulator environment rather than a 
real SCC is another issue, which can affect the results of the 
experiment. Furthermore, the availability of participants is 
another limitation during the human-centered experiments. 
It is important to mention that in the current high workload 
scenario, all the independent factors (number of targets, 
weather, route, etc.) were manipulated aiming to make a 
significant change in the level of workload; thus, the effect 
of each factor is not clear. Future experiments can provide 
more details regarding the independent variable.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
In this paper, we studied general aspects of remote ship 
operations, SCC and EEG in order to a develop human-
centered experiment. EEG is presented as an exceptional 
tool to study stress in different levels of workload within the 
SCC. Moreover, an example case including high and low 
workload scenarios was defined by applying the wayfaring 
approach. The current example case focused on the 
monitoring mode of the SCC. In this respect, future studies 
can investigate stress and workload in other SCC control 
modes. Moreover, future studies can investigate different 
analysis and pre-processing techniques in order to extract 
the required data of stress and workload from raw EEG data.  
REFERENCES 
 [1] 
S. Balters and M. Steinert, “Capturing emotion reactivity 
through physiology measurement as a foundation for 
affective engineering in engineering design science and 
engineering 
practices,” 
Journal 
of 
Intelligent 
Manufacturing, vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 1585–1607, 2017. 
[2] 
K. K. Leikanger, S. Balters, and M. Steinert, “Introducing 
the wayfaring approach for the development of human 
experiments in interaction design and engineering design 
science,” in DS 84: Proceedings of the DESIGN 2016 14th 
International Design Conference, 2016, pp. 1751–1762. 
[3] 
T. Porathe, J. Prison, and M. Yemao, “Situation awareness 
in remote control centres for unmanned ships,” p. 9, 2014. 
[4] 
Y. Man, M. Lundh, and T. Porathe, “Seeking Harmony in 
Shore-Based 
Unmanned 
Ship 
Handling: 
From 
the 
Perspective of Human Factors, What Is the Difference We 
Need to Focus on from Being Onboard to Onshore?,” in 
Human Factors in Transportation, CRC Press, 2016, pp. 
81–90. 
[5] 
Ø. J. Rødseth, B. Kvamstad, T. Porathe, and H. Burmeister, 
“Communication architecture for an unmanned merchant 
ship,” in 2013 MTS/IEEE OCEANS - Bergen, 2013, pp. 1–
9. 
[6] 
Ø. J. Rødseth and H. avard Nordahl, “Definitions for 
autonomous merchant ships,” in Norwegian Forum for 
Unmanned Ships, 2017. 
[7] 
M. X. Cohen, “It’s about Time,” Front. Hum. Neurosci., 
vol. 5, 2011. 
[8] 
iMotions, “EEG (Electroencephalography): The Complete 
Pocket Guide,” iMotions, 07-Jun-2016. [Online]. Available: 
https://imotions.com/blog/eeg/. [Accessed: 27-May-2019]. 
[9] 
R. Kari, H. M. Gaspar, A. H. Gausdal, and M. Morshedi, 
“Human 
Interactions 
Framework 
for 
Remote 
Ship 
Operations,” in 2018 26th Mediterranean Conference on 
Control and Automation (MED), 2018, pp. 1–9. 
[10] 
S. N. MacKinnon, Y. Man, and M. Baldauf, “D8.8: Final 
Report: Shore Control Centre.” Maritime Unmanned 
Navigation through Intelligence in Networks, 2015. 
[11] 
T. B. Sheridan, Telerobotics, automation, and human 
supervisory control. MIT press, 1992. 
[12] 
Ø. J. Rødseth, Å. Tjora, and P. Baltzersen, “D4.5: 
Architecture specification.” MUNIN, 2014. 
[13] 
Ø. J. Rødseth et al., “TCI and status indicator specification, 
Flagship deliverable D-D1”, 2008. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.mits-forum.org/resources/D1-1-TCIs-v12.pdf 
[Accessed: 29-May-2019]. 
[14] 
V. Vindøy, “A functionally oriented vessel data model used 
as basis for classification,” in 7th International Conference 
on Computer and IT Applications in the Maritime 
Industries, COMPIT, 2008, vol. 8. 
[15] 
E. 
Niedermeyer 
and 
F. 
H. 
L. 
da 
Silva, 
Electroencephalography: 
Basic 
Principles, 
Clinical 
Applications, and Related Fields. Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2005. 
[16] 
D. L. Schomer and F. L. da Silva, Niedermeyer’s 
Electroencephalography: 
Basic 
Principles, 
Clinical 
Applications, and Related Fields. Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2012. 
[17] 
W. Klimesch, “Memory processes, brain oscillations and 
EEG 
synchronization,” 
International 
journal 
of 
psychophysiology, vol. 24, no. 1–2, pp. 61–100, 1996. 
[18] 
A. S. Malik and H. U. Amin, “Chapter 1 - Designing an 
EEG Experiment,” in Designing EEG Experiments for 
Studying the Brain, A. S. Malik and H. U. Amin, Eds. 
Academic Press, 2017, pp. 1–30. 
[19] 
B. Schack, W. Klimesch, and P. Sauseng, “Phase 
synchronization between theta and upper alpha oscillations 
in a working memory task,” International Journal of 
Psychophysiology, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 105–114, Aug. 2005. 
[20] 
T. Harmony et al., “EEG delta activity: an indicator of 
attention to internal processing during performance of 
mental tasks,” International journal of psychophysiology, 
vol. 24, no. 1–2, pp. 161–171, 1996. 
[21] 
A. R. Subhani, L. Xia, and A. S. Malik, “EEG signals to 
measure mental stress,” in 2nd International Conference on 
Behavioral, 
Cognitive 
and 
Psychological 
Sciences, 
Maldives, 2011, vol. 2012, pp. 84–88. 
[22] 
S. Tong and N. V. Thakor, Quantitative EEG analysis 
methods and clinical applications. Artech House, 2009. 
[23] 
G. Pfurtscheller and A. Aranibar, “Event-related cortical 
desynchronization detected by power measurements of 
scalp 
EEG,” 
Electroencephalography 
and 
clinical 
neurophysiology, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 817–826, 1977. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
[24] 
C. Setz, B. Arnrich, J. Schumm, R. La Marca, G. Tröster, 
and U. Ehlert, “Discriminating stress from cognitive load 
using a wearable EDA device,” IEEE Transactions on 
information technology in biomedicine, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 
410–417, 2009. 
[25] 
K. D. Rana and L. M. Vaina, “Functional Roles of 10 Hz 
Alpha-Band 
Power 
Modulating 
Engagement 
and 
Disengagement of Cortical Networks in a Complex Visual 
Motion Task,” PLoS ONE, vol. 9, no. 10, p. e107715, Oct. 
2014. 
[26] 
V. Vanitha and P. Krishnan, “Real time stress detection 
system based on EEG signals,” 2016. 
[27] 
J. Onton, A. Delorme, and S. Makeig, “Frontal midline 
EEG dynamics during working memory,” Neuroimage, vol. 
27, no. 2, pp. 341–356, 2005. 
[28] 
S.-H. Seo and J.-T. Lee, “Stress and EEG,” in Convergence 
and hybrid information technologies, IntechOpen, 2010. 
[29] 
M. J. Kahana, R. Sekuler, J. B. Caplan, M. Kirschen, and J. 
R. Madsen, “Human theta oscillations exhibit task 
dependence during virtual maze navigation,” Nature, vol. 
399, no. 6738, p. 781, 1999. 
[30] 
G. Giannakakis, D. Grigoriadis, and M. Tsiknakis, 
“Detection of stress/anxiety state from EEG features during 
video watching,” in 2015 37th Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society (EMBC), 2015, pp. 6034–6037. 
[31] 
H. Peng et al., “A method of identifying chronic stress by 
EEG,” Personal and ubiquitous computing, vol. 17, no. 7, 
pp. 1341–1347, 2013. 
[32] 
Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, S. L. Bressler, and M. Ding, “Response 
preparation and inhibition: the role of the cortical 
sensorimotor beta rhythm,” Neuroscience, vol. 156, no. 1, 
pp. 238–246, 2008. 
[33] 
C. S. Herrmann and T. Demiralp, “Human EEG gamma 
oscillations 
in 
neuropsychiatric 
disorders,” 
Clinical 
Neurophysiology, vol. 116, no. 12, pp. 2719–2733, Dec. 
2005. 
[34] 
T. Ingold, Lines : A Brief History. Routledge, 2016. 
[35] 
M. Steinert and L. J. Leifer, “‘Finding One’s Way’: Re-
Discovering 
a 
Hunter-Gatherer 
Model 
based 
on 
Wayfaring,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Engineering 
Education, vol. 28, no. 2, p. 251, 2012. 
 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

