 On-site Knowledge Transfer in Agriculture: TalkingPot 
 
Yosei Isoe 
Graduate School of Science and 
Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, Japan 
cc001071@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Tomoko Izumi 
College of Information Science 
and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, Japan 
izumi-t@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Yoshio Nakatani 
College of Information Science 
and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, Japan 
nakatani@is.ritsumei.ac.jp 
 
Abstract— Recently, the continuity of agricultural knowledge 
transfer has grown in importance because of a decrease in the 
number of agricultural workers. In agriculture, novice 
agricultural 
workers 
gain 
knowledge 
through 
on-site 
agricultural work. Therefore, on-site agricultural work is 
important for the transfer of knowledge in agriculture. This 
system targets the cultivation of potted plants and compares 
the user’s history of agricultural work and experts’ history of 
agricultural work. The system constructs the rules of the user’s 
failure habits and the plant pot communicates with the user 
based on these rules. This enables the user to obtain knowledge 
directly in on-site agricultural work. 
Keywords-Knowledge transfer, agriculture, tacit knowledge, 
explicit knowledge, SECI model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Knowledge transfer is currently a very important theme 
in business and education, and has been the subject of a great 
deal of attention [1]. The issue of knowledge transfer is 
being tackled in a variety of contexts, for example, system 
engineering, artificial intelligence, and so on.  However, 
these approaches involve a number of problems. This study 
tackles the problem of transferring knowledge in agriculture. 
Agriculture is not corporatized in Japan, and hence, has 
typically been transferred through direct communication 
from parents to their children or senior farmers to juniors 
over long periods of time. In recent years, however, the 
number of people who have been changing jobs from 
corporate employees to farmers has been increasing. In 
addition, the number of expert agriculture workers has been 
decreasing rapidly [2][3]. Thus, the opportunities for novice 
agriculture workers to directly learn from experts have also 
decreased. As a result, the need for agricultural knowledge to 
be transferred to inexperienced workers has increased as well. 
On the other hand, with the increase of home gardens 
allowing the cultivation of crops, a gardening boom has 
taken place among people young and old in Japan, and the 
need for agricultural knowledge to be transferred to such 
people is also increasing.  
However, as such trends are relatively recent, the newly 
increased needs for the transfer of agricultural knowledge 
have been satisfied via the trial and error process until now. 
In the agricultural field, transferring or acquiring knowledge 
is problematic because appropriate cultivation methods vary 
according to various environments. Thus, it is difficult for 
novice agriculture workers to acquire customized knowledge 
only through standardized manuals. Recently, the possibility 
of global knowledge sharing through the new ubiquitous 
network architecture has arisen. This study proposes a 
framework by which novice agricultural workers can access 
the knowledge of experienced agricultural workers via a 
network. In particular, this study targets the cultivation of 
potted plants. The plant pot communicates with a novice 
agriculture worker, considering the differences between the 
experiences of the novice and experts. Through the dialogue 
with plant pots, the novice agricultural workers can learn 
useful practical knowledge on-site during agricultural work. 
There have been a number of studies and support systems 
aimed at enabling objects to provide information to users, 
and this study is characterized by the changing nature of 
plants and their environments. 
Section II describes related concepts and some 
agricultural studies. Next, we introduce the previous study 
and its problems in Section III, and describe the proposed 
system in Section IV. Finally, we examine the prototype 
system in Section V and discuss our conclusion and future 
work in Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED CONCEPTS 
A. Tacit Knowledge 
Nonaka and Takeuchi defined tacit knowledge to be 
“knowledge gained from individual experiences or specific 
situations, which can include intangible elements such as 
beliefs, views, value systems, and so on” [4]. This concept 
was a refinement of Michael Polanyi's concept of tacit 
knowledge [5]. Agricultural knowledge regarding necessary 
tasks, know-how, and experience gained from failures could 
be classified as tacit knowledge. 
B. SECI Model 
The SECI model was defined by Nonaka and Takeuchi 
as a knowledge acquisition process used to share tacit 
knowledge within a company. This model repeats 4 
processes, which are given below. 
i . 
Tacit to Tacit (Socialization) 
ii . Tacit to Explicit (Externalization) 
iii . Explicit to Explicit (Combination) 
iv . Explicit to Tacit (Internalization) 
 
Figure 1 shows the flow of the SECI model. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 1. Flow of SECI model. 
These four processes lead to the creation of new 
knowledge. The transfer of agricultural knowledge can also 
be classified into the four steps of the SECI model, with 
examples of each step being as follows. 
i . 
Socialization 
Novice agricultural workers work together with 
experienced agricultural workers. Novice agricultural 
workers can thus observe them, and then imitate them, 
learning the techniques of experienced agricultural workers. 
ii . Externalization 
Novice agricultural workers and experienced agricultural 
workers note down their observations during agricultural 
work. 
iii . Combination 
Novice agricultural workers summarize what they have 
noted down. In addition, novice agricultural workers also 
transcribe what was noted down by experienced agricultural 
workers. 
iv . Internalization 
Novice agricultural workers work alone without the help 
of the experienced agricultural workers. 
Several studies have been conducted on agricultural 
support, but have been inadequate thus far. Examples 
include “Cloud Computing Applied for Agriculture and 
Other Fields” [6], which uses the cloud service of Fujitsu, 
and “PotPet: pet-like flowerpot robot” [7]. However, these 
support systems or studies place importance on product 
management and enjoyment of cultivation. Thus, it is 
difficult for a novice agricultural worker to learn directly 
from their experiences on-site. In addition, there have been 
almost no support systems from the aspect of “objects that 
can provide information to people”. 
III. 
PREVIOUS STUDY 
A. Agricultural Knowledge Transfer 
This study is based on our previous research, titled 
“Agricultural Knowledge Transfer based on Experience from 
Failures” [8]. The previous system aimed to support the 
transfer of knowledge that is deemed necessary as a result of 
failure experience, using the SECI model. 
B. Construction of Previous System 
The flow of the previous system involves 5 main 
functions. An explanation of each function and the 
corresponding SECI model process are given below. 
i． Retrieval of Failure Experience (Socialization) 
ii． Recommendation of Relevant Failure Experience 
(Socialization) 
iii． Registration of Failure Experience  
(Externalization) 
iv． Construct rules (Combination) 
v． Information (Combination) 
The 
system 
does 
not 
actually 
implement 
the 
Internalization part of the SECI model; instead, novice 
agricultural workers have to select the right choice before 
doing the actual work, which therefore plays the role of 
Internalization in the SECI model. 
Figure 2 shows an image of the previous system, and 
Figure 3 shows the main screen of the previous system. 
Figure 2. Image of the previous system. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 3. Main screen of the previous system. 
C. Evaluation of Previous System 
An evaluation experiment was conducted on the previous 
system. The purpose of this evaluation was confirming 
whether the subjects actually learned from experienced 
agriculture workers and their own experiences. In addition, 
the system also confirmed whether or not the subjects were 
able to gain individual knowledge.  Before the evaluation, a 
questionnaire was provided on their knowledge of 
agriculture, with 29 university students from a Social 
Communication Laboratory completing the questionnaire 
form. 6 subjects who gave the same answers to the 
questionnaire were then selected because of the assumption 
that their knowledge of agriculture would be basically the 
same.  The evaluation involved the method of cultivation 
being classified into 3 patterns, the results of which were 
then compared. The 3 patterns were: 
i． Pattern where nothing was utilized 
ii． Pattern where a manual was utilized 
iii． Pattern where our system was utilized 
The results of interviews were classified into three kinds 
of knowledge and experience, with the classified knowledge 
“Knowledge the subjects learned from this system or a 
manual”, “Knowledge the subjects learned via experience” 
and “Chores the subjects experienced”.  One of the results 
of the interviews is given below, which is based on the 
above classification.  
TABLE I.  
RESULT OF “USING NOTHING AT ALL” 
< Knowledge the subjects learned from this system or a manual> 
Nothing in particular 
< Knowledge the subjects learned via experience > 
Don't plant too many seeds at one time 
< Chores the subjects experienced > 
Planted a little less seeds / Watered the crop everyday / Watered the crop 
using a glass container and tap 
 
TABLE II.  
RESULT OF “USING A MANUAL” 
< Knowledge the subjects learned from this system or a manual> 
Water the crops carefully / Don't overwater 
< Knowledge the subjects learned via experience > 
Nothing in particular 
< Chores the subjects experienced > 
Planted seeds in a line / Watered the crop carefully / Watered the crop 
using the right amount 
TABLE III.  
RESULT OF “USING THIS SYSTEM” 
< Knowledge the subjects learned from this system or a manual> 
Narrowly-spaced planting results in slow growth 
The crop can be blighted because of being watered too many times or not 
watered enough 
< Knowledge the subjects learned via experience > 
Mizuna seeds are very small / Take care not to plant seeds too close to each 
other / Mizuna leaves are not very big 
< Chores the subjects experienced > 
Planted seeds at appropriate spacing / Didn’t plant one seed per space but 
instead two 
 
The 
subjects 
cultivated 
mizuna 
(Brassica 
rapa 
nipposinica) in pots for a month, then they were interviewed, 
and the results of the 3 patterns were then compared. 
The results led to the following discoveries: 
<Pattern where nothing was utilized> 
Subjects gained knowledge from experience. 
<Pattern where a manual was utilized> 
Subjects gained knowledge from the system or a manual. 
<Pattern where the system was utilized> 
Subjects gained knowledge not only from the system or 
a manual but also from actual experience. 
The traditional transfer of agricultural knowledge has 
involved a method in which experienced agriculture workers 
provide novice agriculture workers with knowledge and 
experience, and the novice agriculture workers then gain 
individual knowledge via actual experience. These steps are 
typically used to transfer agricultural knowledge. The 
pattern that uses our system is thus fairly similar to these 
steps when compared to the other 2 patterns. 
 The system can therefore be used to efficiently transfer 
agricultural knowledge. 
D. Problems 
In 
the 
previous 
study, 
transferring 
agricultural 
knowledge was proved to be effective through the use of 
failure experience and the SECI model. However, 
agricultural work was assumed to be done after referring to 
the failure experience information in front of a computer. In 
the transfer of agricultural knowledge, it is typical that 
knowledge is shared and exchanged between people. Using 
the system via a computer therefore appears somewhat 
unnatural, and using the computer and doing the agricultural 
work will be recognized as two unrelated things. Moreover, 
it will be difficult for users to relate knowledge acquired 
during agricultural work to knowledge acquired from the 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

system, because they would appear to be separate processes.  
In addition, the failure experiences registered by users are 
“noticed failure experiences.” Thus, the system cannot 
provide any useful knowledge about failures that novice 
agriculture workers do not notice. The present study, 
therefore, suggests a framework that users can use to aid the 
face-to-face transfer of agricultural knowledge during actual 
agricultural work. 
IV. 
PROPOSED SYSTEM 
A. Media Equation 
The Media Equation involves a "person corresponding 
unconsciously and socially in treatment of an object" [9]. 
This suggests that a user can treat an object in the same way 
as treating a person. 
An example of a study using the Media Equation is 
“Clothes Which Propose Fashion Coordinate Based on the 
Previous Experience” [10]. The current study uses this 
theory in aiming to aid knowledge transfer. 
B. System Approach 
This system attempts to rectify problems in the previous 
research through the “Media Equation”. In addition, we 
propose a framework to help the user gain knowledge with 
the same feeling as when the user works with a real person. 
A method in which a plant pot provides information while 
talking to the user during agricultural work, in particular, is 
used. This results in the user feeling that they are working 
together with another person, because the plant pot provides 
a form of communication. In addition, the user can act 
according to the information provided by the plant pot. Thus, 
the user can learn know-how from the plant pot and do the 
agricultural work at the same time. Moreover, the plant pot 
provides information based on the agricultural work. Thus, 
the user can acquire knowledge about “unnoticed failure 
experiences”.  Figure 4 illustrates the concept of this system. 
 
 
Figure 4. Image of the proposed system. 
C. System Flow 
The proposed system is based on the approach written in 
the preceding section. The system flow is described below. 
i． Acquires basic data of the cultivation situation and the 
details of agricultural work by using various sensors. 
ii． Stores the basic data as the cultivation history of a 
novice agriculture worker. 
iii． Compares the cultivation history of the novice 
agriculture worker and the registered expert agriculture 
workers. 
iv． Based on this comparison, 
detects 
wrong or 
problematic cultivation methodology and stores these 
as rules. 
v． Monitors agricultural work by the novice agriculture 
worker based on these rules. 
vi． If problematic behavior is detected, the plant pot 
communicates this to the worker based on the relevant 
rule. 
vii． Repeats “i” to “vi” processes. 
 
Figure 5 shows the composition of this system. 
 
Figure 5. Composition of the proposed system. 
V. 
PROTOTYPE SYSTEM  
A prototype system is currently under development 
according to the system flow described above. The 
prototype system focuses especially on watering. Watering 
crops is an essential part of agricultural work. In addition, it 
tends to rely on personal experience and almost all manuals 
fail to specify precise quantities of water. Thus, the act of 
watering contains many kinds of failure experiences that 
agricultural workers do not notice. 
 
A. Data Acquisition Method 
In the prototype system, 3 kinds of data relating to 
watering are obtained.  
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
i. Watering quantity 
ii. Watering interval 
iii. Watering date and time 
 
Sensors are used to obtain these data. In the case of “i”, 
the system uses the weight sensor to measure the weight of 
the plant pot. Then, it compares the weight before watering 
and after watering. Thus, the system can obtain the data 
relating to the quantity of watering.   
     In the case of “ii”, the system uses the soil moisture 
sensor to measure the degree of soil moisture. Thus, the 
system can obtain the data relating to the interval of 
watering. 
     In the case of “iii”, the system connects to the network 
and obtains the date and time of watering. 
 
B. Rule Construction 
This system uses the “MT method” [11] to construct 
rules. The MT method is used to determine tendencies such 
as, for example, whether a person has a propensity to cancer 
or not. Using this method, the system determines whether 
the agricultural work will fail or not. In the prototype system, 
we used 4 kinds of data relationship: “water quantity and 
temperature”, “water quantity and soil moisture”, “water 
quantity and temperature difference from previous day” and 
“water quantity and soil moisture difference from previous 
day”. The flow of the rule construction is described below. 
This is based on the relationship of “water quantity and 
temperature” and sample data relating to watering. 
 
i． Determine the central point of the unit space consisting 
of the experts’ data of water quantity and temperature. 
ii． Divide into 4 groups (A,B,C,D) based on the central 
point,  classify the novice worker’s data (X). 
iii． Determine the distance (R) from the central point of 
the experts’ data to the novice’s data. 
iv． Construct rule based on the classified group and the 
distance.  In this example, Rule 4 will be made. 
 
Figure 6 shows an example of the central point of the 
data relating to water quantity and temperature, Figure 7 
shows an example of classified novice’s data based on the 
central point, Figure 8 shows an example of the distance 
from the central point to the novice’s data and Table 1 
shows an example of rules relating to water quantity and 
temperature. 
 
Figure 6. Example of the central point of the data relating to water quantity 
and temperature. 
 
Figure 7. Example of classified novice’s data based on the central point. 
 
Figure 8. Example of the distance from the central point to the novice’s 
data. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

TABLE IV.  
EXAMPLE OF RULES RELATING TO WATER 
QUANTITY AND TEMPERATURE 
 
 
The system constructs rules according to these 
algorithms.  Rules made by the system are based on the 
novice’s agricultural work.  In addition, the rules contain 
knowledge about “unnoticed failure experiences”. Thus, 
even if the novice does not notice a problematic behavior, 
the system would make and store the rule automatically and 
communicate to the novice.  Finally, the novice can obtain 
knowledge about “unnoticed failure experiences” by 
communicating with the plant pot based on the rule. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have proposed a framework to help the 
transfer of agricultural knowledge via communication with 
plant pots, which stores the data of expert agricultural 
workers. The next step will be to conduct evaluation on the 
use of these data and on the prototype system. In this 
evaluation, we will compare the watering data of the novice 
worker with and without using the prototype system. We 
will then confirm whether the distance from the central 
point of the experts’ data to the novice’s data is shorter 
when using the system. By using this method, we will be 
able to confirm the efficiency of the prototype system. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Miyajima, S., Zukai 2007 nen mondai no subete ga wakaru 
(Understand all the issues of 2007). Gijutsu-Hyohron Co., Ltd. 
Tokyo, Japan. 2006.  
[2] 
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries of Japan, The 84TH 
Statistical Yearbook of Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries 2008-2009.  
http://www.maff.go.jp/e/tokei/kikaku/nenji_e/other/n045.xls 
[retrieved: 11, 2012] 
[3] 
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries of Japan, The 85TH 
Statistical Yearbook of Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries 2009-2010.  
http://www.maff.go.jp/e/tokei/kikaku/other/n045.xls 
[retrieved: 11, 2012] 
[4] 
Nonaka, I and Takeuchi, H., The Knowledge Creating Company. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, England.  1995. 
[5] 
Polanyi, M., The Tacit Dimension.  University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago, USA.  1967. 
[6] 
Hori, M., et al., Cloud Computing Applied for Agriculture and Other 
Fields.  Magazine of Fujitsu. 2010, vol61, no3, pp. 314-320. 
[7] 
Kawakami, A., et al., PotPet: Pet-like Flowerpot Robot. 73th 
Information Processing Society of Japan. Tokyo, Japan.  2011, 1W-6. 
[8] 
Isoe, Y and Nakatani, Y., Knowledge Transfer in Agriculture based 
on Failure Experiences.  73th Information Processing Society of 
Japan.  Tokyo, Japan.  2011, 6R-7, vol. 4, pp. 881-882. 
[9] 
Reeves, B and Nass, C., The Media Equation, How People Treat 
Computers, Television, and New Media Like Real People and Places, 
University of Chicago Press.  1996. 
[10] Fukuda, M and Nakatani, Y., Clothes Which Propose Fashion 
Coordinate Based on the Previous Experience.  73th Information 
Processing Society of  Japan.  Tokyo, Japan.  2011, 2ZA-8, vol. 4, 
pp. 881-882 
[11] Taguchi, G and Kanetaka, T., MT system ni okeru gijutsu kaihatsu 
(Developing technologies in the MT system).  Japan Standards 
Association, Japan.  2002
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

