Towards a Framework for Business Models in Event Management 
 
 
Christina Di Valentin, Dirk Werth, Peter Loos 
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) 
Saarbrücken, Germany 
{Christina.Di_Valentin | Dirk.Werth | Peter.Loos}@dfki.de 
Andreas Segl  
Saarland University 
Saarbrücken, Germany 
andreas@asta.uni-saarland.de 
 
 
Abstract—The choice of the right business model has proven to 
be an important success factor, regardless of the industry. 
Although in literature and practice the concept of business 
models has been broadly discussed, a comprehensive definition 
of business models in the context of event management has not 
been provided so far. Due to the rising experience-orientation 
of society – both in private and in business context – event 
management has emerged to an industry sector of increasing 
importance. By now, event management represents an 
interdisciplinary field which requires efficient and effective 
interactions of all involved business partners. This article 
describes the derivation of the constituent elements of business 
models in event management and classifies them to a business 
model framework. The derived business model framework 
depicts the underlying relationships between business model 
elements to the concepts of strategy and business processes. 
Keywords-Business models; event management; business 
model components; business model framework 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The last two decades have been characterized by a strong 
development of society towards experience orientation [1]. 
In literature, this phenomenon is called “fun-society” [2]. 
Companies and event agencies satisfy this increasing 
demand of multi-sensual incentives through a diversified 
offer of events [3]. In doing so, companies and event 
agencies increasingly use new media and social networks to 
communicate their marketing activities to the specific target 
groups. Besides the use of new media and social networks, 
companies 
increasingly 
rely 
on 
live-events 
as 
communication tool, which supports the establishment of 
long-term customer relationships, as they enable a direct and 
personal contact to the recipients of marketing activities [4]. 
Besides the establishment of a sustainable customer loyalty, 
live-events allow to tailor information to the specific 
audience 
to 
overcome 
information 
overload, 
which 
represents nowadays a frequently occurring problem [5].  
Recent studies about current trends in event management 
have 
shown an increase of expenditures in live-
communication from 1.38 billion in 2005 to 2.55 billion in 
2012 in Germany, which represents an increase of almost 
85% within 7 years [6]. Within the same period the 
contribution of the total advertising budget that companies 
provide for events has increased from 14% to 19%. 
Additionally to this trend that companies initiated as 
advertising and image improvement, the last years have also 
been characterized by an increase of society events, 
motivated by the rising demand of “special experiences 
within leisure activities” [7].  
In the light of these developments, a large service sector 
for managing and carrying out events has emerged [8]. This 
sector includes, e.g., event agencies, technical providers, 
caterer, carriers of event agencies, artists, etc. 
Event agencies are driven by two central motives to 
organize an event: “Own initiative” and “foreign initiative”. 
Event agencies that organize an event by their “own 
initiative” intend to achieve the maximum profit. Within 
“foreign initiative” events agencies are commissioned by 
external companies, public / state institutions or private 
persons, in whose name they act as service provider to plan 
and carry out the event. 
Experts predict further growth in the event management 
sector which comes along with an increase of competitors in 
this industry sector [9]. Thus, agencies – whether service 
providing organizations or independent organizations – 
should be aware of their business models and the competitive 
advantages which come along with their business model to 
establish their organization in the market and prevail over 
competitors in the long run.  
Generally speaking, a business model represents a 
conceptual tool containing a set of concepts, objects and their 
relationships  amongst each other [10]. A business model 
supports companies to express their business logic [10], by 
offering an abstract view on a company’s organizational 
structure and its value creating activities [11], [12], [13], 
[14].  
Regarding event management, so far literature and 
practice has mainly concerned about event marketing, not 
taking into consideration the entirety of key aspects that 
make up business models in event management. Although in 
recent time business model research has increasingly focused 
in specific industries such as the software industry [15] or 
electromobility [16], aspects about event management to 
date have not been covered by a scientific approach. This 
paper describes the derivation of a framework of business 
models in event management containing the basic elements 
of business models in this industry as well as a description of 
these derived business model elements to the concepts of 
strategy and business processes. The goal of the proposed 
framework is to support companies in event management to 
compose their business models according to their key 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

competencies. In doing so, start-up companies as well as 
companies that have been active in the market place for 
some time receive support for the definition of their business 
model.  
The research work presented in this paper follows a 
design-oriented methodology. Subject matter of design 
science are artificially created artifacts [17]. These artifacts 
are classified amongst other things into constructs and 
models. Constructs represent a collection of terms with the 
goal to describe artifacts that are in the matter of interest 
whereas 
models 
describe 
specific 
artifacts 
under 
consideration of the derived constructs [17]. Constructs in 
the context of the research work in this paper represent 
business models, business model elements, business 
processes and event management. Models are described by 
the target groups (companies – particularly CEOs / COOs) in 
the event management industry) and an explanation of the 
relationship between the constituent elements of a business 
model to the concepts of strategy and business processes by 
the use of several examples.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 introduces basic definitions of business models 
and event management and differentiates these concepts 
from each other. Section 3 presents the basic elements of 
business models in event management. These elements form 
the basis of the event management business model 
framework in Section 4. Section 5 summarizes the paper 
and provides an outlook on future research. As specified in 
the outlook the newly created artifacts will be evaluated in 
future research using rigorous IS research methods. 
 
II. 
TERMINOLOGICAL AND CONCEPTUAL BACKGROUND 
This section explains the basic definitions and concepts 
for the derivation of the business model framework in event 
management. 
The 
first 
sections 
provide 
a 
basic 
understanding about business models and business model 
elements in general, followed by an explanation of the 
underlying 
definitions 
and 
characteristics 
of 
event 
management. 
A. Business Models – Basic Concepts and Definitions 
The business model concept is used as a management 
tool to understand and analyze an enterprise’s current 
business logic. Thereby business models support companies 
to plan, design and test new business concepts that represent 
future orientations and therewith enhance current concepts 
[15]. Timmers, e.g., defines a business as “an architecture 
for the product, service and information flows including a 
description of the various business actors; and their roles; 
and a description of the potential benefits for the various 
business actors; and a description of the sources of 
revenues” [18]. The academic analysis of business models 
represents an emergent research field. Already early works 
from 1957 [19] and 1960 [20] discuss business models in a 
broader sense. However, when the dotcom bubble burst in 
the late 1990s, extensive studies dealing with the business 
model concept have extremely emerged [21], [22]. Thereby, 
evolving business activities from traditional to web-based 
business have been the main driver for the rising importance 
of business model research [22].  
Fig. 1 shows that business models are often seen as an 
intermediary between a company’s strategy and its business 
processes [24] [23]. This aspect reflects in different levels of 
granularity [27]. Business models provide an architectural 
as well as a conceptual basis for implementing a company’s 
strategy into executable business processes [24], whereas 
strategy represents the planning layer, as it encompasses all 
tasks required for executing strategic management activities 
[25]. Finally, the layer of business processes represents the 
level of implementation. It represents the concrete process 
implementation of a scenario in executable process steps 
[26], [27], [28]. Fig. 1 shows the business model in its role 
between a company’s strategy and its business processes: 
 
Strategy
Layer of planning: strongly aggregated information
Business model
Layer of architecture: tactical information
Business processes
Layer of implementation: detailed information
Figure 1. Delimitation of the business model to the concepts of strategy and 
business processes [29]. 
 
Business strategy focuses on competitive aspects 
whereas the business model describes collaboration of all 
participating business resources. Finally business processes 
describe how a business models is transferred in practice.  
 
B. Business Model Elements 
Business model elements do not represent an entire 
business model, but they describe the integral parts that 
make up a business model. One problem that often occurs in 
literature and practice is the interchangeably use of the 
terms “business models” and “business model elements” 
[30]. To derive a framework for business models within a 
specific industry (in this context event management), a 
business model first has to be broken down into its 
constituent components. Hence, underlying dependencies 
within the business model itself and to related concepts such 
as strategy and business processes can be depicted [12]. In 
literature, several studies and analysis about the constituent 
elements of business model elements in general have been 
carried out [23], [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36]. The 
business model elements derived by Di Valentin et al. form 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

the basis for the business model framework presented in this 
paper [31]. Thereby, 12 articles about the constituent 
elements of business models have been analyzed and 
conveyed to a conceptual framework. According to the 
literature studies, the main pillars of business models consist 
of the following four elements [31]: 
 Value Proposition: Perceived value that a company 
promises to its customers [37]. 
 Resources: The products and services that a company 
requires to create a unique service offering [38]. 
 Architecture of Value Creation: Design of the 
corporate information, product and service flows, 
required to implement a business model. Hence, this 
element forms the structural basis of a company, 
including 
its 
technological 
and 
organizational 
infrastructure [11]. 
 Revenue Model: The different ways in which a 
company generates its revenues [39].  
C. Events and Event Management 
A “special event” represents an orderly scheduled 
occasion 
[40] 
with 
cultural, 
personal, 
leisure 
or 
organizational objectives [41]. It can be classified into the 
following categories: Leisure events (recreation, sports, etc.), 
personal events (anniversaries, weddings, etc.), cultural 
events (folklore, heritage, etc.) and organizational events 
(sales, commercial, etc.) [41], whereas the latter is in the 
focus of the framework provided in this paper. In 
organizational context, companies mainly use events as 
communication 
tool 
[42]. 
Thereby, 
the 
following 
characteristics are relevant: Activation of the participants, 
uniqueness, positive experience, selected target groups with 
contact intensity, authenticity and exclusiveness of the in situ 
experience [42].  
Event management encompasses measures about aspects 
like organization, execution and controlling required for an 
event [43]. Furthermore, managing an event overlaps with 
many aspects about project management, which is 
considered as the entirety of executive functions like 
organization, technics and measures for initializing, 
definition and planning projects [8]. As many project related 
aspects can be also applied to events – both are temporally 
limited and carried out once – event management is 
characterized by many project-related characteristics. In 
terms of business models, influencing factors on event 
management have to be taken into consideration. These 
influencing factors are split into three categories:  
 Surrounding conditions,  
 shifts in the market place and within competitors and 
 customer interface.  
Surrounding conditions encompass social and legal 
frameworks, as tragic incidents like mass panics have a 
strong influence on the safety stipulation of public events. 
Furthermore, increased charges in event management come 
along with an impact on existing pricing policies [44]. 
Particularly in terms of public events, the customer interface 
is of great importance as directed advertisement represents 
an important success factor within the preparatory stage of 
an event.  
III. 
BUSINESS MODEL ELEMENTS IN EVENT 
MANAGEMENT 
This section presents the business model elements for 
event management which have been derived and enhanced 
on the basis of the business model elements by Di Valentin 
et al. Thereby, each sub-section presents one business model 
element.  
A. Target Groups: Clients and Visitors 
Event agencies focus their offerings to two main target 
groups: “Potential clients” and “visitors”. Potential buyers 
make use of the agency as service provider. Thereby, a large 
group of people may be addressed such as companies that 
intend to present a new product at an event or celebrating an 
anniversary, cities and municipalities, sports associations and 
/ or private persons. It is essential for these target groups to 
already provide in the initial phase the right frame conditions 
and concrete characteristics for the planned event. 
One further target group present “potential visitors” of 
the event, whether the event is public or private. To meet the 
visitors’ expectations agencies must already prognosticate in 
an early stadium, which requirements are expected by the 
visitors from the event. Based on these estimations, the event 
offering has to be arranged [8].  
B. Product Portfolio 
An event managers’ product represents the event itself, 
which is consumed by the visitors. The agencies conceive, 
plan and realize all possible kinds of events. The event 
manager’s task is to carve out a coherent concept and to 
ensure a smooth execution of the event. A successful 
implementation of the event represents the tip of the event 
management iceberg. Fig. 2 shows the efforts in event 
management: 
 
event
immediate surroundings, 
(de)composition, logistics
planning, preparation, wrap-up
personal, physical, organizational & financial background 
and support (stakeholder, supporters)
 
Figure 2. Expenditures in event management [43]. 
 
Fig. 2 demonstrates that expenditures for the preparation 
and post-processing of an event as well as the preparation of 
an appropriate infrastructure is not visible, however they 
come along with the largest amount of efforts. It also shows 
that activities of planning must be finished before the event 
starts [43]. The main goal of event management is to offer 
visitors a unique experience. A special challenge for event 
agencies is to give periodical recurring events an individual 
flair [43]. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

C. Resources and Competencies 
The main competencies for event management agencies 
represent employees including their knowledge, core 
competencies and experiences. Effective organizational 
structures as well as rapid responses on external influences 
are inevitable aspects to prevail over competitors in the 
market place. Additionally, an event management agency’s 
core competencies should be continuously enhanced and 
adjusted to the service offering.  
D. Network of Business Partners 
Events are highly complex services that are generated by 
more than one partner [45]. The event manager acts as 
orchestrator as s/he coordinates the services of the business 
partners and controls the coherence of the final product (see 
Fig. 3). 
 
Partner 2
Partner 1
Event 
agency
Event 
agency
 
Figure 3. Coordinator – orchestrator model. 
 
A network of authentic and competent business partners 
is of great importance for the event manager. The network 
includes, e.g., advertising agencies, caterer, technicians, 
logistic support suppliers, artists, decorators, security 
companies and service employees. Based on a large number 
of service providers that are involved in the process of 
organizing an event, unfulfilled obligations of partners have 
a great impact on further areas of the planned event. Hence, 
mistakes made by business partners can decide whether an 
event will be successful or not.  
E. Revenue Model 
Planning and managing events comes along with a high 
financial risk for event agencies. Hence, event agencies 
have to determine the break-even point and prognosticate 
occasional costs [46]. Comparing estimated costs with those 
of former carried out event represents an advantage. 
Moreover, running costs of the event managing agency have 
to be taken into consideration in the calculations. The costs 
are compensated by incomes, e.g., through entrance fees, 
consuming of drinks and foods, stall rent, share of the 
turnover, sponsor incomes as well as incomes from 
exclusive rights and state subsidies.  
In case the event is a remittance work, there exist two 
different earnings models. Either the service is refunded by 
a previously agreed form allowance or the expenditures are 
paid after hours. In the first case, the event manager is 
generally provided a fix budget. 
IV. 
FRAMEWORK FOR BUSINESS MODELS IN EVENT 
MANAGEMENT 
Fig. 4 shows the framework for business models in event 
management. It has been derived based on the previously 
carved out business model elements for event management. 
The framework shows the business model in its intermediary 
role between business processes and strategy. Thereby, 
underlying interdependencies between the business model 
elements to the concepts of strategy and business processes 
are explained. The blue boxes represent the main pillars of 
the framework consisting of “strategy”, “business models” 
and “business processes”. The blue arrows between the 
different layers show that the business model is related to 
both concepts: strategy as well as business processes. The 
derived business model elements are classified to the 
business model layer. A description of the interdependencies 
between the business model elements is described in [31]. 
However, the dashed arrows show that the business model 
elements are in a mutual influence. The main characteristics 
of the business model element target groups are clients and 
visitors. The product portfolio is described by the provided 
services as well as the coherent concept for the execution of 
an event. An event agencies resources and competencies are 
described by the existing know-how whereas the business 
partner network is responsible for the coordination of 
services and business partners. The revenue model 
summarizes the financial flows of the underlying business 
model. 
 
 positioning in the market place
 establishment of business segments
 event types
Event Management Business Model
Business Strategy
Resources/Competencies
Product Portfolio
Business Processes
Target Groups
business model element
Business Partner Network 
Revenue Model
 coordination of services
 coordination of 
business partners 
 employees‘ know-how 
 effective organizational 
structures
 clients
 visitors
 service offering
 coherent concept for the 
execution of the event
 occassional costs
 break-even point
planning, realizing and controlling of events
relationship to strategy 
and business processes
Legend
interdependencies between 
business model elements
 
 
Figure 4. Framework for business models in event management. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
In the following, the relationships between the business 
model elements to the concept of strategy are going to be 
explained: On strategic level, information gained within the 
Network of Business Partners can be used for optimizing 
decision support and control of strategic consistency with the 
rest of the organizational structure of the event management 
agency. The business model element Resources and 
Competencies requires to be strongly focused on an event 
agencies strategic positioning [13]. Therefore, an event 
agencies resources and competencies have to be generated 
for each Target Group to keep an event agency’s customer 
loyalty on a high level [47]. The way, in which Resources 
and Competencies (of an event agency’s employees) are 
combined create new possibilities for carrying out events 
[12]. Hence, an ideal and efficient allocation of resources 
consequently depends on an event agency’s strategy. In order 
to carry on boosting an event agency’s business model, the 
Product Portfolio must be designed to continuously offering 
customers – whether visitors of an event or clients – an 
added value. Revenues within the Revenue Model can be 
determined by calculating financial key measures such sales 
per event within a certain market or customer segment [48].  
The relationship between business models and business 
processes can be described as follows: Changing demands 
within the Network of Business Partners cause service level 
agreements to change. In order to bring about the changes 
which are necessary to provide the services or goods 
conforming to the service level agreements, the business 
processes that are carried out within the organization of an 
event may have to be changed. Within the business model 
element Target Groups processes offer the possibility to 
align all business activities to the customer’s preferences. 
This comes along with a higher degree of customer 
satisfaction after a successfully carried out event. The 
Revenue Model focuses on actions being carried out on 
operative level that have an influence on the financial 
structure. An efficient allocation of Resources and 
Competencies form the basis for the accomplishment of a 
successful event. On strategic level a decomposition of 
business processes offers clarity about the required resources 
and competencies for the execution of an event which run 
into the Product Portfolio to be offered [49].  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 
This paper presented a framework for business models in 
event management. To be able to obtain a basic 
understanding of business models in a specific industry 
sector, first the underlying components of business models 
have to be derived. So far, in literature and practice there is 
no consensus about the constituent elements of business 
models in event management. Hence, in a first step, the basic 
definitions of “business model”, “business model elements” 
and “event” have been derived. In a next step, the key 
components of business models in event management have 
been defined, which form the basis for the presented 
framework for business models in event management. This 
framework consists of the derived business model elements 
and describes the underlying interdependencies between the 
derived business model elements to strategy and business 
processes.  
The elaboration of this research work has shown that in 
recent years, many scientists addressed the concept of 
business models. So far, however, these concepts have not 
been sufficiently applied in the field of event management, 
although this industry is characterized by a growing number 
of companies. In the light of these developments, theoretical 
foundations should be further considered in future research 
work about business models and event management. 
In future research, the derived artefacts will be 
implemented and evaluated according to rigorous design-
science 
methods. 
Furthermore, 
the 
underlying 
interdependencies between the derived business model 
elements will be analyzed to enhance the current version of 
the framework. A transformation mechanism will be 
developed to transform changes on the business model in 
executable business processes, as changes within a 
company’s strategy and business model have an influence on 
the underlying business processes. Therefore, a value chain 
for the industry sector of event management will be derived, 
which consists of the main value creating activities in event 
management.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research work presented in this paper was supported 
by the Software Cluster and funded within the Leading-
Edge Cluster competition by the German Federal Ministry 
of 
Education 
and 
Research 
(BMBF) 
under 
grant 
01IC10S05. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
A. Drengner, Imagewirkung von Eventmarketing - Entwicklung 
eines ganzheitlichen Messansatzes. Wiesbaden: DUV, 2006. 
[2] 
A. Hepp, Populäre Events - Medienevents, Spielevents, 
Spaßevents. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften, 
2010. 
[3] 
C. Zanger, Stand und Perspektiven der Eventforschung. 
Wiesbaden: Gabler, 2010. 
[4] 
N. Mahrdt, Corssmedia - Werbekampagnen erfolgreich planen 
und umsetzen. Wiesbaden: Gabler, 2009. 
[5] 
W. Kroeber-Riel and P. Weinberg, Konsumentenverhalten. 
Munich: Vahlen, 1996. 
[6] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.famab.de/famab/home.html. 
[7] 
W. Mueller, Eventmarketing - Grundlagen, Rahmenbedingungen, 
Konzepte, Zielgruppe, Zukunft. Duesseldorf: Dr. Mueller, 2003. 
[8] 
O. Thomas, “Referenzgeschäftsprozesse des Event-
Managements.” Saarbruecken, 2005. 
[9] 
J. Koehler, “Von der Muße zum Marketing - Die 
Perfektionierung der Feiertage,” in in Der Trend zum Event, P. 
Kemper, Ed. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 2001, pp. 11–26. 
[10] 
A. Osterwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C. L. Tucci, “Clarifying 
business models: Origins, present, and future of the concept,” 
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, vol. 
16, no. 1, pp. 1–25, 2005. 
[11] 
M. M. Al-Debei and D. Avison, “Developing a unified 
framework of the BM concept,” European Journal of 
Information Systems, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 359–376, 2010. 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[12] 
B. Demil and X. Lecocq, “Business Model Evolution: In Search 
of Dynamic Consistency,” Long Range Planning, vol. 43, no. 2, 
pp. 227–246, 2010. 
[13] 
J. Richardson, “The Business Model: An Integrative Framework 
for Strategy Execution,” Strategic Change, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 
133–140, 2008. 
[14] 
P. Staehler, Merkmale von Geschäftsmodellen in der digitalen 
Ökonomie. St. Gallen: EUL, 2001. 
[15] 
M. Schief and P. Buxmann, “Business Models in the Software 
Industry,” in International Conference on System Sciences, 2012, 
pp. 1–10. 
[16] 
D. Kundisch, T. John, J. Honnacker, and C. Meier, “Approaches 
for business model representation: An overview,” in 
Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik, 2012, pp. 1–12. 
[17] 
A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design Science 
in Information Systems Research,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 28, no. 1, 
pp. 75–105, 2004. 
[18] 
P. Timmers, “Business Models for Electronic Markets,” Journal 
on Electronic Markets, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 3–8, 1998. 
[19] 
R. Bellman, C. Clark, D. Malcolm, and F. Ricciardi, “On the 
construction of multistage, multi-person business game,” 
Operations Research, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 469–503, 1957. 
[20] 
G. M. Jones, “Educators, Electrons, and Business Models: A 
Problem in Synthesis,” Accounting Reviews, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 
619–626, 1960. 
[21] 
J. Hedman and T. Kalling, “The Business Model: A Means to 
Understand the Business Context of Information and 
Communication Technology.” 2003. 
[22] 
J. Magretta, “Why Business Models Matter,” Harvard Business 
Review, vol. 80, no. 5, 2002. 
[23] 
M. Morris, M. Schindehutte, and J. Allen, “The Entrepreneur’s 
Business Model: Towards a unified Perspective,” Journal of 
Business Research, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 726–735, 2005. 
[24] 
A. Osterwalder and Y. Pigneur, “An eBusiness Model Ontology 
for Modeling eBusiness,” in Proceedings of the 15th Bled 
Electronic Commerce Conference – eReality: Constructing the 
eEconomy, 2002, pp. 75–91. 
[25] 
I. Crespo, L. Bergmann, and T. Lacker, “Entwicklung und 
Formulierung der Unternehmensstrategie,” in in Modernisierung 
kleinerer und mittlerer Unternehmen – Ein ganzheitliches 
Konzept, U. Dombroski, Ed. Berlin: Springer, 2009. 
[26] 
M. Hammer and J. Champy, Business Reengineering, 3rd ed., 
vol. 3. Frankfurt: Campus Verlag, 1994. 
[27] 
K. Andresen, C. Brockmann, and N. Roztocki, “Business Models 
for Enterprise System Providers. Towards the Solution Based 
Procedure,” in 17th Americas Conference on Information 
Systems (AMCIS `11), 2011, pp. 1–8. 
[28] 
J. Gordjin, H. Akkermans, and H. van Vleet, “Business 
Modelling is not Process Modelling,” in Proceedings on the 1st 
International Workshop on Conceptual Modeling Approaches for 
e-Business, 2000, pp. 40–51. 
[29] 
M. M. Al-Debei, R. El-Haddadeh, and D. Avison, “Defining the 
Business Model in the New World of Digital Business,” in 
Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS), 2008, 
pp. 1–11. 
[30] 
J. Linder and S. Cantrell, “Changing Business Models: Surveying 
the Landscape.” pp. 1–15, 2000. 
[31] 
C. Di Valentin, A. Emrich, D. Werth, and P. Loos, “Conceiving 
Adaptability for Business Models – A Literature-based 
Approach,” in International Conference on Information 
Resources Management (Conf-IRM), 2012, pp. 1–13. 
[32] 
A. Afuah and C. Tucci, Internet Business Models and Strategies: 
Text and Cases, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw Hill, 2004. 
[33] 
R. Amit and C. Zott, “Business Model Design and the 
Performance of Entrepreneurial Firms,” Organization Science, 
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 181–199, 2007. 
[34] 
F. Betz, “Strategic Business Models,” Engineering Management 
Journal, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 2002. 
[35] 
W. Chesbrough, Open Business Models - How to thrive in the 
new innovation landscape. Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press, 2006. 
[36] 
G. Hamel, Leading the Revolution. Boston: Harvard Business 
Press, 2002. 
[37] 
P. Kotler and G. Armstrong, Principles of Marketing, 14th ed. 
Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall, 2012. 
[38] 
K. Schögel, “Bezugsrahmen der Geschäftsmodellierung,” in in 
Roadmap to E-Business, M. Schögel, T. Tomczak, and C. Belz, 
Eds. St. Gallen, 2002. 
[39] 
A. Hitt, Michael, R. Amit, E. Lucier, Charles, and D. Nixon, 
Robert, Creating Value: Winners in the New Economy, 1st ed. 
Malden: Blackwell Publishers, 2002. 
[40] 
J. Goldblatt, Best practice in modern event management. New 
York: Wiley, 1997. 
[41] 
A. Shone and B. Parry, Successful Event Management, 2nd ed. 
London: Thomson Learning, 2004. 
[42] 
Bruhn, Kommunikationspolitik. Munich: Vahlen, 2005. 
[43] 
U. Holzbaur, Eventmanagement - Veranstaltungen professionell 
zum Erfolg führen. Berlin: Springer, 2010. 
[44] 
C. Klein, Eventmanagement in der Praxis. Bonn: interna, 2008. 
[45] 
S. Paul and T. Sakscheski, Wissensmanagement für die 
Veranstaltungsbranche. Wiesbaden: Gabler, 2012. 
[46] 
J. Wedekind and J. Harries, Der Eventmanager - Das Handbuch 
aus der Agenturpraxis. Muenster: LIT, 2006. 
[47] 
D. Teece, “Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation,” 
Long Range Planning, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 172–194, 2010. 
[48] 
S. Kaplan, Robert and P. Norton, David, The Balanced Scorecard 
- Translating Strategy into Action, 1st ed. New York: McGraw 
Hill, 1996. 
[49] 
J. Gordijn, H. Akkermans, and H. Van Vliet, “Business 
modelling is not process modelling,” in 1st International 
Workshop on Conceptual Modeling Approaches for e-Business 
(eCOMO), 2000, pp. 40–51.  
 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

