Positive Psychology Centered Online Studies 
 
Alexander Voiskounsky 
Psychology Department 
Moscow Lomonosov State University 
Moscow, Russia 
e-mail: vaemsu@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—Flow (optimal) experience is a well-elaborated unit 
in positive psychology. This unit fits well many activities 
mediated by information and communication technologies. The 
paper covers the studies in the mentioned above area, which 
were carried out by Russian psychologists during the last 
decade. The empirical studies include the analysis of flow 
experience in online gaming and of its role in computer 
hackers’ motivation; theoretical proposals refer to optimal 
experience in the web and software usability research and an 
appeal to differentiate Internet addiction and flow experience. 
The paper states that theoretical and applied work based on 
the optimal experience methodology is a promising perspective 
for online research. 
Keywords-flow; psychology; optimal experience; information 
technologies; online gaming; hackers; usability; addiction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
From a psychological standpoint, virtual space is a 
human centric space, intermediate between a human being 
and others, between an inner and outer knowledge, between 
self and multiple selves. Being mediated by computers (or 
mobile vehicles) and the Internet, virtual space is 
characterized by its own inherent metrics (dimensions): 
neither X/Y/Z Cartesian coordinates with up/down, left/right, 
and forward/backward directions of movement, nor 
Einsteinian spacetime are easily and plausibly applicable in 
the virtual space. At the same time, the mentioned above 
genuinely scholastic dimensions are the ones which 
everyone 
who 
enters 
a 
technology-rich 
working 
environment expects to face.  
Virtual spaces represent comfortable environments for 
almost everyone, especially for new generations, often 
called “digital generations”, or “digital natives” [7], starting 
with an elementary school age or even earlier; virtual spaces 
are not any more the privilege of students and lecturers in 
computer science, engineers and all those who are engaged 
in academic work. To enter a virtual space, one need not 
leave either office or home, or both. Consequently, the 
dimensions describing virtual spaces need not be entirely 
scholastic any more; on the contrary, these dimensions are 
becoming more and more close to the ones which proved its 
usefulness in descriptions of contemporary industrial, office 
or home environments. 
For example, the most part of the well-known dimensions 
of the habitual 3D space, such as for example an office area 
as opposed to a living and sleeping area opposed to a 
recreational area opposed to a shopping area opposed to an 
interaction area opposed to a private area (all the 
oppositions are not overwhelmingly strict, of course) have 
definite parallels in the virtual space. Indeed, the virtual 
space dimensions are in a way similar to what people are apt 
to do both in the habitual (physical, or real-life) space and in 
the virtual space, namely: work, interact and make relations, 
play and recreate, learn and explore, go shopping, 
negotiate and gamble, save privacy, etc.  
      Many people find these dimensions easy to follow; but 
there are those who believe the organization of the virtual 
space dimensions is far from being optimal. Very likely, this 
distinction reflects the life-style differences and corresponds 
to diverse human experiences. Anyway, what is known 
about attempts to optimize these dimensions? Optimization 
is dependent on numerous factors, such as economics, 
education, logistics, profession, personality traits, etc.; this 
Section however deals with psychology, and thus we will 
discuss psychological parameters of optimal forms of virtual 
space dimensions. In particular, some emotion-related  
dimensions such as enjoyment or pleasure are no less 
universal than the Cartesian ones, whenever people tend to 
make assessments of unknown spaces. That means, we are 
going to discuss in detail how well a psychological theory of 
optimal experience fits the virtual space.  
In the paper, we review the current directions of studies 
and give a perspective of optimal experience related 
academic 
and 
practical 
work 
within 
the 
virtual 
environments. The review is centered on the studies which 
we have done during the last decade. 
II. 
OPTIMAL (FLOW) EXPERIENCE: A BRIEF 
DESCRIPTION 
Principles and methods of positive psychology [10] are 
widely used in the growing research field of human 
behavior in virtual environments. The most promising 
perspectives in positive psychology seem to be the Self-
Determination theory developed by Deci and Ryan [2] and 
the optimal (flow) experience theory developed by 
Csikszentmihalyi [1]. The methods belonging to the positive 
8
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

psychology and particularly to flow experience relate 
intimately to the patterns of human behavior in virtual 
environments, such as interaction, learning and exploration, 
problem solving, gameplaying, shopping, etc. The history 
and the current status of the positive psychology studies 
referring to the virtual environments was recently reviewed 
[5][15]. The discussion in the review papers is restricted to 
the studies related to optimal experience theory, due to the 
fact that the studies related to virtual environments and 
influenced by the Self-Determination theory are not 
numerous: rather few publications deal with e-learning [9] 
or online gaming [8].  
The feeling of finding oneself – mentally – in the midst 
of a torrent of liquid (especially running water) is not totally 
alien to psychological theory, taking into consideration 
traditional terms such as stream of consciousness or flight of 
ideas. The notion of flow has been introduced by Mihaly 
Csikszentmihalyi who interviewed hundreds of people 
(among them painters, athletes, physicians, dancers, 
scientists and many others), asking them to describe their 
feelings while carrying out their professional or hobby 
work. Each time when respondents expressed a really deep 
devotion to this or that sort of work (not necessarily 
pleasing and playful, often, on the contrary, hard and risky), 
their reports contained a common element, or metaphoric 
description of a sensational experience for which 
Csikszentmihalyi [1] could have hardly choose a name other 
than flow. Indeed, almost every respondent mentioned 
“flowing from one moment to the next, in which he is in 
control of his actions, and in which there is a little 
distinction between self and environment, between stimulus 
and response, or between past, present, and future” [1, p. 
36]. Flow (both deep and rare flow events, and habitual 
microflow events) was reported to happen irrespectively of 
the type of the work: be it spiritual or mundane, creative or 
routine, unique or known to almost everyone, individual or 
team-work, rarely or regularly performed.  
Csikszentmihalyi 
and 
his 
followers 
found 
that 
respondents never report of flow happening (and it is indeed 
a sort of a happening!) when they feel relaxed: on the 
contrary, to experience flow they need to be genuinely and 
deeply involved in the preferred work. People report they 
experience flow when they perform their work to the utmost 
and get a positive result: Csikszentmihalyi and other 
scholars would call it a peak performance. The necessity to 
achieve some success, which may be in fact quite moderate, 
explains the need to acquire, prior to experiencing flow, 
some competence, not necessarily very high, in performing 
the work. Respondents always describe flow as an 
enjoyment, which is characteristic of flow; in the lifespan 
they tend to remember such happenings quite well, 
sometimes decades after the experience itself. Clearly, 
within the positive psychology paradigm this sort of 
experience is called optimal experience.  
Positive psychology is a universal psychological 
discipline; when applied in practice, however, it works 
probably best as a source of motivational theories: this 
refers both to the Self-Determination theory and to the 
theory of optimal experience. Neither is an exclusively 
motivational theory; both are used in practice as theories of 
intrinsic motivation. Various types of such motivation have 
been widely exploited while designing computer/Internet 
applications, as well as in the practice of self-regulation, 
management, education, etc.  An intrinsically motivated 
process is self-rewarding, while its results might be (at least 
partly) irrelevant. In the optimal experience context a 
process, or a sequence of intermediate goal-directed efforts 
performed in order to achieve the desired result is quite 
often reported to be much more pleasing and self-rewarding 
than the result itself, when and if it is gained. Optimal 
experience has been called [1] autotelic (from Greek: self + 
goal), it means that the goal of doing some work is just the 
act of doing it, regardless of whether external rewards will 
follow. While an intrinsically motivated work brings 
enjoyment, Csikszentmihalyi refers an exotelic work and 
extrinsic motivation to pleasure which is a somewhat 
passive and relaxing feeling, compared to enjoyment, at 
least in the optimal experience context.  No doubt, the 
achievement of pleasure, and respectively the extrinsic 
motivation (in the form of money bonuses, lovely sex 
partners or increases of power) have always been an 
incomparably strong stimulus of diverse human activities. 
Positive psychology suggests, nevertheless, that neither 
intrinsic stimuli nor enjoyment should be underestimated; 
successive managers try to combine the two types of 
motivation to stimulate the employees.  
III. 
 FLOW CHARACTERISTICS AND  DIRECTIONS OF  
STUDY OF OPTIMAL EXPERIENCE IN THE VIRTUAL 
ENVIRONMENTS 
Theoretically and empirically, Csikszentmihalyi [1] 
selected the following major – or the most common – 
characteristics of flow:  
 clear and distinct objectives; 
 temporary loss of self-consciousness;  
 distorted sense of time;  
 actions merging with awareness;  
 immediate feedback;  
 high concentration on the task; 
 high level of control over the task;  
 balance (precise matching) between the 
available skills and the task challenges;  
 full satisfaction, while doing work, which 
is worth doing for its own sake.  
      This set of characteristics proved to be applicable in 
diverse environments [1], including the use of information 
and communication technologies: the relevant studies took a 
start in early 1990s [8][9]. In the virtual environments, 
which are the main point of interest in the current paper, the 
most frequently suggested characteristics, additional to the 
9
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

mentioned above, include (see the appropriate references at 
[15]) 
 presence (“mediated perception of an 
environment” or “being there – in a 
somewhat different place”, as well as 
“possibly sharing this place with other 
people”, and finally “immersion”), and  
 interactivity 
(distinguishes 
new 
– 
responsive – media from traditional  
media).  
Each of the two additional characteristics has been 
intensely applied and investigated in empirical studies and 
often proved its usefulness. One can formulate that 
characteristics such as presence and interactivity are among 
the most needed within the virtual environments, partly due 
to the fact that these characteristics are inherently related 
with the information and communication technologies. In a 
book chapter written with Shernoff, the originator of flow 
related studies accepts recently proposed characteristics 
such as “presence” or “being there” as well as “immersion”, 
and makes it evident that “flow theory has been the natural 
theoretical base for exploring the implications of learning 
through immersion in … virtual learning environments 
since the emotional composition of these experiences 
resemble the flow state and precipitate a deeper engagement 
with learning” [11, p. 141]. 
The practice of the use of new information and 
communication technologies represents a variety of areas to 
study flow experience. From the very beginning [4][13] the 
studies of optimal experience in the virtual environments 
referred to ‘computer-mediated communication’, ‘online, 
‘computer based instruction’, ‘Web use’, ‘human-computer 
interaction’, ‘computer-mediated environments’ related to 
marketing, ‘information and communication technology 
use’, ‘activities involving information technology,’ ‘human-
computer interaction’ or ‘Internet/Web use’.  
When classified, the major areas of the use of the flow 
experience methodology in virtual environments are the 
following [15]: 
 
Online marketing and shopping,  
 
E-learning/teaching,  
 
Cyber-recreation 
(most 
often, 
online, 
computervideo gaming),  
 
 Virtual interaction.  
      These research areas do not differ from traditional 
directions of studies which are being carried out in 
psychology of cyberspace. Additionally, less elaborated 
research areas include [15], and are partly discussed in the 
paper: 
 
Virtual psychological rehabilitation, such as 
immersive systems of virtual reality;  
 
Illicit 
penetrations 
into 
the 
virtual 
space 
environments and computer security regulations;  
 
Usability testing, measurement of a web-site 
attraction and friendliness, adaptation of web 
sources to target populations.  
In this paper, we are not going to discuss all the 
mentioned above directions of the studies and applied work. 
Instead, we will limit with the description of the studies held 
in the field by the author and his colleagues and students 
during the last decade. In spite of the fact that the most part 
of these studies have been held in Russia within the last 
decade (see the appropriate descriptions and links to the 
references in Section IV), we believe that the results are 
cross-cultural by their nature. 
IV. 
EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF FLOW EXPERIENCE IN THE 
VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTS 
A. Theoretical Proposals 
In this Section we are going to discuss two proposals 
which lack empirical support to be done by the author. First, 
we will discuss the need to connect the optimal experience 
methodology with applied work traditionally done within 
the projects targeted at the development of new software 
products, namely the work which is known as usability 
testing. The second point to be discussed in this Section 
deals with a possible though non-likely (as it is stressed 
further in the Section) correspondence between the flow 
experience and the Internet addiction disorder (also known 
under diverse names, such as for example Internet overuse, 
Problematic Internet use, Pathological Internet use, Internet 
abuse, or Compulsive Internet use, etc.). 
Current methodology of usability testing should rely on 
longitudinal research and on field studies. When a 
longitudinal fieldwork usability project is being carried out, 
it is preferable to investigate the users’ intrinsic motivation 
which has the highest prognostic value. On the contrary, 
traditional lab settings are optimal to investigate extrinsic 
motivation; since intrinsic motivation is unlikely to be 
revealed while carrying out a traditional type of usability-
related work, the importance of motivational research has 
been largely underestimated.  
A promising approach toward better understanding of 
specifics of intrinsic motivation is a flow paradigm [12]. 
Good match between the software users’ needs and skills, 
on the one hand, and the inner structure of programming 
tools, on the other hand, means that the choice of the “next 
step” while fulfilling the task needs to match the (possibly) 
increased skills.  
The usability practice faces the problem of checking 
whether customers keep experiencing flow in a long 
perspective. 
Usability 
engineers 
need 
an 
advanced 
specialized methodology to apply in field work. In the 
information and communication technologies field, special 
software can be developed to assist the participants in 
reporting particular characteristics of flow, or alternatively, 
the absence of these characteristics. This methodology 
seems to be extremely promising for carrying out 
10
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

longitudinal 
fieldwork, 
including 
software 
users’ 
motivational research [12]. The alternative models, which 
are widely used to evaluate usability of software products, 
only rarely rely on a registration of indisputably 
fundamental type of human needs such as intrinsic 
motivation. Due to this fact the suggested method of 
usability studies can be used either parallel to other 
methods, or alone. Even in the latter case, one may expect 
the results to be exceptionally reliable. When an applied 
usability study involves longitudinal evaluation, the 
methodology of optimal experience is really promising, 
irrespectively of how many alternative methods are being 
used. 
The second point to mention refers to the Internet 
addiction disorder in relation to the optimal experience. 
Indeed, there is a growing body of evidences – mostly 
referring to gameplay activities – in which flow experience 
is correlated with the Internet addictive behavior (see 
appropriate references in [14][15]). At first glance, there is 
indeed some reason to correlate the two types of experience, 
related to addiction and to flow, since repetitive behaviors 
characterize both types of activities. Nevertheless, flow is an 
example of a positive optimal experience and it is hardly 
compatible with addiction or psychological dependency, 
typical for a negative kind of experience [14][15].  
Repetitive behavior referring to a negative type of 
activities, such as intakes of drugs, passive leisure activities 
or abuse of technological artifacts, including computers and 
computer games, is derived from the so-called mimetic flow 
[6], i.e. non-genuine flow experience. Alhough it may result 
in replications of a familiar behavior, the psychological 
nature of mimetic flow is dissimilar with the nature of 
optimal experience, as it was described earlier in this paper. 
Thus, the Internet addiction and flow experienced while 
using the Internet differ in their inner psychological 
structure; this theoretical statement is apt to get an empirical 
support, i.e. evidences that flow experience correlates 
negatively to Internet addiction disorder. 
B. Flow in Computer Hackers’ Activities 
The study of optimal experience patterns in computer 
hackers’ behavior was done as an online study [19]. The 
study rests on an idea that in order to experience flow a 
balance is needed between the level of software use (not 
specifically hacking) skills and the level of challenges (or 
task choices) in hacking. 
A hacker’s development might be presented in the 
following 
way. 
The 
relationship 
between 
hackers’ 
experience and flow is complicated. Flow does not linearly 
increase with the increase of the hackers’ competence. 
Periods of flow experience turn to periods of flow crisis and 
then to periods of flow renovation. In the post-experimental 
interviews the role of task choice in experiencing flow while 
hacking is revealed. The step-by-step task choice often leads 
to close matching of task challenges and skills, marking 
flow experience.  
An inexperienced hacker (a beginner) might find a 
matching combination of challenges and skills and start to 
experience flow. The flow motivation is strong, and the 
beginner feels comfortable. A hacker might stay at this stage 
for years. To stay at a beginner’s stage means that neither 
skills nor challenges develop in a significant way. 
A beginner hacker might progress in at least three ways. 
The first is a step-by-step progress both in challenges and 
skills which keep matching at every developmental stage. 
The progressing hacker keeps experiencing flow all the 
time. The cases of fine skills/challenges correspondence at 
every stage are probably infrequent. Second, a hacker gains 
new skills and lacks the correspondence of new skills to 
non-updated challenges. Or, third, a hacker takes high 
challenges and finds he/she lacks non-updated skills. These 
two ways of a hacker’s progress result in periodical 
dropouts of the flow range, and the hacker periodically stops 
experiencing flow. Constant matching of skills and 
challenges and non-interrupted flow seems to be a hard way 
of progressing.  
If an inexperienced hacker increases challenges, he/she 
turns to become a wannabe hacker, at least for a certain 
stage of his/her development. A hacker might stay at this 
stage long enough, trying to acquire prestigious goals and 
never acquiring them. A wannabe hacker’s rewards might 
lie in the social life: he/she might boast and get some social 
prestige. To renovate the flow experience, a wannabe hacker 
might either lessen challenges and to become an averagely 
competent hacker setting moderate challenges, or update 
skills to become a highly qualified hacker with challenges 
matching the available skills. 
If an inexperienced hacker increases skills, he/she looses 
the fine matching of challenges and skills. His/her skills 
overrun his/her challenges until the challenges are not 
updated. When updated, the flow experience might come 
back at a higher level of skills/challenges correspondence. 
Former hackers often turn into computer security officers; 
that means they loose motivation to pose high challenges in 
hacking.  
The study, which was briefly described in this Section, 
shows first, that the hackers’ motivation includes 
experiencing 
flow, 
and 
second, 
that 
the 
hackers’ 
motivational development is strongly dependent on flow 
experience while this development includes longer or 
shorter periods of interruption and/or dropout periods when 
a hacker ceases to experience optimal forms of motivation.  
C. Flow Experience in Online Gaming: A Cross-Cultural 
Study 
Online gaming is among the most popular patterns of 
use of online services. One of the potential reasons of this 
popularity is that the gamers are fond of playing video and 
online games due to the fact that they experience flow while 
they perform gameplay. This reason was investigated in a 
number 
of 
studies, 
including 
a 
cross-cultural 
Russia/France/USA/China (the latter study is still in 
11
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

progress) study with an identical methodology. In all the 
studies the methodology is the same: first we worked out a 
comprehensive questionnaire in Russian, and after it proved 
to provide reasonable results, this flow-related questionnaire 
was adapted to be used in different ethnic communities of 
gamers [3][16][17][18].  
Each time we performed translations and back 
translations until the questionnaire proved to be adequate. 
The methodology included online administered surveys; we 
did not seek gamers playing identical games since we 
needed replies from the ethnic communities of gamers who 
played the whole continuum of online games. Here is some 
statistics related to the results gained in the series of 
multiethnic factor analytic studies. The Chinese data are 
nowadays being studied anew since the gamers’ population 
is steadily growing, and the data need to be re-studied on the 
current stage of development of the Chinese gamers’ 
population. 
Every particular ethnic-specific factor model proved to 
be reasonably good; moreover, the factor structures seem to 
be similar in many ways. Most important, each factor model 
includes a factor such as ‘flow experience’, mostly as the 
first factor (except for the French sample). The results are 
represented in the following table (see Table I). 
 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF FACTOR MODELS RELATED TO ETHNIC 
SAMPLES OF ONLINE GAMERS 
                    
Ethnic                   
Samples 
 
Russians 
N = 347 
Chinese  
N = 133 
French 
N = 202 
Americans 
N = 287 
Factor 1 
Flow 
Flow 
Achieveme
nt 
Flow 
Factor 2 
Achieveme
nt 
Achieveme
nt 
Interaction/
Cognition 
Achieveme
nt 
Factor 3 
Activity/ 
Passivity 
Spend 
Time  
Flow 
Cognition 
Factor 4 
Interaction 
Interaction 
 
Self-
Control 
Factor 5 
Thoughtful/
Spontaneou
s 
 
 
Interaction 
Factor 6 
Cognition 
 
 
 
 
The relevant factor structures cannot be presented and 
discussed in this paper in detail; confirmatory factor 
analysis was done in the appropriate empirical studies. The 
thorough analysis is presented in the papers [3][16][17][18].  
The factor structure of the Russian gamers is the most 
complex (among the samples we investigated) and contains 
more factors (namely, six) than the factor structures of the 
other ethnic groups of gamers. All the factor structures are 
well-established and reasonable; flow is the first factor in 
almost all the models, with the single exception of the 
French population of online gamers. The corresponding 
factor model for the latter sample contains only three 
factors, which looks minimalistic among the factor 
structures we examined.  
The French sample seems to be even more peculiar since 
Cognition and Interaction merge into one factor. A likely 
supposition is that the members of the French sample are 
fully aware of the fact that interactions with other players 
provide a chance to exchange and share in-game experience, 
which is equivalent to performance of cognitive actions in a 
comfortable manner. Indeed, within the research project we 
discuss, cognition refers to knowledge useful for making 
game-related decisions; in an online multiplayer mode of 
gaming, social perceptive knowledge pertaining to other 
players is no less valuable than information about the 
specifics of gameplay structure; exceptionally useful 
knowledge referring to social perception of partner players 
can be gained by means of interactions with them. Due to 
this fact the interactive mode of online gaming is highly 
appreciated by players. Turning to the factor model 
characterizing the Chinese sample it is evident that the 
members of this sample are the only ones (among those 
investigated) who seem to underestimate processes of 
collecting knowledge: in the corresponding factor model 
there is no factor responsible for cognition. 
Conclusions such as the mentioned above become 
evident after the elements of factor models which have been 
gained in the process of carrying out particular culture-
related studies are organized in a table format. This format 
seems to be helpful: even simple comparison of the existing 
factor structures can provide hints for new hypotheses. For 
example, one of the reasons to perform a new mentioned 
above study within the same project, namely the study 
dealing with a rapidly growing population of Chinese online 
gamers, is our intention to find out whether online gamers 
from China still keep restraining from cognition while 
gaming.  
The main result of the cross-cultural study says that flow 
experience seems to be an important and significant factor 
in online gaming and is one of explanations of its ever 
growing popularity.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Flow experience, or optimal experience, as introduced by 
Csikszentmihalyi, takes an important place in the field of 
the use of information and communication technologies. In 
a number of theoretical and empirical studies this view got a 
sufficient confirmation. A portion of significant studies in 
the field has been done by a team of psychologists from 
Russia; in the current paper this contribution to the field has 
been overviewed briefly. A thorough and fairly recent 
review of the world-wide studies devoted to the use of 
optimal experience methodology in virtual environments is 
presented elsewhere [15].  
12
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

 It has been shown that flow experience is a common 
motivating element for online gamers in four different 
ethnic groups such as Chinese, Americans, French and 
Russians. This proves the fact that optimal experience is a 
basic element in one of the most well-grounded        
explanations of world-wide attractiveness of playing 
massive multiplayer online role-playing games, and very 
likely other types of video and/or console games. 
A nonlinear model of the development of computer 
hackers’ flow experience has been worked out: flow 
depends on the balance between the challenges the hackers 
take and the skills they possess (skills in competent 
computer usage, not necessarily in the use of specific 
software programs for hackers). Flow is shown to develop 
in a step-like manner which includes “flow crisis gaps”, i.e. 
shorter or longer time periods during which hackers do not 
report of optimal experience. The flow crisis gap periods are 
promising for the hackers’ dropouts: their eventual 
transformation 
into 
non-hackers, 
possibly 
(but 
not 
necessarily) into experts in computer security; such a 
transformation may happen when a hacker becomes 
preoccupied with mastering his or her skills in computer 
science and/or software development, and is losing interest 
in new hacking related challenges. This model shows 
prospective directions of educational work aimed at 
reducing the number of computer hackers by transforming 
them into qualified experts in computer science, including 
for example the problem area of computer security, or any 
other problem area which responds to their particular 
interests. 
Flow experience is a complex motivational state and 
should not be confused with some other psychological 
states, such as for example a computer/Internet addiction. 
Flow belongs to entirely positive states which are often easy 
to be mixed up with creativity, while any addiction is  
commonly believed to be a psychological state which is 
desirable to get rid of. It is shown in the current paper that 
optimal experience is a valuable parameter to be used in 
performing web/software usability studies.  
For the youngest generations – those born digital – as 
well as for the representatives of older generations the 
cyberspace is becoming more and more habitual, just the 
space for doing office work, for learning and exploration, 
for spending leisure time, for interactions, for shopping, for 
self-presentation, for diverse forms of entertainments (first 
of all – gaming, viewing videos and movies, uploading 
photos and videos), etc. It is essential that this virtual space 
should 
be 
comfortable 
and 
easy-to-operate, 
both 
emotionally and ergonomically. The optimal experience 
theory developed by Csikszentmihalyi represents an 
underestimated (in the earliest practice of designing the 
cyberspace) dimension which might be helpful, as is shown 
in the current paper, in constructing the virtual spaces which 
are emotionally comfortable; besides, the current paper 
shows that this theory provides valuable targeted hints for 
performing high-quality usability related studies and for 
applied work aimed to enhance the comfort and 
effectiveness of using both current and prospective software 
products.  
Thus it means that flow experience should be considered 
one of the major and most constructive dimensions pertinent 
for estimating new and old virtual environments and for 
designing/redisigning these environments. The notion of 
flow is an entirely human-centric dimension of virtual 
environments, and from now on this dimension should not 
be underestimated. Both scholars and producers of new 
technologies need to work jointly in order to establish 
reliable standards to ensure that the would-be users of 
prospective virtual environments are likely to experience 
flow. This type of theoretical and empirical work, while 
being of global importance, suggests that it might be 
performed in a series of cross-cultural projects; the current 
paper illustrates a particular pattern of such a project. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The studies on which the current paper is based have 
been supported in 2002-2009 by the Russian Foundation of 
Humanities and by the Russian Foundation for Basic 
Research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. 
Csikszentmihalyi, 
Beyond 
boredom 
and 
anxiety: 
Experiencing flow in work and play. San-Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 2000 (first published in 1975). 
[2] E. Deci and R. Ryan, Intrinsic motivation and self-
determination in human behavior. New York: Plenum Press, 
1985. 
[3] A. Faiola and A.E.  Voiskounsky, “Flow experience of MUD 
players: Investigating multi-user dimension gamers from the 
USA,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4564, 2007, 
pp. 324-333. 
[4] J.A. Ghani and S.P. Deshpande, “Task characteristics and  
the experience of optimal flow in human-computer 
interaction,” The Journal of Psychology, vol. 128(4), 1994, 
pp. 381-391.  
[5] D.L. Hoffman and T.P. Novak, “Flow online: Lessons learned 
and future prospects,” Journal of Interactive Marketing, vol. 
23(1), 2009, pp. 23-34.  
[6] F. Massimini and A. Delle Fave, “Individual development in a 
bio-cultural perspective,” in American Psychologist, vol. 
55(1), 2000, pp. 24-33. 
[7] J. Palfrey and U. Gasser, Born Digital: Understanding the 
First Generation of Digital Natives. N.Y.: Basic Books, 2008. 
[8] A.K. Przybylski, C.S. Rigby, and R.M. Ryan, ”A motivational 
model of videogame engagement,” Review of General 
Psychology, vol. 14, 2010, pp. 154-166.  
[9] J.C. Roca and M. Gagne, M. “Understanding e-learning 
continuance intention in the workplace: A self-determination 
theory perspective,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 
24(4), 2008, pp. 1585-1604. 
[10] M.E.P. Seligman and M. Csikszentmihalyi, “Positive 
psychology: An introduction,” American Psychologist, 55(1), 
2000, pp. 5-14. 
[11] D.J. Shernoff and M. Csikszentmihalyi, ”Flow in schools: 
Cultivating 
engaged 
learners 
and 
optimal 
learning 
environments,” in Handbook of Positive Psychology in 
Schools, R. Gilman, E. S. Huebner, and M. Furlong, Eds. 
New York: Routledge, 2009, pp. 131-145. 
13
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

[12] O.V. Smyslova and  A.E. Voiskounsky, “Usability studies: to 
meet or not to meet intrinsic motivation,” PsychNology 
Journal, Vol. 7, № 3, 2009, pp. 303–324. Retrieved March 14, 
2010, from 
http://www.psychnology.org/File/PNJ7(3)/PSYCHNOLOGY
_JOURNAL_7_3_SMYSLOVA.pdf 
[13] L.K. Trevino and L. Webster, “Flow in computer-mediated 
communication,” Communication Research, vol. 19(5), 1992, 
pp. 539-573. 
[14] A.E. Voiskounsky, “Two types of repetitive experiences on 
the Internet,” INTERFACE: The Journal of Education, 
Community and Values, vol. 7, issue 6, 2007. Retrieved 
February 21, 2011, from 
http://bcis.pacificu.edu/journal/article.php?id=174   
[15] A.E. Voiskounsky, “Flow Experience in Cyberspace: Current 
Studies and Perspectives,” in Psychological Aspects of 
Cyberspace: Theory, Research, Applications, A. Barak, Ed. 
N.Y.: Cambridge University Press, 2008, pp. 70-101. 
[16] A.E. Voiskounsky, O.V. Mitina, and A.A. Avetisova, 
“Playing online games: Flow experience,“ PsychNology 
Journal,  Vol. 2, № 3, 2004, pp. 259–281. Retrieved October 
22, 2008, from    
http://www.psychnology.org/PSYCHNOLOGY_JOURNAL_
2_3_VOISKOUNSKY.pdf 
[17] A.E. Voiskounsky, O.V. Mitina, and A.A. Avetisova, 
“Communicative patterns and flow experience of MUD 
players,“ Int. J. Advanced Media and Communication, Vol. 1, 
№ 1, 2005, pp. 5-25. 
[18] A.E. Voiskounsky, O.V. Mitina, and A.A. Avetisova, “Flow 
experience and interaction in online gaming: Comparative 
study of Russian and Chinese MUD players,” in Sixth 
international conference on Cultural Attitudes Towards 
Technology and Communication 2008, F. Sudweeks, H. 
Hrachovec, and Ch. Ess, Eds. School of Informational 
Techology Murdoch University, 2008, pp. 410-421.  
[19] A.E. Voiskounsky and O.V. Smyslova, “Flow-based model of 
computer 
hackers’ 
motivation,” 
CyberPsychology 
&         
Behavior, Vol. 6, № 3, 2003, pp. 171-180. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

