User-friendly Visualization of Energy Flows in Smart Homes
Thomas Dressel
Institute of Information Systems
Hof University of Applied Sciences
Hof, Germany
email: thomas.dressel@iisys.de
Ren´e Peinl
Institute of Information Systems
Hof University of Applied Sciences
Hof, Germany
email: rene.peinl@iisys.de
Abstract—The constantly increasing energy consumption re-
quires to make people aware of energy and the trend towards
the smart home makes it possible. Every manufacturer of so-
called smart products uses its own application to display the
data obtained. However, this makes it difﬁcult for users to see a
connection between individual devices. Even if people are using
a smart home hub to collect data from multiple devices, the
data is still separated in different charts or tables and hard to
compare. To offer them more transparency in their smart home,
an application was developed for electricians that want to offer
their customers added value without great effort. This app makes
the data of the devices available in a central location and provides
an overview of the energy ﬂow users can easily interpret.
Index Terms—Smart home, energy monitor, energy ﬂow.
I. INTRODUCTION
Energy consumption has been rising for years and has more
than doubled between 1990 and 2017 [1]. Despite signiﬁcant
improvements in energy efﬁciency, the electricity consumption
in the European Union per household has increased by 2%
per year from 2000 until 2010 [2]. Reasons for this are
manifold and country-speciﬁc. They include more widespread
use of electronic equipment like electric dryer and dishwasher
that go along with a higher degree of basic comfort [2],
more entertainment electronics like large tv sets [3], gaming
PCs and video game consoles, as well as extensive use of
air conditioning and cooling devices. Energy consumption
of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) and
Consumer Electronics (CE) has risen considerably in recent
years and now accounts for approximately 15% of global
residential electricity consumption. Research further indicates
that almost 41% of supplied power is wasted, e.g., through
devices in standby or wrong room temperature [4].
The emergence of modern smart home devices plays an
ambivalent role since these devices require additional power
on the one hand, but also offer a certain beneﬁt and potential
for saving energy on the other hand [5]. These smart devices
provide the user with a wide range of data. This includes both
the user’s energy consumption and energy generation through
various devices. The available data of the individual networked
devices are usually only displayed in a smartphone application
of the respective manufacturer. As a result, you have to use
several apps to get all the information. A disadvantage of this
is that the data are separate from each other and a possible
connection is difﬁcult to recognize. In order to offer the user
more transparency for its energy consumption or its energy
production and the devices used, the data must be visible
in a central location. Several studies show that this kind of
feedback can change user behavior in a positive way [6]–[9].
This is especially important, since user behavior is a relevant
factor besides the devices mentioned before [10] and people
also have certain beliefs regarding energy consumptions and
possible savings that are far away from the objective facts [11].
To overcome some of these problems, the Energy Flow Mon-
itor (EFM) was developed, a smartphone application that vi-
sualizes data from different devices of different manufacturers
centrally in one app. Modern households include a variety
of energy consuming and also generating devices like heat
pumps, solar heating, photovoltaic collectors. Therefore, it is
increasingly hard for users to keep track of their interplay.
Is the dryer running while PhotoVoltaic (PV) collectors are
providing electricity, or is it using expensive power from the
national grid? EFM can show interactions like this to the user
in an understandable manner. As a result, the user becomes
more aware of how some devices are connected and where
there is potential for energy saving.
The remaining paper is organized as follows. First, related
work is presented and deﬁciencies of existing solutions are
highlighted. This leads to the goal of our research, which
is presented in section three. A short excursion to technical
aspects of the developed app is discussed in section four,
before our solution to the challenge is presented in section
ﬁve. We conclude the paper with a discussion of limitations
an outlook to future work and a conclusion.
II. RELATED WORK
The consumption of energy is abstract, invisible, and un-
touchable - unlike most other consumable goods [12]. There-
fore, home energy usage often goes unnoticed. The only means
of judging their household energy usage is often a monthly (or
bi-monthly) bill (ibid.). In Germany, it is even worse, since
many people only get yearly bills.
Although there is both great potential and great interest in
stimulating behavioral change with energy monitoring tools,
we still know little about how to design, situate, and integrate
them to help people make good decisions to safe energy
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[13]. “Current applications often require too much effort and
management from occupants and are not integrated well with
the set of information tools people already use” (ibid). Bartram
et al. propose a combination of Web application to display on
the PC, mobile app with a subset of the features of the Web
app (see Figure 1) and an ambient display in the kitchen to
positively inﬂuence the occupants.
Fig. 1. Screenshot of the mobile app from Bartram et al. [13].
Existing studies paint a diverging picture of the impact of
energy monitoring solutions on energy savings. [14] found no
differences in energy consumption for one device and only
insigniﬁcant differences (12%) for the other device. However,
this could be due to their limited study size since 12% would
be signiﬁcant for a larger sample based on the measures used
in the paper. The amount is also in line with ﬁndings in
[15] that report 10% savings. [16] found that initially, energy
monitors led to nearly 8% savings, but after four month,
no difference could be observed anymore. However, in large
meta-studies it was shown that feedback systems are effective
in supporting energy saving behavior and resulted in about
10% savings [12], although individual study results differed
between 5% and 15%.
One problem of most existing solutions is that they do
either display only the overall consumption or integrate the
consumption of individual devices using plug adapters, as
e.g., [17] do. This excludes devices without a plug like oven,
water heaters, PV collectors and heat pumps. Some of the
latter devices come with monitoring apps on their own, but as
stated before, an integrative view is missing. [18] claim that
they can monitor individual devices like refrigerator, washing
machine, dishwasher and dryer in addition to furnace and
water heater based on the home’s circuit breaker box (see
Figure 2). However, this seems not plausible since usually
there are only few fuses per house and only high power devices
like the water heater and oven have a dedicated fuse, whereas
refrigerator, washing machine and dishwasher share a fuse
with other devices in the kitchen or cellar.
Fig. 2. Concept rendering of the WattBot application [18].
Feedback on energy consumption has a signiﬁcant role in
raising awareness. It can sensitize users to the extent that a
reduction in consumption in the order of 10% is possible
[6], [7]. One approach to communicate energy consumption
to the user is by Fleisch et al. [19]. This system allows the
user to monitor its energy consumption on a mobile phone
and to compare devices with each other. The disadvantage
of this solution is that one has to run its own web server,
which may discourage some users from using it. There are
also commercial solutions [20], which are installed on the
electricity meter and offer the user a good overview of the
electricity consumption, but there is no visualization how
different devices are connected or the possibility to see the
energy generation.
III. GOAL
In order to create more transparency for the user, an easy-to-
understand overview of the main devices is important. These
must not be scattered over several apps but integrated in one
place. The resulting overview should provide the user with
all important information and especially show the connection
between the individual devices. The aim is to develop a mobile
app that displays data of smart devices centrally and also
provides an overview of the energy ﬂow in a user-friendly
way. This creates greater transparency and makes it easier for
users to understand the energy consumption in their homes.
User-friendly is used here in the sense that Trenner subsumes
under ”how user-friendly is commonly understood” [21]. That
means ”easy to use”, ”designed with the needs of users in
mind” and ”to serve the non-expert or novice” (ibid.). Expert
users are not considered in the ﬁrst iteration.
The application should also be adaptable for companies
without great effort by choosing systems that are as open as
possible. Since there are two major smartphone platforms in
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Germany that both have more than 25% market share and
together provide for over 95% of the market [22], the mobile
app should be available for both platforms.
IV. CROSS PLATFORM APP DEVELOPMENT
Given the task at hand, the decision is between developing
two native apps or one cross platform app. Native apps offer
some advantages. They have full access to all features of the
device and the operating system. In addition, they usually
provide better performance and smoother animations [23]. A
native user interface uses the original widgets provided by the
operating system, and will also be updated over time with
operating system updates. On the other hand, one has to de-
velop two separate applications, using different programming
languages, development environments and paradigms. Offer-
ing the application natively on two platforms will multiply the
effort by factor 1.3 [24] or even up to factor two [23].
Whether cross-plattform apps are a good alternative de-
pends on the complexity and type of application [23]. A
huge challenge is providing a consistent app behavior and
still respecting the UI guidelines of the respective platform
(ibid.), which is also important for the user experience, since
users expect a certain degree of consistency across apps on
their device. Cross platform applications can be developed
with different approaches: Web, Hybrid, Interpreted, Cross-
compiled and Model-driven approach [25]. Web apps run
in the browser and are not installed using the platform’s
app store. Hybrid apps are developed with HTML, CSS and
JavaScript like Web apps, but are packaged into platform-
speciﬁc apps and run inside a Web view instead of the browser.
They can use more native features through abstraction layers
like Phonegap/Cordova. With interpreters like Appcelerator
Titanium, developers can use a single language, which is
than interpreted in a platform-speciﬁc container. It allows for
native user interface components, but comes with performance
degradation. Cross-compilers generate true native code out of
a common codebase. Xamarin is probably the most popular
example of this category. Model-driven development is a
big trend, but it is not yet established in companies outside
academia.
Having only web developers available that had no experi-
ence with Android nor iOS development, and the application
being not too complex, a closer look at frameworks supporting
the hybrid approach seemed sensible. This choice is also
becoming more common since both performance and access
to native features of hybrid apps has become better over the
last years. [26] identiﬁed Ionic (hybrid) and React Native
(cross-compiler) as innovative approaches and concluded that
Ionic made development of interfaces and app ﬂow easy
through their component library, whereas React Native left
more architectural choices to the developer. On the other
hand, React Native mostly delivered un-styled and “not native-
looking” interface components with the option of styling them
to ﬁt the app. Ionic provided a massive library of ready-
made and pre-styled components making the development of
standard native-looking interfaces easy (ibid.).
Recently, a new alternative became available, which is
called progressive web apps [27]. Although they performed
well in the comparison, we did not further consider them since
they do not produce apps for Android and iOS app stores.
Despite the fact that our own app does not make excessive use
of native components, our choice was still Ionic, since other
papers describe it as the “top choice among hybrid mobile
app frameworks” [28]. The app presented here was therefore
developed as a hybrid application using Ionic, Angular and
Apache Cordova to increase its availability and to keep the
programming effort as low as possible.
V. OWN SOLUTION
Froehlich found ten design dimensions when planning en-
ergy monitoring systems [12]: frequency, measurement unit,
data granularity, push/pull, presentation medium, location,
visual design, recommending action, comparison and social
sharing. Our app displays current and historic energy con-
sumption and ﬂows with mostly a few seconds delay to
recording. It uses kW as the measurement unit and displays
data for PV collectors, heat pump, furnace and overall elec-
tricity consumption for a user-deﬁned time interval (current,
day, week, month). Additionally, it display the ﬂow between
national grid, heat pump, PV collectors and the electric devices
in the house. Users have to actively query the data. There
are no proactive push notiﬁcations currently. Information is
displayed on mobile phones and therefore independent from
the location of the monitored devices and even from anywhere
on the world, as long as internet access is available. Visual-
ization is not optimized for tablets given the dominance of
smartphones and the comparatively small number of tablets
in the market. We put much effort into the visual design,
which consists of polished charts (see Figure 4) and our special
energy ﬂow visualization (see Figure 5). EFM does currently
not recommend any actions, nor does it directly contain a
social sharing functionality. Comparison with past data is easy,
using the charts. Comparison with other households is not
implemented.
Apache Cordova and Ionic were used for this application.
Devices whose data can be displayed are a heat pump, PV
collectors, heating, solar heating, thermal buffer, the total
power consumption and energy accumulators. The data include
the current consumption at the time of logging, the power
gained or the temperature proﬁle.
One important consideration for our solution was the ability
to use it independently of the manufacturer of the heat pump
or furnace. This gives electricians much more freedom in
chosing the best solution for the customer, without thinking
about the data connection. The latter is provided by sensors
from a company called Technische Alternative [29]. They
can be used in conjunction with all leading manufacturers.
Despite the availability of a number of smart home hubs like
OpenHAB (based on Eclipse Smart Home [30]), IP Symcon
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

or others, including central heating systems, PV and water
heaters is still a challenge for end users. Whereas lighting,
blinds, temperature and other sensor data is usually available
via standard protocols like Zigbee, Z-Wave or KNX, the
listed devices usually do not provide an easy to use data
interface. The Sensors by Technische Alternative can reduce
this problem by providing energy data independent of the
manufacturer and at affordable prices. A drawback is, that
only certiﬁed electricians are allowed to install those sensors.
This is much more effort compared to the usual plug-adapters
that are merely plugged into the wall socket and the plug of
the appliance is plugged into the adapter.
Avoiding the necessity to operate an own backend, a Mobile
Backend as a Service (MBaaS) solution was desired [31] for
retrieving the data via an Application Programming Interface
(API). Fortunately, the Technische Alternative provides a web
portal for accessing the data of its sensors in the ﬁeld. In
addition to the web interface for humans that is available for
several years, they are offering an API for developers since
spring 2018. We were granted early access to this API in order
to develop EFM. Although this is not an MBaaS solution in a
narrow sense, it provided all the necessary data. The company
that provides the customer with this application therefore does
not have to operate its own web server and thus has the
advantage of offering the customer added value. In order to
speed up visualization of data, it is stored in a local database
on the phone after it was ﬁrst retrieved from the backend. The
database used for that is SQLite.
The great advantage of our application is that both the views
of the individual devices and a combined view to illustrate the
interaction of the devices are located in a central place. Hybrid
cars were used as a basic idea and inspiration because they
also display an energy ﬂow, e.g., the interaction of the engine,
its consumption and recuperation is displayed in a common
view.
The app is divided into four views for energy and energy
ﬂow and the view of settings. Immediately after starting the
app, the user sees the overview page with all connected devices
(see Figure 3). The current value and energy of the current
day is displayed for power generating or power consuming
devices. For devices such as the heater, other data are displayed
accordingly, such as whether the status of the heater and the
current temperature. Each device is shown on an own tile
on the main screen (see Figure 3). For users, that have less
devices, only relevant tiles are displayed. The acronym EVI
that can be found in Figure 3, is the abbreviation for the heat
pump or our project partner.
If a device is selected in the overview by touching a tile, the
detailed view for the respective device is shown (see Figure
4). In this detail view, you can see the energy production for
the current course of the day, the current week, the current
month and the current year.
In the overview of all devices, users will also ﬁnd the tile
“Energy Monitor”. If this is selected, a view is displayed
showing the energy ﬂow and thus the interaction in the house
Fig. 3. Example overview showing the connected devices with current
values.
Fig. 4. The course of the current day can be seen in the detailed view.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

(see Figure 5). If the user has a photovoltaic system, the
current energy generation is displayed there. The total energy
consumption and how it is divided into heat pump and other
consumers can also be seen. If more energy is generated by
the photovoltaic system than is consumed, it is fed into the
national power grid and can also be seen in the energy monitor.
Fig. 5. The “Energie Monitor” shows the energy ﬂow and the
interrelationships of individual devices.
If the user has not yet set up the app, the settings are
displayed directly at the ﬁrst start (see Figure 6). The only
information users are required to enter are username and
password, which they know from their login to the Web portal
of ”Technische Alternative” as well as the CMI ID and the
name of the proﬁle that can be easily found in the Web portal.
The App comes with preconﬁgured mappings from the most
common devices used by the project partner to the displayed
variables so that there is no conﬁguration effort here.
VI. LIMITATIONS & FUTURE WORK
The current app does not incorporate all of the aspects
Froehlich suggests [12]. The envisioned target group is not
known to be excessive users of social media. However, en-
abling the sharing of energy consumption with friends seems
an interesting improvement. It would be even more valuable,
but also much more complex to include recommendation for
actions that are speciﬁc to the sensor readings of the household
monitored. Those recommendations must be realizable and
not trivial. Otherwise, users will reject them and get a bad
Fig. 6. The user has to enter its credentials, the corresponding identity of
the device of the Technische Alternative [29], a created proﬁle and the
device assignment.
impression of the app. Due to the limited amount of time
to develop EFM, this aspect was not implemented yet. Once
the app has a considerable amount of users, it would be also
interesting to offer comparisons between different households.
These comparisons only make sense for households that are
sufﬁciently similar. Comparing a three person household with
120 square meters living space to another one with ﬁve
inhabitants and 180 square meters is nonsense. Therefore, the
app needs to collect meta data about the household in order
to support such a feature. [32] found that users’ willingness to
reduce their energy consumption can be increased from 25%
to nearly 60% when appropriate comparison with peer groups
is provided. However, the strict data protection rules of the
European Union have to be taken into consideration, which
might preclude the feedback with name and photo of other
users that was used in the mentioned study. Finally, it should
also be investigated whether the performance of the app can
be further improved. We did not formal evaluation of the user-
friendliness of the app, but initial feedback of a few test users
was positive.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper introduced EFM, a smartphone application that
provides a central place for users to view data from their smart
devices, especially power consumers and generators. It was
developed as a hybrid app using Ionic, Angular and Apache
Cordova and is able to run on Android and iOS devices. Thus,
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

it is no longer necessary to use several different device- or
manufacturer-speciﬁc apps to display device data. It collects
data from different devices like heat pumps, PV collectors
and furnace using sensors from Technische Alternative, inde-
pendently of the manufacturer of those devices. Data is made
available by Technische Alternative in both a web portal in
human readable form and an API for consumption in own
apps. Our app excels the web portal in providing an integrated
view on energy ﬂows between different devices, which is a
signiﬁcant beneﬁt compared to single data of devices.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work has partly been funded by the European Regional
Development Fund (ERDF) as part of the GreenTec Workshop
Hof project. The authors would like to thank the anonymous
reviewers, our industry partner Gemeinhardt AG, Manuela
Wimmer and Valentin Plenk for their help.
REFERENCES
[1] Enerdata,
“Global
Energy
Statistical
Yearbook
2018.”
[Online].
Available: https://yearbook.enerdata.net/electricity/electricity-domestic-
consumption-data.html retrieved: September, 2018.
[2] A. De Almeida, P. Fonseca, B. Schlomann, and N. Feilberg, “Charac-
terization of the household electricity consumption in the EU, potential
energy savings and speciﬁc policy recommendations,” Energy and
Buildings, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1884–1894, 2011.
[3] T. Crosbie, “Household energy consumption and consumer electronics:
The case of television,” Energy Policy, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 2191–2199,
2008.
[4] R. J. Meyers, E. D. Williams, and H. S. Matthews, “Scoping the potential
of monitoring and control technologies to reduce energy use in homes,”
Energy and Buildings, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 563–569, 2010.
[5] A.-G. Paetz, E. D¨utschke, and W. Fichtner, “Smart homes as a means
to sustainable energy consumption: A study of consumer perceptions,”
Journal of consumer policy, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 23–41, 2012.
[6] S. Darby, “Making it obvious: designing feedback into energy con-
sumption,” in Energy efﬁciency in household appliances and lighting.
Springer, 2001, pp. 685–696.
[7] ——, “The effectiveness of feedback on energy consumption,” Environ-
mental Change Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, A review
for DEFRA of the literature on metering, billing and direct displays,
2006.
[8] T. Ueno, F. Sano, O. Saeki, and K. Tsuji, “Effectiveness of an energy-
consumption information system on energy savings in residential houses
based on monitored data,” Applied Energy, vol. 83, no. 2, pp. 166–183,
2006.
[9] W. Abrahamse, L. Steg, C. Vlek, and T. Rothengatter, “The effect of
tailored information, goal setting, and tailored feedback on household
energy use, energy-related behaviors, and behavioral antecedents,” Jour-
nal of environmental psychology, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 265–276, 2007.
[10] K. Steemers and G. Y. Yun, “Household energy consumption: a study of
the role of occupants,” Building Research & Information, vol. 37, no. 5,
pp. 625–637, 2009.
[11] S. Z. Attari, M. L. DeKay, C. I. Davidson, and W. B. De Bruin, “Public
perceptions of energy consumption and savings,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of sciences, vol. 107, no. 37, pp. 16 054–16 059, 2010.
[12] J. Froehlich, “Promoting energy efﬁcient behaviors in the home through
feedback: The role of human-computer interaction,” in Proceedings of
the HCIC Workshop, vol. 9, 2009, pp. 1–11.
[13] L. Bartram, J. Rodgers, and K. Muise, “Chasing the negawatt: visualiza-
tion for sustainable living,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 8–14, 2010.
[14] M. A. Alahmad, P. G. Wheeler, A. Schwer, J. Eiden, and A. Brumbaugh,
“A comparative study of three feedback devices for residential real-
time energy monitoring,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics,
vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 2002–2013, 2012.
[15] T. Ueno, R. Inada, O. Saeki, and K. Tsuji, “Effectiveness of displaying
energy consumption data in residential houses. analysis on how the
residents respond,” in Proceedings of the European Council for an
Energy-efﬁcient Economy, vol. 6, 2005, p. 19.
[16] S. S. Van Dam, C. A. Bakker, and J. D. M. Van Hal, “Home energy mon-
itors: impact over the medium-term,” Building Research & Information,
vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 458–469, 2010.
[17] A. Hashizume, T. Mizuno, and H. Mineno, “Energy monitoring system
using sensor networks in residential houses,” in Proceedings of the
26th International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and
Applications Workshops.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 595–600.
[18] D. Petersen, J. Steele, and J. Wilkerson, “WattBot: a residential electric-
ity monitoring and feedback system,” in CHI’09 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2009, pp. 2847–2852.
[19] M. Weiss, F. Mattern, T. Graml, T. Staake, and E. Fleisch, “Handy feed-
back: Connecting smart meters with mobile phones,” in Proceedings of
the 8th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia.
ACM, 2009, p. 15.
[20] “Blue
Line
Innovations
Inc.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.bluelineinnovations.com retrieved: September, 2018.
[21] L. Trenner, “How to win friends and inﬂuence people: deﬁnitions of
user-friendliness in interactive computer systems,” Journal of informa-
tion science, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 99–107, 1987.
[22] Statista,
“Mobile
Operating
Systems
-
Market
Share
Internet
Usage
in
Germany
until
2018.”
[Online].
Available:
https://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/184332/umfrage/marktanteil-
der-mobilen-betriebssysteme-in-deutschland-seit-2009/
retrieved:
September, 2018.
[23] M. E. Joorabchi, A. Mesbah, and P. Kruchten, “Real challenges in
mobile app development,” in Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement, 2013 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on.
IEEE,
2013, pp. 15–24.
[24] F. Ramisch, “Study: App development costs 30,000 euro on average,”
2015. [Online]. Available: https://mobilbranche.de/2015/07/ibusiness-
studie-die retrieved: September, 2018.
[25] M. Latif, Y. Lakhrissi, E. H. Nfaoui, and N. Es-Sbai, “Cross platform
approach for mobile application development: A survey,” in Proceedings
of the International Conference on Information Technology for Organi-
zations Development.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–5.
[26] T. Majchrzak and T.-M. Grønli, “Comprehensive analysis of innovative
cross-platform app development frameworks,” in Proceedings of the 50th
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2017.
[27] A. Biørn-Hansen, T. A. Majchrzak, and T.-M. Grønli, “Progressive
web apps: The possible web-native uniﬁer for mobile development,” in
Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Web Information
Systems and Technologies (WEBIST), 2017, pp. 344–351.
[28] M. Q. Huynh, P. Ghimire, and D. Truong, “Hybrid app approach: could
it mark the end of native app domination?” Issues in Informing Science
and Information Technology, vol. 14, pp. 049–065, 2017.
[29] “Technische Alternative.” [Online]. Available: https://www.ta.co.at/
retrieved: September, 2018.
[30] L. Smirek, G. Zimmermann, and M. Beigl, “Just a smart home or
your smart home–a framework for personalized user interfaces based on
eclipse smart home and universal remote console,” Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 98, pp. 107–116, 2016.
[31] K. Lane, “Overview of the backend as a service (baas) space,” API
Evangelist, 2015.
[32] M. Graffeo, I. Ritov, N. Bonini, and C. Hadjichristidis, “To make people
save energy tell them what others do but also who they are: a preliminary
study,” Frontiers in psychology, vol. 6, p. 1287, 2015.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

