Taking Printed Books into Internet of Things
Harri Ketamo
Satakunta University of Applied Sciences
Pori, Finland
harri.ketamo@samk.fi
Abstract—The aim of this paper is to describe a development 
process for bookAI, a system that takes printed books into the 
Internet  of  Things  by  applying  smartphones,  different 
identification methods, mobile internet, and cloud computing. 
BookAI connects the books into the Internet with NFC, RFID 
or barcode identifiers that are read by smart phones. The 
challenge in the book identification is recognizing the object 
from  various  coding  sets  and  connect  it  to  the  existing 
metadata and content: In bookstores the EAN-13 barcodes are 
used, while in libraries there are several RFID standards as 
well as several barcode formats in use. Metadata and available 
digital content, related to the physical object, are read from 
different  sources. The received  data is  not in  a  structured 
format, which means there are incomplete records and missing 
data that makes challenges  for further computing. BookAI 
applies semantic computing to build a network of detailed 
relations between the books and personal reading interests. 
The personal reading interests are recorded as self-evaluations 
of the users, so bookAI requires several evaluations before it 
can  make  personalized  suggestions.  After  the  system  has 
learned the user preferences, it enables searching interesting 
books from the libraries, bookstores or even from private book 
shelfs by optimizing the personal content and context map 
taught by the user. One of the challenges, in designing and end-
user product, is user interface. The first version of the bookAI 
was evaluated complex to use, so the second revision is built 
based on end-user feedback.  Computationally built semantics 
and  ontologies  save  remarkably  time  when  modeling  big 
domains  or  big  data  like  library  collections.  The  future 
research  is  focusing  in  building  methods  to  collect  more 
complete datasets about books as well as designing the overall 
user experience of the system.
Keywords; smartphones; mobile internet; books; libraries; 
cloud computing
I.
 INTRODUCTION 
The Internet of Things (IoT) is the network of physical 
objects  embedded  with  electronics,  software,  data  and 
connectivity. In IoT, each thing is uniquely identifiable and is 
able  to  interoperate  within  the  existing  Internet 
infrastructure.  This  has  been  expected  to  extend  the 
understanding of the physical world, leading to innovative 
services and increase in efficiency and productivity [1][2].
The relation between books and internet, as well as smart 
museums are widely studied [3]. However, in the discussions 
of IoT applications printed books are mentioned only in 
relatively small number of studies [4][5]. In fact, in terms of 
information retrieval, we can say there is no big difference 
between real-world pages or books compared to web pages 
or social media.
Social  media  services,  such  as  YouTube  and  Flickr, 
contain enormous number of content related to each other. 
Search engines can  list  numerous pieces of content that 
matches more or less perfectly to keywords. A common 
method to increase information accessibility in social media 
applications is tagging. However, when tags are used only as 
single words, we easily end up to information overload. 
Furthermore,  in  social  media,  we  do  not  have 
standardized way to tag content. In fact, tagging the content 
in an optimal way is a difficult task for several reasons. 
Cultural background, educational background, community 
and its social behavior, as well as context where tagging is 
constructed affects enormously the selection of tags. The 
term ‘context’ can be understood in many ways. In this study, 
context is understood to cover all conditions, physical, social 
and  mental,  which  can  be  considered  as  causes  or 
consequences of activity.
The structure of the paper is following: in Section 2, 
related work and background information is presented. In 
Section 3, research objectives are described. In Section 4, the 
research results are presented and explained. In Section 5, 
conclusions are discussed.
II.
RELATED WORK
In this study, semantic networks based approach is used 
to model a user's personal interests in order to optimize the 
recommendations  the  user  gets.  In  this  approach,  the 
originality and novelty is in getting a detailed understanding 
of what a users likes, prefers or needs to know in order to 
reorganize the content map and recommendations to meet the 
needs of the user. In other words, this is more related to user 
centric  computing  than  information  retrieval.  Author’s 
previous studies on  the subject has been made especially 
related to learning sciences [6] and information overload [7]
[8]. The fours on this section is on describing the known 
challenges from existing research: 1) Challenges in tagging 
the content, where also finding the most important words 
from the texts is considered as tagging, 2) challenges in 
adaptive media, 3) challenges in behavior modeling and 4) 
known work in connecting media objects to digital systems.
Tagging is very subjective and numerous research is done 
in  order  to  improve  user  experiences  and  information 
retrieval in social media [9][10][11]. Unclear, or in worst 
case misleading, tagging leads to information loss in social 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

media.  Especially,  constructing  storytelling  or  narration 
between  pieces  of  user  generated  content  becomes 
impossible without socially constructed tagging semantics. 
Furthermore, tagging can be seen as a one key element when 
building  platforms  for  personalized  services,  but 
understanding  semantics  brings  new  dimension  to  text 
analytics. Recently, Google had added semantics into its 
searches,  but  many  educational  subjects  require  more 
detailed  conceptual  models  for  successful  content 
personalization. Furthermore, there are other personalization 
and adaptation solutions for media [12].
Adaptive and/or personalized media is always designed 
to produce optimized user experiences. In adaptation, the 
mechanics optimize the content with technologies that can be 
divided into two main groups: indirect (static) adaptation and 
direct (dynamic) adaptation. In indirect adaptation, the rules 
are fixed beforehand by developers. Indirect adaptation is 
based on statistical rules, decision trees, state machines, or 
the cumulative effects of several fixed functions. In dynamic 
adaptation, the mechanics track the user and optimize the 
content  according  to  a  user's  behavior.  In  other  words, 
dynamic adaptation is based on machine learning. Dynamic 
adaptation requires at the very least 1) a user model, 2) a 
context model and 3) artificial intelligence [13][14][15].
Semantic networks, also known as conceptual graphs, are 
knowledge  representations  constructed  with  directed  or 
undirected graphs [16][17]. Semantic neural networks (SNN) 
are generally used for processing natural languages [18]. 
However, SNNs, as knowledge representations are relatively 
extensible and they have been used, for example, to model 
mental disturbances [19]. On the other hand SNN can be 
utilized  to  model  the  characteristics  of  users,  profiles, 
patterns of behavior, and skill levels in order to support or 
challenge the performance of individuals.
Parallel methods, such as behavior recording [20][21] 
and behaviour mining [22][23] have been studied and used in 
the game industry for some time. Behavior recording refers 
to game development and behavior mining usually refers to 
intrusion detection in networks, etc. Because the idea of 
adaptive educational systems is to produce individual and 
optimized  learning  experiences  [24][25],  high  end  user 
models, as well as methods, are relatively complex. In the 
high end solutions intelligence is based on neural, semantic, 
or Bayesian networks, as well as genetic algorithms [26][27]
[28].
Applying NFC and RFID in end-user products has been 
studied  e.g.,  in  social  mobile  games  with  educational 
dimensions,  with  shared  social  experience  and  physical 
interaction  between  players  [29][30][31].  Furthermore, 
location based NFC games and location aware NFC UIs 
allow users to play games in mixed reality in that they can 
interact with both real and virtual objects within that location 
[32][33][34][35]. In these environment NFC and RFID are 
used to extend mobile devices as media controllers, but not 
only because of the object. The key idea has been to connect 
the  textual  content  of  the  physical  objects  into  digital 
systems.
III.
RESEARCH OBJECTIVES
The  aim  of  this  paper  is to  describe  a  development 
process  for  bookAI.  The  technological  challenge  of  this 
study  is  related  to  the  complexity  of  the  system:  i) 
Recognizing a book with NFC, various RFID and barcode 
formats,  2)  collecting  unstructured  and  incomplete 
information from various sources, 3) modeling context maps 
as well as user’s personalization maps based on incomplete 
data and 4) visualizing complex phenomena in a way that 
end-user can find it useful. 
This is a design study including i) algorithm and system 
design, ii) experimental tests with real world big data and iii) 
piloting study with small number of real-world users.
The first version of the system was evaluated with small 
(n=10) end-user group that consist of Finnish librarians. The 
aim of the pilot study was to proof that the concept works. 
Test persons reported only bugs and challenges in usability. 
Furthermore, they were asked to give ideas and improvement 
comments for next prototype that should be piloted with 
library customers in Fall 2015. No survey data was collected 
after piloting.
When the content consists of millions of objects and 
billions of relations, compared to previous studies with only 
thousands of objects and hundred millions relations [25][36], 
the computational management of the relations between the 
objects  becomes  a  challenge  in  terms  of  smooth  user 
experience. When redefining the relations between content 
objects,  this  system  can  be  managed  through  semantic 
networks  in  a  computationally  efficient  way.  The  data-
sample size is more than 2 million books from Satakunta 
regional libraries. This sample data contains with more than 
500GB of descriptive data about the books, and the data 
enables to build more than 3 billion connections between 
books. This requires also system design from Big Data point 
of view.
The challenge in the book identification is recognizing 
the object from various coding sets and connect it to the 
available metadata and content: In bookstores the EAN-13 
barcodes are used, while in libraries there are NFC, several 
RFID standards as well as several barcode formats in use. 
Metadata and available content (e.g., abstracts) are read from 
different sources. The received data is not is a structured 
format,  which  means  there  are  incomplete  records  and 
missing data that makes challenges for computing.
IV.
RESULTS
Results section is presented in the order required to start 
to use the system: First  the context  model is explained, 
secondly how the system learns the user preferences and 
finally  how  it  adopts  to  user’s  needs.  The  results  and 
feedback from the pilot study is presented with the topic it 
belongs to.
Context  model  design  starts  with  defining  the 
dependencies (or proximity) between single objects (books). 
In this study, the proximity is defined by name of the book, 
keywords  and  other  metadata  given  by  book 
publisher/librarians and abstract text. All this information is 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

not  necessary  available:  metadata  is subjective, It  varies 
between different libraries and bookstores. Also, there are 
differences in abstract texts and surprisingly also with book 
names. The differences in book names is related to age of 
records.  Some  of  the  oldest  records  we  use  was  form 
eighties, and so there were misspellings, additional info in 
name-record, etc.
The  proximity  is  calculated  by  searching  for  similar 
words in similar sections (name, keywords, abstract) and 
weighting the findings according to frequencies of the words. 
An example of the idea is visualized in Figure 1. 
The upper book (Birds of Europe) do have tags/keywords 
(Europe, biology, geography,…) and an abstract text. The 
centre book (Capital cities Europe) do have a same word in 
the name (Europe), two same keywords (Europe, geography) 
and two same words in the abstract. When summarizing the 
total proximity value, keywords are as valuable as name and 
abstract together. So the total score in this example is 7 hits. 
In the final algorithm, the words are also weighted based on 
their reversed frequency, which means words like “news” or 
“sports” do have less weight than words like “Oslo” or 
“Owl”, so this also effects the final scoring, but is excluded 
from this example in order to keep this simple.
The  book  in  the  bottom  (Capital  in  the  twenty-first 
century) has one same word in name that Capital cities 
Europe (Capital) and the same word (capital) in abstract. The 
total proximity score for the book is two, even though we 
know there is relatively little common between capital cities 
and money. That’s why there is always a minimum value for 
proximity that has to be passed before the proximity has 
been validated. In this case (without  word weighting)  it 
would  be  4  or  5  hit  points. In  other  words,  couple  of 
common words is not enough to show proximity in this 
algorithm. 
Figure 1. Calculating the distance between the objects
In the example, there is no common words between 
“Birds of Europe” and “Capital in the twenty-first century”, 
which is relatively obvious. Naturally, pronouns, numerals, 
participles, etc. are excluded from the meaningful word set. 
The  biggest  difference  in  this  study  is  that  the  non-
meaningful words are excluded computationally. If a word 
occurs frequently in texts, the word is useless from text 
prediction point of view. Rare words, however, are useful but 
alone they might be misleading, like previous example on 
word “capital”. That’s why weighting the words as well as 
requiring several common words seems to give reasonable 
results as a full computational approach.
The  biggest  challenge  in  building  proximity  map 
between the books is in the total number of relations between 
the books. For example (Figure 2, in Finnish) the 10 nearest 
book to “Birds of Europe” forms a network of 46 relations 
when maximum is 50 relations between 10 books. In other 
words, the biggest challenge is not to find proximate books, 
but rank the  nature of the proximity and manage the big 
data.
Figure 2. Example on sub-network of books in neighborhood of “Birds of 
Europe”
Based on the data from bookAI, there are approximately 
3 000 000 000 two-way relations between 2 000 000 books, 
which  means,  on  average,  that  each  book  does  have 
approximately 750 single relations to other books. Naturally, 
when just looking for the most proximate books, we don’t 
need two-way relations for all these thousands of books: rank 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

ordered index is enough for defining the data and at the same 
time, performance is fast.
In other words, when building a end-user version of this 
solution, we won’t use the full computational model for all 
the calculations. Most of the information presented in end-
user user interface is pre-computed indexes which ensures 
the  smooth  performance  of  the  system  even  with  high 
number of users.
Another  challenge  is  visualize  complex  data.  N-
dimensional networks are not interesting for most of the 
users,  so  the  information  should  be  presented  in  more 
understandable form. 
In our prototype application, we have transformed n-
dimensional  network  into  2-dimensional  grid/heatmap 
(Figure 3, in Finnish). The idea of the grid is that in the the 
most proximate books are always neighboring and the heat 
(from red to yellow) shows the proximity to the requested 
books (Birds of Europe in this case). In other words, we 
flatten the information in some sense, but increase the instant 
readability of the data. 
Figure 3. Example visualization on two-dimensional network neighborhood 
of “Birds of Europe” (names in Finnish).
The texts in Figure 3 are in Finnish, including the name 
of the book, author of the book, ISBN and language and 
location of the book. The heatmap behind the text is the most 
important factor when visualizing how proximate the books 
are. What closer to red the background is, that proximate the 
books are. If the background is white (no heat) there is not 
much common between the book in whit background and the 
center book (the book we are focusing now).
One major challenge with this data visualization is, that 
we loose some books: if a book is 9th proximate to starting 
book and also 9th proximate (or less) to it’s successors, it 
will be dropped to the grid even though there will be books 
on the grid that has very little to do with the starting book. 
This challenge will be fixed in future studies, when we’ll 
bring different type of visualizations into end-user testing 
and so we can empirically find what kind of visualizations 
users really like.
The context model is a general model about the context 
we’re dealing with, it is built with unsupervised machine 
learning model, where the learning is based on given dataset. 
The personalization / adaptive model, described next, is built 
over context model by applying supervised learning -type of 
methods, where learning is based on input given by the user.
Figure 4. Scanning a book with mobile phone.
In end-user application, the process starts by recognizing 
the book (Figure 4) we are working with. The recognition of 
the book is done by scanning the barcode behind the book 
(either library dependent identifier or global EAN barcode) 
with which we can find the ISBN of the book. The scanning 
is done with mobile device’s camera. The mobile device is 
the connecting object between books and the internet.
Figure 5. Main interface of the first version of the system and evaluation of 
a scanned book.
ISBN number is the key element of the context model, 
while in user model side words are the key elements. This is 
crucial in order to e.g., deal with multiple ISBNs related to 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

same book. In fact, is is common that there are tens of 
different ISBNs related to the same specific book because of 
e.g., new editions, which automatically get a ISBN number. 
After the book and ISBN is recognized user can evaluate 
the book by giving thumbs up or thumbs down for a book 
(Figure 5). In this example we are evaluating a book about 
medical treatment, so when giving thumbs up (user likes the 
book or get the information he/she wanted), the application 
shows the words that get additional positive weight from the 
user.
Each evaluation (thumbs up / thumbs down) increases the 
information  about  user’s  preferences.  In  other  words, 
algorithm learns user preferences case by case and improves 
the explanative power of user model case by case.
In the first version of the bookAI, the scanning button 
and evaluation was placed in the front of the main screen. 
Users were expected to either scan a new book, evaluate a 
previous one or open a new tab. The proximity maps was 
placed on the next tabs, which user should open in order to 
see  the  scanned  maps  and  personalizations.  The  user 
interface  was  found  too  complex  to  use  and  test  users 
reported that is was difficult to recognize which book they 
are evaluating or what proximity map they were following.
Figure 6. Main interface (left),  evaluation (left) in the revised bookAI user 
interface.
This map can be seen as personalized reading assistant 
showing always new books to read. From user experience 
point of view, it is important to show also books that user 
may not like. If showing only books that are probably liked, 
user will sooner or later miss all the interesting new books 
that are close to liked books but with vocabulary not exactly 
the same.
In the revised version of the bookAI (Figure 6) the user 
interface was rebuilt in order to override all these reported 
challenges. The main screen in the heat map with smaller 
grid, consisting only 30 most proximate books, followed by 
semantic heat map, showing the words and themes connected 
to scanned book. In the top-right corner of UI there is two 
icons: upper icon is for menu, from which user can see the 
list of canned books. The list is ordered from newest to 
oldest, so user can immediately see what heatmap he/she is 
following.  The  camera  button  takes  to  scanner  and 
evaluation is immediate action after scan. User can override 
the evaluation any time, but in this we we ensure user knows 
for sure what book he/she is evaluating.  
In Figure 7, an example about fictive reader’s opinions 
about  bird-books:  User  has  evaluated  altogether  10  bird 
books, from which 4 can be seen in Figure 6. Books covering 
natural environments (or environment is not mentioned) are 
thumbed  up  and  books related  to built  environment  are 
thumbed down.
In Figure 7, the background heat map (context map) and 
the texts are the same as in Figure 3. The personal layer 
consist of a) books with blue background, representing the 
probability  that  user  don’t  like  the  book,  b)  green 
backgrounds representing that user most probably like the 
books (what lighter green that higher probability) and c) grey 
backgrounds showing that user data about the book is noisy.
About the personalized map user can immediately see 
which books he/she likes and how the books are related to 
centre book. 
Figure 7. Example on two-dimensional personalized network neighborhood 
of “Birds of Europe” (names in Finnish)
From machine learning point of view it is crucial to give 
extensive evaluations. If the system starts to get only positive 
evaluations from very narrow context and the context would 
get even narrower all the time, there is soon nothing to learn 
any more. From information theory point of view the system 
needs entropy in order to learn more. 
The recommendation system can be used outside the 
library e.g., in online education (Figure 8) as well as for 
presenting additional information already online (Figure 9). 
When the online content is added into bookAI as a 'book', 
we can connect physical books in the library into the digital 
course (Figure 8). The idea in case of online learning is that 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

user thumbs up content that he/she understands and thumbs 
down the content he/she don’t understand. The application, 
in this case, shows the books related to online content and 
also predicts if user understands the specific topic of the 
book.
Figure 8. Connecting library to online course
Figure 9. Connecting libraries existing online content to books.
The same goes with e.g., household appliances: When 
scanning the barcode of microwave oven, a user will get a 
heat  map  about  books  related  to  cooking,  microwave 
technology and ovens. The personal layer depends on user’s 
personal preferences (cooking or technology or both). In all 
cases, the books will be connected to other objects via  user’s 
personal mobile device.
Furthermore, existing online content about the books, can 
be  connected  to  bookAI.  With  this  feature,  user  can 
immediately  find  additional  information  about  the  book 
without  logging  into  library's  information  system.  The 
additional content is can be accessed directly from heatmaps.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The aim of this paper was to describe the production and 
design challenges of bookAI. The bookAI  maps the content 
automatically, algorithm based, which means no manually 
designed  semantics  or  ontologies  are  needed. 
Computationally  built  semantics  and  ontologies  save 
remarkably time when modeling big domains or big data like 
library  collections.  This  kind  of  non-supervised  learning 
requires, however, a large learning data and the idea is not 
applicable  for  small  or  medium  size  learning  data.  For 
example, single web page is far to small on content in order 
to be mapped, but conference proceedings with hundreds of 
papers may be enough.
When  comparing  bookAI  to  more  known  literature 
recommendation systems, such as e.g., Amazon Bookstore's 
crowd sourced 'the buyers of this book also bought  the 
following books' -type of recommendation systems, we can 
immediately point out two major benefits. 
First of all, when crowd sourcing recommendations, we 
need a big user data in advance. Without big user data, we 
can  give suggestions for only a small number of book. The 
minimum requirement for such data would be equal to the 
number of books and in that case there should be exactly two 
bought books per user and no overlapping at all. Naturally 
this never exists in real world and the required data would be 
remarkably  bigger.  With  bookAI  we  can  start 
recommendations immediately and the recommendations get 
more exact during the use of the system. 
Secondly, when recommendations are based on previous 
buys, the first buys starts to control the next buys and finally 
there  is  no  room  for  real,  empirically  grounded, 
recommendations.  In  other  words,  the  crowd  sourced 
recommendation data is corrupted by the meas how it was 
collected. BookAI can bring recommendations based on the 
semantic proximity of the books and empirically collected 
user preferences. This gives the user better understanding on 
what is available without limitations of somewhat misleading 
way to use empirical data.
BookAI learn user skills and competences based on self-
evaluations (thumbs up / down) and connects preferences to 
general  context  map.  Using  machine  learning  for 
personalization enables developer to bring any content to 
system.  Pre-fixed  preference  lists,  defined  by  users,  are 
always to restricted and out of date. The downside on using 
supervised  machine  learning  is  that  it  requires  tens  of 
evaluations before the system has learned something about 
the  user.  When  the  user  has  spent  some  time  to  do 
evaluations  (teaching  the  system),  the  user  model  is 
transferrable to other contexts as well, so in long run, the 
time it takes to start teaching the system pays off.
The visualization of the data is designed to be easily 
understandable.  This,  however,  requires  more  research. 
According to user feedback received from librarians, the data 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

is readable but maybe still a bit too complex for average 
library user. This indicates that more research has to be done 
in visualization side in order to build a successful consumer 
platform.
REFERENCES
[1]
D.  Bandyopadhyay  and  J.  Sen.  “Internet  of  Things: 
Applications  and  Challenges  in  Technology  and 
Standardization”.  Wireless  Personal  Communications,  Vol 
58(1), 2011, pp. 49-69.
[2]
D. Miorandia, S. Sicarib, F. De Pellegrinia, and I. Chlamtaca. 
“Internet  of  things:  Vision,  applications  and  research 
challenges”. Ad Hoc Networks, Vol 10(7), 2012, pp.1497–
1516.
[3]
L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito. “The Internet of Things: 
A survey”. Computer Networks, Vol 54(15), 2010, pp.2787-
2805.
[4]
H. Pencea. “Smartphones, Smart  Objects, and Augmented 
Reality”.  The  Reference  Librarian,  Vol  52(1-2),  2010, 
pp.136-145. 
[5]
A. Koivisto, H. Ketamo, and E. Hammais. “Combining the 
Dimensions of Written and Digital Media in a NFC-based 
Non-linear Adventure Game for Children”. In proceedings of 
IFLA WLIC 2014. August 16-22, 2014, Lyon, France. 
[6]
H.  Ketamo.  “Learning  Fingerprint:  Adaptive  Tutoring  for 
MOOCs”.  In  Proceedings  of  World  Conference  on 
Educational
 
Multimedia,
 
Hypermedia
 
and 
Telecommunications. Jun 23, 2014, Tampere, Finland, pp. 
2349–2358.
[7]
H. Ketamo. “Sharing Behaviors in Games and Social Media”. 
International  Journal  of  Applied  Mathematics  and 
Informatics, vol. 5(1), 2011, pp. 224-232.
[8]
H. Ketamo. “Managing Information Overload  - Teachable 
Media  Agents”.  In  Proceedings  of  the  8th  International 
Conference on Intellectual Capital, Knowledge Management 
& Organisational Learning – ICICKM 2011.  27-28 October 
2011, Bangkok, Thailand, pp. 301-308.
[9]
E.  Agichtein,  C.  Castillo,  D.  Donato,  A.  Gionis,  and  G. 
Mishen. “Finding high-quality content in social media”. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Web Search 
and  Web  Data  Mining,  WSDM'08.  Palo  Alto,  California, 
USA, February 11-12, 2008, pp. 183-194.
[10] P. Heymann, G. Koutrika, and H. Garcia-Molina. “Can social 
bookmarking improve web search?” In Proceedings of the 
International  Conference  on  Web  Search  and  Web  Data 
Mining, WSDM'08. Palo Alto, California, USA, February 11-
12, 2008, pp. 195-206.
[11] B.  Sigurbjörnsson  and  R.  van  Zwol.  “Flickr  tag 
recommendation  based  on  collective  knowledge.”  In 
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on World 
Wide Web, WWW'08. Beijing, China. April 21-25, 2008, pp. 
327-336.
[12] J.  Ahn,  P.  Brusilovsky,  D.  He,  J.  Grady,  and  Q.  Li. 
“Personalized  web  exploration  with  task  models.”  In 
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on World 
Wide Web, WWW'08. Beijing, China. April 21-25, 2008, pp. 
1-10.
[13] J. Manslow. “Learning and Adaptation”. In Rabin, S. (ed.) AI 
Game Programming Wisdom. Massachusetts: Charles River 
Media, Inc., 2002, p. 557-566.
[14] P. Brusilovsky. “Adaptive Hypermedia”. User Modeling and 
User-Adapted Interaction. vol 11, 2001, pp. 87-110.
[15] J.  Eklund  and  P.  Brusilovsky.  “InterBook:  an  Adaptive 
Tutoring System”. UniServe Science News, vol 12, 1999.
[16] J.  F.  Sowa.  “Semantic  networks”.  In  Shapiro,  S.C.(ed.) 
Encyclopedia  of  Artificial  Intelligence,  Wiley,  New  York, 
1987.
[17] J.  F.  Sowa.  “Conceptual  Graphs”.  In  van  Harmelen,  F., 
Lifschitz, V., & Porter, B. (eds) Handbook of Knowledge 
Representation, Elsevier, 2008, pp. 213-237.
[18] D. E. Shuklin. “The Structure of a Semantic Neural Network 
Realizing Morphological and Syntactic Analysis of a Text”. 
Journal Cybernetics and Systems Analysis, vol 37,5, 2001, 
pp.770-776.
[19] A.  B.  Geva  and  A.  Peled.  “Simulation  of  cognitive 
disturbances  by  a  dynamic  threshold  semantic  neural 
network”.  Journal  of  the  International  Neuropsychological 
Society, Vol 6(5), 2000, pp. 608 - 619.
[20] M.  Bowling,  J.  Furnkranz,  T.  Graepel,  and  R.  Musick. 
“Machine learning and games”. Machine Learning, vol 63, 
2006, pp. 211-215.
[21] R.  Houlette.  “Player  Modeling  for  Adaptive  Games”.  In 
Rabin,  S.  (ed.)  AI  Game  Programming  Wisdom  II. 
Massachusetts: Charles River Media, 2003, pp. 557-567.
[22] S. Mukkamala, D. Xu, and A. H. Sung. “Intrusion Detection 
Based  on  Behavior  Mining  and  Machine  Learning 
Techniques”. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer 
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2006, pp 619-628.
[23] Y.  H.  Kuo,  Y.  M.  Huang,  J.  N.  Chen,  and  Y.  L.  Jeng. 
“Extended  Real-Time  Learning  Behavior  Mining.”  In 
proceedings  of  Fifth  IEEE  International  Conference  on 
Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT'05), 2005, pp. 440-
441.
[24] P. Brusilovsky and C. Peylo. “Adaptive and intelligent Web-
based educational systems”. International Journal of Artificial 
Intelligence in Education. vol 13, 2-4, 2003, pp. 159-172.
[25] H.  Ketamo.  “Balancing  adaptive  content  with  agents: 
Modeling and reproducing group behavior as computational 
system”. In proceedings of 6th International Conference on 
Web Information Systems and Technologies, WEBIST 2010, 
7-10 April 2010, Valencia, Spain, vol 1, pp. 291-296.
[26] J.  Reye.  “Student  Modelling  based  on  Belief  Networks”. 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 
vol 14, 2004, pp. 63-96.
[27] K. M. Kim, J. H. Hong, and S. B. Cho. “A semantic Bayesian 
network approach to retrieving information with intelligent 
conversational  agents.”  Information  Processing  & 
Management, vol 43,1, 2007, pp. 225-236.
[28] P.  J.  F.  Lucas.  “Bayesian  network  modelling  through 
qualitative patterns”. Artificial Intelligence, Vol 163, 2, 2005, 
pp. 233-263.
[29] P. C. Garrido, G. M. Miraz, I. L. Ruiz, and M. A. Gomez-
Nieto. “Use of NFC-based Pervasive Games for Encouraging 
Learning  and  Student  Motivation”.  Near  Field 
Communication (NFC), 2011 3rd International Workshop on, 
IEEE 2011, pp. 32-37.
[30] A. Nandwani, P. Coulton, and R. Edwards. “NFC Mobile 
Parlor Games Enabling Direct Player to Player Interaction”. 
In proceedings of Near Field Communication (NFC), 2011 
3rd International Workshop on Near Field Communication, 22 
February 2011, Hagenberg, Austria, pp. 21-25.
[31] A. Koivisto, H. Ketamo, and E. Hammais. “Combining the 
Dimensions of Written and Digital Media in a NFC-based 
Non-linear Adventure Game for Children”. In proceedings of 
IFLA WLIC 2014. August 16-22 2014, Lyon, France. 
[32] O.  Rashid,  P.  Coulton,  R.  Edwards,  and  W.  Bamford. 
“Utilising  RFID  for  mixed  reality  mobile  games.”  In 
proceedings of Consumer Electronics, 2006. ICCE '06. 2006 
Digest  of  Technical  Papers.  International  Conference  on, 
IEEE 2006, pp. 459-460.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[33] I. Sánchez, M. Cortés, J. Riekki, and M. Oja. “NFC-based 
interactive  learning  environments  for  children”.  In 
Proceedings  of  the  10th  International  Conference  on 
Interaction Design and Children, IDC '11, June 20-23, 2011, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA, pp. 205-208.
[34] T. Vajk, P. Coulton, B. Bamford, and R. Edwards. “Using a 
Mobile Phone as a “Wii-like” Controller for Playing Games 
on  a  Large  Public  Display”.  International  Journal  of 
Computer  Games  Technology  Volume  2008,  Article  ID 
539078, 6 pages.
[35] G. Broll, R. Graebsch, P. Holleis, and M. Wagner. “Touch to 
play: mobile gaming with dynamic, NFC-based physical user 
interfaces”.  In  Proceedings  of  the  12th  international 
conference  on  Human  computer  interaction  with  mobile 
devices  and  services,  MobileHCI  '10,  September  2010, 
Lisboa, Portugal, . pp. 459-462.
[36] H.  Ketamo.  “Self-organizing  content  management  with 
semantic neural networks”. In Recent Advances in Neural 
Networks:  Proceedings  of  the  10th  WSEAS  International 
Conference  on  Neural  Networks  (NN’09),  Prague,  Czech 
Republic, 23-25.3. 2009, pp.63-69.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

