Designing a Math Game for Children Using a Participatory Design Experience
I. Rodriguez, A. Puig
Applied Mathematics and Analysis
University of Barcelona
Catalonia, Spain
inmarodriguez,annapuig@ub.edu
S. Grau
UScience Tech
University of Vic
Central University of Catalonia
sergi.grau@uvic.cat
M. Escayola
Escola del Mar
Barcelona
Catalonia, Spain
montserrat.escayola@gmail.com
Abstract—Today teachers have in their hands learning resources,
such as games, to engage primary school students in dry subjects.
Nevertheless, many of these games have a mechanic very similar
to in-class exercises, e.g., question -answer and match up images.
Then, children end up boring. In this research, we aim to design a
game for and by children. We present results of two Participatory
Design (PD) sessions performed with children of 6th grade of
Primary School to jointly design a game about fractions. The
experience has been very fruitful both for us and for children.
On one hand, they had an exciting experience as game designers,
enforced their learning about fractions, and contributed with
numerous and diverse ideas. On the other hand, we have co-
created a game with enthusiastic stakeholders. Additionally, this
research constitutes a further step in the study of methodologies
and techniques of participatory game design with children. As a
result of our experience we can say that participatory sessions
with children should be very dynamic, with well-differentiated
parts and using very different activities. We have used individual
brainstorming using post-its, brainstorming and discussion in
groups. We have also organised written activities, which seem
to be adequate, provided that children have templates to be
ﬁlled with ideas related to elements and mechanics of the game.
We observed they showed really concentrated in these writing
activities. Those parts of the participatory design that required
the use of computers were the most appealing for them. Moreover,
teachers and designers should pay attention and give children
positive reinforcement regularly in order to avoid distraction
during the PD sessions.
Keywords–Serious Games;Participatory Design;child-computer
Interaction.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Learn by doing is already here, we can ﬁnd a myriad
of learning resources, which aim to provide the learner with
more engaging and fruitful experiences, i.e., simulations and
games [1]. Nevertheless, if we ask students to play games, they
sometimes get bored and frustrated after some poor gameplay,
mainly because is difﬁcult to qualify them as ”real games” but
as mere interactive quizzes.
What if we allow students to actively participate in the
creation of these gaming experiences? [2][3] [4] After all,
children are ideal partners for co-design mainly because they
have grown with the technology and their game literacy can
undoubtedly trigger the generation of creative ideas during
the design process. Moreover, a psychologic study states that
children today are more imaginative than those decades before
[5].
Through participatory design, this research aims to bring
together the worlds of designers and children in an effort to
design more engaging and satisfactory games for learning.
In particular, we focus on a dry math subject, fractions,
which is difﬁcult to grasp by children, as stated after some
discussions with teachers of primary school of Escola del Mar
in Barcelona. We thanks them for their participation.
Participatory design approaches may follow either a germi-
nal method, where participants start the design from scratch,
or a transformational one, where the design team creates an
initial proposal to present to the users. In this research, we
have followed the transformational method, initially presenting
a basic rationale of the game concept to children and incre-
mentally introducing them four game design tasks: characters
and game settings, activities these characters may perform in
the game, metres inﬂuencing both characters and environment
state, and then translate learning goals into game mechanics
(i.e., challenges creation).
These design tasks have been scheduled in two participa-
tory sessions which have taken place in students’ classroom.
Participants of the study had already worked with fractions
a few months before. Therefore, some of them could be
considered ”experts” in the concept of fractions, favouring the
generation of well founded and quality ideas. The results of the
participatory design experience are fruitful both for us and for
children. From our point of view, we have a game designed
by and for children and have deﬁned a methodology to be
applied and reﬁned in future experiences. From the perspective
of children, they had a new experience as ”game designers”,
and they went again over fraction concept, achieving a better
grasp of their learning.
This paper is structured as follows. Section II presents
the state of the art. Section III describes the steps in the
participatory design. The discussion in Section IV provides
a high level analysis, which results from the participatory
experience. Finally, Section V concludes and gives some hints
about future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
Since its early introduction in the HCI ﬁeld, Participatory
Design (PD) has been a topic of study in the research of soft-
ware and hardware design [6] [7]. Concretely, child-computer
interaction has raised the attention to PD in the design of
serious games for children.
In the serious game literature, several works present meth-
ods, experiences and results when involving children in all the
stages of design process, with a variety of interesting results [3]
[4]. Games range from those focused on emotional intelligence
[8], collaborative storytelling [9], social skills [10], and social
inclusion of children with disabilities [11].
A common concern raised in these research studies is the
lack of children’s domain content familiarity and game design
literacy. Domain content familiarity depends on students back-
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

ground, and, if missing, it can be afforded either by previous
basic training or by selecting user groups who adapt well to
demands of PD sessions. Another key issue that is considered
of great importance is to tightly couple domain content to
game mechanics. In this research, we have focused on the
intrinsic metaphor as introduced by Fabricatore, where player’s
cognitive tasks are related to the learning objectives and are
relevant to achieve the goal of the game, thus being part of
the activities of the game [12]. Moreover, nowadays we ﬁnd a
lot of children with a high degree of ”game literacy”, which
although not being ”game design literacy”, can be enough
valuable if participatory sessions are adequately focused and
conducted.
Additionally, many of these works see the signiﬁcance of
the results centred in two aspects: the actual contribution of
participants to the design of the game, and a very valuable
domain experience gained by participants.
Related to PD methodologies, a recent research describes
two case studies of a game intended to teach primary school
students conﬂict resolution skills [2], each of them using
a different PD method. In the ﬁrst case study, they apply
well-known germinal (i.e., generating ideas from scratch) PD
methods, such as brainstorming and storyboarding, to support
the generation of children’ ideas in the early steps of game
design. In the second one, they follow a transformational
method (idea generation by modifying existing solutions) for
involving children in middle steps of serious game design.
Results on the former case study were not as positive as
expected, mainly because of the limited domain knowledge
of children. Nevertheless, children in the second case study
proposed manifold and useful ideas on game mechanics and
its relationships with the conﬂict resolution issue (learning
objective). As stated before, our research follows the trans-
formational method.
III.
STAGES ON THE DESIGN EXPERIENCE
We have followed the three basic stages of participatory
design [13]: the initial exploration, the discovery process and
the prototyping. The ﬁrst stage, to know and learn from
stakeholders (teachers and children), and second and third
stages to elicit narratives and mechanics for the game from
students, and create a lo-ﬁ prototype of the game, respectively.
Nevertheless, as will be introduced in the description of PD
session 2, we did not arrive to deﬁne the prototype of the
entire game, but fractions challenges which will form part of
a gymkhana in the ﬁrst game level.
A. Initial Exploration
We started this research work with some meetings with
teachers in the school Escola del Mar in the city of Barcelona
(Spain). They expressed us their concern about the difﬁculty on
engaging students in speciﬁc math concepts. Particularly, they
currently struggle on teaching the basic concept of fractions
using physical objects like cords and wooden sticks, [14] and
they would like to use other technical media, such as computer
games. Nevertheless, available games do not fulﬁl teachers’
expectations, mainly because they usually are really similar
to those exercises performed in the blackboard, not favouring
students’ engagement.
We used existing fraction games to gather data (opinions,
desires and feelings) from children. We met children in school
labs and applied conventional contextual inquiry methods for
user and task analysis, i.e., questionnaire, observation and
interview.
The participants were 6 children of primary school, with
ages between 10 and 12 years. Some of them had studied
fractions in the previous academic year, and others had just
learned the concept and basic operations with fractions.
The design team consisted of one moderator and one
note taker. The study was performed individually for each
student. The moderator welcomed and thanked each child for
participating in the study, explained the goal of the session
and what we wanted him/her to do. He also explained that the
study was not an exam, but a way of getting his/her opinions
and feeling about the games.
The protocol of the session consisted in three main steps:
pre-gaming questionnaire, playing games, post-gaming ques-
tionnaire and short interview. In the playing game step, mean-
while the child was interacting with the game, the observer
took notes. We encouraged them to think aloud. Although
not all of them were able to do it, those who expressed their
feelings while playing, did it pretty well.
In the pre-gaming questionnaire, we asked children general
questions about their habits and likes about games: how fre-
quently they play computer games, how many hours per week,
what kind of games they like more (RPG, adventure, sport,
others), how they get more fun in games (overcoming either
their record or friends’ scoring, living adventures, achieving
levels), their preferences on play mode, either individually or
multi-user. The post-gaming questionnaire included questions
directly related to just played games. We asked which game
they preferred and why, which one they did not like and if they
thought that playing these games they would learn more about
fractions. We also asked them to score the played games.
We selected four fractions games, which are representative
of those we can ﬁnd in the market. They differ in the metaphor,
setting, story, graphics and sounds. Nevertheless, all of them
share a common mechanics consisting of either questions or
fractions matching.
We gave the children the following games (see Figure 1)
about fractions: pipo club [15], fraction booster [16], Melvin’s
make a match [17] and Problem solving [18]. All these games
work around fractions’ basic concept and equivalent fractions.
The ﬁrst game, pipo club, shows an image of the sky
with three airplane parkings. The child is the pilot of the
plane which must answer a question about fractions, if done
correctly, he/she parks the plane in the parking, if not, the plane
crashes. The second game displays a pizza and the player has
to answer questions related to pizza portions. It has 5 different
levels, and each level has several sublevels. The theme of the
third game is witches and magic potions. There is an image
of a shelf with bottles displaying fractions or ﬁgures with
shaded parts. The player selects pairs of bottles/ﬁgures that
represent the same fraction (equivalent fractions). In the scale
displayed below, he/she can see if they match correctly. Finally,
the fourth game displays a platform with a walking lizard, it
stops when there is a gap. The gap is a measure (1m , 1/2
meter, etc. ) and the lizard can pass through the gap only if
the player correctly placed boards. These boards have different
sizes and colors, depending on the fraction that they mark.
Later, we analysed the data collected during the contextual
inquiry. Pre-gaming questionnaire showed that all participants
play games between 2 and 5 hours per week, and they prefer
adventure and role play games. When the question was related
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

to single-user versus multiuser, the majority of them prefer
multi-user games, due to the competitive aspect of existing
games.
After analysing the post-game questionnaire and observer
notes, taken meanwhile children played the 4 fraction games,
we draw on the following conclusions. Children like games
with sounds or messages that encourage them to make further
progress in the game, a fact corroborated by Reeves and Naas
who found that computers that ﬂatter and praise users in
education software programs produce positive impact on them
[19]. Children also like to have a guide or a clear indication
of the target, if not they feel lost and lack interest in the game.
Additionally, they do not want to answer all the time similar
questions with similar format. At the time of playing they
wanted to go changing between different screens, having new
characters and new challenges about fractions. Some players,
those who had just learned about fractions, wanted puzzles
enough simple to be able to solve, but not extremely easy, some
of them said ”that’s so easy...”. When children were asked
about if they got fun with the game, most of them answered
”well .. not much”.
The games better scored were Problem Solving (lizard)
y Make-a-Match (magic portions) because students got more
fun with them and seem to be less repetitive and less boring
than others. Anyway, none of the games completely fulﬁlled
children’ expectative as they wanted to be immersed in a really
fun experience and not in a serie of questions-answers similar
to the exercices performed in the blackboard.
B. The Discovery process
In this stage, we worked with children to jointly design
the fractions serious game. As game target audience is 9 to 12
years old kids, we selected a focus group of students with an
intermediate level of fractions (sixth grade, with ages 10-11),
rather than students of a higher grade that could add difﬁculty
to game activities designed along PD sessions.
This stage was organised in two participatory sessions,
which consisted of 25 children, the class teacher, three de-
signers and an assistant. One of the designers actuated as
moderator, introducing and explaining sessions’ objectives and
activities to be performed along the sessions. Session 1 was
2.5 hours long and session 2 lasted for 3.5 hours.
1) Participatory session 1: game conception: As previ-
ously mentioned, we have followed the transformational ap-
proach of participatory design. First, we introduced children
the initial game concept - genre, goal, main characters, and
scenario. Then, we elicited children ideas to incrementally add
new elements to the game.
The group of 25 children was divided in 5 teams of 5
students, mixed in genre. The composition of each team was
facilitated by the class teacher. Each team had a leader who
had the role of team’ spokesperson.
We presented children the initial game concept with slides
(see Figure 2). ’The game scenario is a remote island in the
middle of nowhere. Two shipwrecked players have to survive
by eating, drinking, ﬁghting and discovering stuffs in the
island. Some of these actions have to be based on mathematical
challenges related to fractions. For instance, players have to
cut a part of wooden boards to build a bridge over a river that
blocks the road. Game goal is to get away from the desert
island.
We divided the session in three main parts. First, we asked
Fractions Game
Snapshot
Scoring
(0-10)
PipoClub
7
Fraction Booster
7
Melvin
9
Problem Solving
9
Figure 1. Games used in contextual inquiry
them to propose objects and NPCs which may live in the
island. In the second part, we asked children to think about
how to escape from the island and to propose fraction-solving
activities in the game. In the ﬁnal part, we discussed and
reviewed together emerged ideas, and we tried to obtain an
initial consensus about game dynamics.
In the ﬁrst part, we asked children three open questions:
1)
”What kind of things do you want to ﬁnd in the
island?”. In this case, we encouraged kids to propose
stuffs that are normally in an island, but also con-
tribute with fun and original objects of other contexts.
2)
”Which characters do you want to meet in the is-
land?”. We also encourage them to be originals.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Figure 2. The proposed scenario: An island in the middle of nowhere and
the two shipwrecked players.
Figure 3. The set of the stickers obtained from the questions about the game
conﬁguration.
3)
”If you were not a shipwrecked kid, who would you
like to be?”. With this question, we wanted to know
the character that children would like to be.
To gather children’ answers to these questions we used
the Nominal Group Technique (NGT) which is a group
brainstorming technique to gather ideas but want everyone’s
opinions taken into account [20]. In this context, ’Nominal
Group’ means that people are nominally in a group but mostly
work on their own. To do so, we distributed sticky notes and
pens to each member of the teams [21]. Each team member
wrote down the response individually on the sticky notes,
promoting the participation of all team members, even shy
kids. We ﬁxed that it should be one idea per sticky note.
Nevertheless, we did not ﬁxed the ideas on a set of predeﬁned
categories, encouraging kids to be free to express their ideas.
At this point, the class teacher, the three co-design experts
and the design assistant acted as facilitators to help children
to express their ideas.
The leader of each team collected sticky notes and ﬁltered
repeated answers. Then, he/she arranged them in a vertical
cork surface (see Figure 3). A co-design expert grouped notes
with similar categories and explained aloud generated ideas.
We used the color-code sticky notes as team group identiﬁer
to easily visualize groups’ preferences.
As a result of this ﬁrst part of the session, we obtained a
huge shower of ideas for the game concept. Surprisingly, some
groupings of categories naturally emerged, such as vehicles,
electronic devices, magical objects, sportsmen, famous people
etc. Different scenarios were proposed as answers to the ﬁrst
question (ice-playground, soccer stadium, etc.), and a huge
amount of characters were suggested in the second question
(music players, sportsmen, fairies, animals, etc.). This large
amount of ideas suggests us to integrate them in different levels
of the game and therefore allow a variety of game scenarios.
Again, in the third question about the player appeareance,
kids’ imagination was really far from our expectations. They
proposed characters such as sailors, dancers, multimillionaires,
pirates, actress, roller-bladder, fairies, survival experts, etc. As
conclusion, our game design should include multiple conﬁg-
urations and mods to expand the game with new levels and
characters.
In the second part of the session, we used brainstorming
in teams of 2 students to gather design ideas about player’s
interactions in the game, such as how to get away from the
island, how to survive, how to obtain things or how to solve a
puzzle. As co-design experts, we gave to kids special scaffolds
and resources to answer these questions. We gave children
“templates for a design task” (i.e., a ﬁll in the gap sentences)
that allowed them to express their ideas while writting in
“gaps”. This material was used in another context, to facilitate
teachers the design of reading tasks [22]. For instance, we
encouraged them to ﬁll the gaps in sentences such as ”If
you are a ....... and you want to get away from the island
doing ......., you have to .................... in order to get ..............”.
Moreover, the proposed challenges had to be related to the
fraction concept. The class teacher was especially important
at that point to help children validate their ideas related to the
fraction concept. Initially, we planned to use digital tablets to
help kids to propose their ideas. However, in the live session
we used paper-drawings and written activities to enhance and
facilitate informal and quick interactions.
Finally, in the last part of the session the entire group
shared the proposals elaborated during the brainstorming and
pushed the most popular ideas under vote.
From the second and the third parts we obtained some
consensus about the main game dynamics. The most preferred
idea to escape the island was that both players had to construct
together an engine or a ship to get away from the island.
In order to obtain the pieces of the engine, players had to
follow a Gymkhana through some middle challenges related
to fractions (e.g., a fraction of gas is needed to get out the
island, use a fraction of a rope to avoid to be killed by a
carnivorous plant). Additionally, students suggested that good
results could be awarded by obtaining short-cuts in the roads.
Children also proposed to play some challenges competitively
and some challenges in collaborative mode with the second
player.
2) Participatory session 2: challenges design and lo-ﬁ
prototype: The main goal of this second session was to work
with children to deﬁne the fractions’ challenges that the players
have to complete to achieve the goal of escaping the island.
At the beginning of the session, the moderator recapped
last session. Then, she presented a video of the intro to the
game. The video showed the two players, and two mysterious
boxes, arriving to the island after a sinking. Each box contained
some tools and appareils that could be useful for the players to
survive and leave the island. These tools were some of those
proposed by children in the ﬁrst participatory design session,
i.e., knife, iPad, pieces of wood, and rope. As seen in Figure
4 boxes’ content formed part of game HUD, which is player’s
inventory. Note that in addition to tools, the HUD includes
fractions (1/2, 3/4, 4/5) which are used to cut some proportion
of rope, wood, or any other resource encountered or collected
along the game.
After the video, the moderator explained the rules and
dynamics of the game. The goal of the game is to escape
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Figure 4. The proposed game HUD and the six proposed challenges.
the island. Then, when players pass each level of the game,
they achieve a piece of the boat needed to go back home.
During their initial stay in the island (ﬁrst game level) they will
participate in a gymkhana. Therefore, they have to overcome
several challenges in order to arrive to a ’magic’ cave. Once
in the cave, they have to solve a ﬁnal enigma (big boss) that
conducts them to the next level of the game. To complete the
challenges the player has to use resources in her inventory.
Initially, each player has 5 lives which loses when she fails
fraction challenges.
The participatory design session continued with a proposal
of six challenges (see Figure 4) children had to select to work
on:
1)
The bridge challenge.
2)
The oasis challenge.
3)
The carnivorous plant challenge.
4)
The trap challenge.
5)
The treasure challenge.
6)
The cave challenge.
At this point, the class was divided in 12 teams of 2
children. Each team selected one of the six challenges. Nev-
ertheless, nobody selected the bridge challenge. Instead, they
proposed a new one related to a wall.
Afterwards, and to deﬁne a challenge, they should ﬁll an
empty template with questions that should be answered by the
children. In the following, we show in caps, questions children
should answer. In other words, this template should capture the
design of the challenge.
•
SCENARIO DESCRIPTION: PART OF THE SCENARIO
WHERE PLAYERS ARE SITUATED, OBJECTS IN THE
SCENARIO, TOOLS IN THE INVENTORY, AND OTHERS
TOOLS THEY COULD NEED TO PERFORM THE CHAL-
LENGE.
•
WHAT’S THE CHALLENGE?
•
HOW CAN THE PLAYER COMPLETE THE CHALLENGE
USING FRACTIONS?
◦
WHICH
ACTIONS
SHOULD
PERFORM
THE
PLAYERS?
◦
WHICH OBJECTS DO THE PLAYER NEED? EI-
THER FROM THE INVENTORY OR THE SCE-
NARIO.
◦
HOW
PLAYERS
COULD
COLLABORATE
IN
THIS CHALLENGE?
•
WHAT HAPPENS WHETHER:
◦
THE PLAYERS COMPLETE THE CHALLENGE.
THAT MEANS, WHAT HAPPENS IN THE SCE-
NARIO
AND
HOW
IT
MODIFIES
PLAYERS’
STATE AND INVENTORY.
◦
THE PLAYERS DO NOT COMPLETE THE CHAL-
LENGE BECAUSE:
THEY EITHER FAILED COMPLETELY.
THEY
FAIL
PARTIALLY
AND
HAS
NO
TOOL TO CUTS FRACTIONS OF HERBS
PROPERLY.
In the following we show the example (ﬁlled) template
which we gave to them, ’The roads challenge’. Again, in caps,
the questions children should answer and, in italic, examples
responses.
•
SCENARIO DESCRIPTION: PART OF THE SCENARIO
WHERE PLAYERS ARE SITUATED, OBJECTS IN THE
SCENARIO, TOOLS IN THE INVENTORY, AND OTHERS
TOOLS THEY COULD NEED TO PERFORM THE CHAL-
LENGE.
The players are in front of several roads. Some roads
are closed for herbs/ﬂowers. There is an open path
that leads to the river, the player can not cross the
river because there is no bridge. On the other side of
closed roads, there are dangerous animals (bears and
monkeys), rope and wood. The player has knives in
her inventory of different sizes (fractions) that can be
used for cutting vegetation.
•
WHAT IS THE CHALLENGE?
Open the roads
•
HOW CAN THE PLAYER COMPLETE THE CHALLENGE
USING FRACTIONS?
◦
WHICH
ACTIONS
SHOULD
PERFORM
THE
PLAYERS?
Cutting the fraction of herbs that close the
roads that leads to some ropes and woods.
◦
WHICH OBJECTS DO THE PLAYER NEED? EI-
THER FROM THE INVENTORY OR THE SCE-
NARIO.
Knife, with the adequate size, e.g., 2/3
◦
How players could collaborate in this chal-
lenge?
The player, who has the knife with the adequate
measure, cuts the herbs.
•
WHAT HAPPENS WHETHER:
◦
THE PLAYERS COMPLETE THE CHALLENGE.
THAT MEANS, WHAT HAPPENS IN THE SCE-
NARIO
AND
HOW
IT
MODIFIES
PLAYERS’
STATE AND INVENTORY.
Both roads open and players can arrive to the
roads and woods, which are added to their
inventories. These materials may be useful in
the next challenge, to build the bridge.
◦
The players do not complete the challenge
because:
THEY EITHER FAILED COMPLETELY.
The bear, situated behind the herbs, eats
both players.
THEY
FAIL
PARTIALLY
AND
HAS
NO
TOOL TO CUTS FRACTIONS OF HERBS
PROPERLY. Players fail consciously to die,
lose one live and start again.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Figure 5. The basic material delivered to kids in a power point presentation.
Figure 6. Children working in couples to create the challenges’ comicboards.
Children had 30 minutes to discuss in group the deﬁnition
of the challenge they had selected. Once they ﬁlled the chal-
lenge description, they had to visually describe their proposal
and so produce a lo-ﬁ prototype of the design. They used a
powerpoint document to compose the scenario using different
images. We provided children with a set of images that could
use (See Figure 5), but they were also free to search for other
images in the Internet.
This strategy is based on the Comicboarding technique,
that is a variation of storyboarding intended for children that
has been used to brainstorm with children aged 6 to 13.
Comicboarding can be used early in the design process to
depict user interactions and to capture user scenarios, cases,
and tasks [23]. Figure 6 shows teams of children working in a
Comicboard. The three co-design experts, the design assistant
and the teacher helped the students in the process of ﬁnding
the needed images that better expressed their ideas.
Figure 7 shows one of the challenges designed by a team
of two children. The top-left of the ﬁgure shows the start of
the challenge, the top-right the proposed fraction’s challenge
to be solved, the bottom-left what happens when the player
hits the fence, and the bottom-right what happens when the
player fails the challenge. Speciﬁcally, the description of one
of the challenges designed by children was: ’Our challenge is
to obtain the 8 keys to open the treasure’s chest and overcome
the enigma. There is a treasure’s chest in front of you, but
you can not open it. There are 8 keys to open the chest. The
players need to ﬁnd the 8 keys inside the forest to be able
to open the treasure. Each key is located in a tree. When the
chest is opened by the 8 keys, a fairy will appear from the
chest and it will ask the next enigma to the players: Which
fraction of the trees in the forest have you visited to obtain the
keys? The players have to answer correctly to open the door
of the cave (the next challenge).’
Figure 7. Children design.
In the template card, the children had to explain also what
happens when the players perform different actions. In the
same example, the children explained the following cases: ’In
the case the players do not answer correctly the fairy’s enigma,
the fence will be opened, then the bear will attack them, and
they will lose 1 life each of them’, ’In order to obtain the
8 keys, the players need to collaborate using their different
inventory, the players can not obtain the 8 keys alone’, ’In the
case they can not obtain the 8 keys, they are able to skip the
current challenge to return to the island, but losing the keys
they have collected’. Figure 7 shows an example result of the
visual description of this challenge proposed by children.
This session was initially designed to be done in 1.5 hours,
but the children were so motivated, and they wanted to work
one more hour on their designs. Finally, the entire session
was 3.5 hours long. The results of this session were two
different descriptions for each of the six challenges. Each team
explained their proposal to the rest of the class, and the best
two challenges were awarded. The selection of the bests ones
were made by a voting of the children. Some of the ideas
obtained after this session were used to deﬁne the game design
document.
Although children were rather motivated during all the
session, but they were even more engaged during the creation
of comicboards using the computer and searching for images
in the web. Undoubtedly, computers are a tool they love to use,
either for playing games or for helping in design of the game.
Furthermore, they improved transversal competences such as
their powerpoint skills, e.g insert images, cut & paste, etc.
IV.
RESULTS ANALYSIS
This section provides a high level analysis of relevant issues
raised during our Participatory Design (PD) experience. This
analysis aims to provide foundations and useful knowledge for
other researchers who will engage with children in future PD
experiences.
An important factor related to PD planning is the proper
scheduling of sessions. From our experience we have learned
that sessions should be scheduled within close time periods.
Otherwise, it is needed a considerable part of the session time
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Small group 
brainstorming 
GAME CONCEPTION
Nominal group
 
CHALLENGES 
DESIGN
Whole group 
brainstorming 
Small group 
design activity
Childs high 
involvement
Childs very  high 
involvement
Figure 8. Childs’ involvement in different phases of PD
to refresh childs’ memory, and they have a harder time to put
their minds in the game design endeavour.
Regarding kids’ involvement, they pay more attention and
are more committed and motivated in whole group brainstorm-
ing activities. However, we think that it is important to deﬁne
individual activities such as nominal groups. These activities
place them in context and foster an initial involvement in the
design activity. Figure 8 shows kids’ engagement in different
activities performed during game conception and challenges
design.
When it comes to facilitate children participation, both co-
designers and teachers can help them to express their ideas, and
material and examples are also essential to guide them in the
design task. Therefore, the group of co-designers and teachers
should be capable to assist all the children. We recommend
at least 4 co-designers and 1 teacher for a class of 25 pupils.
Additionally, when designing a participatory session with a
classroom of primary school children, it should be taken into
account that they need breaks and their level of attention
is short. If the activity is not well deﬁned and constrained,
they may become bored, upset and a large variety of ideas
may overcome the design. Designers should pay attention to
give positive reinforcement at regular intervals to encourage
children to continue in their work. However, once they are
engaged in the problem, they may be rather creative and
ﬂexible about others’ ideas.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have presented a participatory design
experience to create a game by and for children. Particularly,
this game focuses on the math concept of fractions.
We, designers, have attempted to empower children de-
cisions about the fractions game they would like to play.
Children role can be as a design-partner (early steps of the
design’s conception), as evaluator (with early prototypes), and
as user (with the ﬁnal game). We have focused in the ﬁrst
role, and aimed to exploit the collective creativity of students
during the steps of game conception and challenges creation.
The outcomes of this research are twofold. First, the design
experience constitutes a further step in the understanding and
study of methodologies of participatory game design. Second,
design ideas and challenges resulting from the PD sessions
have been used to develop a ﬁrst prototype (link to video in
youtube).
As future work, we will consider a full conceptual map
of fractions that children have to learn in primary school in
order to consider a complete set of fractions’ challenges in
the game. We are also interested in providing teachers and
parents with real-time monitoring of students’ interactions and
learning progress within the game.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Research work funded by SGR-623-2014 and TIN2012-
38876-C02-02.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Aldrich, The complete guide to Simulations & Serious Games,
Pleiffer, Ed., 2009.
[2]
R. Khaled and A. Vasalou, “Bridging serious games and participatory
design,” International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction, vol. 2,
no.
2,
2014,
pp.
93
–
100,
special
Issue:
Learning
from
Failures
in
Game
Design
for
Children.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212868914000063
[3]
M. Horton, J. C. Read, E. Mazzone, G. Sim, and D. Fitton,
“School
friendly
participatory
research
activities
with
children.”
in
CHI
Extended
Abstracts,
J.
A.
Konstan,
E.
H.
Chi,
and
K. Hook, Eds.
ACM, 2012, pp. 2099–2104. [Online]. Available:
http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/chi/chi2012a.html#HortonRMSF12
[4]
A. Druin, “The role of children in the design of new technology,”
Behaviour and Information Technology, vol. 21, 2002, pp. 1–25.
[5]
S. W. Russ and J. A. Dillon, “Changes in children’s pretend play over
two decades,” Creativity Research Journal, vol. 23, no. 4, 2011, pp. 330
– 338.
[6]
D. Schuler and A. Namioka, Eds., Participatory Design: Principles and
Practices.
Hillsdale, NJ, USA: L. Erlbaum Associates Inc., 1993.
[7]
M. J. Muller, The Human-computer Interaction Handbook.
Hillsdale,
NJ, USA: L. Erlbaum Associates Inc., 2003. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=772072.772138
[8]
E. Mazzone, J. C. Read, and R. Beale, “Design with and for
disaffected teenagers,” in Proceedings of the 5th Nordic Conference
on Human-computer Interaction: Building Bridges, ser. NordiCHI ’08.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp. 290–297. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1463160.1463192
[9]
G.
Taxen,
A.
Druin,
C.
Fast,
and
M.
Kjellin,
“Kidstory:
a
technology
design
partnership
with
children.”
Behaviour
&
IT,
vol. 20, no. 2, 2001, pp. 119–125. [Online]. Available: http://dblp.uni-
trier.de/db/journals/behaviourIT/behaviourIT20.html#TaxenDFK01
[10]
J. L. Tan, D. H. Goh, R. P. Ang, and V. S. Huan, “Child-centered
interaction in the design of a game for social skills intervention,”
Computers in Entertainment, vol. 9, 2011.
[11]
B. Brederode, P. Markopoulos, M. Gielen, A. Vermeeren, and
H. de Ridder, “powerball: The design of a novel mixed-reality
game for children with mixed abilities,” in Proceedings of the
2005 Conference on Interaction Design and Children, ser. IDC ’05.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pp. 32–39. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1109540.1109545
[12]
“Learning and videogames: an unexploited synergy,” 2000, URL:
http://www.learndev.org/dl/FabricatoreAECT2000.pdf
[retrieved:
September, 2015].
[13]
E. B.-N. Sanders, E. Brandt, and T. Binder, “A framework for
organizing the tools and techniques of participatory design,” in
Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference, ser.
PDC ’10.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 195–198. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1900441.1900476
[14]
M. Canals, Fracciones. Los dossiers de Maria Antonia Canals.
Ed.
Octaedro, ISBN: 978-8492748068, 2009.
[15]
“PipoClub game,” 2015, URL: http:/www.pipoclub.comjuegos-para-
ninos-gratisjuego-fracciones.html [retrieved: September, 2015].
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[16]
“FractionBooster
game,”
2015,
URL:
http:/www.maths-
games.orgfraction-games.html [retrieved: September, 2015].
[17]
“Melvins
game,”
2015,
URL:
http:/pbskids.org/cyberchase/math-
games/melvins-make-match/ [retrieved: September, 2015].
[18]
“ProblemSolving,” 2015, URL: http:/www.mathplayground.com [re-
trieved: September, 2015].
[19]
B. Reeves and C. Nass, The Media Equation: How People Treat
Computers, Television, and New Media Like Real People and Places.
New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
[20]
D. Marvin, J. Campbell, and K. Jaastad, “The effect of group participa-
tion on brainstorming effectiveness for two industrial samples,” Journal
of Applied Psychology, vol. 47, no. 2, 2001, pp. 30–37.
[21]
J. A. Fails, M. L. Guha, and A. Druin, Methods and Techniques for
Involving Children in the Design of New Technology for Children.
Hanover, MA, USA: Now Publishers Inc., 2013.
[22]
V. Phillips and C. Wong, “Teaching to the common core by design, not
accident,” Kappan. Education week, vol. 93, no. 2, 2012, pp. 31–37.
[23]
S. Wahid, D. S. McCrickard, J. DeGol, N. Elias, and S. Harrison, “Don’t
drop it!: Pick it up and storyboard,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’11.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 1571–1580.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

