Quantifying the Quality of Business Models 
A State of the Practice 
 
 
Christina Di Valentin, Dirk Werth, Peter Loos 
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence  
Saarbruecken, Germany 
{Christina.Di_Valentin | Dirk.Werth | Peter.Loos}@dfki.de 
Tobias Weiblen 
SAP Research 
St. Gallen, Switzerland 
tobias.weiblen@sap.com  
 
Anton Pussep 
TU Darmstadt 
Darmstadt, Germany 
pussep@is.tu-darmstadt.de 
 
Abstract – Companies increasingly show that the choice of the 
right business model is a crucial success factor. In particular, 
the software industry is characterized by a high degree of 
dynamics within their business activities. To stay competitive 
in a continuously changing business environment, companies 
must be able to adapt their business models to external or 
internal influencing factors. Business models are often seen as 
a mediator between a company’s strategy and its business 
processes. Hence, this paper has a strong focus on the existing 
dependencies between business models and business processes. 
To gain insight on how companies currently measure the 
quality of their business models, several expert interviews have 
been carried out. To obtain significant results, the expert 
interviews have been carried out within one specific industry 
branch, namely, the software industry. The interviews have 
shown that, in practice, so far, there does not exist a 
standardized framework to measure relevant key performance 
indicators (KPIs) from business processes to determine the 
existing interrelations between business models and business 
processes. 
Keywords 
– 
Business 
models; 
business 
processes, 
adaptability; performance measurment; software industry 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The last decade has shown that the concept of business 
models has proven to be an increasingly important factor in 
literature, as well as in practice. Especially, companies in fast 
evolving sectors such as the software industry, demonstrate 
that business models form the basis for most innovations 
these days [1]. IBM’s Global CEO study has shown that 
CEO’s are increasingly forced to adapt their business models 
to dynamic factors to stay competitive within the 
continuously changing business environment [2]. Hence, 
companies must be flexible enough to adapt their business 
models to external and internal influencing factors [3]. So 
far, research on business models has a strong focus on static 
aspects, not adequately taking into account the huge amount 
of dynamic factors that continuously affect a company’s 
business model [4][5].  
Due to the lack of existing theory in the area of interest, 
this paper follows a design-oriented approach [6]. Several 
semi-structured interviews with experts from the software 
industry and different areas of expertise have been carried 
out. Based on these results, shortcomings of business model 
management in practice are identified and collected as 
requirements for deriving a framework to obtain feedback 
from business processes with the goal to adapt the current 
business model. Hence, this paper has a strong focus on the 
“bottom-up perspective” (feedback loop from business 
process level back to the business model level), providing 
practitioners an overview of relevant KPIs that serve as 
feedback parameters for business model adaptations.  
The outline of the document is as follows. First, an 
overview of business models and business processes and 
their interrelations is given in Section 2. Section 3 explains 
the methodology and the results of the interviews carried out 
to gain insights in the transformative influence of business 
processes on business models. Section 4 summarizes the 
main results and gives an outlook on future research. 
II. 
LITERATURE ANALYSIS ON BUSINESS MODELS AND 
BUSINESS PROCESSES – A STATE OF THE ART 
A. Business Models 
There is a large number of definitions for the term 
“business model” found in literature (e.g., [4][7–11]). Al-
Debei et al. define a business model as “an abstract 
representation of an organization, be it conceptual, textual, 
and / or graphical, of all core interrelated architectural, co-
operational, and financial arrangements designed and 
developed by an organization presently and in the future, as 
well as all core products and / or services the organization 
offers, or will offer, based on these arrangements that are 
needed to achieve its strategic goals and objectives” [12]. 
Hence, business models serve for understanding a 
company’s business logic by containing a set of concepts and 
objects which are described by their relationship amongst 
each other [13][14]. Business models are used as 
management tool as they support the planning and the design 
of innovative business concepts to demonstrate a company’s 
future orientations [15]. Furthermore, business models are 
also used in the field of requirements engineering e.g., for 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

choosing needed information and communication technology 
to implement a company’s current business model into 
practice [16].  
The business model concept has already been addressed 
in literature in 1957 by Bellmann et al. [17] as well as in the 
1960s by Jones [18]. Since the internet boom in the late 
1990s however, the business model concept gains 
importance ever since [1].  
In this paper, the consideration of dynamic factors plays 
an important role. For this reason, existing interrelations 
between a company’s business model and its underlying 
business processes have to be taken into consideration in 
order to learn from business processes. The following sub-
section gives an overview on the basic aspects about 
business processes. 
B. Business Processes and the Software Value Chain  
As already shown in the previous sub-section, business 
models provide a view on aspects about value creation 
within the enterprise [13]. In contrast to business models, 
business processes represent a chain of logically related 
activities that have to be carried out within a certain order 
[19]. Thereby, the consideration of organizational aspects 
also plays a significant role [20]. Another definition 
describes business processes as several activities that provide 
a company’s customers a certain value in form of an output 
by requiring several input factors [21].  
To be able to measure the quality of a company’s 
business model based on its underlying business processes 
and value chains, relevant KPIs have to be derived first. To 
define industry-specific KPIs, we have a strong focus on one 
distinct industry branch, named software industry. Figure 1 
depicts the value chain of the software industry which has 
been derived by several empirical and literature studies [22]. 
 
Research
Development
Maintenace
Production
Marketing
Replace-
ment
Implementation
Education 
Support
Operations
 
Figure 1.  Value Chain of the Software Industry [23] 
Software value chain activities serve for the identification 
of changes within the business processes of a software 
producing company that are caused by modifications on the 
underlying business model. A certain number of business 
processes is assigned to each activity in the value chain 
activity diagram. This means several related business 
processes are merged within one single value chain activity. 
If certain business processes are modified by external or 
internal influencing factors, these changes have a significant 
influence on the corresponding value chain activity. In the 
following, the above mentioned value chain activities will be 
described:  
 
Research: The conceptualization of a first vision of a 
product, fundamental research and first feasibility 
studies [24].  
 
Development: The core activities of a software 
producing company (e.g., requirement analysis, 
software design, software development, technical 
documentation, verification and validation). It refers 
to the process of software development. 
 
Maintenance: The continuous supervision of all 
required production facilities. Thus, “Maintenance” 
is responsible for the quality of the manufactured 
software products.  
 
Production: Encompasses product composition, 
production and packaging. This activity is mainly 
characterized by a physical reference. 
 
Marketing: This software value chain activity is 
„associated with providing a means by which buyers 
can purchase the product and inducing them to do 
so, such as advertising, promotion, sales force, 
quoting, channel selection, channel relations, and 
pricing [25].“ 
 
Replacement: This activity includes the decision 
whether an existing system will be replaced by an 
alternative system [26].  
 
Implementation: 
Encompasses 
the 
installation, 
configuration and adaptation of a specific software 
product [24]  
 
Education: The user’s instruction and explanation of 
the developed product. Within Support error 
corrections and improvements of the software 
product as part of the waterfall model are carried out 
[24][26].  
 
Operations: Comprise the monitoring within the 
accomplishment of specific software product by an 
information system [24][27]. To avoid damages 
caused by data loss, backups have to be carried out 
and releases have to be continuously actualized.  
The following section gives an overview about the 
existing relationships and dependencies between business 
model layer and the level of business processes, 
encompassing the presented value chain. 
C. Interdependencies between business models and 
business processes 
Business Models are often described as a mediator 
between a company’s strategy and its business processes 
[28]. These interrelations are depicted in Figure 2 and form 
the basis for the conduction of the expert interviews that are 
presented in the following section: 
 
Strategy
Business Model Layer
Strategy
Business Processes / Value Chains
Performance
Dashboard
 
Figure 2.  Intedependencies between strategy, business models and 
business processes [3] 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Especially the connection between a company’s strategy 
and its business processes shows that business model 
analysis should not only be conducted top-down but also 
bottom-up, beginning from business process level. The main 
focus of this paper is in analyzing the interrelations between 
business models and the layer of business processes. 
Therefore, relevant KPIs for each value chain activity are 
needed, which serve as feedback parameter for the 
underlying business model. This means, a continuous 
feedback loop arises which is essential for business model 
adaptability. Hence, business models gain flexibility which is 
needed for the adaptation to influencing factors (e.g., market 
developments or changing prices). 
III. 
CONDUCTION OF THE INTERVIEWS 
In this section, the conduction of the interviews with 
experts from the software industry is described. First, the 
scientific goal of the expert interviews is described, followed 
by an explanation of the results and implications for business 
model research.  
A. Methodology 
As already shown in the previous sections, existing 
interdependencies between business models and business 
processes are a so far an understudied area of high practical 
relevance [3]. The bottom-up perspective has not been 
analyzed in literature and practice so far. Hence, to gain 
insights in how companies shape and implement this 
feedback mechanism in practice, an empirical study within 
the software industry has been conducted. We employ an 
explorative study design that follows the ideas of grounded 
theory [29]. This inductive approach “means to start with 
individual cases, incidents or experiences and develop 
progressively more abstract conceptual categories to 
synthesize, to explain and to understand [the] data and to 
identify patterned relationships within it.” [30]  
The data for the study was collected in semi-open 
interviews with experts from different software companies 
and areas of expertise. In total, 13 interviews of 30 to 90 
minutes length each have been conducted. Interviewees were 
selected based on two guiding principles. First, the overall 
composition of companies in the sample should be as broad 
as possible – both in terms of company size and field of 
business. This principle aimed at ensuring generalizability of 
the results for the entire software industry. Second, the 
experts contacted should have deep insights into the area of 
interest in order to be able to structure the concrete field of 
action logically and precisely. Consequently, we identified 
interviewees whose daily business is located between 
management and reporting, at the border between operations 
and strategy. Following the second principle also entailed a 
specialization of knowledge: most interviewees surveyed for 
the empirical study were experts covering a small part of the 
value chain only. 
B. KPI Usage in Software Enterprises 
The most diverse perceptions about the constitutional 
definition and evaluation of software specific KPIs are 
present in the companies surveyed. Even within bigger 
enterprises, there is a discrepancy in KPI usage depending on 
the respective value chain activity.  
Many interviewees have significant problems in 
connecting their collected KPIs to their business models. 
Another noticeable aspect is that many software firms are not 
able to assign relevant KPIs to each activity in the software 
value chain because they are still in the process of defining 
relevant key measures for their business processes. Most of 
the companies surveyed do not have a superior performance 
measurement system and do not carry out internal or external 
benchmarking. However, if KPIs are measured, this is 
predominantly done on a regular basis. 
In the analysis of the interviews, two paths / 
characteristics to classify the usage of process KPIs in 
enterprises emerged. On one hand, there is the maturity and 
elaboration of performance measurement systems as a basis 
for the definition, measurement, monitoring and tracking of 
KPIs. Several companies already set up such a measurement 
system, some are about to conceptualize such a system, but 
others are not covered by any data collection mechanism 
concerning process KPIs. Based on the experts’ descriptions, 
the maturity of their performance measurement systems can 
be broken down to a number of criteria. They include:  
 
the existence of a KPI measurement system,  
 
whether the system is completely set up and KPIs 
are defined, 
 
if the defined KPIs are automatically measurable and 
 
how distinctive the institutionalization of the 
measurement is  
Some companies establish particular units for setting up a 
performance measurement system that interacts with all sub-
activities of the generic software value chain. 
On the other hand, there were many different perceptions 
concerning the importance of process KPIs for strategic 
decisions and the strategic orientation on those performance 
measurement systems. This characteristic can also be broken 
into three criteria to classify the companies’ positions:  
 
first, there is the general awareness of the connection 
between process KPIs, and the business model,  
 
second, the perceived importance of such a 
performance measurement system for strategic 
decisions, 
 
as a third criterion, companies were asked to give 
examples for past strategic adjustments in their 
business model caused by certain developments of 
process KPIs 
The evaluation of the experts’ interviews highlights the 
very diverse KPI usage in software enterprises. These 
differences can be the result of the different company sizes, 
the products’ nature or the respective business models, 
besides the general attitude towards the usage of process 
KPIs for strategic decisions. 
C. Exemplarily KPIs  
During the interviews, it was difficult for the experts to 
ad hoc establish a link between KPIs monitoring the 
processes of their respective value chain activity and the 
related business model elements. In order to lead them to the 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

actual research question, they were at first asked to list as 
many process KPIs as possible. Favored by the classification 
of the experts into the software value chain’s activities, it is 
logical to also subsume the key measurements presented by 
them in this manner. As already mentioned in the previous 
section, most KPIs were presented within the activities 
holding high user and customer contact, such as marketing 
and support. In contrast, activities such as research, 
production and implementation are not represented by many 
key measures. This tendency however can also be due to the 
few questioned enterprises. 
The collected KPIs can be found in Table 1. Most of the 
KPIs are hard KPIs, as they can be easily described in 
numbers (e.g., number of bugs, business contacts, fixes, and 
open/closed tickets are hard KPIs). In contrast, soft KPIs 
(e.g., customer satisfaction), do not occur as countable units, 
but can also be translated into numbers to make them 
comparable. 
Other 
categorizations 
can 
be 
time, 
differentiating into non time-related and time-related KPIs, 
such as implementation time and time for user training, or 
permanently and irregularly monitored KPIs. 
TABLE 1. 
RESULTS OF THE EXPERT INTERVIEWS 
Value Chain 
Activity 
Named KPIs by the interviewees 
Research 
 
Rated Feature Requests 
 
Elaboration Time 
Development 
 
Implementation Time 
 
Number of Implementation Inquiries  
 
Time Units for Definition and Test  
 
Number of Customer Complaints 
 
Product Quality 
 
Number of Bugs 
 
Developers per Software Project 
 
Profit Margins 
 
Number of rescheduled milestones 
 
Log in time  
 
Number of accesses to shop 
 
Social contacts (number of sent Mails, 
interactions between friends) 
Maintenance 
 
Number of Customer Complaints 
 
Number of Bugs 
 
Implementation Time 
 
Number of Implementation Inquiries 
 
Time Units for Definition and Test 
 
Product Quality 
 
Developers per Software Project 
Production 
 
Completion time 
Marketing 
 
Sales Growth 
 
Brand Awareness Level 
 
Number of Business Contacts 
 
Effort per Marketing Activity 
 
Revenue per Marketing Activity 
 
Conversion Rate 
 
Number of contacts/potential customers 
(after marketing campaigns, 
presentations, monthly) 
 
Participants/Customers per contact 
 
Customer Acquisition Rate (Sign up 
numbers: number of users per time 
periods) 
 
Log in numbers (concurrent user 
capacity, general log in frequency, time 
spent playing the online game, identified 
peaks of use) 
 
Customer Churn Rate (Funnel for 
tracking user losses: taken burdens at 
payment procedure) 
 
Payment behaviour (amount spent, time 
intervals) 
Replacement 
 
Number of carried out Software Updates 
 
Implementation time for the replacement 
of legacy systems 
Implementation 
 
Time for implementation 
Education 
 
Number of certified consultants 
 
Time for user training 
 
Number of trained people 
 
Training portfolio 
Support 
 
Number of fixes 
 
Number of support calls 
(absolute/average/per employee/per 
customer/per transaction/per active 
installation) 
 
Number of open/closed tickets 
(distribution per employee/time period) 
 
Costs per solved ticket 
 
Error rate (distribution of found bugs) 
 
Customer satisfaction index (initial 
reaction time, response quality, 
accessibility, friendliness, competence, 
time to solution, technical 
comprehensibility) 
 
Number of forwarded support calls (to 
development, maintenance) 
 
Average Support carried out per 
employee 
 
Escalation rate  
 
Average Processing Time 
 
Effort for Rework 
Operations 
 
Number of Participants 
 
Transactions per Time Unit  
 
Data Volume per Time Unit 
 
Employee Satisfaction Index 
 
Number of developers per project 
 
Response time 
 
Table 1 shows that most interviewees were able to assign 
most KPIs to the value chain activities Development, 
Maintenance, Marketing, Support and Operations. The 
majority of the interviewees share the opinion that measuring 
KPIs according to the underlying value chain and business 
model can be an indicator for successfully adapting a 
company’s business model. There is also a large consensus 
amongst the interviewees that research on business model 
adaptations based on KPIs is a highly relevant topic in future 
research. The results also show that, in practice, there is still 
no holistic and systematic approach of performance 
measurement within the software industry. This, however, 
represents a lack in research, as only a systematic evaluation 
of current events affecting a company’ s business model 
gives decision makers adequate motivation for changing 
specific elements of their business model. The measurement 
of the aforementioned KPIs can be carried out by several 
performance measurement systems which enable to measure 
the quality of business processes and sending the collected 
information to a company’s strategy. By this means, the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

collected KPIs can be used on strategic level to be matched 
to the building blocks of the underlying business model [31]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 
This paper contributes to the understanding of the 
existing interconnections between the business model and 
the layers of strategy and business processes. The state of the 
art analysis and the expert interviews have shown that, so far, 
there is no standardized framework in literature and practice 
that efficiently supports measuring KPIs from business 
processes on business models and vice versa. This aspect, 
however, is essential for enterprises to be able to analyze, 
define and adapt their current business model to internal or 
external environmental factors. In a next step, further 
analysis will be carried out to determine how these derived 
KPIs will influence decisions on business model adaptations. 
The study revealed that there is a lack of practical tools 
and conceptual work that addresses a systematic link 
between business processes and business models. Thus, 
future work should have a strong focus on these 
interrelations. First research work addressing a formalized 
description of business models have already been addressed 
by deriving a business model framework which has also been 
formalized in an ontology [32].  
This paper depicted relevant KPIs and value chains in the 
software industry. Future research should also focus on 
different industry branches. By this means, a conceptual 
framework for different industry branches can be derived, 
containing the most significant KPIs for business model 
adaptations. Another research question addresses on agile 
enterprise software which is capable to support the described 
feedback loop between business processes and business 
models. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This presented research results are supported by the 
Software-Cluster and funded within the Leading-Edge 
Cluster competition by the German Federal Ministry of 
Education and Research (BMBF) under grant “01IC10S05”.  
 
REFERENCES  
[1] J. Magretta, “Why Business Models matter,” Harvard 
Business Review, vol. 80, no. 5, 2002, pp. 86–92. 
[2] IBM, “IBM - Global CEO Study.” 2010. 
[3] C. Di Valentin, A. Emrich, D. Werth, and P. Loos, 
“Conceiving Adaptability for Business Models: A Literature-
based Approach.,” in International Conference on Information 
Resources Management (Conf-IRM-12), 2012, pp.1-12. 
[4] W. Chesbrough, Henry and S. Rosenbloom, Richard, “The 
Role of the Business Model in capturing Value from 
Innovation: Evidence from Xerox Corporation’s technology 
spin-off companies,” Industrial and Corporate Change, vol. 
11, no. 3, 2002, pp. 529–555. 
[5] H. Bouwman and H. de Vos, Mobile Service Innovation and 
Business Models, 1st ed. Berlin: Springer, 2008. 
[6] T. 
Wilde 
and 
T. 
Hess, 
“Forschungsmethoden 
der 
Wirtschaftsinformatik - Eine empirische Untersuchung,” 
Wirtschaftsinformatik, vol. 49, no. 4, 2007, pp. 280–287. 
[7] P. Timmers, “Business Models for Electronic Markets,” 
Journal on Electronic Markets, vol. 8, no. 2, 1998, pp. 3–8. 
[8] A. Osterwalder and Y. Pigneur, “An e-business model 
ontology for modeling e-business,” in Proceedings of the 15th 
Bled Electronic Commerce Conference, 2001, pp. 1–12. 
[9] J. Linder and S. Cantrell, “Changing Business Models: 
Surveying the Landscape.” 2000, pp. 1–15. 
[10] A. Afuah and C. Tucci, Internet Business Models and 
Strategies: Text and Cases, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw Hill, 
2004. 
[11] B. Mahadevan, “Business Models for Internet-based E-
Commerce: An Anatomy,” California Management Review, 
vol. 42, no. 4, 2000, pp. 55–69. 
[12] M. M. Al-Debei and D. Avison, “Developing a unified 
framework of the BM concept,” European Journal of 
Information Systems, vol. 19, no. 3, 2010, pp. 359–376. 
[13] A. Osterwalder and Y. Pigneur, “Clarifying Business Models: 
Origins, 
Present, 
and 
Future 
of 
the 
Concept,” 
in 
Communications of AIS, 2005, pp. 1-25. 
[14] T. Burkhart, J. Krumeich, D. Werth, and P. Loos, “Analyzing 
the Business Model Concept: A Comprehensive Classification 
of Literature,” in International Conference on Information 
Systems (ICIS-11), 2011, pp. 1-19. 
[15] M. Schief and P. Buxmann, “Business Models in the Software 
Industry,” in International Conference on System Sciences 
(HICSS-11), 2011, pp.1-10. 
[16] J. Gordjin, H. Akkermans, and H. van Vleet, “Business 
Modelling is not Process Modelling,” in Proceedings on the 
1st International Workshop on Conceptual Modeling 
Approaches for e-Business, 2000, pp. 40–51. 
[17] R. Bellman, C. Clark, D. Malcolm, and F. Ricciardi, “On the 
construction of multistage, multi-person business game,” 
Operations Research, vol. 5, no. 4, 1957, pp. 469–503. 
[18] G. M. Jones, “Educators, Electrons, and Business Models: A 
Problem in Synthesis,” Accounting Reviews, vol. 35, no. 4, 
1960, pp. 619–626. 
[19] H. Oesterle and R. Winter, Business Engingeering – Auf dem 
Weg zum Unternehmen des Informationszeitalters, 2nd ed. 
Berlin: Springer, 2003. 
[20] A.-W. 
Scheer, 
ARIS 
– 
Modellierungsmethoden, 
Metamodelle, Anwendungen, 4th ed. Berlin: Springer, 2001. 
[21] M. Hammer and J. Champy, Business Reengineering. 
Frankfurt. 1994. 
[22] A. Pussep, M. Schief, T. Wildjaja, P. Buxmann, and C. Wolf, 
“The Software Value Chain as an Analytical Framework for 
the Software Industry and Its Exemplary Application for 
Vertical Integration Measurement,” in American Conference 
on Information Systems (AMCIS-11), 17th Americas 
Conference on Information Systems, 2011, pp.1-8. 
[23] A. Pussep, M. Schief, and T. Widjaja, “The Software Value 
Chain: Methods for Construction and Their Application,” in 
European Conference on Information Systems, 2012. 
[24] D. Messerschmitt and C. Szyperski, Software Ecosystem. 
Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003. 
[25] M. Porter, Competitive Advantage. London: Free Press, 1985. 
[26] I. Crnkovic, M. Chaudron, and S. Larsson, “Component-
based Development Process and Component Lifecycle,” 
Journal of Computing and Information Technology, vol. 13, 
2005, pp. 321–327. 
[27] W. Royce, “Managing the development of large software 
systems,” in Proceedings of IEEE, 1970, pp.328-338. 
[28] M. 
Morris, 
M. 
Schindehutte, 
and 
J. 
Allen, 
“The 
Entrepreneur’s 
Business 
Model: 
Towards 
a 
unified 
Perspective,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 58, no. 6, , 
2005, pp. 726–735. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[29] G. Glaser, Barney and L. Strauss, Anselm, The Discovery of 
Grounded Theory. Strategies for Qualitative Research. Aldine 
Pub, 1967. 
[30] K. Charmaz, “Grounded theory,” in Rethinking methods in 
psychology, J. Smith, Ed. London: Sage, 1995, pp. 27–49. 
[31] “MIT Communications Futures Program,” 2012. [Online]. 
Available: http://cfp.mit.edu/.[retrieved: June, 2012]. 
[32] T. Burkhart, M. Schief, S. Wolter, J. Krumeich, C. Di 
Valentin, D. Werth, and P. Loos, “A Comprehensive 
Approach towards the Structural Description of Business 
Models,” in International ACM Conference on Management 
of Emergent Digital EcoSystems (MEDES), 2012, pp. 1-8.  
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

