The Evolution of the Customer-Centric Helpdesk: Two Case Studies 
 
Maryam Rezaeian 
University of Gloucestershire 
Library, Technology and Information Services 
Cheltenham, UK 
Email: MRezaeian@ glos.ac.uk 
Martin Wynn 
University of Gloucestershire 
School of Business and Technology 
Cheltenham, UK 
Email: MWynn@glos.ac.uk 
 
 
 
Abstract – This article examines how the helpdesk function has 
changed over the past three decades through examination of two 
case studies. In 1985, the European shipment of PC 
workstations overtook shipments of simple terminals (i.e., video 
display units and keyboards, with very little processing power), 
instigating a revolution in end-user computing, with computer 
users taking advantage of new word-processor, spreadsheet, 
graphics, email and database applications. This article looks at 
two snapshots of end-user computing and helpdesk operations 
separated by a 30 year period – one at Glaxo Pharmaceuticals 
in 1988, and the other at the University of Gloucestershire in 
2018. This case study research finds that whilst the range of 
technologies requiring support has increased markedly, this has 
been counter-balanced somewhat by the emergence of 
standards and dominant products in many technology 
categories. It also finds that the concept of support and the role 
of the end-user have evolved significantly in a rapidly changing 
technology landscape. 
 
Keywords – End-user computing; helpdesk functions; customer- 
centricity; office systems; personal productivity tools; IT support 
strategy; Service Desk. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The technology environment in major organisations has 
changed significantly in the past 30 years. In 1988, there was 
virtually no use of the Internet, portable computers were in 
their infancy, and there were no mobile phones or tablets. 
Although the personal computer (PC) had broken through to 
become the main desktop device in the more advanced 
organisations, local area networks were just being introduced 
and MSDOS was the main PC operating system in the pre- 
Windows age. Many of the mainstream corporate systems 
were bespoke (often in 3G languages like COBOL), and the 
main packaged software products like the SAP and Oracle 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems were just 
starting to be taken up by the bigger corporations. 
Technology support is a key issue in nearly all 
organisations today, and this article examines the origins and 
evolution of end-user computing and helpdesk support 
functions over the past three decades. In so doing, the article 
highlights the key support issues that organisations must 
address today. It features two case studies. First, Glaxo 
Pharmaceuticals, which was an advanced technology user and 
was seen as a leader in its rapid uptake of PC applications in 
the 1980s [1]. The second case study concerns the University 
of Gloucestershire (UoG) in 2018. This introductory section        
is followed in Section 2 by a brief discussion of the 
background to this research and the case study methodology, 
and sets two research questions. Sections 3 and 4 focus on the 
two case studies and section 5 makes some final comparisons 
and addresses the two research questions. 
II. 
BACKGROUND & RESEARCH METHOD 
IT services are key in ensuring the efficiency and agility 
of business processes [2], and within this context, the 
importance of a successful helpdesk in supporting corporate 
performance is generally accepted. Sood [3] recently noted 
that “the cross-functional nature of its operation means the 
help desk directly impacts productivity and is an essential part 
of what enables an agency to meet its stakeholder needs”. 
As early as 1992, Bridge and Dearden [4] noted “the 
quality of helpdesk operations can be improved by the 
provision of knowledge to front line helpdesk operators” and 
that “this could only be done effectively if AI technology is 
used”. This early study of helpdesk operations proved 
prophetic as helpdesks have evolved to meet the changing 
demands of end-users and have used increasingly 
sophisticated support systems. Existing literature also 
highlights the increase in the range of technologies that 
helpdesks have to support. Gonzalez, Giachetti and Ramirez 
[5], for example, note that the average number of information 
technologies supported by central support functions has 
increased from 25 to 2000 in the current millennium. 
This article looks at two case studies of helpdesk 
operations and end-use computing requirements, spanning a 
30 year time gap. The case study is a widely used 
methodology within business research. Bryman and Bell [6] 
argue that the case study is particularly appropriate to be used 
in combination with a qualitative research method, allowing 
detailed and intensive research activity, usually in 
combination with an inductive approach as regards the 
relationship between theory and research. Saunders, Lewis 
and Thornhill [7] argue that case studies are of particular value 
for explanatory or exploratory investigation. 
Data collection to date has been achieved through 
participant observation and action research. One of the 
authors worked at the first case study company (Glaxo 
Pharmaceuticals) as IT Trainer and then End-User 
Computing manager in the 1984-88 period. Some of the 
observations included here were discussed in research 
publications at the time [1] [8], and these have been used as 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

secondary sources of material. The other author has worked 
on the IT Service Desk at the second organization (UoG) and 
thus has first-hand experience of the technologies deployed 
and the Service Desk operations. There are thus multiple 
sources of evidence, which as Yin [9] suggests, is one way of 
increasing the construct validity of case studies. At UoG, this 
includes participant observation and a number of internal 
reports [10]. 
Within this context, this article addresses two research 
questions (RQs): 
RQ1. How have the support requirements of helpdesks 
evolved over the past 30 years? 
RQ2. How has the helpdesk developed in response to these 
changes in the technology landscape? 
III. 
CASE STUDY 1: GLAXO PHARMACEUTICALS 1988 
Overview: 
Between 
1984 
and 
1988, 
Glaxo 
Pharmaceuticals saw a rapid increase in the use of PCs, which 
radically changed the nature of computing within the 
company. In excess of 1300 PCs were installed in the 
company's four sites at Greenford (London), Barnard Castle 
(Co Durham), Ware (Hertfordshire) and Speke (near 
Liverpool). This expansion reflected the dramatic growth and 
improvement in PC-based office systems during this period, 
which changed the nature of standard office computing 
functions in the company. However, in 1984, office systems 
were clearly a function of the HP3000 mini-computers, there 
being over a thousand users of these office systems in Glaxo, 
over 600 of which were electronic mail users. There were just 
a few PC-based users of spreadsheets in the sales, marketing 
and market research areas. By 1988, one in four staff had a 
PC, and of these, six out of ten had a spreadsheet, four out of 
ten had a graphics package and a word-processor, and three 
out of ten had a database package. The use of mini-computer 
graphics modelling and word-processing had virtually 
disappeared, but electronic mail remained a function of the 
Hewlett Packard mini-computers, there being over 2,500 
users, a fourfold expansion since 1984. 
 
Word-processing and desktop publishing: In the period 
1984-88, word-processing experienced several phases of 
growth. In the two years after 1984, the company standardized 
on one main word processing system (HPWord), based on an 
HP mainframe or mini-computer for all secretarial/office 
staff. Then, in 1987-88 as the PC became the standard desktop 
machine rather than the terminal, users were transferred to a 
PC-based version (PCWord) of the mainframe package, thus 
minimizing the need for retraining. Then in 1988, the 
company embarked on a further change that would see the 
introduction of a more sophisticated word-processor as the 
standard for secretarial use. This was in part driven by the 
well-publicised benefits of using the so called “desktop 
publishing” (DTP) packages, which required a skill level 
normally beyond that of the average secretary, and which also 
required specialist workstations (an 80386 chip, and a 
PostScript-compatible printer) if acceptable performance was 
to be achieved. 
This resulted in the introduction of only two desktop 
publishing workstations (running PageMaker and/or Ventura 
software packages). However, it was expected at the time that 
the standard document processing software available to 
secretaries would come to include some DTP functions such 
as graphics and scanned image importation, and this is indeed 
what happened. It was suggested that a move to the type of 
mid-range product in the word-processing to DTP spectrum, 
such as the Lotus Manuscript or Advancewrite Plus software 
packages was likely. The coming of Windows as the standard 
operating system and the gradual dominance of the Microsoft 
office products was not envisaged at that time. 
 
Database and spreadsheets: Databases are possibly the 
most powerful end-user tools of all the functional “off- the- 
shelf” packages, while spreadsheets are the most commonly 
used. A PC survey carried out at Glaxo in May 1988 found 
that for every PC database system written by the company’s 
Information Management Division (IMD), end-users had 
developed three systems for themselves. The PC systems 
developed by IMD at the request of end-users is shown in 
Table I. Authorisation for these systems was done on an ad 
hoc basis, and approval for resource allocation from higher 
management levels was not required. 
A number of different spreadsheet packages had been tried 
by end-users, but Lotus 1-2-3 was the most commonly used. 
 
 
TABLE I. END-USER COMPUTING SYSTEMS AT GLAXO 1988 
 
End-user system name 
Software 
Electronic faces folder 
DB3+/Tencore 
Medical records 
DataEase 
Unpublished journals 
DataEase 
Label reconciliation 
DataEase 
Materials requisition 
RBase 5000 
Medical terms dictionary 
Custom-made with 
Pascal 
Accident records 
DataEase 
Project engineer management 
DataEase 
Media scheduling 
DataEase 
Planning & budgeting 
DataEase 
Action reporting 
DataEase 
 
Graphics packages: Graphics packages were not as 
common as word-processors, but the two were increasingly 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

used in unison as standard secretarial software. They were 
used mainly for departmental reports and presentations. The 
data was still input manually for the most part, but electronic 
transfer into graphics packages was on the increase as 
integration with mainframe databases and other office systems 
improved. This was to be a forerunner of the wider integration 
and consolidation of office productivity tools that occurred in 
the Microsoft era. By 1988, the main graphics package used 
was Freelance or Freelance Plus, which was then from the 
provider of the Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet, ensuring ease of data 
transfer between the two packages. 
 
Electronic presentations systems and presentation design 
software: This was a significant end-user computing activity. 
There were a range of software packages available for 
electronic systems, including PictureIt and Freelance Plus, 
running on the so-called “IBM compatible” PCs. PictureIt 
enabled the user to design bar, pie, line, organization and word 
charts in a range of pre-determined formats. It was extremely 
easy to use and yet contained sufficient variety to facilitate the 
design of a reasonable presentation. This was particularly 
useful for senior management and the sales and marketing 
functions. 
For more specialised needs, Freelance Plus was used. This 
was a freeform drawing package, with a range of icon libraries 
that could be combined with PictureIt images. Graphs could 
also be imported from other software packages (including 
Lotus 1-2-3 and Lotus Symphony). Standard 80 column/25 
line text screens could also be converted to VideoShow format 
and edited using VIP. 
 
Figure 1. The Rupert helpdesk system: interaction with end-users and 
support groups. 
 
The VideoShow presentation system was made available 
to be taken out on loan from the IMD, and each of the four 
sites had at least one of these machines. Having prepared the 
presentation with software running on the PC, this was then 
saved to “floppy disc” and run on the VideoShow presentation 
system. These presentations could be given to a large audience 
via a projector (e.g., Barco Data 3 or Electrohome ECP 2000) 
or a colour monitor for smaller audiences. The wide range of 
colours available (1,000) as well as the range of formats 
available made this a convenient way to present material 
suitable for a 35mm slide presentation. The obvious 
advantages included the portability of the presentation (one 
floppy disc could hold as many as 200 images) and the fact 
that the presentation was always in the correct order, the right 
way round and there were no focusing problems. 
 
Computer based training (CBT) packages: From 1985 
onwards, approximately 30 CBT packages were developed by 
IMD using the Tencore authoring language [11]. Most of 
these were for sales and marketing training, and their support 
and on-going enhancement and update constituted an element 
of PC systems support at the time. 
 
The helpdesk function: The helpdesk function was 
centralized at the company’s Greenford site, but had links to 
support staff in the company’s three main manufacturing 
plants at Ware, Barnard Castle and Speke (Figure 1). By 1988, 
IMD had developed its own in-house fault logging diagnostic 
system, built using an expert system shell (CASSANDRA). 
This system was known as “Rupert” (Resolves Users' 
Problems Expertly). 
The helpdesk had hitherto been manned by a senior 
network analyst who used his expertise to help solve users' 
problems. Rupert encapsulated some of the experts' 
knowledge and was able to apply it to users' problems. By 
asking a series of questions, Rupert could home in on a 
problem. In some situations it could take action such as 
aborting a users' session, disconnecting a terminal or asking 
the user to perform some action such as pressing a key etc. In 
other cases, where Rupert was unable to provide a full 
solution, the call was passed on to the support group which, in 
Rupert’s judgement, would be best placed to deal with the 
problem. 
The support groups were still in the main geared to helping 
users of the company’s wide range of bespoke transaction 
processing and reporting systems for their manufacturing and 
financial functions. These were mainly written in COBOL or 
PASCAL, and the analyst-programmers of the day doubled up 
as support staff to help end-users. Indeed, for the main 
manufacturing system (known as “MENTOR”), there was a 
programme of courses run on the four sites on test machines 
on which the main manufacturing systems could be simulated. 
There were three main support groups for the main corporate 
business systems and a fourth for office systems and end-user 
computing. The main business systems were run on Hewlett 
Packard mini-computers at the four sites linked by a wide area 
network, and there were also a number of test and 
development machines. 
In addition to helping to solve problems more quickly, 
Rupert also produced fault statistics which helped IMD to 
identify problem areas and thus continue to improve the 
service given to users. 
In the first two months of Rupert’s operation, the helpdesk 
staff: 
• 
handled nearly 2,500 enquiries; 
• 
solved 70 per cent of all queries themselves; 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

• 
found that a number of queries were from users who 
did not understand the applications (more training courses 
were arranged); 
• 
discovered that the maintenance support provided by 
the terminal supplier was unsatisfactory (the company asked 
its supplier to modify its support system). 
The major benefits of Rupert to the company were: 
• 
its role as a training aid for new helpdesk staff; 
• 
the ease with which new knowledge could be added 
to the system; 
• 
the time taken to resolve user problems was halved; 
• 
the improved image of IMD in the rest of the 
company; 
• 
the better statistics it provided about user problems. 
The last two benefits could probably have been obtained 
from any helpdesk function and fault reporting software. 
However, Rupert's excellent user interface made this a very 
successful application of expert system techniques. It was 
envisaged that the system would eventually be the focal point 
of a comprehensive network management system. 
 
IV. 
CASE STUDY 2: UNIVERSITY OF GLOUCESTERSHIRE 
2018 
Overview: UoG is located across six sites within 
Cheltenham and Gloucester with 20 professional departments. 
The Library, Technology and Information Service (LTI) 
department provides supports for both staff and students, 
particularly for teaching and learning, along with the provision 
of appropriate training and skills development. The University 
has over 1,500 staff, most of which are computer users, and 
approximately 10,000 students, who use a range of 
applications on University equipment in labs and classroom 
environments. The IT Service Desk is located within LTI and 
provides full support for staff in University hardware, 
communications and software solutions. Support for students 
encompasses Office 365, assignment submission, the Moodle 
learning management system, and a range of IT guides 
accessible via MyGlos Help (a web portal guidance page 
which helps student to search for guidance and information). 
 
Office productivity tools and end-user computing: 
Microsoft Office 2016, Adobe, SSRS, SPSS, and NVivo are 
the main packages that are increasingly used as standard on a 
daily basis. SSRS (SQL reporting) is mainly used for 
departmental reports, whilst SPSS and NVivo are only used 
for teaching and research purposes, and PowerPoint (part of 
Office 2016) is the main package used for presentations. 
There are many different packages on different machines, 
depending on department needs. For example, there are 150 
graphics package users in the departments of art and design 
and landscape architecture. The operating system for the PCs 
is currently Windows 7, although a University-wide upgrade 
to Windows 10 is currently being rolled out. The University 
email system is based on Microsoft Office365 and hosted 
externally. The University supports Office apps such as Skype 
for business, Outlook, OneDrive, and uses the international 
roaming service 
called Eduroam to provide WiFi 
connectivity.  Eduroam allows UoG users to login at any 
participating institution using their UoG login name and 
password. Eduroam also allows users from any participating 
institution to login to UoG using their local login name and 
password. LTI use Gmetrix to provide Microsoft office 
training to both staff and students. UoG supports staff and 
student research efforts with SPSS and Nvivo. 
As regards telephony, the internal telephone system (an 
Avaya IP phone system providing telephony for all the 
University campuses and the majority of the student halls of 
residence) is complemented by a number of exchange lines 
direct from the BT exchange, which are used for alarm lines, 
swipe machines for debit and credit cards, and payphones 
around the University and in halls of residence. LTI are 
responsible for managing mobile phone services, which are 
coordinated through a centralised agreement with Vodafone. 
The University will provide support for equipment and 
software which is procured by the University, but does not 
support mobile phones, tablets or other equipment purchased 
by staff or students themselves. Nevertheless, the frontline 
support teams will endeavour to help students with their own 
devices if they can (e.g., to reinstall software or attempt data 
recovery), but they will not attempt to fix any major hardware 
or mechanical problems. 
 
UoG Main Business Systems: There are about 60 business 
systems running across the University, including Sunrise, 
SITS Student Records, Resource link, Agresso Finance and 
Moodle (Table 2). All of these are now supported by LTI, 
although some started as departmental end-user systems prior 
to the centralisation of IT support within the University and 
the imposition of certain policies and standards. Many of these 
systems are administered by end-users who undertake data 
maintenance and general support tasks. 
 
TABLE II: MAIN BUSINESS SYSTEMS SUPPORTED BY UOG  LTI 
 
System 
Description 
Sunrise 
IT application to manage enquiries 
from students and staff 
 
 
 
SITS Student 
Records 
SITS is a student records 
management system used to store, 
administer and manage all aspects of 
student information from initial 
enquiry and application through to 
degree congregation. A configurable 
package from software provider 
Tribal. 
ResourceLink 
Resourcelink is an integrated HR and 
Payroll software package. 
Agresso 
Finance 
(Live) 
A global accounting system from 
software provider Unit4. 
 
Moodle 
Moodle is a free and open-source 
learning management system written 
in PHP and distributed under the 
GNU General Public License. 
 
The SITS student records management package is one of 
the University’s core systems, and the system is upgraded 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
 
Software 
Support 
regularly with modifications and new releases from the 
software supplier (Tribal). These are tested and implemented 
in the test environment by the SITS users. When the software 
has been tested thoroughly and approved, a change control is 
raised which then goes to a change control board, who will 
approve or reject the change. New developments are driven by 
the University’s business and legal requirements. 
The general policy for the procurement of new software 
applications is that it should be based on web enabling 
technologies that will assist in the development of a 
University-wide Managed Learning Environment (MLE). 
This principle guides procurement when the University has 
the opportunity to replace systems software through the 
annual IT capital programme. 
 
UoG IT Service Desk function: Sunrise is the main system 
used by the LTI staff to manage enquiries from students and 
staff. In addition, any enquiries received via the MyGlos Help 
Portal are redirected to the appropriate team. Different 
versions of Sunrise have been used by the University since the 
year 2000, but all with the same backend. With the latest 
version of this system, keywords can be used to select the 
problem categories and automates the assignation to 
appropriate support personnel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Main Functions of the UoG IT Service Desk 2018. 
 
 
The IT Service Desk performs a number of functions 
(Figure 2). It has the responsibility for all user account 
management as well as giving access to all University 
business systems such as Agresso and SITS. LTI is 
responsible for providing the basic “image” (i.e.software 
footprint) for all staff and student devices. A minimum of 
between 4-6 weeks is allowed to enable a thorough evaluation 
and testing of any new software application. 
When the IT Service Desk was first established in 2000, 
one of the front-line technicians would be on Rota to cover the 
helpdesk shift during the working day. Since June 2017, the 
IT Service Desk has been run by two officers and one 
manager from 8am till 5pm during weekdays. An out-of- 
hours service is provided by IT technicians who share the 
shifts across the Universitiy’s three main campuses on a rota 
basis.  
A Service Desk officer takes a call or email and logs a call. A 
first fix is applied if possible and remote connections used 
where appropriate. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Incident Tracking by UoG IT Sevice Desk 2018 
 
Figure 3 shows the escalation of a call through different 
levels 
of 
service 
expertise 
depending 
on 
the 
complexity/specialism of the problem reported. This 
systematic approach to tackling problems, combined with the 
application of dedicated human resources to solving Service 
Desk enquiries, has contributed to a significant improvement 
in response times and a more efficient IT service for the 
University’s staff and students. 
Teams across four sites use IT Service Desk tools and the 
Sunrise support system. The IT Service Desk tools are an 
integral part of the Sunrise system, and were developed as a 
bespoke, standalone system for UoG. Some of its main 
functions are: 
 
Password reset 
 
Unlock accounts 
 
Create guest login for externals 
 
Provide access to shared drives 
 
Deploy software 
 
Change voicemail passwords 
 
LTI uses the Sunrise system to log calls, update the call, 
and transfer the call to the appropriate support team. Service 
Desk officers have access to all communications across the 
University by searching for the Incident Number, call 
details, surname, forename, category, hub area, open date, 
network logon, global summary, priority, escalation level, 
assigned group, and first time fix. The call needs to be logged 
under the name of the person that reported the enquiry, which 
can be logged by network logon (staff number) or forename 
and surname. The category is selected based on the enquiry; 
for example, if someone reports an issue with email, Service 
Desk officers can search for emails and pick the correct 
category. The use of keywords and categories ensures that an 
enquiry is managed by the most appropriate team. Once the
Hardware & 
Communicatio 
ns Support 
Incident 
Management 
UOG IT 
Service 
Desk 
Procurment 
(PCs, Mobiles, 
Ipad) 
Problem 
Management 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

category has been selected, the system will automatically pick 
the first line team and referral team appropriate to the job. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This section draws on the case study material discussed 
above to address the research questions set out in section 2. 
RQ1. How have the support requirements of helpdesks 
evolved over the past 30 years? 
Thirty years ago, the needs for IT support in major 
organisations were somewhat different from those of today. 
There was no significant use of the internet and very few 
mobile phones or laptops. There was no Windows - MSDOS 
was the main operating system for PCs. There was no SKYPE, 
no viruses and no wifi, but Intel chip-based PCs had 
established themselves in most organisations and hard-wired 
LANS linked them to server PCs and mini-computers. Most 
business systems were bespoked in-house – the age of 
integrated packaged software was just around the corner. 
However, despite the expansion in the range of 
technologies that helpdesks are now called upon to support, 
there was arguably more variety in the range of products that 
needed supporting in each technology category. For example, 
the Glaxo helpdesk supported 5 different word-processors and 
several spreadsheets and graphics packages. The market was 
still evolving with many competing products and no obvious 
standards. 
Presentation 
graphics 
systems 
and 
videoconferencing also needed support, along with bespoked 
computer-based training packages in the era before on-line 
help functions for many software products. 
There are now a greater range of technologies to support, 
but there are clearer standards and more obvious choices 
within each category. It is thus critical that the central support 
function has clear policies and makes product choices in each 
technology area. At Glaxo, despite the lack of standards in 
end-user software, the IMD Director was adamant that only 
Intel chip based PCs would be permitted in the company, and 
this has parallels with UoG’s non-support of devices not 
obtained through the University procurement system. In 
recent years, there has been a clear imposition of standards 
and product choices at the University as central IT strategy 
and policies have taken precedence over departmental 
initiatives. 
RQ2. How has the helpdesk developed in response to these 
changes in the technology landscape? 
Over the time duration between the two case studies, the 
helpdesk function has evolved and adapted to changing 
requirements and developments in technology. The concept of 
support has also evolved, with helpdesks increasingly seeing 
computer users as “customers”, but at the same time end-users 
taking some responsibility for systems ownership, data 
maintenance and training. The super-user and 
data 
maintenance specialists have emerged as key link personnel 
between the computer user-community and central IT support. 
The helpdesk is also increasingly seen as part of a broader 
Service Desk function, with service being defined as “an 
approach to IT service management that emphasizes the 
importance of coordination and control across the     various 
functions, processes and systems necessary to manage the full 
lifecycle of IT services” [12]. This definition is often applied 
in the context of a third party service provider, but is also 
relevant to in-house IT service provision. At UoG, the Service 
Desk is the customer facing front end of all IT services which 
are measured against stipulated service level targets defined 
in service level agreements. This aligns with the IT 
Infrastructure Library (ITIL) concept and definition of the IT 
Service Desk as the single point of contact between the IT 
function and users, which manages incidents and service 
requests, and handles communication with users. There is 
also a more subtle change in that the service is seen as 
supporting business processes and people capabilities along 
with the pure technology elements. The Service Desk now 
focuses on delivering high quality customer service to end- 
users, whereas the helpdesk was more concerned with incident 
management and resolving problems related to IT in the 
organization [5]. 
The range of different technologies supported by the 
Service Desk has seen developments in its own support 
technology. In addition, the requirements set out in service 
level agreements have meant that Service Desks need to 
increase end-user satisfaction levels by responding to the 
incidents and problems within stipulated response times [13]. 
To support this increase in customer service levels, support 
technology has become more sophisticated, involving 
elements 
of 
knowledge 
management 
and 
artificial 
intelligence. Nevertheless, the basic functions of the RUPERT 
system established in 1988 at Glaxo remain largely the same. 
Over and above this, however, as Peppard [14] has noted, the 
role of people skills and capabilities in delivering a successful 
Service Desk operation remains critical. Despite advances in 
technology support systems, a fully automated helpdesk 
function remains some years away for most organisations, and 
people skills will remain critical in providing an effective 
Service Desk operation. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Wynn, “The business benefits of pc office systems and 
end-user computing at Glaxo Pharmaceuticals, 1984 – 
1988”, Journal  of  Information  Technology,  vol  4  (1),  pp 
17-29, 
March 1989 
[2] N. Kumbakara, "Managed IT Services: the role of it 
standards", Information Management & Computer 
Security, vol 16 (16/4), pp.336-359, 2008. 
[3] U. Sood, “ 7 Essentials for a Top-Performing IT Help Desk”, 
GCN Executive Roundtable Cloud, March 30, 2017. 
Available 
from: 
https://gcn.com/articles/2017/03/30/help- 
desk-
essentials.aspx/ 
[4] D. Bridge and A. Dearden, “Knowledge Based Systems 
Support for Help Desk Operations: A Reference Model”, 
Dept of Computer Scoiencwe University of York, April 
1992. 
Available 
from 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10 
.1.1.47.5118&rep=rep1&type=pdf /2018.07.22 
[5] L.Gonzalez, R. Giachetti, and G. Ramirez, “Knowledge 
management- 
centric 
help 
desk: 
specification 
and 
performance evaluation”, Decision Support Systems, vol. 40, 
pp. 389-405, 2005 
[6] A. Bryman and E. Bell, Business Research Methods, 3rd 
edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[7] M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, Research methods 
for business students, 5th ed., 2009, England: Pearson 
Education Limited. 
[8] M. Wynn and L. O’Callaghan, “Quality graphics at Glaxo 
Pharmaceuticals”, Training Technology,  vol. 1 (4), pp.  18- 
20, April, 1988 
[9] R. K. Yin, Applications of Case Study Research. 3rd ed., 
2012, London: SAGE Publications, Inc. 
[10] R. Livesey, N. Moore, and D. James, User account policy. 
University of Gloucestershire, Library, Technology & 
Information Service, 2018. 
[11] M. Wynn, “'Computerised training solutions at Glaxo”, 
Interactive Learning International, vol. 4 (3/4), pp. 73-80, 
Sept 1987. 
[12] The Stationary Office (TSO), ITIL Foundation Handbook, IT 
Service Management Forum, 2012. 
[13] S.Serbest, Y.Goksen, O.Dogan, and A.Tokdemir, “Design 
and implementation of helpdesk system on the effective 
focuses of information system”, Procedia Economics and 
Finance, vol 33, pp. 461.476, 2015 
[14] J. Peppard "Managing IT as a portfolio of services" European 
Management Journal, vol. 21 (4), pp. 467–483, 2003. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

