A Method to Synthesize 3-Dimensional Face Corresponding to Diverse Words 
Expressing Facial Features through Mapping and 
Inspecting Validity of Mapping Function 
 
Futoshi Sugimoto 
dept. of Information Sciences and Arts 
Yoyo University 
Kawagoe, Japan 
e-mail: f_sugi@toyo.jp 
 
 
Abstract— In this study, the process to synthesize a human face 
based on the information of words is defined as a mapping 
from a word space, which is composed of the words expressing 
dimensions and shape of facial elements, into a physical model 
space where physical shape of the facial elements are formed. 
By introducing a concept of mapping, the use of whole words 
existing in the word space makes it possible to synthesize a 
human face based on free and uninhibited description. 
Furthermore, we have only to make 3-dimensinal physical 
models corresponding to the words that are selected as training 
data to identify a mapping function. The others are made 
through the mapping. Finally, we inspect the validity of the 
mapping function that is obtained in this study. 
Keywords- three dimensional facial synthesis; information of 
words; mapping function; computer graphics; GMDH. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, since the importance of the facial 
information has been recognized, various studies and the 
practical use to computerize the information have been 
performed, and many papers and articles on them were 
published [1][2][3]. These researches can be divided into 
recognition and synthesis from the viewpoint of information 
processing. Our study is set in the area of the face synthesis 
among these researches. We aim at constructing a system to 
synthesize a 3-dimensional face by using computer graphics 
based on the information of words, which can describe facial 
features very freely (we call them “feature words” in this 
study). In this paper, we are to propose a method to form 
physical models of facial elements corresponding to the 
feature words using a mapping function, which plays a main 
role in our face synthesis system, and then we are also to 
inspect the effectiveness of the mapping function. 
When we try to describe facial features of a person whom 
we picture to ourselves, the description is by using several 
distinct levels of words. Some words may describe directly 
and concretely the physical dimension and the shape of facial 
elements; while others may do so abstractly or meta-
phorically. In former studies on synthesis of a human face by 
utilizing the information of words, only few words 
describing directly the physical features were used, and the 
words explaining some degree of physical dimension, i.e., 
“slight,” “a little,” “very,” and so on, were simply added to 
[4]. 
In this study, our main aim is to synthesize a face based 
on free and uninhibited description. Which means we can 
use abstract and metaphorical words as well as concrete and 
physical ones as the feature words. In order to realize it, we 
define the process to synthesize a human face based on the 
information of words as a mapping from a word space to a 
physical model space. The word space and the physical 
model space are to be explained in another section in detail. 
Introducing the concept of mapping enables us to 
synthesize the 3-dimensional physical models corresponding 
to diverse words [5][6][7][8]. We adopted GMDH (Group 
Method of Data Handling) [9] to identify a mapping function 
in this method. It is because the effectiveness of GMDH to 
identify a mapping function under the conditions whose 
relations are complicated and non-linear, and there are little 
training data, is already verified [10][11]. In this paper, we 
focus on inspecting the usefulness of the mapping and the 
validity of the mapping function that is obtained by GMDH. 
The contents of the paper is as follows; In Section 2, the 
system we have been developing is outlined. In Section 3, 
the process to construct the word space and its characteristics 
are described. In Section 4, the physical model space is 
described. In Section 5, the process to make the training data 
and to identify the mapping function is described. In Section 
6, the validity of the mapping function that is obtained in this 
study is inspected. Finally, in Section 7, the conclusion and 
the future works are presented. 
II. 
OUTLINE OF THE SYSTEM 
The outline of the facial synthesis system that we have 
been developing is shown in Figure 1. This system has a 
word space and a physical model space, which are to be 
explained in another sections in detail, and the process to 
synthesize a physical model of a human face is defined as a 
mapping from the word space to the physical model space. 
The facial elements in this research are nose, eyes, mouth, 
eyebrows, cheeks, jaw, and profile. The word space and the 
physical model space are made for each facial element, and 
the mapping is executed for each facial element respectively. 
54
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

Before synthesizing facial elements, the feature words 
are collected from a sentence describing facial features or 
testimony of a witness, which is not, however, included in 
our current research. A physical model corresponding to an 
extracted feature word is made through mapping every 
individual facial element, and then a human face is 
synthesized through combining all physical models of facial 
elements together. This paper focuses on the part of making 
the physical models of facial elements by mapping. 
III. 
WORD SPACE 
The word space in this study is composed of the feature 
words, which express dimensions and shape of facial 
elements, and it is constructed for each facial element. 
A. Construction of Word Space 
In order to construct the word space, firstly many feature 
words were collected for each individual facial element, and 
secondly those words were located in a space by Multi-
Dimensional Scaling method (MDS) [14] based on the 
similarity of those feature words. We call this space the word 
space. Those feature words were from a Japanese dictionary 
[12] and [13]. We provided four following criteria on 
collecting the feature words. 
 
(1) The nouns that express figuratively the feature of the 
facial elements. 
(2) The adjectives that express the feature of the facial 
elements when they are put before a facial element. 
(3) The mimetic words that express the feature of the facial 
elements. 
(4) The words that are used for expressing the feature of 
the facial elements in our daily conversation. 
 
A similarity matrix among the feature words to be the 
input data of MDS was obtained using a method [15] of 
applying information theory in this study. In this method, the 
subjects (50 male students in our department, around 22 
years old) classified the feature words based on the similarity 
of the impression with which the feature words are 
associated, and probability that the feature words are 
classified in the same group was found, and finally similarity 
among the feature words was calculated based on the 
probability. In the word space obtained from MDS, the more 
similar the feature words are, the closer they are located, 
while the farther, the less similar. 
Every word space has six dimensions in this study. This 
is determined based on an indicator called “stress,” which 
shows how the distance relationship in the word space 
satisfies the similarity relationship among the feature words. 
Since a feature word is a point in the 6-dimensional word 
space, a feature word in the word space of a facial element is 
defined as Wi , and it is described as follows; 
 
 
1
2
6
(
,
,...,
),
1,...,
i
w w
w
i
m
=
=
W
 
(1) 
Here, m is the number of the feature words in a word space, 
wj expresses coordinate value of jth axis in the 6-dimensional 
space. 
B. Characteristics of Word Space 
The word space of nose is shown in Figure 2 as an 
example. Since we cannot find any proper English words 
corresponding to all Japanese feature words, we display the 
word space in Japanese except the training data. Although 
the word space is 6-dimensional in reality, it is projected on a 
two dimensional plane for visually understanding. The 
Figure 1. Outline of the system to synthesize 3-dimensional face
Mapping 
Text expressing 
facial features 
Collection of 
feature words 
Nose 
Word Space 
Mouth 
Jaw 
・・・・ 
Physical Model Space 
・・・・ 
Combining 
Figure 2. Word space, clustering result and training data of 
feature words in case of nose 
上向きの鼻
突き出た鼻
低い鼻
平らな鼻
つぶれた鼻
ふっくらした鼻
ペチャンコな鼻
小さい鼻
短い鼻
鉤鼻
尖った鼻
下向きの鼻
大きい鼻
高い鼻
ワシ鼻
長い鼻
のびた鼻
太い鼻
立派な鼻
締まった鼻
胡坐鼻
まっすぐな鼻
大振りな鼻
獅子鼻
段鼻
のっぺりした鼻
でかい鼻
ブタ鼻
細い鼻
丸みのある鼻
広がった鼻
鋭い鼻
鼻筋の通った鼻
整った鼻
堂々とした鼻
すっきりした鼻
すっとした鼻
直線的な鼻
シャープな鼻
膨らんだ鼻
三角形の鼻
ごつい鼻
かわいい鼻
角ばった鼻
腫れぼったい鼻
控えめな鼻
つんとした鼻
天狗鼻
鼻筋の通っていない鼻
ひしゃげた鼻
曲がった鼻
団子鼻
plump nose 
low nose 
small nose 
short nose 
upward nose 
thin nose 
long nose 
high nose 
downward nose 
crooked nose 
big nose 
fat nose 
55
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

characteristics of the word space summarized to be seen in 
Figure 2 are as follows; 
 
(1) The feature words that have completely opposite 
meanings stand face to face each other across the origin 
of coordinates. 
(2) Almost the feature words tend to be located at the edge 
of the word space. 
(3) The feature words that have the meaning of almost a 
standard feature are located near the center. 
 
By the analogy from the characteristics mentioned above, 
it is appropriate to think that the “standard feature” is located 
at the origin of the word space, and the feature words that 
have an adjective that expresses the degree of feature such as 
“slight” and “very” are located on the straight line 
connecting the origin and a certain feature word. 
IV. 
PHYSICAL MODEL SPACE 
The physical model space in this study also is constructed 
for each facial element. It is composed of the physical shape 
of the facial element corresponding to each feature word. 
A. Construction of Physical Model Space 
The 3-dimensional geometric model of facial element 
corresponding to each feature word is made as a wire frame 
model by computer graphics (CG). In this study, the wire 
frame model is called the physical model of the feature 
words, and the space composed of the physical models is 
defined as physical model space. A physical model Mi 
corresponding to a feature word Wi of a facial element is a 
set of apexes of the wire frame model, which is described as 
follows; 
 
 
1
2
(
,
,...,
)
i
i
i
in
M =
P P
P
 
(2) 
Here, n is the number of apexes of the wire frame model for 
each facial element. Pij is jth apex of the wire frame model, 
and it is composed of xyz coordinates as shown in (3). 
 
 
(
,
,
),
1,...,
i j
i j
i j
i j
x
y
z
j
n
=
=
P
 
(3) 
Since the number of apexes is different from each facial 
element, the physical model space for each facial element 
has a different dimension (3 x the number of apexes) from 
each other. 
B. Design of Standard Face Model 
The standard face model used in this study is a Japanese 
man who is about 22 years old. The process to make the 
standard face model is as follows; First of all, the 
photographs of the face of 40 male university students were 
taken from the front and the side, and 34 items (some 
examples shown in Figure 3) were measured, and then the 
mean values of the items were calculated. Secondly, a wire 
frame model of the standard face was designed based on the 
mean values. Finally, the standard face model was completed 
by mapping the textures of eyes, eyebrows, lips and skin that 
are shown in Figure 4 on the wire frame model. 
The standard face model is divided into 5 facial elements, 
e.g. nose, eyes, mouth, cheeks, and jaw, as shown in Figure 5, 
and their shape can be deformed for each element. The 
1
2
12
9
11 
15
20
34
31
Figure 3. Examples of measurement items 
10
Figure 4. Texture and standard face model 
Figure 5. Division into five facial elements 
56
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

eyebrows are deformed by changing their shape, position and 
leaning of the texture, not by 3-dimensional model. It is not 
necessary to make the physical models for all feature words 
by manual labor for each facial element. Only the physical 
models for the feature words chosen for training data that is 
explained in Section 5 are needed to be made. Concerning 
the model of another feature words except training data, the 
coordinates of apexes of wire frame model are calculated by 
a mapping function, and the wire frame model becomes the 
physical model of other feature words. 
V. 
MAPPING FUNCTION 
There are many feature words in the word space of a 
facial element. In order to identify the mapping function, we 
need to select several training data from the feature words 
and to make physical models corresponding to the selected 
feature words. 
A. Training Data 
It is necessary that several feature words are extracted for 
training data from the word space equally in space for each 
individual facial element respectively. At first, the feature 
words were classified using cluster analysis based on Euclid 
distance among the feature words in the word space. Next, 
the representative was selected from each cluster, and they 
became the training data. The clusters of the feature words in 
the case of nose are shown classifying with colored area in 
Figure 2, and the words that are selected for the training data 
are enclosed with a square. Only the training data words are 
displayed in English for the reason mentioned in Section 3. 
The training data in the physical model space 
corresponding to the one in the word space is necessary to be 
made. Several photographs, which have the facial element 
having the impression with which the training data is 
associated were picked up from 40 photographs mentioned 
in Sections 4. The physical models of the training data were 
made by manual labor based on the average value of the 
measured items of the selected photographs. Figure 6 shows 
the twelve training data words of nose and the physical 
models corresponding to the words. 
B. Identification of Mapping Function 
A set of xyz coordinates of all the apexes in the wire 
frame model becomes the parameters of the physical model 
space. We identify the mapping function from the training 
data using a statistical method, GMDH. The mapping 
function can be described as follows; 
 
 
(
)
i
i
M =
f W  
(4) 
Since a physical model Mi is a set of apexes of the wire 
frame model as shown in equation (2), the mapping function 
for each apex becomes as follows; 
 
 
(
)
i j
j
i
P =
f W  
(5) 
Furthermore, since an apex Pij is composed of xyz 
coordinates as shown in equation (3), the actual mapping 
function becomes as follows; 
 
 
(
),
(
),
(
)
ij
ij
i
ij
yj
i
ij
zj
i
x
f
y
f
z
f
=
=
=
W
W
W  
(6) 
A set of functions are obtained for each individual facial 
element respectively. The number of mapping function for 
each facial element is 3 x the number of apexes of the wire 
frame model. 
VI. 
INSPECTION OF MAPPING FUNCTION 
We inspect the validity of the physical models, which are 
made by this system using the mapping function in this 
section. Therefore, the questionnaire including 36 sets such 
as shown in Figure 7 was presented to 20 subjects, and they 
Figure 6. Physical models of nose corresponding to 
each training data of feature word 
downward nose 
thick nose 
big nose 
crooked nose 
high nose 
long nose 
thin nose 
upward nose
short nose
small nose
low nose 
plump nose 
57
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

were required to evaluate the agreement degree between the 
feature word and the physical model with five-rank-system. 
The subjects are male students in our department, and are 
around 22 years old. The 36 sets that combine the feature 
word and the physical model are as follows; 
 
(1) The training data model and the feature word 
corresponding to it, 12 sets. 
(2) The training data model and the feature word having 
opposite meaning, 6 sets. 
(3) The model belonging to the same group of the training 
data and the feature word corresponding to it, 12sets. 
(4) The model belonging to the same group of the training 
data and the feature word having opposite meaning, 6 
sets. 
(2) and (4) are inserted into the questionnaire in order to 
check the reliability of the subjects. The examples that used 
in each case in the experiment are shown in Table I.  
The result of the questionnaire is shown in Figure 8. The 
evaluation of case (1) is slightly lower than case (3). The 
reason is that since the words directly express physical shape, 
they are selected as the training data, so it seems that the 
subjects may expect a more typical shape. On the other hand, 
since the other words except the training data are abstract, 
the subjects tend to easily agree. The portrait resembles the 
person himself if the characterized part is emphasized more 
than necessary. In the same way as this effect, the training 
data model may be the extreme geometric model that the part 
is emphasized more in our system too. However, it may be 
said that the purpose to make the physical models 
corresponding to the feature words except training data using 
mapping function can be accomplished enough. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We propose a method to synthesize a 3-dimensional face 
from the information of words in this paper. This method 
allows a user to use the words abstractly or figuratively 
expressing the physical shape of facial elements as well as 
the words directly expressing it. The characteristics of this 
method is that it defines the process where a human face is 
synthesized based on the information of words as a mapping 
Please answer with five-rank-system 
how much the agreement degree 
between the word and the synthesized nose is.
Figure 7. An example of questionnaire used in experiment to inspect 
validity of physical models 
thin nose 
Figure 8. Result of experiment to inspect validity of physical models 
3.09 ★
★ 0.38 
★ 0.75 
3.30 ★ 
TABLE I.  
EXAMPLES USED EACH CASE IN THE EXPERIMENT 
Case 
Feature word 
Physical model 
(1) 
thin nose 
 
thick nose 
 
(2) 
thick nose 
 
small nose 
 
(3) 
flattened nose 
 
tight nose 
 
(4) 
pointed nose 
snub nose 
 
 
58
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

from the word space to the physical model space. Using this 
method, it becomes possible to synthesize a human face 
corresponding to all words in the word space. 
Finally, we describe the future challenge and prospect. 
The process to synthesize human 3-dimensional face by 
combining the physical models of facial elements together is 
already completed, so we will perform the evaluation 
immediately in the future and publish it in an article. 
Although the current standard face model is a Japanese man 
who is about 22 years old, we will make it for each sex, age 
and for typical shape of facial profile, and then we will make 
it possible to synthesize more various face models. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Kaneko Ed., “Now, How Interesting a “Face” Is!; 
Processing of Facial Images and Its Application,” The Journal 
of the Institute of Image Information and Television 
Engineers, Vol. 62, No. 12, pp. 13-41, 2008. (in Japanese) 
[2] R. Valenti, A. Jaimes and N. Sebe, “Facial Expression 
Recognition as a Creative Interface,” Proceedings of 2008 
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, pp. 
433-434, 2008. 
[3] S. Kumano, K. Otsuka K, J. Yamato, E. Maeda, and Y. Sato, 
“Pose-Invariant 
Facial 
Expression 
Recognition 
using 
Variable-Intensity Templates,” International Journal of 
Computer Vision, Vol. 83, No. 2, pp. 178-194, 2009. 
[4] S. Iwashita and T. Onisawa, “Facial Caricature Drawing with 
Personal Impressions,” Proceedings of 5th International 
Conference on Soft Computing, pp. 209-212, 1998. 
[5] Y. Hoshino and F. Sugimoto F, “Forming 3-Dimensional 
Face Model Based on the Information of Words Expressing 
Facial Feature,” Proceedings of the 68th Annual Convention 
IPS Japan, Vol. 4, pp. 69-70, 2006. (in Japanese) 
[6] K. Mochida and F. Sugimoto, “A System to synthesize 3-
Dimensional Face Based on the Flexible Verbal Expression,” 
Proceedings of the 2006 Symposium of Human Interface 
Society, pp. 1139-1142, 2006. (in Japanese) 
[7] F. Sugimoto and M. Yoneyama, “3D Face Synthesis Based on 
the Information of Words Expressing Facial Features,” 
Proceedings 
of 
IEEE 
Workshop 
on 
Computational 
Intelligence in Virtual Environments, pp. 1-6, 2009. 
[8] F. Sugimoto, “A Method to Visualize Information of Words 
Expressing Facial Features,” Proceedings of IEEE Computer 
Society 2010 Fifth International Multi-conference on 
Computing in the Global Information Technology, pp. 169-
174, 2010. 
[9] A. G. Ivakhnenko, “Polynomial theory of complex systems,” 
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Vol. 
SMC-1, No. 4, pp. 364-378, 1971. 
[10] N. Honda, F. Sugimoto, and S. Aida, “Analysis of Cartoon 
Faces and Design of Face Pattern Used in Faces Method,” 
The Bulletin of the University of Electro-Communications, 
Vol. 31, No. 1, pp. 1-10, 1980. (in Japanese) 
[11] A. G. Liao, W. F. Liu, and G. Y. Xiang, “The prediction 
research on the vehicles for business transport of Guangxi in 
China with the GMDH algorithm method,” Proceedings of 
2010 International Conference on Computer Application and 
System Modeling, Vol. 3, pp. 36-38, 2010. 
[12] K. Kindaichi, Japanese Dictionary, the Fifth Edition, Sanseido, 
2001. (in Japanese) 
[13] R. Konomiya Ed., Dictionary to Explain Body, Shintensya , 
2002. (in Japanese) 
[14] C. Hayashi A. and Akuto, Multi-Dimensional Scaling Method, 
pp. 3-160, Science Co., 1976. (in Japanese) 
[15] T. Saito, Multi-Dimensional Scaling Method, pp. 197-200, 
Asakurasyoten, 1980. (in Japanese) 
 
 
 
59
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

