Natural Language Processing in IBM Watson
Assistant, an Automatic Veriﬁcation Process
1,2Beatriz Consciˆencia, 1,2Sim˜ao Santos, 1Pedro Martins, 2Lu´ıs Pombo, 1Steven Abrantes, 1Cristina Wanzeller
1Polytechnic Institute of Viseu, Dep. of Computer Sciences, Viseu, Portugal
{pedromom, steven, cwanzeller}@estgv.ipv.pt
2Soﬁnsa, IBM, Portugal
{beatriz.consciencia, simao.santos, jose.luis.pombo}@pt.softinsa.com
Abstract—The exponential growth of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
powered systems affect us all. IBM Watson Assistant is one
of the central AI-powered systems used in small and larger
business. For instance, in Portugal, IBM Watson is powering call-
center systems for companies in banking and telecommunications
business. This paper proposes a strategy that can automate the
veriﬁcation process of generalization capability in the creation
of chat-bots using IBM’s platform. K-Fold cross-validation is
a favorite technique in machine learning for estimating the
performance of a learned hypothesis on a data set. Therefore, the
proposed method is not new for testing. However, this method is
newly applied to the chat-bot application using IBM’s platform.
In this paper, the primary goal is to make the chat-bot testing
process automated, with the objective of making it faster, more
productive, and efﬁcient. Algorithms like k-fold cross-validation
demonstrate the need for a representative and reasonable amount
of data when it comes to training IBM Watson in his ability to
learn.
Keywords-IBM Watson; cognitive computing; neural networks;
natural language processing.
I. INTRODUCTION
As said, the progress in artiﬁcial intelligence is incredibly
fast, close to exponential [13]. Companies are adopting this
technology so they can make the most of it. For instance,
call centers, hotel’s room services, car’s dashboards or even
information balconies in airports are being redesigned to
embrace AI.
In 2010, IBM presented Watson, a supercomputer whose
architecture was question-answer based [15]. Recently, in
March 2018, IBM launched IBM Watson Assistant, a platform
that allows every user to create his very own chat-bot within
the domain of knowledge that the user intends the chat-bot
to be ﬂuent at. Using this platform, chat-bots are built and
deployed in a few clicks in a very user-friendly graphical
interface. For that matter, users only need to acknowledge
few terms and concepts such as “intent”, “entities”, “dialogue”
and “digressions”. In the upcoming section, those concepts are
described.
With IBM Watson Assistant, users can deploy their chat-
bots on other platforms such as Slack or even Facebook.
However, when building a chat-bot application for an enter-
prise, it needs to be tested before going into production phase
and, that testing should be carried out by real-life users who
interact with it and point out the failures on recognition and
misunderstandings of user intentions. The main goal is to make
chat-bot testing an automated process so that it becomes a lot
faster and consequently more productive and efﬁcient for the
business.
This research work presents a solution for the automation
of the testing process in the creation of chat-bots in the
Portuguese language, with the IBM Watson Assistant platform.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II, makes a brief
resume of the related work. Section III, describes basic back-
ground knowledge regarding chat-bots. Section IV explains,
making use of some examples how the k-fold algorithm is
applied. Section V, identiﬁes the case study used to motivate
this work. Section VI, brieﬂy describes, work-in-progress,
implementation. Finally, section VII, point out some of the
conclusions and future work directions.
II. RELATED WORK
IBM Watson Assistant was presented on March 19, 2018,
at the ”IBM Think 2018” in Las Vegas. It is a branch of the
giant IBM Watson aimed at creating assistants intuitively [6].
Virtual assistants created with the help of Watson Assistant
are targeted for business environments, which means that its
main ambition is not to be available directly to the general
public. [4]. Watson Assistant has already been tested in the
new Maserati GranCabrio dashboard computer and at the
Munich airport, integrated with a robot, destined to answer
to transient issues [2].
Besides, the IBM Watson Assistant, as stated earlier, is
possible to integrate into any and every business [3]. For
example, in a hotel, this can be integrated into each room
and allow the customer through simple commands to control
the temperature and ambient lights or even ask for room
services [5]. Another example, in the case of a bank, makes it
possible to integrate IBM Watson Assistant as a chat-bot on the
institution where the customer can carry out operations without
the need of replacing the concept of “customer support” [10].
However, IBM Watson Assistant, as well as IBM Watson,
do not communicate in Portuguese of Portugal. There is not
yet an algorithm of natural language comprehension oriented
to Portuguese, given the complexity and ambiguity of the
language.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Fig. 1: IBM Watson Assistant integration
Watson is also an assistant based on an intent architecture
[16], where intents represent the user’s intention in his or her
speech, that is, what he or she desires and can usually be
identiﬁed by a verb like “to go” or “to do” [12].
To the best of our knowledge, in the ﬁeld of Portuguese
(Portugal) chat-bots, this area is uncharted.
The Portuguese language, today is the sixth most spoken
language in the world, with 244 million speakers spread across
ﬁve continents. Thus, there is a large market for the Portuguese
language that has not been yet conquered by AI-powered chat-
bots.
Watson Assistant proposes that its users will be able to, in
a short time, create a chat-bot, with which they can establish a
dialogue. That creation is done in three steps, corpus creation,
design, and integration [7]. Figure 1 shows a scheme of IBM
Watson Assistant integration.
III. CONCEPTS OF CHAT-BOTS ARCHITECTURE
As said before, some concepts need to be understood before
diving into chat-bot development. Most of those concepts
are regarding “intents” and ”entities.” Intents represent the
intention of a user when he/she addresses a chat-bot. For
instance, if someone says “I want to buy a book”, wanting to
buy was the intention and therefore it would trigger an intent
that contains other phrases related to that intention, and that
can also trigger it. Another key term concerning to chat-bots
is “entity”. Referring again to the example sentence, “I want
to buy a book”, the entity, in this case, would be “books”. So,
entities are words that put intents into perspective giving them
a purpose.
The other two terms that are relevant when it comes to
developing a chat-bot with the IBM Watson Assistant platform
are “dialogue” and “digressions”. The ﬁrst term refers to the
dialogue ﬂow which the chat-bot need to follow to have a
structured speech. The second term, “digressions”, refers to
the conditions which allow the user off the chat-bot to jump
from one intent to another and return to the former one if
intended. Those represent a set of rules that allow the chat-
bot to change context without losing the sense of the speech.
IV. K-FOLD CROSS VALIDATION
K-fold Cross Validation is algorithm mainly used in ma-
chine learning related problems where the main goal is to pre-
dict something and/or to estimate the reliability of a predictive
Fig. 2: Samples Partition into k equal sized sub-samples.
Image adapted from [14].
model [1]. It is mostly applied to Supervised Learning models
where a data-set is given with known labels of the target, on
which training is performed (training data-set) [9]. It is also
given a data-set of unlabeled data, against which the model is
tested (testing set) [8]. The purpose of cross-validation is to
test the model’s ability to predict new data that were not used
in estimating it, to ﬂag problems like over-ﬁtting and to give
an insight on how the model will generalize when deployed
on production [17].
To test and validate the proposed system, the original sample
is randomly partitioned into k equal sized sub-samples, as can
be seen in Figure 2. Of the k sub-samples, a single sub-sample
is retained as the validation data for testing the model, and
the remaining k − 1 sub-samples are used as training data.
The cross-validation process is then repeated k times (the
folds), with each of the k sub-samples used exactly once as
the validation data. The k number of results from the folds can
then be averaged to produce a single estimation. The advantage
of this method over repeated random sub-sampling is that all
observations are used for both training and validation, and each
representation is used for validation precisely once [11].
Given the example “I want to buy a book”, that was
previously classiﬁed as related to speciﬁc intent, the k-fold
algorithm will match that previous classiﬁcation with the
classiﬁcation resulting from IBM Watson Assistant. After that,
it will present the result of that comparison (equal or not
equal). This approach is then applied to the entire data model
(i.e., the test array). When all instances have been compared,
the k-fold algorithm will provide the results for each metric
(e.g., Accuracy) per k fold which can be used to generate
synthetic parameters such as the average accuracy of the whole
chat-bot.
V. CASE STUDY
For this study, a chat-bot was developed in IBM Watson
Assistant platform. That chat-bot was a banking related one,
therefore named Credit-bot.
Credit-bot is a chat-bot created just for this study on an
academic proposal. It allows performing simple tasks that
usually require a trip to the local bank branch. For instance,
making a bank wire transfer; open an account, or even making
a credit simulation. Notice, again, this tasks were simulated for
academic purposes only.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Fig. 3: Implementation process
To make Credit-bot learn information about this domain
some intents where created such as “Making Transfer” that
compiles a set of useful user examples. User examples are
phrases the user may address to the chat-bot and which need
to relate to the respective intent to follow a workﬂow. Eleven
intents to perform banking related actions were created, and
twenty user examples were given to each intent, making a
total of 220 user examples. Besides that, ﬁve entities were
also created containing female names, male names, Portuguese
city’s, villages, terms related to account types and credit types.
This case-study it is aimed to create a chat-bot able of
answering in Portuguese (Portugal) natural language to most
frequent users requests. For instance, when using a chat, the
user can authenticate himself, and then request in natural
language (written) to transfer some money from his account
to any other account. The same way, he can request credit,
loans, pay regular bills, or even create routine tasks.
VI. IMPLEMENTATION
After the chat-bot creation in IBM Watson Assistant plat-
form, it was produced a JSON ﬁle with the user examples
needed to feed the chat-bot. This JSON ﬁle was then sent
to the IBM Watson Assistant platform that reads the ﬁle and
trains the chat-bot. For this study, the 20 examples per intent
were hand-crafted (in a total of 220 examples). For each intent,
the similar examples were split, where 18 were assigned to
training data and 2 for testing. The process of sending this
arrays to IBM platform is also performed through a JSON
ﬁle. The process was then repeated ten times, as ten is the
number of k. All samples were then sent to the IBM Watson
Assistant through the API, where they were classiﬁed. This
process scheme can be seen in Figure 3.
As a result of the classiﬁcation, the API outputs a clas-
siﬁcation JSON ﬁle that was used by the k-fold algorithm.
That JSON ﬁle was the target of an examination by the
algorithm itself to compare the classiﬁcation made by the IBM
Watson Assistant versus the expected rating. That comparison
resulted in another classiﬁcation in another JSON ﬁle being
the parameters “True Positive” when the classiﬁcation made
Fig. 4: Metrics
by the system was equal to the expected, and “False Positive”
when it was not. Moreover, when an example was classiﬁed
with “True Positive” the other examples must be classiﬁed as
“True Negative”, and when an example was classiﬁed as “False
Positive” the other must be classiﬁed as “False Negative”.
That classiﬁcation was then used to calculate parameters
like accuracy, recall, precision, and F1 score. This classiﬁca-
tion and obtained results are based on a confusion matrix. The
method used to reach the metrics are depicted in Figure 4. The
experimental results can be seen in Table I.
The IBM Watson Assistant platform was then powered with
a set of test arrays. Each test array consisted on a set of
examples, frequently named “user examples”, that are phrases
that a user might address to IBM Watson Assistant to trigger
an intent. Each test array had in total 22 user examples. The
test arrays were then used to test the platform generalization
ability when classifying examples that were unknown. This
test was performed to analyze where the model fails, so that
model gaps are recognized and corrected. Gaps include, for
example, spelling errors, unstructured sentences or even slang
words, are translated into intents (e.g., if the user addresses
to IBM Watson the sentence “send money” the system must
recognize it with the intent “Make a transfer”) that require a
greater quantity or quality of data for disambiguation.
Results in Table I, show that it is possible for the proposed
model to identify almost all true positives (TP). Thus, having
a high Recall value (close to 1). However, there is also a high
number of false positives (FP), which tells us that in many
cases the platform classiﬁcation fails, assuming the test cases
as being relative to an intent of which they are not.
As for the means of precision by intent, these tell us that
two intents have more miss-classiﬁcation by the platform, such
as attempting to “AfﬁrmativeResponse” (positive answer) and
“MakeTransfer” (make transfer). These intents are therefore
more susceptible to ambiguity than the rest, which may lead
to a dialogue with many doubts, making it unpleasant to the
user. One possible reason for the ambiguity is the similarities
in the training-set.
As far as the averages by k are concerned, from the same
statistical distribution, presented values are equal, indepen-
dently of the data subset, allowing no other conclusions than
the one obtained.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

TABLE I: RESULTS FROM METRICS
INTENT
AVERAGEPRECISION
STDPRECISION
AVERAGEACCURACY
STDACCURACY
AVERAGERECALL
STDRECALL
AVERAGEF1SCORE
STDF1SCORE
AFIRMATIVERESPONSE
0.4
0
0.945
0
1
0
0.571
0
MAKETRANSFER
0.4
0
0.945
0
1
0
0.571
0
FAREWELL
0.417
0.029
0.947
0.003
1
0
0.588
0.028
CAPACITIES
0.438
0.048
0.949
0.004
1
0
0.608
0.046
BOT CONTROL CHANGE SUBJECT
0.45
0.05
0.95
0.005
1
0
0.619
0.048
BOT CONTROL CLARIFICATION
0.458
0.049
0.951
0.004
1
0
0.627
0.047
CREDITSIMULATION
0.464
0.048
0.951
0.004
1
0
0.633
0.045
ACCOUNTBALANCE
0.469
0.046
0.952
0.004
1
0
0.637
0.044
NEGATIVERESPONSE
0.472
0.044
0.952
0.004
1
0
0.64
0.042
OPENACCOUNT
0.475
0.042
0.952
0.004
1
0
0.643
0.04
GREETING
0.477
0.041
0.952
0.004
1
0
0.645
0.039
Main conclusions point out that “AfﬁrmativeResponse” and
“Make a transfer” has a lower generalization capability when
compared to other intents. As stated above, this is because the
given examples are very similar.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
The main goal of this paper was to outline a strategy to
test the quality of a chat-bot automatically. This was achieved
through means of the application of the k-fold cross-validation
algorithm on the outputs of Watson Assistant intent classiﬁca-
tion, which allow us to assess the generalization ability of the
underlying model through multiple metric which, in turn, give
us a strong indication on the quality of the chat-bot solution.
In practice, the advantages include the ability to identify in
which topics the chat-bot will have more trouble ﬁguring out
the user true intent (therefore correcting the situation by adding
more relevant data or splitting intents) and a way to contin-
uously improve the quality of the chat-bot by continuously
providing real-world usage data while measuring the quality
improvements of the model. For instance, the chat-bot had less
generalization ability towards the intent “MakeTransfer”. This
can be concluded through the values of average accuracy, that
for that intent are ”0”, meaning that there was no record of
true positive neither true negatives which means that there has
the only record of false negatives and false positives. There is,
none user example trigger the intent correctly. This is related to
the quality of data given to the chat-bot since example phrases
related to the entities do not variate much in content. Therefore
we must ﬁnd other ways to invoke the intent and consequently
feed the intent with more examples so it can generalize better.
This also happens with the intent “AfﬁrmativeResponse”.
Future work will include semantic analysis, integration of
grammar parsing tools, text and/to speech recognition and
other business tools provided by IBM Watson.
Other future work directions, lead to apply the proposed
system to help visually impaired people, as well as, hearing
impaired people.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
“This article is ﬁnanced by national funds through FCT -
Fundac¸˜ao para a Ciˆencia e Tecnologia, I.P., under the project
UID/Multi/04016/2016. Furthermore, we would like to thank
the Instituto Polit´ecnico de Viseu for their support.”
More, we especially would like to thank the Viseu Polytech-
nic professors: Prof. Cristina Wanzeller for her outstanding
work supervision; Prof. Pedro Martins, for his support and
orientation. Finally, we thank Softinsa, IBM group, for making
possible this research work.
REFERENCES
[1] M. W. Browne and R. Cudeck. Single sample cross-validation indices
for covariance structures. Multivariate behavioral research, 24(4):445–
455, 1989.
[2] H. Chen, R. H. Chiang, and V. C. Storey. Business intelligence and
analytics: from big data to big impact.
MIS quarterly, pages 1165–
1188, 2012.
[3] Y. Chen, J. E. Argentinis, and G. Weber. Ibm watson: how cognitive
computing can be applied to big data challenges in life sciences research.
Clinical therapeutics, 38(4):688–701, 2016.
[4] L. Comerford, D. Frank, P. Gopalakrishnan, R. Gopinath, and J. Sedivy.
The ibm personal speech assistant. In Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing, 2001. Proceedings.(ICASSP’01). 2001 IEEE International
Conference on, volume 1, pages 1–4. IEEE, 2001.
[5] F. Curbera, M. Duftler, R. Khalaf, W. Nagy, N. Mukhi, and S. Weer-
awarana. Unraveling the web services web: an introduction to soap,
wsdl, and uddi. IEEE Internet computing, 6(2):86–93, 2002.
[6] R. High. The era of cognitive systems: An inside look at ibm watson
and how it works. IBM Corporation, Redbooks, 2012.
[7] P. Imrie and P. Bednar. Virtual personal assistant. In ItAIS 2013. AIS
Electronic Library (AISeL), 2013.
[8] A. Kapur, A. Kapur, N. Virji-Babul, G. Tzanetakis, and P. F. Driessen.
Gesture-based affective computing on motion capture data.
In Inter-
national conference on affective computing and intelligent interaction,
pages 1–7. Springer, 2005.
[9] R. Kohavi. Glossary of terms. Special issue on applications of machine
learning and the knowledge discovery process, 30(271):127–132, 1998.
[10] A. P. Massey, M. M. Montoya-Weiss, and K. Holcom. Re-engineering
the customer relationship: leveraging knowledge assets at ibm. Decision
Support Systems, 32(2):155–170, 2001.
[11] G. McLachlan, K.-A. Do, and C. Ambroise. Analyzing microarray gene
expression data, volume 422. John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
[12] S. Memeti and S. Pllana.
Papa: A parallel programming assistant
powered by ibm watson cognitive computing technology. Journal of
Computational Science, 2018.
[13] M. Minsky. Steps toward artiﬁcial intelligence. Proceedings of the IRE,
49(1):8–30, 1961.
[14] F. Pedregosa-Izquierdo. Feature extraction and supervised learning on
fMRI: from practice to theory. PhD thesis, Universit´e Pierre et Marie
Curie-Paris VI, 2015.
[15] C.
Thompson.
What
is
ibm’s
watson.
New
York
Times
Magazine
(accessed
on
October
2018).
http://www.
nytimes.
com/2010/06/20/magazine/20Computer-t. html, 2018.
[16] C. Todd, R. Vazquez Pena, and R. Srinivas.
Evaluation of artiﬁcial
intelligence frameworks. SMU Data Science Review, 1(1):10, 2018.
[17] X. Xie, J. W. Ho, C. Murphy, G. Kaiser, B. Xu, and T. Y. Chen. Testing
and validating machine learning classiﬁers by metamorphic testing.
Journal of Systems and Software, 84(4):544–558, 2011.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

