Sightseeing Spot Communication System using Four-Frame Stories 
Tomoko Izumi 
College of Information Science and 
Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
izumi-t@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp 
 
 
Masaki Masuda 
Graduate School of Information 
Science and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
rnaskm17@gmail.com 
 
 
Yoshio Nakatani 
College of Information Science and 
Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
nakatani@is.ritsumei.ac.jp
 
Abstract— Recently, many people introduced their personal 
sightseeing trips on the Internet, with the effect that some of 
the introduced sightseeing spots have attracted the attention of 
tourists. In this research, we propose a sightseeing 
communication system based on making and sharing a 
sightseeing “story”. Users make a story consisting of four 
frames about the sightseeing by editing pictures taken at 
sightseeing spots. The story-creating process yields to new 
discoveries about the appeal of sightseeing spots, because the 
user will look for topics to feature in a story during their 
sightseeing trip. We expect that such a process will make the 
sightseeing more individual and creative. The produced story 
is also shared among other users, which we anticipate to 
generate interest in the sightseeing spots. 
Keywords-Sightseeing support system, Four-frame story, 
Tourism recommendation. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A great deal of importance is placed on the tourism 
industry in Japan. Domestic and overseas trips are one of the 
main leisure activities of Japanese people. In recent years, 
the sightseeing style of Japanese consumers is changing. 
Traditionally, the package tour has been the most popular 
sightseeing style in Japan. The package tour is a travel 
product wherein the entire process including destinations, 
routes and time schedule, is managed by a tour company. 
Thus, the participants enjoy their sightseeing simply by 
following the instructions of a tour guide. However, another 
sightseeing style has come into use significantly in recent 
years. This is a style wherein tourists determine the process 
of their sightseeing themselves and enjoy their trip without 
using a package tour. Ishimori [1] describes this as 
“autonomous tourism.” In addition, “Travelers Trends 2010” 
[2], published by the Japan Travel Bureau Foundation, 
calculated that the number of people who were interested in 
gourmet food, history, urban tourism, and strolling had 
increased by 10% in 2009 compared to 2007. With all these 
factors, it can be said that tourists are interested in various 
activities and want experiences of various types. Therefore, 
just as Ishimori points out, the sightseeing style in Japan is 
changing from moving efficiently along a predetermined 
route to freely visiting places of interest anywhere, anytime, 
and tourists are looking for new discoveries and chance 
encounters. 
In planning such a personal tour, many people gather 
information about sightseeing spots from social media such 
as Facebook and Twitter, and take into account 
word-of-mouth information from such sites. A tourist who 
had a positive experience and memories uploads some 
stories and photos of their trip to the Internet, and other 
people who are planning their own tours are affected by 
these shared stories and photos. Since people have 
diversified personal preferences, the attractive factors of a 
sightseeing spot differ from person to person. Thus, people 
select information on the Internet, which matches their 
preferences and plan their personalized tours. Therefore, a 
desired recommendation system for sightseeing spots should 
propose not only standard destinations but also personalized 
destinations for each user, and lead to new discoveries about 
the appeal of sightseeing spots.  
This 
paper 
proposes 
a 
novel 
sightseeing 
spot 
communication system. Our goal is to invite tourists to visit 
various new sightseeing spots by sharing their experiences 
and memories about trips with each other. As a way of 
sharing experiences of the sightseeing spots, we focus on the 
interesting part of making and reading a “story” using 
photos taken at the spots. That is, users make a four-frame 
story  about their sightseeing experience by editing photos 
taken at sightseeing spots, and share the story using our 
system. The shared stories are read by other users, which we 
anticipate to generate interest in the introduced sightseeing 
spots. We consider that the processes of creating and sharing 
the stories will yield new discoveries about the appeal of 
sightseeing spots, because the user will look for topics to 
feature in the story during their sightseeing trip in the 
story-creating process, and in the sharing processes, the user 
will have access to the various perspectives of many other 
tourists.  
This paper presents the results of an evaluation 
experiment using our prototype system. These results 
demonstrate the effectiveness of our system in terms of 
occurrence of discoveries about new appeal of sightseeing 
spots by creating four-frame stories, guidance to new spots 
by sharing stories, and the addition of narrative to 
sightseeing information.  
In this paper, we present the related works in Section II. 
Sections III and IV show the outline and details of our 
proposed system. The evaluation results are shown in 
Section V, and we conclude this paper in Section VI. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we introduce sightseeing navigation 
systems, which attempt to create opportunities for 
encounters, and systems for sharing edited photos. 
A. Encounter-Creating Navigation Systems 
Most traditional sightseeing navigation systems used by 
tourists during sightseeing offer the shortest route and 
methods of transport from a departure to a destination, and 
attach a high value to the efficiency of user movement. 
However, it can be said that the user's area of activity is 
limited, and opportunities for new discoveries and chance 
encounters that may happen during sightseeing decrease in 
order to realize high efficiency. Considering the sightseeing 
trends in Japan in recent years, such methods are not 
effective because tourists who demand fun and memorable 
sightseeing are increasing. 
In order to resolve these problems, some sightseeing 
navigation systems, which attempt to stimulate new 
discoveries and chance encounters, have been proposed [3]. 
These systems adapt the idea of “Benefit of Inconvenience”. 
Ichikawa, et al. proposes a system which shows a map 
consisting only of a rough handwritten route, some icons 
and the current position of the tourist (Fig. 1 (a)). In the 
system proposed by Tanaka et al., an electronic map hides 
the information related to the area immediately surrounding 
the tourist (Fig. 1(b)). By hiding detailed maps and routes, 
these systems promote interaction with the user’s previously 
unnoticed surrounding environment, and foster new 
discoveries and chance encounters. As an extended system, 
Takagi et al. built a navigation system, which hides most of 
the map’s information (Fig. 1(c)) [4]. In this system, only 
the current and destination positions, and some landmarks, 
are shown on the display. The landmarks are selected based 
on the user’s preferences.  
 
 
      (a)                 (b)              (c) 
Figure 1. Screen images of navigation systems which promote interaction 
with the user’s surrounding environment.  
 
B. Edited Photo-Sharing Systems 
Due to the widespread use of smartphones, in recent 
years some tourists use photo-sharing applications, such as 
LINE camera [5]. Users of these applications take photos at 
sightseeing spots using their cell-phone or smartphone 
camera, edit these photos in the application, and share the 
edited photos with their friends or all other users. In LINE 
camera, a user can edit a photo by adding text, stamps 
featuring characters, and decorated frames. The edited 
photos are shared on LINE, Facebook, and Twitter. The goal 
of these systems is only the sharing of photos, not the 
sharing of information about sightseeing spots such as their 
locations. Thus, they do not provide a function of navigation 
to sightseeing spots.  
Dinh Pham Quang et al. propose a navigation support 
system to sightseeing spots by sharing photos with “graffiti” 
[6]. A tourist takes a photo at a spot, and enjoys editing the 
photo by adding graffiti freely. The photo with graffiti and 
the location data of the photo are shared on the Internet. 
Other users see the photo with graffiti on an electronic map. 
Evaluation 
results 
demonstrate 
that 
the 
expressing 
sightseeing as a narrative by adding graffiti to photos attracts 
other users’ interest. In addition, the system implements 
sightseeing spot navigation function by providing location 
information showing the place where the photo was taken. 
Some evaluators said that they would look for graffiti topics 
during their sightseeing trip. This fact indicates that the 
system creates opportunities for new discoveries and chance 
encounters. 
Dinh Pham Quang et al. use only one photo to express a 
story. In our study, we use more than one photo; specifically, 
we use a four-frame story, because we consider that higher 
diversity of story will realize the provision of multiple 
opportunities for new discoveries and chance encounters.  
III. 
OUTLINE OF PROPOSED METHOD 
This paper proposes a novel communication system by 
sharing four-frame stories based on photos taken at 
sightseeing spots. The system targets tourists who are 
carrying out casual sightseeing on foot. Through the action 
of making and sharing stories, tourists obtain opportunities 
for new discoveries and chance encounters. 
A. Benefits of Story-Making 
Cognitive actions related to creative processes occur in a 
chain [7]. In order to perform a creative process, a human 
responds sensitively to various visual features and 
relationships between spatial locations of objects in a space, 
and then creates conceptual meanings for the objects. Thus, 
such responses lead to a new discovery for the human.  
Our proposed method compels tourists to have active 
interaction with their environment at sightseeing spots by 
taking actions to create stories. This active interaction 
provides a chain of cognitive actions and new discoveries. 
B. Basic Policy of Method 
We propose a sightseeing spot communication system, 
which utilizes sharing of four-frame stories. A tourist takes 
photos during their trip, and creates short stories of four 
frames which introduce the trip. The created stories are 
shared using our system, and other users read the shared 
stories to learn about the introduced spots. In order to 
consider four-part narrative structure, which is traditional in 
Japan, we limit the length of the stories to four frames. This 
structure is used internationally, one of the famous 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

examples is SNOOPY’s story [8]. Limiting the length of 
story simplifies the process of story creation. 
The scenarios for both modes of use, creating a story and 
sharing a story, are as follows:  
1) Scenario for the story-creating process 
1. A tourist considers a four-frame story using photos 
taken at sightseeing spots when he encounters 
interesting objects such as scenery, buildings, shops, 
food, etc. During this time of consideration, it is 
important to conduct sightseeing with an awareness 
of whether there is anything suitable for a story 
around oneself, thereby developing sensitivity for 
sightseeing.  
2. If the tourist can construct a story, they create a 
four-frame story by taking some photos and editing 
them. Editing methods include attaching text 
comments, appropriate characters and graffiti. More 
than one spot may be included in a story.  
3. The created story is sent to the system’s server in 
order to share the story. Location information for 
each photo in the story, obtained via GPS(Global 
Positioning System), is also stored on the server. 
2) Scenario for the story-sharing process 
1. A user browses the shared four-frame stories from a 
location outside of the spots introduced in the story. 
However, the user cannot read the last frame of the 
story outside of the spots introduced in the story. 
This mechanism stimulates the user to wish to know 
the ending of the story, and to visit the introduced 
sightseeing spots.  
2. The user conducts sightseeing based on the shared 
story that they are interested in. A photo of each 
frame in the shared story is shown at a 
corresponding position on an electronic map. Thus, 
the user can visit the spots that were introduced in 
the stories that interest them. At the sightseeing spots, 
the user can see all frames of the story, including the 
last frame.  
IV. 
SYSTEM DETAILS 
In this section, we describe our prototype system.  
A. Development Environment 
Our system is assumed to be used during sightseeing. 
Thus, the system needs to be developed for mobile 
computers. In our prototype system, we use the iPhone as a 
mobile computer. The system was developed as an iPhone 
application in Objective-C. The server requires a database 
function, for which we use XML and PHP.  
B. System Architecture 
Fig. 2 shows the architecture of our prototype system, 
which consists of an iPhone and a server. The server stores 
the four-frame stories uploaded by the user in a database. A 
unique ID is attached to each uploaded story. Photo data for 
each frame in the story are assigned a name with the ID of 
the story and its order in the story, and stored in an image 
folder. For each frame, the database stores its ID and 
location information obtained via GPS(Global Positioning 
System). The program to upload to and download from the 
server uses PHP(Hypertext Preprocessor). The iPhone 
device reads this PHP program in order to access the 
database.  
C. System Functions 
Our system consists of the following three functions:  
1) Store the photos taken at sightseeing spots, 2) create a 
four-frame story, and 3) browse the shared four-frame 
stories. In this section, the details of these functions are 
described.  
1) Photo Store Function 
With this function, the user can take and store a photo. 
There is a camera button on the lower left of the main 
screen. When the user pushes this button, the equipped 
camera is activated. The user takes photos and stores them 
in the local memory of the iPhone. The stored photos are 
shown on the electronic map. Therefore, the user can see 
the photo image and the location where the photo was taken, 
and select some of the photos to use in making a story. 
2) Story Creation Function 
With this function, the user selects a photo from the 
stored ones in the iPhone, and edits the photo by adding 
texts, characters, and graffiti to the photo. Fig. 3 shows an 
example of screens during the creation process. Our system 
provides six functions to edit photos, each of which 
corresponds to a button at the bottom of the screen.  
1. Pen button: When the user writes some graffiti on the 
photo, they tap this button. The pen color can be 
selected from three colors: red, blue, and green. The 
pen also has five width settings. 
2. Callout button: When the user adds some text in a 
speech bubble, they tap the callout button. A speech 
bubble of default size appears on the photo. The user 
writes some text in the speech bubble, and then 
Figure 2. System architecture. 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

moves it to an appropriate position in the photo (Fig. 
3(a)).  
3. Chara button: When the user taps this button, a list of 
the characters in this system is displayed. The user 
selects one of the characters, and double taps the 
position where they want to place the character. The 
character appears in a default size at the tapped 
position (Fig. 3(b)).  
4. Size button: The size of text in a speech bubble, the 
speech bubble itself, and characters is changed by 
tapping the size button.  
5. ID button: The order of the edited photo in a story is 
assigned by tapping the ID button. After tapping this 
button, the user inputs the order.  
6. Save button: After editing a photo, the user taps the 
save button. When all frames in a story are created, 
they are uploaded to the server.  
 
 
3) Story Browse Function 
Using the browse function, a user can see the shared 
four-frame stories and learn the locations where the photos 
in the story were taken. Fig. 4(a) shows an example of a 
screen of the list of shared stories. The user selects one of 
the stories that they want to read. Then, the user can read 
each frame of the selected story, and learn the locations 
where the photos in the story were taken. Fig. 4(b) shows an 
example of a screen indicating the locations of a story. Thus, 
when the user sees an interesting photo or story, they can go 
to the place introduced in the photo or story by using this 
map function.  
When a user sees this list of shared stories from a place, 
other than where the photos in the story were taken, the last 
frames of these stories are not available for the user (Fig. 
4(a)). This trick gives the user motivation to go to the 
sightseeing spots introduced in the stories that they found 
interesting. 
V. 
EVALUATION EXPERIMENT 
A. Experiment Method 
We conducted an evaluation experiment with 12 human 
evaluators, who are students in Ritsumeikan University in 
Japan and are selected randomly from among applicants, in 
order to verify the effectiveness of this sightseeing spot 
communication system. The experiment was conducted with 
Kyoto as the experiment area, and subjects strolled in the 
eastern area of the city centered around the Kiyomizu-dera 
temple. The reasons why this area was chosen for the 
evaluation experiment are:  
(1) The area is suitable for casual sightseeing by foot, 
because there are various famous spots including 
historical places, cultural places, etc. 
(2) Tourists are able to enjoy the streetscape of Kyoto, 
which has many narrow alleyways. 
(3) Many of the evaluators in this experiment had not 
visited this area before.  
The evaluators in the experiment were 11 men and 1 
woman in their twenties who live in the Kansai area, which 
includes Kyoto. The first experiment was carried out in 
December 2012 with half of the evaluators, and the second 
one in January 2013 with the remaining evaluators. They 
were assigned randomly to three groups regardless of their 
gender, age, previous experience of sightseeing in Kyoto, etc. 
Each group consisted of two persons.  
Each group enjoyed the streetscape freely in the target 
area with at least one iPhone device installed with our 
prototype system. First, at a start point in the area, we 
explained the target area and how to use our system easily to 
the evaluators, and instructed them to return to the start point 
in 90 minutes. One observer accompanied each group to 
observe the behavior of the evaluators.  
We asked the evaluators to answer a questionnaire in 
order to gather evaluation data on the usefulness of the 
system. In this questionnaire, questions about the following 
three facts were asked:  
 
 
 
text 
(a) 
Use of speech bubbles 
(b) Use of characters 
Figure 3. Examples of story creation function 
   
   
(a) List of shared stories 
(b) Locations of photos in a 
story 
Figure 4. List screen of four-frame stories 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

(1) For each story the evaluators created: “why did you 
want to create this story?” 
(2) For each visit to a spot which was introduced in a 
shared story: “why did you want to go there?” 
(3) For the whole process of sightseeing using this system: 
“how would this system affect your sightseeing?” 
B. Evaluation Results 
1) New discoveries about the appeal of sightseeing 
spots 
First, we will examine the effect of creating stories during 
sightseeing. We expected that the act of looking for topics 
for stories would provide tourists with new discoveries 
about the appeal of sightseeing spots. 
In answer to the question “How would this system affect 
your sightseeing?” evaluators gave replies such as, “I 
focused on various objects in the sightseeing spots to look 
for a topic for a story,” “I walked with greater care than 
usual because I wanted to find some interesting objects to 
create a story,” etc. Most of the evaluators conducted their 
sightseeing actively and creatively by searching for 
interesting episodes and objects during their sightseeing, and 
by thinking about using these for story creation. For example, 
one of the groups created a story about interesting signs. 
They could also find some interesting objects in addition to 
funny signs because they looked around with curiosity.  
A further interesting finding is that this system fosters a 
competitive spirit in the tourists. Some of the evaluators 
reported this fact in the questionnaire. Because the created 
stories are shared with other users, the evaluators made an 
effort to create a good story to get others’ attention. 
Therefore, they looked around themselves carefully to find 
something funny or interesting. That is, it can be said that 
the communication of sightseeing spots based on four-frame 
stories is effective for the realization of creative sightseeing.  
At the end of this evaluation, the evaluators talked about 
the stories that they had created. Such feedback from other 
users is good motivation for creating good stories. One of 
our future tasks is implementing a function for receiving 
feedback from other users in order to sustain motivation.  
2) Navigation function by sharing stories 
One of our aims in this study is to invite tourists to visit 
various new sightseeing spots by sharing their experiences 
as a story. In our system, the locations where the photos in a 
story were taken are shown on an electronic map. As a result, 
the behavior of visiting spots introduced in the shared stories 
occurred three times in the first evaluation, and seven times 
in the second evaluation. The reason that the number of such 
visits by the second group was larger was that the first group 
conducted experimental sightseeing under conditions where 
there were no shared stories in the system. That is, the 
evaluators in the first group could not see the shared stories 
at first, so they focused on the creation of stories.  
The visits to the introduced spots can be classified into 
three categories based on motivation:  
(1) Eight visits were motivated by interesting photos in 
the shared story. 
(2) Three visits were motivated by the distance to the 
introduced spot. 
(3) One visit was motivated by the desire to complete an 
incomplete task. 
Examples of the first motivation are photos of scenic views, 
a shop displaying favorite characters, and something unique. 
In answer to the question “Why did you want to go there?” 
some evaluators replied that they read an interesting story, 
and the story unfolded there. That is, they became interested 
in the photos by reading the shared stories. The second 
motivation is caused by the map function. In this system, a 
user can learn the locations of photos in shared stories. The 
evaluators found interesting spots close to their current 
position, and were able to go there easily.  
   Moreover, it was demonstrated that the users shared 
information about less famous spots by sharing four-frame 
stories, and that this communication yielded new discoveries 
about the appeal of these spots. An evaluator stated that he 
wanted to go to ordinary places using our system, whereas 
he had tended to go only to major spots introduced in 
guidebooks. Another evaluator also reported that he 
obtained interesting information about unique sightseeing 
spots that could not be focused on by simply following a 
tour guide. 
   By using this system, users encounter various 
perceptions of sightseeing spots. For example, one frames of 
two different shared stories are based on photos taken at the 
same shop. In one frame, the character good in the shop is 
perceived to be cute, but in the other, it is expressed as 
humorous. This was reflected by one of the evaluators, who 
reported that he realized that there are various ways of 
thinking about sightseeing.  
 
3) Effect of adding narrative to sightseeing information. 
In this section, we describe the effect of sharing stories 
based on photos, rather than sharing only edited photos. 
From the evaluators’ answers to the question “Why did you 
want to create the story?” we found that there are three 
methods of creating stories:  
(1) The theme of story is decided previously.  
(2) The story is created in chronological order of 
sightseeing.  
(3) The ending of the story is decided first, and the other 
frames of the story are created subsequently. 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

In the first method, the evaluators set a theme for their 
story such as interesting spots or funny signs, and created all 
four frames based on the theme. In the stories created by this 
method, the evaluators used characters which matched their 
feelings at the sightseeing spots. They also expressed their 
feelings for the spots by adding some text in speech bubbles, 
which could not be expressed only by using characters.  
   In the second method, the evaluators created four frames, 
which expressed only their experience of sightseeing. The 
evaluators who created their stories in this way added some 
information to the photos using characters, speech bubbles 
and graffiti to introduce interesting sightseeing spots. Fig. 5 
shows an example of a story created this way. 
   In the last method, the evaluators got an idea for the 
ending of the story first, and then looked for the other three 
spots to create the remaining three frames. In this case, they 
conducted their sightseeing wanting to take specific photos 
which could lead to the ending. Thus, the observers saw that 
the evaluators looked at various objects at the spots in order 
to discover something interesting.  
   From the experiment results, we can identify the 
following effects of adding narrative to sightseeing 
information:  
(1) Motivation to visit spots: All of the evaluators in the 
second half of the experiment said that “we wanted to 
go there because we wanted to know the ending of 
the stories.” This motivation is derived from adding 
narrative to sightseeing information and the trick of 
making the final frames unavailable.  
(2) Self-expression: The evaluators tried to create good 
stories that would attract attention from other users. 
This behavior makes their sightseeing creative (see 
Section V-B-1).  
(3) Discovering less famous sightseeing spots: The 
shared stories are triggers to go to the spots 
introduced in the stories. In the questionnaire, there 
were some answers, such as “we had not been 
interested in that spot, but the stories and its edited 
photos were very fun, so we went there.” 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper proposed a sightseeing spot communication 
system based on making and sharing a sightseeing story. 
Users of this system make a story of four frames about their 
sightseeing by editing pictures taken at sightseeing spots, 
and share it among other users. An evaluation experiment 
demonstrated that our proposed system is effective in terms 
of making the sightseeing individual and creative. In 
addition, by reading the shared stories, people are interested 
in new spots introduced in the stories. 
Our future works aim to evaluate this system with more 
evaluators quantitatively, because this paper showed the 
results from 12 evaluators, and compare with other 
application. In addition, we limit the length of story to four 
frames, but there are may choices of story length, such as 
two, six or eight frames. The effect of story length and 
giving the choices to users should be revealed. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Ishimori, “The Potentialities of Autonomous Tourism in 
the Twenty-first Century,” Senri Ethnological Reports, vol. 
23, 2001, pp. 5-14 (in Japanese). 
[2] Japan Travel Bureau Foundation, “Travelers Trends 2010,” 
Japan Productivity Center , 2010. 
[3] Y. Nakatani, K. Tanaka, and K. Ichikawa, "New Approach to 
a Tourist Navigation System that Promotes Interaction with 
Environment", 
Advances 
in 
Computer 
Science 
and 
Engineering, InTech Publishing, March, 2011, pp. 353-370. 
[4] S. Takagi, T. Izumi, and Y. Nakatani, ”A Sightseeing 
Navigation System without Route Information”, Fifth 
International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented 
and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services 
(CENTRIC 2012), November, 2012, pp. 50-55. 
[5] NAVER Japan Corporation, “LINE camera”,  https://itunes. 
apple.com/jp/app/id516561342 (retrieved: 5/30/2013). 
[6] D. P. Quang, M. Masuda, and Y. Nakatani, “A Navigation 
System of Sightseeing Spots using Photos with Graffiti”, the 
74th National Convention of IPSJ, March, 2012, pp. 303-304  
(in Japanese). 
[7] M. Suwa, “Discussion on Pragmatic Studies to Synthesize 
Creative Processes”, Journal of the Japanese Society for 
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 19，no. 2，March, 2012, pp. 
205-213 (in Japanese). 
[8] Peanuts, http://www.peanuts.com/ (retrieved: 8/13/2013). 
Figure 5. An example of shared stories in this experiment(Since the story is written in Japanese, the text in the figure are translated into English.). 
 
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

