User Profile Matching: A Statistical Approach 
Work in Progress Paper 
 
Benjamin Wassermann, Gottfried Zimmermann 
Wilhelm Schickard Institute of Computer Science  
Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen 
Germany 
benjamin.wassermann@uni-tuebingen.de 
gottfried.zimmermann@uni-tuebingen.de 
 
 
Abstract - Users interact with many applications and user 
interfaces, optionally involving additional user interface 
components such as assistive technologies. Adaptations of user 
interfaces, including the activation of assistive technologies, 
typically require the user to perform manual adaptations for 
every new device and application. It would be beneficial for the 
user, if adaptation data could be automatically collected and 
stored in a standardized way, to be utilized by any device and 
application the user interacts with. In this paper we present a 
new approach for user interface adaptation, based on 
statistical methods. These methods operate on an extended set 
of user interaction-related properties, which may be part of 
user profiles. We plan to implement this approach in a 
prototype on real user data and evaluate its results against 
manual adaptations by user interface experts.  
Keywords - Adaptive user interface, user interface matching, 
user profile, user profile matching, statistical analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Internet is a fast evolving network exposing new 
technologies in a fast pace. In one of the current trends, user-
generated files and data are moved from the local desktop to 
the cloud in the Web. This means that the user stores their 
documents, emails, pictures, etc. on Internet-based servers 
rather than their personal computers. Not only is the data 
stored on the Internet; the application itself to create and edit 
the data is provided over the Internet, running directly in the 
Web browser. This allows for accessing and editing the same 
data on a broad range of devices (personal computer, mobile 
phones, etc.) that have access to the Internet all over the 
world. 
Currently, many new and versatile Web applications are 
emerging in the Internet. The user is confronted with new 
dynamic user interfaces on various devices that differ from 
classical Websites and local applications. These new Web 
applications give rise to new opportunities in user 
interaction, in that dynamic user interfaces can be adapted 
not only for the device and environmental contexts, but also 
for the needs and preferences of any user. Such user interface 
adaptations have the potential to increase the usability of 
Web applications in general, and particularly for people with 
disabilities. 
We identify three different approaches of automatic user 
interface adaptations: The rule based approach uses 
heuristics to make decisions on adaptations; the statistical 
approach uses large collections of recorded user data to make 
decisions based on statistical analysis of the data. A third 
approach combines both previous approaches as a hybrid. 
Statistical approaches for matchmaking are used in 
different fields of applications. One important application 
field is image and video processing. Statistical algorithms are 
used to find patterns and objects, improve quality, predict 
movement, etc. [1]. 
On the Web, statistical approaches are currently being 
used for various purposes: 
• 
Amazon is collecting data from the users while they 
are using their shopping portal. Amazon uses 
statistical algorithms on the collected data to find user 
preferences on products and align this information 
with similar users to create selective shopping 
suggestions for a user [2].  
• 
Dating agencies are using statistical methods to find 
good matches between people. They analyze the user 
profiles and their collected data about successful 
meetings to continuously improve their matching [3].  
While these applications use statistical approaches for 
making recommendations to the user, we want to use 
statistical algorithms for user interface adaptations based on 
user profiles. 
Research on user interface adaptations is being conducted 
in a number of projects, but none of them uses a statistical 
matching approach.  The European FP7 projects MyUI [4] 
and GUIDE [5] are examples of such projects.  
Before we describe our concept, we will set the scene 
with a scenario that describes an instance of what the concept 
of this paper could achieve. After that we will give a brief 
introduction to the technical backgrounds for user profiles, 
user profile matching and user interface matching based on 
user profiles. In section 4 we will discuss the evaluation 
methods we intend to use to prove the concepts. Finally, we 
give an outlook for how we plan to implement and validate 
the concepts of this paper. 
60
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

II. 
EXAMPLE SCENARIO 
Martha (31 years old) lives alone in her flat in the city 
center. She has a notebook for surfing in the Web and for 
writing emails. She also has a smartphone, but uses it only to 
make calls or to write text messages. At her work, she has a 
personal computer and writes product reviews. 
Martha uses an office suite for writing texts, both at 
home and at work. She is glad to have managed to use this 
application, and doesn’t know much about other software. 
To perform the functions in her office suite, she uses the 
computer mouse in the office and the touchpad on her 
notebook at home. She doesn’t use keyboard shortcuts, 
except for copy and paste. For other features, such as text 
formatting, she uses the toolbar of the office application. 
At work she got an assignment to write a report, together 
with her colleagues. They have agreed to use a new Internet-
based tool that allows them to work in parallel on the same 
text. It also promises to adapt automatically to the user’s 
needs and preferences.  
Martha goes to the website and registers for the new tool, 
so that she can use it. Before she can start, she has to fill out 
a questionnaire, asking a few questions about her preferences 
for different applications, such as what software she uses, 
whether she uses shortcuts and, if so, what kind of shortcuts.  
In fact, the user interface of the Web application looks 
very similar to her desktop program. She can start working 
immediately without learning the new interface. There are a 
few functions she doesn’t know. However, the program 
informs her about the new functionality and tells her that 
other users (that have a similar profile to hers) have rated 
these functions as very practical. Martha reads the 
descriptions and decides that two of the four functions might 
be useful for her and disables the other two functions. 
Internally, the system recognizes the user adaptations and 
stores them in the user profile, so the functions will no longer 
appear. 
Over the time, Martha starts to use other Web 
applications and is very pleased how well the user interfaces 
adapt to her behavior and needs. In particular, changes done 
in one application are also reflected in the other applications. 
Meanwhile, she wants this functionality for all of her 
applications. 
III. 
TECHNICAL BACKGROUND 
A. User Profile 
The foundation for adapting a user interface to a specific 
user in general, and in particular for above scenario, is the 
user profile. It stores various data that can be used to derive 
an optimal adaptation of the user interface.  
Data mining of user profiles is essential if we want to 
apply statistical methods to user interface adaptation. We 
need to operate on rich information items on the user, which 
is more than mere demographic data. Information about the 
user preferences and patterns of typical user interactions are 
required to make informed and reasonable decisions. This 
can be achieved by user modeling techniques [6] [7]. 
A user profile should therefore include: 
• 
Demographic data; 
• 
Preferences on features, settings, shortcuts, etc.; 
• 
Preferred user interaction strategies (user interaction 
patterns); 
• 
User interaction enhancements, such as assistive 
technologies. 
Of course, as the profile holds sensitive user data, 
security and privacy issues about data storing and data access 
need 
to 
be 
thoroughly 
considered 
in 
an 
actual 
implementation. However, in this paper we focus on the 
concept of user profile matching.  
B. User Profile Space 
An initial user profile is normally incomplete, because 
user interaction patterns or user preferences are recorded 
gradually while the user works with various applications. In 
general, only demographic data and simple preference data, 
which is present at the beginning, is collected by an initial 
questionnaire. This data is not sufficient to produce any 
reliable results by the means of statistical analysis. One 
possible solution to this problem is to borrow the missing 
data from other similar, though more complete, user 
profiles. For this task a user profile space is needed, that is 
generated from a high number of user profiles. Such profiles 
are collected over a long period of time to yield enough 
interactions and preferences of the users. It is also possible 
to import user profiles from existing profile databases or to 
create them from virtual users or personas.  
A new user profile is classified by a profile matching 
component and is afterwards integrated into the user profile 
space, using the available data stored in the profile (see fig. 
1). After the classification, similar user profiles can be used 
to fill the gaps in the new user profile. It is important to note 
that at this point, this data is only a hypothesis by the system, 
and is therefore assigned with appropriate probability levels. 
However, with every new interaction of the user with any 
application, this hypothetical information becomes either 
corrected or enforced, resulting in higher probability scores. 
 
 
By following this process, we can constantly extend and 
improve the user profile space, with new user profiles being 
integrated and existing profiles validated by incoming user 
data (see fig. 2). 
We will use a statistical approach for matching user 
profiles into the user profile space. One candidate is the 
principal component analysis (PCA) [8]. This method 
transforms a high dimensional feature space, derived from 
the user profiles, to so-called principal components. Ideally, 
User Profile
User
Profile Matching
User Profile Space
b
a
Figure 1.  Sequence for (a) creating a new user profile and (b) matching it 
to the user profile space. After the matching the user profile is 
supplemented with data from similar profiles.  
61
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

no data gets lost with the transformation, and redundant data 
gets combined to correlated data.  
A new user profile can be aligned along the principal 
components to get an optimal classification in the user 
profile space. Now, the correlated data can be used for the 
completion of the missing information of a user profile. 
Additionally, a plausibility weight in form of a probability is 
assigned for any derived information item of the user space. 
This probability is continuously adjusted to user profile 
space updates, e.g., when new user profiles are added or 
profiles get updated with new data from a user.  
 
 
 
C. User Interface Matching 
For the matching of a user interface based on a user 
profile, two different means of adaptation should be 
considered:  
• 
Static configuration of (assistive) tools, which 
enhance an application (e.g., screenreader) 
• 
Direct customization of an application (e.g., changing 
font size, or reordering menus) 
For 
direct 
customization, 
an 
interface 
matching 
component obtains a list of possible adaptations of an 
application. From this list, it provides an optimal adaptation, 
as it compares the customization options with the user 
profile. The result is passed on to a special service (interface 
adaptor), which is responsible for   performing the 
adjustments on the corresponding platform or application 
(see fig. 3).  
For the matching itself, different approaches can be used: 
rule-based, statistical or a hybrid approach combining the 
rule-based and statistical approaches. 
In the statistical approach, appropriate algorithms from 
the field of machine learning and statistical analysis will be 
used for the matching. A classical candidate approach is 
based on Support Vector Machines [9]. 
They perform a classification that can make a statement 
about which adaptation options make a good match to a user 
profile. This classification is based on previous adjustment 
decisions made by the user or similar users. Therefore, 
extensive training datasets must be created before this 
approach yields reliable results.  
 
 
In addition, the user can correct wrong decisions of the 
classifier by manually undoing or changing adjustments. 
These user adjustments are stored in the user profile and will 
influence future decisions of the matching algorithm. 
 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
The implementation and fine-tuning of the proposed 
approach requires an iterative approach based on real user 
data and extensive assessments of the results achieved.  
At the beginning, we will develop an initial set of 
training and validation data.  Based on this data, we will 
experiment with existing statistical methods and their 
parameters. The results of these approaches will be 
compared against the set of validation data. As more data 
becomes available, we will conduct additional optimization 
through parameter adjustments, and conduct small-scale user 
tests to compare this approach to the other approaches 
(rule/heuristics-based, hybrid, expert).  
We will use manual adaptations by user interface experts 
as a benchmark to compare and evaluate the automatic 
adaptation strategies. The quantitative evaluation will be 
based on a compound metric, consisting of measurements on 
effectiveness, efficiency and user satisfaction. Our goal is for 
the statistical approach to come as close as 80% to the 
benchmark of the expert-provided adaptations.  
 
V. 
OUTLOOK 
In this paper, we introduced a concept for adapting user 
interfaces based on user profiles using statistical methods. 
For this, not only the matching algorithm is important, but 
also user profiles and their structure, collecting and storing 
user information and the classification of new user profiles 
within a user profile space. 
User
Interface Matching
c
Interface Adaptor
User Profile
Adaptive Applications
e
d
a
Figure 3.  Sequence for matching a user interface to a user profile 
a. 
The user starts a new application.  
b. The application starts the user interface adaptation by transfering the 
adaptation feature list to the interface matching algorithm.  
c. 
The matching algorithm also receives the user profile of the current 
user to perform the matchmaking.  
d. The matchmaking results are forwarded to the interface adaptor.  
e. 
The interface adaptor applies the adaptations on the running 
application. 
User Profile
Adaptive Applications
User
User Profile Space
b
c
Figure 2.  Sequence for updating the user profile and user profile space. 
a. 
The user starts a new application.  
b. Manual adaptations made by the user are stored to the user profile.  
c. 
Updating the user profile also updates the user profile space.
62
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

One of the main tasks is to find optimal statistical 
methods for the various problems introduced in this paper. In 
order to do this, statistical approaches will be implemented 
on real profile data, applied, evaluated and compared among 
each other. 
We intend to research and implement the described 
concept for matching between user interfaces and user 
profiles in a future European project.  Together with other 
project partners we will also investigate additional 
approaches, including a rule-based and a hybrid approach, 
which combines the rule-based with the statistical approach.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, 
Springer, 2007. 
[2] T. Segaran, Programming Collective Intelligence, O'Reilly, 
2007, pp. 7-28. 
[3] T. Segaran, Programming Collective Intelligence, O'Reilly, 
2007, pp. 197-224. 
[4] Mainstreaming 
Accessibility 
through 
Synergistic 
User 
Modelling and Adaptability (MyUI).  European FP7 project.  
http://www.myui.eu/  
[5] Gentle User Interfaces for Elderly People (GUIDE).  
European FP7 project. http://www.guide-project.eu/  
[6] A. Kobsa, Generic User Modeling Systems. User Modeling 
and User-Adapted Interaction 11, 2001, pp. 49-63. 
[7] J. Sobecki, Consensus-Based Hybrid Adaptation of Web 
Systems User Interfaces. Journal of Universal Computer 
Science 11, no. 2, 2005, pp. 250-270. 
[8] I. T. Jolliffe, Principal Component Analysis, 2nd ed., 
Springer, 2002. 
[9] B. Schöllkopf, A. J. Smola, Learning with Kernels: Support 
Vector Machines, Regularization, Optimization, and Beyond, 
The MIT Press, 2001. 
 
63
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

