User Models and Domain Ontologies for Generating Personalized Questions and 
Answers  
 
 
Marta Gatius 
 Computer Science Department 
 Technical University of Catalonia  
 Barcelona, Spain 
e-mail: gatius@lsi.upc.edu
 
 
 
Abstract—The incorporation of user models has become more 
popular in recent years. This paper describes how user models, 
domain ontologies and natural language generation techniques 
can be integrated to generate personalized questions and 
answers related to a particular scenario. For this purpose, a 
general organization of different types of knowledge involved is 
proposed, that facilitates its adaptation to different domains, 
user models and languages. In this proposal, the domain 
conceptual knowledge is represented by a domain ontology, 
that provides a framework for representing the user’s 
knowledge and interests. Ontologies provide a powerful 
formalism because they allow the representation of detailed 
descriptions of concepts, attributes and relations, thus 
facilitating richer inferences about user knowledge and 
interests. Additionally, in the approach presented, the domain 
concepts in the ontology are also related to a general syntactic-
semantic taxonomy that facilitates the generation of more 
appropriate questions and answers for each user. The 
proposed organization has been applied for generating 
personalized questions and answers, that help the user when 
searching information about university courses.  
Keywords-user models; personalized content generation; 
domain ontologies,  multilingual language generation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The integration of user models and domain ontologies is 
a relatively new direction of research to personalize 
different types of contents and applications. Although user 
models have been used since the 80's, during the last years 
the interest in adapting the contents to the different types of 
users is increasing in many areas (as described in [1] and 
[2]). The huge amount of contents and systems in the web, 
where user population is diverse, have also increased the 
interest on the incorporation of users models in different 
types of systems, such as  web communication systems, 
intelligent web systems, information extraction, e-learning 
and e-health.  
User's models can be used for personalized content 
generation and can also be incorporated in adaptive systems, 
that behave different for different users. User's models can 
incorporate diverse information from the user. Most models 
use one of the following features about the user: background 
(i.e., profession), knowledge, interest, goals and individual 
traits (personality and cognitive factors). Information on the 
context of the user's work can also be modeled. Additionally, 
more than one of these features can also be combined.  
The use of a specific user's feature is usually related to 
the type of the application that incorporates the model.  
Thus, user's background is used most frequently for content 
adaptation (as in the work on medical domain described in 
[3]), user's interests are usually incorporated in information 
retrieval and recommended systems (such as the dialogue 
system described in [4]), user’s knowledge is useful in 
educational systems, user's goals are incorporated in 
intelligent interfaces, while individual traits are considered 
in several commercial systems (such as the system 
described in [5]). 
This paper describes the use of information about the 
user's backgrounds to generate personalized questions (and 
their answers) in a specific domain. Information about the 
user profession or experience is considered when classifying 
the users in different groups or stereotypes. Specific 
questions and answers for each group are generated semi-
automatically from the domain ontology. 
Stereotypes have been used for more than 25 years 
because they are simple and can be powerful for several 
domains. Stereotypes have been used in domains where the 
distinction of two or three user groups is easy and useful, 
such as the medical domain, where users can be classified as 
professionals (and subclassified as doctors, nurses and 
students) and patients (and subclassified considering 
different knowledge levels). Information necessary to 
classify the user is provided explicitly, usually by the user. 
There are already several research works that integrate 
user models and domain ontologies [6][7][8]. Ontologies 
provide a framework for representing the user knowledge (or 
interest) about different domain concept, or about the 
attributes describing the concept. Ontologies provides a more 
powerful 
formalism 
than 
other 
forms 
of 
semantic 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

representation, used in previous work on user adaptation 
(such as concept networks), because they allow the 
representation of detailed descriptions of concepts, attributes 
and relations, thus facilitating richer inferences about user 
knowledge and interests. 
The approach described in this paper differs from other 
works, such as the above mentioned, in that it is focused on 
the optimization of the generation of questions and answers 
in several languages. For this purpose, it uses a general 
syntactic-semantic taxonomy (described in [9]), that 
establishes general relations between the ontology concepts 
and the linguistic structures supporting questions and 
answers about them. 
The integration of user models and language generation 
techniques has also focused several research works, such as 
the relevant information-systems Ilexand and PEBA-II 
(described in [10]), that dynamically generates pages 
according to the user profiles. However, those works used 
other language generation techniques, not based on 
ontologies. 
The organization of the conceptual and linguistic 
knowledge that is proposed in this paper was already 
incorporated in an adaptive dialogue system (described in 
[11]), where information on how well the communication is 
doing is used by the system to select the most appropriate 
respond to a user's intervention: a directed (explicit) question 
or a more open message. The approach presented in this 
paper incorporates a user model that uses the domain 
ontology to represent the user background related to the 
domain concepts. 
In the approach presented, the process to generate the 
personalized questions and answers consists of four steps: 
The study of the different types of users, the representation 
of the domain concepts, the relation of the attributes 
describing concepts to the syntactic-semantic taxonomy and, 
finally, the generation of questions and answers. 
The work described is being done in the framework of 
the Spanish project SKATER, for Scenario Knowledge 
Acquisition by Textual Reading. The personalized questions 
and answers are generated from the ontology describing a 
particular scenario, previously built from text. 
 The next section describes how the proposed approach 
has been applied for a particular scenario, in which the user 
is seeking  specific information about a particular university 
course. Then, the last section describes the conclusion and 
future work. 
II. 
GENERATING PERSONALIZED QUESTIONS AND 
ANSWERS 
As mentioned in the introduction, several systems 
incorporate user models and ontologies to adapt contents 
and presentations to different types of users. For example, in 
several scenarios, the generation of personalized questions, 
dialogues and summaries can help the adaptation of the web 
contents and systems to the user’s needs.  
  Domain ontologies have been incorporated in many 
different types of applications because they provide a great 
flexibility to represent knowledge and are easy to adapt to 
different domains. Furthermore, they are especially 
appropriate for representing conceptual knowledge in 
multilingual systems, because they provide a common 
semantic representation for the several languages supported. 
Recently, domain ontologies have also been used for 
personalizing 
presentation 
in 
several 
communication 
systems (such as [12] and [13]). Ontologies favor the 
generation of personalized content because they provide a 
framework for representing user’s domain knowledge (or 
interest). In more simple semantic representations the user’s 
knowledge about a domain concept is represented as a 
binary value (known-not known) or as a weighted value. 
Ontologies allow the representation of more detailed 
information on the user’s knowledge about a specific 
concept, such as that related to the different attributes 
describing the concept and the relations with other concepts. 
Additionally, they also support inference and other 
reasoning mechanisms. 
This section describes how domain ontologies are used 
to generate personalized questions and answers for several 
user’s stereotypes. In a particular domain, groups of users or 
stereotypes are distinguished because they have different 
interests and/or knowledge. This information is represented 
as an overlay of the domain concepts in the ontology.  
The approach presented has been applied to the scenario 
in which the user searches for specific information about a 
specific university course. In this particular scenario, the 
representation of the domain concepts and the interests of 
the different type of users is simple, as shown in Figure 1. 
There are only two domain concepts involved and two 
different types of users: teachers and students. The domain 
concepts are described by a set of attributes, and user 
domain interests are represented as a binary value associated 
with each of the conceptual attributes. When generating 
personalized questions, only the conceptual attributes 
interesting for each specific user type are considered.  
This approach uses of a syntactic-semantic taxonomy that 
defines general relations between conceptual attributes and 
linguistic knowledge to facilitate the generation of the 
questions for different domains and languages.  
The process of generating personalized questions and 
answers for a particular scenario consists of the four steps: 
 
 
Study of the needs of the different types of users. 
 
Description of the domain concepts involved in 
the scenario. Each concept is described by a set 
of attributes and those attributes are associated 
with the specific types of users interested on 
their values. 
 
Relating conceptual and linguistic knowledge. 
 
Generation of the questions and answers from 
the conceptual attributes for each type of user. 
 
The next subsections describe the adaptation of these 
four general steps to generate the personalized questions and 
answers about university courses. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

A. The Study of the User needs 
Most web universities incorporate the description of the 
degrees and master courses the university offers. Those 
descriptions are usually accessed by both, teachers and 
students. In this particular scenario, teachers and students can 
be considered different types of users because the specific 
information they need about a course is not exactly the same. 
Although course descriptions in web universities usually 
include information interesting for both, teacher and students 
(i.e., the number of the credits of the course), they also can 
include formal details only interesting for  teachers  ( such as 
the course code and the responsible unit) and  other more 
practical information mostly accessed by students (i.e.,  the 
teaching language and the teacher email). 
B. Representing the Domain Concepts  
The description of most courses in a web university 
usually includes similar information. There are two main 
concepts involved in this scenario: Course and Teacher. A 
partial description of those concepts is shown in Figure 1. As 
shown in the Figure 1, each conceptual attribute is associated 
with the specific group of users interested on its value: 
teacher, student or both (represented by T/S). The questions 
(and the corresponding answers) for a group of users are 
generated by selecting the specific attributes associated 
within the particular group.  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Concepts describing course information 
 
C. Relating Conceptual and Linguistic Knowledge 
The concepts and attributes describing the domain have 
to be associated with the corresponding lexical entries for 
each language. Additionally, in order to generate more 
natural language expressions, the conceptual attributes are 
also associated with the corresponding category in a 
syntactic-semantic taxonomy. For example, the attribute 
Credit number describing the course is associated with the 
class quantity, the attribute Coordinating teacher with the 
class who_does and the attribute Office address with the 
class where.  Each category in the syntactic-semantic 
taxonomy is associated with the specific linguistic patterns 
needed for generating question and answers in different 
languages. 
D. Generating Questions and Answers 
Two general grammar rules are used to generate 
questions and answer from the conceptual representations: 
 
Rule 1.  questionattribute -> questionpattern 
                         conceptname 
 
where questionpattern corresponds to the linguistic pattern 
associated with the sintactico-semantic class of the attribute 
(i.e attributes in the class quantity are associated with the 
pattern how many). 
 
 Rule 2. answerattribute -> attributename conceptname 
 
 
 
  verbe attributevalue 
 
   Using these two general rules, the questions and answers 
for the conceptual attributes associated with each user’s 
group are automatically generated. Then, the resulting 
sentences have to be manually supervised. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Grammars for generating questions and answers 
... 
Teacher 
 
Office Student  
Name T/S 
Email Student 
Web page Student 
  ... 
 
Course 
 
Complete name Teacher 
Code Teacher 
Teaching unit Teacher    
Academic year  T/S   
Degree T/S 
Credit number: T/S 
Teaching language Student  
Coordinator Teacher T/S 
Other teachers T/S 
… 
 
% generatext (Lex,Para,Lex). 
generatext([],_,[]). 
generatext([Leftcat1|Rest],Param,[[Leftcat1,Text1]|TextF]):- 
    ruletext(Leftcat1,Param,Text1), 
    generatext(Rest,Params,TextF). 
 
%ruletext(catlgory,Lex). 
ruletext(Leftcategory,Parameters,Text):-   
rule(Leftcategory,Parameters,Rightpart),     
obtainlexentries(Parameters,Rightpart,Text). 
 
% obtainlex(Param,categoriesrightpart,Lex). 
obtainlexentries(P,[],[]). 
obtainlexentries(P,[Cata|R],[L1|L]):- 
      lex(Cata,L1),obtainlexentries(P,R,L). 
 
%rule(Leftcategory,Parameters,Rightpart). 
%questionattribute - questionpattern  conceptname 
 
rule(questionattribute, 
parameters(language(L),user(U1),concept(C),attribute(A)),               
[questionpattern(language(L),user(U),concept(C),attribute(A)), 
conceptname(language(L),concept(C))]):-  
       member(U1,U). 
 
% answerattribute -   
%  attributename conceptname verbe attributevalue 
 
rule(answerattribute, 
parameters(language(L),user(U1),concept(C),attribute(A)),                
[attributename(language(L),user(U),concept(C),attribute(A)),  
of(language(L)), 
conceptname(language(L),concept(C)), 
verbe(language(L)), 
attributevalue(language(L),user(U),concept(C),attribute(A))]):-  
member(U1,U). 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

The 
general 
grammar 
rules 
described 
can 
be 
implemented following different formalisms. Figure 2 
shows their implementation in Prolog language. The 
unification mechanism of Prolog is appropriate for working 
with such conceptual grammars, because the general 
categories can be augmented with features representing 
specific information, such as the user group, the language as 
well as the concept and attribute identifiers.  
  As shown in Figure 2,  Rule 1 and Rule 2 are 
implemented in Prolog using a predicate (rule) with three 
parameters (Leftcategory, Parameters, Rightpart), where 
Leftcategory is the category in the left part of the rule. The 
category Leftcategory is augmented by the features 
appearing 
in 
the 
second 
parameter 
(the 
predicate 
parameters): language (represented by L), user (U1), 
concept (C) and attribute (A). The third parameter of the 
predicate rule, Rightpart, is a list containing the categories in 
the right part of the rule and these categories have been 
augmented with the corresponding features. 
For example, Rule1 is represented as the following 
predicate: 
 
rule(questionattribute, 
 parameters(language(L),user(U1),concept(C),attribute(A)),                
[questionpattern(language(L),user(U),concept(C),attribute(A)), 
 conceptname(language(L),concept(C))]) 
 
The features associated with the left-part of the rule, 
questionattribute, are language (L), user(U1), concept(C) 
and attribute(A). These four attributes have to be unified 
with the same features associated with the category 
questionpattern, and the category conceptname. That is, the 
variables associated with the corresponding features (L for 
language, C for concept and A for attribute) have to be the 
same, while the variable U1, associated with the feature user, 
has to be a member of the variable U, associated with the 
same feature in the category questionpattern and that 
represents a list of user groups interested on the conceptual 
attribute. Figure 3 shows examples of the generated 
questions and answers for the type of user students using 
Rule 1 and Rule 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Examples of question and answers for students 
  
E. Considering other Scenarios 
Other scenarios where a personalized presentation of 
web information can help the users have also been 
considered. For example, in  the scenario where users access 
the web for finding information about a particular medical 
specialists two different types of users can be easily 
distinguished: professionals (doctors, nurses and medicine 
students) and no professionals.  
The main concept in this domain is the concept doctor. 
A fragment of this concept description is shown in Figure 4.  
A more complete representation of the concepts involved in 
this scenario is described in [14]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. A fragment of the concept Doctor 
 
Although the information the two types of users need 
about the medical specialist can be the same (i.e., the 
complete name, the specialization and the place of work), the 
presentation of this information may differ. For example, 
professionals only need the name of the specialization, while 
information about the specific parts of the body related to the 
specialization can be useful for no professionals.  
The approach described could also be adapted in 
scenarios where users can be classified in different groups 
considering their language level. For example, distinguishing 
between language natives and not natives can be useful in 
many different scenarios. The specific lexical words and 
syntactic patterns selected when generating questions and 
answers for each type of user would be different. 
 
III. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper is about how user models, domain ontologies 
and natural language generation techniques can be combined 
to generate questions and answers adapted to the different 
types of users. The approach described is based on the use of 
a domain ontology for representing the user’s background 
related to the domain concepts. The ontology concepts are 
also related to a general syntactic-semantic taxonomy that 
facilitates the generation of the questions and answers in 
several languages. This modular organization of the 
knowledge in separated and declarative knowledge bases 
facilitates its adaptation to different domains, user models 
and languages. 
 Future work will also include working with more 
complex user models, such as those using dynamic 
information about the user’s knowledge and interests that can 
be combined with user's background. This information 
obtained dynamically could also be represented as a layout 
of the domain ontology. The resulting user’s model can be 
incorporated for different purposes, such as for educational 
Q1. How many credits does the course has? 
      The course has 6 credits 
Q2 Who is the coordinator teacher of the course? 
      The coordinator teacher of the course is Dr. 
      John Smith 
Q3 Which is the teaching language of the 
course? 
    The teaching languages of the course are 
    Catalan and Spanish 
Q4 Where is the coordinator teacher office? 
    The coordinator teacher office is at U Building 
Office number 322. 
 
 
Doctor 
 
Name 
Specialization 
Visiting at equipment 
Visiting timetable 
…. 
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

applications. Furthermore, the same organization can be used 
to generate other language resources, such as personalized 
summaries, dialogues and domain-restricted grammars. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the Spanish project 
SKATER(TIN2012-38584-C06-01). 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] P. Brusilovsky and E. Millán, “User Models for Adaptive 
Hypermedia and Adaptive Educational Systems”, The 
Adaptive Web, LNCS 4321, 2007, pp. 3 – 53.  
[2] P. Brusilovsky, “Adaptive Hypermedia”, User Modeling and 
User-Adapted Interaction, 2001, vol. 11, pp. 87-110.  
[3] S. Williams, P. Piwek, and R. Power, “Generating monologue 
and dialogue to present personalised medical information to 
patients”, in.Proc. of the Eleventh European Workshop on 
Natural Language Generation, 2007, pp. 167 – 170.  
[4] M.A. Walker et al. , “Generation and evaluation of user 
tailored responses in multimodal dialogue”, Cognitive 
Science, September–October 2004, vol. 28(5), pp. 811–840.  
[5] M. Belk, P. Germanakos, P. Zaharias, and G. Samaras, 
“Adaptivity Considerations for Enhancing User-Centric Web 
Experience”, in Proc. Of ACHI, January 2012, pp- 348-353.  
[6] D.G. Sampson, M.D. Lytras, G. Wagner, and P. Diaz, 
“Ontologies and the Semantic Web for E-learning” (Guest 
editorial), Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 
2004, vol. 7, pp. 26-28.  
[7] O. Stock, and al., “Adaptive, intelligent presentation of 
information for the museum visitor in PEACH”, User Model 
and User-Adapted Interaction, 2007, vol. 17, pp. 257–304. 
[8] F. Cena, S. Likavec, and F. Osborne, “Property-Based Interest 
Propagation in Ontology-Based User Model”, UMAP, LNCS 
7379, 2012, pp. 38–50.  
[9] M. Gatius, “Improving knowledge representation for speed-up 
the generation of grammars for a multilingual web assistant”, 
in Proc. Of Semdial, December 2013, pp- 188-189.  
[10] M. Milosavljevic and J. Oberlander, “Dynamic hypertext 
catalogues: helping users to help themselves”, In Proc. Of the 
ninth ACM conference HYPERTEXT, ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 1998, pp. 123-131.  
[11] M. Gatius and M. González, “A Flexible Dialogue System for 
Enhancing Web Usability”, in Proc. Of WWW, April 2009, 
pp- 1167-1168.  
[12] D. G. Sampson, M. D. Lytras, G. Wagner, P. Diaz, M. E. 
Foster, and M. White, “Assessing the impact of adaptive 
generation in the comic multimodal dialogue system”, In 
Proc. Of the IJCAI Workshop on Knowledge and Reasoning 
in Practical Dialogue Systems, 2005.  
[13] H. Bosch, D. Thom, G. Heinze, S. Wokusch, and T. Ertl, 
“Dynamic 
Ontology 
Supported 
User 
Interface 
for 
Personalized Decision Support”, in Proc. Of CENTRIC, 2012, 
pp. 101-107.  
[14] M. Gatius and P. Paliwal, “Generating Domain-Restricted 
Resources for Web Interaction in Several Languages: Hindi, 
English and Spanish”, in Proc. Of INFOCOMP, November, 
2013, pp. 94-98. 
 
 
 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

