The Case for Integrating Needs and Preferences in the Internet of Things  
 
Andy Heath 
Axelrod Access For All  
Sheffield, United Kingdom  
andyheath@axelrod.plus.com  
 
 
Gill Whitney, Irena Kolar, Mark Springett 
Design for All Research Group 
Middlesex University  
London, United Kingdom  
G.Whitney@mdx.ac.uk , I.Kolar@mdx.ac.uk, 
M.Springett@mdx.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract— This paper was written because the authors believe 
the Internet of Things has enormous potential to enrich the 
lives of all people, but particularly those people sometimes 
referred to as “disabled”, who are excluded from participating 
in normal life processes that present fewer barriers to others 
and by that exclusion experientially impoverished.  Further, we 
believe that there are grounds for personalization or 
individualization to be the accessibility delivery mechanism of 
choice to meet the diverse needs of this non-homogenous group 
of people in diverse contexts and in fact, of all people.  From 
demographics it is clear that if the accessibility of the Internet 
of Things is not approached effectively, then a problem will be 
created for people with disabilities and older people.  The 
paper gives a direction forward driven both by results from 
practical 
research 
with 
real 
users 
and 
theoretical 
considerations of what approaches are available to apply to 
this problem.  We believe that Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) 
is a significant aspect of the Internet of Things. 
Keywords- Internet of Things, Accessibility, Standards 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A. The Problem to be Addressed  
This paper presents an argument for integrating 
accessibility in the Internet of Things (IoT) in a particular 
way. It describes and makes the case for an approach to 
integration and presents some of the requirements that need 
to be considered. 
Accessibility is a huge and very complex domain and it is 
essential to address it if the Internet of Things is not to 
impoverish our humanity by excluding many people from its 
numerous benefits. There is a need to incorporate 
accessibility in a way that supports its use by everyone and 
in all environments.  We approach the argument first from 
demographics, and then consider common difficulties in 
using Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 
devices in several use cases that demonstrate the complexity 
of the field. Our central argument is that accessibility is so 
complex, from computational and human understanding 
perspectives, that an approach that makes it simpler for 
everyone is required. We go on to suggest what we believe 
should be the approach of choice in dealing with the 
complexity of modern technology in a way that works for all 
users. We present all of this in a context of evolving models 
of accessibility and social context. 
The Internet of Things is not yet well defined but is a 
developing field.  In one view of and application of IoT, 
items and computers are labeled with an electronic identifier 
consisting of a unique number called an IP address. The 
attachment of the labels supports the development of 
networking infrastructures where devices can autonomously 
communicate with one another and share control and 
communication.  The successful implementation of IoT will 
require:   
 
An IP address which can be associated with every 
possible source object that needs one (usually). 
 
Software applications that can communicate with 
and manage the data from an ever-growing number 
of the enabled devices. 
 
Consideration of requirements for ensuring IoT 
devices are accessible to all persons needing to 
directly access them or who are impacted by systems 
they connect to.  We develop this in detail later in 
the paper. 
The networking of devices has the potential to benefit 
people currently with requirements not well served by the 
design of mainstream systems and devices to date, especially 
if the network infrastructures or devices support the use of 
assistive or alternate technology. Examples might include a 
medicine cabinet that is continuously aware of the status of 
each medicine bottle stored inside the cabinet such as its 
name, 
contraindications 
and 
expiry 
date. 
It 
could 
communicate the need for replacements to the medical 
professional as well as to the drinks cabinet to warn of the 
need to avoid alcohol (if required). Another example is a fall 
detector linked to both the telephone system to call help, the 
cooker to switch off any item which the user can no longer 
control, and the central heating system to ensure the person 
is kept in a comfortable situation until they are rescued.  
Practical research carried out at Middlesex University as 
part of a European Project has indicated a number of 
potential problems that occur when users require special 
features. The accessibility features within current ICT 
systems are often well hidden, meaning that users requiring 
those features need greater technical skills than others to 
reach them. This is impractical and unacceptable and could 
result in the IoT devices becoming a greater problem. 
Many users have particular access requirements that are 
critical in that they are often unable to access some particular 
systems at all unless those systems are designed with 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

mechanisms to meet those access requirements.  Such users 
are often described as “disabled”, which effectively places 
the cause of the access challenge at their door – it makes it 
“their fault”. This is not the only way to attribute causal 
factors and the authors particularly reject it in favour of a 
more balanced view where accessibility is thought of as a 
relationship between user and product and accessibility 
challenges represent a mismatch of product characteristics to 
required features. 
For other users the lack of particular access mechanism 
means that their use of the system is possible but less than 
optimal. We believe the needs of every user can be best met 
by the adoption of an equitable system that does not 
apportion blame but considers accessibility as a relationship 
and develops systems and products that can be adapted to 
meet individual preferences.   However, the term “disabled” 
is embedded in our cultures and is difficult to avoid. In this 
paper, where we present examples and results using the term, 
we are referring to those users for whom particular 
accessibility requirements are critical.  That does not detract 
from the thesis that adaptation to individual preferences 
should be the approach to meet the needs of every user. 
B. What is the Internet of Things? 
There is no single agreed definition of the Internet of 
Things; different groups working in the area have different 
ideas of what it is.  A fundamental distinction in the positions 
organizations take relates to whether the “people” dimension 
is considered part of the system. For example, The European 
Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) [1] describe 
IoT in a “machine to machine” fashion as,  
“Communication between two or more entities that do 
not necessarily need any direct human intervention.  M2M 
services intend to automate decision and communication 
processes  [2]. 
Whereas the International Telecommunication Union 
Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) [3] 
gives this description 
“A global infrastructure for the information society, 
enabling advanced services by interconnecting (physical and 
virtual) things based on, existing and evolving, interoperable 
information and communication technologies [ITU-T 
Y.2060]” [4], which implies that people need to be 
considered. 
In this paper, we take as a tenet that the IoT involves 
people at some points. There are several different ways that 
people might be involved. 
 
Some systems have direct human interfaces. In any 
such system, it is necessary to consider the 
requirements of all potential users in using those 
interfaces.  Methods for consideration of the 
accessibility of interface technologies have been 
given much attention, for example in the Web 
Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 [5] 
and many other sets of guidelines.  Technical and 
other guidelines, such as these, are essential but they 
are not always used and are not sufficient nor do 
they provide optimal accessibility [6] for every user. 
 
Some systems may have no direct human interface 
but cascading effects on human interfaces in 
interconnected systems may need to be considered. 
A burglar alarm monitoring a factory might raise an 
alert on a system that it is connected to.  As well as 
the need to address the accessibility of any such 
connected 
human 
interfaces 
there 
may 
be 
implications for the humans using that system of the 
information content transmitted by the alarm.  The 
High Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI), 
which is a standard concerned with the transmission 
of video data between computer monitors, digital 
televisions, video projectors and related devices and 
might be thought of as a machine-to-machine 
transmission standard not involving humans, was 
designed without the capability to carry closed 
captions  as required for example by The Federal 
Communications Commission [7], which alone had a 
significant impact on a large number of humans and 
created further difficulties in lack of interoperability 
between systems adopting mechanisms to get around 
its limitations. 
To meet both these requirements (systems with human 
interfaces and systems without but which might interconnect 
with those that do) we will argue that it is needed to look at 
both the accessibility of the device or system under 
consideration and the accessibility of possibly interconnected 
systems with a systemic (holistic) view in a common 
framework and that taking the tenet that we need to build 
systems that can respond to and adapt to individual 
preferences is an approach that can do that.  It can provide an 
approach that can be used in different parts of heterogeneous 
systems with consistency.  
C. Structure of this Paper. 
This paper describes how the Internet of Things and 
personalization can have a greater positive effect for people 
with disabilities by describing firstly what is the `Internet of 
Things‟ and the numbers of older and disabled people who 
could benefit. In Section II the argument from demographics 
using a traditional medical model is presented. In Section III 
the paper focus on real world accessibility issues that people 
with disabilities can experience with current technology. 
Section IV then describes the solutions that exist for users 
with respect to Ambient Assisted Living, in which fine-
tuning the match between system design and user needs and 
preferences can have overwhelming positive effects for the 
end user. The paper continues in Section V to describe a 
number of models of accessibility including the medical 
model of disability, the one or many sizes fit all approach, 
the approach offered by testing a product with groups of 
users, usually with disabilities. This section concludes by 
addressing the issue that the way to optimally meet the needs 
of every individual consumer is to establish communication 
between each consumer and producer. The paper concludes 
in Section VI by stating that in the context of changing 
demographics across the world there is a need to address 
accessibility effectively in The Internet of Things if we are 
not to exclude and impoverish many people.   
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

II. 
DEMOGRAPHICS  
In this section, we present the argument from 
demographics using a traditional medical model. This is 
necessary because it isn‟t possible to discuss demographics 
using “the individual” as the basis of approach and because 
there is so much existing culture and research that addresses 
it this way. In later sections, we show how the model is 
flawed as a way to deal with accessibility in the IoT. 
The IoT has the potential to benefit many people 
currently not well-catered for by supporting control of 
information and communication systems using a personally 
accessible mechanism. More than one billion people in the 
world live with some form of disability, of whom nearly 200 
million experience considerable difficulties in functioning 
and carrying out daily living tasks [8]. The increased ageing 
of the population will lead to an increase in this number and 
an increase in the number of people with disabilities 
requiring accessible interfaces. In 2000, there were 606 
million persons aged 60 or over throughout the world. Fifty 
years later, the number of persons aged 60 or over is 
projected to expand by more than three times to reach nearly 
2 billion in 2050 [8]. The International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health defines disability as, "the 
... result of complex relationships between an individual's 
health condition and personal factors, and of the external 
factors that represent the circumstances in which the 
individual lives". [9]. Technology such as  Radio-Frequency 
Identifiers has the power to make people more or less 
disabled by altering the external factors and enabling people 
with disabilities to interact with items of technology which 
have been adapted to interact via a radio frequency interface.   
To ensure that older citizens and those with disabilities 
can benefit from the Internet of Things it is necessary for 
services to be designed in a way so that they can be used by 
people with a sensory, cognitive, physical or multiple 
disabilities. It is also necessary to ensure that the 
functionality of the objects being controlled meets the needs 
of the end user. This will require designers to understand the 
full range of needs both in terms of utility and operational 
control. Addressing these needs properly would require a 
drastic change in the mindset of designers so that they 
consider all people as `normal‟ customers or as customers of 
`normal‟ products.  
Establishing an appropriately user-sensitive design 
culture may be difficult.  Recent research with the committee 
members of the British Standards Institute identified that 
33.3% of those questioned said yes to the question “Do any 
of your standardization activities involve the standardization 
of products or services where the accessibility for older and 
disabled people needs to be considered?”  Whilst 76.7% had 
said yes to “Do any of your standardization activities involve 
the standardization of products or services which are 
designed to be used by people? This suggests that older 
citizens and those with disabilities are not a typically 
recognized subset of the group „people‟.  Also, as we explain 
later, the complexity of people‟s needs in different contexts 
is huge.  Even without the need for a mindset change it is not 
realistic to expect designers to absorb and operate with that 
complexity.  Something new is needed.  
III. 
CURRENT REAL WORLD ACCESSIBILITY 
ISSUES 
The integration of digital technology into everyday life 
has the potential to be of great benefit to older and mobility-
limited people and people constrained by cognitive, 
emotional, social or other constraints by enabling them to 
carry out a wide range of tasks, including accessing many 
public 
services, 
using 
entertainment 
systems 
and 
communicating both remotely and locally.  
The range of people who can access ICT systems and the 
contexts in which they can be accessed can both be extended 
by following accessibility guidelines such as Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 [5] and other 
hardware and software standards/guidelines. Such standards 
will have increased benefit in the design and practical 
application of the combination of technologies which is the 
IoT. As we argue elsewhere, however, they have many 
limitations and challenges.  
Accessibility support and information provision on 
commercial media company websites is often hard to find 
and highlights an apparent lack of sensitivity to the 
importance and needs of customers with disabilities [10].  
An inspection of three leading providers‟ sites on the World 
Wide Web illustrated this well. This inspection focused on 
the task of finding accessibility information pertaining to the 
companies‟ mobile products.  It was found in one case that 
the information was not provided.  In the other two sites 
inspected, the information was deeply buried and difficult to 
find.  On one site a link was provided in a small font that, for 
example, those with vision problems are likely to miss.  On 
another it was found that no explicit link existed, causing an 
extensive search, including use of keyword search and a 
lengthily browse through numerous options.   The sub-tasks 
of scanning for obscure links, scanning large numbers of 
search results and, in general, protracted search seem to 
imply the assumption that all users are comfortably capable 
of these actions.  There was no evidence of designers taking 
into account the difficulties that the typical users of 
accessibility features are likely to have. 
IV. 
AMBIENT ASSISTED LIVING 
The 
Internet 
of 
Things 
provides 
unprecedented 
opportunity to explore the space of possible life-enhancing 
solutions for specific individuals.  However, the complex 
and varied nature of peoples‟ cognitive, perceptual and 
physical condition, and their life circumstances mean that 
bespoke solutions are needed.  The case of Ambient Assisted 
Living is one where fine-tuning the match between system 
design and user needs and preferences is particularly critical.  
This is true both of the service design and of the interaction 
design.  The nature of this type of system is that it is 
designed to support day-to-day living for a complex variety 
of user needs and contexts, and needs that are prone to 
significant changes over time.  We identify two key distinct 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

levels at which design for individual needs is critical.  These 
are firstly the service level and then the interaction level.   
Complexity, asynchronous processes, time dependent 
behavior, and safety concerns are typical of the design 
problem for home environments.   The definition of AAL we 
use here assumes different possible distributions of control 
between the technology, user control and third party control.  
One of the key elements of design is how control is 
distributed between these actors.  One is the degree of 
control that a user requires over the technology.  Will a 
person, or a technology controlled by a person procedurally, 
or controlled by a person declaratively, or by a secondary 
person, or automatically by technology, or combinations of 
these fulfill a task?  The assessment of an individual‟s 
service requirements is partly a question of designing an 
optimal distribution of tasks.  There is a danger that AAL 
technology may wrest too much control from the individual.   
There are also hedonic considerations in design that 
should be weighted appropriately alongside considerations of 
functional requirements.  Finding the „optimal‟ solution for 
task performance is not simply a matter of considering the 
efficiency of candidate design solutions, particularly with 
reference to the distribution of control.   For example, it may 
be quicker to prepare meals if the beneficiary has minimal 
involvement.  However, even a severely restricted individual 
may prefer to have control over the process. Tasks such as 
cooking are ones that have an important personal cache, and 
to simply surrender control to a device would not be 
acceptable.   A further consideration is privacy.  Removing 
control from individuals implies a greater level of ambient 
monitoring where data is collected from sensors embedded 
in the domestic environment, and possibly sharing of data 
with third parties. This may even include video footage.    
The „calm computing‟ notion originally championed by 
Weiser (1990) [11] envisions that the environment 
anticipates and responds to perceived user needs.  In this 
vision, the user is not actively manipulating devices and at 
times may not even be aware of the complex combination of 
sensors, processors and actuators around them.    This is the 
philosophy used in „smart home‟ prototypes that were 
designed by Microsoft and others, in which domestic 
technologies 
were 
activated 
by 
human 
movement, 
environmental change and timing, but not by direct 
intentional human input.  The concern is that such a model 
for AAL ignores both pragmatic and hedonic requirements 
of users.  As discussed, users desire to have tasks done a 
certain way or just simply to have control, means that AAL 
design must be conceived on an individual service level, 
rather than simply automating processes that the beneficiary 
may find difficult.   It is better to see AAL as a collection of 
individual services for which the degree of automation 
relative to direct user control is determined on a case-by-case 
basis.  
At the interaction level, the design of control devices for 
ambient technologies is critical both to its accessibility and 
its range of utility. The perceptual and motor skills of 
potential AAL users vary considerably.  This issue is 
compounded by the fact that older users in particular will be 
prone to diminishing capacities.  Such devices may be 
embedded in wheelchairs, domestic fittings or individual 
utilities, presenting a raft of potential design issues for 
interaction design.  Therefore, design needs to allow for 
customization/personalization both initially and throughout 
the service lifecycle. Optimization of user controls such as 
joysticks involves the comfortable efficient and maximally 
effective control of the device.  This may take a radically 
different solution dependent of the nature of the user‟s 
abilities.  For example, a user may be best able to manipulate 
a joystick using their wrist rather than the front of the hand.  
Another may find that gripping a golf ball attached to the 
joystick allows greater control.  It is important to allow for 
customizable input in design. The subtleties of input 
requirements should be researched early in projects, but the 
user should also be given the chance to „finish the design‟. 
A further reason for supporting personalization is that 
user capacities are likely diminish progressively with age.  
Usability requirements are therefore subject to change over 
time.  It may be that the requirements for text displays on 
device controls change several times during the lifetime of a 
product.  Recent work, (e.g., Biswas et al 2011 [12]) has 
shown that some quite fine differences in perceptual and 
motor 
abilities 
can 
lead 
to 
significantly 
different 
requirements for interactive device design.  This is 
particularly critical for AAL, where multiple use devices 
tend to be embedded in the physical environment.   
Some progress has been made on providing for 
customization in AAL.  One example is Casensa [13], a 
context-aware system that can be installed in houses of 
elderly to support them in everyday life activities.  Users are 
given the power to create the supportive smart behavior of 
the house and have control over the activation and 
deactivation of the smart home facilities.  It also allows for 
critical communication between ambient living devices and 
caregivers, which is particularly useful in cases where the 
elderly beneficiary may have diminished abilities, (e.g., 
dementia sufferers).  
V. 
MODELS OF ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE 
INTERNET OF THINGS 
In this section, we look very briefly at the IoT 
accessibility requirement from the perspective of some 
models of accessibility provision. We explain why it is so 
important to incorporate needs and preferences in IoT 
network and device architectures and point at some ongoing 
work in Needs and Preferences and supporting delivery 
architectures.  In fact there are many accessibility models, 
we describe here only a few and make no attempt to be 
exhaustive.  
A. Accessibility as a Relationship and Changing Models of 
Disability  
Traditionally and historically persons even imagined as 
having characteristics not conformant with the norm have 
been separated from society and “blamed” for what has been 
often seen as “their problem”.  A full treatment of this and 
ongoing societal changes would look at perception and 
complexity, 
psychological, 
sociological, 
philosophical 
models, organizational theories, history, religion and indeed 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

the nature of the universe and all that [14 ]. Such a treatment 
is beyond the scope of this paper and we rely here on 
anecdotal evidence and received historical wisdom of which 
examples are legion, ranging from the treatment of witches 
in Middle Age Europe to Eugenics and the treatment of 
disabled persons by the Third Reich [15]. Here, we merely 
observe and describe the changes underway. 
Over a long period the view of “disability” has shifted 
and continues to shift, towards a view of accessibility as a 
relationship between system provider or producer and 
consumer or user.  Approaches to accessibility can be seen as 
ways to manage that relationship.  
1) The Medical Model 
The medical model of disability takes the view that a 
“disabled person” has some characteristic(s) that lead to that 
person being unable to use some system or product in the 
fashion that some others can.  Hidden behind the “in the 
fashion that some others can” phrase is often the view “in the 
way that we designed it and expect it to be used”.  It is a 
view of the situation that posits people and behaviors as 
completely understandable and classifiable.  Unfortunately, it 
fails to capture the richness of human behavior and 
functioning. 
The 
International 
Classification 
of 
Functioning, 
Disability and Health [9] is a widely-accepted medical-
model approach. This is an extensive complex classification 
of human functioning that some find difficult to understand 
and use.  The medical model is only a model rather than a 
true representation of real people. As medical science 
advances so our understandings of conditions, behaviors and 
needs are refined and improved.  This implies that in practice 
there is a gap between real needs and the model (otherwise 
the model would not need to develop and advance).  The 
model isn‟t the person in the context, it merely predicts 
something about the functioning or behavior of the person 
and every model does this imperfectly. This gap between 
predicted need and actual or experienced need is often 
crucial in that it prevents delivery of a system from being 
optimal for every user. In addition, the nature of the model 
contributes one component of a computational complexity 
issue described below  
2) One or many Sizes Fit All 
The Medical Model has some aspects with the flavor of 
“One Size Fits All” (“this is what you are getting so it works 
for you”) or “Many Sizes Fit All” (“here are a few 
possibilities, one of them must work for you”).  Imagine 
selecting a suit from a rack of suits for sale and no single suit 
has a perfect fit and contrast this with a tailor-made suit. The 
suit from a rack may not fit any person perfectly and for 
some particular person there may be no size that fits at all.  
Approaches to accessibility in the “Many Sizes Fit All” 
camp would include bundling together media modalities in a 
delivery package, such as captions and Audio Description 
along with a video or providing multiple ways into a 
building, some having wheelchair ramps and some having 
steps only. Clearly “Many Sizes Fit All” is an improvement 
on “One Size Fits All” and it has been widely used as a 
model to deliver accessible systems and products.  It suffers 
from a number of limitations: 
 
It has the same gap between system and user as the 
medical model because it “guesses” what the user 
needs. 
 
On the one side of the relationship we have 
extremely varied users and contexts. On the other 
side, we have solutions, which are also extremely 
varied and also evolve over time, particularly in ICT 
where we have rapidly changing technology. 
Bridging between these two has a computational 
complexity close to exponential.  Without some 
other mechanism we can only solve a limited 
number of cases with exact solutions. Given the 
diverse nature of individual needs it may be that not 
all cases can be solved optimally.  That is, its likely 
that not all users will have a solution that is ideal for 
them in the context they are in and possible that no 
user at all will have a solution with a high usability.   
 
Delivering all potential sizes in one package is 
unacceptably demanding on delivery systems and 
packages.  In the ICT domain, trying to do so bloats 
data and uses unnecessary network bandwidth.  In 
the world of supermarket car parks it means making 
every parking space large enough for families (which 
might be possible but wastes significant resources) 
and making each one close enough to the store that 
nobody has to walk far (which is not possible at all).  
3) User Testing and Other Approaches 
Space precludes description of all of the models which 
are employed to manage the accessibility relationship but all 
of them exist because of the complexity of the problem space 
and all of them attempt in some way to limit this complexity 
so as to make the problem solvable.  The unfortunate 
characteristic is that in some way they all also compromise 
and limit the solutions, e.g., a commonly-used mechanism is 
that of testing a product with groups of users, usually with 
disabilities.  This is a similar exercise to methods such as 
think-aloud protocols [16] which are commonly used in 
mainstream usability testing.  The aim of such techniques is 
to establish generalizable results from a small sample of 
population.  For example, if a mobile device‟s menu 
structure is found to be navigable by a sample of 15-20 non-
impaired users it is broadly assumed to navigable by a whole 
population.  However, this approach cannot be applied in the 
same way to a population of users with disabilities. It cannot 
be “exhaustive” with persons and contexts.  Such exercises 
expose the product to only certain persons and it may not 
meet any individual‟s needs optimally.  In fact, in many 
cases making a product meet the needs of one individual in 
the group may make it fail to meet the needs of another.  For 
example, the needs of some persons for simplified 
information can conflict with needs associated with some 
cognitive “disabilities” for information to be presented in 
multiple forms. Individualization is the only mechanism that 
can get around this to deliver optimally to every user in 
every context.  
4) Matching to Individual needs and Preferences  
An implication of our discussion of models is that the 
only way to meet the needs of every individual consumer 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

optimally is to establish communication between each 
consumer and producer – anything else will have some 
element of guesswork about the needs of the particular 
consumer or some element of putting users in groups in 
which they may or may not (often not) fit.  However, the 
idea, even with modern social network systems, of having a 
conversation between producer and every consumer around 
the use of every product in every context is computationally 
infeasible.  What is needed is some way to manage the 
relationship that reduces the complexity whilst optimizing 
the needs of both parties in the communication – consumer 
and producer.  As we mentioned above, in the case of media, 
it isn‟t reasonable or economically possible or sensible to 
deliver every possible alternative media format permutation 
to every user in every context. But in ICT it is feasible to 
deliver exactly what that user needs if we can find ways to 
build automated delivery systems that can do that.  
A common way to reduce the complexity of problems 
involving relationship between two parts is to introduce an 
intermediate representation.  Examples include the PBMPlus 
Image formats conversion kit [17]. PBMPlus set out to solve 
the problem of converting any of M image formats to any 
other of those M formats.  At first sight it would appear to 
require M x (M – 1) convertors (every format to every other 
format) but by introducing a small number G of general 
formats and converting via the appropriate intermediate 
general format the number of required converters is reduced 
to 2 x M x G. Where M is large and G is small this is a much 
smaller number of convertors. A similar approach was taken 
in [18].  The approach would appear to apply to all problems 
where it is necessary to map one large domain to another, as 
it is here (an intermediate representation reduces the 
combinations and “manages” the relationship). It is 
particularly useful where the operation is expensive (so we 
keep G small to minimize costs) and whilst ICT solutions 
that meet the requirements of an individual are often cheap 
(because ICT is cheap and flexible), identifying those 
solutions is often expensive, on the scale of the Internet of 
Things ridiculously so – the world cannot afford to deal with 
the accessibility requirements of each device, person and 
context separately. It should be noted also that great care 
needs to be taken to design the intermediate representation, 
itself a model, so as not to exclude particular mappings. An 
intermediate representation between producer and consumer 
then would reduce the computational complexity of 
managing the relationship and improve the results quality. 
A great deal of work is underway in ICT Accessibility to 
develop individualization approaches and a common way to 
do this is based around sets of individual preferences 
associated with a user and applying in specific contexts.  A 
small sample of that work might include: 
 
ISO/IEC 24751 Individualized Adaptability and 
Accessibility in Learning, Education and Training, 
currently under revision and to be re-titled as Access 
for All [19, 20, 21]. 
 
IMS Access for All – a family of specifications of 
personal needs and preferences and matching 
metadata, latest version is 3.0[22]. 
 
W3C IndieUI (Independent User Interfaces) Indie 
UI: User Context 1.0 [23]. 
 
Global Public Inclusive Infrastructure (GPII)[ 24]. 
 
A11yMetadata Project and Schema.org[25].  
 
Preferences for Global Access [26]. 
 
Document Accessibility Profile [27]. 
This list is far from exhaustive and there are many 
technical standards we have not been able to include. 
Other groups such as the ISO/IEC Joint Task Advisory 
group working on Guidelines for incorporating accessibility 
in standards and ISO/IEC Special Working group on 
accessibility [28] also consider individualization important 
enough to incorporate in their roadmaps. 
Individualization based around sets of individual 
preferences provides an intermediate representation between 
producer and consumer, that being the individual preferences 
that a user has for that context.  There are not yet completely 
accepted definitions of the words “preference” and “need” 
and different groups working in the area use them 
differently, but the general principle is that systems including 
content and human interface can adapt to a set of individual 
preferences at or close to delivery time and thus come closer 
to meeting a individual‟s needs optimally.  There are many 
ways individual preferences can be used, from static 
adaptation of interface to fetching matching content or 
requesting the production of content that matches. Examples 
and Use Cases for Individualization Using Preferences: 
 
A video is being delivered with captions.  That may 
be because the user has an expressed preference that 
auditory content be replaced with or augmented by 
textual content (for example the user may be deaf or 
it may be that the environment is noisy). 
 
A user may have some vision impairment and 
require that text rendered on a screen is in a large 
font or alternatively the contrast is enhanced (each 
achieves a similar result) 
 
A user may have difficulty using complex 
instructions and need that instructions are presented 
in simplified language. Another user might find a 
simplified interface frustrating and slow to use. 
 
A user with limited dexterity at some times of day 
might have a preference to operate a device by voice 
input at those times and by physical means at other 
times. 
 
A security video camera watching a house for 
movement might be set up so as to send text alerts, 
or video pictures to a remote location.  A 
homeowner using such a camera might be driving 
and wish to be alerted to something the camera has 
detected by an auditory means.  Preferences for that 
context and user (while driving) of auditory-for-
visual or auditory-for-textual could trigger the 
delivery an auditory alert.  The preference “textual 
for visual” might for a different context, say at the 
theatre, trigger the delivery of a textual (quiet) alert 
for the same event. 
In each of these cases, given appropriate network 
infrastructure, a system might respond to specific user 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

preferences expressed in ways that are machine-readable and 
system-interpretable.  Those preferences might be expressed 
in terms of required media modality adaptations or 
substitutions or interface customizations. 
Making human interfaces to IoT systems and the 
messaging and media in those and in connected networks 
individualizable is likely to improve their accessibility 
significantly.  However, on its own that won‟t solve the 
complexity problem.  To solve that standardization is needed 
so that when an interface uses preferences for a particular 
user and context the same set of preferences is used across 
devices and contexts.  Specific preferences relevant to a 
device and to a context may be different but some needs 
remain the same or closely-related.  What is to be avoided is 
“unnecessary difference” in technological detail.  We need to 
find the commonality (of technical and human needs) and 
build approaches around that.  
For example, the need for enhanced visual display we 
mentioned above might be satisfied on one display by 
increasing a font size and on another by increasing the 
contrast and the solution adopted might be determined by the 
functionalities available on the device itself (consider for 
example the limited display functionalities of very cheap 
L.E.D. displays -  a ubiquitous-device use case might require 
these) or by a combination of the display functionalities 
available and the environmental conditions at the time (say 
sunlight or shade).  The “common preference” in this case 
would be for enhanced display and adaptation of fonts or 
contrast would be the solution.  There are other solutions to 
this interaction need, such as delivering a different modality.  
We might in this case be able to deliver the information in 
auditory form – if we knew it was consumable – a factor of 
other user needs (being able perceive auditory content) and 
the environment (not too noisy to hear for that user and an 
environment in which sound is acceptable).  However, in 
another case entirely it may be that increased contrast is both 
the preference and the solution. 
There are common interoperability issues here that are 
often addressed by the development of appropriate standards 
and indeed many standards are in development to meet that 
need (some of which are mentioned above) and others are 
planned. Some specific requirements for IoT systems are 
developed later in this paper.  
B. The Internet of Things 
1) Relevance of Individualization 
If we accept that the Internet of Things has many places 
where its necessary to have human interfaces or where there 
are implications for closely-connected systems and if we 
accept that people and contexts are so varied that there is a 
serious complexity issue in making those human interfaces 
and the information carried accessible then we must accept 
that building our management of the accessibility 
relationships in IoT is best done with personalization 
approaches. Any other way is too computationally 
expensive. It is far from feasible to expect every device 
designer to know about and use accessibility guidelines that 
characterize 
every 
“disability” 
and 
every 
human 
functionality. 
An exciting use case and requirement is that of doing 
individualization not just “in” the heterogeneous networks 
that will be the backbone of the IoT but across those 
networks. 
 
Consider a user requiring screen enhancement on a 
television screen.  It‟s a strong possibility that the 
user might require similar enhancement on any 
display they are using.  With individualization 
integrated in IoT we might for example be able to 
know on what that user required in similar contexts 
and to be able to provide it without asking.  This is 
extremely useful in situations where a user is not 
able to ask for what they require.  
 
Consider 
a 
device 
that 
transmits 
auditory 
information so a user can listen (perhaps a baby 
alarm) and a user who requires text-for-auditory in 
some contexts.  It might be that the user has that 
requirement because the environment is noisy 
(preventing hearing), or it might be because the user 
is in a theatre listening to a performance (though not 
a baby alarm!) and so is unable to wear a listening 
device or disturb others, or it might be because the 
user 
has 
temporary 
or 
permanent 
hearing 
impairment. By knowing the context we might be 
able to infer what the user would require in a 
different context entirely without user input.  Doing 
this requires architectures in which individualization 
is integrated with IoT. 
 
Consider the benefits to a person unable to cope with 
complexity of being able to approach a cash machine 
or ATM and be provided with a simplified interface 
without asking for it.   
 
Consider the benefits to a blind user travelling on a 
bus of information concerning the whereabouts of 
the bus and the next stop being delivered in auditory 
form directly to a personal device but consumed by 
sighted people as text.  
 
2) Requirements and Issues for Integrating Preferences 
in IOT  
In order to deliver adaptation to individual needs and 
preferences across heterogeneous networks to meet the kinds 
of use case we have described a number of interdependent 
technical issues need to be approached – some are open 
questions not yet solved.  We list some here along with 
tentative and even speculatory suggestions for mechanisms, 
considerations or areas to explore towards solutions: 
 
Where are individual preferences stored? 
o 
In the cloud? How can that interoperate 
across different vendor clouds? 
 
How can we handle privacy given that in some 
cases we can deduce information about an 
individual from their preferences, particularly from 
multiple contexts? For example, if a user required 
enhanced visual access across multiple contexts it 
might suggest they have a visual impairment. 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Where and how are “solutions” (“this works well in 
that context”) stored and where in IoT architectures 
can the engines that match solutions to devices live? 
 
How can we determine whether the design of a 
device, system, or protocol will have impact for 
accessibility of systems connected indirectly to it? 
Finally, whilst not completely accessibility-related, how 
can we ensure, particularly in loosely-coupled IoT systems 
such as those built around RFID [29] that ethical 
considerations are applied to those systems in which they 
are embedded.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has shown that in the context of changing 
demographics across the world towards more elderly 
populations there is a need to address accessibility 
effectively in The Internet of Things if we are not to exclude 
and impoverish many people.  We have argued from 
practical and from computational complexity and purely 
theoretical considerations that current widely-used models of 
accessibility, including “medical models” and “one size fits 
all” are inadequate to meet the task and even “many sizes fit 
all” is inadequate alone and that we will need to use a 
combination of “many sizes fit all” and individualization or 
personalization to address the problem. 
Our 
conjecture 
is 
that 
combining 
AAL 
and 
personalization in the IoT can in the future enrich the lives of 
many and that we need to start building infrastructure 
support for that approach in the heterogeneous networks and 
devices that will form the IoT. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] The 
European 
Telecommunications 
Standards 
Institute, 
http://www.etsi.org/ [retrieved: May 2013] 
[2] ETSI TS 102 689 Machine-to-Machine communications (M2M); 
M2M service requirements, http://www.in2eps.com/em2m/tk-etsi-
m2m-102-689.html, [retrieved: May 2013] 
[3] International 
Telecommunication 
Union 
Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector, http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/ , [retrieved: 
May 2013] 
[4] New ITU standards define the Internet of Things and provide the 
blueprints 
for 
its 
development, 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-
T/newslog/New+ITU+Standards+Define+The+Internet+Of+Things+
And+Provide+The+Blueprints+For+Its+Development.aspx 
, 
[retrieved: May 2013] 
[5] Web 
Content 
Accessibility 
Guidelines 
(WCAG) 
2.0, 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2008/REC-WCAG20-20081211/, [retrieved: 
May 2013] 
[6] H. Petrie and O. Kheir, “The relationship between accessibility and 
usability of websites,” CHI 2007, ACM Press, 2007 pp. 397-406. 
[7] FCC 
Adopts 
Closed 
Captioning 
Rules 
for 
Online 
Video 
Programming, http://www.dwt.com/FCC-Adopts-Closed-Captioning-
Rules-for-Online-Video-Programming-01-17-2012//, [retrieved:May 
2013] 
[8] World Health Organization (WHO), World report on disability, 
http://www.who.int/disabilities/world_report/2011/summary.pdf, 
June 2011, [retrieved: May 2013] 
[9] World Health Organization (WHO), International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF),  
http://www3.who.int/icf/intros/ICF-Eng-Intro.pdf, 2001 [retrieved: 
May 2013] 
[10] Empirica Communications and Technology Research, “Accessing 
and Promoting e-Accessibility”, 2013 unpublished 
[11] M. Weiser, “The Computer for the Twenty-First Century”, Scientific 
American, 1991 pp. 94-104.  
[12] P. Biswas, P. Robinson, and P.M. Langdon, “Designing inclusive 
interfaces through user modeling and simulation”, International 
Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 2011. 
[13] A. Dohr, R. Modre-Opsrian, M.Drobics,  D.Hayn, and G. Schreier, 
“The Internet of Things for Ambient Assisted Living”, ITNG '10 
Proceedings of the 2010 Seventh International Conference on 
Information Technology: New Generations, IEEE, 2010 , pp804-809. 
[14] D. Adams, “The Hitchhiker‟s Guide to the Galaxy”, Pan Books, 
United Kingdom, 1979.  
[15] H. Gallagher, “By Trust Betrayed: Patients, Physicians and the 
License to Kill in the Third Reich”, 1990. 
[16] K.A. Ericsson and H.A. Simon, “Protocol Analysis: Verbal Reports 
as Data (revised edition)”, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass , 1993. 
[17] Software.  pbmplus - image file format conversion package, 
http://acme.com/software/pbmplus/ /, [retrieved: May 2013] 
[18] G. Woo, C. Heung Seok, and J. Hanil,  “An intermediate 
representation approach to reducing test suites for retargeted 
compilers”, Proceeding Ada-Europe'07 Proceedings of the 12th 
international conference on Reliable software technologies, Springer-
Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007, pp 100-113. 
[19] International Standards Organisation (ISO), 2008. ISO/IEC 24751-1 
Information 
technology 
-- 
Individualized 
adaptability 
and 
accessibility in e-learning, education and training -- Part 1: 
Framework 
and 
reference 
model,   
www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=41521 , 
[retrieved: 
May 2013] 
[20] International Standards Organisation (ISO) 2008,   ISO/IEC 24751-2 
Information 
technology 
-- 
Individualized 
adaptability 
and 
accessibility in e-learning, education and training -- Part 2: "Access 
for all" personal needs and preferences for digital delivery,  
http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=43603, [retrieved: 
May 2013] 
[21] International Standards Organisation (ISO) 2008,  ISO/IEC 24751-3 
Information 
technology 
-- 
Individualized 
adaptability 
and 
accessibility in e-learning, education and training -- Part 3: "Access 
for 
all" 
digital 
resource 
description, 
www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=43604, [retrieved: May 
2013] 
[22] The IMS Accessibility project group, 2012.  IMS Access For All v3.0 
Public 
Draft 
Specification, 
http://imsglobal.org/accessibility 
, 
[retrieved: May 2013] 
[23] IndieUI 1.0: User Context. Contextual Information for User Interface 
Independence. 
W3C 
Editor's 
Draft 
03 
May 
 
2013,   
https://dvcs.w3.org/hg/IndieUI/raw-file/default/src/indie-ui-
context.html, [retrieved: May 2013] 
[24] The Global Public Inclusive Infrastructure (GPII), 2011, 
http://gpii.net , [retrieved: May 2013] 
[25] A11yMetadata 
Project,2013. 
A 
Schema.org 
Proposal 
for 
Accessibility Metadata, http://www.a11ymetadata.org/, [retrieved: 
May 2013] 
[26] Fluid Project, Preferences for Global Access, 
http://wiki.fluidproject.org/display/fluid/Preferences+for+Global+Ac
cess , 2013, [retrieved: May 2013] 
[27] U.S Department of Education; Student E-Rent Pilot Project., 2011, 
Document 
Accessibility 
Profile 
(BETA). 
 
Available 
at 
http://stepp.gatech.edu/label.php, [retrieved: May 2013] 
[28] JTC 
1 
Special 
Working 
Group 
on 
Accessibility, 
http://www.jtc1access.org/, [retrieved: May 2013] 
[29] Definition of RFID, www.webopedia.com/TERM/R/RFID.html , 
[retrieved: May 2013] 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

