e-Health Control and Location Services for Wandering Patients through          
Cloud-based Analysis 
 
Javier Rubio-Loyola1, Gustavo Ramírez2 
1CINVESTAV Tamaulipas, 2Tairda Innovations 
Mexico 
{jrubio@tamps.cinvestav.mx, 
gustavo.ramirez@tairda.mx} 
Tonny Velin3, Jorge Sánchez4, Eduardo Burgoa5 
3Answare Technologies, 4Acesyd, 5AIDO 
Spain 
{tvelin@answare-tech.com, jsanchez@acesyd.com, 
eburgoa@AIDO.es}
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents work in progress towards a 
platform system aimed at providing support in e-health control 
and provision of location services for wandering patients through 
real-time medical and mobility information analysis. These 
critical aspects are pivotal for the PAVISALE project whose core 
ideas are presented in this paper. The PAVISALE platform 
provides services for patients, caregivers and for e-health service 
operators. Patients are enabled to receive notifications and 
suggestions in response to emergency, contingency situations or 
deviations from health and mobility patterns. Caregivers receive 
such notifications as well for further assistance and they are also 
enabled to analyse health information and mobility behaviour of 
patients during time scales and territorial scopes. E-Health 
service operators are enabled to program e-health and mobility 
control guidelines according to specific needs of wandering 
patients. A platform system for e-health control and mobility for 
wandering patients is possible if and only if efficient and robust 
wearable devices are designed and they are integrated into a 
holistic analysis system that can monitor, analyse and store 
medical information in run-time aligned to the needs of 
wandering patients’ health control and mobility constraints.  
Keywords-wandering 
patients`; 
Location-based 
services; 
medical information processing; cloud. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Dementia refers to the loss of cognitive functioning. People 
suffering from dementia are affected in their ability to think, 
remember and reason. There are a number of conditions that 
cause symptoms of dementia. The most common causes are 
Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia or multi-infarct 
dementia with Lewy bodies and frontotemporal dementia [1]. 
Although vascular dementia covers 20% to 30% of all cases of 
dementia, Alzheimer's disease is the most common cause of 
dementia covering 50% to 75% of cases. It destroys brain cells 
and nerves, affecting the transmitters that send messages to the 
brain, particularly those responsible for storing memories. 
As mentioned by León-Ortíz et al. [2], the age is the most 
important risk factor for developing a dementia syndrome. It is 
expected that by 2030, 60 countries will have more than 2 
million elderly persons over 65 years. This will have great 
impact on public health in several countries because dementia 
is the leading cause of disability in elderly people, accounting 
for 11.9% of years lived with disability from non-
communicable diseases. Symptoms of Alzheimer's disease are 
the sudden loss of memory, confusion in everyday activities, 
adoption of disturbing behaviour like getting up in the middle 
of the night or wander errantly and getting lost [1].  
People with dementia are at constant risk of wandering 
away, being exposed to suffer physical, emotional damage and 
even death. In addition, wandering patients, mostly elderly 
people, frequently have other diseases that could demand 
additional health control processes (e.g., taking pills, blood 
pressure and temperature checkups, etc.), which in turn could 
be jeopardized due to their wandering behavior.  
This paper presents our work in progress towards a cloud-
based platform that supports e-health and location services for 
wandering patients. We present our initial ideas towards a 
system that would allow monitor specific biomedical 
parameters, produce alerts in case of abnormal biomedical 
behavior or unknown location of wandering patients, and also, 
to produce suggestions from the system to control the health of 
the patients, all in all, to increase the quality of life of 
wandering patients. The novelty of this platform relies on the 
improvement of the capabilities of e-wearable devices, and its 
integration with a novel intelligent system, which both together 
can be exploited to produce comprehensive tracking, 
monitoring and control of healthy life in wandering patients 
with specific needs. The system will exploit cloud services to 
enable intelligent storage and processing of information in real 
time, in favour of scalable e-health services.  The system will 
allow monitor, locate, detect patterns of behaviour and 
mobility, and follow up of medical treatments using smart 
technology for a large number of patients. The proposed 
system is the target of the PAVISALE project, which is a 
research and innovation project targeting a platform for 
assistance of healthy life control and location of wandering 
patients.  
After this introduction, Section II presents the state of the 
art. Section III presents the conceptual framework of the 
platform system. Section IV presents the technological impact 
of the proposed solution, and finally Section V concludes the 
paper.  
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
The last decade has seen a tremendous interest for all 
aspects of e-health. As a comprehensive survey would require 
more than a single paper, this section describes selected work 
related to the system subject of our study. 
Intercom Sick-nurse Systems [3] provides support to have 
the information and patient’s alarms in one centralized system. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

It includes breathing equipment and electronic whiteboards 
where the staff of doctors and nurses has relevant information 
of the patient, reports the presence of nurses or doctors in the 
room, and continuously monitors the system for fault detection 
and alarms to alert staff by means of pagers and wireless 
phones. The operator can make group calls, monitor and setup 
service requirements, locate staff members, verify service 
needs and identify sites with staff availability. 
The device I'm Home [4] allows taking vital signs of 
patients at home through sensors, which are sent to the cloud 
and then it is reviewed by the physician through mobile 
devices. When a parameter goes outside the normal range, for 
example, if the pressure rises above 180 or if the temperature 
rises above 38 degrees, the alarm triggers a call to the call 
center, which in turn communicates with the patient through a 
videoconference. I’m home records temperature, heart rate, 
blood pressure and oxygen levels. The device can be used by 
patients recovering from the hospital, people with severe lung 
disease, cancer patients after chemotherapy and elderly people. 
E-doctor [5] is a platform for home monitoring in real-time 
using bluetooth. The application works with physiological 
sensors and it uses smartphones as gateway. It allows monitor 
several patients at once. The application presented in [6] uses a 
WSN (Wireless Sensor Network) tele-monitoring system for 
health care. It proposes a milti-protocol architecture with 
physiological sensors and biokinetic sensors. Is uses multiple 
gateways and it can handle several patients. The application 
presented in reference [7] is an experimental application that 
uses a smartphone as Gateway, the bluetooth protocol, 
physiological sensors, specifically to monitor heart rate, and 
Internet to transmit data to a remote center. The application 
presented in [8] is a pilot application that works with Bluetooth 
and Zigbee (802.15.4) protocol; it offers a redundant system in 
case of failure of a protocol. It uses sensors and physiological 
biokinetic sensors.  
The e-Health system presented by Cervantes et al. [9] is a 
research application based on wireless sensor networks that 
works with physiological sensors, ZigBee (802.15.4) with 
bridge to WiFi and a personal computer as gateway. The 
application Cardiosentinal presented by Gao et al. [10] is a 
sensors application for remote monitoring of cardiac signals 
with smartphones that is active 24 hours a day. It allows 
monitoring several persons with cardiac problems and it is run 
on an infrastructure that allows to act at a given moment in case 
of a medical emergency.  The application presented by Hu et 
al. [11] is one of the classic applications along with others like 
"Codeblue" and MEDiSN, which were the precursors of 
medical treatments and disease control technology, specifically 
with the use of sensors. This application has evolved to real 
time streaming using different protocols and different sensors.  
A detailed study of sensor networks and applications 
oriented to collect and analyze biomedical signals is presented 
by 
Campaña-Bastidas 
and 
Londoño-Peláez 
[12]. 
The 
characteristics of the applications described above (and others 
in the literature) have a common denominator; the information 
collected through sensors takes place in real time. However, 
only a few consider the operation and evolution of the 
monitored parameters to predict emergencies, or they do not 
perform data analysis to generate alerts, recommendations or 
suggest any specific treatment. 
From the information included in this section and other 
works in the literature, we acknowledge that there is a tendency 
for the use of smartphones to capture and transmit data from 
sensors. However, the most important limitation of most of the 
works related to our work is that the use of real-time 
information analysis is not yet predominant for giving 
suggestions for health control. In addition, none of the 
applications consider monitoring the location together with 
health control approaches, both optimized with the aim at 
enhancing the quality of like for wandering patients. These 
basic aspects are of particular relevance to the PAVISALE 
project. 
III. 
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
The general objective of our work is the design, 
development and implementation of a permanent control 
system for patients that need special care, namely patients that 
suffer from disorientation disorders or diseases such as senile 
dementia, schizophrenia or Alzheimer. 
The Figure 1 shows a graphical representation of the system 
platform that we are targeting in our research. 
The proposed solution includes the following elements: 
• Users’ (patient) wearable devices that allow capturing 
physical activity signals and special biomedical parameters for 
wandering persons.  
• Wireless access technology to support ubiquitous 
transmission of such information to the cloud. 
• Localization infrastructure based on GPS via Wi-Fi or 
other wireless network. 
•   Storage and real-time analysis services in the cloud. The 
cloud will be used to store raw biological and location 
information of the patients. Data mining and learning 
algorithms will be executing in the cloud to track, analyze and 
to determine whether the patient is within appropriate 
biological levels and also whether the patient is physically 
located in areas that could fall within his/her location patterns.  
Algorithms development in this phase are critical because the 
platform will deal with a large number of patients and also, 
with specific needs. Scalability passes through efficient and 
scalable analysis mechanisms that will be addressed in this 
phase of our developments.  
• Real-time self-learning system with manifold objectives: 
i) to determine patients’ behaviour parameters;  ii) to monitor 
for thresholds crossing of biomedical parameters; iii) to give 
suggestions for healthy life aligned to patients’ medical state 
and evolution. 
• Web and mobile applications for users; this is caregivers 
and/or residence personnel to follow-up, monitor, and react to 
incidents or events related to the health of the patients.  
• A web service interface where administrators can 
program, and update health control parameters and follow-up 
guidelines for each patient.  
The end-users (patients) will be provided with a wearable 
device that will implement diverse sensors for vital signal 
measurement. The capabilities of the wearable device will be 
aligned to the needs of the patients. The information from the 
devices will be transmitted to a cloud storage service through a 
wireless access point. The system will be designed to be aware 
of the capabilities and nature of the wearable devices and it will  
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
Figure 1. Services supported by the location-based service platform 
 
implement appropriate gateway transmission devices coupled 
with the sensors. 
The users of the platform (caregivers, residence/hospital 
staff) will have at hand a localization infrastructure that will 
follow-up, monitor, and react to incidents or events related to 
the location of the patients.  
The cloud service will gather and store the patients’ 
information making use of appropriate anonymization 
techniques or encryption security protocols to ensure 
confidentiality. 
The self-learning component will analyse the biomedical 
information in order to detect anomalies as well as to suggest 
new activities and reinforce those that have produced good 
results in the patients. The self-learning component will 
provide services for analysis, recommendation and alert 
generation. Alerts will be sent to the specialized staff of the 
residence (end user) through a web application that could run in 
tablets, PCs, smartphones, etc. Also, the patient could receive 
the alert if he/she is capable of reacting to such alert 
accordingly.  
To date, there are two types of products related to the 
solution described earlier: i) systems for locating wandering 
persons [13] and ii) wrist bands for physical activity 
registration [14][15]. The proposed solution covers completely 
the functionality of systems for locating wandering persons, 
and it greatly enhances the functionality of the wristbands for 
physical activity registration. Our solution does not only 
measure the taken steps, but it also offers real-time 
measurement of sensitive vital signs for wandering persons 
which comprise temperature, heart rate, skin humidity or 
breathing. Also, the main innovation that differentiates our 
approach from other products is  that  it  incorporates a   system 
 
that analyses the activity and parameters of all users (patients), 
offering tips to follow a healthy life style, and the auto 
prediction of possible health problems. In the next section, we 
elaborate on the technological challenges and contributions to 
all actors involved in the solution presented in our work. 
IV. 
TECHNOLOGICAL IMPACT 
The expected growth on the quantity of wandering patients 
for the next years demands the deployment of new solutions 
that help enhance the quality of life of persons with wandering 
behaviour, and also that can provide support for more efficient 
attention and follow up for wandering patients in health 
centres, residences and hospitals.  
This is not an easy task because wandering patients can be 
elderly, and they may present a combination of various health 
conditions that require personalized care and continuous 
monitoring. The constant monitoring of diverse biomedical 
parameters and the periodic tracking of biomedical information 
of several wandering patients is only possible by means of the 
use and development of diverse technologies that include: 
design of electronic devices with restrictions of usage, 
portability, and energy efficiency, a safe and plug-and-play 
communication protocol that guarantees the smart gathering of 
biomedical data, the development of new scalable storage and 
information analysis services, and finally, smart tools that 
allow hospital directors/administrators and technical staff of 
residences to track physical location, as well as monitor the 
evolution of biomedical parameters of patients. The 
contributions to the state of the art in all actors involved in the 
solution proposed in this paper are described hereafter.  
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

A. Impact on health care operators 
The contributions to health care operators are manifold and 
they are summarized in this section.  
The system will extend the health care operators’ role to a 
more active role that is commonly taken by specialized service 
operators at expensive costs. In this sense, public and private 
hospitals as well as diverse residencies with wandering patients 
will be enabled to define and operate autonomously the health 
care services for their communities according to the 
parameters, and the desired tracking for each patient.  
The system will allow hospitals, residences, etc., acquire 
and define patterns of e-health services, which could be 
instantiated in several places for patients with similar needs. 
This would also have an impact on the reduction of operation 
and maintenance costs in e-health care services. 
Cost reduction has a domino effect on critical aspects of e-
health services provision, such as: i) increase the offer of 
service operators; ii) improve existent services by integrating 
new devices for the monitoring of biomedical signals with 
improved capabilities.  
The proposed system will be designed to be flexible and 
scalable allowing for the integration of new specialized or 
emerging monitoring devices. 
The system will be tested in real environments. Moreover, 
an important effect of its application in real environments is 
that it will bring new business models for its exploitation in 
commonly neglected environments such as rural residencies, 
regional hospitals, and remote homes with patient tracking 
needs.  
B. Impact on device manufacturers 
The proposed system will allow manufacturers of 
electronic/wearable devices to get know-how for developing 
emerging technologies for monitoring and tracking healthy life 
of wandering patients. In addition, they will design and develop 
more and better devices that could be integrated to platforms of 
monitoring and analysis of large volumes of information. The 
above will have an impact towards mass production of devices 
with improved capabilities. Finally, device manufactures will 
adapt to market evolution to address the requirements of the 
increasing number of wandering patients in the world. 
C. Impact on wandering patients 
The proposed system will have a significant impact on 
wandering patients, since the researched technologies in this 
work will allow the provision of services for systematic 
location tracking and biomedical data monitoring in general. 
Wandering patients could enjoy such advanced services at 
affordable prices and in consequence an increase in its quality 
of life due to the assistance and personalized tracking of 
location and health control. 
D. Impact on family members 
The family members of wandering patients would benefit 
from our platform system in several ways. They would be able 
to monitor and pay special attention about biological 
information and physical location of their relatives through 
their smartphones, tables, etc. With this regard, family 
members could be warned when the patient may experience 
deviations of biological state or in case the patient gets lost at a 
given time. With the support of the platform system, family 
members could call for assistance or they could be able to 
provide the caregivers access to the patient in cases when the 
latter ones attend the alerts triggered by the system. Family 
members could enjoy these services at affordable prices and 
they would increase their quality of life as they would be 
supported by an intelligent and reliable system when looking 
after their wandering relatives.  
V. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
This paper has presented work in progress towards a 
platform system aimed at providing support in e-health control 
and provision of location services for wandering patients 
through real-time medical and mobility information analysis. 
The conceptual framework presented in this paper indicates 
that e-health control and location services for wandering 
patients can be achieved with appropriate enhancements of 
wearable devices that can transmit biomedical information 
towards an analysis system that can monitor, analyse and store 
medical information in run-time aligned to the needs of 
wandering patients’ health control and mobility targets. This 
paper has presented the core ideas with which we think that we 
will contribute to the state of the art in the critical nature of 
providing support in e-health control and provision of location 
services for wandering patients. Mainly, we expect to 
contribute to the state of the art with an implementation of the 
conceptual design presented in this paper, and the specific 
algorithms that would analyse and process the large amount of 
biological information to enhance the quality of life of 
wandering patients.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partially supported by the Spanish 
Government by its funding through the project COSAIF, 
“Connectivity as a Service: Access for the Internet of the 
Future” (TEC2012-38754-C02-01 and TEC2012-38754-C02-
02) and the Council for Science and Technology of Mexico 
(CONACyT) under the CONACYT-CDTI Project 189413. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Alzheimer’s Disease International, “Types of dementia,” The Global 
Voice on Dementia, http://www.alz.co.uk/ visited last time Oct 6, 2015 
[2] 
P. León- Ortíz, M. L. Ruiz-Flores, J. Ramírez-Bermudez, and A.L. Sosa-
Ortíz. Lifesyle in elderly people and their association with dementia. 
Gaceta medica de Mexico 149(1):36-45 · July 2013, pp. 36-45 
[3] 
“Sistema 
Enfermo-Enfermera.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.adix.com.mx/Productos/Enfermo-Enfermera.html. 
[Accessed: Oct 6, 2015] 
[4] 
Article “Making life easier for remote patient monitoring” [Online]. 
Available: http://www.am.com.mx/leon/tecnologia/facilitan-monitoreo-
de-pacientes-a-distancia-114345.html. [Accessed: Oct 6, 2015] 
[5] 
Z. Jin and Z. Qian. E-doctor: A real time home monitoring and mobile 
healthcare plataform. IEEE ComSoc Multimedia Communications 
Technical Committee Letter, vol. 6, no. 11, November 2011, pp. 36-38 
[6] 
J. M. Corchado, J. Bajo, D.I. Tapia, and A. Ajith. Using heterogeneous 
wireless sensor networks in a telemonitoring system for healthcare. 
IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine. vol. 14, 
no. 2, March 2010, pp. 234-240. 
[7] 
P. Crilly and V. Muthukkumarasamy, “Using smart phones and body 
sensors to deliver pervasive mobile personal healthcare,” Sixth 
International Conference on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and 
Information Processing (ISSNIP), Australia, 2010, pp. 291–296. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[8] 
F. Felisberto, N. Costa, F. Fdez-Riverola, and A. Pereira, “Unobstructive 
Body Area Networks (BAN) for Efficient Movement Monitoring,” 
Sensors, vol. 12, no. 12, Sep. 2012, pp. 12473–12488, 
[9] 
H. Cervantes,  J. I. Nieto, J de D. Sánchez, M.E. Martínez, and A. H. 
Calvo. e-Health architecture based on wireless sensor networks.  
DIF100ci@, ISSN 2007-3585, vol. 6, no. 2, December 2012. Pp. 54-61 
[10] M. Gao, Q. Zhang, L. Ni, Y. Liu, and X. Tang, “CardioSentinal: A 24-
hour Heart Care and Monitoring System,” J. Comput. Sci. Eng., vol. 6, 
no. 1, Mar. 2012, pp. 67–78 
[11] F. Hu, M. Jiang, L. Celentano, and Y. Xiao, “Robust medical ad hoc 
sensor networks (MASN) with wavelet-based ECG data mining,” Ad 
Hoc Networks, vol. 6, no. 7, Sep. 2008, pp. 986–1012 
[12] S. E. Campaña Bastidas and J. M. Londoño Peláez. Wireless Sensor 
Networks and Related Applications for Collecting and Analyzing 
Biomedical Signals. Gerenc. Tecnol. Inform. vol. 12, no. 33, May - Ago, 
pp. 85 – 99 
[13] M. Avvenuti, C. Baker, J. Light, D. Tulpan, and A. Vecchio, “Non-
intrusive Patient Monitoring of Alzheimer’s Disease Subjects Using 
Wireless Sensor Networks,” World Congress on Privacy, Security, Trust 
and the Management of e-Business, 2009, Canada, pp. 161–165 
[14] “Medical Alert Systems & Service | Philips Lifeline ®,” Philips Lifeline. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.lifelinesys.com/content/. [Accessed: Oct 
6, 2015] 
[15] “Medical Alert Systems | Medical Alert Services for Seniors - Alert1®.” 
[Online]. Available: http://www.alert-1.com/. [Accessed: Oct 6, 2015] 
 
 
 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

