User-Centered Methods Applied to 4D/BIM Collaborative Scheduling 
 
 
Hugo Carvalho Mota 
PErSEUs EA7312 
Université de Lorraine  
Metz, France 
Email: hugo.carvalho-mota@univ-lorraine.fr 
Benoît Roussel 
PErSEUs EA7312 
Université de Lorraine 
 Metz, France 
Email: Benoit.roussel@univ-lorraine.fr
 
 
Abstract—4D simulation (linking 3D models with time 
schedules) allows stakeholders to better understand the 
construction process of a building. However, 4D tools’ recurrent 
usability issues contribute to its limited adoption. We used user-
centered methods to better understand the nature of those issues 
and identify current practices and users’ needs. Based on the 
gathered data, we framed and then conducted a creativity 
session 
with 
architecture, 
engineering, 
construction 
professionals and researchers, as well as construction software 
editors. Through the creativity process, users produced 46 ideas 
that led us to define and develop new functionalities for a new 
4D prototype. 
Keywords- User-Centered Design; User needs; 4D BIM; 
Collaboration; Creativity. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The design of a construction building is a complex activity 
that requires great coordination and a lot of information 
exchange from different disciplines (architects, engineers, 
contractors, project managers, etc). Given the fragmented 
nature of the construction market and information flows, close 
collaboration between the different stakeholders is essential 
for the construction process to meet the time, financial and 
aesthetic requirements of the owner. To that end, the planning 
and scheduling processes must be carried out in a rigorous and 
collaborative way. These two processes are complementary, 
although often confused [1]. Thus, in the construction field, 
planning consists in defining the objectives, modalities and 
resources of the project while scheduling makes it possible to 
allocate resources to tasks as well as to define their sequencing 
and the time necessary for their completion. [2]. Nowadays, 
this activity is still carried out manually and requires a large 
amount of individual and collective work to produce and 
exchange information [3]. However, a significant amount of 
information is lost during these exchanges, which results in 
low quality documents strongly impacting the project’s 
planning and scheduling process [4]. Collaborative scheduling 
process mainly occurs during the "Design stage" and more 
precisely in the pre-construction phase. It is during this pre-
construction phase that the teams work together on the 
definition of the construction process. This collaborative 
activity mainly occurs during coordination meetings, during 
which plans and diagrams from different disciplines are 
pooled to resolve design errors. These documents, in 2D or 
3D, are digital or paper representations of the physical 
characteristics of the building and are therefore mediators in 
the process of collaboration and decision-making [5]. 
To meet this growing need for collaboration and 
information sharing, recent decades have seen the emergence 
of Building Information Modeling (BIM). The Associated 
General Contractors (AGC) of America defines BIM “as a 
data-rich, object-oriented, intelligent and parametric digital 
representation of the facility, from which views and data 
appropriate to various users; needs can be extracted and 
analyzed to generate information that can be used to make 
decisions and to improve the process of delivering the facility” 
[2]. BIM is, therefore, both a technology and a new work 
process requiring a reorganization of workflows. Documents 
and information centralization allow each actor to have access 
to all of the information throughout the entire project lifecycle. 
With the help of BIM tools, each stakeholder produces a 3D 
digital artifact representing a “business-oriented” vision of the 
building. These are then regularly updated and merged to form 
a centralized artifact. When applied to scheduling processes, 
BIM turns a 3D model into 4D. 4D artifacts are created by 
linking a 3D model with a planning, resulting in a model that 
visually simulates the construction process over time. Trough 
visualization of construction process, 4D offers many benefits 
such as work process optimization, rework reduction, 
increased errors detection, construction time reduction, and 
better communication among stakeholders [4]. Thus, 4D can 
be crucial to improve collaboration, decision making and 
reduce misinterpretations among teams. 
While BIM’s adoption and use in coordination meetings 
are growing, 4D’s remain low. Despite its numerous 
advantages and potential uses, it is still mainly used as a 
visualization tool [6]. Researches have identified softwares’ 
visualization issues as a barrier to 4D adoption at the 
individual level [7]. 
This paper is organized as follows:  Section 2 gives an 
overview of related works on 4D’s flaws and usability issues. 
Section 3 presents the creativity method, tools used and 
participants. Section 4 presents and analyzes the results of the 
creativity session. Section 5 concludes the paper and give an 
outlook of future work. 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

II. 
RELATED WORK 
Some studies have sought to identify the usability issues 
of 4D softwares that limit their adoption.   Guevremont and 
Hammad [6] and Castronovo, Lee, Nikolic and Messner [7] 
provide an overview of 4D issues. Through semi-structured 
interviews of AEC professionals, they found, among other 
issues, that there is a lack of visualization and interaction 
standards, such as common color coding, information filtering 
(i.e obtaining a precise information about a mechanical 
object), zooming to visualize precise spatial information or 
modifying the graphical level of detail. Both studies propose 
guidelines to enhance 3D models and schedule representation 
of 4D models. 
 Others researchers have been focusing on observing and 
analyzing the interaction between stakeholders and artefacts 
during coordination meetings from an ethnographic point of 
view [8]. 
In their study on the use of 3D and 2D digital, or paper, 
artifacts during coordination meetings, Mehrbod, Tory and 
Staub-French [8] identified the navigation between artifacts as 
the major problem. When solving a problem, actors spend a 
large part of their time navigating between 2D and 3D artifacts 
searching for more detailed 2D views, trying to obtain 
measurements and trade-specific information or even 
annotating documents. These navigation difficulties, as well 
as the lack of visualization and interaction standards, greatly 
slow down the collaboration and decision-making process 
during coordination meetings.  
In summary, few studies have attempted to determine the 
AEC professionals needs about the use of 4D for scheduling 
purpose through the use of user-centered methods on all stages 
of the design process. Among them, none have described how 
users’ needs have been used to generate and provide 
professionals with adapted solutions. In this paper, we present 
a collective creativity method used to generate functionalities 
that meet users’ requirements. 
III. 
SCOPE OF PROJECT AND METHODS  
This paper describes part of a research project, 4DCollab 
[9], which involves the use of a collective creativity method 
to produce new 4D features. The project objective is to 
develop, through a user-centered methodology, a synchronous 
and co-located collaborative tool to help AEC professionals 
with site planning in the pre-construction phase. Using BIM 
and 4D technologies, the tool should improve communication, 
decision-making and information sharing between the various 
stakeholders. To tackle the identified issues, user needs were 
determined through a user-centered approach by first 
conducting semi-structured interviews with professionals in 
order to collect data on their individual and collective practice 
with 4D tools. Then, a multimodal analysis of speech gestures, 
exchanges and interactions around 2D, 3D and 4D documents 
during coordination meetings was performed. The data 
collected highlighted the main obstacles to the adoption of 
these technologies, as well as their main advantages. These 
data were then used to define the framework of a creativity 
session. 
 
A. Means of the creativity process 
In accordance with Parjanen [10], we define collective 
creativity as an approach of creative activity that emerges 
from the collaboration and contribution of many individuals 
so that new ideas are produced collectively by individuals 
connected by the common concern. Once the subject is 
defined (in our case, it is centered on user needs), the course 
of a collective creativity session is designed around an 
alternation of divergence-convergence. Thus, the creative 
process is structured in 4 main phases: an analysis phase, a 
divergent phase, a convergent phase and post workshop, a 
synthesis phase (Figure 1). 
The objective of the divergent phase is to move away from 
the subject by diverging through exploratory reasoning. Its 
purpose is to produce new, unexpected, even crazy ideas. 
They can be lifted in this way, as their potential links with the 
subject have not yet been highlighted. The role of the 
convergence phase is then to bring the subject (user needs) 
and these ideas together in order to be able to respond to the 
problem at hand. Once this rapprochement is achieved, the 
term "crazy" ideas may then disappear and give way to 
"interesting" ideas to solve user needs. Our collective 
creativity action (during 2 continuous half-days of work) 
aimed to explore the theme of "new functionalities to share 
knowledge with others" and to formalize as many idea sheets 
as possible.  
B. Participants 
The working group was made up of 13 people (3 women 
and 10 men) from different professions: 2 architects, 2 
computer scientists, 1 building construction professional, 1 
researcher in architecture, 1 researcher in psychology, 2 
mecanical engineers, 2 programmers in BIM, 2 software 
editors.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
The creative process was structured in 4 main phases : an 
analysis phase, a divergent phase, a convergent phase and a 
synthesis phase. The analysis phase was carried out using a 
purge tool (in our case, we used the mindmapping tool [11]. 
The purpose of the purge is to define the scope of the group’s 
understanding of the initial subject. The purge resulted in a 
representation of ideas and concepts in the form of a Mind 
map which allowed the emergence of generic work themes. 
14 thematic areas comprising a total of 68 items emerged. 
The divergent phase opened up the initial topic by drawing 
from other areas concepts, notions and ideas that could later 
feed into the initial topic. Three tools were used: "Hot Potato" 
[12], Brainstorming [13], and then Analogy [12]. The initial 
questions were "What evokes for you the words : Compare, 
Appreciate, Confront, Bring together,...?" and "How to 
facilitate an instructive discovery in a city abroad ?". The 
convergent phases focus on returning to the initial subject by 
integrating the elements found in the divergent phase. It is 
during these phases, provoked at different moments of the 
creativity session, that the creativity group collectively brings 
out 38 embryos of ideas. An "idea embryo" is the first step of 
an idea explained by a member of the creativity group to the 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

other members in the form of a drawing. "Idea embryos" are 
most often generated during the phases of divergence and 
convergence. 
The selection (by voting) and classification of ideas 
allowed the identification of 12 embryos of ideas that most 
caught the attention of the members of the working group. The 
drafting of 8 of the 12 idea sheets was carried out in groups of 
2 or 3 people (Figure 2). A total of 46 idea sheets were 
produced, 8 of which were produced directly by the group 
during the creativity session. 
 For the 4DCollab project, idea generation (one of the 
results of collective creativity) is not an end in itself. A 
synthesis of the results was presented visually in a CK 
(Concept-Knowledge) 
Tree [14][15] 
(Figure 
3). 
The 
classification "by families of Idea sheets" was carried out 
(after the session by the facilitator) with the formalization of 
C tree (concepts). This is intended to provide a vision of the 
links between the sheets produced as well as an overview of 
the fields explored (and not explored) by the group’s 
production.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
      In this paper, we have discused 4D’s issues that limits its 
use by AEC profesionnals and how user-centered methods 
can be used to resolve those issues. We have presented and 
defined a user-centered method, based on the principles of the 
collective creativity, that we used to generate new 4D 
functionnalities adapted to users’ needs. From a quantitative 
point of view, 14 thematic areas (including 70 items) 
emerged during the analysis phase and were presented in a 
Mindmap. During the creative production phase, 38 ideas 
were generated. They open up new ways of solutions, 
complementary to existing "main stream" solutions. The 
collective creativity session was centered on user needs and 
its conception was organized around successions of 
divergence/convergence. 
The 
group 
of 
professionals 
participating in the session generated a total of 38 ideas. 12 
of them were evaluated by them as the most interesting to 
meet the user needs of "new functionalities to share 
knowledge with others". Following this collective creativity 
session, some of these new functionalities were also 
evaluated as relevant from a business point of view. These 
were developed and implemented on the first version 
prototype, whose usabilility is being iteratively evaluated 
with the user testing method. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors acknowledge financial support from the 
Fonds Nationale de la Recherche (FNR), Luxembourg, and 
the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR), France, to 
4DCollab project, grant reference: 11237662 (LU) / ANR-16- 
CE10-0006-01(FR). 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Baldwin and D. Bordoli, Handbook for construction 
planning and scheduling. John Wiley & Sons, 2014. 
[2] S. A. Mubarak, Construction project scheduling and control. 
John Wiley & Sons, 2015. 
[3] H. Liu, Z. Lei, H. X. Li, and M. Al-Hussein, “An automatic 
scheduling approach: building information modeling-based 
onsite scheduling for panelized construction”, Construction 
Research Congress 2014: Construction in a Global Network, 
pp. 1666-1675, 2014. 
[4] P. H. da Silva, J. Crippa, and S. Scheer. “BIM 4D no 
planejamento 
de 
obras: 
detalhamento, 
benefícios 
e 
dificuldades.” PARC 
Pesquisa 
Em 
Arquitetura 
E 
Construção 10 (2019): e019010-e019010.M. 
[5] M. Tory, S. Staub-French, B. A. Po, and F. Wu. “Physical and 
digital 
artifact-mediated 
coordination 
in 
building 
design,” Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), 
vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 311-351, 2008. 
[6]  M. Guevremont and A. Hammad, “Criticality visualization 
using 4D simulation for major capital projects,” Winter 
Simulation Conference (WSC), pp. 2360-2371), 2017. 
[7] F. Castronovo, S. Lee, D. Nikolic, and J. I. Messner, 
“Visualization in 4D construction management software: a 
review of standards and guidelines,” Computing in Civil and 
Building Engineering, pp. 315-322, 2014. 
[8] S. Mehrbod, S. Staub-French, and M. Tory, “Interactions with 
BIM tools in design coordination meetings,” Proceedings, 
Annual Conference—Canadian Society for Civil Engineering, 
Vol. 2, 2013. 
[9] 4DCollab project web site. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.4dcollab-project.eu/ 2020/10/16 
[10] S. Parjanen, “Creating possibilities for collective creativity”, 
Approches cognitives et ergonomiques, Ed. Acta Universitatis, 
2012, ISBN 978-952-265-234-8. 
[11] T. Buzan, B. Buzan, & J. Harrison, The mind map book: 
Unlock your creativity, boost your memory, change your life, 
Pearson BBC Active, New York, 2010. 
[12] H. JAOUI, La créativité mode d’emploi : connaissances du 
problème, applications pratiques, ESF Edition, 2ième édition, 
1996. 
[13] A. F. Osborn, Applied Imagination: principles and procedures 
of creative thinking, Ed. Charles Scribner’s sons, New York, 
1953.  
[14] A. Hatchuel and B. Weil, “C-K design theory: an advanced 
formulation”, Research in Engineering Design, vol 19 no 4, pp. 
181-192, 2008. 
[15] T. Gillier and G. Piat, “Exploring over the Presumed Identity 
of Emerging Technology”, Creativity and Innovation 
Management, Wiley, vol. 20 no 4, pp. 238-252, 2011, hal-
00641765. 
 
 
 
 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

  
Figure 2. Example of Idea sheet (PAT 7-8-9) written by a group during the 
workshop (see d) in Fig.2) 
 
Figure 1. Visual summary 
of the creative process of 
the workshop 2. Example of ID Card (PAT 7-8-
9) written by a group during the workshop (see d) in Fig.2) 
 
Figure 1. Visual summary of  the creative process used for the workshop 
 
a 
b
c
d
b
Figure 3. CK Tree : Classification “by families of Idea sheets” :  
a) Global view of CK tree, b) Detail of a family, c) Caption, d) Example of Idea sheet written (detail in Figure 2) 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

