Systems and Productivity Metrics – a Review 
 
 
Mauro Almeida 
Polytechnic Institute of Castelo Branco 
6000-767 Castelo Branco, Portugal 
mauro96alex@gmail.com 
  
 
 
Filipe Fidalgo 
R&D Unit in Digital Services, 
Applications and Content, Polytechnic 
Institute of Castelo Branco 
6000-767 Castelo Branco, Portugal 
 ffidalgo@ipcb.pt 
 
 
Ângela Oliveira 
R&D Unit in Digital Services, 
Applications and Content, 
Polytechnic Institute of Castelo Branco 
6000-767 Castelo Branco, Portugal 
angelaoliveira@ipcb.pt 
 
Abstract— Nowadays, the industry produces a large amount of 
data in its daily activities. Invested time and resources in 
acquiring, storing, and managing this data can represent a 
huge added value to organizations decision makers. Besides 
data produced by information systems used to support 
operational tasks, additional data can also be acquired and 
stored automatically, without human interaction. In Industry 
4.0, technologies are becoming more prevalent in production 
and logistics. Intelligent sensors can generate a large volume of 
industrial data, so it is crucial to collect, store, analyze, and 
distribute this data in organizations. Dashboards allow 
operators to make informed decisions and solve issues on the 
fly. Thus, to address the presented concepts, a systematic 
review was conducted, based on Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Review and a Meta-Analyses guideline (PRISMA). 
These studies address some consistent positive evidence on the 
use of Internet of Things (IoT) technologies to support 
productivity metrics in industry, creating knowledge for the 
development of a digital solution.  
Keywords: Productivity metrics; Industry 4.0; Internet of 
Things; Systems; Key Performance Indicators. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Making a good plan for a given task is the key to success 
in any business area. To make the best decisions, an analysis 
of the organization’s data is necessary. Data collection is as 
essential as its analysis. In a computerized world, data 
collection is fundamental, regardless of the business areas in 
which this collection occurs. Fortunately, IoT solutions and 
computer solutions collect a huge amount of data every day 
and help us optimize and analyze a specific business area in 
the best way, thus supporting decision-making through data 
analysis. These IoT solutions are found in different business 
areas, from small to large technology companies. One sector 
that has been growing with the help of IoT is the primary 
sector, giving rise to IoT Smart agricultural solutions [1]. 
The present study follows the PRISMA [2] methodology. It 
provides a comprehensive review of the scientific literature 
on the use of IoT technologies to support productivity 
metrics in the industry. This review is important because it 
presents an identification of the approaches used in 
productivity metrics in the industry and identifies a set of 
opportunities that can be explored in future research. 
However, it also has some limitations. The literature search 
was performed only in three databases (IEEE Xplore, ACM 
Digital, and Scopus), which may have influenced the number 
of relevant studies obtained. The use of other databases could 
possibly have increased the number of studies analyzed and 
contributed to improving the general analysis, as well as the 
search strategy, which had restricted the number of non-
relevant studies (studies published many years ago, very 
general studies, studies that do not focus on the research 
objectives, or studies not written in English). However, these 
restrictions did not have a significant effect on the discussion 
and conclusions. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the 
details of the methodology and the results that were obtained 
through the research. Section III presents the conclusions and 
directions for future work. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
This section aims to analyze scientific articles that 
contain information related to tools and technologies 
associated with data collection and visualization and 
treatment of related data and respective metrics. This review 
includes the following topics: research questions; inclusion 
criteria; search strategy; results; extraction and data analysis; 
discussion. 
Research Questions 
According to the proposed objectives, the research 
questions are addressed in this topic are:  
Question_1: What systems exist to measure productivity?  
Question_2: What kind of metrics are used to collect 
information?  
Question_3: What kind of frameworks/tolls allow the data 
collection? 
Question_4: What data analysis and visualization tools are 
possible and used? 
Inclusion criteria 
The literature studies are selected according to the 
following criteria. 
Criterion_1: Studies published between 2017 and 2021. 
Criterion_2: Studies written in English. 
Criterion_3: Studies where the full texts are available free 
of charge. 
Criterion_4: Studies regarding IoT solutions. 
Criterion_5: Studies concerning tools and technologies 
associated with productivity and the identification of metrics 
and data visualization/treatment.  
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-999-7
CENTRIC 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Research Strategy 
The IEEE Xplore, ACM Digital and Scopus databases 
were used in the research to identify the articles. The set of 
search terms was: "Industry 4.0", "IoT", "Framework", 
"Assessment", and "Key Performance Indicators (KPI)". The 
search was carried out between November and December 
2021. 
Results 
As shown in Figure 1, after carrying out the search and 
applying criterion 1, 206 scientific articles were found, 24 
from the IEEE Xplore database, 86 articles from the ACM 
Digital database and 96 articles from the Scopus database. 
Applying criterion 2 and removing duplicates resulted in the 
exclusion of 18 studies. Thus, 188 studies were analyzed 
based on title and abstract, and 152 were excluded, based on 
criteria 4 and 5. Complete text analysis of the 36 resulting 
studies was performed, applying criteria 3, 4 and 5. The 
remaining 13 studies were included in the review.  
A. Extraction and Data Analysis 
Data were extracted from all identified studies using a 
predefined format: Study; Year of publication; Metrics; 
Technologies, and Data Visualization. Table I presents the 
extracted data. The characteristics of the included studies are 
summarized below.  
In [1], the authors explore ways of visualizing data 
collected from IoT systems. They address the importance of 
data and its visualization to support decision-making and 
indicate some of the most used tools in different industries, 
such as Tableau, Thingsboard, Plotly, IBM Watson IoT 
Platform, Power BI (Business Intelligence), Gephi, Grafana, 
Kibana Tool, JavaScript libraries, frameworks, and toolkits. 
They refer to these tools as the most used for viewing data 
quickly and dynamically. This article refers to different 
business areas, highlighting the importance of viewing these 
collected data. 
The study carried out in [3] focuses on the importance of 
data collection and the monitoring and productivity of 
employees, developing an Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) 
system. The project primarily addresses business areas where 
employee monitoring is required. Additionally, machines 
need to be used on the shop floor to operate, where the 
information collected through "wearable sensors" and 
processed and stored in the Cloud. KPI are produced for each 
employee through this collection of information. In this 
study, a factory where employees must cut meat was used as 
an example. In addition, to propose a solution to the 
problem, the employees use a wearable technology called 
“MetaWear”. The sensors send the information through 
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) to the Raspberry Pi, used as a 
gateway. All the collected data is sent to the Cloud. As an 
interface for employees, Andon systems were used. 
However, several KPIs were calculated, with the data 
collected and analyzed without referring to the tools used for 
their visual analysis. 
In the study presented by [4], a new Andon system was 
proposed, referring to the importance of the employee on the 
factory floor being able to quickly, through the colors, 
understand what is happening and act accordingly, as quickly 
as possible. Thus, a new interface was proposed to maximize 
 
Figure 1.  Flow diagram for new systematic reviews (adapted from [2]) 
  
              TABLE 1.    EXTRACTED DATA 
Study 
Metrics 
Technologies Data visualization 
Data visualization on the 
internet of things: tools, 
methodologies, and 
challenges 
 [1] 
N/A 
N/A 
Tableau, 
Thingsboard, Plotly, 
IBM Watson IoT 
Platform, Power BI, 
Kibana Tool, 
JavaScript libraries, 
etc. 
An Industrial IoT Solution 
for Evaluating Workers' 
Performance Via Activity 
Recognition [3] 
Productive 
and non-
productive 
work time 
Wearable 
Technologies, 
Cams, RFID, 
NFC, 
Bluetooth 
Low Energy 
Sensor 
Andon Systems 
Designing usable 
interfaces for the industry 
4.0 [4] 
N/A 
N/A 
Andon Systems and 
Stacked Bar, Line 
and Ring Graphs 
Microservice architecture 
in industrial software 
delivery on edge devices 
[5] 
N/A 
Microservices 
and Pipeline 
N/A 
Modelling and assessing 
the effects of digital 
technologies on KPIs in 
manufacturing systems  
[6] 
Overall 
Equipment 
Effectiveness 
(OEE), Time, 
Quality, 
Product 
Quantity 
RFID, VR 
(Virtual 
Reality) 
N/A 
Key performance 
indicators in the 
production of the future 
[7] 
Data 
Management, 
Transparency 
and 
networking, 
Product 
Management 
Profitability-
Liquidity KPI 
system, 
DuPont 
System of 
Financial 
Control 
N/A 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-999-7
CENTRIC 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Study 
Metrics 
Technologies Data visualization 
Developing key 
performance indicators 
tree for lean and smart 
production systems [7] 
Product 
Control, 
Equipment 
Productivity 
Bosch 
Production 
System, PLCs, 
CNC Work 
Centers 
N/A 
Motion Analysis System 
for the digitalization and 
assessment of manual 
manufacturing and 
assembly processes 
[9] 
Movement 
distance and 
speed, 
Vertical 
movements, 
Workstation 
utilization, 
Productive 
and non-
productive 
work time. 
Motion 
Analysis 
System, 
MOCAP 
(Motion 
capture 
system) 
Bar and circular bar 
chart 
MAESTRI Efficiency 
Framework: The Concept 
Supporting the Total 
Efficiency Index. 
Application Case Study in 
the Metalworking Sector 
[10] 
Manufacturing 
process 
ecoPROSYS 
Bar and pie charts 
Line Balancing 
Assessment Enhanced by 
IoT and Simulation Tools 
[11] 
OEE, 
Employee 
Performance, 
Productivity 
Collection 
N/A 
N/A 
Auditing and Assessment 
of Data Traffic Flows in 
an IoT Architecture [11] 
Traffic Flow 
Application & 
Microservice 
Monitor and 
Analyser 
DevDash  
Modelling food supply 
chain traceability based on 
blockchain technology  
[13] 
Product 
Control, 
Quality, 
Process 
Control 
N/A 
N/A 
Cognitive internet of 
things for smart water 
pipeline monitoring 
system [14] 
Control and 
monitoring of 
water pipes, 
water leakage, 
water pressure 
and flow rate 
N/A 
JavaScript e Ajax 
 
usability. The rapid transmission of knowledge and events is 
vital so that accidents or more serious problems do not 
happen. In addition, it refers to the KPI of machines on the 
shop floor and not the employees. A prototype was made for 
the Andon systems, where the following principles were 
implemented and tested: information made available in a 
hierarchy; multi-window interaction; multitouch interaction 
and self-explanatory diagrams. To test usability, 18 
participants tested the system, playing the role of a worker. 
Through this test, it was possible to visualize that with the 
new interface, the efficiency, and the interaction of the 
employees with the system improved.  
The work in [5] portrays a microservices system and 
pipeline in Industry 4.0. Unlike what happens in monolithic 
systems, this approach allows the management and delivery 
of software to the different devices without stopping the 
entire production system to simply apply new features. This 
problem happens when the system "is dominated by the 
monolithic architecture", and this type of system requires "a 
production stop planning for the manual installation" of 
updates. The author defines as primary objectives of the 
study the focus on the requirements and architecture of the 
application system and the introduction of pipelines for the 
delivery of software that comes against the manual 
installations in traditional industries. In addition, an analysis 
application was developed in Supervisory Control and Data 
Acquisition (SCADA) systems, where the objective is the 
analysis and measurement of data, where the end-user 
defines what type of metrics can be taken from the system, 
which, according to the author, could be "productivity, 
Overall Equipment Effectiveness (OEE), etc.". Despite 
referring to these KPIs, the article focuses more on the 
application of pipeline systems in the industry, which, in a 
way, comes to revolutionize with cutting-edge technology 
that, monolithic systems are dominant in traditional 
industries present in the market. 
The work in [6] mentions an approach for companies to 
select an appropriate digital technology, considering the 
objectives of each business idea. Thus, different KPIs are 
approached and categorized, the best forms of information 
collection are exemplified, and some examples of 
technologies to be used are also presented. This study made 
it possible to identify some types of indicators for which 
information can be collected. In addition to the OEE, 
information such as time, quality and quantity of product can 
also be collected. The KPIs presented are structured in 4 
groups: Process, Worker; Financial; and Customer. Two 
types of technology were also proposed, depending on the 
objectives: Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) and 
Augmented Reality (AR).  
In [7], the main objective is to present new KPIs for the 
industry in the future and mentions some challenges that it 
must face in relation to the availability and collection of 
information. Some current KPIs in the financial sector are 
discussed, such as the "DuPont System of Financial Control" 
programs, "ZVEI KPI System"; "Profitability-Liquidity KPI 
system". In addition, reference is made to ISO 22400 as a 
framework for structuring production KPIs. However, 
despite these examples, it is mentioned that they are not 
useful, as they are not flexible enough for the collection of 
information and as such, they propose a new framework 
considering Porter's Value Chain. In addition to existing 
KPIs, such as Logistics, Production process, and Quality, the 
work proposes three new groups: Data management, 
Transparency and Networking, and Product Management. 
Once collected, the data can be visualized and analyzed 
using the "Harvey-Balls" graph. These pie-shaped graphs are 
used to visualize qualitative data. Although they refer to this 
type of graph, it only represents a form of information 
visualization and not a data visualization framework. 
The authors in [8] propose a KPI tree structure to 
describe a Performance Measurement System (PMS), with 
the data collected, the system recognizes the failures in the 
actual productivity. This study used as an example a Bosch 
factory where "Lean Manufacturing" or "Lean Production" is 
applied. This system called Bosch Production System (BPS) 
is based on the maximum reduction of the waste in the 
production flow, with the ideal state of 100% deliveries, 
100% added value and 0 defects. The system also supports 
the decision-making process. They identify three areas of 
process cycles: "Source", "Make", and "Deliver", which 
describe the objectives of projects related to Industry 4.0. In 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-999-7
CENTRIC 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

this way, the hierarchical structure of the proposed KPIs 
offers real-time measurements and performance calculations. 
Using the identified process cycle areas helps collect all the 
information to focus on continuous improvement and thus 
achieve the defined objectives. 
In [9], the authors present the "Motion Analysis System" 
system that digitizes employees' operations in different 
production environments. A Motion Capture (MOCAP) 
system was introduced and adopted, initially used in the 
gaming industry for the manufacturing environment. This 
system can collect and analyze measurements related to 
productivity and performance. Cameras were used to capture 
the employee's movements, which are connected to a 
computer via USB, whose main function is to send data via 
Wi-Fi. The main KPIs which can be analyzed through this 
system are: Physical distance travelled and speed of 
movement; Vertical movements (operator needs to lift or 
lower something); Use of the workstation by the employee; 
Working time (productive and non-productive). 
In [10], the main objective is to collect information and 
reduce waste, focusing on sustainability. This project is 
based on "Multi-layer Stream Mapping", responsible for 
accessing process efficiency and ecoPROSYS, a quantitative 
management tool that assesses the environmental impacts of 
a production cycle. The collected data is transformed into 
KPI where Value Added (VA), Efficiency, Ecoefficiency, 
and Total Efficiency Index (TEI) are calculated.  
In [11], the main objective is to propose a framework 
that, from Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), collect 
information regarding the performance of employees and 
machines. Thus, the proposed system has the collection and 
sending of production data in real-time as its main objective. 
Employee data is calculated and collected. There is an 
evaluation of the employees in terms of workload, the 
number of parts produced and OEE for the equipment. It 
presents formulas for calculating the indicators mentioned 
above. However, it does not refer to the technology used, 
focusing more on the result and analysis of the calculations 
of the optimization of production processes, seeking the 
efficiency of the process and employees.  
The study in [11] has as main objective a solution that 
processes, stores, monitors, and indexes data from different 
IoT and Smart City devices to control and monitor the flow 
of traffic of motor vehicles. The solution uses DevDash 
(Developer Dashboard) to index data from devices and 
Application & Microservice Monitor and Analyze (AMMA) 
tools for real-time data control and monitoring the traffic 
flow. Data is collected in real-time and stored in a non-
relational database. This data is processed by a tool called 
"Apache NiFi", whose main objective is to optimize big data 
flow. The DavDash and AMMA tools also contain and work 
data, placing it in a visual way ("Both AMMA and DevDash 
include a set of classical dashboard widgets to visualize data 
such as histograms, time-pickers, filters, facet selection on 
the different kind of data managed, heatmaps, pie charts, 
tables, and newly created panels (...)"). 
In [13], the main objective is to create an "autonomous, 
functional and back-end system where data is not 
centralized" that benefits all food-related industry players. 
The tracking includes the process, the product, and the 
quality control. For tracing a Table of Content (ToC) is 
suggested, containing all product information stored locally 
in an Interplanetary File System (IPFS). Some KPIs are 
calculated, however, for the system itself "efficiency, 
responsiveness, 
required 
trust 
assumptions, 
context 
requirements, required consensus mechanisms and food 
quality of the proposed blockchain-enabled mode". Despite 
referring to a good form of data transmission and tracking, 
they do not indicate what type of IoT technology was used, 
nor what type of system was used to visualize the KPI 
themselves indicated above. 
In [14], the authors have as their central objective the 
proposal of a system of "control and monitoring of water 
pipes". The IoT solution presented uses the Apache Spark 
framework for big data processing. A "Wireless Actuator 
Sensor Network" sensor was used to detect and locate water 
leakage. Data such as water pressure and flow speed are 
collected and sent over Wi-Fi. This data is processed and 
placed in the Cloud. It was then worked and presented on a 
website using JavaScript and Ajax. 
B. Discussion 
The discussion is based on the results presented in Table 
1. The articles analyzed were published between 2017 and 
2021. Of the 13 articles for more detailed analysis, 46% refer 
to the year 2018, 30 % to 2019, 24% reference 2020, and 0% 
for 2017 and 2021. Figure 2 describes the result obtained in 
several articles per year, where it is verified that in three of 
the years analyzed, no results were obtained. Although 
specific studies refer to quality control or process and 
product management, it could be tried to infer what kind of 
metrics could be collected; however, their description was 
not explained.  
In Figure 3, some of the metrics referenced in the 
analyzed studies can be observed. Although 19% of the 
articles did not refer in detail to what metrics were collected, 
all referenced the collection of information and the 
importance of obtaining, or not, a vision of achieving the 
defined objectives, thus allowing the identification of 
improvement points, either at the level of quality control or 
at the human or machine level. Two critical metrics, 
illustrated in Figure 3 are the employee's productive and non-
productive working time. Productive work can be counted 
(concept mentioned in 19% of studies), and the non-
productive work deduced (this concept mentioned in 14% of 
studies).  
As for technologies, as illustrated in Figure 4, there is no 
reference in 29% of the studies. The other studies analyzed 
refer to technologies dedicated to the problem in question, 
something expected for projects where IIoT is present. 
Despite this, RFID and Microservices and Pipeline 
technologies outnumbered the remaining ≈6% of the 
remaining 
technologies. 
The 
RFID 
technology 
was 
referenced in cases where the authors intended to have 
greater process control, quality control, product tracking and 
real-time and automatic data collection.  Concerning achitec- 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-999-7
CENTRIC 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
   
Figure 2.  Number of studies per year 
 
 
Figure 3. Metrics Used 
 
ture in Pipeline, it was referenced as an innovative 
architecture for industrial systems, thus contradicting the old 
monolithic system. Near Field Contact (NFC) technology 
was also referenced as a suitable technology for tracking, 
however, it was only reported in 5.9% of studies. The 
collection of all information is an important process, but no 
less relevant is the analysis and study of the data collected. 
Given the vast alternative solutions for data visualization, as 
in technologies, no emphasis was observed, as illustrated in 
Figure 5. The highest visualization reference in the studies 
concerns the graphic representation, yet 41% of the studies 
did not refer to the type of tools used to visualize the data. 
However, analyzing the two tools that obtained a higher 
percentage of reference stand out with 9% the Andon 
systems, something expected to exist on any fabric floor. For 
systems that use JavaScript, a percentage of 9% was also 
obtained compared to the systems mentioned in all articles. 
Andon systems make sense for the fabric floor and 
sometimes on the same interface of the machine where the 
operator is working. Systems developed in JavaScript make 
more sense in being used when a website is needed, usually 
to represent data collected in production. After analyzing 
scientific articles, it became clear that IoT systems are highly 
sought after in different sectors and business areas, being 
very understandable for their usability. This study was 
essential to identify which technologies should be 
implemented and which KPIs to be calculated. After 
analyzing the different articles and obtaining the answers to 
the questions at the beginning of this document, we can 
conclude that there are different technological solutions for 
each problem. General systems and/or systems may be 
developed to address a particular problem. Thus, of the 
thirteen articles analyzed, the main conclusions drawn were: 
 
Figure 4. Percentage of technologies 
 
 
Figure 5. Data Visualization Tools 
 
Question 1: What systems exist to measure productivity?  
     Several systems have been put forward to answer this 
question. Some studies had the presence of a new tool for 
measuring productivity as their primary objective. Others 
chose existing systems as the basis of their study and 
presented proposals for improvement. Thus, information 
collection systems can be divided into two groups: the first 
group belongs to the general systems, which serve as a 
solution for various business ideas. The second group refers 
to the dedicated systems developed to respond to a given 
problem. In the general systems group, some names 
appeared throughout the study, such as: Bosh Production 
System [7], and MAESTRI Total Efficient Framework [10]. 
In the second group, the systems are based on the 
development of IoT [3][11]-[14]. These systems are flexible 
in the type of technology they use, but all with a single 
common goal, data collection. In addition to these groups, 
articles brought another type of innovation to the industry, 
such as pipeline systems, focusing on the importance of not 
having a monolithic system and the management issues that 
these monolithic systems bring to the industry or any system 
that implements it [5]. A group of systems was also 
mentioned throughout the study, the Andon systems. Despite 
being significantly related to the fabric floor's machinery and 
color system, these systems can also contribute to the 
collection of productivity information. These systems allow 
for measurements and present visual solutions that help 
improve the interaction with the machines by the employee. 
[4] proposed a new interface in Andon systems that 
significantly improves the usability of systems. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-999-7
CENTRIC 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Question 2: What metrics are used in the collection of 
information? 
     Throughout the research, it was clear that the metrics to 
be used were dependent on the type of analysis desired. 
Metrics can refer to equipment but also the employees, 
depending on what you want to measure, as well as the 
context, such as measuring the temperature of an oven or the 
humidity of a warehouse. In the previous articles, we have 
been presented with solutions to specific problems, and these 
problems are overcome by collecting information. Although 
process control, product tracking and quality are one of the 
most referenced metrics [7][13][14], others, such as OEE, 
movement speed, distances travelled, productive and non-
productive working time, water pressure were also 
mentioned in the articles [3][7][8]. 
Question 3: What frameworks/tools are used to collect 
information? 
     Although there are some dedicated frameworks for 
collecting information [7], there are many other things 
developed for a given case study, being almost dedicated 
systems, only developed to respond to a particular problem. 
These end up having as technological base IOT systems, 
which collect information and send it to bases of relational or 
non-relational data through sensors. Thus, the tools to be 
chosen and mentioned in the studies also end up being 
dynamic depending on the problem because they try to apply 
the best technology to which it fits, trying to respond to a 
particular problem. We can see this in [14], where the main 
objective was to construct a system in which it was possible 
to "control and monitor water pipe". For this, an IoT solution 
was developed that answered this issue. 
Question 4: What data analysis and visualization tools 
are possible and used?  
     Some tools were indicated throughout the analysis of the 
studies. Sometimes they were tools and graphics in the 
framework or application itself, such as Andon systems  
[3][4]. Others are well-known frameworks in the industrial 
world, such as PowerBI and Thingsboard [1]. The study by 
[1] emphasizes the importance of these tools in supporting 
decision-making. Some of these tools are known and widely 
used, such as: Tableau; Thingsboard; Plotly; IBM Watson 
IoT Platform; Power BI; Gephi; Grafana; Kibana Tool; 
JavaScript libraries, frameworks e toolkits. Some tools can 
be incorporated into a website [14] using JavaScript or tools 
such as DevDash [11]. However, today has the same 
objective: The valorization of the collected data and 
subsequent treatment and analysis. This type of tool is 
extremely important because it is through the visualization of 
the data that we can make decisions or see the system's state 
for analysis. 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
Production control systems are complex. Several 
technologies can be used, such as the use of contact 
technologies or the collection of information through 
sensors, using IoT technologies. In this type of application, it 
is important for the visualization of information that can be 
simpler as Tableaux or more complex platforms, such as 
Amazon Web Services (AWS), integrate into it all the 
operations. In this type of approach, KPIs are the focus in 
what concerns the search to improve productivity factors, 
resulting from metrics and information analysis, also in this 
field studies refer to several approaches. According to the 
problem to be solved, IoT can be used, associating platforms 
for data visualization and analysis that allow productivity to 
be improved for the situation in question. For future work, 
we recommend a larger study to tackle the presented 
limitations in the introduction and to develop a system that 
combines IoT technologies to support productivity metrics in 
the industry. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Protopsaltis et al., "Data visualization in internet of things: tools, 
methodologies, and challenges", in 15th International Conference on 
Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES '20), New York, NY, 
USA, 2020. 
[2] M. J. Page et al., “PRISMA 2020 explanation and elaboration: 
Updated guidance and exemplars for reporting systematic reviews”, 
BMJ, vol. 372,  doi: 10.1136/BMJ.N160, 2021. 
[3] A. R. M. Forkan et al., "An Industrial IoT Solution for Evaluating 
Workers' Performance Via Activity Recognition," 2019 IEEE 39th 
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems 
(ICDCS), 2019, pp. 1393-1403, doi: 10.1109/ICDCS.2019.00139. 
[4] M. Di Gregorio et al., "Designing usable interfaces for the Industry 
4.0 | Proceedings of the International Conference on Advanced Visual 
Interfaces", in Advanced Visual Interfaces. Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, 2020. 
[5] F. Li and L. Gelbke, "Microservice architecture in industrial software 
delivery on edge devices", in 19th International Conference on Agile 
Software Development, New York, 2018. 
[6] C. Siedler, L. Pascal and A. Jan, "Modeling and assessing the effects 
of digital technologies on KPIs in manufacturing systems", Procedia 
CIRP, vol. 93, pp. 682-687, 2020. 
[7] Robert Joppen et al.,"Key performance indicators in the production of 
the future", Procedia CIRP, vol. 81, pp. 759-764, 2019, ISSN 2212-
8271,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2019.03.190. 
[8] G. Ante et al., "Developing a key performance indicators tree for lean 
and smart production systems", IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 51, no. 11, 
pp. 13-18, 2018. 
[9] E. Ferrari et al., "Motion Analysis System for the digitalization and 
assessment of manual manufacturing and assembly processes," IFAC-
PapersOnLine, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 411-416, 2018. 
[10] A. Baptista et al., "MAESTRI Efficiency Framework: The Concept 
Supporting the Total Efficiency Index. Application Case Study in the 
Metalworking Sector", Procedia CIRP, pp. 318-323, 2018. 
[11] M. Fera et al., "Line Balancing Assessment Enhanced by IoT and 
Simulation Tools", 2019 II Workshop on Metrology for Industry 4.0 
and 
IoT 
(MetroInd4.0&IoT), 
2019, 
pp. 
84-88, 
doi: 
10.1109/METROI4.2019.8792889. 
[12] P. Nesi et al., "Auditing and Assessment of Data Traffic Flows in an 
IoT Architecture", in IEEE 4th International Conference on 
Collaboration and Internet Computing, Philadelphia, 2018. 
[13] F. Casino et al., "Modeling food supply chain traceability based on 
blockchain technology.", IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 52, no. 13, pp. 
2728-2733, 2019. 
[14] M. Abdelhafidh et al., "Cognitive internet of things for smart water 
pipeline monitoring system", IEEE Press, pp. 212–219, 2018.
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-999-7
CENTRIC 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

