Spectrum Monitoring. An Approach Based on People-Centric Sensing (SMOPEC) 
 Cuevas-Ruíz, J.L. 
Centro de Estudios. 
 Instituto Federal de Telecomunicaciones. IFT. 
México D.F., México 
e-mail: jose.cuevas@ift.org.mx 
García-Alba- Iduñate, P. 
Centro de Estudios. 
 Instituto Federal de Telecomunicaciones. IFT. 
México D.F., México 
e-mail: pascual.garcía@ift.org.mx 
 
 
Abstract— Spectrum monitoring is a key factor in the 
spectrum management strategy implemented by government 
entities. It is of enormous importance to evaluate the spectrum 
use and its overall performance. Spectrum monitoring, with 
inspection and law enforcement provide useful tools to 
maintain the integrity of the spectrum management process. 
The infrastructure and equipment necessary to get a complete 
monitoring system require a huge investment, about money, 
time and human resources. Using People-Centric sensing it is 
possible to develop a monitoring system using the users’ mobile 
devices. An app installed in the mobile device allows to manage 
all the information obtained by the device sensors. The 
monitoring system based on mobile devices, would reduce the 
mentioned investment. Also, the system updates could be 
cheaper and easier. In this paper we present a Spectrum 
Monitoring 
approach 
using 
a 
People-Centric 
sensing 
(SMOPEC) approach; the system elements are described, the 
operation are detailed, a pilot test results are showed and the 
feasibility are exposed. 
Keywords–– Spectrum Monitoring; People-Centric; Spectrum 
Management. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Actually, technological advances in electronics, computation 
and telecommunications will turn the near ubiquitous smart 
phones into a global mobile sensing device, integrating an 
extensive sensors network for all the base station coverage 
area. These devices are able to measure some parameters like 
temperature, acceleration or user localization; also the smart 
phones can obtain other technical data, like reception power, 
transmission frequency, Signal to Noise ratio (SNR), data 
rate, etc. In Figure 1 some sensors and technical information 
obtained from smart phones are identified.  
The cell network could be seen as a people-centric 
system, where the users’ devices become the focal point of 
sensing and the sensor-based information is used for get a 
more elaborate analysis [1]. People using their mobile 
phones integrate sensing networks called people-centric 
sensing networks that sense what we are doing and support 
our daily activities. Most of the sensing applications depend 
on the ability to monitor statistics including max, average, 
ranking, rather than raw sensor readings [2]. These sensor 
networks are proposed to be used to spectrum monitoring. 
Otherwise, and as a consequence of increased demand for 
mobile services around the world, the International Mobile 
Technology (IMT) spectrum has been defined as a very 
precious commodity. The demand for more spectrum is 
increasing every day. This higher demand could generate 
some spectrum scarcity in these bands; however, some 
authors mentioned that this could be just an “apparent 
scarcity”; they stablish that this scarcity is due to inefficient 
spectrum management strategies [4].  
To fulfill this increased demand the government entities 
and operators have the commitment to integrate an efficient 
spectrum management strategy in order to optimize the 
spectrum use; this spectrum management strategy must be 
based on spectrum monitoring system. The monitoring 
system will provide an accurate and actualized information 
about the spectrum use. The provided information will be 
fundamental to integrate an efficient spectrum management 
strategy [3].  
The information provided by the spectrum monitoring 
system contain the assigned bands, the interference levels, 
the coverage area, quality of service, etc. All these 
parameters will be useful for the management entities of the 
spectrum radio, including governments and operators. 
Actually, to get these information, they spent a lot of 
resources 
integrating 
monitoring 
spectrum 
systems, 
including investment in measurement equipment, human 
resources and time. 
In this paper we present a Spectrum Monitoring approach 
based on a People Centric sensing (SMOPEC) system, to 
inventorying the spectrum utilization while this is occupied 
by mobile users. 
This paper is organized as follows: In Section II spectrum 
monitoring concept are described, detailing its importance as 
key issue for spectrum management, in order to get more 
spectrum efficiency. In Section III the SMOPEC system is 
detailed, identifying its elements and basic operation is 
explained. The monitoring process based on the SMOPEC 
system is explained in Section IV by describing some 
technical issues. Some results, conclusions and future works 
are mentioned in Sections V and VI.  
II. 
SPECTRUM MONITORING AND MANAGEMENT 
Spectrum management is the combination of administrative, 
scientific and technical procedures necessary to ensure the 
efficient operation of radio communication equipment and 
services without causing interference. Simply stated, 
spectrum management is the overall process of regulating 
and administering use of the radio frequency spectrum [5]. 
The goal of spectrum management is to maximize spectrum 
efficiency, minimize interference and eliminate unauthorized  
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
Figure 1.  Mobile sensor network using the mobile phones. The SMOPEC concept. 
 
 
 
  
 
and improper use of the spectrum. Rules and regulations, 
based on relevant legislation, form a regulatory and legal 
databases facilitates the spectrum management process 
resulting in decisions for spectrum allocations, frequency 
assignments, and licensing. Spectrum monitoring, inspection, 
and law enforcement provide the necessary means to 
maintain the integrity of the spectrum management process. 
 
For government managers and mobile operators the 
spectrum monitoring is a key factor in order to achieve a 
more efficient use of this commodity. The employment of an 
infrastructure and organization to monitoring the spectrum 
operational issues could be a very expensive assignment.   
For governments, the assigned frequency bands to the 
operators for IMT services are based on national and/or 
international directives; in these advices are defined 
technical 
requirements 
regarding 
to 
coverage 
area, 
interference level, power transmission, etc. Moreover, these 
directions include fines and others punitive actions; these 
recommendations should be applied when the operator has 
an omission / failure in the operation over the assigned 
frequency band. However, if there is not a mechanism to 
monitoring 
the 
spectrum 
performance, 
the 
operator 
assessment could be a so problematic mission. 
Otherwise, for mobile operators, the spectrum monitoring 
allow them identify opportunities and “holes” in the used  
 
 
bandwidth (inefficient use); with this information the 
operator can implement new shared spectrum algorithm to 
increase spectrum efficiency, evaluate the Quality of Service 
(QoS) delivered or rate provided to users; information about 
coverage area and power reception could be useful to 
integrate plans about marketing strategies too. 
For this project, the key sensors are the accelerometer (to 
detect user movements), Global Position System (GPS) and 
the information obtained from the RF signal captured by the 
mobile. In this first stage, we focus to get a first approach to 
evaluate the SMOPEC feasibility to monitoring spectrum 
use.  
According to the above mentioned facts, the spectrum 
monitoring is a valuable tool in order to increase the 
spectrum efficiency and benefits. Monitoring is closely 
associated with inspection and compliance in that it enable 
the identification and measurement of interference sources, 
the verification of proper technical and operational 
characteristics of radiated signals, and detection and 
identification of illegal transmitters. Monitoring further 
supports the overall spectrum management effort by 
providing general measurement of channel and band usage, 
including channel availability statistics and the effectiveness 
of spectrum management procedures. It obtains statistical 
information of a technical and operational nature on 
spectrum occupancy. Monitoring is also useful for planning, 
in that it can assist spectrum managers in understanding the 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

level of spectrum use as compared with the assignments 
signed [7].   
As the demand for mobile communication systems 
grows, the needs for radio spectrum increases too. In order to 
generate an effective and efficient spectrum management, it 
is imperative to possess a full understanding about how the 
IMT spectrum behaves over time, frequency and space. 
Then, the spectrum monitoring issue is a key factor in order 
to achieve an efficient spectrum use.  
III. 
SMOPEC. GENERAL CONCEPT 
The spectrum monitoring by people-centric strategies 
using the mobile devices provide a less expensive alternative 
to obtain the spectrum parameters performance, inside the 
huge investment required for the traditional approach.  
Moreover, due that the monitoring operation using the 
mobile phones are based on an app installed on the mobile 
device, the system is flexible, allowing that new 
characteristics could be added just with a software update. 
The smart-phones around the world are increasing every 
day. Using these devices the users can receive a lot of 
information from practically anywhere around the world. At 
the beginning, the users were defined primarily just as 
information receivers, however this condition have been 
changing due to the increased connectivity available in many 
places and a better quality in these links. Moreover, in the 
smart phones are integrated a numerous sensors that can 
obtain a lot of the environmental information, also 
operational and technical data. The information collected for 
the sensors could be saved, processed and sent by the device 
to other specific user or shared in some social network. Some 
of these information could be sent without the user 
intervention, in an automatic mode.  Mobile phones sending 
data automatically from their location integrate a sensor 
mobile network, and this scenario open a lot of possibilities. 
This is the main concept behind the SMOPEC system: 
thousands of mobile sensors collecting and providing 
information about the IMT spectrum performance. The 
mobile devices situated in the base station coverage area, are 
generating information about the spectrum performance; 
these spectrum information are sending to a central data 
processing where a more specific analysis is done. 
In order to the mobile phone send just the key 
information, an app is installed on the device. This app 
manage the information obtained by the sensor, saving the 
data sensed, pre-processing it and sending the relevant data. 
The information sent from each user are: reception power 
(dB), location, SNR, reception frequency, standard used, call 
duration and data rate (bps). The pre-process and analysis are 
explained in the next sections. The data protection issue is 
not analyzed in this paper. 
IV. 
MONITORING USING SMOPEC  
As mentioned before, the installed app on the smart phone 
manages the collected information. These data are collected 
and sent by the cell phone throw the cell network to the data 
center, where all the information are processed. A system 
overview is showed in the Figure 2. The system operation is 
as follows: 
 
a) Using the installed app, the device save the 
parameters values obtained by the cell phone 
sensors. 
b) To avoid send redundant information to the data 
center processing, an algorithm compute the data 
correlation to select the data to be sent. This 
algorithm economize the operations volume 
performed in the device (saving energy and time). 
c) The selected information is sent throw the cell net 
toward the processing data center; the data are 
analyzed and processed, using some statistical 
algorithms. Localization, data rate, call duration, 
operation frequency and power received were 
reported. 
d) An information report is integrated and sent to the 
operator, indicating coverage area, average rate, 
users, technology, etc. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Spectrum Monitoring System 
In the monitoring process, there are some particulars 
concerns to be considered to avoid that the monitoring 
process interfere with the device overall performance. 
Among others, we consider: 
 
• 
Store capacity. 
• 
Energy consume. 
• 
Bandwidth used. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
TABLE I RESULTS FROM MONITORING PROCESS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The monitoring process is integrated for 5 stages: sensing 
data, pre-processing, save selected information, send the 
saved information and erase the sent data. 
To avoid affectations on the device store capacity, the app 
installed in the mobile phone will send the selected data just 
a few seconds after the data were saved; once the 
information be sent to the data center processing, this 
information will be eliminated from the device memory, to 
achieve a more efficient memory use. 
The operations committed with the spectrum monitoring 
assignment will consume extra energy; the goal is to get that 
this extra consumption be minimum. To get this reduction in 
the energy consumption, an algorithm is implemented to 
compute the data correlation between two consecutive 
samples obtained by each sensor, named as x(t) and x(t-1). 
In the Figure 3 is showed the flow diagram for this 
algorithm. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Monitoring process algorithm 
 
In the monitoring process, and to optimize the memory 
occupancy is needed to determine if the obtained 
information, x(t), is different compared with the previous 
saved saved, x(t-1) (to avoid redundancy). To implement  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this evaluation, the correlation coefficient between these 
samples is calculated. If the correlation coefficient between  
the two samples is bigger than 0.5, then the system assume 
that the conditions in which the device are operating are the  
same and there are not changes about spectrum operation 
(i.e. same rate or same location); in this case, not new 
information is generated and just an update procedure is 
execute in the data center processing using the last 
information available (last sample saved). Otherwise, if the 
correlation coefficient is less than 0.5, then the sensed data 
in x(t) is defined as different compared with the previous 
sample saved in x(t-1), then the value in x(t) will be 
considered as new information as a consequence of a some 
changes in the operation conditions; therefore, x(t) will be 
saved and sent, in order to actualize the data base in the data 
center processing. Once the data was sent, it will be 
eliminated from memory as be stated before.  
Considering the before explanation, just new information 
will be collocated over the channel. With these scheme, 
there is a considerable reduction in the information amount 
sent by the wireless channel, achieving an improved in the 
spectrum efficiency. In the case for GPS sensor, the app 
read the accelerometer values, taking a sample each 5 
seconds to determine if the user is in movement or not. If 
there is some acceleration detected by the sensor, then it 
assume that the user is moving and a new location will be 
detected. 
One advantage of the spectrum monitoring using the app 
installed on the mobile device is that all the parameters 
defined to perform the monitoring process can be changed 
to obtain more or less sample rate for the data collected, in 
order to find the ideal values to get accurate measurements.   
To get a higher coverage area levels (more user using the 
app), the users must to obtain some benefits using it. Due 
that the system would provide valuable information for 
operators and Government, the business model must be 
contemplate an investment to offer some benefits to users.  
These paybacks could be free calls, others apps, new 
devices, etc. This is a key issue for the project. 
Users 
Location (Lat, Long) 
Power Rx 
(dBW) 
Rate (mbps) 
Call 
duration 
(secs). 
1 
19.398936, -99.171843 
-82.7 
6.2 
4.27 
2 
19.583247, -99.236731 
-75.89 
1.3 
1.8 
3 
19.266798, -99.266567 
-92.25 
0.8 
4.9 
4 
19.599682, -99.227647 
-88.9 
5.7 
8.96 
5 
19.398517, -99.156978 
-72.49 
9.2 
7.02 
6 
19.520446, -96.92688 
-89.92 
3.7 
2.95 
7 
19.479021, -96.871948 
-94.26 
2.9 
3.76 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
V. 
RESULTS 
For the pilot test, the app was installed in several smart 
phones and the users were monitoring while they were using 
their devices (voice or data). The data collected were: 
geographical location, power reception, data rate, and call 
duration. In Table 1 some results are showed. The mobile 
phones transmission were done using the GSM and LTE 
bands (800 and 1700 MHz), reporting an average rate of 3.3 
Mbps.  The information showed correspond a sample taken 
from the overall users registered in the data base; it means 
that the information was pre-processed and just the relevant 
data were sent and saved in the data base. The users in the 
test were distributed mainly in the metropolitan Mexican 
area (DF and Mexico State) and the Veracruz state. In the 
first case, there is metropolitan area, with a high user per 
area density; otherwise, for the second scenario we consider 
a low user density. The devices were identified by their IP 
(Internet Protocol) and their Mobile Identification Number 
(MIN). The test were running for about one week with a user 
average number of 150 users randomly distributed. The 
mobile users did not report any malfunction or some 
affectation over the device performance.  
 
With collected information by the GPS system, a report 
with coverage area are generated; in the Figure 5 are showed 
two users position in one minute interval, using the available 
samples in the data center processing.  
The final report can integrate the users per area and user per 
base station, among others data. 
The power reception is an average power over the time that 
the mobile is receiving information. The power reception and 
the data rate are important issues to evaluate the quality of 
service (QoS) offered. 
The sensors quality and the environmental interference could 
affect the information accuracy. To get a system error 
margin, the data collected and processed by the SMOPEC 
system, could be compared with the information obtained 
from past measurement campaigns stored in data bases.   
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
 
The SMOPEC project offer several opportunities. Regarding 
to the SMOPEC implementation, the software that manage 
the collected information can be installed with the operative 
system from factory. In this way, all the mobile phones will 
be able to be added to the mobile sensors network and 
consequently, more information will be obtained.  
For 
governments, 
this 
alternative 
brings 
some 
opportunities. An application can be developed to monitor 
the frequency bands dedicated to official and public services. 
Moreover, the application will send only the parameters that 
the authority decides. Thus, to prevent the key and sensitive 
information was exposed. 
Big Data algorithms can be used to process all the 
information and new opportunities can be developed. For 
example, in marketing areas, the user behavior and consumer 
habits would be predicted. 
In some cases, some interference signals were detected. 
In order to determine if these transmissions were done by a 
license transmitter, the information could be saved and 
compared with other interference signals captured before in 
the same geographical area. When these signals were highly 
correlated, the system could report as a probable illegal 
transmitter. The authority might compare the signal reported 
(magnitude and time), with the legal communications done 
in that area to determine if it was a license transmission or 
not.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. T. Campbel, S. B. Eisenman, D. D. Lane, E. Miluzzo and 
R. A. Peterson. “The Rise of People-Centric Sensing”. 
Internet Computing, IEEE. Year: 2008, Volume: 12, Issue: 4.  
[2] Motegi Shinji, Nishimra Yasutaka and Yoshihara Kiyohito. 
“Communication Algorithm for Statistics Monitoring in 
People-Centric Sensing Networks”. 2010. Networks (ICN), 
2010 Ninth International Conference on. 
[3] A. T. Campbel, S. B. Eisenman, D. D. Lane, E. Miluzzo and 
R. A. Peterson. “The Rise of People-Centric Sensing”. 
Internet Computing, IEEE. Year: 2008, Volume: 12, Issue: 4  
[4] Rep. ITU-R SM. 2012-1. “Economic aspects of spectrum 
management”. 
[5] A. Chandra. “Spectrum management for future generation 
wireless 
based 
technology”. 
Wireless 
Technology 
Conference, 2009. EuWIT 2009. European Year: 2009 pp. 
201 – 205. 
[6] OECD Digital Economy Pappers. “New Approaches to 
Spectrum Management”. No. 235, OECD Publishing. 
[7] S. W. Boyd, J. M. Frye, M. B. Pursley and T. C. Royster. 
“Receiver 
Statistics 
for 
Spectrum 
Monitoring 
While 
Communicating”. Global Telecommunications Conference, 
2009. IEEE GLOBECOM.                                                .                         
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

