Assessing the Effect of Domotics used as an Assistant to Meal Preparation with 
People with an Intellectual Disability  
 
Dany Lussier-Desrochers, Yves Lachapelle, and 
Nancy Leclerc 
Department of Psychoeducation  
Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières 
3351, boul. Des Forges, C.P. 500 Trois-Rivières 
Québec, G9A 5H7 
e-mail: Dany.Lussier-Desrochers@uqtr.ca, 
Yves.Lachapelle@uqtr.ca, Nancy.Leclerc@uqtr.ca 
Hélène Pigot, Jérémy Bauchet, and Sylvain Giroux 
Computer science department 
Université de Sherbrooke 
2500, boul. De l’Université, Sherbrooke 
Québec, J1K 2R1 
e-mail: Helene.Pigot@USherbrooke.ca, Jérémy. 
Bauchet@USherbrooke.ca, 
Sylvain.Giroux@USherbrooke.ca
                          
 
 
 
 
Abstract— Interventions in all life settings of a person with an 
intellectual disability makes social inclusion possible. Although 
access to apartments is an important element to promote social 
participation, several obstacles limit their access. For this 
reason, it seems that technology can be of assistance to people 
in completing their daily tasks. Innovative technology 
encompasses domotics (house automation). The objective of the 
research presented in this article is to evaluate the effect of 
using domotics as an assistant to meal preparation. This 
research presents new ideas and new results and is directly 
related to the field of user-centric networking and services and 
more specifically the user adapted services. Twelve people with 
an intellectual disability carried out two recipes with and 
without technological assistance. Results show that people were 
able to use the assistant and by so doing, decreased the 
necessary human assistance for doing the task. This research 
also sheds new light on new intervention methods in home 
settings.  
 
Keyword-self-determination; assistive technology; domotics; 
autonomy; cooking.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many authors consider the fact of living in a home 
environment to be essential for the promotion of social 
participation of individuals [1][2]. Currently, research and 
intervention settings are working together in order to develop 
mechanisms that encourage access to different residential 
settings for people with an intellectual disability [3][4]. 
Unfortunately, for them, access to this type of apartment is 
riddled with obstacles. Foremost, for several people with an 
intellectual disability, access to apartment living is highly 
limited due to the necessary abilities and skills required to 
perform certain tasks. Thus, the significant limitations 
regarding reasoning, planning, problem solving and abstract 
thought may have considerable impacts on their ability to 
complete complex house tasks. Moreover, significant 
limitations regarding adaptive behaviours jeopardise their 
possibility of having access to these apartments. Overall, 
integration into these settings requires one to acquire and 
apply a certain number of functional and adaptive abilities 
(meal preparation, house cleaning, ensure the safety of 
his/her home and of his/herself, etc.) [1]. Certain researchers 
consider it possible for people with an intellectual disability 
to overcome many of these obstacles and to participate 
actively within their community with the assistance of 
assistive technologies [5]. 
The article first presents the use of technology in the 
daily lives of people with an intellectual disability. The 
following section presents the research conducted up to now 
on the use of automation to support the preparation of meals. 
Thereafter, the objectives of the research, the proposal and 
participants are described. The results obtained are explained 
and discussed in the final sections of the article. 
II. 
ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES IN DAILY LIFE 
Proulx et al. [6] describes a study that evaluated different 
aspects of apartment life for people with an intellectual 
disability. Results show that the task of preparing a complete 
meal for people with an intellectual disability who live in an 
apartment is the most difficulty. For these individuals, meal 
preparation is generally the daily life activity that requires 
the most assistance [7]. Therefore, meal preparation plays an 
important role in people’s lives. 
Several measures are used to support people with an 
intellectual disability in the preparation of their meals. In 
rehabilitation settings, illustrated recipes in pictogram style, 
are commonly used. In the past few years, these visual aids 
have gradually been transferred onto handheld devices. 
These task assistants not only display each step of the recipe 
but also use picture prompting in order to offer people the 
proper feedback and reinforcement in carrying out their task. 
These systems are particularly helpful in assisting people in 
fulfilling their daily life activities and in reducing the 
assistance needed to perform a task, which in turn, encourage 
self-determination [8]. The progress made in the field of data 
processing as well as access to inexpensive cameras and 
video editing software have also made it possible to use 
videotaping to assist meal preparation. The results of these 
video methods, which have been developed and tested in the 
past few years, show that these technologies reduce the 
number of mistakes made during recipe-making and promote 
learning that is maintained over a period of several weeks 
[9][10]. Finally, it is important to mention that studies 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

showing the effectiveness of these technologies had 
individuals follow simple recipes (e.g., reheating a dish in 
the microwave, making a sandwich, and preparing cookies 
and deserts).  
III. 
DOMOTICS AS A NEW APPROACH TO MEAL 
PREPARATION ASSISTANCE 
While these technologies are being used to assist meal 
preparation in home settings, domotics makes it possible to 
create safe environments which ensure continuous support 
for the initiation and realisation of routines in residential 
contexts [11].  
Most research evaluating the effects of domotics have 
been carried out in the fields of information technology and 
engineering and have focused primarily on technology 
development intended for older people and people with 
physical disabilities [12][13][14]. In physical rehabilitation 
settings, domotics is especially used for surveillance and 
injury prevention with the elderly and disabled people, 
people with physical disabilities or with craniocerebral 
traumas.  
The purpose of the research, until now, has been to use 
domotics to carry out certain tasks for the person. Little 
research has focused on specifically evaluating the 
application of domotics with the perspective of self-
determination, that is to say, assist the person in the 
successful completion of his/her daily tasks. Recent research 
shows that this type of environment encourages greater 
independence (meals, choice of daily activities) and a sense 
of control over the achievement of daily activities [15]. 
Moreover, users are generally quite satisfied and perceive 
ubiquitous technology as meeting their needs and giving 
them greater control over the achievement of their activities 
[15]. Results from these initial studies also tend to show that 
environments using domotics promote certain conditions 
such as safety, autonomy, independence, a better quality of 
life and community integration and are all conducive to the 
expression of self-determination, which turn encourage the 
social participation of individuals [15][16]. In social and 
human sciences, little research has studied the application of 
these technologies with human beings. Until now, only two 
studies on the application of domotics in a residential setting 
have been carried out with people with an intellectual 
disability [5][17]. Consequently, there is no doubt as for the 
application of these technologies with people with an 
intellectual disability.  
IV. 
THE STUDY 
      The next sub-sections present the research objectives, 
the experimental site, the research proposal used and the 
method of analysis. 
A. Study objectives 
In one of the initial studies on the use of domotics with 
people with an intellectual disability, this technology was 
studied from the angle of self-determination. The general 
objective of this study is to perform an initial evaluation of 
the contribution of domotics when used as a meal 
preparation assistant for people with an intellectual 
disability. The research also pursues three specific 
objectives: a) to examine the effectiveness of domotics in 
helping a person complete a recipe; b) to verify if there is a 
difference in the length of time required to complete a recipe 
using domotics; c) to examine if the use of domotics reduces 
the frequency as well as the type of human support offered to 
the person in the completion of a recipe of a more complex 
nature.  
The choice of meal preparation is strategic. On a 
cognitive level, meal preparation involves many challenges 
particularly in relation to planning, reasoning, problem 
solving and memory. This daily life task allows different 
assistance methods to be tested. This study is amongst the 
very few that evaluate the applicability of domotics with 
people with an intellectual disability. 
B. Description of the experimentation site and of the 
technology 
Research was carried out at the DOMUS laboratory. This 
laboratory, situated at the University of Sherbrooke, is 
equipped with an apartment that uses domotics, which is 
furnished with basic domiciliary equipment. For the purpose 
of this study, an assistant for meal preparation was created 
and set up in the apartment. This assistant is the result of 
collaborative work between specialists stemming from 
different fields (occupational therapy, psychology, special 
education, design and computer science) [11]. The dynamic 
contextual assistant is composed of three main components.  
Sensors. First of all, electromagnetic sensors, movement 
detectors and tactile carpets collect information on the 
activities performed by the participant. All of the information 
collected by the sensors is analysed by the Archipel software. 
Assistance interface. The second system component is 
the assistance interface, which is presented on a tactile screen 
placed on a workable kitchen surface. When using the tactile 
screen, the person may press the buttons “before” and “next” 
to visualise accomplished steps or simply to see the 
following steps, which is helpful to plan the preparation of 
the recipe. Finally, the person may, if need be, press on the 
“video” button for video prompting (visualise a short video 
sequence) that shows explicitly how to perform the task.  
Object locator. Locating objects and ingredients in the 
kitchen is an important component in ensuring the successful 
preparation of a recipe. The installed interface in the 
apartment can help the person find objects in his/her 
environment. When the person presses the button for the 
localisation assistance, a home menu displays categories of 
objects and ingredients. When the person presses on the 
desired object, the system activates a small diode integrated 
in the doors and drawers to indicate exactly where the object 
is located.  
Four elements guided the development of this assistant to 
help individuals follow recipes. First of all, the graphic 
elements of the interface stem from the Pocket Coach 
software marketed by AbleLink technologies and were tested 
on people with an intellectual disability [18]. Secondly, 
researchers of this study also followed the recommendations 
of researchers concerning the creation of interfaces 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

specifically geared at a clientele with an intellectual 
disability [19][20]. Finally, the fact that research results 
[21][22] showed that video prompting is effective for 
teaching culinary tasks to a population with an intellectual 
disability convinced researchers to add a concrete assistance 
standard using video sequences. 
C. Participants 
The research was comprised of twelve participants. 
Sampling was done according to an accidental non-
probabilistic method. Participants were selected according to 
three inclusion criteria: 1) adults (18 years and over) with a 
mild intellectual disability without an associated physical 
disability or mental health problems; 2) living in an 
autonomous and supervised apartment or in foster homes; 3) 
regularly participating in meal preparation. Out of the twelve 
participants, 7 were women and 5 were men. 
D. Design, variables and experimental procedure 
The research uses 2x2 factorial design (with and without 
technology). This design makes it possible to control 
potential bias sources associated to the internal validity of 
the research such as the learning effect and familiarisation 
with the environment and with the type of recipe. 
Participants 
were 
randomly 
divided 
into 
the 
two 
experimental groups. Thus, depending on the group 
assignment, persons in group 1 carried out an A-B plan 
(Time 1 without technology / Time 2 with technology) and 
persons in group 2 carried out a B-A plan (Time 1 with 
technology / Time 2 without technology). In condition A, the 
participant prepares a recipe without the help of domotics. 
Condition B corresponds to the introduction of the 
independent variable (assistive technology using domotics) 
and requires the participants to carry out routines with the 
help of the computer system. In both conditions, the 
researcher is present and offers help to the participant when 
needed. The level of help offered by the researcher is 
recorded (dependent variable). In both conditions, the 
participant has at his/her disposal a paper version of the 
recipe that describes the ingredients and the procedure to 
follow.  
For the purpose of the research, the participants spent 
three days at the DOMUS laboratory apartment of the 
University of Sherbrooke. Every day, the participant must 
spend between 1 to 3 ½ hours for experimentation purposes. 
The first day constitutes a preparatory phase. This phase is 
not part of the experimental design and its goal is to 
introduce the participant to the functioning of the computer 
and apartment components. During this preparatory phase, 
the researcher introduces the participant to the functioning of 
the tactile screen. In order to do so, the researcher plays three 
games of tic-tac-toe with the participant. The researcher then 
prepares a pancakes recipe with the participant. During the 
preparation, the researcher intentionally makes mistakes in 
order to demonstrate to the participant how to react to signals 
given out by the apartment. The two following days are 
devoted to experimentation and data collection. As soon as 
the participant arrives, the researcher explains the recipe to 
be carried out, the steps to be accomplished and the expected 
end result. Both recipes are relatively complex. Participants 
must prepare either spaghetti or macaroni from scratch. 
Thus, they must cut and cook the vegetables, add the meat, 
prepare the sauce and cook the pasta. Both recipes have the 
same number of steps (n=12), use the same ingredients 
(except for the type of pasta) and have the same cooking 
time. The last step is the only difference. The researcher also 
informs the participant as to whether he or she must follow 
the recipe with or without the computer’s assistant.  
E. Analysis of results 
A camera on the ceiling films each experiment. The 
video sequences are then viewed in order to identify 
precisely the help given by the researcher. Help behaviours 
and participant reactions are listed in an Excel document and 
compiled for each participant along with the precise time that 
help was given and in which manner for each condition. In 
order to have a more accurate idea of the level of help 
needed to complete a recipe, help behaviours are coded 
according to four categories taken from the support intensity 
scale of the American Association on Mental Retardation 
[23], they are: monitoring, verbal prompting, gestual 
prompting, full physical assistance. For condition B, another 
category was added: assistance with the technology. In order 
to ensure data validity, counter-coding was done and the 
level 
of 
agreement 
between-judges 
was 
considered 
satisfactory. Descriptive analyses are then carried out 
(percentage, average, standard deviations). When it is 
statistically possible, paired samples t tests are used in order 
to examine if differences between means are significant.  
V. 
RESULTS 
The overall results are described in the next sub-sections. 
A. Accomplishment time and help given by the researcher 
Participants were all able to complete the recipes in both 
conditions. The average time to complete the recipe with the 
technology is 72.00 minutes (SD = 15.06) and without the 
technology is 70.83 minutes (SD = 12.66), t(11) = 0.34, p = 
.74 (two-tailed). 
In general, we observed a considerable decrease in the 
help offered by the researcher for the completion of a recipe 
when we compared the conditions with and without the use 
of technology. Thus, when the person carries out the recipe 
without the technology, the researcher must offer assistance 
on an average of 40.58 times (SD = 24.25) compared to the 
situation with the technology where required help falls to 
18.33 times (SD = 11.30), t(11) = 4.06, p = .002 (two-tailed). 
The detailed analysis data of the types of assistance 
offered to participants for each condition are displayed in 
Table 1. The major portion of the assistance offered by the 
researcher for the accomplishment of the recipe can be found 
under verbal prompting. Verbal assistance given in the 
domotic condition was 91.9% and 86.2% in the condition 
without domotics. The analysis of the video sequences shows 
that the researcher essentially gave guidelines, answered 
participants’ questions or confirmed that the actions were 
adequate. The second most used assistance by participants 
was gestual prompting. The analysis shows that the 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

researcher mostly pointed out the location of objects and 
ingredients in the kitchen. The other types of assistance were 
used less by participants (monitoring and physical 
assistance). However, these types of assistance were also 
reduced by more than half in the domotic condition.  
TABLE 1. SUPPORT PROVIDED FOR THE COMPLETION OF THE RECIPES 
WITH AND WITHOUT DOMOTICS 
 
 
 
With domotics 
(n = 12) 
 
Without domotics 
(n = 12) 
Domain 
M 
SD 
 
M 
SD 
Monitoring 
.17 
.39 
 
.33 
.47 
Verbal prompting 
14.25 
19.19 
 
34.92 
21.32 
Gestual prompting 
.67 
.78 
 
3.67 
4.01 
Full physical assistance 
.50 
.80 
 
1.67 
1.07 
Total help for recipes 
15.59 
10.07 
 
40.58 
24.25 
Technology 
2.75 
2.89 
 
--- 
--- 
Total 
help 
provided 
(recipe, 
technology, 
unexpected)  
18.33 
11.30 
 
40.58 
24.25 
 
 
 
The video sequencing analyses of condition B show that 
people use the different components of the assistant to 
complete the tasks. The two components most often used are 
the picture prompting and the object locator. Participants use 
picture prompting to see each step concretely in order to 
complete the recipe. The participants then imitate the 
behaviour presented on the picture. Nearly all participants 
used the object locator to find utensils and ingredients. Many 
used it systematically to locate all of the necessary utensils 
and ingredients for the accomplishment of their recipe. The 
analysis also shows that many participants take great 
pleasure in using this function. Video prompting is the less 
frequently used function by participants. In this condition, 
the researcher gave a certain type of additional assistance 
specifically related to the technology. The analysis of results 
shows that in this condition, the researcher helped the 
participants 2.75 times on average for the use of different 
domotic functions built into the apartment. The detailed 
analysis shows that the assistance given is related to the use 
of the video and the buttons on the interface as well as the 
comprehension and interpretation of verbal messages and 
light signals.  
However, an important variation in the intensity of the 
use of the technological assistance for each participant is 
noticed in the standard deviation. 
B. Results related to individual scores of participants 
The research sample was heterogeneous in relation to 
kitchen abilities. The high standard deviations clearly 
illustrated this situation. Indeed, the analysis of individual 
scores indicates a very important variability in the intensity 
of the support given to participants.  
Results show, with the exception of two participants (#7 
and #11), that all other participants were given less support 
when using the assistant to carry out tasks. These two 
participants belong to group 2 (with domotics / without 
domotics). 
 
Figure 1. Indivual scores for the support provided 
for the completion of the recipes with and 
without domotics. 
 
 As for candidate #7, we notice a consistency as to the 
quantity of overall support given by the researcher with (n = 
22) and without technology (n = 22). For this candidate, the 
most frequent type of support given is verbal. A more 
detailed analysis of the videos shows that for both 
conditions, the candidate requested, on several occasions, the 
approval of the researcher (for example, she asked the 
researcher if the quantity of the ingredient was correct or if 
she was doing the task in the correct manner). Concerning 
candidate #11, we noticed a decrease in the support offered 
when she did not use the assistant to carry out her tasks (with 
n=21 / without n=19). However, in the domotic condition, 
the video sequencing analysis shows that the researcher 
intervened 5 times with the candidate regarding technology. 
The help offered was given in relation to the functioning of 
the tactile screen. Thus, if we only focus on the assistance 
given for the recipe, we notice an increase in the assistance 
when comparing the condition with technology (n = 16) and 
without technology (n = 19), which is also the case for all the 
other candidates.  
C. Results according to the group membership of 
participants 
The use of the 2x2 factorial design made it possible to 
control the influence of certain variables. The analysis of the 
results according to group membership represents the 
situation well. These results are presented in Figure 2.  
The candidates in group 1, follow the recipe without 
domotic and then with domotic (group without/with). In this 
condition, help given is notably less in the condition without 
domotics (M = 52.67; SD = 18.27) and with the use of 
domotic (M = 18.50; SD = 6.65). Concerning this condition, 
we observed a decrease of verbal assistance between the 
conditions without (M = 44.33; SD = 14.75) and with (M = 
14.17; SD = 5.53) and an important decrease in the number 
gestual prompting given to persons between the conditions 
without (M = 5.67; SD = 4.93) and with (M = 0.50; SD = 
0.55). In group 2, the conditions are reversed. It is in this 
condition that the difference is the smallest between both 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

conditions; with technology (M = 18.17; SD = 15.38) and 
without technology (M = 28.50; SD = 24.70).  
Figure 2. Total support offered for both 
experimental conditions. 
 
Finally, results show that the help offered is similar and 
this, regardless of whether the domotic is used first (M = 
18.50; SD = 6.65) or secondly (M = 18.17; SD = 15.38). 
This therefore shows constancy for this intervention method.  
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
The results obtained identify the contributions of an 
innovative technology used with people with an intellectual 
disability for the preparation of recipes. The discussion will 
refer to the study’s three objectives.  
A. Effectiveness of domotic as an assistant for people with 
an intellectual disability when in carrying out a recipe 
The proposed technology is innovative and until now, 
few studies reviewed the implementation of this technology 
with people with an intellectual disability. This study wanted 
to verify if these persons were able to use this type of 
technological support and gain certain benefits. The study 
shows that these persons were able to use the assistant to 
prepare recipes and understand the different options offered. 
All participants used the picture prompting and the object 
locator. Even though several studies show the positive 
impacts of using video prompting, participants seldom used 
this method of assistance [22]. It seems that several did not 
know how to activate this function. Researchers must then 
reflect on ways to access more easily this type of assistance 
on the interface. 
The complexity of the technology led us to believe that 
the participants would require a great deal of assistance to 
use this technology. Results show that the preparatory period 
was in itself sufficient for participants to comprehend the 
functioning of the tactile screen as well as the assistant for 
the preparation of the recipe. Our experiment showed that 
tactile screens are effective in simplifying interactions with 
the computer.  
B. Impacts on the time of completion of the recipe 
Results related to the time of completion of the recipe 
show a minimal difference between with and without 
technology. Hence, the technology in place does not 
lengthen the time devoted to meal preparation. This element 
is important for the future of this technology. Indeed, the 
technologies proposed to people should not make task 
completion more difficult. This element could bring people 
to lose interest. 
C. Effect on the necessary human assistance for the 
completion of a complex recipe 
This study is audacious; a relatively complex technology 
was combined with a recipe with a certain degree of 
difficulty. This study differentiates itself from other research 
that generally uses simple recipes such as preparing 
sandwiches, reheating meals in the microwave, etc. 
Nevertheless, this study shows that this technology does 
reduce the human assistance needed by the person to follow 
a recipe. Results of this study are similar to that of previous 
studies exploring the effect of technology as an assistant to 
the completion of tasks in a home setting [22][24][25][26]. 
The decrease in assistance is essentially at a verbal and 
gestual prompting level. The analysis of experimental 
conditions shows a certain stability of the technology. Thus, 
whether it is used in time 1 or in time 2, the level of human 
assistance remains relatively stable. Future studies should 
look into the effects of this technology when applied 
repeatedly to examine whether this tendency is maintained 
over time or if there is an observable learning effect after 
several consecutive uses of the assistant.  
Finally, we cannot dismiss the heterogeneity of the 
sample, which had an important impact on the results 
obtained. Future research should be done with a sample of 
people that have similar abilities in carrying out a recipe. We 
believe that the success in applying this type of technology is 
largely determined by the identification of the needs and 
abilities of future users.  
D. Global effects of the technology 
Several effects could not be explained. On the other 
hand, interactions with the participants and informal 
discussions with them allow us to believe that there is an 
important potential for these technologies in relation to the 
dimensions of self-determination. Results clearly show that 
the assistant to help individuals follow recipes had a positive 
impact on the behavioural autonomy of participants.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
The research on domotics intended for people with an 
intellectual disability is an innovative and promising research 
field. It appears that SDST (have beneficial effects on the 
lives of people with an intellectual disability, facilitating 
inclusion and the fulfillment of the role of an active citizen 
within the community. According to us, the development of 
this research field is a first step towards the implementation a 
new innovative residential model in the next few years. This 
solution will possibly make it easier to save money for home 
care services and diversify the range of services offered. 
Research will indisputably have concrete repercussions on 
the life of people with an intellectual disability. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Morin, D. Robert and H. Dorvil, "Le logement comme 
facteur d'intégration sociale pour les personnes classées 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

malades mentales et les personnes classées déficientes 
intellectuelles," Nouvelles pratiques sociales, vol. 14, Dec. 
2001, pp. 88-105. 
[2] R. McConkey, S. Abbott, P. N. Walsh, C. Linehan and E. 
Emerson,"Variations in the social inclusion of people with 
intellectual disabilities in supported living schemes and 
residential setting, " Journal of Intellectual Disability 
Research, vol. 51, March 2007, pp. 207-217, doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2788.2006.00858.x 
[3] J. Mansell, B. Ashman, S. Macdonald and J. Beadle-Brown, 
"Residential care in the community for adults with intellectual 
disability: needs, characteristics and services," Journal of 
Intellectual Disability Research, vol. 46, Nov. 2002, pp. 625-
633, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2788.2002.00440.x 
[4] P. K. S. Wong and D. F. K. Wong, "Enhancing staff attitudes, 
knowledge and skills in supporting the self-determination of 
adults with intellectual disability in residential settings in 
Hong Kong: a pretest-posttest comparison group design," 
Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, vol. 52, March 
2008, pp. 230-243, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2788.2007.01014.x 
[5] Y. Lachapelle, D. Lussier-Desrochers and H. Pigot, "Des TIC 
en soutien à l’autodétermination des personnes présentant une 
déficience intellectuelle," Revue québécoise de psychologie, 
vol. 28(2), 2007, pp. 111-123. 
[6] J. Proulx, L. Dumais and Y. Vaillancourt, "Le logement à 
soutien gradué: Évaluation d'un projet prometteur pour les 
personnes ayant une déficience intellectuelle," (Cahiers du 
LAREPPS, No 07-09). Montréal: Laboratoire de recherche 
sur les pratiques et les politiques sociales (LAREPPS) - 
Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM), 2007. 
[7] OPHQ, "La participation sociale des personnes handicapées 
au Québec: les activités de la vie quotidienne: la vie 
communautaire," 
Proposition 
d'une 
politique 
gouvernementale pour la participation sociale des personnes 
handicapées. 
Drummondville: 
Office 
des 
personnes 
handicapées du Québec, 2007. 
[8] G. E. Lancioni, M. F. O'Reilly, P. Seedhouse, F. Furniss and 
B. Cunha, "Promoting Independent Task Performance by 
Persons With Severe Developmental Disabilities Through a 
New Computer-Aided System," Behavior Modification, vol. 
24, Oct. 2000, pp. 700-718, doi: 10.1177/0145445500245005 
[9] R. A. Rehfeldt, D. Dahman, A. Young, H. Cherry and P. 
Davis,"Teaching a simple meal preparation skill to adults with 
moderate and severe mental retardation using video 
modeling," Beharioral Interventions, vol. 18(3), 2003, pp. 
209-218. 
[10] R. Shipley-Benamou, J. R. Lutzker and M. Taubman, 
"Teaching daily living skills to children with autism through 
instructional video modeling," Journal of Positive Behavior 
Interventions, vol. 4, July 2002, pp. 166-177, doi: 
10.1177/10983007020040030501 
[11] H. Pigot, D. Lussier-Desrochers, J. Bauchet, S. Giroux and Y. 
Lachapelle, "A Smart Home to Assist Recipe Completion," In 
A. Mihailidis, J. Boger, H. Kautz and & L. Normie (Eds.). 
Technology and Aging, Selected Papers from the 2007 
International Conference on Technology and Aging (pp. 35-
42). Amsterdam : IOS Press. (2008) 
[12] K. Chapman and K. McCartney, "Smart homes for people 
with restricted mobility," Property Management, vol. 20(2), 
2002, pp. 153-166, doi: 10.1108/02637470210428356 
[13] R. Cucchiara, C. Grana, A. Prati, and R. Vezzani, "Computer 
vision system for in-house video surveillance," Intelligent 
distributed surveillance systems, vol. 152(2), 2005, pp. 242-
249. 
[14] H. Eriksson and T. Timpka, "The potentiel of smart home for 
injury prevention amoumg the eldery," Injury Control and 
Safety Promotion, vol. 9, Aug. 2002, pp. 127-131, doi: 
10.1076/icsp.9.2.127.8694 
[15] S. Martin, C. Nugent and A. Porter-Amstrong, "User 
perspectives: Living and working with in a "Smart Home" 
environment," In S. Giroux & H. Pigot (Eds.). From smart 
homes to smart care (pp. 33-41). Amsterdam : IOS Press. 
2005 
[16] J. Lundell, "Ubiquitous computing to support older adults and 
informal caregivers," In S. Giroux & H. Pigot (Eds.). From 
smart homes to smart care (pp. 11-22). Amsterdam : IOS 
Press. 2005 
[17] S. Junestrand, G. Mollin, K. Tollmar and U. Keijer, "User 
Study of Video-Mediated Communication in the Domestic 
Environment 
With 
Intellectually 
Disabled 
Persons," 
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 
15(1), 2003, pp. 87-103. 
[18] D. K. Davies, S. E. Stock and M. L. Wehmeyer, "A Palmtop 
Computer-Based Intelligent Aid for Individuals With 
Intellectual Disabilities to Increase Independent Decision 
Making," Research & Practice for Persons with Severe 
Disabilities, vol. 28(4), 2003, pp. 182-193. 
[19] D. K. Davies, S. E. Stock and M. L. Wehmeyer, "Enhancing 
Independent Internet Access for Individuals with Mental 
Retardation through Use of a Specialized Web Browser: A 
Pilot Study," Education and Training in Mental Retardation 
and Developmental Disabilities, vol. 36(1), 2001, pp. 107-
113. 
[20] C. M. Okolo, C. Bahr and H. Reith, "A retrospective view of 
computer-based instruction," Journal of Special Education 
Technology, vol. 12, 1993, pp. 1-27. 
[21] T. B. Graves, B. C. Collins, J. W. Schuster and H. Kleinert 
"Using Video Prompting to Teach Cooking Skills to 
Secondary Students with Moderate Disabilities," Education 
and Training in Developmental Disabilities, vol. 40(1), 2005, 
pp. 34-46. 
[22] J. Sigafoos, M. O’Reilly, H. Cannella, M. Upadhyaya, C. 
Edrisinha, G. E. Lancioni, et al., "Computer-Presented Video 
Prompting for Teaching Microwave Oven Use to Three 
Adults 
with 
Developmental 
Disabilities," 
Journal 
of 
behavioral education vol. 14, Sept. 2005, pp. 189-201, doi: 
10.1007/s10864-005-6297-2 
[23] J. R. Thompson, B. R. Bryant, E. M. Campbell, E. M. Craig, 
C. M. Hughes, D. A Rotholz, et al., "Supports Intensity Scale 
(SIS-F)," Wahinton,DC: American Association on Intellectual 
and Developmental Disabilities, 2008.  
[24] G. E. Lancioni and M. F. O'Reilly, "Teaching food 
preparation skills to people with intellectual disabilities: A 
literature overview," Journal of Applied Research in 
Intellectual Disabilities, vol. 15, Sept. 2002, pp. 236-253, doi: 
10.1046/j.1468-3148.2002.00122.x 
[25] G. E. Lancioni, E. Van den Hof, F. Furniss, M. F O'Reilly and 
B. Cunha, "Evaluation of a computer-aided system providing 
pictorial task instructions and prompts to people with severe 
intellectual disability," Journal of Intellectual Disability 
Research, vol. 43, Feb. 1999, pp. 61-66, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-
2788.1999.43120165.x 
[26] L. Mechling, "Use of video prompting, via a portable DVD 
player, laptop computer, or PDA as self-prompting devices 
for persons with moderate intellectual disabilities," ATIA 
Orlando: Showcasing Excellence in Assistive Technology, 
ATIA 2009. Orlando, Fl, USA. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

