Personalizing Learning with m-Technologies to Improve Students 
Performance in South African Higher Learning 
Refilwe Constance Mogase 
Department of Informatics 
 Tshwane University of Technology 
Pretoria, South Africa 
mogaserc@tut.ac.za 
Patricia M Alexander 
Department of Informatics 
Tshwane University of Technology 
Pretoria, South Africa 
alexandermp@tut.ac.za 
Abstract— Personalized Learning (PL) is recently being 
endorsed by higher institutions of learning as a strategy for 
improving students’ engagement and academic attainment. 
Although existing PL technologies offer some flexibility, there 
is still room for further innovation to extend this learning 
support. However, PL still lacks fully adaptive and timely 
content, which can enhance their flexibility further. Often 
times instructors are faced with a challenge of giving students 
attention in the undergraduate courses. This limitation is a 
consequence of fewer contacts sessions between lecturers and 
students due to timetable schedules. Therefore, it is imperative 
for institutions of higher learning to consider integrating PL 
through use of mobile devices to extend learning beyond the 
institution’s 
geographical 
boundaries. 
Some 
theoretical 
foundations already exist for learning through personalisation 
and learner perceptions on using technologies to develop 
effective PL environments. However, there exists the need to 
develop models for mobile computing personalized learning in 
the African context to best suit the needs of students from the 
socio-economic backgrounds in support of their learning 
environments.  The study aims to develop a mobile computing 
model to enhance PL for students in South African context 
with the aim of improving their academic performances.  
Content analysis was used to evaluate the factors that had been 
identified in the literature and were tallied according to their 
frequency. The results indicated that device factors that relates 
to technology use along with pedagogy predominantly impact 
on the effectiveness of PL using mobile technologies. 
Keywords-
Mobile 
computing, 
Personalized 
learning, 
Technology-supported personalized learning environments, M-
Learning
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Education in the 21s century takes into cognizance of the 
fact that students think differently, where their thinking is 
influenced by their social, cultural and technological 
environment [3]. This suggests that their learning is a 
constructive process of acting within an environment full of 
ubiquitous computing devices. These devices are supported 
by wireless communication networks, which make possible 
to access content anywhere anytime. Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT), which has presented 
opportunities for knowledge creation and easy access to 
information, has modified the conception of time and space 
in the learning environment.  Mobile computing play an 
important role not only to education, but to society, and it is 
further making a positive contribution to other areas outside 
the learning spheres such as health, management, scientific 
research 
and 
business 
administration 
[23]. 
Mobile 
technologies lay a good foundation for expanding teaching 
and learning that goes beyond the confines of classroom and 
university campus. It further provides a platform that support 
student collaboration, sharing of information, and flexibility 
in learning if employed effectively, which can support social 
constructivist approaches to learning [7]. PL through use of 
digital resources has promoted new version of learning by 
tailoring learning to suit learner needs, where emphasis is on 
supporting the learner [21].  The combination of these two 
learning strategies can offer an impending educational 
innovation that is significant for the flexible delivery of 
learning content. This mix of learning strategies allows for 
the customization and personalization of student’s learning 
process. 
In essence, integrating mobile technologies and 
personalization in the formal learning will enable a learning 
environment that is ubiquitous where students may be 
leaning without even being fully aware. This will be due to 
the social and personal aspects of mobile devices, where the 
limits and distinctions between work and play, learning and 
entertainment, formal and informal learning are no longer 
relevant. This research will identify key components that 
contribute to the implementation of learning tailored for a 
specific set of learners. This takes into consideration 
student’s learning needs, interests and preferences. More so, 
the study is seeking to make a contribution to higher 
education (HE) by combining both PL and mobile 
technologies to ensure that learning is made flexible, fun, 
and seamless with the aim of improving student’s academic 
performances.  
This study investigated the factors that impact on the 
effective implementations of PL using mobile technologies 
to improve student’s learning and their academic 
performances. The paper was structured in a form of 
sections indicating a brief description of what each section 
entails. In Section 2, the study highlights PL background in 
the context HE and its impact on student’s learning 
processes. Section 3 specifies the gaps that exists in PL 
environments along with the goal and objectives the study. 
Section 4 gives a brief literature review indicating PL in 
higher education, PL challenges and the opportunities it 
brings to academia, this is followed by related works 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

indicating various factors that need to be taken into 
consideration to ensure the effectiveness of PL using mobile 
technologies in HE. A buildup of a conceptual framework 
that underpins the study is then described concluding the 
section. In Section 5, the methodology adapted for the study 
is explained in detail followed by a table of results that 
identifies the key factors that are sort key to the 
implementations 
of 
PL 
environments 
using 
mobile 
technologies. Section 6 provides future works and a 
conclusion of the study.  
II.
BACKGROUND
PL facilitates both formal and informal education since it 
supports collaboration and communication between the 
learner and his or her instructor and between learners. In 
addition, PL shifts the role of students from being simply 
consumers of education to co-producers and collaborators of 
their learning pathway [21]. Through use of technologies, the 
style of teaching and learning can be modified to suit a group 
of students with diverse backgrounds and experiences [1]. 
More so, institutions of higher learning are able to consider a 
variety of student’s needs and characteristics within the 
teaching and learning process through personalization. The 
emphasis of PL is on the usage of flexible instructional 
practices in order to facilitate students’ personalization 
endeavors. 
PL can blend different forms of learning and techniques 
to cater for learners who learn in different ways. The focus 
of PL is on the choice of what to study, how and when, 
whilst considering the pace at which the student learn, 
tailored to students’ learning preferences and specific 
interests of different learners. Bingham et al. [6] points out 
that PL, powered by technology, can allow for more 
productive time-on-task. However, its extensions are 
sometimes limited by lack of resources such as internet 
accessibility, PCs or laptops due to their cost.   
Phillipson et al. [24] noted that currently PL lacks the 
mobility aspect that allows learning to reach higher 
pedagogical level, where constructing and absorbing 
knowledge becomes life long, breaking the boundaries of 
time and space. This can be achieved if PL is designed 
based on mobile computing technologies and through the 
use of portable devices such as Mobile phones, PDA, iPads 
and other devices built on mobile technology.  
III.
PROBLEM STATEMENT
There is an increased pressure on higher institutions of 
learning 
by 
higher 
education 
department 
to 
meet 
quantitative performance targets [11] which had led to a 
massive 
numbers 
of 
students 
enrolled 
in 
African 
Universities. Often times instructors are faced with a 
challenge of giving students attention in the undergraduate 
courses [26]. This limitation is a consequence of fewer 
contacts sessions between lecturers and students due to 
timetable schedules. More so, there is lack of instructional 
goals that involves high levels of cognitive skills, low self-
esteem among learners, and minimum opportunities of 
individual feedback. While ICT has the potential to provide 
higher institutions with such learning opportunities, its use 
is still limited in the SA context. As a result, there is a 
demand for instructors to reach every individual student by 
incorporating 
ICT 
interventions 
such 
as 
mobile 
technologies. To recap, mobile tools have the inherent 
ability to connect with information tools and communicate 
in a networked manner and this makes them valuable in a 
situated learning context [11].  There is a need for constant 
connectivity in order for just-in-time learning and students’ 
collective knowledge sharing to be leveraged to promote 
collaboration [3]. 
On the other hand, studies have built theoretical 
foundations that address learning through personalization 
and learner perceptions on using technologies to develop 
effective PLEs [19]. However, due to PL in formal learning 
being a relatively new technological enhancement, there 
seems to be few studies that have explored this area of 
research [4]. As a result, little guidance has been given to 
enhance interactions that support extended flexibility, 
mobility, reachability and accessibility for teaching and 
learning in PL environments [2]. Therefore, there is a need 
for personalized learning models that caters for a specific set 
of learners and their supporting environments. 
To solve the highlighted problem, the following goal and 
research objectives have to be met. 
1) Goal 
To design a Mobile Computing model to enhance 
Personalized Learning for students in South African higher 
learning 
2) Specific objectives  
1.
To determine and analyse the influence of PL to 
effective teaching and learning of students in 
higher learning institutions  
2.
To investigate and analyse technology-based PL 
models for higher learning institutions 
3.
To investigate the determinants that influence the 
incorporation of mobile computing for PL  
4.
To develop a mobile computing model  that can be 
used to enhance PL for students in higher 
institutions 
IV.
LITERATURE REVIEW 
This section provides an overview of PL in HE, its 
benefits and challenges. Furthermore, it previews works that 
have been done in light of presenting key factors that impact 
the effective implementations of PL in academic institutions 
of higher learning.   
A. Personalized Learning in Higher Education  
PL extends learning through a mix of pedagogies such as 
student mentoring, incorporation of learners’ personal and 
social experience, using ICT, and other learning strategies 
such as flipped learning. This provides learner support which 
reforms learning from a ‘fixed content and fixed timing’ 
concept. Accounts of pedagogies relating to PL and ML 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

overlap to some extent but reflect different ways of offering 
flexibility in the learning processes. However, their distinct 
difference is in the learning mode of delivery and 
information filtering to cater for individual needs [29]. While 
they both incorporate ICT tools to offer blended learning, 
ML with PL adds just-in-time, on-the-go learning, and easy 
access to PL resources due to its mobility and portability 
capabilities.   
Ross et al. [25] supports this active learning strategy that 
puts the learner at the center of teaching and learning with 
students’ independently exploring, generating, and applying 
ideas in and outside the classroom setting. These 
instructional methods have proven to show amicable 
improvements in student’s conceptual understanding when 
correctly applied.  
Waldrip and Vaughan [28] also highlighted note-worthy 
facts in their meta-analysis review of the effects of 
integrating mobile devices with teaching and learning on 
students’ learning performance. They alluded to various 
scholars’ resulting consensus that to exert maximum effect of 
learning with technologies in higher education institutions, 
there should be reconciliation of the connections between the 
following components: 1) technology (both hardware and 
software), 2) process of teaching and learning to 
accommodate different settings (educational context), 3) and 
users (both lecturers and students)  [25].  
B.  Benefits of PL in Higher Institutions of Learning 
The aim of PL is to provide a positive learner experience 
that is based upon information about the learner. Students 
have the opportunity to access services that are most relevant 
to their learning context which suit their interests saving 
them time to filter out from the vast amount of information 
available. PL’s main objective is to address the intended 
‘one-size-fits-all’ 
approach, 
provide 
support 
that 
is 
dependent on the student’s engagement with the course 
material, and peer interactions [26].   
Verdu et al. [27] alludes to some of the benefits that PL 
brings. 
These 
include 
increased 
motivation, 
learner 
empowerment, and improved attitudes to learning. PL further 
contributes towards sharing and developing expertise, 
through collaboration and networking. It produces better 
results through a student’s personal development of better 
learning strategies, skills, and technological capacities. It 
caters for differences in learning contexts and cultures in 
terms of sociocultural practices in urban versus developing 
areas. More so, PL enable students to have the agency when 
making choices of what, when, how and where to learn, 
where control over setting their learning goals is within their 
reach. Learning is made flexible enough to allow students to 
take their learning outside the confines of the traditional 
classroom. 
C. Challenges of Personalizing Learning  
While the idea of personalization might be appealing, the 
reality of its implementation is much more complex. As Ross 
et al. [25] indicated many universities are faced with the 
dilemma of same content presentation in different sequence 
for different students thus not serving the purpose of filtering 
it to cater for a diverse set of students. Hostler [14] postulates 
the difficulties of implementing PL especially for larger 
groups. This is because not only does it require training but 
also time to accommodate the approach in the lecturer’s 
teaching practices. In addition, it requires restructuring of 
curriculum and change of teacher classroom practices. The 
introduction of new technologies calls for support and on-
going training to address specific challenges that may arise 
while using PL tools and spaces. More so, with large lecture 
environments it is difficult to individualize the learning to 
ensure all students’ misconceptions are addressed. Therefore, 
careful thought and consideration should be put forth in 
terms of structuring learning when applying this PL strategy 
to have an effective lecture session. 
D. Related Work   
Laohajaratsang [17] explored the use of technology to 
personalize learning in a study for personalized, flexible 
blended learning features of the Moodle Learning 
Management System (LMS) through mobile platforms. The 
study factored the following as key to the implementation of 
PL, change in teaching practices including instructors skills, 
need to develop the learning content, support staff needed to 
manage, inspire and support both student and lecturers, and 
training particularly in areas of mobile content creation and 
pedagogical skills.  
On the other hand Callaghan et al. [8] looked at using 
web-based technologies as pedagogy to enhance learning. In 
in their findings they indicated that students’ academic 
performance increased by 67%. They emphasized the 
universities’ need to explore other innovative ways beyond 
web-based technologies that could be used to ensure 
seamless learning environments. Furthermore, the study 
identified 8 factors that can enhance learning through use of 
technology. These included high-performance network 
infrastructure, choice of digital devices and software to 
support the pedagogical model underlying the course, 
content presentation to facilitate ease of use, social 
interaction and human touch, flexibility and adaptability of 
systems to cater for learner diversity, stimulating interaction, 
facilitating student’s learning processes, and fostering an 
effective learning climate, specifically in the context of 
African higher institutions of learning. 
 Pimmer et al. [23] highlighted the works of Casany et al. 
[9], which presented a Protus system that was built on the 
foundations of an intelligent tutoring system. The system 
recognized different patterns of learning styles and learner 
habits through testing their learning styles and mining their 
server logs as key to ensure system flexibility. By so doing 
the requests done by students would then be customized to 
suit their learning preferences thus creating a learning space 
that is flexible and personalized to their needs. 
More so, Pimmer et al. [23] emphasized on use of 
gaming for computing education as another means of 
personalizing learning for students. Its ability to teach 
specific concepts and strengthen particular competencies 
helps students to stay focused on the learning activity while 
stimulating their will to achieve. However, majority of 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

evaluations on gaming education were ran with small 
samples and they lacked scientific rigor. Therefore, there is a 
need for further research on how to improve scientific rigor 
of their evaluations for teaching computing. 
Studies by Verdú et al. [27] were carried out in the 
spheres of PL which highlighted the need for incorporating 
mobile technologies to extend learning flexibility. The study 
identified among other factors, the need for stimulating 
interaction, facilitating student’s learning processes, and 
fostering affective learning climate.   
E. Theoretical Foundations and Conceptual Model 
Several theories have been adopted to underpin learning 
with technologies, particularly using mobile devices to 
support or extend teaching and learning, which came with 
their shortfalls [22] ;[6]. These theories lacked the inclusion 
of curriculum that is more tailored to student needs as an 
important aspect that would strengthen their personalized 
experiences. Instead, their focus was more on mobile 
technologies embedded in their current LMS. Studies of 
Bachman and Gannod [5] have used FRAME by Koole [16] 
aiming to explain mobile learning dynamics. They added 
additional characteristics that affected the device, learner, 
and social aspects in M-learning and referred to their 
conceptual model as augmented FRAME. Lai et al. [18] also 
used FRAME as a reference model to design tablet-based 
activities for pre-service teachers, which addressed aspects of 
collaboration, engagement, motivation and independent 
learning.  Other studies by Juvova et al. [15] for example 
used and explained FRAME as an evaluation framework and 
showed through demonstrations how it could be applied in 
M-learning studies. 
However, there is still some limitations in these theories 
in terms of the learner side when creating learning 
experiences that support individualized learning [23]. 
Moreover, various proportions need to be taken into 
consideration to help in making recommendations that could 
help in facilitating PL materials that can be administered via 
mobile devices. In addition, there is still lack of evaluation 
methods that are multi-attributed to help in modeling student 
needs for the creation of PL environments that more learner-
centered [3].  
The proposed study aims to reference two existing 
theoretical frameworks, FRAME by Koole [16] and a 
framework of Mobile Learning Preference by Lai et al. [18] 
to combine its variables to develop a pedagogical model for 
PL via MC for institutions of higher learning in South 
Africa. It is believed that no current framework can address 
the needs and interests of users in a holistic manner. The 
intent is to get insights based on the identified elements for 
PL through qualitative methods, which will help in 
determining whether they should be considered as key 
elements for effective design and implementation of a 
mobile computing model for PL. Graphical depictions of a 
conceptual framework for the proposed study are given in 
Figure 1. 
Figure 1. Conceptual Framework. 
The intersection between learner and device aspect 
(technology use) describes the complexity and usability of 
the technology in terms of accessibility, portability and 
ergonomics.  Whilst the intersection of the device and 
content (Mobile content) addresses the type of content 
suitable to run on portable devices and how they need to be 
customized. The intersection between content and social 
aspects (Cognitive learning) describes how the learner 
engages with the content based on their social interactions 
with their peers and instructors, which may affect how they 
interpret and construct meaning of their own learning. Lastly, 
the interaction between learner and social aspects 
(interaction learning) addresses the collaboration issues and 
interactive learning that promotes learning pertaining to their 
unique cultural contexts that may influence how they learn 
individually and from each other.  The study proposes that 
when all these identified aspects are met and their four 
dimensions are well balanced, a conducive mobile 
personalized learning environment can be created. 
V.
METHODOLOGY 
This study used content analysis to search for factors that 
influence the effective implementations of PL in higher 
education. Relevant keywords such as "personalization", 
"learning with technologies", "pedagogical tools for 
learning", "education", "enhanced learning", "collaboration", 
"student-centered learning", "ubiquitous learning", "adaptive 
learning" were used to direct all searches on journal and 
conferences in the three well know databases JSTOR, Web 
of Science, and Science Direct. Furthermore, thorough 
searches were conducted on the following scientific journals 
which were considered key journals for the field due to their 
focus on educational use of technology. These include 
Education and Information Technologies, Journal of 
Research 
and 
Practice 
in 
Information 
Technology, 
Interactive Technology and Smart Education, British Journal 
of Educational Technology Computers & Education, Journal 
of Research on Technology in Education, International 
Journal of Engineering & Technology, Computers in Human 
Behavior, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Education 
and 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Development 
using 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology, Universal Journal of Educational Research, 
Journal of Educational Computing Research, Educational 
Technology Research and Development. 
The total searches were limited to the period from 2014 
to 2018 due to this pedagogy being at its infant and gaining 
popularity in the education domain. The results documented 
in a search protocol were then cleared of any articles that are 
identified to fall outside the research area of interest-i.e. PL 
in formal education. 30 articles were read and categorized as 
relevant based on the preliminary criteria with the intention 
to identify more themes in the literature. The criterion was 
inclusive of the following: the novelty of the research, 
empirical data presence, learning theories applied, model 
design, 
technological 
prototyping, 
implementation, 
evaluation and recommendation, and applied educational 
practices. The criterion was chosen with the intent to help 
identify literature that deals with different aspects on 
learning with technology, specifically in PL environments to 
enhance 
student 
performances, 
and 
pedagogy. 
The 
identification of themes and key factors contributing to the 
effectiveness of mobile computing PL model were identified 
following the reading of the articles.   
Ms excel was used to tabulate the results and to count the 
frequency of the appearance of each factor. Factors that were 
similar in concepts were placed in the same category 
whereas those with the same meaning were renamed and 
given a common name. By so doing, many factors were 
eliminated and the remaining factors were placed into five 
categories. Table 1 demonstrates the factors tallied with their 
frequency of appearance in the review literature. 
TABLE I. 
FACTORS INFLUENCING PL 
Factors influencing PL effectiveness 
Pedagogy 
Freq 
Device/ 
Technology 
Freq 
Leaner 
Freq 
Pedagogical 
skills  
Learning 
theories
21 
16 
Compatibility 
Complexity 
Flexibility 
System 
quality 
 Internet 
 connectivity 
23 
18 
18 
16 
22 
Experience 
Education 
& Training  
Learner 
diversity 
Learning 
styles 
Use of 
technology  
11 
7 
16 
17 
16 
Content  
Freq 
Social 
Freq 
Content presentation  
Content development 
Information quality 
9 
8 
14 
Collaboration  
Interactive learning 
15 
14 
VI.
FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSION 
Mobile technologies are considered a new form of social 
and cultural artifact that mediates teaching and learning in 
education. Emerging personalized learning spaces along with 
mobile technologies in the African context aims to better 
understand how these technologies can enhance quality of 
learning while promoting accessibility to learning resources. 
Therefore, it is imperative to look into a holistic approach to 
education that must be studied in its natural surrounding 
where personal, situational, cultural and socio-economic 
factors play a role. PL along with mobile technologies in the 
African context aims to look into how use of technology can 
enhance the quality of learning. More so, by extending 
educational resources to ensure they are readily available to 
learners anytime and anywhere with no geographical 
boundaries. This therefore calls for longitudinal studies to be 
conducted, not just pilot projects that investigate these PL 
spaces with an attempt to transform pedagogical approaches 
with authentic contexts that are linked to developing high 
order thinking.  
Mobile computing and technologies have promoted a 
new vision for learning, particularly in higher education. 
However, there still exist challenges in education as learning 
should 
be 
fundamentally 
personal, 
flexible, 
social, 
ubiquitous, complex and dynamic in nature [12]. Therefore, 
there is a need for a shift in pedagogy towards a more 
personalized learning environment as opposed to a one-size 
fits all and passive learning solutions. This requires learning 
designs that are based on use of mobile technologies that are 
capable of supporting individual learners to produce 
desirable learning outcomes. Literature indicates that use of 
mobile phones have gone beyond making calls and texting 
due to internet and the Web, which has led web browsing, 
social media as top uses [11]. The concept of mobile 
personalized learning aims to put emphasis on the use of 
mobile technologies and personalization to make learning 
better in terms of accessibility, portability and mobility, thus 
eliminating any geographical boundaries. This paper aims to 
extend flexibility of PL through enhancements of existing 
models of teaching, and learning with technologies as studies 
indicates that they are currently minimal [2].  
REFERENCES
[1]
Z. Abdrakhmanova, K. Aisultavona, L. Chaltikenova, 
Satkenova, Z. and B. Zhanat,  “Implementation of Modern 
Computer 
Science 
and 
Information 
Technologies 
in 
Teaching,” International Business Management. Vol.11, pp. 
469–473, 2017. 
[2]
M. Al-emran, H. M. Elsherif, and K. Shaalan. “Investigating 
attitudes towards the use of m-Learning in higher education,” 
Computers in Human Behavior. Vol. 56, pp. 93–102. 2016, 
Doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2015.11.033. 
[3]
M. Alrasheedi, L.F. Capretz, and A. Raza, “Management’s 
perspective on critical success factors affecting m-Learning in 
higher education institutions — an empirical study,” Journal 
of Educational Computing, Vol. 54, pp. 253–274, 2016, Doi: 
10.1177/0735633115620387. 
[4]
E. N. Asiimwe, Å. Grönlund, and M. Hatakka, “Postprint 
Practices and challenges in an emerging m-learning 
environment,” 
Interntional 
Journal 
of 
Education 
and 
Development 
using 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology, Vol.13, pp. 103–122, 2017. 
[5]
M. K. Bachman, and C. G. Gannod, “A critical analysis of m-
learning initiatives,” IADIS International conference, Avila, 
Spain, pp. 310-312, 2011. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[6]
A.J. Bingham, J.F. Pane, E.D. Steiner, and L.S.Hamilton, 
"Ahead of the Curve: Implementation Challenges in 
Personalized Learning School Models," Educational Policy,  
[7]
K.J. Burden, and  M. Kearney, ""Investigating and critiquing 
teacher educators’ mobile learning practices", Interactive 
Technology and Smart Education, 2017, vol. 14, pp. 110–125. 
[8]
F.V.O. Callaghan, D.L. Neumann, L. Jones, and P.A. Creed, 
“The use of lecture recordings in higher education : A review 
of institutional , student , and lecturer issues”, Education and 
Information 
Technologies,” 
pp. 
399–415, 
2017, 
doi: 
10.1007/s10639-015-9451-z. 
[9]
M. J. Casany, M. Alier, E. Mayol, J. Piguillem, and N. 
Galanis, “Moodbile : A framework to integrate m-learning 
applications with the LMS,” Journal of Research and Practice 
in Information Technology, Vol. 44, pp. 129–149, 2012. 
[10] P.Cerna, "Mobile Computing Framework for Student 
Engagement System in Ethiopian Higher Educational 
Institution," 
International 
Journal 
of 
Wireless 
Communications and Mobile Computing, 2018, vol. 6, pp. 
10–19, doi: 10.11648/j.wcmc.20180601.12. 
[11] H. Crompton, “Interactive technology and smart education 
article information ,” Interactive Technology and Smart 
Education, Vol. 14, pp. 97–109, 2017. 
[12] A. Hevner, S.T. March, and J. Park, “Design Science in 
Information Systems Research,” MIS Quarterly. Vol. 28, 
pp.75–105, 2004 
[13] W. Holmes, S. Anastopoulou, H. Schaumburg, and  
M.Mavrikis, "Technology-enhanced Personalised Learning: 
Untangling the Evidence," The Robert Bosch Stiftung GmbH, 
Stuttgart, 2018. 
[14] A.K. Hostler, “Framing Mobile Learning: Investigating the 
Framework for the Rationale Analysis of Mobile Education In 
Keengwe J. & Maxfield, B.M,” Advancing Higher Education 
with Mobile Learning Technologies: Cases, Trends, and 
Inquiry-Based Methods, 2015. 
[15] A. Juvova, S. Chudy, P. Neumeister, J. Plischke, and J. 
Kvintova,. “Reflection of Constructivist Theories in Current 
Educational Practice,” Universal Journal of Educational 
Research. 
Vol. 
3, 
pp. 
345–349, 
2015, 
doi: 
10.13189/ujer.2015.030506.M. L. Koole, “ A model for 
framing m-Learning. In M. Ally (Ed.), M-Learning: 
Transforming the delivery of education and training,” 
Athabasca, AB: Athabasca University Press, 2009. 
[16] M. L. Koole, “ A model for framing m-Learning. In M. Ally 
(Ed.), M-Learning: Transforming the delivery of education 
and training,” Athabasca, AB: Athabasca University Press, 
2009. 
[17] T. Laohajaratsang, “The effect of tablet-based learning on 
pre-service teachers' learning experiences at Chiang Mai 
University,” IEEE 63rd Annual Conference International 
Council for Educational Media (ICEM), 2013, pp. 1-11. 
[18] C.L. Lai, G.J. Hwang, and J.C. Liang, “preferences of high 
school teachers and students in Taiwan : a structural equation 
model analysis,” Educational Technology Research and 
Development. Springer US, Vol.64, pp. 533–554, 2016, doi: 
10.1007/s11423-016-9432-y. 
[19] L. Lindsay, “ransformation of teacher practice using mobile 
technology with one-to-one classes: M-learning pedagogical 
approaches,” British Journal of Educational Technology. 
Vol.45, 883–992. 2016, doi: 10.1111/bjet.12265. 
[20] S. Meacham,  A. Stefanidis, L. Gritt, and  K. Phalp, "Internet 
of Things for Education: Facilitating Personalised Education 
from 
a 
University’s 
Perspective," 
 
Thwenty 
Third 
International Conference on Technology in Education, 2018, 
pp.69–82. 
[21] Mercado, and P. Agustin, “Mobile application integration 
framework for educational institutions,” in The Tenth 
International Conference on eLearning for Knowledge-Based 
Society, 2013, pp. 7.1-7.10. 
[22] S. Olusegun, “Constructivism Learning Theory : A Paradigm 
for Teaching and Learning,” The International Journal of 
Research & Method in Education, Vol.5, pp.66–70. 2015, doi: 
10.9790/7388-05616670.  
[23] C. Pimmer, M. Mateescu, and U. Grohbiel, “Computers in 
Human Behavior Mobile and ubiquitous learning in higher 
education settings: A systematic review of empirical studies,” 
Computers in Human Behavior, Vol. 63, pp. 490–501, 2016, 
doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2016.05.057. 
[24] A. Phillipson, A. Riel, and A. B. Leger, “Between Knowing 
and Learning : New Instructors ’ Experiences in Active 
Learning Classrooms,” The Canadian Journal for the 
Scholarshi of Teaching and Learning, Vol. 9, pp. 1–20, 2018. 
[25] L. Ross, E. Judson, C.J. Ankeny, S.J. Krause, and R.J. 
Culbertson, “Is There a Connection Between Classroom 
Practices and Attitudes Towards Student-Centered Learning 
in Engineering ?,” 2018 ASEE Annual Conference & 
Exposition, “Is Technology good for education?,” Polity 
Press, 
Cambridge, 
2018, 
doi:10.1080/00220671.2016.1253948. 
[26] S.W. Tabor, “Making Mobile Learning Work : Student 
Perceptions and Implementation Factors,” Journal of 
Information Technology Education: Innovations in Practice, 
Vol. 15.pp. 75–98, 2016. 
[27] E. Verdú, L.M. Regueras, E. Gal, J.P. de Castro, M.J. Verdú, 
and D. Kohen-Vacs, "Integration of an intelligent tutoring 
system in a course of computer network design," Educational 
Technology Research and Development,  vol.65, pp. 653–
677,  2017, doi: 10.1007/s11423-016-9503-0. 
[28] B., Waldrip, J. Jin, & Y. Vaughan, “Validation of a model of 
personalized learning,” Learning Environments Research, 
Vol. 19, pp. 169–180, 2016, doi 10.1007/s10984-016-9204-y. 
[29] D. Zou, and F.L.Wang, “A flexible graph-based model for 
facilitating digital learning activities,” International Journal of 
Innovation and Learning, Vol. 23, pp. 444-462, 2018.
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

