A Preliminary Analysis of the Physiological Response Generated by Negative Thoughts
Nagore Sagastibeltza,
Asier Salazar-Ramirez
and Raquel Martinez
Faculty of Engineering in Bilbao
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU)
Bilbao, Spain 48013
Email: nagore.sagastibeltza@ehu.eus,
asier.salazar@ehu.eus,
raquel.martinez@ehu.eus
Ainhoa Yera
and Javier Muguerza
Faculty of Informatics
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU)
Donostia-San Sebasti´an, Spain 20018
Email: ainhoa.yera@ehu.eus,
j.muguerza@ehu.eus
Abstract—Positive and negative emotions have a great impact
on the human organism. The main purpose of this work is
to analyze the physiological effects of negative thoughts using
affective computing techniques. With this aim, we carried out
an experiment in which participants had to recall past negative
experiences while their physiological signals were being collected.
Then, using two algorithms based on biosignal analysis, we
assessed their levels of stress and relaxation at each time.
According to the results, 100% of the participants who had
negative thoughts produced a physiological stress response. This is
promising, since it could enable affective computing based systems
to adapt to the emotional state of the users through the real-time
monitoring of the physiological signals of the human body.
Keywords–Affective computing; Emotions; ECG; GSR; Negative
thoughts.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Feeling emotions, either positive or negative, is common
in every human being. Nowadays, one of the most demanded
skills in different social and/or labor environments [1] is
knowing how to control emotions and thoughts generated as a
reaction to particular situations. Affective computing provides
useful tools for emotion recognition by developing algorithms
and devices that can interpret human emotions [2].
We ourselves create our emotions, based on the interpreta-
tion we have of the information we receive [3] [4]. In our ev-
eryday life, we tend to generate thoughts, emotions and actions
unconsciously [5]. Controlling and educating our thoughts is
of paramount importance in order to have increasingly positive
emotions and consequently, behaviors and actions that provide
a greater well-being to our lives. In contrast, negative thoughts
cause negative and frustrating emotions and actions. Because
the physiological response of our organism is in sync with our
thoughts, stressful thoughts or painful memories increase the
cortisol, lower the defenses, deteriorate the physiology of the
arteries, activate the nervous system, and accelerate the heart
rate [6] [7].
To this regard, affective computing provides methods that
recognize human emotions and help to identify what everyone
is feeling and living [8]. This paper aims to analyze the
effects of negative thoughts in the physiological response,
more precisely, in those relating to the heart and sweat. To
do so, Section II explains the experimental design used for
collecting a physiological signal database related to stressful
memories. Section II also presents the collected biosignals,
as well as the studied population. Then, the analysis of the
database is covered in Section III, providing explanations of
the results obtained from the application of two affective
computing algorithms. Finally, the conclusions and future lines
of the work are presented in Section IV.
II.
METHODOLOGY
In this section, we describe the methodology of experi-
mentation used to obtain the psychological database analyzed.
This procedure has been certiﬁed by the corresponding ethical
committee CEISH-UPV/EHU, BOPV 32 (M10 2016 189).
A. Experimental setup
In order to analyze the physiological response to negative
thoughts, we have designed an experiment where participants
had to recall a problematic or stressful situation from the
past using visualization techniques, while their electrodermal
and heart activities were being captured. Several researches
have shown that visualization techniques bring the imagination
closer to the reality [9] [10].
The experiment had several stages and was conducted
individually for each participant (see Fig. 1). In the ﬁrst stage,
we ensured the participants were comfortable in their position,
described to them the experimental procedure and gave them
a consent form to sign. Then, we connected the sensors to the
participants and provided some time so that they could choose
a stressful situation to use during the experiment.
In the second stage, at the start off of the experiment,
the participants watched a relaxing video with the lights
off. Thereon, we asked the users to close their eyes and
let themselves be guided by the words of the experimenter
while listening to quiet music in the background. In this
ﬁrst part of the visualization, the participants were induced
into a deeper level of relaxation, and once they reached this
state, they were asked to bring back the previously chosen
stressful situation. Finally, using neurolinguistic programming
techniques, the subjects were guided to solve that conﬂict
[11]. Once the visualization was completed, a new relaxing
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

1 / 129
Tesis Doctoral:  Raquel 
BASAL
VISUALIZATION
BASAL
TEST 
Relax
Conflict
Resolution
Figure 1. Stages of the experiment carried out.
video was projected to bring the participants back to a basal
emotional situation.
The last stage of the experiment ended with the emotional
evaluation using the Self-Assessment Manikin questionnaire
[12] and a personal interview. Regarding the stages of the
experiment represented in Fig. 1, it should be noted that
although users had similar visualization duration records, these
were not equal, since they were adapted to the participant’s
non-verbal communication at each moment.
Fourteen volunteer students from the Faculty of Engi-
neering in Bilbao of the University of the Basque Country
(UPV/EHU) were recruited for the experiment. However, due
to technical problems, one of the participants was removed
from the study. Thus, a total of 13 participants (9 males
and 4 females), 19-22 years old (mean=20.30, standard de-
viation=0.94) were taken into account for the analysis.
B. Biosignals and data acquisition system
This work is based on the study of two particular biosig-
nals, the Heart Rate Variability (HRV) and the Galvanic Skin
Response (GSR). The HRV is a signal derived from the
electrocardiogram (ECG) and it is representative of the heart’s
activity. This signal provides information of the variation in
time of the heartbeat, with high variability indicating a healthy
heart. On the other hand, the GSR signal is representative
of the conductive capacity of the skin’s surface. This signal
has been widely used in the area of electrophysiology, since
besides providing information on the body’s thermoregulatory
activity, its variations are indicative of different psychological
phenomena: nerves, surprise, anxiety, etc.
Regarding the regulation of the signals mentioned in the
previous paragraph, this is managed by the autonomous ner-
vous system and most of these regulatory functions take place
in the hypothalamus. In turn, the hypothalamus is strongly
connected with the amygdala, that is the part of the brain re-
sponsible for, among other functions, the emotional responses.
Considering this connection, it is not surprising that emotional
changes produce changes in the physiological balance of the
organism, with the HRV and GSR signals being affected,
among others, hence the reason we selected them for this study.
Concerning the materials used in the experiment, the
capture of the aforementioned signals was done using the
commercial hardware Biopac MP36 and its associated software
Studentlab, which are considered a reference experimental
equipment for gathering physiological signals. The acquisition
was conﬁgured at a sampling frequency of 1000 Hz and was
performed with the corresponding electrodes to collect the
ECG and GSR signals. In addition, the room in which the
experiment took place was equipped with a PC to store the
signals and with the audiovisual material necessary to project
the two relaxing videos (projector, screen and speakers).
III.
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
After collecting the aforementioned physiological signals,
the next step of this study was to analyze the participants’
physiological reactions to the experiment. Different algorithms
can be used depending on what the study looks for. For
instance, for continuous online analysis, some researchers
have used algorithms such as fuzzy logic [13], support vector
machines [14] or artiﬁcial neural networks [15] to compute
physiological signals. However, in this case, the target of the
experiment was to analyse whether the participants’ negative
memories had an impact on their physiology. Therefore, the
results belong to the discrete domain, and thus, for the sake
of continuity, we decided to use two algorithms previously
developed by the research team, which assess both stress and
relaxation in a discrete manner: algorithm 1 [16] and algorithm
2 [17], respectively, named ALG 1 and ALG 2 hereinafter.
ALG 1 was designed for detecting arousal of the Auto-
nomic Nervous System (ANS) caused by a stressful expe-
rience. The output of ALG 1 varies discretely from 0 to 6
according to the intensity and duration of the arousal, output
0 meaning that there is no stressful arousal. Then, output
levels 1, 3 and 5, respectively, correspond to the detection
of a short-duration arousing alert of low, medium and high-
intensity. Finally, output levels with even numbers (2, 4 and
6) correspond to the detection of ANS activations that last
for longer than 30s. For instance, ALG 1 will trigger output
level 1 if it detects an ANS activation of low intensity. If the
activation lasts over 30s, then ALG 1 will trigger output level
2. Accordingly, output levels 4 and 6 would be triggered when
3 and 5 activation levels lasted for longer than 30s. Therefore,
even-number outputs stand for sustained stressful activations.
On the other hand, ALG 2 is used for detecting the opposite
type of reaction: the inhibition of the ANS or a relaxing
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

response. In the case of ALG 2, its output is bounded to the [-
3, 0] range and, as it happened with ALG 1, level 0 is related
to the absence of any relaxing response. Then, similarly to
ALG 1, output levels -1, -2 and -3 correspond to low, medium
and high-intensity relaxation responses, respectively. However,
unlike ALG 1, the outputs of ALG 2 do not take into account
the time-length inhibition of the ANS.
After applying both algorithms to the physiological signals
of the participants, we obtained similar results to the ones
shown in Fig. 2. The three a) graphs of the ﬁgure show the
data of the subject 12 of the experiment, whereas the three
b) graphs correspond to the subject 5. The ﬁrst two graphs
of each participant correspond to the HRV and GSR signals
respectively, plotting green the raw signal and black the low-
pass ﬁltered signal. Then, the third graph shows the outputs of
both ALG 1 (in red) and ALG 2 (in blue). Although only data
from two participants is depicted in Fig. 2, these physiological
patterns are also representative physiological reaction patterns
of the other volunteers. The ﬁrst main pattern, shown in charts
a) of Fig 2., represents those subjects that could recall a
negative memory which had a physiological impact on the
organism (subject 12, for instance). On the other hand, the
patterns shown in charts b) of Fig. 2, correspond to subject 5
and are representative of the cases in which the participant did
not get involved or that could not recall a negative memory.
0.6
0.8
1
HRV (s)
S12
15
20
25
GSR (mS)
123
330
700
TIME (s)
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
ALG  OUTPUT
ALG 1
ALG 2
BASELINE
VISUALIZATION
CONFLICT
START
BASELINE
a)
0.8
1
1.2
HRV (s)
S05
10
15
20
25
GSR (mS)
123
640
TIME (s)
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
ALG  OUTPUT
ALG 1
ALG 2
b)
VISUALIZATION
BASELINE
BASELINE
Figure 2. Physiological signals (HRV and GSR) and algorithm outputs. The
charts of a) corresponds to subject 12 and the charts of b) to subject 5.
According to Fig. 2 a), subject 12 was able to relax during
the beginning of the visualization stage. However, his ANS
activated when he started remembering his conﬂict and bad
memories came to his mind. This activation produced an
acceleration of the cardiac rhythm, along with the subsequent
decrease of the HRV and an increase in the sweating. Looking
at the third graph, it is possible to see how the two types of
physiological patterns were correctly detected by both ALG 1
and ALG 2.
On the contrary, Fig. 2 b) presents another type of situation
in which subject 5 did not feel stressed at all during the
experiment. According to the personal interview, subject 5
could not manage to remember any personal conﬂict and
so, no negative memories were recalled. This absence of
negative memories were clearly reﬂected in the outputs of the
algorithms, which indicated high levels of relaxation during
the conﬂict evoking stage.
As seen in Fig. 2, there are signiﬁcant differences in
how participants reacted during the experiment. Most of them
mentally recalled a personal conﬂict, but three of them did
not do so, either because they could not manage to do it,
they did not want to face again such a delicate experience, or
because they did not want be involved in the experiment. This
information is summarized in Table I, where the ﬁrst row gives
the identiﬁcation code of the subjects and the second (S.E.)
gives the information on whether they recalled the personal
conﬂict (Y) or not (N). Finally, the last row (Smax) presents
the maximum ANS activation level detected by ALG 1.
TABLE I. SUMMARY OF THE EXPERIMENTAL DATA AND ALGORITHM
OUTPUTS.
Subjects
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
S.E.
N
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Smax
0
3
3
3
0
3
5
5
1
0
3
5
5
The content of Table I shows how ALG 1 gives an output
value that is coherent with the information provided by the
participants in their respective interviews. For all the subjects
who stated that they had felt stressed, the algorithm detected
all those ANS activations with different intensity levels (see
Fig. 2 and Table I). Besides, ALG 1 gave a 0 stress level
output for the three participants that were unable to either
evoke the conﬂict or get stressed, whereas ALG 2 detected
high relaxation levels for those subjects (output level -3).
Hence, this preliminary study corroborates the hypothesis
that negative thoughts generate similar physiological variations
to the ones that stress produces on the organism: all the
subjects that thought about and recalled a conﬂictive situation
suffered from ANS activations (getting a 100% accuracy for
the used detection algorithms).
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
The study presented in this work shows the steps of an
analysis relating physiological changes to negative thoughts.
For this initial analysis stage, we designed an experimental
setup in which 13 participants had to recall a personal conﬂict
using guided visualization techniques. As mentioned in Section
III, it has been possible to conﬁrm that not all the participants
could recall a negative situation of such characteristics. This
work also corroborates Schachter’s and Singer’s cognitive
theory [18] that stated that it is not the stimulus the one
which produces the emotional reaction on the organism, but the
person’s cognitive perception of the stimulus. Besides, in the
case of all the participants that could evoke a past conﬂict, their
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

organism reacted in the same manner as if they were going
through a stressful situation. These results help to provide
adaptations according to the emotional state of the users based
on the physiological information of the human body.
As future lines, we would like to widen the study by
adding new biomarkers related to stress, such as cortisol or
electroencephalographic signals. By doing this, we aim to
clarify to what extent the negative thoughts can affect the
organism. Besides, this initial study is limited to a very reduced
population. Therefore, we plan to expand the cases of study
to a larger population. Finally, we are designing a new set of
experiments in which bad thoughts and feelings are elicited
with other types of techniques from the ﬁeld of psychology
and also using audio-visual stimulation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been funded by the following units: First, by
the research group ADIAN which is supported by the Depart-
ment of Education, Universities and Research of the Basque
Government, (grant IT980-16). Second, by the Ministry of
Economy and Competitiveness of the Spanish Government, co-
founded by the ERDF (PhysComp project, TIN2017-85409-P).
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Lopes, D. Grewal, J. Kadis, M. Gall, and P. Salovey, “Evidence
that emotional intelligence is related to job performance and affect and
attitudes at work,” Psicothema, vol. 18, no. Suplemento, 2006, pp. 132–
138.
[2]
E. Cambria, “Affective computing and sentiment analysis,” IEEE Intel-
ligent Systems, vol. 31, no. 2, 2016, pp. 102–107.
[3]
C. Casado and R. Colomo, “Un breve recorrido por la concepci´on de
las emociones en la ﬁlosof´ıa occidental,” A parte Rei, vol. 47, no. 10,
2006.
[4]
R. Lazarus, “The cognition-emotion debate: A bit of history,” in
Handbook of cognition and emotion, T. Dalgleish and M. Power, Eds.,
1999, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 3–19.
[5]
W. Wood, J. M. Quinn, and D. A. Kashy, “Habits in everyday life:
Thought, emotion, and action.” Journal of personality and social psy-
chology, vol. 83, no. 6, 2002, p. 1281.
[6]
L. Capobianco, A. P. Morrison, and A. Wells, “The effect of thought
importance on stress responses: a test of the metacognitive model,”
Stress, vol. 21, no. 2, 2018, pp. 128–135.
[7]
H. Gu, C. Tang, and Y. Yang, “Psychological stress, immune response,
and atherosclerosis,” Atherosclerosis, vol. 223, no. 1, 2012, pp. 69–77.
[8]
S. Wang, P. Phillips, Z. Dong, and Y. Zhang, “Intelligent facial emotion
recognition based on stationary wavelet entropy and jaya algorithm,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 272, 2018, pp. 668–676.
[9]
M. Hoffart and E. Keene, “Body-mind-spirit: the beneﬁts of visualiza-
tion,” AJN The American Journal of Nursing, vol. 98, no. 12, 1998,
pp. 44–47.
[10]
R. Burkhard, “Strategy visualization: A new research focus in knowl-
edge visualization and a case study,” in Proceedings of I-KNOW, vol. 5,
2005, pp. 1–8.
[11]
J. Lee, “Teaching NLP for conﬂict resolution,” The law teacher, vol. 34,
no. 1, 2000, pp. 58–76.
[12]
P. Lang, “Self-assessment manikin,” Gainesville, FL: The Center for
Research in Psychophysiology, University of Florida, 1980.
[13]
A. de Santos Sierra, C. ´Avila, J. Casanova, and G. B. del Pozo, “A
stress-detection system based on physiological signals and fuzzy logic.”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 58, no. 10, 2011, pp.
4857–4865.
[14]
G. Sakr, I. Elhajj, and H. Abu-Saad, “Support vector machines to
deﬁne and detect agitation transition.” IEEE Transactions on Affective
Computing, vol. 1, no. 2, 2010, pp. 98–108.
[15]
N. Sharma and T. Gedeon, “Artiﬁcial neural network classiﬁcation
models for stress in reading.” in International Conference on Neural
Information Processing (ICONIP 2012), vol. 7666.
Springer, 2012,
pp. 388–395.
[16]
R. Martinez, E. Irigoyen, A. Arruti, J. Mart´ın, and J. Muguerza, “A real-
time stress classiﬁcation system based on arousal analysis of the nervous
system by an f-state machine,” Computer methods and programs in
biomedicine, vol. 148, 2017, pp. 81–90.
[17]
R. Martinez et al., “A self-paced relaxation response detection system
based on galvanic skin response analysis,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, 2019,
pp. 43 730–43 741.
[18]
S. Schachter and J. Singer, “Cognitive, social, and physiological deter-
minants of emotional state.” Psychological review, vol. 69, no. 5, 1962,
p. 379.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-829-7
CENTRIC 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

