A Traﬃc Adaptive Backoﬀ Approach for Wireless Networks
Youngho Lee, Byeongung Kim, Jeongbae Yun,
Seonhwan Hwang, Gihyuk Seong and Kyuchang Lee
The Graduate School of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, Kyungpook National University,
1370, Sankyuk-dong, Buk-gu, Daegu, 702-701, Korea
{yholee, jbyun, shhwang, khseong, kclee,
bwkim}@netopia.knu.ac.kr
Kijun Han
The School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Kyungpook National University,
1370, Sankyuk-dong, Buk-gu, Daegu, 702-701, Korea
kjhan@knu.ac.kr
Abstract—An eﬃcient backoﬀ algorithm is required to
achieve a high network capacity in wireless networks. The
IEEE 802.11 Distributed Coordination Function (DCF) has
generally been used in wireless LAN. The DCF algorithm
uses a Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance
(CSMA/CA) with a Binary Exponential Backoﬀ (BEB). The
increasing solution of Contention Window (CW) in BEB is
very eﬀective to decrease the probability of collision. But, BEB
cannot be adaptive to the dynamic change of traﬃc load, so it
sometimes acts as the cause of the delay and the collision. This
paper proposes a Traﬃc Adaptive Backoﬀ Algorithm (TABA)
which tunes the value of CW parameter depending on the
slot utilization and the collision count during a monitoring
period. TABA determines a more appropriate CW, so it
reduces the delay to access the channel and the collision rate
without the decrease of throughput. In this paper, we evaluate
the performance of the proposed TABA, and compare the
TABAs performance with existing backoﬀ algorithms by using
simulation. Our proposed mechanism shows that it outperforms
the existing methods because it has better adaptability to the
load variation of the network.
Keywords-wireless networks; backoﬀ; contention window.
I. Introduction
The Distributed Coordination Function (DCF) of the IEEE
802.11 [6] that used Carrier Sense Multiple Access/Collision
Avoidance (CSMA/CA) [8] is a representative Medium
Access Control (MAC) protocol [1] for wireless networks. It
is based on a random slot selection basis from the Contention
Window (CW) in which all stations participating in trans-
mission are involved. In the CSMA/CA, every contending
station senses the carrier before the transmission. The carrier
sense avoids collisions by testing the signal energy in the
occupied band. When the station does sense the carrier, it
starts to transmit its frames. When the channel, however,
is detected as busy, it schedules its transmission at random
moments to decrease the probability of a collision. At each
collision, the station increases its CW exponentially. This
exponential increase of CW is very eﬀective in reducing
the probability of a collision. It sometimes, acts however,
as the cause of a transmission delay of data. The proper
selection of backoﬀ parameters is an essential factor in
enhancing the network performance. In this paper, we pro-
pose a Traﬃc Adaptive Backoﬀ Algorithm (TABA), which
tunes the length of the CW period depending on the slot
utilization and the collision count during the monitoring
period. Our mechanism reduces the delay and the collision
rate without the decrease of throughput. Section 2 describes
the existing backoﬀ algorithms. Section 3 and Section 4
present the TABA and simulation results. Section 5 contains
the conclusion.
II. Related Works
A. Binary Exponential Backoﬀ Algorithm (BEB)
The basic access method in the IEEE 802.11 MAC
protocol is the DCF which is a CSMA/CA protocol [1].
The backoﬀ count is determined as a pseudo-random integer
drawn from a uniform distribution over the interval [0,CW].
The set of CW values shall be sequentially ascending, with
integer powers of 2 minus 1, beginning with CWmin and
continuing up to CWmax value. The value of CW shall take
the next value every time there is unsuccessful attempt
of transmission until reaching the value of CWmax. The
CW shall be reset to CWmin after every successful attempt
transmission, and shall remain at the value of CWmax until
it is reset.
B. Estimation-Based Backoﬀ Algorithm (EBA)
In [2], they proposed Estimation-Based Backoﬀ Algo-
rithm (EBA) to tune the backoﬀ window size depending
on the number of idle slots during the backoﬀ period. The
EBA algorithm estimates the system status by using the idle
slot counts during the backoﬀ period, and it determines a
proper contention window size that accurately matches the
current network conditions. But, the CW range which EBA
set is shorter than the CW range which BEB set. It reduces
transmission delay in low oﬀered low. It is caused many
collisions.
III. Proposed Scheme
In this paper, we propose Traﬃc Adaptive Backoﬀ Algo-
rithm (TABA) which adaptively updates the length of CW
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

depending on the estimate of channel utilization at each node
to enhance the system performance. The detailed algorithm
is as follows.
Given N nodes in wireless network, a random variable
X is deﬁned as the number of nodes to transmit their data
during a slot. Then, the probability that k nodes out of N
nodes try to send their data is given by
P(X = k) =
 N
k
!
pk ( 1 − p )N – k
(1)
where p denotes the probability that a node has data to
transmit during a slot. We can get the probability that the
channel is IDLE during a slot, denoted by P(IDLE) by
setting X = 0 in Eq.(1). Similarly, we can also get the
probability of the successful packet transmission during a
slot in the wireless network, denoted by P(SUCC) by setting
X = 1. In addition, we can get the probability that there
happens a collision during a slot, denoted by P(COLL), as
follows.
P (COLL)
=
1 − P (SUCC) − P (IDLE)
=
1 − Np(1 − p)N−1 − ( 1 − p)N
(2)
And we can get the throughput S of the wireless network
by
S =
P (SUCC)
P (COLL) + P (SUCC) + P (IDLE) = P (SUCC)
(3)
We diﬀerentiate S with regard to p to ﬁnd the value of
CW maximizing S, denoted by CWTABA, by
dS
dp = N( 1 − p )N – 1 − N( N − 1 )p( 1 − p )N – 2 = 0
(4)
So, we have
CWTABA = N
(5)
In our algorithm, all nodes should examine the status
of slots during a monitoring period (denoted by T) with
a length of several time slots. Another random variable Z is
deﬁned as the number of collided slots when k nodes out of
N nodes transmit their data during the monitoring period T.
From (1) and (2), we can easily get the average value of Z
by
E (Z) = T × P (COLL)
(6)
The number of slots used to carry data plus the collided
slots, denoted by U, can be obtained by
U = T

1 − 2 (1 − p)N
(7)
Arranging (7) with respect to N, we have
CWTABA = log (T − U) − log (2T)
log (T − 1) − log (T)
(8)
Figure 1 shows the algorithm and notation of parameters
used in the TABA. The duration of the monitoring period T
is determined based on measurement of the collision count
and slot utilization. T is initially given 8 slots, and stays
unchanged if there is no collision. It is also reset to 8
slots every successful transmission. If the node experiences
a collision, the value of T will be determined depending on
the value of CWTABA. If T < CWTABA, T will be doubled
for each collision in the same way as the BEB. However,
if T ≥ CWTABA, T will not be changed even though there
is a collision. This way, we can adaptively adjust the length
of backoﬀ period depending on the collision count and slot
utilization.
Figure 1.
Traﬃc Adaptive Backoﬀ Algorithm
Figure 2 shows an example for determining the length of
CW and T. Initially, assuming that T = 8 and U = 6, then
we have CWTABA = 14 from (10). This means that there
will be a good possibility that the nodes can transmit their
data without collision using a contention window with a
length of 13 slots. In this case, the backoﬀ time is randomly
selected from [0, 13]. If there happens a collision in this
case, the monitoring period T changes to 15 because T <
CWTABA. On the other hand, when T = 15 and U = 4, we will
have CWTABA = 11, the backoﬀ time is randomly selected
from [0, 10]. If there happens a collision at this time, the
monitoring period T does not change because T ≥ CWTABA.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Figure 2.
Example of TABA operation.
IV. Simulation
In order to evaluate the performance of our mechanism,
a simulation study has been performed. We evaluate the
performance in terms of the delay, the collision count, and
the throughput. The system model for analysis consists of
an Access Point (AP) and nodes. The number of nodes is
assumed inﬁnite. It is also assumed that all stations only
transmit their packets to AP and AP does not generate its
own packets. In addition, several assumptions have been
made to reduce the complexity of the simulation model.
The ﬁrst, the eﬀects of propagation delay are neglected
assuming that the transmission distance is very close in order
to transmit a packet. The second, the channel is error-free,
that means that each transmitted packet was successfully and
correctly received at its destination. The third, the packet
transmission where is all stations transfer to AP is assumed
to be a Poisson traﬃc source and there is no interference
from the nearby Basic Service Sets (BSSs). The parameters
used for the performance evaluation are listed in Table 1.
Table I
Parameter in The Simulation.
Parameter
Value
Monitoring period (T)
8 ∼ 1023 slots
Min of CWTABA
7 slots
Max of CWTABA
7796 slots
Paket size
100 bytes
Slot time
50us
Transmission Rate
16Mbps
Figure 3 shows the average length of CW in our algorithm
and the existing algorithms. When the oﬀered loads are
below 0.5, the TABA selects a shorter CW than the BEB.
On the other hand, when the oﬀered loads are over 0.6, the
TABA selects a longer CW than the BEB. We can also see
that the TABA gives a longer CW than the EBA over all the
range of oﬀered loads. This indicates that the TABA selects
the CW more adaptively to the network traﬃc than other
existing algorithms. And, this can contribute to reducing
collision ratio while enhancing throughput.
In Figure 3, we see that the TABA provides a longer
CW than the BEB when the oﬀered load is heavy. This
contributes to reducing collisions as shown in Figure 4. We
can see that the EBA gives much more collision count than
the TABA because it uses a shorter CW.
Figure 3.
The average length of contention window.
Figure 4.
Collision Count.
Figure 5.
Average end-to-end delivery delay.
Figure 5 shows the average end-to-end delay that includes
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

the waiting time at the interface queue and transfer time.
We can see that our algorithm provides a shorter end-to-end
delay at low traﬃc intensities than the existing algorithms.
On the other hand, we can see no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
among all algorithms under heavy oﬀered loads even though
the TABA uses a relatively longer CW than the existing
algorithms. This indicates that the TABA adaptively adjusts
CW depending on traﬃc loads in the network.
Figure 6 shows the throughput in the TABA and the exist-
ing schemes. As shown in Figures 3 and 4, the EBA selects
a shorter CW than the BEB and the TABA. For example, if
the TABA selects 13 for CW, the node experiences a single
collision on the average until a successful transmission when
the oﬀered load is 0.4. On the other hand, if the EBA selects
6 for CW. In this case, the node experiences two collisions
on the average until a successful transmission. This example
indicates that a shorter CW of the EBA can contribute to
reducing delay time, but it causes more collisions. The EBA
uses a relatively shorter CW. This can contribute to reducing
delay time, but it causes more collisions and thus lower
throughput when the oﬀered load approaches to high value.
Since the TABA adaptively determines the length of CW,
it can produce a higher throughput when the oﬀered load
is heavy due to less collision. In addition, the TABA also
oﬀers a higher throughput at low traﬃc intensities because
it reduces the delay in comparison with BEB and EBA.
Figure 6.
Throughput..
Simulation results assure that our TABA scheme can oﬀer
a higher throughput by choosing the appropriate value of
CW depending on the slot utilization and the collision count.
It can also reduce the delays without a noticeable increase
of collisions.
V. Conclusion and Future works
The proper choice of the CW parameters has a positively
large inﬂuence on the network performance in the wireless
network. In this paper, we proposed Traﬃc Adaptive Backoﬀ
Algorithm (TABA) to dynamically select the size of CW
depending on the slot utilization and the collision count
during the monitoring period. We compared the performance
of our algorithm with the existing backoﬀ algorithms. Sim-
ulation results indicate that the TABA dynamically adapts
to the variation of the wireless protocols, and may reduce
the MAC protocol delay and collision rate without a de-
crease in throughput. For future work, we plan to eliminate
assumption for simulation and use a test bed with realistic
environment.
Acknowledgment
* This work was supported by the MKE, Korea, under
IT/SW Creative research program supervised by the NIPA
* This work was supported by the IT R&D pro-
gram of MKE/KEIT. [10041145, Self-Organized Software-
platform(SOS) for welfare devices]
* This research was supported by Basic Science Research
Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea
(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and
Technology (2011-0029034)
* This work was supported by the second phase of the
Brain Korea 21 Program
References
[1] P802.11, IEEE Standard for Wireless Lan Medium Access
Control(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations,
Nov. 1997.
[2] Seok-Won K, Jae-Ryong C, and Jae-Hyun K, A Novel
Estimation-Based Backoﬀ Algorithm in the IEEE 802.11
Based Wireless Network, Consumer Communications and
Networking Conference (CCNC), 2010, pp. 1-5.
[3] Cali F., Conti M., and Gregori E., ”IEEE 802.11 Protocol :
Design and Performance Evaluation of an Adaptive Backoﬀ
Mechanism,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
cations, Vol. 18, No. 9, pp. 1774-1786, 2000.
[4] J. Lee, W. Kim, and H. Kim. Estimation of Number of Tags
in ALOHA-based RFID Systems, KICS, 07-7 Vol. 32, No. 7,
2007.
[5] Bianchi G., Fratta L., and Oliveri M., ”Performance evalua-
tion and enhancement of the CSMA/CA MAC protocol for
802.11 wireless LANs,” Proceedings of PIMRC’96, Seventh
IEEE International Symposium, 1996, Vol. 2, pp. 392-396,
1996.
[6] Jost Weinmiller, Hagen Woesner, Jean-Pierre Ebert, and
Adam Wolisz, ”Analyzing and tuning the distributed co-
ordination function in the IEEE 802.11 DFWMAC draft
standard,” Proceedings of MASCOT96, 1996.
[7] Romdhani L., Qiang Ni, and Turletti T., ”Adaptive EDCF:
Enhanced Service Diﬀerentiation for IEEE 802.11 Wireless
Ad-Hoc Networks,” Proceedings of WCNC 2003 IEEE, Vol.
2, pp. 1373-1378, 2003.
[8] Wookwon Lee and Khan M.A., ”CSMA/CA with Multiple-
Variable Contention Window for Wireless Multimedia Com-
munication Systems,” Proceedings of the 10th ICT(Int’l Con-
ferrence on Telecommunications),” Vol. 2, pp. 938-942, 2003.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

