From Anger to Relief: Five Ideal Types of Users Experiencing an Affective 
Intervention in HCI 
 
Mathias Wahl, Julia Krüger, Jörg Frommer 
University Clinic for Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Medical Faculty 
Otto von Guericke University 
Magdeburg, Germany 
e-mail: {mathias.wahl, julia.krueger, joerg.frommer}@med.ovgu.de 
 
 
Abstract—Negative emotions, like distress, frustration or anger 
have been shown to impair the human-computer interaction 
(HCI). Previous research indicates that computers can reduce 
some of these negative emotional states in users by applying 
affective interventions. Until now, studies mainly measured the 
effectiveness of such interventions, but it is still poorly under-
stood why these are effective and how users experience them. 
In the present study, in reaction to a critical dialogue situation 
of HCI, an affective intervention was given to deliberately 
frustrated users. Based on user interviews and by applying 
methods of qualitative research, users’ meaning making pro-
cesses regarding the affective intervention were explored and 
categories of experience were worked out. On the basis of 
these, five ideal types relating to how users experienced and 
conceptualized the affective intervention were constructed. The 
typology clarifies that users’ appreciation of the intervention 
varied greatly between enthusiastic approval and definite 
rejection. This indicates that a ‘one type fits all’ solution is not 
appropriate for affective interventions.  
Keywords—intervention; 
user 
experience; 
qualitative 
research; ideal types; affective computing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Over the past decades, the focus in designing computer 
systems has shifted towards a more user centered perspec-
tive. Besides the consideration of users’ demands, abilities 
and preferences, emotional states that arise during an interac-
tion with a computer system have gained the interest of the 
human-computer interaction (HCI) community as well. 
Thus, the domain of ‘Affective Computing’, which is con-
cerned with emotional communication between users and 
computer systems as well as with systems’ ability to recog-
nize and handle affective information, evolved [1]. Analyz-
ing the impact of emotions seems reasonable, since these 
affect the way people make decisions, process information or 
interact with each other. Especially negative emotions, such 
as distress, frustration, anger, anxiety and sadness have been 
found to be associated with many unpleasant effects, like 
decreased ability to pay attention and think creatively or 
increased likelihood to take risks [2]. 
The consideration of emotions as an integral part of the 
human-computer interaction has led to the development of 
affective interfaces that respond to users’ emotions. Besides 
text- and speech-based graphical user interfaces, especially 
embodied agents with affective capabilities have been uti-
lized to enhance interactions. In a structured overview of the 
research into emotional simulation in agents, Beale and 
Creed [3] found out that simulated emotion can both enhance 
and hinder interactions. However, when looking at agents’ 
ability to help deliberately frustrated users by applying affec-
tive interventions, results seem promising. Providing emo-
tional support toward users led to the relief of negative emo-
tional states like stress [4] or frustration [5], enhanced the 
problem solving capabilities [6] and improved the willing-
ness to further participate in a given task [7]. A positive 
effect of interventions was found throughout, no matter how 
the interventions were implemented (e.g., solely by text 
[5][7], speech-based [6] or as embodied agents [4][5]).  
Although these studies demonstrate that synthetic emo-
tions expressed by computer systems can help frustrated 
users, it is still poorly understood why this is the case [3]. 
Their effectiveness was measured either by obtaining user 
perceptions through questionnaires (ratings of frustration, 
valence and arousal and ratings of the interaction in general), 
observing user behavior or analyzing user performance data. 
Besides these ratings on pre-formulated questionnaire items, 
the question of how users experienced the interactions and 
especially the affective interventions remains unanswered.  
The aim of the present study is to explore how users ex-
perience an affective intervention, which was given to them 
in reaction to a critical dialogue situation of HCI and hence 
to better understand what makes such an approach valuable. 
More specifically, this study can be best considered as a 
piece of basic research at the intersection between HCI, 
Psychology and Social Science. It is not the intention to 
either evaluate the applied system, or to test the effectiveness 
of the applied intervention. Instead, the aim is to basically 
understand subjective meaning making processes regarding 
affective, emotion-oriented interventions applied by tech-
nical systems and thus, to answer questions like: What do 
users generally think about interventions?, What kind of 
wishes and worries do they have?, Under which circum-
stances are interventions valuable?, In which ways are users 
affected by interventions? 
Analyzing in depth user experience of affective interven-
tions above mere answers to predefined categories is a re-
search desideratum. Hence, at first a structuring of the empir-
ical phenomenon is needed. For that reason, an open qualita-
tive research methodology, which aims at building a user 
typology, is applied in the present study. This way it is meant 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

to work out underlying structures of meaning and interpreta-
tion processes.  
In the next part of this paper, related work concerning us-
er typologies in HCI will be presented. In the third section, 
the empirical investigations will be described and in the 
fourth part, the constructed typology will be detailed. Find-
ings will be discussed and in the end of this paper conclu-
sions for future work will be drawn. 
II. 
USER TYPOLOGIES 
In HCI, user typologies are applied in a variety of ways, 
mostly to enhance design and innovation processes [8][9] or 
to categorize users according to their media usage behavior 
[10]. In the design process, user representations, such as 
stereotypes or personas [11], are used as a means of user 
modeling and rely primarily on designers’ conceptualizations 
of users [9]. In assessing how people use media technologies, 
typologies are almost exclusively based on questionnaire 
surveys and quantitative analysis procedures, like cluster, 
factor or frequency analyses [10]. Thus, it seems that user 
types in HCI are mostly grounded on user behavior and have 
not been associated with user experience, since “little is 
known about different user types from a qualitative perspec-
tive” [10, p.949]. Even in the domain of ‘User Experience’ 
(UX), where qualitative research methods are already applied 
in half of the studies [12], user typologies grounded in expe-
rience seem to have been overlooked so far. 
In the present study, the aim is to develop a typology of 
how users experience an affective intervention. Typologies 
are generally useful for structuring empirical phenomena by 
dividing people into distinct groups with high intern homo-
geneity and high extern heterogeneity. They can help to 
understand contexts of meaning and are thus particularly 
valuable in exploring user behavior and experience. More 
specifically, in this study, ideal types in the tradition of soci-
ologist Max Weber will be constructed based on interview 
data. These ideal types can be thought of as idea-constructs 
that do not refer to perfect things, moral ideals or statistical 
averages, but rather stress certain elements common to most 
cases of a given phenomena on the basis of empirical data. 
An ideal type is an analytical construct that is “formed by the 
one-sided accentuation of one or more points of view” [13, 
p.90]. From a methodological point of view, ideal types can 
be positioned between empiricism and theory [14]: on the 
one side, they contribute to a fundamental understanding of 
users’ inner processes, but on the other side, the types are 
abstracted in such a way, that they enable the inference of 
generalizations, which in turn makes findings valuable for 
other research areas as well. 
III. 
EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATIONS 
The present study builds on a widely standardized empir-
ical experiment in which a critical dialogue situation of HCI 
was established. In reaction to this critical situation, an affec-
tive intervention was given to participants. Subsequent to 
taking part in the experiment, participants were interviewed, 
i.a., with regard to their experiences of the intervention.  
A. Wizard of Oz Experiment 
In order to simulate a computer system capable of accu-
rate speech recognition and individualized reactions to user 
behavior, the empirical experiment was designed as a Wizard 
of Oz study [15]. The system was represented solely by a 
computer screen with a graphical user interface (without any 
interface agent) and a male machine-like sounding computer 
voice. The only way for the participants to interact with the 
system was via speech. In cooperation with the system, par-
ticipants had to pack a suitcase for a holiday trip by selecting 
items from a catalogue depicted on a screen in front of them. 
At a certain point during the packing procedure, participants 
were informed about the actual weather conditions at the 
destination of their trip (‘weather barrier’), which were dif-
ferent from what was suggested in the beginning. Therefore, 
participants were required to repack their suitcase under 
increasing time constraints, what was meant to cause feelings 
of stress and frustration. In reaction to this critical situation, 
an affective intervention was given to the participants (for a 
detailed description of the whole experimental design see 
[16]). 
B. Affective Intervention 
The affective intervention was designed to help partici-
pants in reflecting on their critical situation and to offer sup-
port for recovery. It consists of three consecutive compo-
nents (cf. Table 1) and was given to the participants as a 
speech based audio output right after the weather barrier. The 
three intervention components were formulated by the re-
search team consisting of psychotherapists in training and an 
experienced psychoanalyst and basically refer to the com-
mon factors of psychotherapy (activation of positive re-
sources, actualization of what is to be changed, active help 
for coping with the problem, motivational clarification), 
which were formulated by Grawe [17]. 
TABLE I.  
INTERVENTION COMPONENTS AND CORRESPONDING 
SPEECH OUTPUTS 
Intervention component  
Speech output 
1. Empathic understanding 
“Because of an interruption in 
the data line the information 
about your destination could 
not be obtained earlier. Thus, 
your situation surprisingly 
changed. The items you chose 
suggest you had expected 
different weather conditions. If 
you had known the actual 
weather conditions of your 
destination, would you have 
chosen different items? I’m 
interested in your opinion.” 
2. Clarification of affect 
“Did this situation also trigger 
any negative feelings? If so, 
can you describe them?” 
3. Encouragement 
“I hope your motivation to 
further contribute to this task 
was not affected by this too 
much.” 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

C. Interviews 
The interviews aimed at investigating how participants 
experienced the interaction with the system and how they 
were affected by the intervention. For the interviews, a semi-
structured interview guide was used [18]. In the interview 
section relating to the intervention, the Interpersonal Process 
Recall (IPR) [19] was utilized. This method was applied as a 
specialized interview situation, in which participants 
watched a video of the intervention segment of their experi-
ment. They were asked to remember and describe their expe-
riences and feelings associated to that situation. Important to 
note is that they were prompted to explicitly distinguish 
between their reflections in hindsight and their experiences 
in the concrete situation seen in the video segment. IPR was 
meant to help participants to reminisce about those feelings 
and experiences related to the intervention, that would be 
forgotten typically. After an initial narration generating open 
question (“Please tell me what was going on inside of you in 
that situation”), several further questions relating to various 
aspects of the experience of the intervention (e.g., “How was 
it for you that the computer system was asking for your feel-
ings?” or “Is there something you would have wished for in 
that situation?”) were asked. 
D. Sample 
In total, there were 35 participants (17 female, 18 male) 
who took part in the empirical experiment, received the af-
fective intervention and were interviewed subsequently. 
They were between 18 and 75 years old (two age groups: 18-
28 and 60+) and had different educational backgrounds. The 
interview sections of these participants, which were dealing 
with their experiences of the intervention, form the data basis 
of the present study. By investigating such a heterogeneous 
sample, it was meant to grasp a wide range of experiences. 
This corresponds to the rationale of qualitative research, 
which can be seen in the maximization of variance and in the 
generation of hypotheses rather than in testing those. 
E. Analysis Procedure 
Initially, the audio recorded interview protocols were 
transcribed (which resulted in 232 transcript pages) and 
afterwards the transcripts were imported into the analysis 
software ‘MaxQDA’. After this preparation of the data mate-
rial, the actual data analysis began. This was conducted in 
two main steps: (1.) development of a category system and 
(2.) construction of ideal types. To ensure validity of the 
results, the analysis process was accompanied by regular 
discussions in a group of qualitative researchers (consensual 
validation). Moreover, to ensure reliability, the single steps 
of abstraction and interpretation where documented in such a 
way, that it remained verifiable what participants said and 
where the interpretation of the researchers began [20]. 
1) Development of a Category System 
The first main step of analysis corresponds to ‘summariz-
ing qualitative content analysis’ [21][22]. At first, the text 
was broken down into meaning units (MUs), which are seg-
ments of text that contain one main idea and are understand-
able by themselves [23]. These MUs were then assigned to 
the one most suitable of five predefined themes: (1.) experi-
ence of the context, (2.) experience of the system, (3.) experi-
ence of the relation to the system, (4.) self-related experience 
and (5.) experience of the intervention. Next, the assigned 
MUs were paraphrased and ‘streamlined’ (anything that 
distracts from the main statement was deleted) [22], then 
compared to each other and grouped according to similari-
ties, creating a set of subcategories. Finally, based on their 
commonalities, these subcategories were further grouped 
into main categories, which represent a higher abstraction 
level. Altogether these steps produced a hierarchy of 5 
themes, 13 main categories and 58 subcategories (based on 
481 MUs) – the category system. 
2) Construction of Ideal Types 
In the second main step of analysis (which corresponds to 
an approach for building typologies described by Kelle and 
Kluge [14]), theme 5: ‘experience of intervention’ was fo-
cused. In order to construct ideal types, the three main cate-
gories of this theme (‘characterization of intervention’, ‘sub-
jective relevance of intervention’ and ‘impact of interven-
tion’) were set as dimensions and the five subcategories each 
of these main categories was made from, were positioned on 
their respective dimension. Across dimensions, the subcate-
gories were then interpretatively related to each other (cf. 
Figure 1). This way, five ideal types were constructed and 
finally each participant was assigned to exactly one type. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Based on participants’ characterization of the interven-
tion and their appraisals of its relevance and impact for them 
personally, five ideal types were constructed. With the help 
of these ideal types, it can be demonstrated, in which diverg-
ing ways the intervention was experienced and which emo-
tional reactions it evoked (the naming of the types refers to 
participants’ main emotional reaction towards the interven-
tion). In order to further elaborate the characterization of the 
ideal types (cf. Figure 1) and to clarify for whom of the par-
ticipants the intervention was helpful, in the following each 
ideal type will be described in greater detail. 
A.  ‘The Angered‘ 
In total, 7 participants (4 female) of all ages and levels of 
education were assigned to the ideal type named ‘The An-
gered’.  
At first, ‘The Angered’ enjoys interacting with the sys-
tem, but the information about the changing weather condi-
tions at the destination of the holiday trip disappoints him 
and he holds the system responsible for this (“it knew for 
sure that it had disappointed me with this”, KM). He feels 
not to be seen and not to be taken seriously by the system, 
because this doesn’t live up to its promises and even puts 
pressure on him by asking personal questions (“why does it 
want to know my feelings now, of course everybody is angry 
when starting from false assumptions and then it laxly states 
neener-neener your in the wrong winter”, AM). As a result, 
‘The Angered’ is insecure and suspicious and hence, instead 
of perceiving the intervention as helpful, it has a rather nega-
tive effect on him. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
 
Figure 1.  
Dimensions of the three main categories of theme 5: ‘experience of intervention’. Vertical lines indicate how the subcate-
gories of each dimension were related to each other for the purpose of constructing the five ideal types. 
 
B. ‘The Ashamed’ 
Overall, 8 participants (3 female), who all belong to the 
older age group and have rather higher levels of education, 
were assigned to the ideal type termed ‘The Ashamed’. 
For ‘The Ashamed’ it is most important to handle the ex-
perimental task in the ‘right’ way. He feels that the system is 
superior to him, that it tests him and that it critically evalu-
ates his performance (“according to my computer at home 
I’m the active one and the technology is inferior, but here the 
technology is superior and so I have to do what it demands 
of me”, WF). In his opinion, he has failed in packing the 
suitcase the ‘right’ way and therefore feelings of insufficien-
cy arise, which are moreover strengthened by the demanding 
nature of the system. Still, he considers admitting his failure 
towards the system as his obligation, because “when you’ve 
made a mistake, you have to take the responsibility for it” 
(BP). 
C. ‘The Unaffected’ 
Altogether, 8 predominantly young participants (2 fe-
male), with solely higher levels of education, were assigned 
to the ideal type named ‘The Unaffected’. 
‘The Unaffected’ considers himself as experienced with 
technology and therefore knows what he usually can expect 
from a system. To him, having an impersonal and distant 
working relation with the system is as important as keeping 
the control over the interaction (“I’ve always nodded my 
head, because it was so obvious what it wanted at all the 
times, so I just nodded my approval or said no”, FW). Gen-
erally, he doesn’t want to share his feelings with a machine. 
Having an inappropriate suitcase for the holiday trip leaves 
him cold (“I didn’t have the feeling that something was go-
ing on inside of me, it was ok, bad luck”, SK), thus he feels 
no need for the intervention and considers it as dispensable 
(“that’s not useful for me”, HG). 
D. ‘The Flattered’ 
Overall, 4 predominantly young participants (2 female), 
with mostly lower levels of education, were assigned to the 
ideal type termed ‘The Flattered’. 
‘The Flattered’ experiences the system as sincerely inter-
ested and for that reason he feels positive about it. At the 
same time he also recognizes the weaknesses of the system, 
but in favor of a productive collaboration he rather concen-
trates on its strengths (“you can’t be angry with it, it’s a 
computer, it doesn’t do anything malicious by intention, so I 
still felt comfortable with it”, YD). Packing the suitcase is 
more of a game for ‘The Flattered’ and the information about 
the changing weather conditions rather amuses than it stress-
es him. He does not really need the help offered by the inter-
vention, but he appreciates systems’ empathy (“I really liked 
that it was asking after me, because it was like having a cold 
and reserved person in front of you that suddenly offers 
commiserations […] that’s a positive surprise” UK). 
E. ‘ The Relieved’ 
In total, 8 participants (6 female), who are predominantly 
young and have mostly lower levels of education, were as-
signed to the ideal type named ‘The Relieved’. 
‘The Relieved‘ is insecure in working on the experi-
mental task and the weather barrier additionally stresses him 
(“you are thrown in at the deep end, so nobody just keeps 
going as if nothing has happened, of course you have lost it a 
little bit and you don’t know what it’s all about” CK). In his 
helpless state, he experiences the intervention as an empathic 
support that recognizes his misery (“it asked exactly the 
right questions in the right moments of stress”, SS). ‘The 
Relieved‘ generally feels reassured and supported by the 
system, which he perceives as guiding and sympathetic and 
as somehow human-like (“you suspect something or some-
one behind it that is resonating with you”, SD).  
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

V. 
DISCUSSION 
The aim of the present study was to understand how par-
ticipants of a Wizard of Oz experiment conceptualized and 
experienced an affective intervention that was given to them 
in reaction to a critical dialogue situation. In an account of 
basic research, a typology was developed, which clearly 
demonstrates the variance of possible ways in which an 
intervention can be experienced. Especially for the further 
development of assistive technology, which aims at reacting 
adequately to needs and states of its users (e.g., like in the 
case of companion-systems [24][25]), it is important to get 
an idea of the far reaching impact technical support can have 
on users’ system- as well as self-experiences.  
The results presented here, indicate that users’ sense 
making processes regarding the intervention (in terms of 
characterizing it and assessing its relevance and impact) are 
not solely positive and constructive. Besides experiencing 
the intervention as an offer of help (‘The Relieved’) or as 
entertaining (‘The Flattered’), also characterizations as a 
pressuring demand (‘The Angered’) or a critical evaluation 
of performance (‘The Ashamed’) were found. Resulting 
feelings from these negative appraisals, like insecurity or 
insufficiency, can have a negative effect on dialogue success 
and the general rating of the interaction and thus present an 
obstacle to the actual goal of user support.  
Furthermore, this study demonstrates that in case of emo-
tional communication with a computer system, individual-
ized support is needed. The ideal types can serve as basis for 
the development of type-specific interventions: 
 For ‘The Angered’ it will be important to clearly ex-
plain how a system is functioning and which options 
to interact the user has. 
 For ‘The Ashamed’ it is crucial to make clear that the 
system is not evaluating the user and that the user 
does not have to fear negative consequences.  
 For “The Unaffected’ it should simply be possible to 
turn off the intervention.  
 In the cases of ‘The Flattered’ and ‘The Relieved’, the 
approach presented in this study seemed already pret-
ty appropriate. In terms of a possibly more stressing 
event, maybe even more help (e.g., by providing con-
crete recommendations) could be offered.  
These are only first ideas, which definitely need further 
elaboration and empirical validation. 
The affective intervention applied in this research was in-
tentionally kept relatively short, didn’t utilize an embodied 
agent and was given to the participants regardless of their 
current emotional state. This way it was possible to gather a 
differentiated view on experiences, since participants were 
not tempted to interpret the intervention in a certain way and 
moreover, the meaning making processes of all kinds of 
participants (including those who were not in a negative 
emotional state and thus erroneously received the interven-
tion, like ‘The Unaffected’) were included in the analysis.  
In the course of building the typology, the age, sex and 
educational backgrounds of the participants were neglected. 
This way it was possible to develop the typology largely 
independent from pre-expectations of the researchers. How-
ever, trends in terms of these sample characteristics can be 
found within the ideal types, but creating user types solely on 
the basis of sample characteristics is not desirable. In that 
case, the shades between the types would get lost, the types 
would not be rich in substance or it would not even be possi-
ble to identify them at all. For instance, ‘The Angered’ is 
very heterogeneous in relation to the sample characteristics 
and would probably have been overlooked. 
The sample of this study was very heterogeneous, which 
proved to be valuable for revealing the variance of experi-
ences. In terms of qualitative research studies, the sample 
size of 35 participants is adequate [26], since it permitted a 
deep, case-oriented analysis that resulted in a new and richly 
textured understanding of experience [27]. Generally, in 
qualitative research it is not the intention to make predictions 
about the distribution of features in the population, but to 
reconstruct subjective meaning making processes in order to 
identify new aspects. Hence, not the frequency of features, 
but their variety is of interest [28]. 
The implications of the present study can primarily be 
seen in generating an understanding for the importance of 
individual meaning making processes in HCI. With the ideal 
types, an empirically based typology was constructed, which 
offers implications for argumentative generalization and 
theory generation. The typology reveals the ‘how’ and ‘why’ 
of experience as well as it illustrates the broad range of pos-
sible experiences. The types presented here, can serve as a 
basis for building personas, which normally rather rely on 
non-empiric conceptualizations of designers [11]. In working 
out underlying structures of meaning and exemplifying in-
terpretation processes regarding the experience of technical 
support, there is also a content-related relevance for other 
areas of HCI, like User Experience, User Modeling or Per-
sonalization research, because these are either interested in 
similar content (User Experience) or can utilize the typology 
as a basis for adaptation (User Modeling and Personaliza-
tion). 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The present study aimed at analyzing how participants 
experienced an affective intervention, which was given to 
them in reaction to a critical dialogue situation of HCI. In 
applying a qualitative research strategy, the experiences 
participants described in interviews have been structured and 
a user typology consisting of five ideal types has been con-
structed. These ideal types clarify that participants’ apprecia-
tion of the intervention varied greatly between enthusiastic 
approval and definite rejection. This indicates that a ‘one 
type fits all’ solution is not appropriate for affective interven-
tions. In this paper, first suggestions for the development of 
type specific interventions have been made, but further elab-
oration and empirical validation is needed. 
Understanding individual experiences above relating to 
ratings on predefined categories or measurements of effec-
tiveness, was the main objective of the present study. The 
developed ideal types clarify the importance of subjective 
meaning making processes: even a relatively simple inter-
vention was capable of evoking strong feelings, like anger or 
shame, but also the initially intended relief. This reveals the 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

enormous potential the approach of applying affective inter-
ventions has, especially for individualized assistive technol-
ogy (e.g., companion-systems). However, emotional support 
provided by technical systems has to be relevant for users 
and it should enable them to personally relate to it. Other-
wise, it can have a negative effect on users’ interaction expe-
rience, their overall liking of the system or in the worst case 
it can even lead to a decrease in cooperativeness or to com-
munication break ups. 
In the future, more empirical data is needed to further 
validate the described typology. It is unclear, to what extend 
the design of the experimental task and participants’ in-
volvement with it, as well as the design of the intervention or 
the demographical structure of the sample have influenced 
the construction of the typology. It will be interesting to 
explore other contexts of use or even more frustration evok-
ing scenarios and moreover, it will be interesting to investi-
gate another sample with a different demographical structure. 
However, the typology developed here can serve as a starting 
point for future studies with bigger sample sizes. 
After further validation of the typology, it is conceivable 
to develop a questionnaire, with which it will be possible to 
quickly assign users to the appropriate user type even before 
an interaction begins. However, the scales such a question-
naire could be based on have to be identified first. Investigat-
ing user characteristics like attributional style, personality 
traits, self-efficacy or computer-experience could be a start-
ing point for this. When it is possible to identify the user 
types at the beginning of an interaction, the effectiveness of 
type specific intervention strategies can be tested empirical-
ly. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The present study is performed in the framework of the 
Transregional Collaborative Research Centre SFB/TRR 62 
“A Companion-Technology for Cognitive Technical Sys-
tems” funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG). 
The responsibility for the content of this paper lies with the 
authors. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. W. Picard, Affective Computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1997. 
[2] E. Wilson, C. MacLeod, and L. Campbell, “The information-
processing approach to emotion research”, in Handbook of 
emotion elicitation and assessment, J.A. Coan and J. J. B. 
Allen, Eds. New York: Oxford University Press, 2007, pp. 
184-202. 
[3] R. Beale and C. Creed, “Affective interaction: How emotional 
agents affect users”, Int. J. Hum-Comput. St., vol. 67, Sep. 
2009, pp. 755-776, doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2009.05.001. 
[4] H. Prendinger, S. Mayer, J. Mori, and M. Ishizuka, “Persona 
effect revisited: Using bio-signals to measure and reflect the 
impact of character-based interfaces”, The 4th International 
Working Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents, 2003, pp. 
283–291, doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-39396-2_48. 
[5] K. Hone, “Empathic agents to reduce user frustration: The 
effects of varying agent characteristics”, Interact. Comput. 18, 
vol. 
18, 
2006, 
pp. 
227-245, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.intcom.2005.05.003. 
[6] T. Partala and V. Surakka, “The effects of affective 
interventions in human–computer interaction”, Interact. 
Comput., 
vol. 
16, 
2004, 
pp. 
295-309, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.intcom.2003.12.001.  
[7] J. Klein, Y. Moon, and R. W. Picard “This computer responds 
to user frustration: theory, design and results”, Interact. 
Comput., vol 14, 2002, pp. 119–140, Feb. 2002, doi: 
10.1016/S0953-5438(01)00053-4. 
[8] D. Schuurman, K. De Moor, L. De Marez, and T. Evens, 
“Investigating user typologies and their relevance within a 
living lab-research approach for ICT-innovation”, The 43rd 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 
2010), 
IEEE 
Press, 
Jan. 
2010, 
pp. 
1-10, 
doi: 
10.1109/HICSS.2010.242. 
[9] T. Clemmensen, “Four approaches to user modelling—a 
qualitative research interview study of HCI professionals' 
practice”, Interact. Comput., vol. 16, 2004, pp. 799-829, doi: 
10.1016/j.intcom.2004.04.009.  
[10] P. B. Brandtzæg, “Towards a unified Media-User Typology 
(MUT): A meta-analysis and review of the research literature 
on media-user typologies”, Comput. Hum. Behav., vol. 26, 
Sep. 2010, pp. 940-956, doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2010.02.008.  
[11] P. Turner and S. Turner, “Is stereotyping inevitable when 
designing with personas?”, Des. Stud., vol. 32, Jan. 2011, pp. 
30-44, doi: 10.1016/j.destud.2010.06.002.  
[12] J. A. Bargas-Avila and K. Hornbæk, “Old wine in new bottles 
or novel challenges: a critical analysis of empirical studies of 
user experience”, Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (SIGCHI), 2011, pp. 2689-2698, doi: 
10.1145/1978942.1979336 
[13] M. Weber, “Objectivity in Social Science and Social Policy”, 
in The Methodology of the Social Sciences, E. A. Shils and 
H. A. Finch, Eds. Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1949, pp. 50-112. 
[14] U. Kelle and S. Kluge, Vom Einzelfall zum Typus [From 
Individual Case to Type]. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für 
Sozialwissenschaften, 2010. 
[15] N. Dahlbäck, A. Jönsson, and L. Ahrenberg, “Wizard of Oz 
studies—why and how”, Knowl-Based. Syst., vol. 6, 1993, 
pp. 258-266, doi: 10.1145/169891.169968.  
[16] D. Rösner, J. Frommer, R. Friesen, M. Haase, J. Lange, and 
M. Otto, “LAST MINUTE: a Multimodal Corpus of Speech-
based User-Companion Interactions”, Proc. of the Eighth 
International Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC 2012), ELRA, 2012, pp. 2559-2566, 
ISBN: 
978-2-9517408-7-7, 
Available 
from: 
http://lrec.elra.info/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/550_Paper.pdf 
[retrieved: 09, 2015]. 
[17] K. 
Grawe, 
“Outline 
of 
a 
general 
psychotherapy”, 
Psychotherapeut, vol. 40, 1995, pp. 130-145, ISSN: 0935-
6185. 
[18] J. Lange and J. Frommer, „Subjektives Erleben und 
intentionale Einstellung in Interviews zur Nutzer-Companion-
Interaktion [Subjective experience and intentional stance in 
interviews regarding user-companion interaction]“, Proc. der 
41. GI-Jahrestagung (INFORMATIK 2011), LNI, 2011, p. 
240, ISSN: 1617-5468, ISBN: 978-3-88579-286-4, Available 
from: 
www.user.tu-berlin.de/komm/CD/paper/060332.pdf 
[retrieved: 09, 2015]. 
[19] R. Elliott, “Interpersonal Process Recall (IPR) as a 
psychotherapy 
process 
research 
method”, 
in 
The 
psychotherapeutic process: A Research Handbook, L. 
Greenberg and W. Pinsof, Eds. New York, NY: Guilford, 
1986, pp. 503-527. 
[20] U. Flick, “Gütekriterien qualitativer Forschung [Quality 
criteria in qualitative research]“, in Handbuch Qualitative 
Forschung in der Psychologie [Handbook Qualitative 
Research in Psychology], G. Mey and K. Mruck, Eds. VS 
Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften, 2010, pp. 395–407. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[21] P. Mayring, Qualitative content analysis. Theoretical 
foundations, basic procedures and  software solution. 
Klagenfurth, 
2014, 
Available 
from: 
http://nbn-
resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-395173 [retrieved: 09, 
2015]. 
[22] M. Schreier, Qualitative content analysis in practice. Sage 
Publications, 2012. 
[23] R. Tesch, Qualitative research analysis types and software 
tools. New York: Palmer Press, 1990.  
[24] Y. Wilks, Close Engagements with Artificial Companions: 
Key Social, Psychological, Ethical and Design Issues. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2010. 
[25] A. Wendemuth and S. Biundo, “A Companion Technology 
for Cognitive Technical Systems”, Proc. of the 2011 
International Conference on Cognitive Behavioural Systems 
(COST 2011), LNCS, 2012, pp. 89-103, doi: 10.1007/978-3-
642-34584-5. 
[26] C. J. Yeh and A. Inman, “Qualitative data analysis and 
interpretation in counseling psychology: Strategies for best 
practices”, Couns. Psychol., vol. 35, 2007, pp. 369-403, doi: 
10.1177/0011000006292596. 
[27] M. Sandelowski, “Sample size in qualitative research”, Res. 
Nurs. Health, vol. 18, Apr. 1995, pp. 179-183, doi: 
10.1002/nur.4770180211. 
[28] K. Köhler and J. Frommer, “Criteria of sample recruiting in 
qualitative research”, Psychother. Psychosom. Med. Psychol., 
vol. 61, Jun. 2011, pp. e34-5, doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1266114. 
 
 
 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

