Centricity in Project Risk Management: Towards a Conceptual Framework for 
Improved Practice 
Jose Irizar 
Information Systems Department 
TRW Automotive 
Germany 
Jose.Irizar@googlemail.com 
Martin Wynn 
School of Computing and Technology 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
MWynn@glos.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract – Most organisations engage in major projects during 
their life cycle, and effective project management is 
increasingly accepted as a necessary competence in larger 
companies. Nevertheless, a considerable proportion of projects 
continue to fail to meet their due dates, exceed budget, do not 
deliver to specification, miss quality standards, or fall short on 
customer expectations. The effective management of project 
risk is a major component of this problem, and central to its 
resolution, and yet the theory of risk management remains 
relatively undeveloped and its practice is often poorly 
executed. This paper examines how the concept of centricity 
can be applied to some key elements of risk management to 
develop a conceptual framework that highlights some of the 
shortcomings of current practice and suggests alternative ways 
forward. This model will be tested and evolved through 
primary case studies of risk management in major projects in 
the automotive industry. 
Keywords - project management; centricity; risk; risk 
identification; risk management; risk assessment; subjective 
construct; conceptual model  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Project management is part and parcel of business 
operations in a wide range of industry sectors, including 
information technology (IT), engineering, construction, 
education, and health management [1]. It is now viewed as 
of strategic significance, and the management of risk is an 
integral part of the project management process. Despite the 
recognized criticality of project success for organizations, a 
considerable proportion of projects continue to either not 
meet their due dates, exceed budget, do not deliver to 
specification, miss quality, or do not meet customer 
requirements.  
Project failure remains an area of considerable interest in 
contemporary project management literature, and effective 
risk management has been identified as one of the major 
criteria for project success [2]. Yet it remains an area where 
there is neither a clearly defined theoretical underpinning nor 
an agreed approach to support the development of a 
universally agreed method for managing risk. Nevertheless, 
risk management has become a central component of some 
of 
the 
most 
widely 
deployed 
industry 
standard 
methodologies, such as Project Management Body of 
Knowledge, PRINCE2®, Systems Development Life Cycle, 
Integrated Capability Maturity Model, and Information 
Technology Infrastructure Library. Comprehensive risk 
management increases the probability of project success [3]. 
It is considered as the means by which the effects of 
unexpected events can be limited, or even how such events 
can be prevented from happening. Risk management, as an 
integral component of project management, can make a 
significant contribution to overall project success [4]. This 
article attempts to develop some new directions in this 
debate through applying the concept of centricity to a 
number of themes that run through existing risk management 
literature – risk identification, risk assessment, and the nature 
of the management process itself. The overall aim of the 
research is to assess the validity of centricity as a key 
concept in the development of project management practice. 
This will also inform policies aimed at enhancing current 
project risk management, particularly in the automotive 
industry. 
This introductory section is followed by a discussion of 
the theoretical framework for this paper. The application of 
the centricity concept to different aspects of risk 
management is presented in section three, and this is further 
developed in an analysis section which examines the 
implications 
of 
this 
model 
for 
contemporary 
risk 
management practice. Finally, the concluding section 
summarises results to date and looks at how this research can 
be further progressed. 
II. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK AND RESEARCH METHOD 
The risk management process is often viewed as 
comprising five main activities (see Figure 1) [5], and this 
provides a useful frame of reference for this study. Our focus 
 
 
Figure 1.  Generic overview of the risk management process  
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

is on risk identification, and then risk assessment; and 
finally, we look at the process as a whole, comprising all five 
activities. 
Risk identification is the starting point for risk 
management in projects, and the way in which risks are 
identified is considered to be a major influencing factor in 
project outcomes [6]. There are two main schools of thought 
regarding risk identification – “risk as an objective fact” and 
“risk as a subjective construct”. The former considers risk as 
epistemologically probabilistic, whilst risk in the subjective 
construct perspective allows multiple epistemological 
dimensions of risk [7]. “Risk as an objective fact” considers 
risks to objectively exist. In the case of “risk as a subjective 
construct” risk phenomena are subjectively constructed by 
observers themselves. Risk as a subjective construct may 
thus be considered to be “person-centric”, originating from a 
subjective perception of risk, rather than from an objective 
assessment of whether the risk exists and the significance of 
it. 
As regards risk assessment, the choice of a particular 
industry prescribed project management methodology can 
have a major impact on how risks are assessed, and on 
overall project outcomes. Project management methodology 
can be defined as the application of knowledge, skills, tools, 
and techniques to project activities to meet the project 
requirements [8] or, using the widest definition given by 
Cockburn [9], anything that the project management team 
relies on in order to successfully deliver project results.  
 All of the mainstream methodologies have their own 
techniques 
and 
tools 
for 
assessing 
risks. 
These 
methodologies include the Project Management Body of 
Knowledge 
(PMBoK), 
Project 
Risk 
Analysis 
and 
Management (PRAM), PRINCE2 and the Scrum Agile 
Standard.  The first three of these are generally considered to 
belong to the so called traditional project management 
approach, whilst Scrum is the most prominent of the new 
project management approaches [9].  
PMBoK, published by the Project Management Institute 
(PMI) is the project management guide most widely 
followed by international organizations. PMI’s outreach, its 
proximity to project management core theories and 
formalization of processes compared to the other standards, 
make it to the optimum standard guide for many authors 
[10]. One major criticisms of PMBoK is its mechanistic 
approach, making it suitable for routine or technical 
situations [11], but not so appropriate for unusual or one-off 
situations. The methodology entails the use of its Probability 
and Impact Matrix for qualitative risk assessment. Some 
authors, such as Chapman and Ward [12], challenge the 
value of this tool for risk assessment. The experience of the 
risk assessor can determine the so-called probability estimate 
starting values, and thus estimates become biased. This effect 
is known as “anchoring” [13].    
The development of risk matrices for assessment has 
taken place isolated from academic research in decision 
making – risk matrices produce arbitrary decisions and risk-
management actions. These problems are difficult to 
overcome because they are inherent in the structure of the 
matrices [14]. Their theoretical basis is superficial and the 
validity of the qualitative information they employ is highly 
suspect [15]. The use of risk matrices for assessment 
illustrates the potential impact of project management 
methodologies on risk management and project outcomes. 
 Looking at the risk management process as a whole, 
many risk management professionals see the control of risk 
management as being dependent on the project manager. 
This leads to the conclusion that the effectiveness of the risk 
management process depends on the project manager’s 
skills, experience and management style [16]. This can be 
viewed as project-centric risk management, with the project 
manager seen as the key individual in operational delivery of 
project outcomes. An alternative perspective highlights the 
criticality of allocating risk ownership to a range of 
individuals, who may not be in regular contact with the 
project manager [17]. Practitioners’ responses suggest that an 
alternative system that encourages all project members to 
participate in the risk management process is normally 
missing. The consequence is the failure to create a collective 
responsibility to manage risk [16]. 
The aim of this research is to explore how the concept of 
centricity can be applied to the three dimensions of risk 
management discussed above. Centricity in a managerial 
context can be defined as the mind set or attitude that 
characterises the managers or organisation’s outlook and 
motivation in the relationship to others [18] [19]. In recent 
years, qualitative research has found increasing recognition 
in many areas of project management practice. A large 
number of empirical studies using qualitative data are 
available in academic literature and specialized journals 
[2][4][6]. At the same time, management researchers and 
practitioners in particular rely on evidence-based policy. In 
fact, most of the existing generally accepted standards in the 
project management field as a whole are built around 
evidence-based policy and best practice. 
Through an analysis of existing literature, allied to 
empirical 
data 
and 
observations 
in 
large 
project 
environments, this paper looks to develop a conceptual 
framework for research in the following areas: 
• 
Person-centric risk identification vs. objective risk 
identification 
• 
Methodology-centric risk assessment vs. multi-
disciplinary/eclectic risk assessment 
• 
Project-centric 
risk 
management 
process 
vs. 
devolved risk management process  
This approach assumes that it is feasible and sensible to 
cumulate findings and generalize results to create new 
knowledge. The application of the centricity concept to the 
aspects of risk management discussed in this paper will be 
tested and developed further through primary research case 
studies as part of an on-going research project. 
III. 
CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT 
The identification of risk as a subjective phenomenon 
coincides with its creation – the risk exists only once the 
stakeholder has identified it. This is particularly noticeable 
for risks linked to an organization’s own qualities and 
deficiencies [20]. This subjective or person-centric risk  
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

identification can often produce inefficiencies in the 
management of risk that may impact detrimentally on project 
cost and overall project success (see Figure 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If we now view risk identification against risk 
assessment, it is apparent that most projects adopt a person-
centric approach to risk identification and adopt a 
methodology centric approach to risk assessment. Yet we 
suggest that a combination of objective risk identification 
and eclectic risk assessment is likely to produce the most 
successful project outcomes (see Figure 3). The use of risk  
matrices for risk assessment illustrates this well. Their 
apparent simplicity and transparency are reasons for their 
popularity; 
however, 
they 
potentially 
entail 
serious 
mathematical defects and inconsistencies. Different risk 
assessors may assign greatly different ratings to the same 
exposure 
[21]. 
Such 
different 
ratings 
are due 
to 
fundamentally different worldviews, beliefs, and other 
 
psychosocial factors, the consequences of which are not 
minimized through reflection and learning. 
There are a number of evident shortcomings in the use of 
these matrices. These include instability resulting from 
categorization differences, and the lie factor, which suggest 
that they can obscure rather than enlighten communication. 
The ranking produced was shown to be unduly influenced by 
the matrix design, which is ultimately arbitrary. It is 
suggested that other means of assessing risk based on 
decision-analytical 
methods 
could 
produce 
improved 
outcomes [14]. Marmier, Gourc and Laarz [22] present a 
decision-making tool in order to help the project manager 
choose the best way to improve project success rate while 
controlling the level of risks. Other authors combine the 
content analysis with cluster analysis or decision trees to 
build risk management guidelines [23]. These scientific 
decision analysis tools could be an alternative to the popular 
but inefficient use of risk matrices for risk prioritization. The 
establishment of systematically maintained lessons learned 
datasets could also provide quantitative reliable data to 
estimate the likelihood of potential events. 
If we now examine risk identification in conjunction with 
the nature of the risk management process, a similar picture 
emerges (see Figure 4). The different approaches to the risk 
management process often appear as a conflict between 
centralized project risk management and the empowerment 
of sub-project teams [24]. The complexity of certain projects 
makes it difficult to understand the consequences of central 
decisions for the team members. The project manager alone 
will struggle to comprehend the details of all potential risks, 
oversee these and control their management. Yet most 
projects are project centric in terms of risk management 
process and person-centric as regards risk identification. The 
ongoing monitoring and maintenance of the risk register in 
which project risks are listed tends to be controlled by the 
central project manager [25]. It is suggested that overall 
project outcomes would be improved by appropriately 
combining centralized and decentralized risk management 
 
Figure 2. The two means of risk identification [7]. 
 
Figure 3. Risk identification and risk assessment: basic model 
 
Figure 4. Risk identification and the risk management process: basic model 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

activities, especially in complex projects [16]. More 
particularly, project management practitioners in industries 
which require intense collaboration - such as automotive 
product 
development 
- 
complain 
about 
insufficient 
development of risk management methods and about 
methods 
and 
processes 
not 
being 
integrated 
and 
synchronized. Lack of collaborative risk management, 
together with miscommunication, is the main reason for 
project failure in the automotive industry [26]. 
 
 
 
Similarly, in major information systems projects, the IT 
function has traditionally owned and lead information risk 
management and security operations. However, the move to 
user ownership of systems requirements, process change 
issues and data access and maintenance, have changed the 
risk and security paradigm. Business managers, systems 
users and the IT function are now required to understand and 
learn others risk-reward trade-offs. The IT function must 
now share ownership of the risk management process and 
transfer accountability for some key areas of risk to business 
partners [27]. 
As Peter Drucker has put it, “when intelligent, moral, and 
rational people make decisions that appear inexplicable, it’s 
because they see a reality different to the one seen by others” 
[28]. This phenomenon, in the case the risk management 
process, requires further research into the interaction and 
communication between project teams and their contexts. If 
it can be successfully harnessed to enhance the risk 
management process, it has the potential to significantly 
enhance eventual project outcomes. 
IV. 
MODEL PROGRESSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
The basic conceptual model can be developed further in 
the light of literature analysis and project experience, 
indicating the downsides and upsides of operating in each 
quadrant of the model (see Figures 5 and 6). This also has 
implications for the use of some of the mainstream project 
management methodologies in their treatment of risk issues.  
For example, PMI’s project management guide, although 
considered as the best in class among all available  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
methodologies and guides, could be enhanced with some 
early risk identification tools and techniques from more 
minor project management methodologies such as Scrum. 
Such enhancements would help reduce project uncertainty. 
In addition, experience gained by specific industries’ 
customized methodologies can increase risk management 
effectiveness. These could provide quantitative data to 
support estimations of the probabilities of risks occurring. 
Equally, decision analysis tools are an alternative or 
complement to the inconsistent but widely used risk 
matrices. Decision analysis tools may be initially difficult to 
adopt; however, they can provide objective data to support 
risk assessment as an alternative to the use of risk matrices 
with all their inherent deficiencies. 
The popularity of new project management approaches, 
such as that embodied in Scrum, resides in their adaptability 
to accommodate change and the unexpected, as opposed to 
the quest for risk predictability which is the basis of the 
traditional approaches [9]. These new approaches also 
highlight the importance of both formal and informal 
Figure 5. Risk identification and risk assessment: model development 
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

communication, 
collaboration 
between 
project 
team 
members, and their involvement in decision making, 
suggesting a more devolved and collective risk management 
process is generally beneficial.  
Context, such as the projects organization’s size and 
complexity, may play a significant role in tailoring and 
adapting any project risk management methodology when 
applying the different standards. Generally speaking, the 
traditional approach is more appropriate for projects with 
very low level of uncertainty in which emphasis will be on  
 
 
 
 
planning. Conversely, agile project management, with a 
more flexible approach to a collective risk management 
process, fits best in environments characterized by a high 
level of uncertainty [9]. 
The two standards with a higher emphasis upon early risk 
identification are PRINCE2 and Scrum. Traditional project 
management practices struggle to deal effectively with 
uncertainty. In highly uncertain environments, approaches 
such as Scrum and lean methods can help manage residual 
uncertainty about risk not addressed by traditional project 
management practices [29]. 
The model developed using centric concepts suggests a 
combination of risk management based on traditional 
standards and more flexible approaches typified by Scrum 
would be beneficial for most projects. However, this would 
imply significant mindset changes in the organisation [30].   
Project teams need to be empowered to effectively use a 
range of different methodologies and techniques, which may 
involve team members adopting new roles. This may result 
in teams creating their own, tailored, risk management 
process and activities [31]. 
V. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
This article has explored how the concept of centricity 
can be applied to some key aspects of project risk 
management to aid understanding and develop alternative  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perspectives. The concept of centricity has been used as a 
key component in the development of a conceptual model 
that will now be tested and refined through primary case 
study research of risk management in information 
technology and new product development projects in the 
automotive industry. This will entail action research through 
which the conceptual framework will be applied and further 
developed in major pan-European projects. 
Harnessing and applying the concept of centricity 
suggests that, in most projects, risk identification is person-
centric, risk assessment is methodology-centric, and the 
overall risk management process is project-centric. Yet 
current literature, recent trends and personal observation 
suggest that a move away from centricity in these 
components of risk management would benefit project 
outcomes. The integration of traditional and agile project 
management to tailor project management methodologies to 
Figure 6. Risk identification and the risk management process: model development 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

the specific needs of the organization is gaining wide public 
attention.  For the project manager considering how to 
manage overall risk, the question is not just which project 
management risk approach should be adopted, but more how 
to select a “best of breed approach”, choosing the most 
suitable techniques, templates, tools and artifacts out of the 
different standards and methodologies. It is hoped that this 
article, by using the concept of centricity to analyse current 
practice, will engender this process and lead to better overall 
project outcomes. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. E. Hodgson, “Disciplining the professional: The case of 
project management,” Journal of Management Studies, 39(6), 
2002, pp. 803-821. 
[2] D. McClure, From the CIO trenches: Why some projects fail 
and others succeed, Gartner Industry Research, 2007. 
[3] R. Jen, Visual Ishikawa Risk Techique (VIRT) - An approach 
to risk management, PMI Virtual Library, 2009. Available: 
http://www.pmi.org/en/Knowledge-Center/Knowledge-
Shelf/~/media/Members/Knowledge%20Shelf/Jen_2009.ashx. 
[Retrieved: July, 2014]. 
[4] K. de Bakker, “Risk management affecting IS/IT project 
success through communicative action,” Project Management 
Journal, 42(3), 2011, pp. 75-90. 
[5] F. D. Patterson, K. Neailey, “A Risk Register Database 
System to aid the management of project risk”, International 
Journal of Project Management 20, 2002, pp. 365-374.  
[6] K. de Bakker., A. Boonstra, and H. Wortmann, “Risk 
managements' communicative effects influencing IT project 
success,” International Journal of Project Management, 30(4), 
2012, pp. 444-457. 
[7] H. Zhang, “Two schools of risk analysis: A review of past 
research on project risk,” Project Management Journal, 42(4), 
2011, pp. 5-18. 
[8] PMI, A guide to the project management body of knowledge 
(PMBOK®) (Fifth ed.) Project management institute, Inc., 
2013. 
[9] M. Špundak, “Mixed Agile/Traditional Project Management 
Methodology – Reality or Illusion?” Procedia - Social and 
Behavioral Sciences, 119, 2014, pp. 939-948. 
[10] M. J. Thaheem, “Project Risk Management for Sustainable 
Restoration of Immovable Cultural Heritage: Lessons from 
Construction Industry and Formulation of a Customized PRM 
Model.” (Doctorate of Philosophy), 2014 Politectnico de 
Torino. [Retrieved: July, 2014]. 
[11] P. W. G. Morris, L. Crawford, D. Hodgson, M. M. Shepherd, 
and J. Thomas, “Exploring the role of formal bodies of 
knowledge in defining a profession – The case of project 
management.” International Journal of Project Management, 
24(8), 2006, pp. 710-721. 
[12] C. Chapman and S. Ward, Project risk management: 
processes, techniques and insights: John Wiley & Sons, 2003. 
[13] A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Judgment under uncertainty: 
Heuristics and biases”, science, 185 (4157), 1974, pp. 1124-
1131.  
[14] P. Thomas, “The Risk of Using Risk Matrices”, Masters  
thesis, 
University 
of 
Stavanger, 
2013. 
http://brage.bibsys.no/uis/bitstream/URN:NBN:no-
bibsys_brage_45899/1/Thomas_Philip.pdf. [Retrieved: July, 
2014]. 
[15] K. D. Wall, “The Trouble With Risk Matrices”, DRMI 
Working Papers Ongoing Research, 2011, pp. 11-23. 
[16] C. M. Harvett, “A Study of Uncertainty and Risk 
Management 
Practice 
Related 
to 
Perceived 
Project 
Complexity.” (PhD), 2013. Avalilable: Bond University, 
ePublications@bond. [Retrieved: July, 2014]. 
[17] T. Raz and E. Michael, “Use and benefits of tools for project 
risk 
management.”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Project 
Management, 19 (1), 2001, pp. 9-17. 
[18] H. V. Perlmutter, “The Tortuous Evolution of the 
Multinational Corporation.”, Columbia Journal of World 
Business, 4 (1), 1969, pp. 9-18. 
[19] M. Olsen and A. Roper, “Towards an Understanding of 
Centricity: 
Profiling 
International 
Hotel 
Groups”, 
International Journal of Hospitality Management, 17 (2), 
1998, pp. 111-124. 
[20] J. Irizar and M. Wynn, “Risk as a Subjective Construct: 
Implications for Project Management Practice.” The Fifth 
International Conference on Information, Process, and 
Knowledge Management (eKNOW 2013) IARIA, Feb. 2013, 
pp. 135-141, ISBN: 978-1-61208-254-7. 
[21] D. J. Ball and J. Watt, “Further Thoughts on the Utility of 
Risk Matrices”, Risk Analysis, 33(11), 2013, pp. 2068-2078. 
doi: 10.1111/risa.12057. 
[22] F. Marmier, D. Gourc, and F. Laarz, “A risk oriented model 
to assess strategic decisions in new product development 
projects”, Decision Support Systems, 56, 2013, pp. 74-82. 
[23] V. Holzmann and I. Holon, Analyzing Lessons Learned to 
Identify Potential Risks in new Product Development 
Projects. Paper presented at the 6th European Conference on 
Information Management and Evaluation, 2012, pp. 127-134. 
[24] T. M. Williams, “Empowerment vs risk management?” 
International Journal of Project Management, 15, 1997, pp. 
219-222. 
[25] P. L. Bannerman, “Risk and risk management in software 
projects: A reassessment,” The journal of systems and 
software, 81(12), 2008, pp. 2118-2133. 
[26] K. Niebecker, “Collaborative and cross-company project 
management within the automotive industry using the 
Balanced 
Scorecard.” 
(Doctor 
of 
Philosophy), 
2009 
Available: University of Technology Sidney. [Retrieved: July, 
2014]. 
[27] E. Chobanova, “Why You Should Share Your Risk With 
Business 
Partners.” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.executiveboard.com/it-blog/why-you-should-
share-your-risk-with-business-partners, 
2014. 
[Retrieved: 
July, 2014]. 
[28] Bud Baker, “The fall of the firefly: An assessment of a failed 
project strategy,” Project Management Journal, 33(3), 2002, 
pp. 53-57. 
[29] C. Besner and B. Hobbs, “The paradox of risk management; a 
project management practice perspective.” International 
journal of managing projects in business, 5(2), 2012, pp. 230-
247. 
[30] M. McWha, “Agile is a Mindset, not a Methodology.” 
[Online]. 
http://www.executiveboard.com/it-blog/agile-is-a-
mindset-not-a-methodology, 2014 [Retrieved: July, 2014]. 
[31] R. Rodríguez Gutiérrez, J. Minguella Canela, F. Fenollosa i 
Artés, B. Ventayol Femenias, and M. A. d. l. Santos López,   
“Experiences in Agile R&D Project Management for New 
Product Design and Development in the Automotive 
Industry.” The 16th International Research/Expert Conference 
on Trends in the Development of Machinery and Associated 
Technology, TMT 2012, pp. 223-226.  
 
PRINCE2® is a Trade Mark of The Office of Government 
Commerce.
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

