A Player-centric Game Design Paradigm with Compassion 
Game design challenges for players with Parkinson Disease 
Aslihan Tece Bayrak 
Dept. of Game Development 
Media Design School, MDS 
Auckland, New Zealand 
tece.bayrak@mediadesignschool.com 
 
Abstract—The population playing games vary from young ages 
to older adults, spread across people with variations of 
physical and cognitive abilities, and with different physical and 
mental health conditions. When additional sub-demographics, 
such as elders, people with specific disabilities or chronic 
diseases, etc., are taken into account, the territory for 
accessibility in game design and accessibility related design 
challenges are underexplored. Although the emphasis on 
usability in game development somewhat follows common 
usability 
guidelines 
developed 
for 
human 
computer 
interaction, usability context for games and game-like 
experiences includes more than the interface or the interaction 
modality. This body of work presents a player-centric game 
design paradigm to allow a closer exploration for challenges of 
designing games for sensitive demographics, with a focus on 
Parkinson Disease (PD) patients. The contribution is not a 
clear-cut recipe but an initial model towards designing 
accessible games for sensitive demographics. 
Keywords-games; game design; player-centric design; 
accessibility; parkinson disease; games for health. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Games have been receiving attention from health and 
well-being research due to their compelling nature. Over the 
years, literature on games for health has grown with both use 
of commercial games and development of custom made 
games for health interventions [2]-[5]. Although positive 
results and various key learnings are reported by many 
studies, clear contributions on reappropriation of existing 
games for specific purposes or developing games for people 
with chronic and/or neurological diseases is limited. 
Researchers have mostly adopted or applied existing game 
design models [9][19] or developed on an ad-hoc basis in 
order to create a suitable product without much emphasis on 
the design practice [4][5][14][15]. Therefore, findings from 
these studies are fragmented and hard to reconcile for further 
studies. Lack of a methodology that facilitates design 
exploration for these demographics seems to be a result of 
limited design research within games research [21]. Both for 
the use of existing commercial games and with the purpose 
of developing custom games, there is a need for further 
design research to ensure suitability and accessibility of 
games for special demographics [4][5]. Even for the 
application of accessibility guidelines, practice for the 
accessible games does not go much further than the user 
interface or interaction [16]. A suitable interaction modality 
and a satisfying user experience are integral to the creation of 
engaging and enjoyable game experiences. Furthermore, it is 
essential for the player to be able to see past the interaction 
modalities while playing a game so that they could fully 
engage with the activities and events in the game. This paper 
aims to encourage exploration of these issues by introducing 
a new design paradigm that helps the researchers to focus on 
player and player’s perception of the system (the game). 
Games for health research hopes to leverage the compelling 
nature of games for positive health outcomes; therefore, 
games that are designed for this purpose need to be player-
centred and favouring player’s conditions. 
Moving forward from the existing research, this paper 
presents a game design paradigm to explore designing for a 
set of impairments identified for a special player group—
Parkinson Disease (PD) patients. Even though these 
challenges seem to be specific for PD, the model developed 
to explore player-centric game design remains relevant 
regardless of the specificity of the target player group. The 
model promotes discussion to understand the relation 
between players’ conditions and the layers of the game. For 
this purpose, the paper is composed of following sections. 
Section II presents the motivation with a discussion on the 
challenges of game design for PD patients. Section III 
explains player-centric design and presents the player-centric 
design model with further elaboration on the main elements 
of the model. Section IV ends the paper with a conclusion 
while also pointing to future work. 
II. 
MOTIVATION FOR DESIGN RESEARCH 
Nielsen and Norman group defines usability as ”a quality 
attribute that assesses how easy user interfaces are to use” 
[6]. A usable interface should be easy for a user to become 
familiar with and competent in; to achieve their objective; to 
discover previously less known attributes when need arises; 
to recover from an error; and to recall how to use the 
interface on subsequent visits. Accessibility is also well 
defined within user experience domain and has been a core 
element of usability evaluations. Similarly, accessibility of a 
game refers to the ability to enable the participation of 
people with disabilities to interact with the game and play 
without feeling any barriers during their interaction with the 
game or during overcoming the challenges presented by the 
game. Extending from usability research, playability and 
player-game interaction research has finally started gaining 
some speed to explore practical applications for game 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

usability challenges [16]. The interest in the field includes all 
facets of player experience including but not limited to 
engagement, immersion, etc. 
 A set of guidelines was collated to inform developers on 
the special constraints for their design [11][14][17][18] while 
also pointing out the lack of further development in the game 
design discipline. Game design in its practice is agile and 
opportunistic, yet the design practice itself is under-
researched. A study by Isbister and Mueller on variety of 
interaction modalities especially in the field of movement 
based games is one of the few that evaluates conditions of 
interaction and suggests strategies for a more successful 
design of movement-based systems, mainly games [17]. The 
guidelines provide insights for the design of interaction 
modalities, necessary feedback compatible with the 
interaction device and activity, extends of self-expression, 
challenges and fun. Among the few studies that attempt to 
develop games for PD patients, Assad et. al. previously 
suggested design principles for designing games for PD, 
particularly for motion based games for rehabilitation 
purposes [11]. Although informative, the principles are 
prescriptive for a specific type of game rather than allowing 
a wider applicability, and the paper does not present a clear 
methodology for design. Another model named as “extended 
model” by Gerling et. al [18] inspired the development of the 
paradigm presented in this paper for two reasons: the model 
presented in the paper is restricted with the structural 
constraints of existing models and it is limited in terms of 
acknowledging the role of the player from a player 
experience perspective even though there are discussion on 
accessibility. Nevertheless, the notes on the player’s abilities 
(both cognitive and motor abilities, such as attention span, 
short-term memory, repetitive input, etc.) to be considered as 
resources resonates with the perspective of this paper. 
A. On Challenges of Game Design for PD Patients 
Citing form Sutton-Smith, Zimmermann and Salen [13] 
refers to game experience as a combination of five 
dimensions: visual scanning, auditory discriminations, motor 
responses, concentration and perceptual patterns of learning. 
Players scan the entire scene based on the visual and auditory 
signs while concentrating on events and signals provided by 
the game. They perform actions based on the demands of the 
game and proceed whilst scanning for visual and auditory 
cues. This cycle continues as the player carries on playing 
the game. As they do so, players learn more about the 
patterns of play and improve their standing against the game 
from familiarity to higher expertise. At its core, the cycle of 
play stands on the perceptual understanding of the game 
world, the processing time of the perceptions, and the 
response from the player. Swink [10] explains this implicit 
loop for moment-to-moment play as a correction cycle that 
demands emphasis on game feel for a continuity of 
perception. An impairment that creates delay or incapability 
on any of these stages (impairment of the player or the game) 
would impact the quality of experience.  
Game accessibility requests compassion from the system 
to bridge the gap between the player and the game in order to 
reduce the impact of impairment. For example, similar to 
how a poor visual design of an interface would reduce the 
usability significantly, a poor visual fidelity of a game world 
would also reduce the quality of game experience. However, 
contextual content of games requires far more depth 
compared to a user interface. The player perceptions of the 
game world not only stem from the narrative elements that 
are telling a story of the game world but also the familiarity 
of the player with the game and game world. Therefore, the 
player needs a high processing power in order to evaluate all 
the information they could gather from the game in real time 
while playing the game. Thus, the system needs to show 
compassion when player’s impairment is getting in the way 
of their player activity. Without a model that helps breaking 
down areas that demand processing power and areas to hide 
delay, it is uneasy to contemplate on how this need could be 
resolved without frustration. 
According to Swink, any delay that breaks the continuity 
of the experience creates poor game feel [10]. Therefore, the 
game needs to be responsive for the player inputs. Similarly, 
any player action in response to the events presented by the 
game needs to be timely; otherwise, deemed unsuccessful by 
the game. Hence, the game acknowledges successful 
behaviour and rewards it while also clearly communicating 
the consequences upon failure. From a purely game design 
point of view, this makes sense because facing consequences 
help bringing meaning to the choices. However, from a 
player-centric design point of view, especially for players 
with motor and/or cognitive impairments as in PD, how 
much time should be evaluated as the time-frame for “timely 
response” is unclear. The procedures of the game should be 
forgiving with a suitable error margin and compensating for 
delays as motor-cognitive processes in player’s mind may 
take longer than an ordinary player. 
Research shows that quality of life for PD patients drops 
over time meaning that activities of daily living, such as 
dressing, grooming, bathing, self-feeding and functional 
mobility are jeopardised as disease develops [23]. Even at 
earlier stages various disturbances and impairments limit the 
ability of the users while performing tasks that are 
considered simple; rendering many games inaccessible for 
this player base. The disturbances and impairments that are 
commonly observed across PD patients are sensory 
sensitivities, motor impairments, cognitive impairments and 
emotional sensitivities. Many of these impairments, 
especially in early stages of PD, show close similarities to 
age related changes that are commonly observed among 
older adults or other health related situations, such as stroke 
patients [14].  
B. Impairments due to Parkinson Disease 
1) Sensory Sensitivities: Sensory difficulties include not 
only hearing or vision problems as mostly seen with elders 
[18], but also sensitivities for sensory overload due to visual 
and sound stimuli. Occupational therapy for PD advise 
reducing visual stimuli by reducing confusing patterns 
(striped-checker), strong colours and hues, and simplifying 
the load by preventing contrasting visuals and clutter [22]. 
Visio-spatial disturbances and strong contrasts cause 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

freezing while clutter overloads cognitive processes with a 
need of strategising and replanning. There are no specific 
sensitivities reported about audio; however, the use of 
metronome and inducing percievable rhythm into daily life 
are presented to be useful to enhance motor abilities [22]. 
2) Motor 
Impairments: 
Main 
motor 
impairments 
observed in PD are trembling fingers and hands (tremor), 
rigidity, slowness in movement (bradykinesia), and gait 
problems [22]. Subtle slowness in movement, postural 
change and gait problems are also seen in elders even 
though the scale of these differ from PD. Trembling fingers 
and hands, especially depending on the scale of movement 
can make it very hard to use an input device or perform 
button presses while the slowness in movement can increase 
the response time.  
3) Cognitive Impairments: Cognitive impairments that 
are commonly seen with PD are learning and retaining 
information (working memory), concentration and attention, 
and executive functions. Executive functions are a set of 
inter-related cognitive processes that are essential for goal-
directed behaviours [1]. Even though they are heavily 
related to cognitive domains, motor skills and connection 
between cognitive and motor skills are the main reason why 
they are absolutely necessary for activities of daily living 
[1][23]. In order to preserve gait, a person needs to evaluate 
their surroundings, strategically decide a path of movement, 
shift their weight and meanwhile check their balance. If they 
come across an obstacle, they should be able to stop 
executing their plan and rework a new plan similar to the 
correction cycle mentioned before. This means all six 
executive functions are actively used during a simple 
walking task: attention, inhibition, planning, reasoning, 
shifting (flexibility), and working memory. Gait disorders 
share similar issues originating from deficiencies in 
executive functions and also observed among older adults. 
This means impairments in executive functions also develop 
among older adults, perhaps milder than PD. In addition to a 
previously identified need for task creation frameworks to 
facilitate purposeful use of games for special demographics 
[4], it has become appearant that there is a need for a design 
paradigm that draws attention to the abilities and limitations 
of the players. Therefore, the player-centric design model is 
developed to support and inform designing games for 
rehabilitative and preventative therapies for PD.  
III. 
PLAYER-CENTRIC DESIGN PARADIGM 
Game design is perceived to be player centered; however, 
authorial intent and its dissonance with the nature of 
designer’s perception of the player may jeopardize this. This 
section discusses player-centric design while suggesting a 
player-centric model for designers to explore and understand 
the human nature of their target audience.  
A. Player-centric Design 
It is commonly thought that player-centric design is an 
extension of the user-centred design. On one hand, one can 
argue that game design is inherently player-centric since it 
always questions what the player is doing, what they are 
allowed to do, objectives, rewards, consequences for the 
player, and how the player is supposed to feel during the 
gameplay experience. Therefore, it would be unfair to 
suggest that game design is not player-centric. On the other 
hand, game design practice is a creative endeavour as well, 
meaning that it could carry a separate authorial intent due to 
its creative nature. Therefore, the intent of the designer in 
making of a game may be slightly different than the intent or 
expectations of a player while stepping into the magic circle 
of the game. Besides, game design practice could also be 
perceived as play-centric, putting emphasis on gameplay 
over other elements of the game. A designer can argue for a 
different act between challenge and motivation, intended 
difficulty of the game or intended interaction for an intended 
experience based on the authorial creative endeavour or play 
focus. In response to all these arguments, player-centric 
design is centred with empathy to the player and aims to 
provide a positive experience to the player despite 
contradictions with creative pursuit [9]. Therefore, player-
centric design puts the player before the creator. 
B. A New Model for Player-centric Design 
The model seen in Fig. 1 attempts to merge player’s 
perspective with formal elements of games in order to enable 
a deeper discussion on game design challenges for special 
demographics. Literature has a few well recognised 
frameworks for game design—Schell’s, Fullerton’s and 
Adams’ [9][19][20]; however, these do not allow to closely 
look at underlying concepts of games or dismantle a 
complete game experience into its thinner slices. Such 
granularity would be very helpful for designing games for 
impaired players.  
Schell’s design tetrad remains quite high level while 
Fullerton’s is too low level without any visible interplay 
between and above the formal elements or much 
consideration on player’s stance [19][20]. On the other hand, 
Adams’ model is based on interaction design, presenting an 
interaction model between the player and the game, yet does 
not encourage explorations on sensory complexity of games 
more than perceiving them as user interfaces [9]. Although 
Adams’ could be a much clearer approach that allows the use 
of existing HCI research for games, it creates further 
ambiguity on the potential needs of games on a visual and 
contextual level. Gerling et. al’s “extended model” presents a 
useful basis for designing for older adults [18]; however, the 
analysis lacks a wider perspective on the interplay between 
the elements of the model as a game design paradigm and a 
player-centric focus for the designer to explore the position 
of the player in this context especially for the needs/issues of 
special demographics.  
In order to create a player-centric focus, the proposed 
model (Fig. 1) combines layers of player experience—as 
inspired from Garret on the planes of user experience 
[7][8]—with Adam’s game design model [9]. The layers of 
the model and elements of these layers are also discussed 
further in the following subsections. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 1.  A player-centric game design model favouring the capabilities of the player and perceiving the system from player’s point of view 
1) Interaction Layer: Interaction layer represents the 
overlapping space of game world and player’s world. Via 
this layer, player sends input to the game world, observes 
the results of their input and receives a response from the 
game world. Interaction takes place between the player and 
the game world. It is either started by the player via an 
input, or by the game world via an event presented with the 
presentation layer. When it is initiated by the player, the 
game responds; when it is initiated by the game via 
presentation layer, the player responds via input layer. In 
both cases, information layer feeds the presentation layer 
with necessary data. Interaction layer is composed of 
presentation layer and input layer. 
a) Presentation Layer: Presentation layer can also be 
thought as sensory layer encompassing audio, visual and 
haptic presentation of the current status of the game. This 
includes continuous presentation of the game world and the 
game’s response to the player inputs. Any feedback 
generated in response to the player inputs is presented by 
the presentation layer. Clarity of presentation and a suitable 
composition of audio-visual elements are essential for 
readability. Based on movement advice of PD handbook 
[22], a suggestion to facilitate performance of motor skills is 
using sensory stimuli that provides a perception of rhythm. 
Since the cognitive difficulties include attention and 
concentration, any support to conciously activate attention 
and maintain concentration is very useful in daily life, 
therefore for the presentation layer as well.  
b) Input Layer: Input layer is responsible for the 
interaction device, input techniques, clarity of input 
mapping, directness, sensitivity and consistency of input. A 
common goal for a game controller is effortless use with 
which the input device feels like the extension of the body 
[10]. It is important to note that PD has some symptoms, 
such as tremor, bradykinesia or hypokinesia that may cause 
difficulty in using an input device or perform an input action 
within a required time-frame. Therefore, additional research 
into input devices and interaction modalities would be 
useful. Moreover, further research on familiarity of the 
player group, mental model, and restrictions of disease 
stages for input modality is expected to improve the design. 
2) Information Layer: Information layer sits in the 
middle of presentation layer and structural core of the game, 
and interprets outputs of the core system in a readable 
format for the player. Cues for meaning making (semantics), 
affordances and limitations for the player [12], contextual 
visual material, data organisation, response of the game 
(feedback for the player), and any information, such as 
score, status, outcomes, etc., belongs to this layer. Even 
though the information is generated by the core layer of the 
game, its interpretation is handled in information layer and 
passed to the presentation layer for the player to see.  
3) Structural Core: Structural core of a game comprises 
formal elements [19]. Both the information layer and the 
presentation layer are dependent on the core structure of the 
game while also creating meaning for it. From player’s 
point of view, the core of the game may be completely 
invisible as their perception is shaped by the presented 
information (based on how it is interpreted by the 
information layer). Therefore, discoverability, learnability 
and consistency of the system need to be resolved at this 
layer so that relevant information could be fed to the 
information layer.  
Procedures are the first point of interaction with the 
input from the player. They are integral for moment-to-
moment gameplay and define the chain of moves to perform 
actions in the game. Reiterating the previous discussion on 
correction cycle (see Section II, A and B.3), a delay in any 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

stage of player performance will make the time-frame of 
user input longer. For example, double jump could require 
hitting the jump button twice within a second in order to 
perform double jump. This seemingly simple action could 
pose a problem for a person with rigidity or sloweness of 
movement, who might find hitting the same button twice 
hard to repeat within a second’s window. Another example 
is the number of steps necessary to do something, such as 
the steps to be performed to bake a cake. For a person with 
memory issues, remembering those would be really hard, 
therefore frustrating to perform. Thus, procedures should be 
catered for a longer grace time, simple recovery (this does 
not mean game needs to be easy), shorter and less complex 
chain of actions for learnability and retaining information. 
On top of these, additional compassion for  impairments 
would make a big difference. When done right, the core 
game demands less player resources or compensates for 
those when necessary. The player resources are explained 
below in item 4. 
Contextual content works with the formal elements and 
supports meaning making. Objectives, rules, procedures, 
affordances and limitations become meaningful with the 
help of contextual content. While being important for 
engaging the audience, contextual content is also important 
for maintaining attention and motivation. In order to 
develop content based on the interests of the target audience 
(elders, kids, young adults, etc.), a participatory approach or 
persona studies would be preferable. 
4) Resources: Rather than the resources discussed for 
formal elements of the game, the resources referred in this 
model is intrinsic player resources. Intrinsic player 
resources are cognitive skills, motor skills, physical abilities 
and emotional abilities (physical and emotional stamina). 
These are within the power of the player and do not belong 
to the in-game economy. They are not generated by the 
game or in the game; however, they are brought in and used 
by the player, yet consumed by the game. They are limited, 
and refresh time for these vary from person to person. For 
example, after long hours of play, the physical stamina of a 
player may drop, and they may not be able to function as 
prompt as they were at the beginning of the play. This is an 
example of player spending their physical ability resource. 
For a suitable design tragetting players with health related 
difficulties and in order to prevent frustration, designers 
need to study how these resources are effected by the 
disease. 
C. Strengths and Limitations of the Model 
The player-centric design paradigm, as seen in Fig. 1, is 
developed as a bi-product of design research for game based 
rehabilitation of PD. Previous sub-sections presented further 
details on the layers of the model with a focus on constraints 
for PD. The purpose of the model is to promote further 
discussion on the elements of game design with a player-
centric focus; therefore, the main strength of the work 
originates from the incorporation of user experience model to 
ensure this. It is by no means a complete model, yet 
welcomes exploration in those layers, and encourages 
analytical thinking towards player-centric design. The main 
limitation of the paradigm is its theoretical nature even 
though it has emerged from the design process of a game for 
players with PD.  
The model stands as player-centric, yet the principles of 
user-centered design and their alignment with the model has 
not been completely examined. A useful improvement would 
be development of a set of questions for each layer to prompt 
the designer while using this paradigm in their design 
practice. In addition, the discussion on information layer is 
less explored compared to the other layers and could benefit 
from further contemplations on the relation between 
contextual elements and information layer, especially for the 
potential impacts of these on players’ resources. Finally, an 
additional angle with playability concept and a discussion on 
how playability relates to this model would be informative. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, a newly developed player-centric design 
paradigm is presented to improve game design practice for 
special demographics. The model has extended existing 
game design models with inspiration from user experience 
field in order to present a player focused practice for game 
design. The layers of the model are discussed by employing 
a PD focused impairment analysis. Future work includes 
verification of the presented paradigm with the analysis of 
existing games and the development of new ones.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. 
Diamond, 
"Executive 
functions," Annual 
review 
of 
psychology, vol. 64, pp. 135-168, 2013. 
[2] 
D. Levac, S. Glegg, H. Colquhoun, P. Miller, F. Noubary, "Virtual 
reality and active videogame-based practice, learning needs, and 
preferences: A cross-Canada survey of physical therapists and 
occupational therapists," Games for health journal 6, no. 4, pp. 217-
228, 2017. 
[3] 
A. E. Staiano, and R. Flynn, "Therapeutic uses of active videogames: 
a systematic review," Games for health journal, vol. 3.6, pp. 351-365, 
2014. 
[4] 
A. T. Bayrak, B. Wünsche, C. Lutteroth, "Reviewing the Evidence: n 
Pursuit of a Framework for Parkinson Disease Rehabilitation with 
Games," The Promise of New Technologies in an Age of New Health 
Challenges, p. 9, 2016. 
[5] 
B. Bonnechère, Serious Games in Physical Rehabilitation, Springer, 
2018. 
[6] 
J. Nielsen, "Nielsen norman group," [Online]. Available from 
https://www. nngroup. com, 2016. 
[7] 
C. Macklin, and J. Sharp. Games, Design and Play: A detailed 
approach to iterative game design, Addison-Wesley Professional, 
2016. 
[8] 
J. J. Garrett, Elements of user experience, the: user-centered design 
for the web and beyond, Pearson Education, 2010. 
[9] 
E. Adams, Fundamentals of game design. Pearson Education, 2014. 
[10] S. Swink, Game feel: a game designer's guide to virtual sensation. 
CRC Press, 2008. 
[11] O. Assad et al., "Motion-based games for Parkinson’s disease 
patients," In International Conference on Entertainment Computing, 
pp. 47-58, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

[12] D. A. Norman, Emotional design: Why we love (or hate) everyday 
things, Basic Civitas Books, 2004. 
[13] K. Salen Tekinbaş, and Eric Zimmerman, Rules of play: Game design 
fundamentals, MIT press, 2004. 
[14] M. Balaam et al., "Motivating mobility: designing for lived 
motivation in stroke rehabilitation," In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, pp. 
3073-3082, 2011. 
[15] A. C. de Barros, J. Cevada, À. Bayés, S. Alcaine, B. Mestre, "User-
centred design of a mobile self-management solution for Parkinson's 
disease," In Proceedings of the 12th international conference on 
mobile and ubiquitous multimedia, ACM, p. 23, 2013. 
[16] L. Caroux, K. Isbister, L. Le Bigot, N. Vibert, "Player–video game 
interaction: A systematic review of current concepts," Computers in 
Human Behavior 48, pp. 366-381, 2015. 
[17] K. Isbister, and F. “Floyd Mueller. "Guidelines for the design of 
movement-based games and their relevance to HCI," Human–
Computer Interaction 30.3-4, pp. 366-399, 2015. 
[18] K. M. Gerling, F. P. Schulte, J. Smeddinck, M. Masuch, "Game 
design for older adults: effects of age-related changes on structural 
elements of digital games," In International Conference on 
Entertainment Computing, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 235-242, 
2012. 
[19] T. Fullerton, Game design workshop: a playcentric approach to 
creating innovative games, CRC press, 2008. 
[20] J. Schell, The Art of Game Design: A book of lenses. AK Peters/CRC 
Press, 2014. 
[21] A. Kultima, "Game design research," Proceedings of the 19th 
International Academic Mindtrek Conference, ACM, 2015. 
[22] A. Aragon, B. Ramaswamy, J. C. Ferguson, The professional's guide 
to Parkinson's disease, Parkinson's Disease Society, 2007. 
[23] G‐M. Hariz, L. Forsgren, "Activities of daily living and quality of life 
in persons with newly diagnosed Parkinson’s disease according to 
subtype of disease, and in comparison to healthy controls," Acta 
Neurologica Scandinavica 123.1, pp. 20-27, 2011. 
 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-670-5
CENTRIC 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

