Mobile App Marketing:  
A Conjoint-based Analysis on the Importance of App Store Elements 
 
Stephan Böhm and Stefan Schreiber 
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences 
Department of Media Management 
Wiesbaden, Germany 
e-mail: stephan.boehm@hs-rm.de, stefan.schreiber87@web.de 
 
 
Abstract—Today, little is known about how the various elements 
involved in the presentation of mobile applications (apps) in app 
stores influence the download or purchase decision. Current 
publications primairly focus on the possibilities and technical 
tools of app store marketing based on best practices or experi-
ence. However, research on customer preferences with regards 
to the presentation of apps in app stores as well as the impact of 
single app store elements on purchase or usage decisions has yet 
to be addressed. In this context, the key research objective of 
this paper is to analyse the impact of individual app store ele-
ments on customer choice. Accordingly, this study will identify 
the relative importance of individual app store elements to de-
rive recommendations on how to successfully present mobile ap-
plications in app stores. With this objective in mind, a conjoint 
analysis was carried out in this study for a fictitious mobile mes-
saging app to be presented in the Apple App Store. 
Keywords-Mobile App Marketing; App Store Elements; App 
Marketing; Consumer Preference; Conjoint Analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The number of available mobile applications is steadily 
growing. More than a million applications are now available 
for Android and iOS in the respective app stores (i.e., Goog-
lePlay and Apple App Store). Accordingly, the competition 
among individual app providers has also risen continuously 
[1]. The competitive pressure is constantly rising along with 
the number of available offers and the growing number of pos-
sible alternatives for the user. It has long since ceased to be 
enough to simply turn a good idea into an app. More and more, 
the question has become which factors trigger the user’s pur-
chase decision. Numerous managers in the mobile phone busi-
ness are now forced to deal with this situation and to define 
mobile app marketing strategies on how to achieve and defend 
a competitive position for their apps in the market. 
The specification of marketing plans and strategies is usu-
ally made using the concept of the marketing mix, which also 
plays a key role in mobile app marketing [2]. As we know, the 
marketing mix should be an optimal combination of market-
ing tools from the areas of Product (product policy), Price 
(pricing policy), Promotion (communication policy) and Place 
(distribution policy) [3]. These “4Ps“ are also the components 
of the app store marketing toolkit. Product policy starts at a 
very early stage and deals with the app idea and with the sub-
sequent design of the application [2]. 
With regards to pricing policy both before and after the 
launch of the mobile app, a wide range of decisions have to be 
made. These decisions range from adequate price level to dy-
namic pricing strategies designed to systematically alter prices 
over time in order to react to changes in actual demand and 
current market conditions. However, pricing policy is limited 
by the possibilites and restrictions of the app stores. For ex-
ample, the app stores may specify certain price points to be 
selected or not permit providers to offer trial versions for a 
limited period of time [4]. 
Distribution policy generally deals with all the marketing 
decisions and activities concerned with the delivery channel 
from the producer to the customer and therefore from produc-
tion to consumption [3]. As early on as the development stage 
of an app, the distribution channel is determined, or at least 
influenced, by the technical implementation. So-called web 
applications, for example, can simply be made available for 
download per link or published via any webserver. The distri-
bution channel for so-called hybrid und native applications, 
on the other hand, is the app store. Before use, they must be 
completely downloaded and installed on the mobile device. 
While native applications are created using the platform-spe-
cific development environment and programming language, 
web technology is usually used with hybrid applications. Ad-
ditional development frameworks and tools, however, allow 
for further processing and compilation of this source code in 
a way that enables its distribution via an app store in a similar 
way to a native application. 
Within the communication policy we have to differentiate 
between activities inside and outside the app store. These in-
clude advertising and other activities which provide and 
spread information intended to familiarise the potential cus-
tomer with the app and its features. App stores are usually the 
only official channel for the smartphone user to buy and install 
new apps on their mobile devices. Thus, the communication 
policy within the app stores and the corresponding design of 
the various app store elements are of particular importance [5]. 
Here, it must be noted that each store has its specific regula-
tions and guidelines on how to publish an app for distribution 
via the store and on the elements that can be used for the 
presentation of the app in the store. However, although the 
regulations vary in detail, the core concepts and the core ele-
ments for the app presentation are quite similar. 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

In this context, the objective of this study is to develop ap-
propriate recommendations for the setup and design of im-
portant app store elements and to empirically validate com-
mon app store marketing best practices. For this reason, a con-
joint-based approach was choosen to analyse user preferences 
and characterize the relative importance of different app store 
elements. 
With this in mind, Section II presents a short discussion on 
related work and current best practices in app store marketing. 
Section III describes important elements of the presentation 
for mobile applications in app stores. The explanations refer 
to the example of the Apple App Store; can, however, to a 
great extent be generalised to include other app stores. In Sec-
tion IV, the methodological approach of this study is then de-
scribed. Significant results of this conjoint analysis are pre-
sented in Section V, before we finally discuss the central find-
ings and recommendations for practical implementation in the 
concluding section. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Mobile app marketing is still a relatively new marketing 
topic. It wasn’t until the first app stores emerged that the ne-
cessity for a market-oriented way of thinking when develop-
ing and marketing mobile apps started to become aparent [4]. 
In principle, we can say that many well established concepts 
from general marketing practices are transferable to mobile 
app marketing. In this understanding, mobile app store mar-
keting adopts standard marketing principles and tools and 
adapts them to the needs of the app specific market. 
Current literature on mobile app marketing predominatly 
focuses on guidelines and recommendations for the successful 
monetarisation of app concepts. For example, the topic of app 
marketing can be found as part of the technical literature on 
app development in which the monetarisation of the app in the 
app store is seen as being the final step in the app development 
process [4][6][7]. 
Additionally, more specialised publications focusing on 
mobile app marketing are available as well [1][5][8][9]. How-
ever, most of these publications comprise structured guide-
lines and extended checklists on how to successfully monetise 
mobile applications based on the authors’ experience or the 
discussion of successful case studies. In contrast, scientific re-
search on app stores and app (store) marketing is rather rare 
today. 
Only few publications have so far dealt with individual as-
pects of app stores, mainly focusing on app ranking mecha-
nisms and fraud [10][11][12], pricing strategies [13] or rec-
ommendations and user reviews [14][15]. 
Against this background, a significant research gap can be 
observed with regard to the availability of empirically based 
recommendations on the market-oriented configuration of app 
store elements. The suggested research approach, a study 
measuring customer preferences based on a conjoint analysis, 
has been applied to software selection processes and even to 
mobile application development [16][17], but is rather new to 
the specific area of app store marketing. 
III. 
APP STORE ELEMENTS 
As stated above, the design of the various app store ele-
ments is one of the key instruments of mobile app marketing. 
Potential users search for suitable mobile applications in the 
app store and obtain information about their features and prop-
erties [2]. In order to acquire a common frame of reference for 
this study, we focussed solely on the Apple App Store. There 
are various app stores for different mobile operating systems 
which are characterised by different appearances, but which 
are fundamentally very similar in terms of the possibilities to 
present mobile applications. 
A fictitious messenger app was chosen to concentrate on 
the importance of the app store elements and prevent partici-
pants from being biased by ealier purchase decisions, 
knowledge of real-world app presentations or brand prefer-
ences. The Apple App Store can be accessed via several mo-
bile devices. It is possible, for example, to open the app store 
via smartphones (iPhone) and tablets (iPad) to download ap-
plications. However, the number of elements is the same for 
all devices and always identical in each case.  
In total, based of an analysis of the Apple App Store and 
the best practices derived from the mobile app marketing lit-
erature in Section II, eight key app store elements were exam-
ined for this study which will be described in more detail be-
low. Moreover, the study also deals with variations of each of 
the attributes which were compared and examined with regard 
to their influence on customer preference in terms of a pur-
chase or usage decision. The fictitious messenger app was pre-
sented to the participants of the study based on the attributes 
and its selected attribute levels only. There was no prototype 
or trial-version in an app store available in this study. 
A. App Icon 
The app icon is seen as being one of the most crucial ele-
ments, as it is generally the first visual element that a potential 
user sees. The purely aesthetic design of the app icon can al-
ready have an effect on the development of user preference, 
for example in the way that the impression the icon makes is 
taken to be an indication of the quality of the app. The app 
icon and the app name are central design elements in many 
app stores, not least because a search request in the store ap-
pears directly on the search result page [4][18]. 
In Figure 1, three icon versions are shown that were devel-
oped for a fictitious messenger app in the study.  
 
 
 
 
(1) „High quality“ 
version  
(2) „Medium quality“ 
version 
(3) „Low quality“ ver-
sion 
 
Figure 1.  App Icons Variations 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

In the form of these icons, the intention is to refer to a par-
ticular messaging app which is characterised by an especially 
high level of security. Best practice guidelines have been used 
to develop the design variations [19]. For example, the clarity 
of the graphic elements to visualise the messaging and secu-
rity features of the app, the colouring and the legibility of the 
writing were varied in order to portray the spectrum from a 
representative “high“ to a “low“ quality of the icon design. 
While icon (1) has easy to understand graphical representa-
tions of messanging, icon (3) uses a confusing illustration and 
illegible writing. The consideration of the icon design as an 
attribute will allow an empirical verification of the aforemen-
tioned existing best practices in the study. 
B. App Name 
As mentioned above, the name of the app is also a central 
element with respect to the presentation of mobile applications 
in app stores, as it is shown in the app store’s search and rank-
ing lists and may therefore influence the user’s purchase deci-
sion [4]. The app name should fulfil certain criteria in order to 
be easy to remember on the one hand, and easy to find via the 
app store’s search algorithms on the other. Ideally, solutions 
to internationalise the name should also be available [2]. For 
the test app in the conjoint analysis, the same name was used 
for all three, but a claim was added for extra clarification – 
varying from a simple allusion to security to a technical de-
scription which is difficult for the average user to understand 
(high to low comprehensibility): 
 
„high“: SafeTalk – Your Safe Messenger 
 
„medium“: SafeTalk Secure Messenger 
 
„low“: Safetalk with AES-256 Encryption 
C. Reviews („stars“) and the number of reviews 
The reviews in the app store are assigned according to the 
star principle (1–5 stars) and are – together with the number 
of total reviews – an initial indicator for the user of how satis-
fied other users were with the app after downloading. A high 
number of stars is perceived as being a positive purchase rec-
ommendation [5]. App providers should note that star reviews 
are not immediately displayed for new apps but are only pub-
lished once a meaningful average value can be calculated. In 
the Apple App Store, this means a minimum of 5 reviews. Ap-
ple also differentiates according to countries. At present, it is 
not possible for the user who is giving the review to interact 
directly with the app provider [2]. The following analysis in-
cludes the review alternatives none, three and five stars.  
D. Price 
Pricing is another element which is immediately displayed 
on the search result page and in all the app store’s lists (for 
example in the „top charts“) and can therefore influence the 
user’s purchase decision during the app selection process. For 
the analysis in this study, a cost-free version and three price 
points were chosen which represented a low, a medium and a 
high price segment, respectively, in comparison to actual mo-
bile messaging applications (0.89 EUR, 1.79 EUR, 2.69 
EUR).  
E. Screenshots 
Screenshots are usually only visible in the detail view of 
an app. An exception is the result page of the search feature. 
Here, the first of a total of five possible screenshots is already 
shown in the preview. Screenshots have several tasks: On the 
one hand, they should display the features of the mobile ap-
plication and, on the other, communicate the app’s design [2]. 
Screenshots offer crucial support to the descriptive text as 
many users do not read this or only read it in part and therefore 
rely heavily on the screenshots for their purchase decision 
[18]. App store users draw conclusions from the screenshots 
as to the aesthetics and user friendliness of the mobile appli-
cation as a whole [5]. In this study, three different qualities of 
screenshots were created (high, medium, low), which vary 
with regard to recognisability and clarity of the functional el-
ements of the mobile messaging app. The bad screenshot, for 
example, displays rather random content, whereas the good 
one highlights important core functions with accompanying 
explanations. 
F. App Description 
The descriptive text is the only element presented here 
which appears solely in the detail view of an app once it is 
opened. The Apple App Store allows a descriptive text with a 
maximal number of 4000 characters [5]. The descriptive text 
is important for two reasons: Firstly, potential customers are 
presented with a list of sales arguments and secondly, the 
search algorithms of most app stores use the text to carry out 
corresponding search requests. As the optimisation for search 
purposes was not the main focus here, the quality of the de-
scriptive text was varied mostly in terms of comprehensibility. 
Here again, three levels of quality were created (high, me-
dium, low). Whereas the good description used simple lan-
guage and easily comprehensible wording, the bad descriptive 
text was characterised by technical terms which the average 
user would find difficult to understand. In addition, the text 
was automatically translated as is often the case in app stores 
which reduced the comprehensibility yet further.  
G. Server Location (as an additional attribute) 
As a messenger with special focus on secure communica-
tion had been chosen as a fictional product for analysis, an 
additional attribute entitled “server location” was included in 
the study for evaluation. This is not an element of an app store 
in a narrow sense, but an important company-related attribute 
of the app provider that can be emphasized within the app de-
scription. While the aforementioned attribute is used to meas-
ure how the quality of language influences user preferences, 
the server location is an example of how various app charac-
teristic, even if just mentioned in the description, could have 
an impact on customer choice. Due to current discussions 
about data security in Germany [19], heightened customer 
awareness was assumed to be a significant influencer on cus-
tomer preference. By including this attribute, we wanted to 
test whether and to what extent such attributes contribute to 
the user’s purchase decision in comparison to the other mar-
keting-related app store elements. Server locations in the US, 
in Germany and an unknown server location were included in 
the study.  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
The conjoint analysis is considered to be the standard 
method when investigating customer preferences and buying 
decisions. Traditional Conjoint Analysis (TCA) goes back to 
the year 1964 and was developed by the psychologist Luce 
and the statistician Tukey [20]. TCA, as well as all the subse-
quent versions of conjoint analysis, basically deals with the 
measurement of preferences for product attributes. Instead of 
asking the participants directly about the importance of attrib-
utes, conjoint analysis is based on the evaluation of product 
profiles. Each product profile consists of several attributes de-
scribing the product characteristics (e.g., brand, price, design, 
etc.). Different product profiles are derived by variation of at-
tribute levels (e.g., high, medium, and low price). An analysis 
is always carried out in such a way that each product profile 
or “stimulus” has to be examined and assessed from a holistic 
perspective or considered jointly) [21][22]. Instead of asking 
directly about the importance of a product attribute, conjoint 
analysis considers products as bundles of attributes on which 
the customer decides and makes trade-off decisions. The ap-
proach is better aligned to real-world purchasing decisions and 
the part-worth utilities of the attributes can be decomposed by 
using statistical methods like regression analysis. 
For this reason, the conjoint method is well suited to ana-
lyse the impact of different app store elements on the customer 
choice decision. As a result, the relevance of the key app store 
elements, derived from the practical literature, can be empiri-
cally validated based on the example of fictitious messenger 
app. The analysis also provides the relative importance of the 
different app store elements for market success. From a more 
pracitical perspective the results could be used by an app pro-
vider to determine the optimal app store configuration for the 
analyised secure messenger app or to conduct market simula-
tions based on different configurations. However, the study at 
hand focusses on the relative importance of the app store ele-
ments. The reference to fictitious messenger app was required 
only because the conjoint analysis cannot be conducted based 
on a non-specific and generic “mobile app”. 
Since the mid-sixties, conjoint analysis research has 
evolved and produced several variants that can be divided into 
traditional and more recent approaches. Traditional Conjoint 
Analysis (TCA) can be applied by using trade-off or full-pro-
file approaches but its significance in research has been de-
clining since its first appearance due to limitations on the num-
ber of attributes as well as other methodological and statistical 
problems [23]. Of the more recent approaches, Choice Based 
Conjoint Analysis (CBC) and its variant, the computer-aided 
Adaptive Choice-Based Conjoint Analysis (ACBC) are taken 
into consideration for this study. 
CBC is the most popular conjoint analysis today. In CBC, 
unlike TCA, discrete selection decisions are analysed instead 
of preference decisions [24]. During CBC, the subject is there-
fore not asked to make an order of precedence of all the prod-
uct profiles, but must select the preferred product profile 
within a set of alternatives or, if such an option is included, 
reject the choice by deciding on a “none option” [21][22] as 
shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of a Choice Set in the Study 
The ACBC is a computer-aided enhancement of classic 
CBC and includes an adaptive approach. This means that 
every piece of information supplied by the test subject during 
the course of the interview gradually reveals the formation of 
his/her preference structure so that the questions posed to 
him/her can be successively adapted to the answers [25].  
In this context, the first consideration for the study was 
which kind of conjoint analysis should be applied. For best 
results, CBC is recommended, if the product bundle in ques-
tion has around six attributes or less; the method can, however, 
be carried out with up to ten attributes. Adaptive ACBC has 
proved to be especially suitable if 5 to 15 attributes are to be 
examined. It is, however, characterised by a more complex 
and time-consuming questioning process [26]. 
The number of attributes in this study was eight. We there-
fore had to determine the feasibility of using a CBC despite 
the large number of attributes, or if the larger effort of drawing 
up an ACBC would be needed. The form of the attributes pro-
vided an important aspect in making this decision. The 
amount of information that a test subject has to absorb and 
process in connection with every single attribute is especially 
important when calculating the reasonable maximum number 
of attributes. If the attributes being examined are graphic ele-
ments (e.g., app icon) or information which can be quickly 
understood (e.g., price), it is also assumed in CBC to be feasi-
ble to carry out this type of analysis with more than six attrib-
utes [26]. 
Due to these criteria and considering the impact of an 
ACBC on the interview duration, CBC appeared to be the 
more suitable choice for the planned empirical survey. 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

As far as survey design was concerned, particularly the 
form of the stimuli had to be defined, specifically the question 
of which combination of attribute variations would constitute 
the stimuli and how the stimuli should be presented to each 
test subject. Here, the Full Profile Method was used, in which 
each product profile consists of all the attributes. As the num-
ber of attributes was already very high, we decided to present 
only two stimuli at a time so as not to overstrain the test sub-
jects with regard to the information they had to evaluate. In 
order to create a selection situation as close as possible to a 
real-life purchase situation, a “none option” was also included.  
Figure 2 shows a complete selection situation as an exam-
ple of how it also appeared in the final survey. In addition to 
the (randomly) created selection sets, so-called hold-out sets 
were integrated into the survey. These special selection sets 
serve to analyse the validity of the prognosis. They are not 
integrated into the benefit evaluation and are used to evaluate 
the quality of the prognosis of the preference rating. Two of 
these sets were defined and included. 
The conjoint analysis was carried out using the Sawtooth 
SSI Web 7 software package [27]. The main objective of the 
study was to measure the importance of the presented app 
store elements for mobile application purchase decisions. The 
study was conducted as an online survey. The website for the 
online survey was generated by the SSI Web 7 software, based 
on the aforementioned study design. The configuration of the 
CBC analysis and selected configuration parameters are sum-
marised in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
CONFIGURATION OF THE CBC ANALYSIS 
Parameter 
Value 
Number of Random Choice Tasks 
12 
Number of Fixed Choice Tasks 
2 
Number of Concepts per Choice 
Task 
2 (and an additional 
“none option”) 
Response Type 
Discrete Choice (single 
select radio button) 
Advanced Design Module Settings 
Traditional Full-Profile 
CBC Design 
Randomise Attribute Position 
within Concepts 
No Randomise of At-
tribute Order 
 
The survey was online between December 19, 2013 and 
January 10, 2014. Participants were acquired by using social 
media and various other online and offline channels of the 
RheinMain University of Applied Science in Wiesbaden, Ger-
many. 
A total of 221 people participated in the conjoint analysis 
interview. Of these, 163 completed the interview in its entirety 
and are, therefore, included in the subsequent evaluation. Se-
lected demographic characteristics of the study participants 
are shown in Table II below. 
 
TABLE II.  
DEMOGRAPHICS OF THE STUDY PARTICIPANTS 
Characteristics 
Absolute 
Number 
Percentage 
Mobile OS 
 
 
Apple iOS 
78 
47.9% 
Android 
78 
47.9% 
Blackberry OS 
1 
0.6% 
Windows Phone / Mo-
bile 
5 
3.1% 
Symbian 
1 
0.6% 
Purchased Apps 
 
 
None 
32 
19.6% 
1–5 
40 
24.5% 
6–10 
20 
12.3% 
11–20 
19 
11.7% 
21+ 
52 
31.9% 
Gender 
 
 
Female 
70 
42.9% 
Male 
93 
57.1% 
Ages 
 
 
18–24 
66 
40.5% 
25–34 
70 
42.9% 
35–44 
21 
12.9% 
45–54 
5 
3.1% 
55+ 
1 
0.6% 
 
The demographics show that the study might be biased by 
the participating media and design students and due to the re-
sulting high proportion of iOS users compared to the lower 
usage rate in the total population in Germany of around 32 
percent at the end of 2013 [28] and the underrepresentation of 
older user segments. 
V. 
STUDY FINDINGS 
The evaluation of the collected data took place in two 
steps: In the first phase, a counting analysis was conducted. 
This analysis can be used to calculate an outline of so called 
main effects. A main effect of an attribute level is calculated 
here as a proportion and reveals how many times a specific 
attribute level was chosen, divided by the number of times this 
attribute level was available for choice in the testing. Counting 
analysis is a simple way to get a first indication of the rele-
vance of the attribute levels. As a second step, the part-worth 
utilities of the attribute levels were estimated based on a logit 
analysis to find the maximum likelihood solution for the data. 
Based on the results of the part-worth utility estimation, the 
relative importance of the individual app store elements were 
finally determined. 
A. Counting Analysis 
A counting analysis and the proportions that are calculated 
at this stage can be used to identify the “winner” of the differ-
ent attribute levels. Table III shows the results of the counting 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

analysis for all attributes and attribute levels considered in this 
study. The higher the proportion of an attribute level is, the 
stronger this attribute level may have influenced the choice of 
participants. For the app store element “Reviews (stars)” a 
five-star rating was the “winner” – which is not surprising. 
However, in comparison, choices with this attribute level were 
selected more than twice as often (0.421/0.158) than choices 
with no stars in the reviews. 
TABLE III.  
SUMMARY OF STUDY RESULTS 
Attributes and  
Attribute Levels 
Counts 
(Proportions 
of “Wins”) 
Part-
Worth 
Utilities 
App Icon 
High quality 
0.312 
0.22215 
Medium quality 
0.262 
-0.01639 
Low quality 
0.234 
-0.20575 
App Name 
SafeTalk – Your safe messenger 
0.277 
0.02744 
SafeTalk Secure Messenger 
0.247 
-0.10392 
Safetalk with AES-256 Encryption 
0.283 
0.07648 
Reviews (stars) 
5 stars 
0.421 
0.73209 
3 stars 
0.229 
-0.13465 
No stars 
0.158 
-0.59744 
Number of Reviews 
7.240 reviews 
0.329 
0.31666 
310 reviews 
0.320 
0.26487 
5 reviews 
0.229 
-0.19484 
No reviews yet 
0.198 
-0.38669 
Price 
Free of charge 
0.385 
0.60605 
0.89 EUR 
0.274 
0.02966 
1.79 EUR 
0.238 
-0.14028 
2.69 EUR 
0.180 
-0.49543 
Screenshots 
High quality 
0.262 
-0.02198 
Medium quality 
0.274 
0.01437 
Low quality 
0.271 
0.00760 
App Description 
High quality 
0.283 
0.07434 
Medium quality 
0.269 
0.01472 
Low quality 
0.256 
-0.08906 
Server Location 
Germany 
0.373 
0.52316 
USA 
0.224 
-0.20529 
Unknown 
0.212 
-0.31788 
 
However, as mentioned before, this analysis can give a 
first indication of the relevance but does not provide measure-
ments for the part-worth utilities of attribute levels and rela-
tive importance of the different attributes, i.e., app store ele-
ments. 
B. Estimation of Part-worth Utilities 
Parth-worth utilities were calculated by using the mul-
tinominal logit estimation provided by the Sawtooth software 
for the CBC analysis. For the model estimation, a Chi Square 
of 473.7 was reported. Considering 18 degrees of freedom (26 
attribute levels and 8 attributes) the Chi Square is much larger 
than the required 34.8 for a 0.01 level, which would mean that 
the choices of the respondents are significantly affected by the 
attribute composition [24]. The estimated part-worth utilities 
represent the relative desirability of an attribute level. The 
higher the value of a part-worth, the greater the impact of the 
corresponding attribute level on the buying decision. Part-val-
ues are automatically standardised, so that the result per attrib-
ute amounts to „0“. Reciprocally, this means that negative val-
ues can also arise. Table III shows the estimated values for all 
attribute levels. These should be interpreted to mean that a 
higher number corresponds to a higher part-worth utility and 
that this attribute variation therefore had a higher preference 
among the test subjects. If we look again at the attribute “Re-
views (stars)“, it becomes evident that the attribute level „5 
stars“ has a very high part-worth value with a positive value 
of 0.73209. The other two variations „3 stars“ (-0.13465) and 
„no stars“ (-0.59744) were less important for the purchase de-
cision of the test subjects due to smaller values of the corre-
sponding part-worth utilities. 
C. Calculation of the Attribute Importance 
The defined objective of the empirical study was not only 
to find out the utilities of the attribute variations but also to 
analyse each individual app store element in terms of its rela-
tive importance for an app purchase decision. We must there-
fore find a unit of measurement to express the relative im-
portance of each attribute. The calculation is carried out by 
dividing the range of the the part-worth of each attribute by 
the sum of the part-worth ranges of all the attributes. Hereby, 
the range is defined as the difference between the highest and 
the lowest part-value within the levels of an attribute [29]. The 
results can be seen in Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF ATTRIBUTES 
Attribute 
Attribute Importance 
Reviews (Stars) 
27.8% 
Price 
23.2% 
Server Location 
17.6% 
Number of Reviews 
14.9% 
App Icon 
9.0% 
App Name 
3.6% 
App Description 
3.3% 
Screenshots 
0.6% 
Total 
100.0% 
 
The values reveal that the reviews according to the star 
principle have the largest influence on the purchase decision. 
Almost 28% of the decisions are based on this criterium. The 
highest part-worth utility and/or the most positive influence 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

was of course an app review with 5 stars. The distance to the 
other attribute variations (3 stars, no stars) was the highest 
with this app store element compared to the other elements. 
This highlights the extremely high relevance of good reviews 
and the importance of this attribute for the perceived total util-
ity of the corresponding app presented in the app store. As was 
to be expected, pricing, too, has a high level of importance for 
the purchase decision. The test subjects reacted in a very 
price-sensitive way. It should also be noted that many apps are 
now offered at the Apple App Store for free or at a greatly 
reduced price at the beginning or at some stage of their life 
cycle for a certain period of time. A certain „freebie“ mental-
ity is also reflected in the order of precedence in this study and 
shows that price is one of the most important criteria for an 
app. 
The app provider’s server location differs from the other 
elements in as far as it is not a standardised app store element 
but the app developer‘s company-related element. We can 
therefore conclude that users not only include the app store’s 
design elements into their purchase decisions, but also con-
sider and evaluate outstanding and specific properties of the 
app. In this case, there was a particularly positive effect on the 
purchase decision if the messenger provider was located in 
Germany. 
The number of reviews relates to the reviews according to 
the star principle. Here, we see the tendency that the part-
worth utility is perceived as higher, the more reviews an app 
has. An interesting aspect here is that the part-worth of the 
extreme scenario considered in the survey with 7,240 reviews 
did not substantially differ from the next level with 310 re-
views. The distance to the next two steps (5 reviews, no re-
views) is considerably larger, however. This means that an op-
timal number of reviews – which can be attained with a rea-
sonable amount of effort on the part of the app provider – can 
be assumed to be more than 5, but not significantly higher than 
310 reviews. 
The app icon is considerably less important than expected. 
Besides the screenshots and the star reviews, it is the third 
graphic element and easy for the potential buyer to under-
stand. Nevertheless, the test subjects apparently did not assess 
the quality of the app on the basis of the icon but stuck to the 
very much more rational criterium of the reviews when mak-
ing their purchase decision.  
The app name is of very low significance. Many users see 
it as a “frill” within the overall impression of the app store and 
it is therefore of little interest. The study results even show 
that the name “Safetalk with AES-256 Encryption” with the 
per definition worst variation actually had the highest partial 
benefit value. However, this could be a result of the specific 
setup and the sensitivity of the app users towards data security 
in Germany. The complicated name –event if not understood 
by the customers – may be associated with a highly sophisti-
cated technological solution to protect the user from the dan-
ger of interception. 
The app’s descriptive text is also of little importance in 
terms of decision making. This suggests that potential buyers 
do not take the trouble to read it or may be very familiar with 
the type of apps that have been tested here. It should be noted 
at this point that the descriptive texts used in the survey were 
relatively short. In real life, an app is mostly described in much 
more detail and using many more characters – the attention 
span could, therefore, be even shorter than for the texts used 
in the survey.  
With a relative importance of 0.6 percent, the screenshots 
had the lowest influcence on the purchase decision. Here, too, 
it was striking that the part-worth of the medium quality 
screenshots was the highest, followed by those of the worst 
quality. The highest quality level had the lowest part-worth 
value for the test subjects. Here we should note, however, that 
the differences recorded were marginal and the general result, 
i.e., that screenshots hardly influence purchase decisions, is 
predominant. This may also be due to the fact that the subject 
of the study, messaging app functions, is relatively well-
known and simple and that therefore screenshots have only 
minor informational value as far as the app is concerned.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
One of the most important findings of the study was that 
reviews have a major influence on the user’s purchase deci-
sion. Average rating according to the star principle as well as 
the number of reviews given determine the buying decision of 
an app to a very large degree. These two criteria, however, 
cannot be directly influenced by the app provider – reviews 
are made by the app user and are published by the provider 
with no prior screening. Nevertheless, there are numerous 
possibilities for the provider to influence the reviews, at least 
to some extent. Active review management should therefore 
be conducted. Review reminders within the app can for exam-
ple help to continuously increase the number of reviews. It is 
advisable to wait for a certain period of time before displaying 
review reminders as the probability of receiving a positive re-
view is higher when the app has been used for a period of time. 
Reviews can also be stimulated by actively reacting to user 
feedback, i.e., by responding to reported software bugs or con-
sidering suggestions for improvements in upcoming updates. 
The possibilities for the provider to influence the price are 
often strongly determined by the costs. In addition, the price 
decision can depend on the app’s life cycle or even some im-
portant seasonal factors (special offers on public holidays for 
example). Thus, a low price level may not be an option and 
the findings of the conjoint analysis can not be transferred to 
a general recommendation on an adequate pricing strategy. 
However, if it makes sense for the type of app in question, a 
free version can be offered which can be supplemented by ad-
ditional content per in-app-purchase. This “freemium model” 
takes the user’s initial price-sensitivity into account. Revenue 
generation is then postponed to a later phase of usage.  
Another important finding is that particular attention 
should be drawn to app-specific properties if these could pos-
itively influence sales. In this study, this applied to the server 
location of the company providing the app and the corre-
sponding messenger service. In this particular case, it appears 
to have addressed a basic need for security among the test sub-
jects. This may not be directly transferable to other apps. 
However, such “unique selling prepositions” should be partic-
ularly highlighted and communicated accordingly via the 
other elements.  
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

The elements not yet mentioned at this point (app icon, app 
name, descriptive text, screenshots) should by no means be 
neglected during the course of marketing activities. It can only 
be stated that these have a smaller influence on the customer’s 
purchase decision. They are, therefore, elements which must 
indeed be well designed, in order to convince a customer to 
purchase or to use the app, yet are only to a limited extent suit-
able for the purpose of setting the product apart from the com-
petition. The descriptive text and the app name, for example, 
are nevertheless crucial for the app store’s search algorithms 
to enable the mobile application to be found at all. Whether 
the app name is easy to remember is another factor that plays 
an important role in the selection process and in word-of-
mouth propaganda.  
This study has revealed some empirically based recom-
mendations on how to align the elements of the app presenta-
tion in app stores to customer preferences. The findings, how-
ever, refer to a rather small and not representative sample. 
Moreover, the generalisability of the study is limited due to 
the fact that here just one single, specific application was in-
vestigated, using the example of select design elements of the 
Apple App Store. More detailed studies in different applica-
tion domains and with regard to different app stores will there-
fore be necessary in order to verify the validity of the findings 
derived in this study.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. F. Hughes, iPhone and iPad apps marketing. Secrets to sell-
ing your iPhone and iPad apps. Que Pub., Indianapolis, 2012. 
[2] 
J. Mayerhofer, Apps erfolgreich verkaufen. Vermarktungs-
strategien für Apps auf iPhone, iPad, Android und Co. 
Hanser, München, 2012. 
[3] 
P. Kotler and G. Armstrong, Principles of marketing. Pear-
son, Upper Saddle River, N.J, 2014. 
[4] 
D. Wooldridge and M. Schneider, The business of iPhone 
and iPad App Development. Making and marketing Apps 
that succeed. Apress, New York, 2011. 
[5] 
R. Mroz, App-Marketing für iPhone und Android. Planung, 
Konzeption, Vermarktung von Apps im Mobile Business. 
mitp, Heidelberg, 2013. 
[6] 
N. Kuh, Ed., Foundation iPhone App Development. Apress, 
Berkeley, CA, 2012. 
[7] 
L. Jordan, Ed., Beginning iOS 5 Games Development. 
Apress, Berkeley, CA, 2011. 
[8] 
E. Kim, The best book on marketing your android app. Cre-
ateSpace Independent Publishing. 
[9] 
M. Amerson, The best book on IOS app marketing. Hyper-
link Press, 2012. 
[10] S.-Y. Ihm, W.-K. Loh, and Y.-H. Park, "App Analytic: A 
Study on Correlation Analysis of App Ranking Data," 2013 
International Conference on Cloud and Green Computing 
(CGC), pp. 561–563. 
[11] H. Zhu, H. Xiong, Y. Ge, and E. Chen, "Ranking fraud detec-
tion for mobile apps," Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Information & Knowledge Manage-
ment, pp. 619–628. 
[12] H. Zhu, H. Xiong, Y. Ge, and E. Chen, "Discovery of Rank-
ing Fraud for Mobile Apps," IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., 
2014, pp. 1. 
[13] B. Ifrach and R. Johari, "Pricing a bestseller," SIGMETRICS 
Perform. Eval. Rev. 41, 4, 2014, p. 51. 
[14] C. Iacob and R. Harrison, "Retrieving and analyzing mobile 
apps feature requests from online reviews," 2013 10th Work-
ing Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). 
Proceedings, May 18-19, 2013, San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 
41–44. 
[15] P. Yin, P. Luo, W.-C. Lee, and M. Wang, "App recommenda-
tion," Sixth ACM International Conference on Web Search 
and Data Mining, WSDM 2013, pp. 395–404. 
[16] J. Muller and M. Lillack, "Conjoint Analysis of Software 
Product Lines: A Feature Based Approach," 2011 37th 
EUROMICRO Conference on Software Engineering and Ad-
vanced Applications (SEAA), pp. 374–377. 
[17] D. Eckjans, J. Fahling, J. M. Leimeister, and H. Krcmar, 
"Mobile Customer Integration:  A Smartphone Application 
Prototype for Conducting Mobile Conjoint Studies," 2011 
Tenth International Conference on Mobile Business, ICMB, 
pp. 129–135. 
[18] R. Sandberg and M. Rollins, The business of Android Apps 
development. Making and marketing Apps that succeed on 
Google Play, Amazon App Store and more. Apress, New 
York, 2013. 
[19] H. Schmundt and G. Traufetter, 2014, Digital Independence: 
NSA Scandal Boosts German Tech Industry. 
http://www.spiegel.de/international/business/german-it-in-
dustry-looks-for-boom-from-snowden-revelations-a-
950786.html 2014.08.12. 
[20] R. Luce and J. W. Tukey, "Simultaneous conjoint measure-
ment: A new type of fundamental measurement," Journal of 
Mathematical Psychology 1, 1, 1964, pp. 1–27. 
[21] C. Breidert, Estimation of Willingness-to-Pay. Theory, Meas-
urement, Application. DUV, Wiesbaden, 2006. 
[22] A. Gustafsson, A. Herrmann, and F. Huber, 2007, "Conjoint 
Analysis as an Instrument of Market Research Practice," 
Conjoint measurement. Methods and applications, A. Gus-
tafsson, A. Herrmann and F. Huber, Eds. Springer, Berlin, 
New York, pp. 3–30. 
[23] P. E. Green and V. Srinivasan, "Conjoint analysis in market-
ing: New developments with implications for research and 
practice," Journal of Marketing 54, 4, 1990, pp. 3–19. 
[24] Sawthooth Software, 2013, The CBC System for Choice-
Based Conjoint Analysis. Technical Paper Series. https://saw-
toothsoftware.com/download/techpap/cbctech.pdf 
2014.08.01. 
[25] P. E. Green, A. M. Krieger, and Y. Wind, "Thirty Years of 
Conjoint Analysis: Reflections and Prospects," Interfaces 31, 
3, 2001, pp. S56-S73. 
[26] Sawtooth Software, 2014, The Adaptive Choice-Based Con-
joint (ACBC) Technical Paper. http://www.sawtoothsoft-
ware.com/download/techpap/acbctech.pdf 2014.08.01. 
[27] Sawtooth Software, 2014, What is SSI Web? 
http://www.sawtoothsoftware.com/support/downloads/down-
load-ssi-web/what-is-ssi-web 2014.09.19. 
[28] StatCounter, 2014, Top 8 Mobile Operating Systems in Ger-
many from July 2013 to July 2014. 
http://gs.statcounter.com/#mobile_os-DE-monthly-201307-
201407 2014.08.01. 
[29] B. K. Orme, Getting started with conjoint analysis. Strategies 
for product design and pricing research. Research Publishers, 
LLC, Madison, WI, 2006. 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-369-8
CENTRIC 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

