Application of QoE evaluation methodology 
A study of the user's acceptance threshold regarding image quality 
Graziella Cardoso Bonadia 
Maria Silvina Medrano 
Nyvea Maria da Silva 
Service Technology Corporate Department 
CPqD Foundation 
Campinas, Brazil 
{bonadia, mmedrano, nsilva}@cpqd.com.br 
 
Abstract — Taking into consideration the methodology to 
evaluate the user's quality of experience (QoE), the objective of 
this work is to evaluate the video image acceptance threshold 
regarding its compression ratio. The aim is to connect technical 
and subjective assessments gathered directly from the user. 
During this first phase, aspects regarding the transport 
network failure were evaluated. The ultimate goal of this work 
in progress is to obtain the technical parameters associated 
with the QoE, so that the best setup is used when adding videos 
to the Digital TV interactive services. 
Keywords-Quality of Experience; compression ratio; video; 
network condition. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The objective of video compression systems is to reduce 
the bit rate required for transmission or storage with enough 
quality for the application. In general, two techniques are 
used: the exploration of the psychovisual properties of the 
human visual system and the reduction of the statistical 
redundancy in images (spatial and temporal). Depending on 
the efficiency of the compression algorithm used, some kinds 
of degradations are introduced in the video signal, which can 
be perceptible or not to the end user. In general, these 
degradations do not occur separately and the final quality 
perceived by the user will be affected through the 
combination of all the effects since the creation of the 
content, its encoding, packaging, transport up to the 
reception and display on the user's device. Due to all the 
technical variables influencing the image quality, the user 
acceptation is not necessarily determined by each of these 
factors. Although the technical evaluation has great 
importance on the final quality, it is the user‟s attitude 
towards the service (video on demand, streaming, among 
others) that will determine the proper level of quality. There 
are many studies regarding technical aspects of image quality 
([1] and [2]). Those studies carry interesting and successful 
methodologies to assess technical variables on image. But on 
a market point of view, the best quality is not always 
requested. The best quality is not always perceived by end 
users and their previous experiences about a particular 
service. To include user‟s perceptions on assessment process 
provides information on balance between the “best” and the 
“enough”, optimizing the use of resources to deliver a 
service. As stated in [3], „methods to assess the visual quality 
of digital videos as perceived by human observers are 
becoming increasingly important…‟. This study takes into 
consideration the user opinion about quality of images. The 
concept of Quality of Experience has taking much attention 
for all kind of service and it is being used for a variety of 
issues ([4], [5] and [6]).   
Quality of Experience (QoE) can be defined as the 
acceptance of an application or service subjectively 
perceived by the user regarding performance and usefulness, 
including system components (terminal, network, service 
infrastructure, etc.), as well as context of use and end-user 
expectations [7]. Nevertheless, the assessment of services 
that takes into account the user‟s opinion is largely based on 
a single score ([3] and [8]). When assessing a service, it must 
take 
into 
consideration 
that 
people 
have 
different 
expectations and they translate these expectations in distinct 
manner for each distinct service. For this reason, this paper 
will consider a methodology that combines two answers 
from users: The score on a well known five point scale and 
the binary answer about whether the service (or video image 
in the case) is acceptable for use on a routine basis. This 
approach will provide a reference curve of score and 
acceptability which accounts for the target market and the 
assessed service. 
Considering the methodology to evaluate the user's QoE 
[9] based on laboratory tests, the purpose is to evaluate, 
throughout several video sessions, the threshold of the 
technical variables values that will be perceived by the user, 
and which are not accepted by the market.  
The typical procedure for subjective evaluation consists 
of submitting to a group of evaluators a sequence of video 
streaming within a controlled environment. Based on these 
sequences, the evaluator is asked to give an opinion on the 
quality and acceptance in watching a program with the same 
image quality level. After the opinions are gathered, a 
statistical analysis is performed resulting in numbers for 
comparison. 
The purpose of the work in progress is to evaluate, at 
first, different video compression ratios (considering the 
same codec used for all five cases) in the viewpoint of the 
user's QoE. The following steps will be to introduce 
simulations regarding the network quality in the user's 
perception. This paper analyzes two network quality cases 
(simulated on laboratory) in addition to five compression 
ratios. The ultimate goal for future work is to obtain data 
based on different types of images with five video 
compression ratios and through several packet loss 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

simulations (in order to simulate network conditions), so that 
a threshold value is obtained regarding the users acceptance. 
At first, the compilation of scores and the acceptance 
regarding the image quality are performed in order to 
evaluate the user's QoE. Then, these values are submitted to 
a logistic regression, with categorical variables (see, for 
instance, [10]) regarding acceptance probability evaluation 
according to the score. Based on this set of probabilities, the 
linear regression between the scores and the probabilities is 
performed in order to obtain the reference curve. In this 
methodology, the final value of the QoE is the probability 
obtained from the data average score of 50% of the most 
positive scores. As a standard, only probabilities above 0.7 
will be deemed acceptable. In the following sections, the 
laboratory test conditions, the analysis and the preliminary 
results will be presented. 
II. 
TEST PREPARATION 
During the first phase, where the objective was to 
evaluate separately the user's perception regarding the image 
quality according to the video compression ratio, simulation 
preparation procedures were performed to be presented to the 
user.  
First, nine 11-second images were selected with different 
levels of complexity, such as movement, landscape, 
drawings, etc. Each image went through five video 
compression ratios: 3 Mbps, 6 Mbps, 9 Mbps, 12 Mbps and 
15 Mbps. Furthermore, each compression ratio condition 
also passed through a packet loss to simulate transport 
network failure. As a result, 90 test conditions would be 
evaluated. Every single test condition was evaluated at least 
by ten users. The video room was fitted with a 42" TV and 
three seats for the evaluators at a distance of three meters 
from the TV set.  As a whole, ten 15-minute test sessions 
were performed with three evaluators each, as well as a 
number of random image conditions (see design of 
experiments methodology by [11]). Each evaluator was 
given a questionnaire with the following questions: 
 
What score would you give image 1: 5, Excellent; 4, 
Good; 3, Average; 2 Poor; or 1, Very poor? 
 
Would you watch a program with this image 
quality? 
The evaluators were requested to answer the two 
questions for every displayed image. 
The data for analysis were obtained only after the ten 
laboratory test sessions were performed, with each condition 
repeated ten times. The purpose of the different complexity 
levels of the images was to obtain the average score of the 
displayed videos that simulate standard TV programs. For 
this reason, they were not considered as variables to be 
studied. The variables considered for user QoE analysis 
include the compression ratios divided in five levels and the 
packet loss divided in two: with and without loss. The 
following table illustrates the analysis. 
TABLE I.  
CONFIGURATION OF PERFORMED TESTS 
Compression 
Ratio 
Without packet 
loss 
With packet 
loss 
With and without 
loss 
3 Mbps 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
6 Mbps 
No 
No 
Yes 
9 Mbps 
No 
No 
Yes 
12 Mbps 
No 
No 
Yes 
15 Mbps 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
(*) Although all types of combinations were calculated, only the extremes 
are analyzed in this paper. 
The analyses presented in the next section are: 
A comparison between the QoE estimate at a 
compression ratio of 3 Mbps and 15 Mbps (both with and 
without packet loss): the main goal is to evaluate whether 
packet loss simulation was perceptible to the user so that 
other simulations are created with more loss conditions 
during the next tests (higher or lower than the current test). 
A 
comparison 
between 
the 
compression 
ratios, 
considering both packet loss conditions: the objective is to 
evaluate the compression ratio separately and to determine 
the ratio perceptible to the user in terms of QoE. 
III. 
ANALYSIS 
The QoE analysis is connected to the users' perception on 
the use of technology. Thus, the purpose of the QoE estimate 
methodology used is to provide a value that would quantify 
the subjectivity of the user evaluation as a form of 
acceptance probability threshold. As stated previously, the 
evaluator was requested to give a score according to the pre-
established scale and then determine if the image quality is 
acceptable for a standard TV program. The combination of 
both will be used to adjust the scale and provide an answer 
suitable for the target audience.  
Through an analysis based on model adjustments, the 
scores and the acceptance status of the service are submitted 
to a logistic regression, followed by a linear regression that 
results in a reference curve (given its characteristics). This 
value, which varies between 0 and 1 necessarily, is the QoE 
estimate. This value structures market aspects and provides 
clear data on the number of people within the target market 
that would watch the program within the evaluated format.  
Equation 1 shows the logistic regression adjustment: 
ln (p/(1-p) = a + b*score(1) + c*score(2) + d*score(3) 
+ e*score(4) + f*score(5)  
          (1) 
where:  
In p/(1-p) is the acceptance or non-acceptance of the 
image quality; 
p is the acceptance probability, for a given score(x); 
a, b, c, d, e, f: are the parameters adjusted by the logistic 
regression; 
score(x): is equal to 1 if the score is x or 0, otherwise. 
Equation 2 shows the acceptance probability: 
    p= ea +b x/(1+ea +b x)                   (2) 
 
where b is the parameter for score(x). 
After calculating the probability for each score and each 
test condition, the reference curve was adjusted by the linear 
regression. The results are presented in two parts. Firstly, the 
analysis is performed considering the comparison between 
the images with the five compression ratio values, without 
distinguishing whether or not there is a packet loss. Then, 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

another analysis is performed to assess if the procedure used 
to simulate the packet loss is perceived by the user. To do so, 
the video compression ratios at 3 Mbps and 15 Mbps with 
and without packet loss are compared. Table II lists the 
probability values according to the reference curves in both 
analyses: 
TABLE II.  
ACCEPTANCE PROBABILITY BY SCORE – ANALYSIS 1 
 
Analysis 1 
Score 
3 Mbps 
6 Mbps 
9 Mbps 
12 Mbps 
15 Mbps 
1 
0.04 
0* 
0* 
0* 
0* 
2 
0.24 
0.20 
0.2 
0.17 
0.19 
3 
0.45 
0.46 
0.45 
0.44 
0.44 
4 
0.65 
0.71 
0.69 
0.70 
0.69 
5 
0.86 
0.96 
0.95 
0.97 
0.93 
(*) Minimum and maximum approximate values. 
TABLE III.  
ACCEPTANCE PROBABILITY BY SCORE – ANALYSIS 2 
 
Analysis 2 
Score 
3 Mbps without 
packet loss 
3 Mbps with 
packet loss 
15 Mbps 
without packet 
loss 
15 Mbps with 
packet loss 
1 
0.12 
0* 
0* 
0* 
2 
0.29 
0.22 
0.17 
0.21 
3 
0.46 
0.45 
0.41 
0.48 
4 
0.63 
0.68 
0.65 
0.74 
5 
0.80 
0.9 
0.89 
1* 
(*) Minimum and maximum approximate values. 
 
After the calculation, the reference curves were adjusted 
to the five compression ratio cases and the four combinations 
between the compression ratios and the packet loss status. 
The purpose of reference curves is to associate the given 
score with the QoE estimate in cases when scores given by 
the users are still required, even after the product is launched. 
Figure 1 illustrates the five adjusted reference curves, while 
Figure 2 shows the four curves related to the packet loss 
status.  
 
Figure 1.  Reference curve – Analysis 1 
 
Figure 2.  Reference curve – Analysis 2 
In this context, the QoE estimated is the probability 
obtained from the curve regarding the average score of 50% 
of the data compiled during the laboratory tests. Figure 3 
shows the QoE estimate of each compression ratio setup.  
 
Figure 3.  Quality of Experience estimate 
As shown in Figure 3, the QoE level increases according 
to the compression ratio, which means that the user is aware 
of the difference in quality between the images.  However, 
the perception is decreased when considering compression 
ratios at 12 Mbps and 15 Mbps. The QoE values are 
established by the probability of a person to agree to watch a 
program with the image quality under evaluation. 
Furthermore, the probability for the person to accept the 
service, considering that he/she belongs to the 50% potential 
users, is 0.75 for the 15 Mbps compression ratio and 0.78 for 
12 Mbps. Within the acceptance criteria, the user considers 
the images with 9 Mbps compression ratio to be of good 
quality, even if the difference with better ratios is 
perceptible. 
To evaluate if the criteria to run the network interference 
simulation, with random packet loss throughout the video, 
cause changes in the image quality, tests were performed 
comparing high-quality and low-quality images, with and 
without packet loss. Figure 4 shows the QoE estimate for 
each case. Simulation 1 represents cases with no packet loss, 
whereas Simulation 2 represents packet loss. 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

 
Figure 4.  Quality of Experience estimate 
The analysis shows that the difference obtained from the 
comparison is due to the compression ratio. When this 
characteristic is discarded, 3 Mbps image quality is 
perceived less in Simulation 2 than in Simulation 1. 
However, when performing the chi-square test to evaluate 
whether there was a significant difference, the result was 
0.99. By comparing the calculated value (0.99) with the 
value from the chi-square table, considering 5% significance 
(3.84), the result indicates that there is no evidence the 
packet loss simulation is perceived by the user regarding 
image quality. On the other hand, by comparing the 
compression ratios, both with packet loss, the calculated 
value of the chi-square test was 12.11, much higher than 
3.84. This means that the image quality level is perceived by 
the user. 
IV. 
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 
At this fist part of the project, the analyzed data was used 
to evaluate the user perception mainly regarding the different 
video compression ratios, considering a group of images 
with different levels of complexity. The objective was to 
evaluate if the user perceived the difference in the image 
quality and when it would be acceptable. The results 
obtained from the analysis showed that there is a perception 
and the images with compression ratios above 9 Mbps are 
accepted, according to the established criteria. Nevertheless, 
the difference between the 6 Mbps and 9 Mbps compression 
ratios is considerable only with 10% significance level. 
Images with 3 Mbps compression ratio are substantially 
distinct from all other conditions.  
To evaluate the packet loss status, a specific 
methodology for randomized image degradation was used. 
The result was not perceived by the user. Therefore, to 
evaluate the tolerance thresholds on the network aspects, 
new simulations with specific packet loss techniques with a 
larger scope than the one used in this study must be 
performed.  
Similarly, other variation sources will be the object of 
analysis in future studies. Examples of variation sources are: 
network parameters and the different sizes and technologies 
used in the receivers. The objective is to obtain a response 
surface in order to evaluate how the set of parameters 
contributes to a tolerance threshold or acceptance of a 
program in the user's perception, translated in QoE estimates. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Z. Wang, L. Lu, and A. C. Bovik, “Video Quality Assessment 
Based on Structural Distortion Measurement”, Signal 
Processing: Image Communication, vol. 19, no. 2, Feb. 2004, 
pp. 121-132. 
[2] C. Yim and A. C. Bovik, “Evaluation of Temporal Variation 
of Video Quality in Packet Loss Networks”, Signal 
Processing: Image Communication, vol. 26, no. 1, Jan. 2011, 
pp. 24-38. 
[3] K. Seshadrinathan, R. Soundararajan, A. C. Bovik, and L. 
K. Cormack, “ Study of Subjective and Objective Quality 
Assessment of Video”, IEEE Transactions on Image 
Processing, vol. 19, Issue: 6, June 2010, pp. 1427-1441. 
[4] I. Wechsung, K. P. Engelbrecht, C. Kühnel, S. Möller, and B. 
Weiss, “Measuring the Quality of Service and Quality of 
Experience of Multimodal Human-Machine Interaction”, 
Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, vol. 6, Issue 1-2, July 
2012, pp. 73-85. 
[5] H. A. Tran and A. Mellouk, “QoE Model Driven for Network 
Services”, 
Wired/Wireless 
Internet 
Communications 
– 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6074, 2010, pp. 264-
277. 
[6] D. K. Moore et al., “Linking Users‟ Subjective QoE 
Evaluation to Signal Strength in an IEEE 802.11b/g Wireless 
LAN 
Environment”, 
EURASIP 
Journal 
on 
Wireless 
Communications And Networking, vol. 2010, pp. 1-12, 
Article ID 541568, doi: 10.1155/2012/541568.  
[7]  ITU, Recommendation G.1080. “Quality of experience 
requirements for IPTV services”, 2008. 
[8] J. Xu, L. Xing, A. Perkis, and Y. Jiang, “On the Properties of 
Mean 
Opinion 
Scores 
for 
Quality 
of 
Experience 
Management”, IEEE International Symposium on Multimedia 
(ISM 
– 
2011), 
Dec. 
2011, 
pp. 
500-505, 
doi: 
10.1109/ISM.2011.88. 
[9] G. C. Bonadia, C. A. Tambascia, and E. M. Menezes, 
“Standardizing the Evaluation of QoE by Users – A 
Methodology to Estimate the Acceptance of Interactive 
Services”, The Fifth International Conference on Advances in 
Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies 
and Services (CENTRIC 2012), Nov. 2012,  in press.  
[10] D. W. Hosmer and S. Lemeshow, Applied Logistic 
Regression, 2nd ed., New York: John Wiley & Sons INC., 
2000. 
[11] D. C. Montgomery, Design and analysis of experiments, 8th 
ed., New York: John Wiley & Sons INC., 2012. 
 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-232-5
CENTRIC 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

