Assessing Management and Leadership of Work Communities 
Related Concepts, Views and ICT-tools  
Seppo Väyrynen
Faculty of Technology  
University of Oulu  
Oulu, Finland  
e-mail: seppo.vayrynen@oulu.fi 
Heli Kiema-Junes 
Faculty of Education 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland  
 e-mail: heli.kiema@oulu.fi
Abstract— Our key starting point for analyzing and developing 
work conditions is based on a systematic approach that focuses 
on humans at work interacting with tasks, organization, 
technology, and environment, i.e., the work system. This 
system is not seen in isolation; it is embedded in wider systems 
of stakeholders, with their contexts enabling or restricting 
work. Work and wider systems are kept in interactive intra- 
and inter-connections throughout the key psychosocial and 
physical human factors within society and work communities. 
Systems are producing both desirable and undesirable 
concrete and abstract outcomes. Continuous improvement 
process aims to achieve optimal work systems to increase 
desirable outcomes and decrease undesirable ones. Systems, 
and the inner and outer actors within them, should be optimal 
and balanced. If this is not the case, productivity and well-
being, which include health and safety, are threatened. This 
paper presents an international collection of guidelines and 
documentation for promoting and maintaining especially 
safety (11 maturity models). The documents comprise 
contemporary, useful, and multi-focused works consisting of 
clear, important concepts. All the concepts (words) are closely 
related to safety culture, which in turn is described with both 
its essential implicit and explicit attributes. The 12th maturity 
model, the one which the authors have helped develop, is a 
certain kind of benchmark, as it regards the key aspects of 
health, safety, environment, and quality (HSEQ). This 
maturity model is called the HSEQ AP, with AP standing for 
assessment procedure. In addition to management assessment, 
this and other models provide good practices and tools for 
planning, leadership, risk reduction, and more positive 
features at work, creating a good culture. 
Keywords-safety; health; maturity; management system  
I.
INTRODUCTION 
A team from the University of Oulu has been the main 
co-developer of the Health, Safety, Environment and 
Quality Assessment Procedure (HSEQ AP) for supply 
companies that are partners with big Finnish companies (12 
principal companies), particularly those related to the heavy 
process industry, mainly in the steel, forestry, energy and 
chemical production sectors, described by Väyrynen et al. 
[1]. Another key background for this paper is the 
university’s Frictionless Communication (FRICO) project. 
FRICO aimed at developing managers’ and employees’ 
social skills and innovating new actions for organizations to 
increase work fluency, and overall well-being at work 
through skillful, professional communication between 
subordinates and supervisors [2].   This paper, based on a 
pilot study, aims at analyzing other assessment methods 
than just HSEQ AP but is based on the key issues of  HSEQ 
AP and FRICO. The paper’s one focus is finding ideas to 
develop the current version of HSEQ AP [3] by 
emphasizing the role of psychosocial factors (PSFs). We 
first proposed this PSF improvement of HSEQ AP one year 
ago, and the key point of that paper was that specific HSEQ 
knowhow should be distributed to all people at workplaces, 
not only among the experts, service buyers and various level 
managers within companies [4]. A wider utilization is 
considered    psychosocially wise, and HSEQ AP-style 
managerial tools are clearly needed in other manufacturing 
sectors or service businesses than just the heavy process 
industry. 
 Contemporary, 
more 
developed 
managerial 
and 
leadership practices and procedures are needed to better 
meet intra-, and inter-organizational and multi-employer 
challenges. For example, the PSF and approaches presented 
in FRICO should be implemented in management systems, 
with an emphasis similar to Kiema et al.’s [2] and Filppa 
and Soini’s [5] reports, to develop the social skills that are 
associated with employees’ well-being at work and their 
work engagement. Thus, PSFs should to be more deeply 
emphasized, generally, e.g., [7][8], and specifically in 
holistic work systems, cf.  Väyrynen and Kiema-Junes 
[4][6]. The question is what other relevant new features 
could be found and integrated into HSEQ AP and other 
management models of good practice. Could the other 
managerial maturity models, i.e., assessment tools and lists 
of 
checkpoints 
for 
good 
HSE(Q) 
be 
useful 
for 
organizations? Do the other assessment tools include PSFs, 
and to what extent? 
Regarding explicit PSFs, we focus on the proper 
communication and interaction, individual factors, and 
subjective well-being. Based on the issues described above, 
and also considering the methods and results of FRICO, we 
have determined that the most important words for our 
analysis 
are 
psycho, 
social, 
social 
skills, 
and 
communication. Some models that we examined seemed to 
focus on assessing supply companies, as does HSEQ AP. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

  We sought answers to the following questions: (1) 
What key issues do the organizational maturity models 
typically include? (2) Do these issues cover PSFs that are 
essential for the whole organization's performance and 
implementation of the models? (3) Can HSEQ AP be 
improved through the ideas of the key issues found in the 
other maturity models and vice versa? (4) How can the 
assessing methods be further developed by contemporary 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) tools, 
such as smart phones? Regarding the paper’s structure: 
“Section II. Materials and Methods” describes how the 
simple content analysis of the models, mainly the analysis 
of the word(s) of interest, was carried out. “Section III. 
Results” shows the most often and most rarely mentioned 
words, and then “Section IV. Discussion and Conclusions” 
discusses the results.     
II.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The paper is based on (1) a description of of the 
documents and field experiences of HSEQ AP and (2) the 
other managerial maturity model documents we found and 
analyzed. The other models were sought from various 
industries, countries, and continents, and they were found by 
searching a wide range of research- and practice-related 
publications (cf., Appendix). The key terms were defined by 
literature review. After finding, choosing, and listing the key 
words and groups of words, their use frequency in HSEQ 
AP and the other model documents was determined. 
Analyzing the documents also included benchmarking. 
HSEQ AP is related to networking: employees from several 
supply companies or contractors and self-employed 
individuals often work simultaneously for the same core 
production of the principal company, such as in the process 
industry (the supplier customer). Many of the other models 
consisted of documents related to the role of networking, 
i.e., supply companies and contractors. The sub- or support 
services delivered by supply chain companies typically 
consist of difficult cleaning services (e.g., cleaning of 
machinery), 
maintenance 
(i.e., 
repair 
and 
service), 
construction, and security. The principal companies that are 
buying these services must assure their customers that their 
facilities satisfy the requirements for holistic quality, e.g., 
work conditions: negative issues regarding ecology or 
humans and their community shall be at an acceptable 
minimum.  While regulatory needs must be carefully 
considered, the need to fulfill ethical and imago aspects are 
also important. HSEQ AP is an auditing tool for checking 
the management maturity of the whole network led by the 
principal company. Hundreds of suppliers have been HSEQ 
AP audited. The principal companies, and particularly their 
supply chains, have been able to considerably improve their 
capabilities and outcomes, e.g., accident situation (Figure 
1). Figure 2 shows both the essential principal drivers and 
assessment categories of HSEQ AP.  Based on the safety 
culture and just culture literature by Dekker [9], and Hudson 
[10], and Reason [11], as well as our above projects, 11 
words were chosen as key terms or concepts for analyzing 
maturity models. The total number of times these 11 
implicitly psychosocial keywords were used within the 11 
documents was 1,225 (Table 1).  
III.
RESULTS
     The following four terms, with their respective codes, 
comprise the most often mentioned word(s), concept(s) 
among all those selected (Table 1) from the documents 
(Appendix): IV=report(ing), V= inform(ed, -ing, -ation), 
VI= learn(ing), train(ing), instruct(ion), X= meet(ing), talk, 
discuss(ion), involve(ment), participat(e, -ion).  
The most often mentioned word(s), listed in the 
order of the documents from 1 to 11, were:  
1)
Safety climate and inform(ed, -ing, -ation) 
and meet(ing), talk, discuss(ion), involve(ment), 
participat(e, -ion); 
2)
Safety culture; 
3)
Report(ing); 
4)
Learn(ing), train(ing), instruct(ion); 
5)
Learn(ing), train(ing), instruct(ion); 
6)
Learn(ing), train(ing), instruct(ion); 
7)
Repor(ing) and -learn(ing), train(ing), 
instruct(ion); 
8)
Repor(ing) and -learn(ing), train(ing), 
instruct(ion); 
9)
Repor(ing) and -learn(ing), train(ing), 
instruct(ion); 
10)
Change; 
11)
Learn(ing), train(ing), instruct(ion). 
The most rarely mentioned word(s), listed in the 
order of the documents from 1 to 11, were: 
1)
Just, fair, and report(ing); 
2)
Safety climate and satisfactory, -faction 
and Just, fair; 
3)
Satisfactory, -faction and just, fair and 
flexib(ility, -le), resilien(ce, -t); 
4)
Flexib(ility, -le), resilien(ce, -t); 
5)
Just, fair and flexib(ility, -le), resilien(ce, -
t); 
6)
Change; 
7)
Satisfactory, -faction and safety climate 
and flexib(ility, le), resilien(ce, -t); 
8)
Just, fair and flexib(ility, -le), resilien(ce, -
t) and safety culture; 
9)
Satisfactory, -faction and inform(ed, -ing, 
-ation); 
10)
Safety climate; 
11)
Just, fair. 
              The most frequent words presented in the analyzed 
11 documents were: reporting and informing, training and 
learning, and participative human interaction. All the 
documents had some explicitly psychosocial terms, i.e., the 
ones including words “psycho, social, or communication”. 
The amount of these words was: (document number in 
parenthesis): (1) 1, (2) 2, (3) 8, (4) 4, (5) 2, (6) 6, (7) 18, (8) 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

89, (9) 2, (10) 23, (11) 21. Table 1 and Figure 2 present 
additional details regarding the results. 
IV.  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
     We found many implicitly psychosocial-oriented features 
in the maturity models. The most frequently used terms 
matched Reason’s [11] recommendations for a better safety 
culture. Thus, we found significant evidence to recommend 
utilizing HSEQ AP principles and tools to improve the well-
being and culture within work organizations. The FRICO 
methodology’s results in the field and the laboratory are 
promising. FRICO’s Peer Group Counseling was effective 
for improving social skills in the first trials [2][5], and the 
new practices were implemented in case organizations in the 
field [5]. Our results [2][5] also highlighted the importance 
of social skills in work life and for well-being at work, as 
many researchers have suggested [7][8]. This finding, 
related to FRICO, encourages not only including  PSFs in 
models but also utilizing them in implementation and 
general use within work organizations. This shows a 
pathway for increasing the role of psychosocially skillful 
practices for supervisors and subordinates in work 
communities, as well as all types of employers. The “service 
and repair” of patients and technological systems for 
manufacturing consist of similar challenges for appropriate, 
contemporary management of all employees within their 
work conditions and communities. These challenges can be 
successfully met by utilizing the HSEQ AP and FRICO 
approaches together (e.g., for implementing HSEQ 
awareness and improvements at all levels of organizations).  
      Ernst & Young [12], a global consulting company, 
provided the following view of near-future work changes: 
”However these models were developed with physical 
safety in mind at a point in time when we were just being 
acquainted with the internet, when physical health was 
prioritized and no-one spoke about mental health.” To make 
the best choices in business, more attention must be paid to 
holistic maturity models. Da Silva [13] has shown that 
uncontrolled and unskilled outsourcing in the economy can 
lead to insufficient risk management in supply companies.  
The control and prevention of this kind of negative scenario 
is one of the first priorities. Positive views regarding multi-
employer and inter-organizational challenges present, for 
example, in Finnish health care units [14] can be seen by 
emphasizing psychosocial approaches, particularly those 
that were promising for health professionals and patient 
relationships [2]. The HSEQ AP [1] should be developed 
further with consideration for psychosocial aspects and for 
expanding HSEQ AP utilization to all employees [4]. 
Today, the practice is predominantly the following: 
Managers, supervisors and experts in the fields of 
purchasing, as well as health and safety, utilize HSEQ AP 
information via computer access [4]. The application of 
HSEQ AP–style possibilities to cases in other sectors, such 
as health care organizations, should be studied further. 
Therefore, the present study should be extended to find 
ways to improve the systems for management and 
leadership. More detailed benchmarking of the HSEQ AP 
and the 11 documents would reveal new possibilities for 
granting every-person ICT access to HSEQ information and 
for providing ideas for its utilization, for example, by smart 
phones.  Many good recommendations can be found by 
combining the best practices from the 11 documents. New 
employee-centric tools, with updated, even real-time HSEQ 
information in the contexts of daily managerial actions and 
documented management systems, are increasingly possible 
and useable with contemporary tailored ICT applications. 
The HSEQ AP can be briefly outlined as follows: HS issues, 
11 assessed categories; e.g., ”Managers and supervisors 
have received occupational safety training targeted to 
managers, 
which 
includes 
the 
responsibilities 
of 
occupational safety.” E issues, nine assessed categories; 
e.g., ”Waste sorting has been instructed and trained and 
containers for different sections of waste exist. Sorting 
know-how is included in the orientation.” Q issues, 20 
assessed categories; e.g., ”The company has evidence of 
systematically developing its own network of suppliers and 
partners in multiple fields of HSEQ.”  
     The above approaches also open new visions for the 
leadership of multi-employer, mobile and remote work, and 
work places. HSEQ information would provide much added 
value throughout the increased role of PSFs, which are 
needed to improve the implementation of the systems with a 
user-centric emphasis and usability goals. Smart workplaces 
and sites could be enabled through the new increased roles 
of PSFs and ICT, while still being based on existing 
management and leadership HSEQ expertise. Furthermore, 
the 11 concepts found and listed can be called implicitly 
psychosocial key factors related to HSEQ assessment. If we 
add the 12th concept, the explicit PSFs we used, i.e., 
psycho-, social-, and communication-related expressions, 
we have a dozen of the important concepts     (words) 
regarding the essential features that should be  included in 
an HSE(Q)-style or corresponding assessment of leadership, 
management, planning, or training in work organizations. 
Their utilization is mainly based on various ICT support, for 
example, each employee’s personal mobile smartphone 
[15]16]. ICT may also be used for additional psychosocial 
purposes, such as praising excellent employees for skilled 
work [17].  
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Väyrynen, H. Jounila, J. Latva-Ranta, S. Pikkarainen, and 
K. von Weissenberg, “HSEQ Assessment Procedure for 
supplying network: A tool for promoting sustainability and 
safety culture in SMEs, Chapter 5,” in Ergonomics and 
Human Factors in Safety Management. P. Arezes, and P. V. 
Rodrigues de Carvalho, Eds. Roca Baton, FL, USA: CRC, 
Taylor 
& 
Francis 
Group, 
pp. 
83–108, 
2016. 
(cf., 
www.HSEQ.fi, [retrieved: August, 2019]) 
[2]
H. Kiema, M. Mäenpää, T. Leinonen, and H. Soini, “Peer 
Group Counseling as a tool for promoting managers’ 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

communication 
skills 
in 
industrial 
and 
planning 
organisations,” Proc. The Fourth International Conference on 
Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications 
(COLLA 2014) IARIA,  August 2014, pp. 28-33. 
[3]
M. Koivupalo, H. Junno, and S. Väyrynen, “Integrated 
management within a Finnish industrial network: Steel mill 
case of HSEQ Assessment Procedure,” in Integrated 
Occupational Safety and Health Management – Solutions and 
Industrial Cases. S. Väyrynen, K. Häkkinen, and T. Niskanen, 
Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, pp. 41–67, 2015. 
[4]
S. Väyrynen and H. Kiema-Junes, “Information for managers 
and experts or communication with all employees within 
organisations and networks – case HSEQ”. Proc. The World 
Congress on Engineering Asset Management, WCEAM, 
September 2018. in press. (cf., https://easychair.org/smart-
program/WCEAM-2018/2018-09-25.html) 
. 
[retrieved: 
August, 2019] 
[5]
H. Filppa and H. Soini, Eds. Unpublished FRICO project 
document. 2014. 
[6]
S. Väyrynen and H. Kiema-Junes, “Exploring blue- and 
white-collar 
employees’ 
well-being 
at 
work 
system: 
Differences in indicators of physical and psychosocial 
conditions of occupational groups,” International Journal of 
Sociotechnology and Knowledge Development, vol. 10(2), 
pp. 14-34, 2018. 
[7]
W. N. Isaacs, “Dialogic leadership,” The Systems Thinker, 
vol. 10 (1), pp. 1–5. 1999. 
[8]
A. B. Bakker and D. Xanthopoulou, “Creativity and charisma 
among female leaders: The role of resources and work 
engagement”. International Journal of Human Resource 
Management, vol. 24, pp. 2760–2779, 2013. 
[9]
S. Dekker, Patient Safety: A Human Factors Approach, 1st 
Edition. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis 
Group, 262 p. 2011. 
[10] P. Hudson,  “Safety Management and Safety Culture The 
Long, 
Hard 
and 
Winding 
Road.” 
http://www.caa.lv/upload/userfiles/files/SMS/Read%20first%
20quick%20overview/Hudson%20Long%20Hard%20Windin
g%20Road.pdf, 25 p. 2001. [retrieved: August, 2019] 
[11] J. Reason,  Managing the risks of organizational accidents. 
Aldershot: Ashgate, 252 p. 1997. 
[12] Ernst & Young, “Why should I trust you? A fresh look at 
HSE.” 
Ernst 
& 
Young 
AU.
https://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY-why 
should-i-trust-you-a-fresh-look-at-hse-culture/$FILE/EY-a-
fresh-look-at-hse-culture.pdf, 16 p. 2016. [retrieved: January, 
2019] 
[13] A. J. N. Da Silva, I. M. Almeida, and R. A. G. Vilela,  
“Outsourcing and Accidents in the Electrical Sector,” in S. 
Trzcieliński, and W. Karwowski, Eds. Proc. The 5th 
International Conference on Applied Human Factors and 
Ergonomics AHFE 2014, July 2014, pp. 5832-5844. 
[14] T. Pohjosenperä, P. Kekkonen, S. Pekkarinen, and J. Juga, 
“Service modularity in managing healthcare logistics,” The
International Journal of Logistics Management, vol. 30(1), pp. 
174-194, 2019.  https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-12-2017-0338. 
[15] R. Bye, “Designing mobile user experiences:      Disruptive   
Innovation in railway asset information,” in Rail Human 
Factors: Supporting reliability, safety and cost reduction. N. 
Dadashi, A. Scott, J.R. Wilson, and A. Mills, Eds. London: 
CRC, Taylor & Francis Group, pp. 453–460, 2013. 
[16] K. Thomas, “Wanted: a WhatsApp alternative for clinicians,” 
British Medical Journal, 360, p. k622, 2018. DOI: 
10.1136/bmj.k622. [retrieved: August, 2019] 
[17] T. Horishita, K. Yamaura, and M. Kanayama, “Study of 
effective praise in train driver’s workplace,” in Rail Human 
Factors: Supporting reliability, safety and cost reduction. N. 
Dadashi, A. Scott, J.R. Wilson, and A. Mills, Eds. London: 
CRC, Taylor & Francis Group, pp. 614–620. 2013.
Figure 1. Accident frequency rates (LTI, a linear regression trend) showing an example of the HSEQ AP Cluster’s 8-year results (n…n+7). The total rate in 
the Finnish industry can be seen as well. The positive trend supported and forced with HSEQ AP to supply chain of the principal companies. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

Figure 2. The eight drivers (the left list) of the development and utilization of the HSEQ AP (IMS mean Integrated Management System; TQM means Total 
Quality Management; CSR means Corporate Social Responsibility). The right list describes the nine capability categories chosen for the assessment 
framework of the HSEQ AP.   
TABLE I. THE WORDS CHOSEN TO BE UNDER SPECIFIC CONSIDERATION AS REGARDS ANALYZING AND BENCHMARKING THE 
MATURITY MODELS. 
Code 
Word(s) 
Amount 
of 
mentions
Number of maturity documents where used, and 
an example of use 
I 
Satisfact(ory, -tion 
51
7, …product or service quality, and customer 
satisfaction 
II 
Safety culture 
65
5,…from those with strong safety cultures 
III 
Safety climate 
20
5,… Occupational Safety Climate Questionnaire 
IV 
Report(ed, -ing) 
203
10,…the use of the Global Reporting Initiative 
V 
Inform(ed,-ing,-ation) 
288
11,…Ensuring relevant information 
VI 
Learn(ing), train(ing), instruct(ion) 
61
11, … Employees have been trained 
VII 
Flexib(ility, -le), resilien(ce, -t) 
11
6,… develops a fair, learning, flexible 
VIII 
Just, fair 
10
7,… must be clear, fair and adhered to 
IX 
Trust, confident 
32
8,… safety management system on the trust 
X 
Meet(ing), talk(s), discuss(ion), involve(d), participat(ive, -ion) 
313
11,… List of toolbox meeting dates 
XI 
Change 
171
8,… being informed of safety-related changes 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

APPENDIX 
No 
Assessment document 
Country(-ies) 
Aspects: 
H, S, E, Q, Sus- 
(tainability) 
Scale etc. 
General 
(G) 
Specific (S) 
Number  
Of 
pages 
Reference to document 
1 
NOSACQ  
DK, FI, IS, N, S 
S 
Likert 
G 
8 
http://nfa.dk/da/Vaerktoejer/Sporgeskemaer/Safety-
Climate-Questionnaire-NOSACQ50 
2 
Safety culture maturity model 
UK 
HS 
Maturity scale 
Five levels 
G 
12  
HSE (2001). Safety culture maturity model, 
Health and Safety Executive (HSE), UK.  
3 
ESPO Green Guide 
EU 
E, Sus 
Themes, principles 
S 
38 
ESPO (European Sea Ports Organisation) 
(2012). Green Guide, E, EU, Brussels, BE.  
4 
RISQS Audit Protocol 
RSSB Railways 
UK 
H, S, E 
S 
22 
RISQS (2018). Audit Protocol, Industry Minimum 
Requirements Document no.: RISQS-AP-001 Revision. 
RISQS Board Industry Minimum, info@rssb.co.uk 
5 
Score your safety culture 
Instit. Resilience, sustainability 
CA, AU 
S, Sus 
(Institutional 
resilience) 
-questionnaire, 
scoring 
G, S 
(transport, 
aviation) 
2 
J. Reason (2001). Score Your Safety Culture. Flight Safety 
Australia, January-February, 2001. pp. 40-41. 
J. Reason (2008). Score Your Safety Culture. TP 13844. 
(11/2008). Transport Canada. 2 p 
6 
Safety, Health & 
Environment Checklist for 
Contractors  
NL 
H, S, E 
Themes, 
principles 
S (con-
tractors, 
supply 
chain ) 
26 
SSVV (2018). Safety, Health & Environment 
Checklist for Contractors, Foundation 
Cooperation for Safety (SSVV). AK 
Leidschendam, NL. pp. 27-52.  
7 
Recommended Practices; 
S&H Programs in Construction  
US 
H, S 
Themes, principles 
S (con-
struction) 
40 
OSHA (2016). Recommended Practices for Safety & Health 
Programs in Construction. Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration. 40 p. www.osha.gov 
8 
Workplace Safety & Health 
Manual for Marine Industries  
SG 
H, S 
Themes, 
principles, 
checklist 
S (harbours, 
marine, 
logistics) 
360 
WSH Council (2009). Workplace Safety & Health Manual 
for Marine Industries, SG, 360 p. 
9 
Vendor Checklist AkzoNobel,  
H&S, Sustainability,  
NL 
H, S, E, Sus 
Checklist, Likert-
style and yes / no 
G (S) 
Chemical, 
paints, 
coatings 
4 
Akzo Nobel. (2008). Vendor Checklist, 
Checklist for Supplier Support Visits 
Concerning Sustainability and HSE issues  
 v3, Sustainability, HSE. Amsterdam, NL. 
10 
Risk Management Maturity 
Model (RM3), Road&Rail 
UK 
H, S 
Maturity scale 
(five-point) 
G, S 
(transport, 
road,rail) 
64 
RM3 The Risk Management Maturity 
Model, (2017). Version 2.0. Office of Road 
and Rail, Health & Safety Laboratory, 
https://www.hsl.gov.uk 
11 
Niskanen: Research Article: 
Leadership and OSH processes 
(risk prevention, collaboration) 
FI 
H, S 
Data from em-
ployers / -ployees 
S (chemical 
industrial 
manu-
facturing) 
36 
T. Niskanen  (2015). Leadership Relationships and 
Occupational Safety and Health Processes in the Finnish 
Chemical Industry, In: S. Väyrynen, K. Häkkinen and T. 
Niskanen (Eds.), Integrated Safety and Health Management 
– Solutions and Industrial Cases (pp. 185-220). Cham: 
Springer International Publishing. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-754-2
CENTRIC 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

