A Multi-Method Approach to Assessing the Usability of Mobile Job Advertisements 
 
Stephan Böhm, Susanne J. Niklas, and Wolfgang Jäger 
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences 
Department of Media Management 
Wiesbaden, Germany  
e-mail: {stephan.boehm, susanne.niklas, wolfgang.jaeger}@hs-rm.de 
 
 
 
Abstract—Accessing the Web from mobile devices has become 
increasingly common even when searching for job information. 
Nowadays, most job board offerings are mobile-optimized. How-
ever, the search results often refer to job advertisements (ads) 
and external career pages that are not completely optimized for 
mobile access. As a result, mobile users may be confronted with 
inadequate usability or a dissatisfactory user experience. In this 
context, the purpose of this study is to assess the usability of job 
ads posted on job portals to identify deficits and best practices. 
This paper is a work in progress and presents the intended multi-
method approach as well as some preliminary findings for an 
exemplary sample of job ads posted on a German job board. 
Keywords-Usability, User Experience, User Interfaces, 
Heuristic Evaluation, Mobile Recruiting 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Recent studies point out that about 69 percent of all In-
ternet users access the web using mobile devices [1]. In this 
context, it is becoming more and more common to use these 
devices in order to retrieve job information as well. In Ger-
many, 58 percent of all online job seekers are already access-
ing job information via mobile devices; in high-tech indus-
tries or the media sector as many as 63 percent browse the 
mobile Internet for a new professional challenge [3]. Thus, 
mobile optimization is becoming essential in order to main-
tain reach among target groups and to keep up with the 
changing usage of media channels. 
According to a multi-year study on mobile recruiting in 
Germany [5], HR managers attribute a growing relevance to 
mobile devices in personnel recruiting. In 2011, 95 percent 
of the participating HR managers stated that addressing po-
tential candidates via mobile devices is becoming increasing-
ly important. The proportion of companies and organizations 
using mobile recruiting technologies and applications rose 
from 8 percent in 2009 to 25 percent in 2011. A mobile op-
timized career website is offered by 17 percent of the com-
panies according to the afore-mentioned study [5]. More 
recent analyses suggest that 24 percent of all German com-
panies already offer a mobile optimized career website, fol-
lowed by 17 percent with company-owned iPhone applica-
tions by the end of 2012 [3]. A study focusing on large en-
terprises in Germany revealed that as many as 80 percent of 
the companies provide a mobile career website and about 30 
percent have a mobile career app [14]. 
Mobile recruiting activities of individual companies are 
complemented by job boards. Their providers aggregate job 
ads and career information across companies and sectors. In 
2011, an analysis of the Apple App Store already identified 
ten mobile job board applications for the German market [4]. 
Employers who place job ads on job boards usually get a 
package for the online channels supported by the portal. 
When doing this, job board providers mobile-optimize ac-
cess to their own portal functions, but may not alter the de-
sign of the job ads provided by a company. In that case, the 
search results of the job board can refer to a career website or 
a job ad that is not mobile-optimized. Thus, the mobile users 
may be confronted with inadequate usability or a dissatisfac-
tory user experience. 
As a result, all three interest groups are confronted with 
setbacks concerning their individual goals: The job seeker 
does not get the information he/she was looking for or has a 
poor user experience. Consequently, he or she probably 
decides to discontinue the app usage. The employer placing 
the job ad may experience a negative impact on the recruit-
ing process, its employer branding, or may even lose a poten-
tial applicant. The job board provider, in turn, loses an app 
user, i.e., reach, which constitutes the basis of the job board 
business model. But even if a user does not directly discon-
tinue the app usage, the design of the mobile ad and its con-
tent does play a major role concerning job ads’ efficacy in 
terms of recall and retention [19]. However, regular usability 
guidelines for mobile websites cannot be applied directly to 
mobile job ads. Job ads provide very specific information 
within a focused area of application and thus require adapted 
criteria for usability analysis. But, despite the importance of 
these aspects and their high practical relevance, neither spe-
cially focused developer guidelines nor scientific research 
studies on mobile job advertising exist. 
To fill this research gap, the study at hand aims to identi-
fy deficits and best practices on a mobile-optimized job ad 
design, proposing a multi-method approach. The research 
framework will be described in Section II, followed by the 
intended research methodology in Section III. Some prelimi-
nary findings and an outlook on further research are dis-
cussed in the last part of the paper. 
 
 
 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

II. RESEARCH FRAMEWORK 
Requirements for the design of mobile-optimized job ads 
can be found in guidelines for the user-interface design of 
mobile applications or mobile websites, e.g., the well-known 
Best Practice Guidelines of the World Wide Web Consorti-
um (W3C) [24]). Here, recommendations are given regard-
ing image format support, style sheet support, page weight, 
or color usage. However, two problems exist concerning the 
usage of such guidelines: firstly, the development as well as 
improvements of modern smartphones are occurring at a 
furious rate. As a result, guidelines on principles for mobile 
development rapidly become outdated [9]. Secondly, those 
guidelines merely refer to technical capabilities and do not 
address the importance of different design aspects from the 
user perspective or usage context [15]. Some existing ap-
proaches, such as Nielsen’s usability heuristic [18] or the 
adapted metric of the Microsoft Usability Guidelines (MUG, 
[22]), present a more holistic view on aspects influencing 
system usability. The MUG guidelines are based on the ISO 
9241 usability definition, defining usability as the “Extent to 
which a product can be used by specific users to achieve 
specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfac-
tion in a specified context of use” [13]. Besides structural 
evaluation in the form of heuristic analysis, user-oriented 
usability tests constitute an important evaluation method in 
order to measure efficiency, effectiveness as well as user 
satisfaction [12, 13]. User satisfaction can be measured by 
experience-based rating scales, product liking, or level of 
acceptance of the task solving effort [13]. 
As this study aims at giving practical recommendations 
for the design and development of mobile job ads, a multi-
method approach with regard to both −structural evaluation 
as well as user based testing of usability aspects− will be 
adopted. In order to not just ensure success in terms of usa-
bility, but also in terms of a company’s communication suc-
cess, research on design aspects influencing the reception of 
job ads’ content will be conducted additionally. The intended 
research approach will be described in the next section.  
III. METHODOLOGY 
Usability analysis can be classified in empirical and ana-
lytical methods. Empirical testing can comprise user and task 
observations of prototypes and final products by field or 
laboratory studies, including walk through and thinking-
aloud analysis [2, 7, 18]. Heuristic evaluations, in turn, refer 
to assessment by a small group of evaluators according to a 
predefined set of usability guidelines or criteria [18]. As 
described above, mobile development often draws on tech-
nical guidelines and best practice standards, leading to the 
problems of being quickly outdated as well as not seeing the 
goal of overall usability concerning user satisfaction and 
usage acceptance [9, 15]. Heuristic usability evaluations 
however, by implementing a systematic inspection of user 
interface design aspects, enable the identification of usability 
problems to which special attention should be paid [18]. 
Here, two main methodologies are available for evaluation. 
Firstly, validator tools offer a standardized evaluation and in-
depth analysis of websites determining how well the site 
performs on mobile devices. Secondly, a heuristic evaluation 
can be carried out by looking at interface design in accord-
ance with certain rules as listed in the guidelines. Here, a 
small number of evaluators (at least three) assess the compli-
ance of a user-interface with usability principles, the so-
called heuristics [18]. As presented in Figure 1, phase 1 of 
the study at hand implements two methods of usability eval-
uation for an exemplary set of mobile job ads: (1) A tool 
based usability evaluation by the W3C mobileOK Checker 
[25] and the mobiReady testing tool [17] validator. Both 
tools provide an overall value of “mobile fitness” as well as a 
detailed report on specific technical checks. (2) A heuristic 
analysis by evaluators, i.e., usability experts. The evaluation 
heuristic was defined by considering usability criteria of 
common standards, e.g., the W3C guidelines [24], the BBC 
Mobile Style Guide [10], the mobile applications of the 
MUG [22] or the Microsoft Mobile Design Guidelines [16].  
 
Tool-based
Validation
Heuristic
Evaluation
Usability (User Perspective)
(User Walkthrough, Thinking Aloud)
User Satisfaction
(User Questionnaire, Ranking of Job Ads)
Design Best Practices
(A/B Testing, Variation of Design Elements)
Visual Perception and Effectiveness
(Eye Tracking, Recall Test)
Usability (Design/System Perspective)
3rd
Phase
2nd
Phase
1nd
Phase
Prototypes
Sample of Job Ads
 
Figure 1.  Study’s Multi-method Approach 
In phase 2, empirical user testing is carried out to consid-
er how users perceive mobile job ads and to identify usability 
issues and misconceptions from the user perspective [18]. 
Here, test subjects are asked to search for a job on the job 
board and to utilize presented job ads for this purpose (user 
walkthrough) by applying a thinking aloud approach for the 
analysis. This enables us to identify the job ads’ major aber-
rations and drawbacks with which the user is confronted 
when attempting to achieve his or her goal and to evaluate 
design aspects within an actual usage context. Following this 
procedure, the test users will be asked to rate the likability of 
the observed job ads as well as to rank them in order of their 
preference to get a measure of the users’ final satisfaction 
with the ads [13]. 
As mentioned above, the aim of the study is not only to 
evaluate pure usability aspects but also to assess the commu-
nication efficiency of the job ads. For this purpose, A/B 
testing will be combined with an eyetracking and a recall 
analysis in phase 3. Within the so-called A/B testing, various 
user interface design alternatives are analyzed to obtain de-
sign recommendations, i.e., design best practices. Here, only 
one single design attribute is varied and evaluated, like type-
face or button design. Analysis of the different versions can 
either be done in a live setting by, e.g., tracking conversion 
rates of design alternatives or within an experimental labora-
tory environment [11]. An experimental setup enables a 
 
 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

combination of A/B testing with other types of analysis, e.g., 
to better understand user interaction and visual perception of 
the presented job ad [6]. For this purpose, one of the most 
advanced usability testing methods is the eyetracking tech-
nique, which can be conducted directly on a mobile device 
(using head-mounted systems) or based on a simula-
tion/representation of the design artefact on a desktop-based 
configuration. Thus, researchers are able to gain information 
on unconscious perception and information processing, 
which can be used to optimize user interfaces [6, 20]. As it 
has been shown that content related design aspects like struc-
ture or visual design have a major influence on user percep-
tion and comprehension [8], these aspects were included in 
the study. To allow for aggregated group analysis and be-
cause the focus of this part of the study was on visual percep-
tion and not on user interaction, the study incorporates a 
desktop-based test configuration. Factors for design variation 
to be considered are, i.e., length and complexity of job de-
scription, single column vs. two column layout, or media 
richness. Aspects for such a variation can be identified with-
in the preceding heuristic analysis and usability testing as 
well. The eyetracking analysis will be followed by recall 
tests on the user perception of the job ads’ content. Here, 
users will be asked to name companies, job titles or to recall 
employer brands in order to measure ad efficacy [19]. The 
combination of the results from the eyetracking and recall 
testing is intended to gain recommendations for improving 
both, usability as well as communication effectiveness of the 
job ads. Aspects of the information quality [21] provided in 
the mobile-optimized job ad and its implications on the ease 
of finding appropriate job information in job portals is not 
analyzed but might be subject to future research. 
IV. STATUS QUO AND PRELIMINARY FINDINGS 
The implementation of the multi-stage research approach 
to assess the usability of job ads within the research project 
is a work in progress and not completed yet. As a first step, 
the heuristic evaluation was applied to a sample of 13 exem-
plary job ads from a German job board. As mentioned above, 
available mobile design guidelines were analyzed and con-
solidated to define an appropriate heuristic. By doing this, 
e.g., the formerly advised maximum page size of maximum 
20 KB [24] was identified as no longer being up to date, 
since processing power and data transmission have improved 
tremendously [9]. Therefore, some more recent studies sug-
gest that mobile pages should ideally not exceed 50 or max-
imum 100 kilobyte [23]. Other criteria refer to more detailed 
aspects like touch screen optimization, automatic redirects to 
mobile sites when accessed by mobile, the integration of 
inbuilt mobile functions like click-to-mail/-call, design as-
pects like font, contrast and images, as well as content relat-
ed aspects concerning the appropriateness and relevance of 
information, e.g., job description, company, qualification or 
application. As shown in Table I, a catalog with criteria 
subdivided into the categories access/navigation (ACN), 
design (DES), content (CON), and interactivity (INT) was 
derived. The catalog contained more than 30 criteria for the 
evaluation of the job ads and was intended to complement 
the tool-based assessment of “mobile fitness” mentioned in 
the preceding section. The tools calculate the mobile fitness 
as a percentage of mobile optimization. Likewise each cate-
gory of the heuristic evaluation was measured by a percent-
age representing the extent to which the job ads comply with 
the criteria in the category as well as from an overall per-
spective. 
TABLE I.  
AREAS OF HEURISTIC EVALUATION  
Category 
 
No. of. 
Criteria 
Areas of Analysis 
(No. of Criteria) 
ACN. 
Access/ 
Navigation 
9 
Mobile accessibility (3), use 
of mobile technologies (2), 
mobile optimized navigation 
(2), ease of access to addition-
al sources (2) 
DES 
Design 
12 
Layout and structure (3), text 
and readability (3), mobile 
optimized embedding of 
media (6) 
CON 
Content 
10 
Corporate identity, appropri-
ateness and relevance of em-
ployer and job information 
(8), contact channels 
INT 
Interactivity 
5 
Click-to-mail/-call, social 
media integration, locate job 
on map, option to apply mo-
bile 
 
The sample of job ads was assessed by eight evaluators 
using these heuristic criteria. An overall result was calculated 
based on the ratings of the two validation tools (VAL) and 
the consolidated heuristic evaluation (HEU). At this stage of 
the study, no weighting of the criteria, categories or types of 
tests was applied. This means the overall result was calculat-
ed as the arithmetic average of the partial results. Table II 
shows the preliminary results for this analysis in phase 1 of 
our study. The table also shows the lowest (Min.) and high-
est (Max.) rating as well as the difference (Diff.) between the 
highest and lowest ranking job ad within each category and 
for the overall result. 
TABLE II.  
PRELIMINARY RESULTS OF USABILITY ANALYSIS 
 
VAL 
HEU 
Heuristic (HEU) 
by Category 
Over-
all 
 
ACN 
DES 
CON 
INT 
Avg. 
27% 
50% 
43% 
56% 
77% 
24% 
38% 
Min. 
12% 
38% 
22% 
37% 
45% 
3% 
26% 
Max. 
54% 
69% 
74% 
83% 
98% 
48% 
48% 
Diff. 
42% 
32% 
51% 
46% 
53% 
45% 
22% 
 
The key finding is that each of the examined job ads 
needs to be improved in order to provide an acceptable mo-
bile user experience. None of the thirteen tested job ads 
achieves an overall rating of 50 percent. This is mainly 
caused by the dissatisfactory results for most of the job ads 
in terms of technical validation. However, the results provid-
ed by the validators and the heuristic rating differ greatly in 
the majority of the cases as presented in Figure 2. Many of 
 
 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

the job ads achieve results between 10 and 20 percent in 
validation; only two of the job ads rated 50 percent or more. 
For the heuristic evaluation, all job ads reached 38 percent or 
more; five of them even achieved 50 percent or more. This is 
due to the fact that the validators are somewhat outdated 
(feature phone focus) and do not consider the context of use 
as does the heuristic evaluation. Over all, the weakest cate-
gory of the heuristic criteria is “interactivity”: not one of the 
examined job ads fulfilled half of the criteria. In contrast, the 
majority of the job ads achieve quite good results in the area 
of “content”, but this was also the category with the biggest 
difference between the lowest and highest ranking job ad. 
The job ads with above-average heuristic results lose their 
top positions in the overall rating because of their low score 
in validation. The top positions in the overall rating have 
only average scoring in heuristics which is bolstered by a 
good validator score, possibly indicating a kind of trade-off 
between technical optimization and adoption of the technical 
capabilities of up-to-date smartphones. 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Rating based on
Heuristic Evaluation
Mobile Fitness (Tool-based Validation)
 
Figure 2.  Usability Validation vs. Heuristic Evaluation 
Overall, each of the analyzed job ads has plenty of room 
for improvement. In most cases, the technical “mobile fit” in 
terms of validation turns out to be poor. The performance of 
the mobile job ads in the areas of “content”, “design” and 
“navigation” is better, but far from good. Most notably, all of 
the tested job ads fail in the area of “interactivity”, where a 
good concept could really set a mobile job ad apart from the 
competitors. Next phases of the research project will contrast 
these results with the findings of assessing usability and 
effectiveness of the job ad design including the user perspec-
tive. Considering the deviations between tool-based valida-
tion and heuristic validation, it will be interesting to see 
whether the results from the heuristic perspective can be 
supported by the findings of the empirical testing. The rele-
vant research progress will be presented at the conference. 
V. REFERENCES 
[1] 
Accenture. Mobile Web Watch 2012. Special edition: Germany, 
Austria, Switzerland, 2012. 
[2] 
R. Agarwal and V. Venkatesh. "Assessing a firm's Web presence: A 
heuristic evaluation procedure for the measurement of usability" In-
formation Systems Research 13, 2, 2002, pp. 168–186. 
[3] 
BITKOM. Mitarbeitersuche per Smartphone, Berlin, 2012. 
[4] 
S. Böhm, W. Jäger, and S. J. Niklas. "Mobile Applikationen im 
Recruiting und Personalmarketing" Wirtschaftsinformatik und Man-
agement 3, 4, 2011, pp. 14–22. 
[5] 
S. Böhm and S. J. Niklas. "Mobile Recruiting: Insights from a 
survey among German HR managers" in Proceedings of the 50th 
ACM SIGMIS annual conference on Computer and People Re-
search (ACM SIGMIS CPR'12), Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 2012, pp. 
117–122. 
[6] 
P. Chynał, J. M. Szymański, and J. Sobecki. "Using eyetracking in a 
mobile applications usability testing" in Proceedings of the 4th 
Asian conference on Intelligent Information and Database Systems 
(ACIIDS'12), 2012, pp. 178–186. 
[7] 
C. Coursaris and D. J. Kim. "A meta-analytical review of empirical 
mobile usability study" Journal of Usability Studies 6, 3, 2011, pp. 
117–171. 
[8] 
E. Cuddihy and J. H. Spyridakis. "The effect of visual design and 
placement of intra-article navigation schemes on reading compre-
hension and website user perceptions" Computers in Human Behav-
ior 28, 4, 2012, pp. 1399–1409. 
[9] 
English, E., 2012. W3C Mobile OK Checker and Mobile Web Best 
Practices – a bit outdated? http://www.pijnz.com/blog/w3c-mobile-
ok-checker-and-mobile-web-best-practices-a-bit-outdated/. 
Ac-
cessed 28 May 2013. 
[10] 
B. Guyer, R. Puustinen, and C. D. D. Urschabch. BBC Mobile Style 
Guide I.I – Global visual language for the mobile Web, 2009. 
[11] 
Hampson, M., 2010. A/B testing. http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/ 
webdeveloper/2010/01/ab-testing.shtml. Accessed 29 May 2013. 
[12] 
A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, and J. Park. "Design Science in Infor-
mation Systems Research" MISQ 28, 1, 2004, pp. 75–105. 
[13] 
ISO – International Organization for Standardization, 1998. Ergo-
nomic requirements for office work with visual display terminals 
(VDTs) -- Part 11: Guidance on usability, 9241-11. 
[14] 
JobStairs. Bewerber und Unternehmen setzen schon heute auf 
mobile Jobangebote, Bad Nauheim, 2012. 
[15] 
A. P. Massey, V. Khatri, and V. Ramesh. "From the Web to the 
Wireless Web: Technology Readiness and Usability" in Proceedings 
of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 
2005, pp. 1–10. 
[16] 
Microsoft, 2010. Design Guidelines. http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/bb158602.aspx. Accessed 29 May 2013. 
[17] 
mobiReady, 2013. mobiReady testing tool. http://ready.mobi/ 
launch.jsp?locale=en_EN. Accessed 21 August 2013. 
[18] 
Nielsen, J. Usability Engineering. Academic Press, Boston, 1993. 
[19] 
M. de Sa, V. Navalpakkam, and E. F. Churchill. "Mobile Advertis-
ing: Evaluating the effects of animation, user and content relevance" 
in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, 2013, pp. 2487–2496. 
[20] 
C. C. Seix, M. S. Veloso, and J. J. R. Soler. "Towards the validation 
of a method for quantitative mobile usability testing based on desk-
top eyetracking" in Proceedings of the 13th International Confer-
ence on Interacción Persona-Ordenador (INTERACCION '12), 
2012. 
[21] 
Shirlee-ann Knight and Janice Burn. "Developing a framework for 
assessing information quality on the World Wide Web" Informing 
Science Journal 8, 2005, pp. 159–172. 
[22] 
V. Venkatesh and V. Ramesh. "Web and wireless site usability. 
Understanding differences and modeling use" MISQ 30, 1, 2006, 
pp. 181–206. 
[23] 
Virginia Commonwealth University, 2011. VCU Web Standards & 
Guidelines. 
Mobile 
Sites. 
http://www.webstandards.vcu.edu/ 
mobile/. Accessed 2 June 2013. 
[24] 
W3C, 2008. Mobile Web Best Practices 1.0. W3C (World Wide 
Web Consortium). http://www.w3.org/TR/mobile-bp/. Accessed 12 
September 2011. 
[25] 
W3C, 2013. W3C mobileOK Checker. http://validator.w3.org/ 
mobile. Accessed 21 August 2013. 
 
 
 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-306-3
CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

