1 
 
Methodolgy for Bridging the Brain and Body for Briliant Innovations
Maher Sefein., Muhammad Iftikhar & Osman Ali 
School of Medicine 
Universiti Malaysia Sabah 
Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia 
 e-mail: {maher, ifti, osmanali}@ums.edu.my 
 
 
Muralindran Mariappan 
 School of Engineering & Information Technology  
Universiti Malaysia Sabah 
Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia 
 e-mail: murali@ums.edu.my 
 
Abstract—Medical doctors are likely to be clinically oriented 
due to monitory benefits and busy life schedule; therefore this 
reduces their interest in research and innovation. In order to 
increase the innovation interest, the School of Medicine, 
Universiti Malaysia Sabah has initiated a new strategy to 
fasten the research and innovation by CLIP Method. This 
concept is based on establishment of Creative Work Station, 
learning enhancement by Mechatronics Workshop, collection 
of innovative ideas and designing new projects. Preliminary 
results are given and further evaluation is required to establish 
the concept. Initial result shows that experienced physician’s 
brain (knowledge & ideas) can be utilized by hands-on 
techniques (body activities) to get more creative ideas leading 
to patentable projects. 
 
Keywords-creativity; research; innovation; medical; prototype 
I. 
 BACKGROUND 
Creativity is a key component to the long-term survival 
of a company [1]. Though creativity is popularly considered 
as in-born qualities of a genius, they can be nurtured and 
developed through continuous training [2]. An undergraduate 
senior level courses which were designed by University of 
Florida, ―Creative Engineering I & II Sequence‖ were able to 
help in their institutions by training [3][4][5].  Despite the 
fact that there has been significant improvement in the 
healthcare industry, inefficiency still exists and little is 
accomplished in understanding how to overcome those 
inefficiencies using innovation in healthcare [6].  
Creativity is a problem identification and idea generation 
whilst innovation is an idea selection, development and 
commercialization [8]. Innovation can therefore be seen as 
the process that renews or improves something that exists 
and not, as is commonly assumed, the introduction of 
something better [9]. All innovation begins with creative 
ideas and successful implementation of creative ideas within 
an organization leads to innovations [10]. In this view, 
creativity by individuals and teams is a starting point for 
innovation; the first is necessary but there is no sufficient 
condition available for the second [11]. Tidd et al [12], stated 
that there are four types of innovation; consequently the 
innovator has four pathways to investigate when in search 
for good ideas i.e. product, process, positioning and 
paradigm innovation. Innovation in healthcare is defined as 
those changes that help healthcare practitioners to focus on 
the patient by helping healthcare professionals to work 
smarter, faster, better and with more cost effectiveness [1]. 
Based on survey of 775 healthcare professionals from the 
US, UK, Germany and India [13]. In this it was stated that 
the problem is not a lack of ideas [1]. Difficulties lie in the 
diverse blockages to new ideas finding their way into 
widespread and transformative change [13]. On-the-job-
training to keep healthcare executives and employees up to-
date would increase their familiarity with technology and 
also enhances their likelihood of adopting new information 
technology [13] [37] [38]. This study summarizes all these 
facts as given below. 
 
Lack of ideas is not a problem. 
 
On job-training will enhance their likelihood of 
adopting new IT and generation of brilliant ideas. 
 
Lack of sharing ideas is always present therefore 
capacity to generate ideas can be enhanced by 
sharing. 
 
Sharing attitude will make project selection easier 
which leads to potent commercialise product. 
 
Another road block for doctors‘ innovation is lack of 
the venue whereby they can work on their innovation 
in hospitals or medical institutes. 
CLIP Methodology is developed to overcome these road 
blocks. It is a strategy that bridges the brain (which is full of 
ideas) and the body (hand‘ skills) to come out with brilliant 
innovations. CLIP is designed from first word of the four 
components: Creative Work Station, Learning Skills, Ideas 
Generation and Prototype Production. Therefore in CLIP 
Methodology, (C) is the venue, where learned skills  
( L ) work together , to transform ( I ) into physical Protypes 
( P ) .   
II. 
OBJECTIVES 
 
In view of the availability of different expertise in 
Universiti Malaysia Sabah (UMS) and the available facilities 
in School of Medicine, it was found that CLIP concept can 
circumvent the above mentioned problems that hinder 
medical practitioner‘s innovations. The comparison of 
creativity, innovation and CLIP methodology is summarized 
in ―Fig. 1‖. The methodology focuses on idea creation, 
generation and selection. A provision of basic structure is 
required for the creation of ideas among medical personnel 
who were never involved in innovative activities. Therefore 
innovation directly starts from idea selection and creativity 
which is simply problem identification and then followed by 
idea generation. CLIP methodology creates comprehensive 
approach to produce prototypes projects leading to 
patentable products.   
1
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

2 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Comparison of Creativity, Innovation & CLIP 
 
All school of medicine members are encouraged to join  
CLIP activities. They are referred here as MAST , where ( 
M ) stands for Management staff,( A ) for Academicians , ( 
S )  for Students  and ( T ) for Technical staff .  
CLIP enhances the creative thinking and innovative 
attitude among MAST through various non-medical training 
programms [29][37]. The training programs (L) in CLIP 
apply the theory of multiple intelligences by Dr. Gardner 
[29]. Accordingly different potential pathways are chosen in 
(L) sessions, whereby the first Mechatronic workshop is to 
enhance the {Spatial intelligence} [30]. In other work, a 
pharmacy school taught electrocardiogram basics by using 
dance and movement {Musical intelligence}. In that trial the 
experiment was effective and had good learning outcome 
[31]. The technological arm along with the medical staff 
will narrow the gap between the practicing doctors and the 
technology which will definitely improve the practice and 
also facilitate innovating process. This will build a 
background of physical understanding and exemplary 
human physiology, which is beneficial for both the students 
and lecturers.  Meanwhile, the engineers and other expertise 
who collaborate in such training (L) will get a new sense of 
understanding of the human body mechanisms [31]. The 
reciprocal discussion and sharing of experience will enhance 
coloration, which will impact on the development of new 
applications in robotics and biomedical engineering. CLIP 
will also enhance inter-university cooperation with other 
schools and institutes in UMS e.g., School of Engineering & 
IT, Biotechnology Research Institute and School of Science 
& Technology, Fine arts, Social science, etc. 
Valuable trainings ( L ) and good facilities ( C )  will 
encourage MAST to participate in innovation competitions 
at the university and national levels. When the students ( S ) 
participate in the CLIP, they will have a better 
understanding of the rule of technology  in the medicine and 
to improve learning process [ 14 ] . They also can use the 
technology to execute learning projects as anatomy models 
[35]. It is an important factor in their learning process, as 
90% is retained in the memory if it is practically done. 
Although it is controversial, it is still commonly refereed 
percentage as the Learning Pyramid which was first 
published by an employee of Mobil Oil Company in 1967 in 
a Film and Audio-Visual Communications [13] [14][35]. 
 
Having the facilities to build up own protypes ( P ), will 
cut the cost, time and overcome the lack  of facilities which 
hampers many of innovative ideas ( I ). These processes will 
enable the School of Medicine to have many  prototypes 
which will support one of its main objectives. 
 
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Wherever the targets are, a clear methodology is 
dependent on the available resources. Creative work station, 
Learning, Innovative ideas and Projects (CLIP Method) are 
its four components as described below:  
A.   Creative work station (C)  
The need for it was recognized in the year 2008 when 
the authors started to transform the innovative ideas and 
projects into prototypes. It was initially difficult to develop 
it in the School of Medicine, as there was no venue for such 
type of  hardware activities. During this period, their own 
facilities was used to for development. The same problem 
was also faced by many of MAST members, especially 
those who had no personal equipments to fabricate the 
prototypes. So having a work station would enable the user 
to transform the birillent ideas into feasible innovations.  
Creative Workstation started on May 2010. The committee 
which look after the ( C ) is the school‘s dean , and 
membership of 5 talented members from MAST . An 
academic member from School of Engineering and IT 
joined the committee as a technical consultant.  
A spacious room was allocated as ( C ). The venue was 
renovated to support the developing  basic hardware work.  
B. (L) activity of CLIP: 
The first mechatronic workshop was an introductory to 
the foundation for the mechanics and electronics. 
The training was led by a lecturer from School of 
Engineering and supervised by 3 postgraduate students as 
technical assistants. The participants were divided into 3 
smaller homogeneous groups. Among these groups, each 
pair had to accomplish their own mini project.  
Robotic Research Laboratory in School of Engineering 
was selected as the venue. The wrkshop was held for two  
successive days.  
Training Structure: The technical skills (L) are ranked in 
different levels from the basic to advance. All participants 
should first join the basic mechatronic workshop to be 
exposed to basic technological skills.  
 
2
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

3 
 
The planned   knowledge and skills were managed to be 
integrated with the attitude (Schön, 1983) of the participants 
to achieve the goal [37].    
The workshop had 4 main themes as given below.  
a) Safety of mechanical tools and electronic devices 
b) Basic electronics and circuits. 
c) Basic sensors. 
d) Basic motor and control. 
 
The objective of this introductory workshop was to 
expose the participants to the basic skills in handling 
different materials. They were exposed to wood and metal 
work. The basic wood work skills were (drilling, cutting 
with different saws, gluing and measuring). While in metal 
work, they practiced (cutting with different saws, metal 
drilling, riveting). This also later covered the basic 
electronics skills (soldering, reading circuits, identifying 
components, testing current and voltage) [39] [40]. Each 
theme is covered through a one hour lecture followed by 3 
hours of Hands-On session. The four lectures enabled the 
participants to understand the basics, application of the 
electronics and mechanical integration gradually in a 
comprehensive way. The outline of the workshop is shown 
in Table 1.  
 
TABLE 1. THE OUTLINE OF 1ST BASIC 
MECHATRONIC WORKSHOP TRAINING 
 
The Hands-On sessions provided ample of time for basic 
demonstration, practice and troubleshooting and problem 
solving.  The personal guidance was given for the 
participants. The three hours session was also divided into a 
three hourly slots. The participants were divided into three 
smaller homogeneous groups and were rotated every hour 
through three stations for better involvement.  This allowed 
them to apply what they had learned in each lecture and 
demonstration to complete their mini project. The 
participants completed their mini project based on the skill 
learned with the assistant of the tutors since it was the 
first time many of them were exposed to these technical 
aspects. 
C. Innovation Ideas (I) 
At the end of workshop, MAST came out with some 
innovative ideas. After data collection by unbiased 
innovators of the university, the potential projects were 
selected. Analyzing these (I) is an important step to 
determine the appropriate way to develop it. Some of the 
innovative ideas could be developed into prototypes within 
available facilities. Meanwhile, big scale projects required 
research grants for development. 
D. Project and  Prototypes (P) 
Developing of the selected innovative project took place 
in the creative workstation. The environment was suitable for 
more experiments and modification. The engineering 
consultation provided in formal and informal ways to 
support the development of each prototype. The projects 
which required special skills and facilities were planned to 
be executed in engineering school workshop. 
IV. 
ASSESMENT 
For evaluation of the cognitive outcome of the 
workshop, a pre and post training questionnaires were 
distributed to the participants to analyze the cognitive 
outcome of workshop. The questionnaire consist of 10 
multiple choice questions. These questions are based on the 
theoretical and practical aspects of the workshop learning 
objectives.  
Meanwhile the practical outcome was monitored 
throughout the four sessions whilst the participants were 
constructing their final projects.  
By the end of the workshop, a feedback form was 
distributed to each participant to indicate what the 
participants liked and disliked in the training and its 
suitability for their needs and expectations.  
(I) are also discussed after the workshop, to be developed 
and modified in preparation for (P). 
 
V. 
RESULTS 
A. Creative work station:  
The current workstation has a  surface working area of 
12 meter2. It is suitable for most of the heavy and light 
hardware projects. It is well ventilated and has proper 
lighting and storage areas. The basic tools are available to 
work on the convenient materials which is mostly used by 
any casual user. It is planned to be upgraded in the future in 
responds to the need and shortage which may be 
encountered during large scale of practice. Materials and 
consumables were provided  such as: cartoon boxes, light 
wood, foam, plastics, aluminium sheets and electric circuits. 
B. Learning: Outcome of 1st Mechatronic workshop 
1) MAST distribution : 
Theoretical 
Hands-On 
Lecture title 
Wood 
skills 
Metal 
skills 
Electronic 
skills 
Safety, tools, 
equipment 
G1 
G2 
G3 
G2 
G3 
G1 
G3 
G1 
G2 
Basic 
electronics and 
circuits 
G1 
G2 
G3 
G2 
G3 
G1 
G3 
G1 
G2 
Basic sensors 
G1 
G2 
G3 
G2 
G3 
G1 
G3 
G1 
G2 
Basic motor and 
their control 
 Free time to finalize the end 
product 
3
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

4 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Red Zone
Yellow Zone Green zone
Perecentage of participants
Pre-W.S
Post W.S.
It is found that there is almost an equal interest between the 
males and females, above and below age of 40 (Table 2) 
 
TABLE II. AGE AND SEX OF THE PARTICIPANTS IN 
MECHATRONICWORKSHOP 
 
A total 23 applicants out of 39 enrolled applicants managed 
to accomplish the two days training program due to 
concurrent events on these couple of days (Table 3). 
 
TABLE III.DIFFERENT CATEGORIES OF THE 
PARTICIPANTS IN MECHATRONIC WORKSHOP 
Category 
n 
Notes 
Academics/Lecturers 
15 
4 lecturers attended 1 
day training  
Non academic MLT 
Staff 
3 
A concurrent meeting 
for administrators held 
on same dates 
Management/Admin  1 
 
Students 
4 
6 students could not join 
the training because of 
other commitments 
2) Practical outcome:  
A total seven final models has been accomplished after 4 
hands on sessions.  It is actually 80% of the expected 
projects. Those who accomplished the practical projects 
were excited and showed great enthusiasm. The project is to 
develop a wooden box with metal bar attached which houses 
a developed electronic circuit that will be activated by light 
to on a small fan.   
3) Cognitive outcome: 
Figure 2. Comparison of the cognitive outcome of the 
Mechatronic workshop: post W.S (post-workshop) 
assessment to pre W.S. (pre-workshop) assessment 
  
The results of pre and post workshop test showed a 
significant 
improvement 
of 
participant‘s 
technical 
awareness. As a standard for evaluation, we considered the 
score of < 30% as red zone, less than 60% as yellow zone. .  
The cognitive outcome of post mechatronic workshop is 
shown in ‗ Fig. 2‖ 
While more than 60% as a green zone. In the post workshop 
assessment, the percentage of participants who scored in the 
green zone was 60%, in comparison to 20% in pre-
workshop assessment. Meanwhile red and yellow zones 
significantly narrowed from 20% and 60% during pre-
workshop into 10% and 30% during the post workshop 
respectively. 
4) The  participants concern of the learning outcome  
All the participants (n=18) were provided with an evaluation 
form (feedback) at the end of the two days‘ workshop. The 
feedback consist of four structured questions to rate the 
different aspects of the workshop. The 5th question was an 
open question to express their opinion. Presented here are 
the results of the evaluation for each question.  
The first question of feedback was to survey the overall 
impression regarding the overall  workshop . As  shown in 
―Fig. 3 ― , the participants were impressed with exposure to 
this technical skills. None of the participants provided 
negative ratings like poor or fair. 
 
Figure 3. Overall impression  of Medical School delegates 
on  Mechatronic training 
The next questions were to evaluate the program structure 
and suitability for its objectives are summarized in table 4 . 
It is rated  excellent and good by the majority. As  they 
came to understand how to design a project and to translate 
the idea to action. In the response to cognitive and new 
practical skills outcome , most of the participants rated very 
good or excellent . Most of them were exposed for the first 
time to such skills . The participants found the new skills are 
relevant to professional practice and could be applicable in 
future projects , as shown in ― Fig. 4 ― 
0
5
10
15
Excellent
Good
Fair ( 2 )
Poor ( 1)
Total  
Age 
Distribution 
Sex  
Distribution 
 
>20 
>30 
>40 
>50 
Male  
Female  
23 
 8 
 3 
 4 
 8 
11 
12 
4
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

5 
 
The 5th question gave the participants an opportunity to 
state what they liked and disliked about the workshop and 
what improvement to be made in the next training session 
that they would like to suggest. Varieties of positive 
comments about the experience of the 2-days training 
program were recorded.  
TABLE IV. THE PARTICIPANTS FEEDBACK 
REGARDING MECHATRONIC WORKSHOP 
OUTCOME 
Parameter 
score ( m) 
Excellent 
(4) 
Good 
 (3) 
Fair  
(2) 
Poor 
 (1) 
Score 
mn=72 
Program 
Structure               
11 
7 
0 
0 
65/72 
(90.3 %) 
New 
Knowledge 
12 
6 
0 
0 
64/72 
(88.9 %0 
Relevance 
and Impact 
11 
7 
0 
0 
65/72 
(90.3 %) 
 
 
Figure 4. Feed back of participants regarding the contents of 
the training program 
 
Majority of the participants liked the brain storming 
atmosphere during the workshop. They expressed that ( L ) 
provoked their interest to think out of the box in different 
aspects . 50 % of them liked the hands-on sessions. 38.8 % 
was impressed with the lectures, methods of training, new 
learned skills and knowledge. 11.1 % of participants 
admired the innovative and interesting training contents.. 
Academicians were motivated and energized by these 
technical training. The favorable comments ranged from 
―The final product is encouraging and comprehending, the 
training gives clear understanding of the principles, it is 
challenging, it is great, best workshop attended so far etc.‖ 
to ―it is well organized and properly prepared‖. 
Meanwhile 
22.2 
% 
provided 
negative 
feedback 
regarding the shortage of allocated time to finalize the end-
product. Another participant expressed about whole day 
session, especially  in post-lunch session . Others pointed 
out about some shortage of tools , which had been shared  . 
Many constructive suggestions for the next training 
sessions came out. Few participant suggested to extend the 
training period , ― from to 3-7 days in a camp like status‖ .  
4/18 suggested to ―introducing more medical applications in 
the program‖. 
2/18 were interested in joining the ―advanced level of 
technical learning in the program‖. Another participant 
suggested ― to hold the program frequently to give chance 
for a more to participate‖. In view of the groups distribution 
, one student suggested that ―each working  group to include 
academics and students together‖. 
C. Innovative Ideas: 
Out of twenty three participants, seven innovative ideas 
were laid out as a result of brain storming and exposure to 
new technical skills. All the ideas came from the lecturers 
who attended the workshop. Immediately after the 
workshop, four of these ideas had further study and 
consultation. (I) underwent modifications and adaptation to 
transform it into action.  
D. Projects and  Prototypes: 
The designated four  ( I )  had the challenge to 
participate in  PEREKA 2011 ( Research and innovation 
competition) at the university level. The four projects had 
been transformed into protypes using the knowledge, 
expertise outcome of the mechatronic workshop. As a fruit 
of ( L ) , expertise consultation was accessible. These 
projects came out of academic category (n=15 ) ( 26.7 %) 
over period of three  months. Most of the innovators used 
Creative workstation facilities to accomplish their projects, 
namely as follows: 
1) ―Scrubbing and sterilization protection sensors 
(SPS)‖.  
2) ―Teaching aid anatomical model for neural motor 
pathway in the upper limb‖ 
3)  ―Amplifier for fetal heart sound for clinical purposes 
in remote areas and for teaching demonstration.‖ This 
project has applied for a grant for  further development.  
4) ―CLIP Methodolgy‖  
Three projects were awarded gold, silver and bronze 
medals in an PEREKA 2011  ( University Innovation 
competition)  on 7th June 2011. 
VI. DISCUSSION 
Most of changes in the medical practices evolve around 
science-based health innovation .  CLIP methodology aims 
to encourage the innovation in health services ,which is the 
synergism of innovative professional products and academic 
tools ‗ Fig. 5 ―  
The professional innovated products vary across a spectrum 
of sophistication, from vaccines, pharmaceuticals, IT 
(Information Technology) applications, medical devices to 
some plant medicines [27] [28]. While in the academic 
institutes of Medicine, the innovation inputs lead to 
innovated   academic tools as  researches , teaching aids and 
teaching methods [ 7 ]. 
It is an opportunity for lecturers ( A ) and other MAST  
categories to go for continuous professional development  
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
3.1. Structure of 
the training              
3.2 The cognitive 
outcome of 
training
3.3 Relevance 
and Impact of 
training to own 
profession
5
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

6 
 
Professional 
product
Academic  
tool
Innovative
(Health ) 
Service
L I P
C
[36]. It sharpens the saw of different intelligence of the 
participants and releases the stress, anxiety and encourages 
the spirit of learning [35].   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  CLIP methodology enhances innovative health 
services. (C) Creative work station is working venue, (L) 
learning supplementary skills, (I) Innovative ideas, (P) 
Prototype production. 
Initially , ten students ( S ) were eager  to join the 
training , but  only four of them attended the (L) session due 
to concurrent school activity. These participants showed 
enthusiasm and got the highest scores among MAST in post 
workshop assessment. They expressed their wishes to attend 
the  advanced mechatronic workshop. 
When (A) and (S) are involved in the (L), new 
innovative ways in teaching and learning process develop. 
Accordingly, it becomes most effective than the dry lectures 
and boring text books [32]. Exposure to these parallel skills 
will challenge students to think critically, communicate 
lucidly, and to think out the box to understand their own 
curriculum [14][33].  
Some academicians ( A ) had shown some uneasiness on 
the concept of CLIP as (C) is hardware workshop and (L) 
content as {mechanical and electronic skills} does not fit 
with the medical curriculum.  Others were afraid to enter 
unknown area of technical knowledge since most of them 
are engrained as medical personnel. 
Meanwhile many academicians encouraged this new 
challenging concept. In this preceding trial, 15 academicians 
(A) had participated in first learning session (L).  The post 
workshop feedback revealed the participants‘ appreciation 
to such non-medical skills. Some of the lecturers found it is 
so interesting to use electronic principles and experiments to 
teach complicated medical concepts in physiology.  
(C) Provides not only the venue, tools and materials for 
prototype production, but also the consultation services. 
These facilities had been used effectively to execute some 
projects. A plan is done to maintain and upgrade (C) to fit 
different styles of innovations. 
A list of (L) skills were chosen to meet the MAST needs 
and to develop their talents [13][38]. From post workshop 
feedback, it is clear that longer time for the workshop and 
additional tools in hands-on session will improve ( L ) 
outcome in term mastering the new skills . 
The School of Engineering started to apply the structure 
of ( L )  ,as a preliminary course for all first year students.  
As the  trainings are run by collaboration with the expert 
people in their professions, it stimulate personal and 
professional growth [31]. The collaboration is a healthy 
environment that allows the exchange of experiences 
between engineers, doctors; artists, musicians, architecture 
and IT people will enrich the university environment known 
as hybrid learning environment [ 33]. 
As a preceding work, other trainings will be arranged in 
collaboration with experts in the university to enhance 
MAST` multiple intelligence as: medical photography, fine 
arts, music, in addition to the advanced mechatronic 
workshop [29][30]. In this advanced workshop  the 
applications of technology in daily used medical equipments 
will be highlighted in depth e.g. Fiber optics, endoscopy, 
manipulating 
and 
acquiring 
medical 
data. 
Micro-
controller programming which is used in robotic arms will 
also be covered [39][40]. Such workshops may be a seed for 
a proposed Bio-Medical Engineering program in the 
university. 
Most of the developed (P) are teaching aids, while the 
professional (I) had not been translated into action as yet 
[34]. Through CLIP, synergizing medical basic sciences, 
clinical medicine with learning (L): non-medical skills in 
technology is expected to lead to more innovation in health 
services as shown as in ―Fig.6‖. 
 
Figure 6. In CLIP methodology ,synergism of basic 
sciences, ( L ) parallel experiences as technology , and 
clinical medicine , leads to  innovation in medicine and  
health services. 
L
Technology
Clinical
Medicine
Basic 
Science
 
Figure  6.  CLIP methodology: Synergism of (L) : 
technology, basic sciences, and clinical medicine, will lead 
to more innovation in health services 
One intrinsic weakness in this study is limited number of 
participants MAST. Accordingly further work is required to 
show statically the impact of CLIP on both academic and 
professional fields. Persistence of different modalities of 
training and participation of more candidates of MAST will 
clarify the effectiveness of this innovative methodology [ 
26].  Other limitation was the limited number of some tools 
in relation to the number of participants in (L). The present 
(C) is relatively small and upgrading is required to be able 
to accommodate transformation more (I) into (P) products. 
―Innovation is like riding a bicycle; you must keep pedalling 
or you coast. And, the only way you coast is downhill‖ [15] 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
CLIP methodology provides the venue, facilities and 
consultations for the members of the institute to execute 
6
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

7 
 
their own innovations. It also exposes them to parallel skills 
which sharpen their talents. This paradigm gives them the 
chance to translate Knowledge to Action.  In the last 10 
months of the activity, brain storming towards innovation 
had been provoked in the school of medicine. Some 
innovated projects had been completed and awarded at 
university level. As a preceding work, a variety of trainings 
programs such as medical photography will be arranged in 
the future. CLIP Methodology is potentially suitable for the 
schools with comparable infra-structure and problems e.g. 
biology and geology institutes .It is hoped to be an effective 
methodology in enhancing creativity and innovations. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Z. J. Acs, & D. B. Audretsch, Innovation and technological 
change. In Z. J. Acs & D. B. Audretsch (Eds.), Handbook of 
entrepreneurship 
research. 
Boston: 
Kluwer 
Academic 
Publishers, 2003. [1] B. E. Mathews and R. L. Bailey, ―A 
course in creative problem solving,‖  
[2] Panthalookaran, V.; , "―Hour of Creativity‖: An agenda to 
foster creativity and innovation in the students of 
engineering," Global Engineering Education Conference 
(EDUCON), 2011 IEEE , vol., no., pp.612-617, 4-6 April 
2011. doi: 10.1109/EDUCON.2011.5773201 
[3] IEEE Transactions on Education, Vol. E-8, No. 4, 1965, 
pp.85-90.  
[4] A. Warsame, P.O. Biney and J. O. Morgan, ―Innovations in 
teaching creative engineering at the freshman level,‖ 1995, 
Proceedings of  ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education 
Conference, Session 2C4, pp.  2C4.21-2c424. 
[5] L. G. Richards, ―Stimulating creativity: teaching engineers to 
be  innovators,‖ Proceedings of 28 th ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in 
Education  Conference, Session S1D,  1998, pp. 1034-1039. 
[6] Thakur R, et al, Innovation in healthcare: Issues and future 
trends, J Bus Res (2011), doi:10.1016/j. jbusres.2011.02.022 
[7] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Research [accessed:  Sept. 10, 
2011] 
[8] http://www.increasebrainpower.com/innovation-
brainstorming.html [accessed:  Sept. 10, 2011] 
[9] Incremental 
innovations 
in 
India 
@ 
http://www.articlesbase.com/intellectual-
propertyarticles/incrementalinnovations-in-india-
4138579.html [accessed:  Sept. 10, 2011]  
[10] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Innovation [accessed:  Sept. 10, 
2011]  
[11] http://www.informationarchtected,com/surfaces/innovation-
management [accessed:  Sept. 10, 2011] 
[12] http://ezinearticles.com/?Types-of-Innovation&id=38384 
[accessed:  Sept. 10, 2011]   
[13] http://www.eiu.com/site_info.asp?info_name=doctor_innovati
on&page=noads&rf=0http://www.intouchhealth.com/  
[accessed:  Sept. 10, 2011]  
[14] http://www.willatworklearning.com/2006/05/people_rememb
er.html [accessed:  Sept. 10, 2011]   
[15] G. C. Nicholson, ―Keeping innovation alive‖. Res.Technol. 
Manage., 
vol. 41 (3), pp. 34—40, 1998.  
[16] G. T. Lumpkin, G. E. Hills, & R. C. Shrader, Opportunity 
recognition, in entrepreneurship: The way ahead, New York: 
Routledge, 2003. 
[17] G. T. Lumpkin and B. B. Lichtenstein, ―The role of 
organizational 
learning 
in 
the 
opportunity-recognition 
process‖. Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice, vol. 29(4), pp. 
451-472 , 2005. 
[18] C. D. Aubrey, Performance Management: Changing Behavior 
ThatDrives Organizational Effectiveness, 4th ed. Performance 
Management Publications, 2006. 
[19] Love, J.H., et al., Openness, knowledge, innovation and 
growth in UK business services. Res. Policy (2011), 
doi:10.1016/j.respol.2011.05.016  
[20] D. Cyr, ―How to solve almost anything‖. Attache, pp. 46-48. 
November 1997. 
[21] Senge, Peter M. , The Fiph Discipline: The Art & Practice of 
The Learning Organization, New York: Doubleday. New 
York, 1990. 
[22]  Leonard, D. and Swap, W., "When sparks fly: Igniting 
creativity in  groups", Workforce, Vol. 78, No. 10, 1999, pp. 
87-89.  
[23] Ekwaro-Osire, S. and Orono, P., "Pan-mentoring in creative 
engineering  design - the coordination of individual and team 
creativity," in Proceedings of 2005 Frontiers in Education 
Conference, Indianapolis,  Indiana, 2005, pp. S2J-7-S2J-11.  
[24]  Carkett, R., ""He's different, he's got 'Star Trek' vision': 
Supporting the expertise of conceptual design engineers", 
Design Studies, Vol. 25, No.  5, 2004, pp. 459-475.  
[25] Dorst, K. and Cross, N., "Creativity in the design process: Co-
evolution  of problem-solution", Design Studies, Vol. 22, No. 
5, 2001, pp. 425-437. 
[26] Hargadon, A., How breakthroughs happen: The surprising 
truth about  how companies innovate, Boston, Havard 
Business School Press, 2003. 
[27] S. Al-Bader, A. S. Daar, and P. a Singer, ―Science-based health 
innovation in Ghana: health entrepreneurs point the way to a new 
development path.,‖ BMC international health and human rights, vol. 
10 Suppl 1, no. 1, p. S2, Jan. 2010.  
[28] J.M. Devoge , E.J. Bass, R.M. Sledd , S.M. Borowitz , and 
L. Waggoner-Fountain, 
―Collaborating 
With 
Physicians 
to 
Redesign A Sign-out Tool an Iterative, Multifaceted Approach With 
Users – Even Busy Ones – can Yield a Satisfying and Efficient 
Product.‖ 
Ergon 
Des.  
1;17(1):20-28, 
Jan. 
2009. 
doi:  10.1518/106480409X415170 
[29] Gardner, Howard. Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in Practice. 
New York: Basic, 1993. 
[30] Armstrong, Thomas. Multiple Intelligences in the Classroom 
3rd ed. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development, 2009. 
[31] K. K. Schultz and M. L. Brackbill, ―Teaching electrocardiogram 
basics using dance and movement.,‖ American journal of 
pharmaceutical education, vol. 73, no. 4, p. 70, Jul. 2009. 
[32] Armstrong, Thomas. In Their Own Way: Discovering and 
Encouraging Your Child's Personal Learning Style, New York: 
Tarcher/Putnam, 1987. 
[33] R. A. Blouin et al., ―AACP Curricular Change Summit Supplement 
Roles of Innovation in Education Delivery,‖ American Journal of 
Pharmaceutical Education, vol. 73, no. 8, 2009. 
[34] J. P. Lane and J. L. Flagg, ―Translating three states of knowledge--
discovery, invention, and innovation.,‖ Implementation science  : IS, 
vol. 5, p. 9, Jan. 2010. 
[35] J. Shapiro et al., ―Relationship of creative projects in anatomy to 
medical student professionalism, test performance and stress: an 
exploratory study.,‖ BMC medical education, vol. 9, p. 65, Jan. 2009.  
[36] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teacher_education/ 
 
[accessed:  
Oct. 10, 2011] 
[37] L. K. J. Baartman and E. de Bruijn, ―Integrating knowledge, skills 
and attitudes: Conceptualising learning processes towards vocational 
competence,‖ Educational Research Review, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 125-
134, Jan. 2011.  
[38] http://rapidbi.com/management/six-big-problems-with-
training-and-development/ [accessed:  Oct. 10, 2011] 
[39] G.Rizzoni.2007. Principles & Applications of Electrical Engineering 
(5thEdition). McGraw Hill 
[40] Hughess, E. 2002.Electrical & Electronic technology.(8th Edition). 
Prentice Hall 
7
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

