Business Context Information Manager: application to Information Retrieval 
Hamdi Chaker1, Max Chevalier2,  
Chantal Soulé-Dupuy1 
1, 2IRIT / SIG-D2S2u 
1Université Toulouse 1 Capitole 
2Université Paul Sabatier 
Toulouse, France 
{chaker, chevalier, soule}@irit.fr 
André Tricot 
Cognition, Langage, Langue, Ergonomie (CLLE) 
Université de Toulouse Le Mirail 
Toulouse, France 
Andre.tricot@Toulouse.IUFM.fr
 
 
Abstract—Taking into account the context is important to 
improve the way systems provide relevant information to 
users. For this purpose, we introduce a business context 
information manager 
based 
on 
a 
novel 
and 
generic 
interpretation of the context. This manager takes into account 
various contextual dimensions and acts as an intermediary 
between 
information 
retrieval 
system 
and 
contextual 
information. The approach presented in this paper is suitable 
to any business context but in the paper we particularly 
illustrate it in Information Retrieval (IR) field. This approach 
relies on an original process (MES) that manages the various 
contextual dimensions to create a unique situation at a moment 
t. To this end, MES uses rules set which is the knowledge of the 
context manager. The situations will be used by a third part 
application 
(i.e., 
IR 
systems) 
for 
activity 
adaptation. 
Furthermore, an extracting process is also proposed to 
improve the context manager reliability over time and to 
facilitate its knowledge evolution. Finally, the proposed BCIM 
have been implemented to demonstrate the feasibility of our 
approach. 
Keywords-Context information management, Contextual 
Dimension, 
Situation, 
Contextual 
Information 
Retrieval, 
Business tasks, Information-related tasks. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The aim of any Information Retrieval System (IRS) is to 
meet the needs of the user by providing relevant information. 
For this, the current trend is focusing on the user in order to 
serve him in the best way. This allows the systems to take 
into account the heterogeneity of users and the diversity of 
their needs. Therefore, the system maintains a representation 
of the user in what is commonly called a user profile. 
However, considering only the user profile to meet the user 
needs is not an answer. Indeed, every user’s tasks of 
Information Retrieval (IR) may be performed quite 
differently depending on the context in which it was carried 
out. As a solution, the IRS gradually become "context-
aware". This motivation is especially important in corporate 
settings (aeronautical, automotive, etc.) where tasks are 
critical and should be performed from specific information. 
In this context, the professional users (operators) require 
from IRS to provide them with accurate information 
necessary to perform their business task (defined and 
formalized as part of a business activity). 
In this direction, we propose an approach to manage 
business context information enabling any IRS relying on it 
to have a realistic snapshot of the past and present context in 
order to perform finer adaptation of the information returned 
to the user. 
The proposed Business Context Information Manager 
(BCIM) is based on an original interpretation of the context 
which assumes that the contextual information is dependent 
on each other. That is to say, the BCIM particularly focuses 
on the analysis of the interactions between contextual 
dimensions. This approach is intuitive and takes into account 
all kinds of contextual dimensions that can be modelled and 
valuated. 
To model context and generate various situations, our 
approach is based on a set of rules and a specific process 
called MES. This process aims at contextualizing the various 
context dimensions on which the adjustment is desired. MES 
handles the adaptation of the different dimensions using 
these rules and creates a unique situation at a moment t. This 
situation is a stable interpretation of the context and all the 
past situations compose the context history. Another process 
introduced in this paper gains knowledge over time and then 
improves the context manager reliability. Indeed, the rules 
extraction process extracts new rules from past situations 
allowing MES to achieve a finer contextualization.  
In this paper, we motivate our approach by giving the 
four main objectives of the BCIM towards the IRS before 
presenting the BCIM with a particular emphasis on MES 
process and the rule extracting process. The proposed BCIM 
is intended to the IR field. Specifically, the dimensions 
considered are the user, the business task and the 
environment (location, equipment, etc.). These business tasks 
need information to be performed by users.  
Hereafter, the paper is organized as following. Section 2 
presents background on context definitions and their use in 
the field of computer science and especially in IR field. 
Section 3 introduces the three contextual components of the 
IRS business context. Section 4 discusses the main purposes 
of the BCIM as well as its overall architecture. In this latter 
section, we also present the two main BCIM processes: the 
MES process and the rules extraction process after giving the 
various types of rules used in our approach. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Since we focus on IRS in this paper and since the general 
concept of context is broad, we concentrate in this section on 
the field of IR after giving some definitions of the context in 
the literature. We also discuss some limits of the IRS in 
28
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

previous work. In the end of this section we give our 
interpretation of the notion of “context”. 
A. Context in the literature 
The existence of numerous definitions comes from the 
multidisciplinary and rich nature of this notion. One of the 
broadest definitions of the context was proposed by Schilit 
and his colleagues. They claim that the important aspects of 
context are: where you are, who you are with and what 
resources are nearby [1]. The physical location of the 
operator situation is the central part of context proposed by 
Schilit and his collaborators. Pascoe [2] defines context as 
the subset of physical and conceptual states of interest to a 
particular entity.  
One of the most accurate definitions is given by Dey [3] 
“Any information that can be used to characterize the 
situation of an entity. An entity is a person, place, or object 
that is considered relevant to the interaction between a user 
and an application, including the user and applications 
themselves”. From this definition, the context is a set of 
situations and actions. Such situations change over time, it 
depends on the behaviours of users, on the applications and 
finally on environmental states at the moment when actions 
are performed. 
Among the multitude of context definitions, it is 
important to introduce the work of Dourish [4] to have a 
clear vision on it. The author introduces taxonomy of 
contexts, according to which contexts can be classified into 
the representational and the interactional views. In the 
representational view, context is defined with a predefined 
set of observable attributes which does not change 
significantly over time. Thus, the representational view 
assumes that the contextual attributes are identifiable and 
known a priori. In contrast, the interactional view assumes 
that the user behaviour is induced by an underlying context, 
but that context itself is not necessarily observable. More 
interesting, Dourish [4] assumes that different types of 
actions may give rise to different types of relevant contexts. 
Thus for Dourish, there is a bidirectional relationship 
between activities and underlying contexts. In other words, 
contexts influence activities and also different activities 
giving rise to different contexts.  
B. Context in IR 
The issue of integrating the context in the IRS lies in the 
simple fact that a system cannot display the same result for 
two users retrieving information in two different contexts 
only because they have expressed the same query [5]. 
First, IRS can be improved by (1) modelling, (2) 
integrating, (3) using the context. Thus, the context can be 
used for example to improve the way people formulate their 
needs to the IRS and explore the returned information [6]. 
Traditionally, important contextual variables are included: 
user contexts (for example, its fields of interest in the short 
and long term, its habits, etc.); object contexts; tasks and 
social contexts where information needs arise. 
There are several types of dimensions that can be 
integrated to a context in an IRS. The most important 
dimension is the user’s profile, or more precisely the user’s 
area of interest [7]. Context-aware IRS can take many other 
dimensions such as the nature of the task or the environment 
of the search to adapt the retrieval process [8]. Cool and 
Spink 
[9] 
distinguish 
four 
dimensions 
for 
the 
contextualization in the field of IR: information environment 
level, information seeking level, IR interaction level and 
query level.  
At the present time, almost all work in this area are 
dependent on the explicit specification of the search goals, 
information related tasks and user intentions [10]. 
We go further to introduce information tasks and their 
relation with the business tasks. These tasks received 
particular attention in recent work to improve context-aware 
IRS. These studies concentrate on the users behaviour 
searching information and on the tasks that motivate his 
search process.  
The relationship between business tasks and the 
information related tasks has been underlined by Byström 
and Hansen [11]. They consider the information related tasks 
carried via the IRS (information-seeking, information 
searching) as sub-tasks of business tasks. A relationship 
between the various information-related tasks has been also 
available. Recent work as those of Li and Belkin [12] offers 
a faceted approach to conceptualizing information related 
tasks in information seeking to explore the relationship 
between business tasks and the interactive behaviour of 
information access. Ingwersen and Järvelin [13] have 
another view of the context in the field of information 
retrieval. Their decomposition of the context is centred on 
the user achieving his business task related to information 
task(s). The information related task is always included in a 
business task which is itself the motivation of information 
search. 
C. Limits of context-aware IRS 
Before discussing the limits of previous work, it is 
important to point out that most of previous approaches 
agree on a common core that includes environment and 
human dimensions, but differs on the elements that must be 
included in the context [14]. 
One of the current IRS limits is that they do not have 
access to the business tasks and the possible conjunctions 
between all parts of the overall context [10, 11]. In addition, 
the specificity of IR in business context is to use the IRS to 
find the (missing) information necessary for business task 
achievement, i.e., the business task belongs to a tasks 
hierarchy; which is linked to other business tasks that have 
pre-conditions achievements, which make the classic IRS 
inadequate. Thus one of the current IRS limits is that they do 
not have access to this business tasks modelling. 
Furthermore, previous work tried to understand how the 
user is doing his information task in his work environment. 
For these approaches, a better knowledge of the user allows 
adapting the search process to meet his needs [15]. However, 
the scope of previous work is limited because they do not 
converge: they are interested only in partial aspects of the 
user tasks or in specific business context.  
Thus, the main objective of the business context 
information manager is to provide the IRS with realistic 
29
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

situations. These saved situations from the context history 
can be used by IRS in two ways: 
 Present use: context history used if it is relevant to 
current user need.  
 Future use: context history used to predict user need or 
contextual element values. 
D. Definitions 
According to the interactional view of Dourish [4], as 
described at the end of the section II.A, the context 
influences activities and similarly different activities give 
rise to different contexts. In addition, some relevant work 
underlines the fact that the context is relative to something in 
particular: the context of an action, background interactions, 
etc. [16]. Thus, in respect of these views and the definition of 
context given by Dey [3], we define a situation as: 
Definition A situation is a stable interpretation 
(snapshot) of the context of an object at a specific time t.  
Every situation is characterized by a set of information 
(cf. Dey definition) which is organized in contextual 
dimensions to describe the various complex elements (i.e., 
user, system, task, environment, etc.) implied in the context. 
So, we define a contextual dimension as: 
Definition A contextual dimension composing the context 
of an object describes an external element that may have an 
impact on this object. 
This definition highlights that we limit the situation to 
elements which eventually have an impact on the object 
which we want to model the context. This has been decided 
to avoid information overload issue in the context 
representation. The choice of contextual dimensions is 
predefined and can vary from one application to another. We 
note that for our approach the contextual dimensions are not 
predefined a priori by the system. With regards to the user 
applications, the contextual dimensions and their contextual 
elements are selected in each situation.  
Definition Contextual elements are the leaf nodes 
composing the contextual dimensions trees.  
A contextual element is characterized by their name, their 
value, a Boolean that indicates if the element can evolve (i.e., 
for the contextual dimension “User”, an element “name” 
could be considered as constant unlike to an element 
“tiredness” that can evolve through situations). The belief 
value (real number) allows the context manager to gradually 
measure the accuracy of the value. Indeed, some changes can 
be done due to the interactions between contextual 
dimensions. So it is important to give to the IRS the belief 
value relatively to the contextual element values. 
In this paper we particularly focus on the dynamics of the 
interactions 
between 
the 
contextual 
information 
as 
underlined by Dourish [4]. Indeed, interactions exist between 
various contextual dimensions. For example, consider the 
following context for a specific information system 
composed of two contextual dimensions: user and task. The 
task dimension may have an interaction with the user 
dimension because this latter becomes stressed when he is 
performing it. That is to say, we cannot consider contextual 
dimensions independently within a situation. This makes 
reference to the stability property in the situation definition. 
Consequently to generate a new situation BCIM have to take 
into account all the interactions between contextual elements 
to ensure the situation stability. That is to say, no more 
interactions exist between contextual dimensions in this 
situation. 
III. 
WHAT IS THE CONTEXT OF IRS? 
We present in the following the three interdependent 
dimensions that compose the business context of an IRS. 
This triptych includes: users modelling, task modelling and 
environment modelling. As described in section II.B, these 
three dimensions are considered in IR field as the most 
important contextual dimensions. 
A. The user 
The user dimension corresponds to all contextual (long-
term) factors related to users. It is based on a user model. 
Several elements can be considered as essential for our 
business context and thus include in the model of the user. 
These elements come from most of personalized information 
access work. This model has to be as general as possible in 
order to be used in different applications as proposed in [15]. 
B. The business task 
The original dimension integrated to context-aware IRS 
concerns business tasks. It includes business task and its 
relations to information related tasks.  
We show (Fig 1) an example of relation between one 
business task (and its sub-tasks), requiring information and 
two information processes allowing supplying the missing 
data necessary for its processing. The information process is 
not unique for a given task (i.e., T1.1). Actually the IRS has 
to select the most adapted information related task for the 
user in his environment. 
 
Figure 1.  - Example of a hierarchical business task and its relation with 
information processes. 
C. The environment  
The environment is the dimension that aims at modelling 
all the environmental factors. The context can be interpreted 
as the environmental information in which the exploitations 
of the information take place.  
IV. 
BUSINESS CONTEXT INFORMATION MANAGER 
We propose a BCIM in order to reach main goals of 
context management for IRS. To achieve these goals, IRS 
30
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

and 
BCIM 
exchange 
information 
like 
contextual 
information, actions done by end-user, etc. 
In the following, we introduce the BCIM main purposes. 
A. Purposes of the proposed BCIM 
We identified four main purposes related to context 
information management that are important for business 
context-aware IRS. 
1) Providing the contextual elements to IR 
This first purpose is the most common one. Indeed, 
context-aware IRS should have access to contextual 
information (e.g., for systems adaptation). For this purpose, 
the BCIM enables the IRS to query contextual dimensions of 
the current situation. As contextual information can be 
“fuzzy” or approximated, every value given by the BCIM is 
associated to its belief level. 
2) Checking situations validity  
The second objective of our BCIM concerns the checking 
of the validity of any situation. A valid situation is a situation 
that actually satisfies the constraints and rules. Invalid 
situations are identified and the system alerted.  
3) Anticipating actions 
The third objective of BCIM is to anticipate actions and 
to recommend them automatically to the IRS for adaptation 
purpose for instance. When generating a situation, the BCIM 
identifies similar situations in order to identify actions that 
have been the most used in such situation. As a consequence, 
for a given situation, BCIM can recommend to IRS as well 
as to end-users a specific way to achieve their goals (through 
recommended actions). 
4) Addressing the lack of information in the context 
The fourth objective of the BCIM is the completion or 
the adaptation of situation content according to the 
knowledge related to interactions between contextual 
dimensions. Indeed, sometimes some contextual information 
is missing or lacks of accuracy. As a solution, the BCIM 
exploits the knowledge it can extract from past situations to 
complete such contextual information. 
B. The knowledge exploited to achieve the BCIM goals 
In this paper, we present three types of rules used by our 
BCIM. Note that the two first kinds of rules are provided a 
priori by domain experts. 
 Legal business rules: they correspond to rules whose 
violation is strictly prohibited by legislation (e.g., law of 
the company). It is necessary to comply with these rules. 
 Business rules: they are provided by experts of the 
domain to enhance activities performance or to establish 
procedures or processes. It is not required to comply with 
these rules. These rules can evolve according to users’ 
real activity. 
 Inferred rules: such rules are extracted via a rules 
extraction process which is detailed in the section IV.C.2. 
Every rule is given as an implication “X implies Y”, 
noted X => Y, where X is a conjunction of some contextual 
elements from user, task or environment. Y is a single 
contextual element that is not present in X. Every rule in 
rules set has also a priority which is computed by the BCIM 
or given by the domain experts. A rule is applied if and only 
if every contextual element in X is satisfied. 
C. Overall architecture of BCIM 
Thanks to these elements, now we introduce the overall 
architecture of our context manager with particular regard on 
MES and the extracting rules process (Fig 2).  
The manager we propose contextualizes IRS. Indeed, the 
situations proposed by our context manager are the entry 
point of IRS. In other words, our approach allows the IRS to 
obtain the most realistic picture of contextual information in 
order to better satisfy / match the needs of the user. 
 
Figure 2.  The overall architecture of the BCIM 
1) MES process 
During initialization stage, when BCIM is creating the 
first situation of a particular activity, the IRS relying on our 
manager provides MES with values of all the contextual 
elements of each dimension. Then MES checks the validity 
of the situation (according to the second purpose of the 
BCIM) and alerts the IRS in case of an invalid one. This may 
happen in two cases: 
 The contextual elements from various contextual 
dimensions cannot interact into the situation because of 
the breach of one or more legal business rules. We can 
give the example of the aircraft maintenance field: 
technician with "class A" skills cannot perform intensive 
tasks or work on the tarmac.  
 In addition to contextual elements, actions sent by the 
IRS may also violate such rules. We can give the 
example of the access to an electronic document that can 
be read only by specific categories of users. 
We notice that the BCIM (through the MES process) 
stores the invalid situations to send feedback to the system 
experts. This can be helpful to improve the BCIM by 
updating the set of legal business rules. 
Thereafter, when the IRS modifies one or more initial 
contextual dimensions (change in contextual element value), 
MES uses the rules set to adapt all other contextual elements 
to build an up-to-date situation. In other words, the goal of 
MES in this case is to assess the impact of the changed 
element value on the rest of the context and above all the 
missing contextual elements values. Thus, MES keeps the 
31
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

given values and it predicts missing ones using the rules set 
(refresh the other values in the new situation).  
We note that MES does not perform any adaptation when 
the situation is the most realistic interpretation of the context, 
i.e., all the values are correct and given by the system 
sensors. 
Furthermore, it is important to give some clarification 
regarding the fourth goal of the manager. The lack of 
contextual information can occur in two cases: 
 Upon initialization stage, there may be missing 
contextual information caused, for instance, by a failure 
in one sensor. To infer this missing information and to 
create the situation, MES applies the different rules in the 
following order: business rules and then inferred rules. 
 Between two linked situations (situation at a moment t 
and situation at a moment t-1). To create a new situation 
(at a moment t), MES gets contextual information from 
the previous situation (at a moment t-1) in addition to 
new contextual element values supplied by the IRS. MES 
therefore can use all illegal rules types to adapt the 
contextual elements. 
a) The adaptation cycle of contextual dimensions  
For the effectiveness of any IRS based on our context 
manager, it is essential for all contextual dimensions to be 
adapted and confronted to each other (i.e., contextualized). 
The goal is to characterize the best possible situation. To 
achieve the adaptation of one dimension, depending on the 
others, the MES process uses the three types of rules to 
describe the various transformations to be applied. As 
detailed in the previous section, the specific type of rules 
used by MES widely depends on the precise purpose to be 
achieved.  
Hereafter we present a simplified example of the three 
contextual dimensions in IR field (Fig 3). We note that these 
contextual elements are provided by the IRS to the BCIM. 
Thus to generate a new situation, the BCIM (thanks to the 
MES process) performs a new adaptation cycle. 
 
Figure 3.  Example of the three contextual dimensions 
Suppose the following set of five rules: R2, R3 and R4 
are business rules provided by the domain expert, R1 and R5 
are inferred rules given by the extracting process. We remind 
that these rules are sorted according to their own priorities 
and they are applied if and only if their conditions are 
satisfied. 
R1: User.Experience level≤4 AND Environment.Location=Office 
   Task.required time=50min (priority = 0.9). 
R2: Task.required time>40min AND Environment.Temperature>25°C 
   User.Emotional state=stressed (priority = 0.8). 
R3: User.Emotional state=stressed AND Task.Objective=read an instruction 
   Environment.Background sound=OFF (priority = 0.6). 
R4: User.Experience level>8 AND Environment.Location=Home 
   Task.required time=5min (priority = 0.5). 
R5: User.Emotional state=stressed AND Environment.Background 
sound=OFF 
   Task.required time=70min (priority = 0.5). 
By taking this example, we want to explain the 
adaptation cycle and how MES could adapt the various 
contextual dimensions. In our case, at the beginning of the 
adaptation cycle only rule R1 can be applied because it is the 
only rule whose condition is satisfied. As a consequence of 
this adaptation, the time required in the adapted task 
dimension (Task’) evolves; the value becomes 50 minutes 
instead of 10 min (see Fig 4). 
 
Figure 4.  The adaptation of the Task dimension 
b) Situation stability 
The adaptation cycle respects our context definition and 
its originality. Indeed, the situation stability gives rise to the 
dynamic interaction between contextual elements we wanted 
to reach. Every dimension is adapted by the use of all other 
dimensions. We therefore emphasize that the construction of 
a situation is a recursive process. Indeed, we cannot consider 
each dimension of a context separately. Thus, these rules are 
applied successively on the dimensions until a stability point 
of the context at a moment t is found; that is what we call 
situation. A stable situation can arise from large number of 
iterations (the stability process). 
Taking the previous example (Fig 3), only R1 was 
applied at the end of the first iteration of the adaptation 
cycle. Therefore, to obtain situation stability, MES performs 
a second iteration and the new task (task’: the adapted one) 
substitutes the initial task in the context dimensions set. As a 
consequence of task’ elements values, R2 condition is 
satisfied. Thus, MES continues the stability process and 
adapts the user dimension using R2. Therefore, this 
adaptation infers knowledge on the emotional state 
contextual element of the user by altering the initial model 
and the emotional state of the user becomes stressed. In the 
same way, the new adapted contextual dimension (user’) will 
impact on the environment since this change satisfies the R3 
condition. In other words, R3 will be applied by our stability 
process and a new environment dimension feature is inferred 
by the MES process. It is important to note that R2 and R3 
could not have been applied if only the initial contextual 
dimensions 
(Fig 
3) 
had 
been 
considered 
without 
incorporating the adapted ones in the adaptation cycle. 
As presented before, the three contextual dimensions are 
adapted at the end of the third iteration of the adaptation 
cycle. At this point MES will not stop the adaptation cycle 
and a fourth iteration is performed. Consequently, R5 can be 
applied and the task dimension is adapted again (time 
required becomes 70 minutes). Finally, at the end of the 
adaptation cycle a stability point is reached (no more rules 
can be applied). MES provides the IRS with the three 
32
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

adapted contextual dimensions (see Fig 5) which are 
considered as the realistic situation. 
 
Figure 5.  The adapted contextual dimensions composing the situation 
2) Rules Extraction Process 
The BCIM must be able to evolve over time. In other 
words, the set of rules used by the MES process should grow 
to enhance contextual information accuracy. For this 
purpose, we propose a novel rules extraction process based 
on past situations. This process concentrates only on valid 
situations because they contain information about what 
happens in practice. Furthermore, the impact of the dynamic 
interaction of various contextual elements during the 
adaptation itself can cause a change in activity or in the 
initial models. Learning from past situations can give to our 
BCIM a realistic view of what actually happens during an 
activity. The system becomes then more and more efficient 
and the information more and more relevant as well. 
For the BCIM, the rules extraction process is based on 
the classical association rules extraction methods [17]. These 
methods aim at finding interesting associations and/or 
correlation relationships among large sets of data items. 
Association rules show the value of items that occur 
frequently together in a given dataset. In our case, these 
items are the contextual elements and our dataset is the set of 
past situations. Thus, via this process, the context manager 
will enrich its rules set. Consequently, this will improve the 
quality of the adaptation of the contextual dimensions. We 
note that inferred rules are subsequently ranked by the BCIM 
according to their priority which is computed by rules 
extraction process using, for example, confidence or support. 
3) Implementation 
The proposed BCIM have been implemented as a Java 
server. The different contextual dimensions are stored in 
XML format. This choice is motivated to improve the 
possibility to describe various contextual dimensions (e.g., 
CTT approach: “ConcurTaskTrees” for hierarchical task 
modelling can generate XML document [18]). To extract and 
manage association rules, the prototype uses Weka API [19] 
and specifically its a priori algorithm. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we present a BCIM for IRS business 
context based on three contextual dimensions: business task, 
user and environment. The manager is based on a novel 
interpretation of the context. This interpretation is original 
because it focuses on the dynamics between all these 
contextual dimensions rather than how information is 
represented. We introduced the MES process that manages 
the three contextual dimensions using the context manager 
knowledge related to interactions between contextual 
dimensions. The BCIM provides the IRS with realistic 
snapshot of the user activity. This snapshot is the current 
situation that will be used for any purpose by IRS. We have 
also shown that the three kinds of rules are useful to model 
knowledge necessary to manage IRS context. Finally, we 
presented the rules extraction process that improves the 
BCIM over time by making it gain new knowledge from past 
situations. As a matter of future work we plan to evaluate the 
BCIM using real situations in concrete business context. 
Then, we can compare other rules extraction methods. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Schilit, N. Adams, and R. Want, « Context-aware computing 
applications », in First Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and 
Applications, 1994, pp. 85-90. 
[2] J. Pascoe, « Adding generic contextual capabilities to wearable 
computers », in Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on 
Wearable Computers, 1998, pp. 92-99. 
[3] A. K. Dey, « Understanding and Using Context », Personal 
Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 4-7, 2001. 
[4] P. Dourish, « What we talk about when we talk about context », 
Personal Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 19-30, 2004. 
[5] J. D. Johnson, « On contexts of information seeking », Information 
Processing & Management, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 735-760, 2003. 
[6] G. Kumaran and J. Allan, « Adapting information retrieval systems to 
user queries », Information Processing & Management, vol. 44, no. 6, 
pp. 1838-1862, 2008. 
[7] J. Bai and J.-Y. Nie, « Adapting information retrieval to query 
contexts », Information Processing & Management, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 
1901–1922, 2008. 
[8] N. Stojanovic, « On the role of a user’s knowledge gap in an 
information retrieval process », Proceedings of the 3rd international 
conference on Knowledge capture, pp. 83–90, 2005. 
[9] C. Cool and A. Spink, « Issues of context in information retrieval 
(IR): an introduction to the special issue », Information Processing & 
Management, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 605-611, 2002. 
[10] N. J. Belkin, « Some(what) grand challenges for information 
retrieval », SIGIR Forum, vol. 42, no. 1, p. 47-54, 2008. 
[11] K. Byström and P. Hansen, « Conceptual framework for tasks in 
information studies: Book Reviews », J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., 
vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 1050–1061, 2005. 
[12] Y. Li and N. J. Belkin, « A faceted approach to conceptualizing tasks 
in information seeking », Information Processing & Management, 
vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 1822–1837, 2008. 
[13] P. Ingwersen and K. Järvelin, The Turn: Integration of Information 
Seeking and Retrieval in Context (The Information Retrieval Series). 
Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 2005. 
[14] P. Brusilovsky and E. Millán, « User Models for Adaptive 
Hypermedia and Adaptive Educational Systems », in The Adaptive 
Web, 2007, pp. 3-53. 
[15] M. Chevalier, C. Julien, C. Soulé-Dupuy, and N. Vallès-Parlangeau, 
« Personalized 
Information 
Access 
Through 
Flexible 
and 
Interoperable 
Profiles », 
in 
the 
International 
Workshop 
on 
Personalized Access to Web Information, France, 2007, pp. 374-385. 
[16] J. C. Pomerol and P. Brézillon, « About some relationships between 
Knowledge and Context », Modeling and Using Context, pp. 461–
464, 2001. 
[17] R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski, and A. Swami, « Mining Association 
Rules between Sets of Items in Large Databases », in International 
Conference on Management of Data, 1993, pp. 207-216. 
[18] F. Paterno, « Model-based design of interactive applications », 
intelligence, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 26-38, 2000. 
[19] http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/, july 18 2011. 
 
33
CENTRIC 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-167-0

