User-oriented Product Information Management with Semantic Technologies 
 
Bastian Eine, Werner Quint 
Faculty of Design – Computer Science – Media 
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences 
Wiesbaden, Germany 
bastian.eine@hs-rm.de, werner.quint@hs-rm.de 
 
 
Abstract— Product information is important for companies’ 
employees and customers and thus, for the companies’ overall 
success. There is the need to manage and represent complex 
product information in a way that addresses different user 
capabilities and perspectives because individuals may have 
different information needs and different perspectives on 
product information. This paper describes the idea that 
product information can be represented and managed user-
oriented with the help of semantic technologies. 
Keywords-product 
information 
management; 
user-
orientation; semantic technologies. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Today, 
business 
transactions, 
including 
business 
processes and acquisition of data, are almost entirely 
electronic in nature. With regards to product information, 
enterprises are faced with the challenge of how to handle 
more and more information about products [1]. Adding to 
the challenge is customer demand for mass customization. 
This requires the management of even more information 
about relations between product parts and product features. 
Information systems may help to reduce the complexity of 
product information for users, but for this the information 
systems need functions based on specific technologies. 
Accordingly, this paper describes the idea of representing 
and managing product information user-oriented with the 
help of semantic technologies. In Section 2, product 
information management (PIM) as a part of enterprise 
information technology will be described. Section 3 shows 
challenges for companies that want to apply PIM. The idea 
of using semantic technologies for PIM will be discussed in 
Section 4. Finally, Section 5 describes the approach of how 
to develop a solution. 
II. 
PRODUCT INFORMATION MANAGEMENT 
Internally, information about products is not always 
consistent. Product information is created by specialized 
departments, or its employees, which have different 
perspectives on information [2]. Also, product information 
is created outside of a company, managed, passed on and 
taken over both by other companies, e.g., suppliers, 
manufacturers and by individuals like customers [3]. If a 
company stores and manages the different information about 
products in a central and media neutral way, the expense of 
maintaining, 
searching 
for 
and 
presenting 
product 
information can be reduced significantly [4]. Thus, the 
company will also able to reuse product information 
consistently 
in 
different 
departments. 
Furthermore, 
consistent product information can reduce the number of 
customer requests and wrong orders and deliveries. 
The establishment of electronic business processes 
brought a number of improvements for companies, e.g., 
automatic handling of purchasing and selling products. 
Therefore, data and information about products are almost 
exclusively managed in companies’ information systems 
[5]. That being said, not all information systems have the 
ability to fully encompass the PIM needs of a company. For 
example, Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems are 
set up to represent all business processes of a company in 
order to increase the overall cost-effectiveness [6]. Often, 
ERP systems do not include product marketing descriptions, 
product pictures or complementary technical product data. 
Additionally, there are a number of other types of 
information systems, with which product information can be 
managed, e.g., Content Management Systems or Customer 
Relationship Management Systems. Finally, PIM systems 
provide centralized and media neutral data storage, data 
management, and data output of product information [7]. 
PIM systems offer a number of functions, which enable 
companies to use product information consistently inside 
and outside of the company. For instance, PIM systems can 
assist companies and employees with product classification, 
translation management, media asset management and data 
output to different media (e.g., print catalogue, technical 
data sheets, online shop, or other third-party systems) [4]. 
III. 
CHALLENGES 
One challenge for managing product information is 
ensuring a consistent description and interpretation of 
product information by users [8]. Therefore, it is necessary 
to implement syntactical, as well as semantical restrictions 
or defaults to avoid redundant statements or wrong 
interpretations. Another challenge is to capture and 
represent complex product information, e.g., relations 
between products or product features. When composing a 
configurable product it has to be taken into account that 
selecting a certain product feature may exclude other 
product features. This information is essential for 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

employees, who are responsible for maintaining product 
information but also for customers, who want to configure a 
product or satisfy their information need. Accordingly, it is 
necessary to capture, manage and present the information in 
a clear and easy to understand manner. PIM systems are 
often advertised as being able to manage a large variety of 
relations between products and product features. Also, they 
should be able to present the products and relations between 
product features in different media easily. This shows that 
there might be alleged solutions already with which product 
information can be gathered and displayed in individual 
formats. However, it is unclear, on which technology and 
approaches the providers are basing their PIM systems. 
Also, it has not yet been analyzed whether existing solutions 
take different user perspectives into account and if they do, 
how satisfying are they. 
IV. 
SEMANTIC TECHNOLOGIES 
The use of semantic technologies, when creating and 
representing information and relations between concepts, 
can help interpret complex information by identifying the 
corresponding context. Semantic technologies can make it 
easier to understand the meaning and purpose of complex 
concepts as well as share knowledge for humans and 
machines [9]. For PIM, semantic technologies can be based 
on simple approaches like glossaries (lists of words and 
their definitions), taxonomies (hierarchies for terms) and 
thesauri (relations of similarity and synonyms) to avoid 
syntactical and semantic problems when creating and 
interpreting product information. Approaches with more 
semantic richness are topic maps [10][11] and ontologies 
[12]. Besides describing product information these two 
semantic technologies can be utilized to also capture and 
represent the relations and connections to other products, 
product components, product features and further product 
information. With ontologies it is also possible to represent 
rules which are associated with the relations mentioned 
before. Hepp [13] and Brunner et al. [14] are examples for 
describing and linking products and services with the help 
of ontologies. 
Normally, the complex labels and structures of semantic 
technologies are created with complex tools (high range of 
functions, programming skills necessary). It cannot be 
expected that users, who are responsible for maintaining 
product information in a company, are able to easily 
understand and utilize these structures and tools. Even more 
problems can arise when a user has to modify or customize 
the structures of the implemented semantic technologies. 
For example, when a product taxonomy has to be modified, 
because product lines are merged. Thus, a user not only has 
to get to know the tool for modifying but also has to 
understand structures and relations of a product taxonomy. 
Only then will the user be able to make useful modifications 
without causing errors, inconsistencies or contradictions. 
This shows that employees and customers can handle 
complex product information more easily if structures and 
relations of semantic technologies for PIM are represented 
in an understandable and user-oriented way. 
V. 
APPROACH 
The idea of this paper is to utilize the concept of 
semantic technologies for user-oriented representation and 
management of product information. First step will be a 
literature review to provide an overview of the current 
concepts in research and the research needs in the context of 
user-oriented representation of complex product information 
and semantic technologies. Also, companies using PIM will 
be interviewed for user requirements analysis. Next steps 
will be to develop a method and a software prototype to 
support user-oriented PIM. This method and prototype will 
be evaluated with the help of companies using PIM. 
REFERENCES 
[1] McKinsey Global Institute. Big data: The next frontier for 
innovation, competition, and productivity. [Online]. Available 
from: http://bigdatawg.nist.gov/MGI_big_data_full_report.pdf 
2015.06.01. 
[2] J. Stark, Product Lifecycle Management - 21st Century 
Paradigm for Product Realisation. London, Springer, 2011. 
[3] B. Otto and M. Ofner, “Towards a Process Reference Model 
for Information Supply Chain Management,” The 18th 
European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS 2010), 
Jan. 2010, pp. 1-12. 
[4] T. Lucas-Nülle, Product Information Management in 
Deutschland - Marktstudie 2005. Mammendorf, Pro-Literatur-
Verl. Mayer-Scholz, 2005. 
[5] J. A. O’Brien and G. Marakas, Management Information 
Systems. New York, McGraw-Hil/Irwin, 2011. 
[6] M. 
Sumner, 
Enterprise 
Resource 
Planning. 
Indiana 
University, Prentince Hall, 2005. 
[7] Gartner, 
Magic 
Quadrant 
for 
Product 
Information 
Management 
2007. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
ftp://public.dhe.ibm.com/software/emea/de/db2/Gartner_MD
M_Magic_Quadrant_PIM.pdf 2015.06.01. 
[8] R. Y. Wang and D. M. Strong, “Beyond Accuracy: What Data 
Quality Means to Data Consumers” J. Manag. Inf. Sys., vol. 
12, Mar. 1996, pp. 5-33. 
[9] T. Pellegrini and A. Blumauer, “Semantic Web und 
semantische Technologien“ in Semantic Web - Wege zur 
vernetzten 
Wissensgesellschaft, 
T. 
Pellegrini 
and 
A. 
Blumauer, Eds. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 9-25, 2006. 
[10] S. Pepper, The TAO of Topic Map - Finding the Way in the 
Age of Infoglut. [Online]. Available from: http://www.onto-
pia.net/topicmaps/materials/tao.html 2015.05.13. 
[11] L. M. Garshol, “Metadata? Thesauri? Taxonomies? Topic 
Maps! Making Sense of it all”. J. Inf. Sci., vol. 30, August 
2004, pp. 378-391. 
[12] T. Gruber, “Toward Principles for the Design of Ontologies 
Used for Knowledge Sharing” Int. J. Hum.-Comp. Stud., vol. 
43, Nov. 1995, pp. 907-928. 
[13] M. Hepp, “GoodRelations: An Ontology for Describing 
Products and Services Offers on the Web” The 16th Int. Conf. 
Knowl. Engin. Knowl. Manag. (EKAW2008), Springer 
LNCS, Sept. 2008, pp. 332-347. 
[14] J.-S. Brunner et al., “Explorations in the use of semantic web 
technologies for product information management” 16th Proc. 
Int. conf. www (WWW2007), ACM, May 2007, pp. 747-756. 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-440-4
CENTRIC 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services

