Threat Analysis of Industrial Internet of Things Devices
Simon Liebl*, Leah Lathrop*, Ulrich Raithel†, Matthias S¨ollner* and Andreas Aßmuth*
*Technical University of Applied Sciences OTH Amberg-Weiden, Amberg, Germany,
Email: {s.liebl | l.lathrop | m.soellner | a.assmuth}@oth-aw.de
†SIPOS Aktorik GmbH, Altdorf, Germany, Email: ulrich.raithel@sipos.de
Abstract—As part of the Internet of Things, industrial devices
are now also connected to cloud services. However, the connection
to the Internet increases the risks for Industrial Control Systems.
Therefore, a threat analysis is essential for these devices. In this
paper, we examine Industrial Internet of Things devices, identify
and rank different sources of threats and describe common
threats and vulnerabilities. Finally, we recommend a procedure
to carry out a threat analysis on these devices.
Keywords—Threat analysis; Industrial Internet of Things; low-
power devices; Cloud.
I. INTRODUCTION
Approximately 20 billion Internet of Things (IoT) devices
are in use today [1], and this number could double in the next
ﬁve years [2]. The steadily increasing number of devices also
raises the interest of attackers. During the ﬁrst half of 2019,
the overall number of cyberattacks increased by more than
350% compared to the previous six months [3]. The majority
of attacks either aim to infect IoT devices or to launch attacks
using them, such as Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
attacks.
The increasing number of attacks also affects Industrial
Internet of Things (IIoT) devices. These are IoT devices
specialized on industrial applications and used in Industrial
Control Systems (ICSs) for holistic monitoring and analysis
using cloud computing. A common approach is to integrate
the IIoT functionality into existing low-power Operational
Technology (OT) devices. This can be recognized by the
number of OT devices connected to a network. While about
60% of OT equipment was connected to the network in 2016,
the ﬁgure had risen to almost 78% by 2018 [4].
ICSs are a frequent target for attacks. Recently, Microsoft
security researchers discovered that the hacker group APT33
focuses speciﬁcally on manufacturers, suppliers and maintain-
ers of ICS components [5]. OT devices installed in an ICS can
cause extensive damage, since they control physical processes.
The impact can be severe, especially in critical infrastructures,
where this can result in a breakdown of power or water
supply, for example. The increasing number of OT devices
connected to the network, however, increases the attack surface
of ICSs. As a result, it becomes easier for hackers to attack,
successfully exploit OT devices and cause damage to ICSs.
Furthermore, the takeover of IIoT devices can also have
an impact on cloud computing. In addition to the previously
mentioned DDoS attacks on cloud servers, false data can be
injected [6]. For example, ICS operators can be selectively
supplied with incorrect information, e.g., abnormally high
temperature values, to cause erroneous reactions, such as an
emergency stop.
As a consequence of the increasing threats, IIoT manufac-
turers must secure their devices to prevent such incidents. This
requires awareness of the risks. It is important to understand
who is interested in exploiting their device and what motivates
attackers to do so. In this paper, we aim to identify the
threats speciﬁc to IIoT devices, describe how attackers could
proceed and support IIoT manufacturers in conducting a threat
analysis for their devices. The paper is structured as follows: in
Section II, the differences between IoT, IIoT and OT devices
are clariﬁed and the use of IIoT devices in ICSs are described.
Different types of threat sources and their respective intentions
are introduced in Section IV. In Section V, several threats and
vulnerabilities for IIoT devices are presented. A list of steps for
a successful threat analysis follows in Section VI. The paper
concludes in Section VII with an outlook on further work.
II. THE INDUSTRIAL INTERNET OF THINGS
After a term differentiation, three potential setup options for
a connection from IIoT devices to the cloud are described.
A. IoT, IIoT, OT and ICS
The IoT is a network of connected devices, which are
sensors and/or actuators fulﬁlling a speciﬁc application [7].
Via the network they can, for instance, mutually exchange data
or store and process data centrally and feed back the gained
knowledge. This can be supported by cloud services. These
have the advantage that there are already many semiﬁnished
solutions that simplify the integration of different devices. The
number of devices or the required storage capacity can also be
easily adapted, i.e., scalability. The use cases can be grouped in
several categories, such as consumer applications (e.g., Smart
Home), commercial (e.g., Medical and Healthcare) or infras-
tructure applications (e.g., Smart Grid). This paper focuses on
industrial applications for which the already introduced term
IIoT has been established. The main difference between IIoT
and most IoT applications, such as consumer IoT, is that IoT
services are human-centered and IIoT services are machine-
oriented [8].
The use of IIoT devices can have various advantages, such
as boosting productivity, avoiding plant downtimes through
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

predictive maintenance and reducing energy consumption.
Furthermore, the IIoT should also enable products to be
manufactured only after the order has been placed, i.e., build
to order, and to be tracked by the customer during production
and delivery. IIoT devices are usually part of the OT. OT
can be found, for example, in industrial factories to monitor
and control physical processes. The term was introduced
to emphasize the signiﬁcant difference to IT, such as ﬁeld
of application and used communication protocols. Some ex-
amples for OT/IIoT sensors are temperature probes or bar
code scanners, actuators are, for instance, valves or power
converter. The primary security challenges for IoT devices are
privacy and conﬁdentiality, e.g., human health data. However,
IIoT devices focus additionally on safety and the impact
on environment and society [9]. They can potentially cause
injury, death, damaged production equipment or environmental
disasters. This can also affect large parts of the population
through critical infrastructures, such as food or health.
An ICS is usually structured into several layers. The lower
levels are made up of OT devices and Programmable Logic
Controllers (PLCs). The middle layers contain, for example,
Human Machine Interfaces (HMIs) and engineering worksta-
tions. The top levels provide servers for services and backups.
An increase in security can be achieved by dividing the ICS
into multiple layers so that more protection can be provided
to the lowest level, which is especially safety-critical. This
concept is known as defense in depth. Another approach is air
gapping, isolating the entire ICS network from the Internet
or even corporate network. It has been demonstrated that
particularly the latter does not provide sufﬁcient security. Nev-
ertheless, both measures result in more complex and expensive
attacks. First, the IT network must be compromised (e.g.,
via email intrusion), then malware must be transferred to the
OT network (e.g., via USB sticks) and, lastly, malicious code
must be transferred to the PLCs [10]. Once this is achieved,
systems be controlled, damaged or spied on. However, these
approaches conﬂict with the IIoT functionality of OT devices,
as the lowest level requires Internet access. As a result, the
architecture of ICS networks is affected by IIoT devices.
B. Cloud Connection Setups
Several IoT/IIoT architectures have already been proposed
to implement segmented and logically structured networks
[11]. In reality, however, these architectures can differ sig-
niﬁcantly. Therefore, different setups are only considered in
an abstract way. The characteristics of a device, the task it
performs and the level it is located on are important for the
threat analysis.
Figure 1 illustrates three possible setups. In small ones,
each device can be connected separately to clouds. This could
be, for example, a small, remote hydroelectric power plant
connected to the Internet via mobile networks. The proprietary
ﬁrmware of valves has been extended by a network stack for
this purpose. The devices are connected to the operator’s cloud
for centralized monitoring and controlling and to the device
Plant Cloud
Device
Manufacturer
Cloud
Company Cloud
Other Clouds
SCADA
PLC
Edge
Large Setup
Middle Setup
Small Setup
Figure 1. Three possible setups for connections from IIoT devices to clouds.
manufacturer’s cloud service for installing remote ﬁrmware
updates.
In the middle setup, devices are connected to the cloud via
an edge gateway. It is not unusual for industrial devices to
be older than ten years. They were not designed to send data
to the cloud. Therefore, gateways collect data from several
devices over mostly proprietary protocols, such as CAN or
Modbus. Compared to low-power ﬁeld devices, gateways have
a more powerful processor and often a Linux-based operating
system.
Even entire Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition
(SCADA) systems are outsourced to the cloud in large indus-
trial factories. Flexible web interfaces for desktops and mobile
devices allow remote monitoring and control of the entire
plant. In this scenario, many more connections to the cloud
are possible, e.g., when the numerous ﬁeld devices connect to
their manufacturer’s cloud or when all plants are combined in
a company cloud.
III. RELATED WORK
Since many IoT device manufacturers often prioritize func-
tionality and time to market, security is neglected or not
considered. This has been recognized by researchers and gov-
ernmental institutions, leading to active research on the threats,
necessary security requirements and mitigation techniques.
The German Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security (BSI)
releases annually an Information Security Management Sys-
tem (ISMS), the so-called IT-Grundschutz Compendium, that
covers, among others, technical and organizational aspects
of information security [12]. The aspects are divided into
several modules. For example, embedded devices (SYS.4.3),
IoT devices (SYS.4.4) and ICS components (IND.2.1) are
modules concerning threats and the resulting requirements.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

In [13], Abomhara et al. evaluate IoT device attacks, vul-
nerabilities, assets and possible intruders. Although industrial
systems, such as SCADA systems, are mentioned, the special
characteristics of ICSs are not described in depth. In [14],
Wurm et al. conducted a security analysis on a consumer IoT
and an IIoT device and demonstrated how these devices could
be exploited. However, the procedure is too speciﬁc and cannot
be adapted to other devices.
So far, manufacturers are assisted by standards and scien-
tiﬁc papers in conducting a threat analysis for any system.
However, there are no mandatory international guidelines on
how the analysis should be carried out. In addition, computer-
based threat modeling tools are not suitable for the special
conditions of IIoT devices.
IV. THREAT SOURCES AND MOTIVES
To protect IoT devices from unauthorized access, it is
helpful to know who is interested in using them, i.e., the threat
sources. Depending on application and device characteristics,
the sources can be different. For instance, IIoT applications
in critical infrastructures are more likely to be attacked by
Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) groups, whereas IoT de-
vices with open Telnet or SSH ports are favored by botnet
operators. Generally, there are also threats caused by natural
disasters or unintentional misuse by employees, but these will
not be considered in this paper. We have classiﬁed the sources
based on two characteristics. First, to what extent the attack
targets were selected arbitrarily or intentionally. Second, what
capabilities attackers have, i.e., how many skills and ﬁnancial
resources are available to them. Figure 2 classiﬁes nine threat
sources accordingly. In the following section, each source is
described in detail.
A. Targeted attacks and capable attackers
a) Government-Sponsored:
The
most
serious
threat
arises when an ICS is the target of attackers who are supported
by a government or agency. Examples include the attacks on
the Iranian nuclear program (Stuxnet) [15] or on the Ukrainian
power grid [16], both of which are suspected to have been
supported by foreign governments. The attacks were targeted
and only possible at high expense due to their complexity.
The motives to conduct such attacks are usually political or
economical.
b) Industrial Espionage: Economic reasons are generally
a major motive. Targeted attacks aim, for example, to sniff
production ﬁgures, customer data and know-how, or simply
cause ﬁnancial loss to competitors. In recent years, there
were several espionage attacks on German companies of the
DAX (German stock index), including the ICS component
manufacturer Siemens [17].
B. Less targeted attacks, but capable attackers
a) Organized Crime: Organized cybercriminals try to
blackmail their victims by encrypting sensitive data. The
recently discovered ransomware EKANS seems to be speciﬁ-
cally intended for ICSs because it terminates several common
ICS-speciﬁc software processes [18].
Targeted
Capabilities
Government-
Sponsored
Organized Crime
Malware
Industrial Espionage
Hacker
Script Kiddie
Terrorism
Malicious
Insider
Hacktivism
Figure 2. Threat Sources.
b) Malware: Malware is often designed to infect as many
devices as possible, for instance, to build botnets. Mirai and
its many variants demonstrated that millions of IoT devices
are vulnerable to malware attacks [19].
C. Targeted attacks, but less capable attackers
a) Terrorism: Threats from terrorism can be considered
from two perspectives. There is a threat from extremist organi-
zations. Although they are theoretically capable of carrying out
attacks, few attacks are known in practice [20]. Additionally,
terrorism can also be sponsored by states. Attacks on critical
infrastructures, such as energy or water, affect the general
civilian population. Therefore, they are a kind of terrorism.
Since government-sponsored threats are already covered, the
capabilities of terrorism is rated low.
b) Malicious Insider: Insider attacks by (former) em-
ployees or contractors cause an average annual loss of more
than eight million dollars [21]. Employees, for example, could
sell conﬁdential data for personal ﬁnancial gain or sabotage
machines due to hostility towards the employer. They also
possess specialist knowledge, which is particularly required
for attacks on IIoT devices. Insider attacks are the major threat
to OT [22], especially for ICSs in critical infrastructures, as
identiﬁed by an evaluation of US hydropower dams [23].
c) Hacktivism: The number of attacks by hacktivists
is increasing and should therefore not be neglected. The
attacks are targeted, but have not frequently been effective
so far. Besides DoS attacks, attempts are made to steal data.
This could affect, for instance, oil and gas companies or
companies that make politically controversial decisions. The
latter happened to heavy machinery maker Caterpillar Inc. as
a result of the sale of bulldozers to Israel [24].
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

D. Less targeted attacks and less capable attackers
a) Hacker and Script Kiddie: The last two threat sources
we identiﬁed are hackers and script kiddies. The source code of
malware, e.g., Mirai, is frequently published on code sharing
platforms like Github or hacker forums. As a result, many
people want to try them out for themselves. Compared to
script kiddies, experienced hackers can build on this code and
develop their own variants.
V. THREATS, VULNERABILITIES AND THEIR IMPACT
Several threats were already mentioned in the listing of
threat sources. In the following section, the threats are sum-
marized brieﬂy and common vulnerabilities are described.
Possible attack vectors on IIoT devices are illustrated after-
wards. Table I provides an overview of frequent threats and
vulnerabilities for IIoT devices.
TABLE I. COMMON THREATS AND VULNERABILITIES.
Threats
Vulnerabilities
Abuse
Code execution
Denial of Service
Communication manipulation
Destruction
Design ﬂaws and bugs
Espionage
Memory manipulation
Intellectual property theft
Misconﬁguration
Maloperation
Physical manipulation
Ransomware
Privilege escalation
Repudiation
Repudiation
Spooﬁng
Web-based vulnerabilities
A. Threats
a) Abuse: The source of this threat could be malware or
employees. The former utilizes IIoT devices as part of a botnet
for DoS attacks, mining cryptocurrencies or for spreading
spam. The latter could use the device for private purposes.
b) Denial of Service: For ICS operators, the availability
of all devices is most important because a single temporary
breakdown can potentially lead to a production stop. There-
fore, the failure of a device could have ﬁnancial consequences
for operators. A denial of service can be achieved not only by
ﬂooding devices with network requests but also by changing
their conﬁguration. Multiple devices could also be utilized to
stop cloud servers. This would not only block one plant from
its cloud services but all other plants of a large company.
c) Destruction: The destruction of a device is also a form
of denial of service, more precisely a permanent denial of
service. The attack can be either on hardware or software.
An example of the latter is BrickerBot, which destroyed more
than ten million IoT devices [25]. Furthermore, the actuators
of an OT device can be incorrectly triggered, destroying
components, such as engines. The consequences are far more
serious than a normal DoS attack. If there is no backup device
that takes over immediately, the plant is out of operation.
Additionally, data saved on the device may be lost.
d) Espionage: Espionage was already introduced in Sec-
tion IV. Stealing production data, process procedures or even
user data is often easy because many industrial communication
protocols are not encrypted at all.
e) Intellectual property theft: OT devices are usually
specialized on one speciﬁc task. Manufacturers invest a lot of
effort into their product in order to be better than competitors.
As a result, leading manufacturers struggle with plagiarism
and cloned, cheaply replicated hardware that runs their original
ﬁrmware.
f) Maloperation: Starting or stopping machines unex-
pectedly or making them work in slightly different ways is not
a theoretical issue anymore. Two recent examples are TRITON
[26] and Industroyer [27] that were speciﬁcally created for OT
devices and protocols. The latter supports four industrial com-
munication protocols and is capable of controlling switches
and circuit breakers in electricity substations.
g) Ransomware: If, in addition to the IT network, the
OT network is also affected by a ransomware attack, some
machines in the plant may no longer be available. As a result,
the ICS must be shut down. This incident happened recently
to a pipeline operator, who had to shut its operation down for
two days, according to a report by the US Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) [28].
h) Repudiation: In case of an error in an ICS, it should
be possible to reconstruct the exact procedure with logs.
Attackers could manipulate or delete them in order to remain
undetected.
i) Spooﬁng: IIoT devices must be uniquely identiﬁable.
Attackers could masquerade as the device and send false data
to PLCs or cloud services. The latest ﬁrmware could also
be obtained by cloning original devices and spooﬁng their
identity.
B. Vulnerabilities
a) Code execution: Arbitrary code execution is the goal
of every attacker. Attacks can be either local or remote. Since
the ﬁrmware of IIoT devices is mostly written in C/C++, they
are vulnerable to memory attacks, such as buffer overﬂows.
b) Communication manipulation: Message senders or
receivers, measured values or commands can be easily ma-
nipulated due to unencrypted communication.
c) Design ﬂaws and bugs: Many industrial devices and
protocols were not designed with security in mind. Even if
this is the case, bugs can still occur. An example of this is the
encrypted OPC UA protocol, which contained numerous ﬂaws
[29]. This is particularly critical in ICSs because the ﬁrmware
of the countless devices is rarely or never updated.
d) Memory manipulation: By manipulating the memory,
incorrect conﬁgurations can be loaded, faulty data can lead to
inappropriate reactions and features that would be subject to
additional costs can be unlocked illicitly.
e) Misconﬁguration: Misconﬁgurations enable many at-
tacks. Common mistakes are unchanged default passwords,
disabled ﬁrmware patches and open but unused ports.
f) Physical manipulation: Attackers with physical access
to IIoT devices can alter the hardware, e.g., sensors or actua-
tors but also microcontrollers or memories.
g) Privilege escalation: Some actions should only be
executed with higher privileges. For IIoT devices it is often
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

simple to obtain these due to standard or company-wide
passwords or backdoors of the developers. Furthermore, most
industrial protocols do not support authentication. Therefore,
it is not possible to verify authorization for them.
h) Repudiation: The aforementioned threat is also a
vulnerability, since insufﬁcient logging and monitoring hinders
the detection and veriﬁcation of threats. Due to lack of
identiﬁcation mechanisms, actions can be easily repudiated.
i) Web-based vulnerabilities: IIoT devices often run a
web server for conﬁguration, maintenance, monitoring or con-
trol of the devices. But this exposes them to web-based attacks.
According to OWASP, the greatest risks include injection,
broken authentication and cross-site scripting (XSS) among
others [30].
C. Attack Vectors
IIoT devices are becoming increasingly complex. As a
result of the IoT, new communication interfaces are being
integrated that were previously rarely or never used in OT. In
any case, they provide typically several interfaces for speciﬁc
requirements. For better illustration, we have structured the
various interfaces into zones in Figure 3. Zones 0 and 1
describe the hardware and software of a device. In zones 2
to 4, established communication protocols are listed in the
left-hand column while systems that interact with them are
listed in the right-hand column.
In the following section, three possible attack vectors are
introduced. Examples are used to illustrate how attackers from
the different zones could proceed or how they could have an
impact on other devices in these zones.
a) Device attacks: In zone 0, device components can be
physically manipulated. This may be intentional or accidental.
In the latter case, a burnt-out circuit board or a defective engine
could be replaced by a spare part that was not purchased from
the original manufacturer for price reasons. Compatibility of
hardware or software is not guaranteed for these components
causing faulty operation, DoS and even destruction to result.
As discussed in Section IV, IIoT devices are especially
threatened by highly capable actors. Attacks with high com-
plexity and effort should consequently not be ignored. Costly
invasive hardware attacks, such as probing, or rather cheaper
non-invasive attacks, such as side-channel analysis, enable ac-
cess to secret data, e.g., cryptographic keys. Attackers can also
directly access the ﬂash memory or EEPROM via interfaces
from zone 2, e.g., JTAG. First, this allows them to read the
memory to retrieve the ﬁrmware, i.e., intellectual property
theft. Second, data or conﬁgurations can be modiﬁed, e.g.,
access data. Third, ﬁrmware can be exchanged so that arbitrary
code can be executed. Attacks of this kind are complex, but
they can cause considerable damage. In case the necessary
knowledge is lacking, there are appropriate service providers
for this (e.g., www.break-ic.com).
The popular USB interface also enables multiple attacks.
USB sticks can be used, for example, to load malware or
destroy badly protected power and data lines, i.e., kill USB
sticks. With bad usb devices, such as Hak5’s rubber duckies,
Hardware
Zone 0
Software
Zone 1
Device
MCU
Memory
Components
Sensors
Actuators
Firmware/(RT)OS
Application
Web server
Local & Internal
Communication
Zone 2
USB
JTAG
RS232
SPI
USB stick
SD card
Display
Microcontroller
PC
Process &
Control
Zone 3
PROFINET
EtherNet/IP
Modbus
CAN
HART
PROFIBUS
PLC
Sensor
Actuator
HMI
Monitor &
Analyze
Zone 4
WiFi
Ethernet
Bluetooth
5G
Cloud
SCADA
Workstation
Historian
Smartphone
Figure 3. Different zones of a device and their respective interfaces with
interaction systems.
it is also possible to execute arbitrary commands and thus
manipulate the device.
b) Application attacks: The process of a production
plant can be interrupted or stopped if the application of IIoT
devices do not work properly. An attacker might change the
conﬁguration or move an actuator incorrectly via its display.
The devices are often misconﬁgured as they still have the
default or a trivial password. Many IIoT devices can also be
programmed using a PC-based conﬁguration tool. A common
design ﬂaw is that users must not be authorized to carry out
these changes. As a result, it is often possible to reconﬁgure,
update or reset a device by connecting to it via a cable or
network. When such a vulnerability is exploited, it is difﬁcult
to reconstruct and verify the incident, as the devices often do
not support user identiﬁcation.
Wrong commands can also originate from the devices of
zone 3. The source can be either an already compromised PLC
or a completely different device. Since messages of the most
proprietary protocols are not authenticated, a different sender
address can be spoofed. Reversely, incorrect information can
also be sent to PLCs or HMIs. For example, PLCs from
the manufacturer Schneider can be stopped using a simple
command via the Modbus protocol [31]. The consequences
of this abrupt stop may be catastrophic. Faulty commands or
sensor data can also be sent to systems in zone 4, e.g., the
SCADA system or the cloud. Since more decisions will be
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

made by a data-driven Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) in the future,
wrong choices may result.
Due to the more widespread network protocols in zone 4,
vulnerabilities can also be exploited remotely. Such vulnera-
bilities can be located in the ﬁrmware/operating system or the
application. An example of the former are the Treck TCP/IP
stack vulnerabilities called Ripple20 that allow remote code
execution, which were recently discovered [32]. Vulnerabilities
in the application can be caused by a web server that allows
SQL injection, for instance. Once they have successfully
exploited a vulnerability, process operations can be sabotaged.
c) Network attacks: The vulnerabilities just mentioned
also allow an infection of botnets. If several devices in a
network are infected and the botnet operator launches a DDoS
attack, internal network trafﬁc can be delayed. This can, for
example, interrupt the connection of PLCs to the SCADA
system. In case the attack is targeted at the own global
company cloud, other plants might be affected as well.
If the device is a network node, such as an edge device, this
also results in multiple threats. Besides snifﬁng or tampering
with messages, they can also be delayed or blocked. Especially
for systems that have to meet real-time constraints, this can
become a major threat.
The network is also useful for spreading an infection. Espe-
cially the systems in zone 4 are targeted either for monetary
gain through a ransomware attack or to obtain as much control
as possible. Workstations with Win 7 or Win XP are not rare
in ICSs, and thus this is often not much effort for an attacker.
VI. RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE
Finally, we summarize all the previously discussed aspects
to deﬁne a recommended procedure for the threat analysis.
1) Know your device: It is important to know the IIoT de-
vice in depth. Which operating system and third party libraries
are utilized? Does it include actuators and sensors and/or is
it collecting data from other devices (i.e., edge device)? How
is the setup? What other equipment is connected to it? Is it
connected to the Internet directly or through a gateway? Is it
installed in critical infrastructures? What additional (PC-)tools
are available for the device?
2) Creation of a network diagram: A network diagram
including all interfaces of the device can help identify which
other systems it interacts with. The authorization should be
speciﬁed for each entry and exit point, i.e., which actions
can be performed and by whom. This is especially important
for industrial protocols, such as PROFINET. While most IoT
applications allow to implement security measures manually,
it is not possible with these proprietary protocols.
3) Identiﬁcation and ranking of assets: Which security
goal is the most important one? Is the focus on maximum
availability, authenticity of actions or privacy of user data?
First, this is important to prioritize the exploration of vulnera-
bilities, and second, to subsequently ﬁnd an appropriate miti-
gation measure. The latter is particularly relevant when safety
must be guaranteed, as real-time behavior and encryption may
not be feasible on a low-power IIoT device.
4) Identiﬁcation of threat sources: Who is interested
in attacking the device and what are their motives? This
is useful for deliberately including or excluding types of
attacks. For IIoT devices in critical infrastructures, the more
complex invasive and non-invasive hardware attacks should be
addressed.
5) Identiﬁcation of threats and vulnerabilities: The next
step is to identify threats and vulnerabilities. Table I serves
as a kick-off aid. In general, we can consider attacks on
identiﬁcation and authentication, authorization, availability,
system, data and communication integrity, data conﬁdentiality,
privilege escalation and repudiation. Penetration testing can be
used to discover additional vulnerabilities, but also to verify
those already identiﬁed and show their severity.
Using attack scenarios, attacks can be better reconstructed in
retrospect. For example, the threat setting an invalid communi-
cation conﬁguration results in a denial of service. The attack
vector is that the web server is accessible via the Ethernet
interface. The action changing of communication parameter
has the consequence that the connection to PLCs is terminated.
The utilized vulnerability is a default password that results
in a privilege escalation. Additional notes, such as default
password can be found in the manual, can also be useful.
6) Vulnerability and risk assessment: To rate a vulner-
ability, all threats and their consequences from the different
attack scenarios should be considered. Using the Common
Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS), the severity of vulnera-
bilities can be expressed by a number. For risk assessment, it is
advisable to consider not only the severity of the vulnerability
but also its likelihood and impact.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK
Compared to IoT equipment, IIoT devices are at increased
risk, since they are part of the OT that controls physical
processes. Beside high availability, safety is also particularly
important in these applications. In addition to destroying a
production facility, people can be injured and a population
can even be cut off from the power grid.
Several threat sources and their motives were presented
and ranked using examples. It turned out that the most
serious threat originates from government-sponsored actors,
who often target critical infrastructures. Afterwards, numerous
threats and vulnerabilities were listed, which exist among other
reasons, because security was ignored in the industrial sector
for decades. Among the threats, destruction caused by moving
parts and intellectual property theft must be highlighted, while
the vulnerabilities include manipulation of the hardware and
the frequently insecure communication. Lastly, we provided a
procedure for identifying and assessing threats and vulnerabil-
ities that emphasizes the specialties of IIoT devices. In order
to prevent these, we intend to develop countermeasures for
low-power IIoT devices as the next step.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research project “Intelligent Security for Electrical
Actuators and Converters in Critical Infrastructures (iSEC)”
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

is a collaboration of SIPOS Aktorik GmbH, Grass Power
Electronics GmbH and OTH Amberg-Weiden. It is supported
and funded by the Bavarian Ministry of Economic Affairs,
Regional Development and Energy.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Hung, “Leading the IoT: Gartner Insights on How to Lead in a
Connected World,” Gartner, White Paper, 2017.
[2]
IDC Corporate USA, “The Growth in Connected IoT Devices Is Ex-
pected to Generate 79.4ZB of Data in 2025, According to a New IDC
Forecast,” June 18th, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.idc.com/
getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS45213219 [accessed: 2020-08-25]
[3]
F-Secure, “Attack Landscape H1 2019,” 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://blog-assets.f-secure.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/12093807/
2019 attack landscape report.pdf [accessed: 2020-08-25]
[4]
J. Santagate, R. Glaisner, and R. Westervelt, “Operational Cyber-
security for Digitized Manufacturing: Emerging Approaches for the
Converged Physical-Virtual Environment,” IDC, 2019. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.fortinet.com/content/dam/fortinet/assets/white-papers/
wp-idc-operational-cybersecurity-for-digitized-manufacturing.pdf
[ac-
cessed: 2020-08-25]
[5]
A. Greenberg, “A Notorious Iranian Hacking Crew Is Targeting Indus-
trial Control Systems,” Wired, November 20th, 2019. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://wired.com/story/iran-apt33-industrial-control-systems/ [ac-
cessed: 2020-08-25]
[6]
B. Bostami, M. Ahmed, and S. Choudhury, “False Data Injection Attacks
in Internet of Things,” in Performability in Internet of Things, F. Al-
Turjman, Ed. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 47–58.
[7]
B. Dorsemaine, J.-P. Gaulier, J.-P. Wary, N. Kheir, and P. Urien, “Inter-
net of Things: A Deﬁnition & Taxonomy,” in 2015 9th International
Conference on Next Generation Mobile Applications, Services and
Technologies, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2015, pp. 72–77.
[8]
E. Sisinni, A. Saifullah, S. Han, U. Jennehag, and M. Gidlund, “In-
dustrial Internet of Things: Challenges, Opportunities, and Directions,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 4724–4734, Nov. 2018, DOI:
10.1109/TII.2018.2852491.
[9]
A. Hahn, “Operational Technology and Information Technology in
Industrial Control Systems,” in Cyber-security of SCADA and Other
Industrial Control Systems, 2016, pp. 51–68, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-
32125-7 4.
[10] Symantec, “Internet of Things: Protecting Against Industrial Cyber
Attacks,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.symantec.com/content/
dam/symantec/docs/brochures/internet-of-things-protecting-against-
industrial-cyber-attacks-en.pdf [accessed: 2020-08-25]
[11] H. P. Breivold, “A Survey and Analysis of Reference Architectures
for the Internet-of-things,” in The Twelfth International Conference on
Software Engineering Advances, 2017, pp. 132-138.
[12] Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security, Ed., ”IT-Grundschutz Com-
pendium” (IT General Protection Compendium), 2019.
[13] M. Abomhara and G. M. Køien, “Cyber security and the internet of
things: Vulnerabilities, threats, intruders and attacks,” Journal of Cyber
Security and Mobility, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 65–88, 2015.
[14] J. Wurm, K. Hoang, O. Arias, A. Sadeghi, and Y. Jin, “Security analysis
on consumer and industrial IoT devices,” 2016 21st Asia and South
Paciﬁc Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC), Macau, 2016, pp.
519-524, DOI: 10.1109/ASPDAC.2016.7428064.
[15] E. Nakashima and J. Warrick, “Stuxnet was work of U.S. and
Israeli experts, ofﬁcials say,” The Washington Post, June 2nd, 2012.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-
security/stuxnet-was-work-of-us-and-israeli-experts-ofﬁcials-
say/2012/06/01/gJQAlnEy6U story.html [accessed: 2020-08-25]
[16] R. Lee, M. Assante, and T. Conway, “Analysis of the Cyber Attack on the
Ukrainian Power Grid,” E-ISAC, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://ics.
sans.org/media/E-ISAC SANS Ukraine DUC 5.pdf [accessed: 2020-
08-25]
[17] H. Tanriverdi, S. Eckert, J. Strozyk, M. Zierer, and R. Ciesielski,
“Attacking the Heart of the German Industry,” BR, July 24th, 2019. [On-
line]. Available: https://web.br.de/interaktiv/winnti/english/ [accessed:
2020-08-25]
[18] A.
Greenberg,
“Mysterious
New
Ransomware
Targets
Industrial
Control Systems,” Wired, February 3rd, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://wired.com/story/ekans-ransomware-industrial-control-systems/
[accessed: 2020-08-25]
[19] C. Cimpanu, “A decade of malware: Top botnets of the 2010s,” Wired,
December 3rd, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.zdnet.com/article/
a-decade-of-malware-top-botnets-of-the-2010s/ [accessed: 2020-08-25]
[20] S. Sin, E. Asiamah, L. Blackerby, and R. Washburn, “Determining
Extremist Organisations’ Likelihood of Conducting Cyber Attacks,”
presented at the 8th International Conference on Cyber Conﬂict, Tallinn,
2016.
[21] Ponemon Institute, “2018 Cost of Insider Threats: Global,” April,
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://153j3ttjub71nfe89mc7r5gb-
wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/ObserveIT-
Insider-Threat-Global-Report-FINAL.pdf [accessed: 2020-08-25]
[22] Siemens, “Caught in the Crosshairs: Are Utilities Keeping Up with
the
Industrial
Cyber
Threat?,”
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//assets.new.siemens.com/siemens/assets/api/uuid:35089d45-e1c2-4b8b-
b4e9-7ce8cae81eaa/version:1572434569/siemens-cybersecurity.pdf
[accessed: 2020-08-25]
[23] U.S. Department of the Interior Ofﬁce of Inspector General, “U.S.
Bureau of Reclamation Selected Hydropower Dams at Increased Risk
from Insider Threats,” June, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.hsdl.
org/?view&did=829751 [accessed: 2020-08-25]
[24] K.
Fazzini,
“Rising
Hacktivist
Attacks
Take
Companies
By
Surprise,”
Dow
Jones,
April
4th,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://dowjones.com/insights/rising-hacktivist-attacks-take-companies-
surprise/ [accessed: 2020-08-25]
[25] radware, “’BrickerBot’ Results In PDoS Attack,” 2018. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://security.radware.com/ddos-threats-attacks/brickerbot-pdos-
permanent-denial-of-service/ [accessed: 2020-08-25]
[26] S. Miller, N. Brubaker, D. Kapellmann Zafra, and D. Caban, “TRI-
TON Actor TTP Proﬁle, Custom Attack Tools, Detections, and
ATT&CK Mapping,” FireEye, April 10th, 2019. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.ﬁreeye.com/blog/threat-research/2019/04/triton-actor-
ttp-proﬁle-custom-attack-tools-detections.html [accessed: 2020-08-25]
[27] A. Cherepanov and R. Lipovsky, “Industroyer: Biggest threat to
industrial control systems since Stuxnet,” welivesecurity, June 12th,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.welivesecurity.com/2017/06/
12/industroyer-biggest-threat-industrial-control-systems-since-stuxnet/
[accessed: 2020-08-25]
[28] Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), “Ransomware
Impacting Pipeline Operations,” February 18th, 2020. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.us-cert.gov/ncas/alerts/aa20-049a [accessed: 2020-08-
25]
[29] Kaspersky,
“Kaspersky
Lab
discovers
critical
vulnerabilities
in
popular
industrial
protocol,
affecting
products
from
multiple
vendors,”
May
10th,
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.kaspersky.com/about/press-releases/2018 kaspersky-
lab-discovers-critical-vulnerabilities-in-popular-industrial-protocol
[accessed: 2020-08-25]
[30] OWASP, “OWASP Top 10 - 2017,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https:
//owasp.org/www-pdf-archive/OWASP Top 10-2017 (en).pdf.pdf [ac-
cessed: 2020-08-25]
[31] C. E. Bodungen, B. L. Singer, A. Shbeeb, S. Hilt, and K. Wilhoit,
Hacking exposed, industrial control systems: ICS and SCADA security
secrets & solutions. New York Chicago San Francisco: Mc Graw Hill
Education, 2017, p.146.
[32] M. Kol and S. Oberman, “Ripple20,” JSOF, White Paper, 2020. [On-
line].
Available:
https://www.jsof-tech.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/
06/JSOF Ripple20 Technical Whitepaper June20.pdf [accessed: 2020-
08-25]
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

