HPCCA: Is efficient in Mobile Cloud Environment (MCE)?
Dr. Khalid Mohiuddin, Asharul Islam, Ashiqee 
Rasool Mohammad
Department of Information System
College of Computer Science, King Khalid University
Abha, Saudi Arabia
(drkhalidmk70, ashar.islam, ashique.rasool)@gmail.com
Aftab Alam
Department of Computer Science
College of Computer Science, King Khalid University
Abha, Saudi Arabia
aftabjh@gmail.com
Abstract—Integrating cloud infrastructure and services 
into the Mobile Communication Environment (MCE) is 
an intensive research area nowadays. Mobile cloud 
computing provides interesting research opportunities to 
resolve the boundaries between mobile and cloud 
computing. Studies show that mobile devices are limited 
in resources: memory, network bandwidth, availability 
and specifically processing power. It does not meet the 
demand of high performance applications for mobile 
users. One obvious solution to this requirement is to get 
the processing power as a service from a resource-rich 
environment. Cloud computing is a service-based 
approach which provides the required computing 
resources to its subscribed users: on-demand, scaled 
elastically, and economically feasible in response to 
user’s requirement. The cloud services which facilitate 
mobile 
environment 
describes 
as 
Mobile 
Cloud 
Computing (MC2). Existing advanced mobile devices 
can perform various multimedia applications (e.g., M-
Commerce, Health Care, Games, Rich Media, etc.) and 
provide a number of utilities; they are not efficient for 
executing intensive computing applications such as 
advanced 3D Games, scientific calculations, result 
optimizer, high definition weather forecasting and many 
more. These applications require high processing power, 
intensive memory mapping and sufficient network 
support for efficient execution. Currently some IT giants 
like IBM, Rackspace, Penguin Computing, Sara, 
PureWeb 
and 
Sabalcore 
are 
providing 
High 
Performance Cloud Computing Applications (HPCCAs) 
over the cloud infrastructure. The HPCCAs shall be 
potential services for existing smart mobile device users. 
In this paper our focus is to analyze and present a 
comprehensive study to observe: Is utilization of 
HPCCA efficient in mobile environment? In our 
analysis,
we 
considered
different 
aspects 
and 
consequences of High Performance Computing (HPC) in 
mobile 
cloud 
environment. 
For 
example, 
High 
bandwidth, Signal quality, Mobility, Service availability 
and Security concerns. Through this analysis, we found 
HPCA is efficient in mobile cloud environment. 
Keywords- Mobile Cloud Computing; High Performance 
Cloud Computing Applications; High Performance Computing; 
Smartphones.
I.
INTRODUCTION
More than decades of research on computational 
performance in traditional Information Technology (IT), the 
focus is now shifted towards the computation and 
communication resources as a service on-demand, over the 
internet, pay-on-usage. Availability is the vital metric for 
these resources; near 100% availability is becoming 
mandatory for both intensive users and service providers. 
Computational needs of users (desktop and mobile) 
increasing to the alarming stage. They need strong support of 
technology and its providers to meet their needs; particularly 
for High Performance Computing Applications (HPCAs). 
The conventional computing technology does not have 
enough potential in mobile environment with resource 
limited devices. Technology evolves and new integrated 
service-centric technologies emerged to offer high quality 
services specifically for HPCA in mobile environment.
Cloud computing has been emerged as a new service-
centric technology. Offers service on-demand, elastic 
provisioning, reliability, security and pay-per-uses economic 
model. Cloud computing exists if tasks and data are kept on 
the internet rather than on individual devices, providing on-
demand access. Data is provided and managed by the service 
providers. Applications run on a remote server and then sent 
to the user [1]. According to NIST cloud offered services in 
the form of Software as service (SaaS), Platform as a service 
(PaaS) and Infrastructure as Service (IaaS). Cloud users may 
access the server resources using a computer, netbook, tablet, 
pad computer, smart phone, or other device. In cloud 
computing, applications are provided and managed by the 
cloud server and data is also stored remotely in the cloud 
configuration [2]. Cloud subscriber need not to invest on 
high configuration hardware and expensive licensed 
software. Processing and storage maintained by the cloud 
service provider with the integration of local service provider
on economically feasible model. Cloud extends its service 
domain with the integration of mobile computing 
technology. This integrated technology refers as Mobile 
Mobile Cloud Computing (MC2), becomes a convenient 
alternative to personal computers by integrating mobility, 
communication, software functionality, and entertainment 
[3]. It offers mobile users great opportunities and turns from 
resource limited device into a resource-rich environment. It 
enables mobile cloud users to execute high computing 
application in potential and flexible environment such as 3D 
games, scientific calculations, result optimizer, high 
definition weather forecasting, and many more. With the 
influential 
growth 
of 
intensive 
mobile applications, 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

developers are shifting from desktop computing to mobile 
cloud computing environment.
The remaining structure of this paper as follows: In 
Section II, we explain existing infrastructure of HPCAs, in 
both fixed/static and mobile cloud environment. Section III
discusses the importance of offloading for HPCCAs in 
desired environment. Section IV describes the required 
service-architecture of HPCCA in mobile environment. 
Section V presents HPCAs offerings by different service 
providers. In Section
VI,
we also discuss HPCCA 
economics. In Section VII, we discuss the much needed 
security and challenges issues and best suited solutions; 
result analysis. Finally, we conclude with our findings and 
future work.
Figure 1. A software system that integrates mobile and cloud computing 
services.
II.
EXISTING INFRASTRUCTURE FOR HPCA
HPCA 
basically 
needs 
intensive 
computing, 
accelerations, efficient parallel computing algorithms, and 
bridge between software and hardware; includes a primary 
HPC and a backup HPC connected by a robust 
communications and secured IT infrastructure. In the early 
age of computing, the high performance computing is done 
by supper computers. It requires a large amount of electrical 
power for its infrastructure and need significant cost to 
maintain. In general, scientific and commercial organizations 
handle the HPCAs by the operating system in powerful 
computers or by the cluster-servers. High-performance 
analytics enable organizations to quickly and confidently 
seize new opportunities in order to make better choices 
ahead of competitors and create new value from big data. It 
enables 
organizations 
to 
handle 
their 
most 
difficult challenges, quickly generate high-impact insights 
and transform their operations [4]. With the computing 
technology evolution, the infrastructure keeps on changing. 
Large organizations like IBM releases technically configured 
powerful systems to meet the increasing demand of HPC. 
The world increasingly global and highly interconnected 
planet; needs communication and computation technology 
on move, anywhere, any time. In the present information 
age, acceleration of data processing is growing dynamically 
and influenced markets to deploy HPC for their applications. 
The HPC architecture requires intensive applications to 
rum on multiple processors, rather than on single, to achieve 
the desired performance. Virtualization, parallel and vector 
processing, multi and co-processing are the fundamentals of 
HPC. Applications such as, 3D-
imaging processing, 
financial commerce, medical imaging, data compression, 
seismic data interpretation, search, security, and many more 
have been efficient in desktop environment. Shall be the 
same in mobile environment? Today, many service providers 
offer HPCA as a service, available for enterprise users, 
community users, and individual subscribers in mobile cloud 
environment.
Figure 2.  Percentage of users who uses wearable devices for each activity and shows content consumption [5].
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

A.
HPCAs in Mobile Cloud Environment
In present scenario, the usage of mobile phone 
applications is potentially increased, due to the integration of 
mobile technologies with the cloud. Cloud delivers services 
to its remote users over the IP network often through a web 
browser without referring to the boundaries. Mobile 
computing technology whereas connects its users in mobile 
or non-static environment across the network(s). This is 
accomplished by connecting mobile computing activities 
wirelessly through the internet or a private network.  This 
connection ties the mobile device to centrally located 
information and application software by using battery 
powered, 
portable, 
and 
wireless 
computing 
and 
communication devices. This encourages manufactures, 
vendors, and service provides to develop an efficient mobile 
environment for intensive computations and quality-
communications. Present mobile phones are heavily used for 
executing high performance   applications such as 3D 
applications and scientific calculations. However the 
limitations exist in resources are the basic obstacles to 
execute these applications efficiently. These limitations can 
be removed or minimized with the integration of resource-
rich, reliable, service-centric cloud technology. 
The integrated (mobile and cloud) technology describes 
as MC2 deploys in heterogeneous radio access environment 
such as WiFi, 3G, WLAN, WiMax, GPRS. It is implemented 
through wireless connectivity. The prime features are access 
24X7, on-demand, energy efficient, and economically 
feasible even for low data rate cloud controlling signals. 
Mobile applications can be launched on the device or cloud, 
and can be migrated between them according to dynamic 
changes of the computing context or user preferences [6]. 
Smartphone and tablets are quickly becoming the 
information worker’s most valuable tools. Young workers 
and their strong affinity for go-anywhere technology is 
changing the shape of the enterprise right here, right now!! 
Enterprise Mobility is becoming more and more Anytime, 
Anywhere service in a true sense!! Smart-phones [7]. 
Figure 3. Block Diagram for HPCCA Services.
The most frequent and intensive users of HPC systems 
are researchers from academic and research oriented 
business 
establishments, 
investigating 
and 
specific 
government agencies; whereas the common users heavily use 
HPCAs for communication, entertainment and such many 
more activities. All need effective, improved, convincing, 
reliable and efficient performance in both, fixed/static and 
mobile cloud-based environment.
Figure 4. Expected growth of usage of mobile internet [8].
B.
Performance Parameters for efficient Mobile Cloud 
Environment
Advancing the efficient HPC architecture is a big challenge, 
particularly in mobile cloud environment. It includes 
processing, managing, using existing architecture, mobility, 
and offering services anywhere anytime from individual user 
to enterprise subscription locally and globally. The following 
features are most desirable for efficient HPCCA: 
Availability: HPC system needs to be clock-driven; highly 
available (99.9%), network, data centers, and at much lower 
cost.
Scalability: It needs to have an infrastructure that provides 
expandable resources to accommodate heavier load, high 
throughput, scalable storage, and reliable communication.
Intensive-scale computing: It is the ability to run massively 
parallel code of instructions with the simulation of data.
Life cycle management: The efforts to maximize the 
efficiency of the transition operations throughout the 
processing cycle.
Software configuration and management: Updates and adopt 
the software standards that accommodate sharing of code 
internally and externally with other partners. 
According to Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, the 
following features are vital in mobile cloud environment:  

A global shared memory abstraction

Support dynamic updates

A high-bandwidth, low-latency network

Ability to exploit fine-grained parallelism

Support for light-weight synchronization

Massively Multithreaded architectures
Symmetric multiprocessors
III.
OFFLOADING ESSENTIAL FOR HPCCA IN MOBILE 
ENVIRONMENT
       Offloading is the process of using complementary 
devices which are resource-rich, for accelerating the 
processing originally targeted for resource-limited mobile 
devices. Offloading technology must be an essential tool in 
the desired environment. Offloading of a mobile computing 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

task is a tradeoff between the energy used for local 
processing and the energy required for offloading the task, 
uploading its data, and downloading the result, if necessary. 
One can express the offloading energy trade-off with the 
formula Etrade = Elocal - Edelegate > 0, where Elocal is the energy 
used for complete local execution, and Edelegate is the energy 
used from the perspective of the mobile device if the task is 
offloaded. If Etrade is greater than zero, then there is an energy 
benefit for delegating the task to the cloud [9].
A.
Factors affecting offloading
Network traffic: High bandwidth is required for fast 
connection to the cloud through internet.
Security Aspects: Secured service access mechanism should 
be ensured.
Business Models: Business models need to be modified to 
adopt the cloud computing standards.
Accessibility: Robust Infrastructure needs to be placed for 
providing high accessibility to the services.
B.
Parameters for offloading decision
Power Consumption:  Power consumption can be a vital 
parameter for offloading decision as battery life time is the 
major concern for mobile devices.
Processing Requirement: Processing requirement is an 
important 
parameter 
for 
offloading 
decision. 
The 
applications 
requiring 
intensive 
processing 
shall 
be 
offloaded. 
Storage and memory requirement: Memory and storage 
requirement is a major parameter. Applications requiring 
huge memory and storage cannot be executed on mobile 
devices as they are generally poor in the resources; these
applications need to be offloaded.
Latency and bandwidth: Latency also plays an important role 
in offloading decision. The interactive applications cannot 
support high latency. Offloading decision shall be taken on 
the available bandwidth.
As shown in figure 5, percentage of total mobile data traffic 
from handsets and tablets, mobile offload will be 31 percent 
(3.1 Exabyte/month) in 2016.
Figure 5. Offloading trend in mobile cloud environment [10].
IV.
HPCCA SERVICE ARCHITECTURE
The service architecture shown in Figure 5 describes how 
the cloud resources can be utilized by mobile devices for 
executing high performance applications.
Figure 6. Service Architecture in Mobile Cloud Environment.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

The mobile device sends request to the cloud through 
mobile cloud interface available in the device itself. The 
request is first verified and authenticated by the verification 
and authentication module then it passes to the service 
identification module. This module categorizes the request as 
per the nature of processing, if the request requires parallel 
processing then the parallel segments shall be assigned to 
individual virtual machines else it will be assigned to any of 
the available clone. Once the process is done, the individual 
results shall be forwarded to the result optimizer. It combines 
the individual results, formulates it, and sends back to the 
mobile client through the service navigation module. The 
virtual machines are created with the help of hypervisor and 
virtualization software; it is controlled and monitored by the 
monitoring and control unit. The clones can be created using 
any of the existing cloning technology shown in Figure 6.
V.
HPCA SERVICES OFFERED IN MOBILE CLOUD 
ENVIRONMENT
In the technically advanced competent environment, many 
cloud service providers offer huge benefits for their users in 
response to their growing needs of HPCAs in mobile 
environment. Focus is gradually shifting, services offer on-
demand, over the internet, through web-browser, pay-as-you-
consume, at very low economic subscription. All most all the 
providers emphasis on HPC, software, infrastructures, data 
storage, networking, and special attention to privacy, 
integrity, and security of data, shown in the table1. In the 
table, column1 shows the services offered by the respective 
providers. A substantial number of providers have 
contributed to the development of this technology and many 
in the adoption process shown in Table 1.
TABLE 1. SERVICES OFFER BY THE RESPECTIVE PROVIDERS IN CLOUD-BASED MOBILE ENVIRONMENT
Services
Service Providers-HPCCAs in Mobile Environment
Sara
PureWeb
Rackspace
Sabalcore
BlueCoat
Penguin
Computation
HPC, Grid 
HPC
HPC
HPC
HPC
HPC
Software
ADF, BLAS, 
HDF, BLACS, 
DMF, FFTW, 
Software
Transformation
KITs
Software as a 
Service for 
Business
Open source 
software
Bespoke 
Service
Scyld 
ClusterWare
Infrastructures
Grid, CPU 
cluster, Lisa
Huygens, 
System
Cyber 
Infrastructure
High 
Performance
configuration
High 
Performance
configuration
Proxy AB 
1400-2400, 
AND, 
MACH5
POD, Hybrid, 
Private and 
dedicated 
Cloud
Data Storage
Grid 
Permanent, 
Data Services
Data Storage
Hosting 
Storage
Ample 
Permanent
Storage
-
HPC 
Datacenter, 
POD 
Networking
High 
Performance 
Networking
High 
Performance 
Networking
High 
Performance 
Networking
High 
Performance 
Networking
High 
Bandwidth 
300X
High 
Performance 
Networking
Security
Data Security
Mobile Data 
Security
Data Security
-
ProxySG, 
web filtering 
solutions
Strong 
Security
A.
Efficiency Parameters of HPCCAs in Mobile 
Environment
As we discussed earlier, the limitations of executing 
HPCAs in mobile environment shall be minimize 
significantly by implementing cloud service-model in turn 
maximize efficiency. The nature of cloud services is best 
suited for efficient processing of HPCAs in mobile cloud 
environment. The following are the most promising features 
need to be considered for an efficient mobile environment:

High Data Rate

Quality of Service (QoS)

Scalability

Availability

Mobility

Security 

Network latency
B.
Service characteristics of HPCCAs in Mobile 
Environment
1)
HPC Ubiquitously: By the subscription of HPCCA 
services, user can access intensive HPAs on their smart 
mobile devices in heterogeneous environment, without 
considering processing burden. During the process mobile 
devices act as interface, send the instructions, and request 
processing is done on cloud infrastructure. Users have full 
advantages of access these services from resource limited 
device to a resourceful environment conveniently.
2)
Right to use – anyplace, anytime: Cloud computing 
with the integration of mobile computing provides services 
anywhere anytime with the application of adequate Service 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Level Agreement (SLA). It includes flexible mechanism for 
delivering IT services at each level of the computing stack: 
from hardware level to application level [11]. Initially,
HPCCA software was supporting desktop environment and 
users are free to work anywhere through the internet. With 
the amount of mobile applications increased, the developers 
extend its reach for mobile access with the devices like 
laptops, notepad, tablets and smartphones. In the present, era 
any software application can be execute by mobile cloud 
users anywhere anytime.
3)
Platform Support: Another promising feature of cloud 
is HPCAs can execute irrespective of platform dependencies. 
PureWeb integrates directly into your existing Microsoft 
Foundation Class, C#, C++ or Java code, bringing the web to 
your application rather than your application to the web. 
Furthermore, adding support for the latest mobile touch-
based devices such as an Apple iPad, iPhone or Google 
Android devices is seamless [12]. 
4)
Data Security and Compliance: Major concern of 
mobile cloud users is security; data is mostly secured in 
static environment and remains uncertain in mobile 
environment. Service providers do not comprise on any less 
secure system for securing and handling data.
VI.
ECONOMICS FOR HPCCA
According to Microsoft, the overall cost of IT is 
determined not just by the cost of capacity, but also by the 
degree to which the capacity is efficiently utilized. It is 
needed to assess the impact that demand aggregation will 
have on costs of actually utilized resources (CPU, network, 
and storage) [13]. Many organizations realized the impact of 
low cost offering by the deployment of cloud services. Cloud 
Computing has been emerged as an economic service-centric 
technology; combines the best economic properties of 
mainframe and client/server computing, and shifting the 
economics of traditional IT. The architecture of cloud 
facilitates elastic consumption and pay-as-you-consume 
pricing model. Resource-intensive computing is offloaded to 
the cloud to leverage the cost advantages of massive data 
centers [14]. Efficient multi-tenancy is a major factor, 
increases 
number 
of 
tenants, 
maximize 
application 
processing, minimize the applications management and 
server cost. Recently, Microsoft joined Google and Amazon 
Web Services in cutting the cost of cloud services. Microsoft 
dropped the price on its Azure Storage Pay-as-you-Go 
service and lowered the price of its six-month storage plan. 
The cost to use Azure Extra Small Compute has dropped in 
half [15]. In cloud paradigm, resource-intensive computing is 
offloaded to the cloud to leverage the cost advantages of 
massive data centers. Researchers are working on different 
techniques that minimize the cost of using cloud resources, 
provide 
efficient 
and 
seamless 
environment 
while 
maintaining user satisfaction. According to PureWeb, the 
following activities slash down the cost significantly:

HPCC will slash web migration cost

The risk & expense of traditional migration

Fast & straightforward with HPCC

No need for expensive & risky rewrites

No licensing fees or proprietary downloads

Significant hardware saving

High speed for any high performing application
VII.
SECURITY CONCERNS
Security, privacy, and integrity, of data and applications 
are major concerns in mobile cloud environment. It is quit 
known fact, data is more secure in static rather than in 
mobility. To design an efficient HPCCA-service system in 
mobile environment, various challenges such as high 
computation, scalability, availability, mobility, and cost 
restrictions need to be addressed. Cloud computing fits well 
as an enabling technology in this scenario as it presents a 
flexible stack of computing, storage and software services at 
low cost [16]. These challenges can be tackled by leveraging 
various cloud services in HPCCA-service system. The major 
constraints, HPCAs require significant computing power, 
need to process from a limited energy source mobile device. 
It is essential to outsource intensive computing applications 
to cloud. Offloading seems to be simple solution; it is non-
trivial, since wireless network bandwidth and latency are 
also big challenge need to be address. According to Alcatel-
Lucent and Techzine, four key strategies should be 
considered to overcome the challenges of mobile cloud 
computing are 1) Processing time at the data center 2) 
Processing time on the device 3) Network latency 4) Data 
transport time.
VIII.
EFFICIENCY RESULT ANALYSIS OF MOBILE VS FIXED 
DEVICES
Connectivity is almost guaranteed in fixed/static networks 
and 
potentially rich 
in 
resources; whereas 
mobile 
environment intensely depend on network bandwidth and 
latency. In processing of HPCAs, both mobile and fixed 
devices require intensive computation, significant amount of 
energy; and consume heavy resources. Efficiency exists in 
fixed/desktop environment and shall be improve for mobile 
environment also with the integration of mobile technology 
with cloud. Although the current generation mobile devices 
have significantly improved in technology and support 
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA), need for efficient 
performance in mobile cloud environment. Market updates, 
eying the users need and requirements, especially for 
HPCAs. A comparative study shown by Kyung Mun, of a 
Dell Inspiron 580 desktop with the iPhone 4 and iPad, for 
example, reveals the tradeoff cost of mobility. As compared 
to a fixed device, mobile devices in general have:

3 times less processing power

8 times less memory

5 times less storage capacity

10 times less network bandwidth
While mobile device performance will continue to 
improve in absolute terms (Figure 7), the disparity between 
the resource constraints of mobile and fixed devices will 
remain and must be accounted for in the types of application 
selected for mobile cloud computing [17]. 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Figure 7. Mobile device computing storage and display trends [18].
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE FOCUS
In this work, our interest was to measure the processing 
performance of HPCAs on existing infrastructure in 
fixed/static and mobile environment. Compare the efficiency 
and investigate: shall HPCAs be potential for existing mobile 
device users in cloud-based environment. Accordingly, we 
presented HPCA architecture, resources consumption on 
both traditional PC and mobile platform. The efficiency shall 
be achieved on resource-limited devices for HPCAs with the 
integration of service-centric cloud technology. We 
presented service architecture for high performance 
computing applications in mobile cloud environment. 
Further we analyzed the HPCCA services offered by cloud 
providers and the characteristics in mobile environment. One 
of the common interests of HPCCAs mobile device users and 
providers is the business-economic, discussed in detail. We 
compared the efficiency performance in our result analysis 
and concluded with the concerns of security and challenges; 
common for both users and cloud service providers. 
REFERENCES
[1]
http://www.smartdevelopments.org/?p=84, [retrieved: May, 2012]
[2]    http://www.smartdevelopments.org/?p=84, [retrieved: May, 2012]
[3]
Hyun Jung La and Soo Dong Kim, “A Conceptual Framework for 
Provisioning Context-aware Mobile Cloud Services”, 978-0-7695-
4130-3/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE DOI 10.1109/CLOUD.2010.78.
[4]
High-Performance 
Analytics 
from 
SAS, 
http://www.sas.com/software/high-performance-analytics/index.html, 
[retrieved: May, 2012]
[5] 
Morgan 
Stanley 
blue 
paper, 
February 
14, 
2011.
http://www.morganstanley.com/views/perspectives/tablets_demand.p
df, [retrieved: May, 2012]
[6]
Le Guan, Xu Ke, Meina Song, and Junde Song, “A Survey of Mobile 
Cloud Computing”, 2011 10th IEEEACIS International Conference 
on Computer and Information Science (2011).
[7]
http://www.smartcloudinfotech.com/enterprise_mobility.php, 
[retrieved: May, 2012].
[8]
Morgan 
Stanley 
blue 
paper, 
February 
14, 
2011. 
http://www.morganstanley.com/views/perspectives/tablets_demand.p
df
[9]
Eemil Lagerspetz, and Sasu Tarkoma “Mobile Search and the Cloud: 
The 
Benefits 
of 
Offloading”, 
http://www.cs.helsinki.fi/u/lagerspe/publications/mobile-cloud.pdf, 
[retrieved: May, 2012]
[10] CISCO 
White 
paper, 
http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/
ns705/ns827/white_paper_c11-520862.html, [retrieved: May, 2012]
[11] Christian Vecchiola, Suraj Pandey, and Rajkumar Buyya, “High-
Performance Cloud Computing: A View of Scientific Applications”, 
2009 10th International Symposium on Pervasive Systems, 
Algorithms, and Networks, 978-0-7695-3908-9/09 $26.00 © 2009 
IEEE DOI 10.1109/I-SPAN.2009.150.
[12] “Calgary 
Scientific 
Revolutionizes 
Application 
Sharing 
and 
Advanced 
Collaboration 
with 
PureWeb® 
3.0” 
http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:2ZF0D9mzE
fwJ:www.getpureweb.com/files/Infotables/pureweb-[retrieved: June,
2012], df+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=sa, [retrieved: June, 2012]
[13] “The economics of the cloud by Microsoft, November 2010.”  
http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/news/presskits/cloud/docs/The-
Economics-of-the-Cloud.pdf, [retrieved: June, 2012]
[14] Kyung Mun, “Mobile Cloud Computing Challenges” Corporate 
Technology Strategist, Alcatel-Lucent- SEP 21 2010.
[15] Nancy Gohring, “Cloud economics improving for users in wake of 
price cuts, March 09, 2012” http://www.infoworld.com/d/cloud-
computing/cloud-economics-improving-users-in-wake-of-price-cuts-
188386.
[16] Suraj Pandeya, William Voorsluys, Sheng Niua, Ahsan Khandokerb, 
and Rajkumar Buyya, “An autonomic cloud environment for hosting 
ECG data analysis services”, 15-05-2011 Elsevier B.V.
[17] Kyung Mun, “Mobile Cloud Computing Challenges” Corporate 
Technology Strategist, Alcatel-Lucent- SEP 21 2010.
[18] Kyung Mun, “Mobile Cloud Computing Challenges” Corporate 
Technology Strategist, Alcatel-Lucent- SEP 21 2010.
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

