A Conceptual Framework to Implement and Manage a Cloud Computing 
Environment  
 
Gerard Conway, Marian Carcary, Eileen Doherty 
Innovation Value Institute, Maynooth University 
Maynooth, Ireland 
emails: {gerard.conway, marian.carcary, eileen.doherty}@nuim.ie 
 
 
 
Abstract-The proliferation of cloud adoption in recent years is 
driven by the potential for realizing benefits, such as reduced 
costs, improved agility and better resource utilization. 
However, there are many challenges to successfully delivering 
cloud-based services and these need to be understood and 
managed prior to cloud migration.  Organizations need a 
systematic means of reviewing their business needs, so that the 
transition and subsequent management of a cloud environment 
is strategically planned. To address this requirement a Cloud 
Management Framework has been conceptualized that can be 
used for both the migration and the ongoing management of 
cloud-based services. 
Keywords-Cloud; Life cycle; Framework; Outsourcing; 
Cloud implementation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper describes a detailed organizational level 
conceptual framework for cloud implementation and 
management, developed through adopting a design science 
approach that involved collaboration with key academics and 
subject matter experts in the area of cloud technology.   
A. An evolving landscape: Drivers and Barriers for Cloud 
adoption 
In recent years, cloud computing adoption rates have 
proliferated, with the complete spectrum of businesses from 
large multinationals to smaller organizations migrating their 
Information Technology (IT) services to cloud platforms. 
There are multiple factors driving this organizational 
transition to a cloud environment,  which include benefits 
such as cost reduction [1][2][6][8][18],  increased scalability 
and 
agility 
[2][5][7][14][15][17], 
improved 
resource 
utilization 
[2][9][14][15], 
improved 
mobility 
and 
collaboration [1][10][14], and business continuity and 
disaster recovery capabilities [10]. However, despite this 
potential for benefits, it is not a panacea for all problems 
faced by organizations; in fact there are many challenges to 
successfully delivering cloud-based services [25]. Such 
challenges or barriers include security, and data protection 
[8][2][4][17], business continuity [2][10], statutory and legal 
requirements and restrictions on the flow of data across 
boundaries [8][16], lack of standardization and the resulting 
technology integration issues [10][17], and latency incurred 
in transferring data [2][18]. 
B. Approaches to cloud implementation 
As cloud computing is a new and rapidly evolving area 
that presents many challenges, there are few detailed 
guidelines or best practices available to support an 
organization in its migration and ongoing management of a 
cloud environment. Various approaches to cloud adoption 
are highlighted in the literature, a number of which are 
discussed in this section.  
Migration to the cloud computing environment reshapes 
a company’s IT landscape. Hence, prior to transitioning to 
cloud, organizations need to weigh up the potential for 
benefit realization against the associated barriers and 
challenges. As such, organizations need a systematic means 
of reviewing their business needs, so that the transition to 
cloud computing is strategically planned and managed 
throughout the migration, and the associated implications are 
understood. Some prior studies have focused on such areas 
as cloud deployment and delivery models [3][11], and 
strategies for cloud adoption [4][8][12]. Others tend to deal 
with specific cloud issues such as security [22] and risk 
management [19], or are geared to specific areas such as 
Mobile clouds [20], are proprietary (e.g., Intel, Unisys, HP), 
or are based on existing frameworks such as the Information 
Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL).    
Previously, Conway and Curry proposed a life cycle 
approach to managing Cloud [4]. This combined Cullen’s 
[26] outsourcing life cycle, with the Innovation Value 
Institute’s (IVI) IT Capability Maturity Framework (IT-
CMF). IT-CMF is an innovative and systematic framework, 
enabling Chief Information Officers (CIOs) and Chief 
Financial Officers (CEOs) to understand and improve their 
organization’s maturity in order to enable optimal business 
value realization from IT investments [21]. The framework 
identifies 35 critical IT capabilities and defines maturity 
models across five levels for each capability. A core function 
of IT-CMF is to act as an assessment tool and a management 
framework. 
The approach taken by Conway and Curry was to adapt 
Cullen’s work on outsourcing to produce a life cycle for 
Cloud, and to map the critical capabilities, as defined by IT-
CMF, to each lifecycle step - see Figure 1 and Tables 1, 2 
and 3 for details. 
This approach was used to develop an Executive (i.e., 
high-level) assessment framework to provide an organization 
with a management structure to assess the following:  
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
The readiness/maturity of an organization to move to 
cloud. 
 
The day-to-day management of an organization’s cloud 
environment. 
 
The identification of services that can be provided by 
cloud. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Cloud Executive Level Framework 
 
 
TABLE 1. CLOUD LIFECYCLE PHASES (EXECUTIVE LEVEL) 
Lifecycle Phase 
Description  
Architect 
Investigate and plan the cloud project. 
Engage 
Select a service provider that can deliver 
the required cloud service. 
Operate 
Implement and manage the cloud service 
on a day-to-day basis. 
Refresh 
Review cloud services on an ongoing basis. 
 
 
TABLE 2. CLOUD LIFECYCLE STEPS (EXECUTIVE LEVEL) 
Lifecycle Phase 
Description  
Investigate 
Provide insight and an understanding of 
what an organization wants to achieve by 
moving to the cloud, and what goals and 
expectations are to be met. 
Identify 
Objectively assess what areas of the 
business are appropriate to outsource to 
the cloud and what impact this will have on 
the current delivery model. 
Implementation 
strategy 
Define at a strategic level how the cloud 
services that are to be outsourced will be 
rolled out. 
Business design 
Design what is to be outsourced to the 
cloud and what the future state will look 
like. 
Select  
Based on the requirements and the other 
criteria defined by the Architect phase, 
select the best supplier based on value, 
sustainability, and quality. 
Negotiate 
Complete the final negotiation, pick the 
preferred supplier, get internal approval 
and sign the contract(s). 
Operational roll 
out 
Put together a project team that will 
manage the transition of the agreed 
services to the new cloud environment. 
Manage Cloud 
Services 
Manage cloud service(s) as efficiently and 
effectively as possible. 
Review 
Review cloud service requirements based 
on: the cloud service itself, other changes 
within the business, changes within the 
supplier organization, or the need to 
change the supplier. 
 
TABLE 3. CLOUD LIFECYCLE CAPABILITIES (EXECUTIVE 
LEVEL) 
Phase 
Step 
Capability 
Architect 
Investigate 
IT Leadership and Governance 
(ITG) 
 
 
Business Planning (BP) 
 
 
Strategic Planning (SP) 
 
Identify 
Sourcing (SRC) 
 
 
Enterprise Architecture 
Management (EAM) 
 
Implementation 
Strategy  
Business Planning (BP) 
 
 
Risk Management (RM) 
 
Design  
Service Provisioning (SRP) 
Engage 
Select  
Sourcing (SRC) 
 
Negotiate  
Sourcing (SRC) 
Operate 
Roll-out 
Risk Management (RM) 
 
 
Solution Delivery (SD) 
 
 
Service Provisioning (SRP) 
 
Manage the 
Supply Chain  
Capacity Forecasting and 
Planning (CFP) 
 
 
Sourcing (SRC) 
 
 
Technical Infrastructure 
Management (TIM) 
 
 
Solution Delivery (SD) 
 
 
Service Provisioning (SRP) 
 
 
Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) 
Refresh 
Review 
Business Planning (BP) 
 
 
Strategic Planning (SP) 
 
 
Sourcing (SRC) 
 
C. Requirement for a Detailed Micro-Level Organizational 
Framework for Cloud Implementation and Management 
A review of the literature illustrates there to be a number 
of approaches to cloud migration available, however many 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

serve to provide a high-level structure [18][20], as opposed 
to a more micro-level of prescription or guidance that can be 
executed at a practitioner level. In effect, what is missing is 
an independent holistic management framework that allows 
an organization to consider all aspects of cloud from a 
technical, people and process perspective. 
Conway 
and 
Curry’s 
original 
Executive 
Level 
Management Framework [4] provides a potential solution, 
however although organizations have used this framework 
successfully, they observe that significantly greater detail is 
required, to adequately address the problems posed by 
cloud. This paper attempts to address this requirement 
through the development of a framework at a detailed 
micro-level to support the migration to and management of 
a cloud environment.  
The structure of the paper is as follows; Section 1 
introduced and provided justification for the development of 
a cloud framework at the micro-level of prescription; 
Section 2 outlines the methodological research approach 
adopted; Section 3 presents the detailed micro-level cloud 
implementation and management framework; Section 4 
discusses and provides an overview of the key conclusions. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Firstly, and closely mirroring the approach taken by 
Conway and Curry [4], the IT-CMF was mapped to the 
Cloud Lifecycle to establish the key capabilities an 
organization should consider in order to successfully 
migrate to, and manage a cloud environment (Figure 2). See 
[27] for a detailed explanation of the IT-CMF capabilities. 
 
 
Figure 2. Detailed micro-level cloud framework 
 
Secondly, a qualitative approach was taken to the 
framework development process (using both a workgroup 
and semi-structured interviews with key stakeholders).  The 
workshop/workgroup 
approach 
was 
undertaken 
in 
conjunction with the Innovation Value Institute (IVI) 
consortium comprising of leading organizations from 
industry (including: Microsoft, Intel, SAP, Chevron, Cisco, 
The Boston Consulting Group, Ernst & Young, and Fujitsu) 
and academia. The consortium adopted an open innovation 
model of collaboration that engages academia and industry 
in scholarly work to amalgamate leading academic theory 
with corporate thought leadership in order to advance 
practices for managing IT for business value and innovation. 
This workgroup followed a design process with defined 
review stages and development activities that were based on 
Design Science Research (DSR) guidelines [23]. A cloud 
workgroup of ten subject matter experts, comprising 
researchers, industry practitioners and academics drawn 
from this consortium was established to develop the 
framework for systematically managing cloud projects. In 
addition to incorporating the insights of workgroup 
members throughout the framework development process, a 
qualitative approach to empirical data collection was 
adopted. Semi-structured interviews with cloud stakeholders 
across 11 organizations were conducted in order to capture 
the views of key domain experts and to understand current 
practice and barriers to managing cloud projects. These 
included organizations that had both successfully delivered, 
and that had failed to deliver, cloud-based projects. The 
interview approach enabled depth, nuance and complexity 
to be captured [24], and the insights gathered were used to 
inform and revise the framework’s development. 
III. 
DEVELOPMENT  OF A DETAILED MICRO LEVEL 
FRAMEWORK TO IMPLEMENT AND MANAGE A CLOUD 
COMPUTING ENVIRONMENT 
In the original Executive level framework, Conway and 
Curry [4] identified 11 critical capabilities (Table 3) to 
provide an executive high-level maturity assessment 
comprising 24 questions, so that organizations could rapidly 
understand their ability to migrate and manage their cloud 
environment. Based on the feedback from organizations that 
used the Executive level framework, a new detailed micro-
level framework was developed as shown in Figure 2 and 
Table 4. This micro-level framework provides organizations 
with an in-depth maturity assessment based on an expanded 
list of 18 critical capabilities (Table 4) that encompasses 169 
maturity questions. 
 
 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
TABLE 4. CLOUD LIFECYCLE CAPABILITIES (DETAILED LEVEL) 
Phase 
Step 
Capability 
Architect 
Investigate 
 IT Leadership and Governance 
(ITG) 
 
 
Budget Management (BGM) 
 
 
Business Planning (BP) 
 
 
Demand and Supply Management 
(DSM) 
 
 
Portfolio Planning and Prioritization 
(PPP) 
 
 
Service Analytics and Intelligence 
(SAI) 
 
 
Strategic Planning (SP) 
 
Identify 
Enterprise Architecture 
Management (EAM) 
 
 
People Asset Management (PAM) 
 
 
Portfolio Planning and Prioritization 
(PPP) 
 
 
Sourcing (SRC) 
 
 
User Training Management (UTM) 
 
Implementation 
Strategy 
Business Planning (BP) 
 
 
Portfolio Planning and Prioritization 
(PPP) 
 
 
Risk Management (RM) 
 
Design 
People Asset Management (PAM) 
 
 
Service Provisioning (SRP) 
 
 
User Training Management (UTM) 
Engage 
Select 
Sourcing (SRC) 
 
 
Supplier Management (SUM) 
 
Negotiate 
Sourcing (SRC) 
Operate 
Roll-out 
Risk Management (RM) 
 
 
Service Provisioning (SRP) 
 
 
Solution Delivery (SD) 
Operate 
Manage the 
Supply Chain 
Budget Management (BGM) 
 
 
Capacity Forecasting and Planning 
(CFP) 
 
 
Demand and Supply Management 
(DSM) 
 
 
People Asset Management (PAM) 
 
 
Service Analytics and Intelligence 
(SAI) 
 
 
Service Provisioning (SRP) 
 
 
Solution Delivery (SD) 
 
 
Sourcing (SRC) 
 
 
Supplier Management (SUM) 
 
 
Technical Infrastructure 
Management (TIM) 
 
 
Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) 
 
 
User Training Management (UTM) 
Refresh 
Review 
Business Planning (BP) 
 
 
Service Analytics and Intelligence 
(SAI) 
 
 
Sourcing (SRC) 
 
 
Strategic Planning (SP) 
 
The micro-level framework is designed for three different 
use case scenarios as follows: 
 
A complete assessment using all 18 capabilities. 
 
An assessment based on specific phases or steps of 
the cloud life cycle: e.g., limit the assessment to the 
negotiate step (where the preferred service 
providers are selected and contracts finalized). 
 
An assessment based on one specific cloud issue: 
e.g., security. 
 Each of these use case scenarios provides the following: 
 
It supports an organization in understanding its 
current maturity using IVI’s maturity model.  
 
It identifies an organization’s future target maturity 
level. 
 
It determines the importance the organization 
places on each capability in the context of the 
cloud lifecycle.  
The output from an assessment highlights areas of low 
maturity, and the gap between current and target maturity 
relative to its importance to the organization’s needs. This 
supports prioritizing those capabilities that will benefit from 
short, medium, and long-term development. The detailed 
micro-level assessment also provides an organization with 
an improvement roadmap, detailing the actions necessary to 
drive improvement across the areas under investigation. 
This is achieved by providing guidance on the practices 
typical at each maturity level, the value-oriented outcomes 
resulting from effective implementation of these practices, 
and a series of metrics to monitor progress and performance 
of these practices over time. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
As highlighted in the literature, there are various cloud 
approaches that can be utilized in the organizational context; 
however it is acknowledged that these frameworks do not 
offer a holistic approach to managing the transition to or 
management of the cloud environment. Consequently, this 
paper presents a detailed micro-level conceptual framework 
developed by key academics and industry practitioners using 
a Design Science approach to address this gap. Engagement 
with these subject matter experts was key in the framework’s 
development and refinement. For example, one key insight 
was that the framework needed to provide organizations with 
the flexibility to use it where and when it was needed, and to 
allow it to be tailored to an organization’s specific 
requirements. This was incorporated into the framework by:  
 
Allowing it to be consumed in its entirety or tailored 
for use at a particular stage, e.g., the Identify stage. 
 
Linking each capability to a specific cloud issue 
thereby allowing an organization to tailor the 
framework to address a specific area, e.g., security.   
This 
framework 
provides 
organizations 
with 
a 
management tool to enable them to better understand their 
enterprise IT capability maturity to position, evaluate, 
introduce and manage cloud services, and their associated 
strengths and weaknesses in these areas. The framework 
further provides organizations with practical improvement 
roadmaps for cloud migration and management which are 
grounded in industry best practice at a detailed level of 
prescription. Whilst the framework does not claim to address 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

all of the issues faced by an organization when implementing 
and managing cloud, it is proposed as a good starting point in 
the transition and subsequent management of the cloud 
environment.  Limitations of the study are its small sample 
and its focus on large multinational organizations. Future 
studies could address these limitations by increasing the 
sample size or by undertaking further research with Small 
and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs).  The study and the 
resultant conceptual framework adds value to academics, as 
it provides new insights into an area where there is currently 
a research deficit, specifically in the transition to a cloud 
computing environment. This paper may assist policy 
makers in this area through highlighting the key challenges 
facing firms in cloud adoption. Finally, from an industry 
perspective it is hoped that researchers in this area may 
utilize this framework and provide further validation and 
refinement through its use.   
ACKNOLEGEMENT 
The work presented in this paper has been funded by 
Enterprise Ireland under Grant CC/2009/0801. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Aljabre, “Cloud computing for increased business value”, 
International Journal of Business and Social Science, vol. 3, no. 1, 
2012, pp. 234-239. 
[2] M. Armbrust, et. al., “A view of cloud computing”, Communications 
of the ACM, vol. 53, no. 4, 2010, pp. 50-58. 
[3] R. Buyya, C. S. Yeo, and S. Venugopal, “Market-oriented cloud 
computing: vision, hype, and reality for delivering IT services as 
computing utilities”, Proceedings of the 10th IEEE International 
Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications, 
2008, pp. 5-13. 
[4] G. Conway and E. Curry, “Managing cloud computing – a lifecycle 
approach”. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Cloud 
Computing and Services Science. April 18-21, 2012, pp 198-207, 
Porto, Portugal.  
[5] EMCC, 
“Knowledge-intensive business services: 
trends 
and 
scenarios”, 
2012, 
Online 
at:  http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/emcc/content/source/eu0
5014a.htm Retrieved February 2015. 
[6] P. Geczy, N. Izumi, and K. Hasida, “Cloudsourcing: managing cloud 
adoption. Global Journal of Business Research”, 6(2), 2012, pp.57-
70. 
[7] A. Goscinski and M. Brock, “Toward dynamic and attribute based 
publication, discovery and selection for cloud computing”, Future 
Generation Computer Systems, 26, 2010, pp.947-70. 
[8] B. Iyer and J. C. Henderson, “Preparing for the future: understanding 
the seven capabilities of cloud computing”,MIS Quarterly Executive, 
9(2), 2010, pp.117-131. 
[9] V. Kundra, “Federal cloud computing strategy”, 2011, Online at: 
http://www.cio.gov/documents/federal-cloud-computing-
strategy.pdf Retrieved February 2015. 
[10] Kynetix Technology Group, “Cloud computing – a strategy guide for 
board 
level 
executives”, 
2009 
Online 
at: 
http://dastikop.blogspot.ie/2012/08/cloud-computing-strategy-
guide-for.html Retrieved February 2015.  
[11] S. Leimeister, C. Riedl, M. Bohm, and H. Krcmar, “The business 
perspective of cloud computing: actors, roles and value networks”. 
Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Information 
Systems. 7th-9th June, 2010, Pretoria, South Africa. 
[12] C. Loebbecke, B. Thomas, and T. Ulrich, “Assessing cloud readiness 
at Continental AG”, MIS Quarterly Executive, 11(1), 2012, pp. 11-
23. 
[13] E. Luoma and T. Nyberg, “Four scenarios for adoption of cloud 
computing in China”. Proceedings of the European Conference on 
Information 
Systems 
2011, 
Online 
at 
http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2011/123 Retrieved February 2015. 
[14] F. T. Neves, F.C. Marta, A. M. Correia, and M. Neto, “The adoption 
of cloud computing by SMEs: identifying and coping with external 
factors”. Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the Portuguese 
Association of Information Systems. 19th-21st October, 2011, 
Lisbon, 
Portugal. 
Online 
at: 
http://run.unl.pt/bitstream/10362/6166/1/Neves_Marta_Correi
a_Neto_2011.pdf. Retrieved February 2015. 
[15] J. Pyke, “Now is the time to take the cloud seriously”, White Paper, 
2009, 
Online 
at: 
www.cordys.com/cordyscms_sites/objects/bb1a0bd7f47b1c91
ddf36ba7db88241d/time_to_take_the_cloud_seroiusly_online
_1_.pdf. Retrieved February 2015. 
[16] SIM Advanced Practices Council “Wisdom of clouds: learning from 
users”, 
2011,Online 
at: 
https://simnet.site-
ym.com/store/default.asp, Retrieved February 2015.  
[17] N. Su, “Emergence of cloud computing: an institutional innovation 
perspective”. Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on 
Information Systems, , 2011, pp. 257-259. 
[18] H. Yang and M. Tate, “Where are we at with cloud computing?: a 
descriptive literature review”. Proceedings of the 20th Australasian 
Conference on Information Systems, 2nd-4th December, 2009, pp. 2-
4.  
[19] C. Horwath, W. Chan, E. Leung, and H. Pili, “Enterprise risk 
management 
for 
Cloud 
Computing”, 
2012, 
Online 
at: 
http://www.coso.org/documents/Cloud%20Computing%20Th
ought%20Paper.pdf, Retrieved February 2015. 
[20] J.S. Mohammad, “Mobile Cloud Management: A New Framework”, 
23rd Annual IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and 
Mobile Radio Communications, 2012, pp. 44-53. 
[21] M. Curley, “Managing Information Technology for Business Value”, 
2004, Intel Press. 
[22] M. Almorsy, J. Grundy and A. S. Ibrahim, “Collaboration-based 
cloud computing security management framework”. 2011 IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Cloud 
Computing. 
Online 
at: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/mostRecentIssue.jsp?punumber
=6008653#, Retrieved February 2015, pp. 364-371. 
[23] A. R. Hevner, S. R. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design Science in 
Information Systems Research”, MIS Quarterly, 28, (1), 2004, pp. 75-
105. 
[24] J. Mason, Qualitative Researching, 2002, London, Sage Press. 
[25] C. Brooks. “Heroku learns the hard way from Amazon EC2 outage”, 
2010. 
Online 
at: 
http://searchcloudcomputing.techtarget.com/news/1378426/H
eroku-learns-from-Amazon-EC2-outage, retrieved Feb 2015. 
[26] S. Cullen, P. Seddon, and L. Wilcox, “Managing Outsourcing, The 
Life Cycle Imperative”, MIS Quarterly Executive, vol. 4, no.1, 2005, 
pp. 229-256.  
[27] M. Carcary and O. Zlydareva, “Investigating the application of the 
IT-CMF in maturing strategic business-IT alignment” in Proceedings 
of the 8th European Conference on Information Management and 
Evaluation, Ghent, Belgium, ECIME 2014, pp. 29-33. 
  
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

