A Risk Assessment Framework and Software Toolkit for Cloud Service Ecosystems 
 
Karim Djemame 
School of Computing 
University of Leeds 
Leeds, UK LS2 9JT 
scskd@leeds.ac.uk 
Django J. Armstrong 
School of Computing 
University of Leeds 
Leeds, UK LS2 9JT 
een4dja@leeds.ac.uk 
 
Mariam Kiran 
School of Computing 
University of Leeds 
Leeds, UK LS2 9JT 
scsmk@leeds.ac.uk 
Ming Jiang 
School of Computing 
University of Leeds 
Leeds, UK LS2 9JT 
scsmj@leeds.ac.uk
Abstract—As the realization of Cloud computing environments 
advances from a simple and single private Cloud towards a 
more complex Cloud Service Ecosystem consisting of multiple 
coexisting public or hybrid Clouds, there are emerging high 
level concerns such as risk, trust, ecological, security, cost and 
legal factors that underpin the non-functional properties of the  
ecosystem. These concerns are beyond the traditional focus of 
providing functionalities at levels close to a single Cloud 
infrastructure such as hardware resource virtualization. In this 
paper we present ongoing research work to analyze and 
address the risk factor in such a Cloud Service Ecosystem for 
the purpose of optimizing Cloud service. The main 
contributions of the work are the design and implementation of 
an effective and efficient risk assessment framework 
(methodologies of risk identification, evaluation, mitigation 
and monitoring) for Cloud service provision. Together with the 
corresponding mitigation strategies, the framework provides 
technological assurance that will lead to a higher confidence of 
Cloud service consumers on one side and a cost-effective and 
reliable productivity of Cloud Service Provider (SP) and 
resources organized by individual Infrastructure Provider (IP) 
on the other side. The design of the risk assessment framework 
and its software toolkit implementation is part of the research 
and 
development 
work 
of 
the 
OPTIMIS 
(Optimized 
Infrastructure Services) project  whose objective is to enable 
an open and dependable Cloud Service Ecosystem that delivers 
IT services that are adaptable, reliable, auditable and 
sustainable both ecologically and economically.  
Keywords-risk assessment; Cloud services; service provider; 
infrastructure provider; optimization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The current model of a single Cloud service 
infrastructure mainly focuses on providing functionalities at 
levels close to the infrastructure, e.g., improved performance 
for virtualization of all, compute, storage, and network 
resources, as well as necessary raw functionality such as 
virtual machine migrations and server consolidation.  
However, for a Cloud Service Ecosystem that consists of 
multiple coexisting Cloud architectures, there are higher 
level concerns (e.g., risk, trust, ecological and legal factors) 
that should be addressed for the purpose of an optimized 
Cloud service provision. The purpose of this research work 
is to analyze and address the risk factor in a Cloud Service 
Ecosystem. Although in its most general sense, risk can be 
defined as the combination of the probability of an event 
occurring and its consequences and constitutes both 
“opportunities” for benefit (upside) and “threats” to success 
(downside) [20], in the context of this work, only those 
undesirable 
events 
with 
negative 
consequences 
are 
considered and need to be mitigated.  
One of the hurdles that prevent a Cloud service consumer 
from adopting Cloud services is the lack of adequate 
confidence of those services in term of the uncertainties 
associated with their qualities and levels in the ecosystem. 
Although the provision of a zero-risk service is not practical, 
if not impossible, an effective and efficient risk assessment 
of service provision, together with corresponding mitigation 
mechanisms, may at least provide a technological insurance 
that will lead to a higher confidence of Cloud service 
consumers on one side and a cost-effective and reliable 
productivity of Cloud Service Provider (SP) and resources 
organized by individual Infrastructure Provider (IP) on the 
other side. In this research, confidence is defined as the 
expectation of a successful fulfillment of a Service Level 
Agreement (SLA) agreed between a Cloud service consumer 
and an SP. The notion of “cost-effective and reliable 
productivity” is defined as a provider’s capability of 
fulfilling an SLA through the entire cycle of the service 
provision, and at the same time realizing its own business 
level objects of an SP (e.g., make a certain amount of profits) 
and high resource utilization efficiency of an IP. By aiming 
this win-win target, this research work proposes a general 
risk assessment framework of Cloud service provision in 
term of assessing and improving the reliability and 
productivity of fulfilling an SLA in a Cloud. Based on this 
framework, a software toolkit is being designed and 
implemented, as a basic risk factor related optimization 
module, which is able to be integrated into other high level 
Cloud management and control software systems for both SP 
and IP. 
Although risk factor related assessments for deciding risk 
levels are the main concerns of this work, we also consider 
that the decision making procedure of how to apply 
corresponding mitigation solutions to already identified risks 
in a Cloud Service Ecosystem may involve considerations on 
other higher level factors such eco-efficiency, cost, security 
and trust. In case such factors constrain the application of 
mitigation solutions in one way or another, certain mitigation 
strategies should be identified to optimize the executions of 
these mitigation solutions. 
119
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

The 
main 
objective 
of 
OPTIMIS 
(Optimized 
Infrastructure Services) project [6]  is to enable an open and 
dependable Cloud Service Ecosystem that delivers IT 
services that are adaptable, reliable, auditable and sustainable 
both ecologically and economically. The key goal of 
OPTIMIS is to allow organizations to automatically and 
seamlessly 
externalize 
services 
and 
applications 
to 
trustworthy and auditable Cloud providers. In the context of 
OPTIMIS, risk assessment will be applied at the Cloud 
service construction, deployment and operation phases 
supporting a wide range of scenarios such as Cloud bursting 
and Cloud brokerage that will be present in a fully developed 
Cloud Service Ecosystem of the future. Such mechanisms for 
managing risk for Cloud-based services which consider 
inherent aspects of Clouds such as energy consumption, the 
cost of reconfiguration and migration, and the reliability and 
dependability of the provided services will maintain secure, 
cost-effective and energy-efficient operations.  
The main contributions of this paper are the design and 
implementation of an effective and efficient risk assessment 
framework (methodologies of risk identification, evaluation, 
mitigation and monitoring) for Cloud service provision. 
Together with the corresponding mitigation strategies, the 
framework provides technological assurance that will lead to 
higher confidence in Cloud providers for Cloud service 
consumers on one side and cost-effective, reliable and 
productive Cloud service provider’s resources on the other 
side.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: in Section 
II, related work on applying risk management methodologies 
into utility computing areas, such as Grids and Clouds is 
surveyed. The risk assessment framework for Cloud Service 
Ecosystems proposed by this research work is described in 
Section III; the corresponding software toolkit for the 
implementation of this risk assessment framework is 
discussed and introduced in Section IV; in Section V, use 
cases of the framework and software toolkit in the context of 
the OPTIMIS project are introduced. Finally, the conclusion 
of current work in progress is presented in Section VI, in 
which future work is also introduced and discussed. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In recent years, the principles and practices of risk 
assessment/management were being introduced into the 
world of utility computing such as Grid and Clouds either as 
a general a methodology [5][7]14] or focusing on a specific 
type of risk, such as security and SLA fulfilment [13] and 
[19]. In this section, we conduct a balanced introduction to 
cover these two aspects. 
In [1], an extended Confidentiality Risk Assessment and 
Comparison (CRAC) method [2], CRAC++, is proposed to 
assess confidentiality risk in IT outsourcing. The aim of this 
method is to enable the specification of confidentiality 
requirements in an SLA between a client and IT resource 
provider. The method claims that it is able to satisfy six 
criteria of confidentiality level specification approach: 
specified confidentiality level is not based on percentages of 
data loss; assessment is not based on monitoring incidents, 
no disclosure of confidential information is required to a 
provider, ease of use; it is repeatable and will increase the 
client’s understanding of confidentiality risks in this 
outsourcing relationship. The most unique feature of the 
method is that it tackles two hard problems regarding the 
specification 
of 
confidentiality 
requirements: 
1) 
confidentiality incidents cannot be monitored, since 
attackers who breach confidentiality try to do this 
unobserved by both client and provider, and 2) providers 
usually do not want to reveal their own infrastructure to the 
client for monitoring or risk assessment.  
In [3], the design, implementation and evaluation of 
separate and integrated risk analysis methods for a 
commercial computing service to support successful utility 
computing model is introduced. By departing from two new 
challenges facing a commercial computing service in order 
to support a  utility computing model:  (i) “what are the 
objectives or goals it needs to achieve in order  to support 
the utility computing model”, and (ii) “how to evaluate 
whether these  objectives are achieved or not”,   the paper 
identifies four essential objectives that are required to 
support the utility computing  model: (i) manage wait time 
for SLA acceptance, (ii) meet SLA requests, (iii) ensure  
reliability of accepted SLA, and (iv) attain profitability.   
Based on the analysis on the nature of these objectives, “risk 
assessment on resource management policy” is identified as 
the key evaluation methodology to examine whether 
resource management policies are able to achieve the 
objectives. Both the separate and integrated risk analysis 
methods 
evaluate 
a 
policy 
using 
two 
indicators: 
performance, as the value measure of the policy, and 
volatility, as the risk measure, that is able to “reflect how 
performance values fluctuate and thus the consistency of the 
policy in returning similar performance values”.  The 
separate risk analysis analyses the performance and 
volatility involved in a single objective for a particular 
scenario and the integrated risk analysis assesses a 
combination of multiple objectives with different weights 
used to denote the importance of each objective. These 
weights for various objectives provide a flexible means for 
the service provider to easily adjust the importance of an 
objective and determine its level of impact on the overall 
achievement of a combination of objectives. Most 
importantly, the crucial impact of the integrated risk 
analysis method is emphasised by simulation results that “an 
objective that is not achieved can severely impact on the 
overall achievement of other objectives. Thus, it is essential 
to examine the achievement of all key objectives together, 
rather than each standalone objective to correctly identify 
the best policy that can meet all the objectives.”   
In [4], a novel “insurance” mechanism is proposed as a 
risk management method that is “primarily used to hedge 
against the risk of a contingent loss due to unfavourable and 
uncontrollable events”. According to this mechanism, a 
service insurer in the Cloud is established to decide and 
collect insurance premium from a service provider, send 
120
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

compensation to a service consumer; a service provider 
negotiates an insurance contract with the service insurer; a 
service consumer submits a claim to the service insurer. 
Since a service consumer is not the payer of premium but 
able to claim compensation in case a loss was caused by the 
service provider, it will be relatively “risk free” for the 
consumer to use the service confidently. A Cloud Risk 
Assessment and Management (Insurance) Reference Model, 
is established based on the extended Zachman framework 
[9] with the service/information assurance, integrity and 
analysis, and also the layered reference Service Oriented 
Architecture (SOA) security reference model [10]. 
In [13], a quantitative risk and impact assessment 
framework (QUIRC) is presented to assess the security risks 
associated six key categories of security objectives (SO) 
(i.e., confidentiality, integrity, auditability, multi- party 
trust, mutual auditability and usability) in a Cloud 
computing platform. The quantitative definition of risk is 
proposed as a product of the probability of a security 
compromise, i.e., an occurring threat event, and its potential 
impact or consequence. The overall platform security risk 
for the given application under a given SO category would 
be the average over the cumulative, weighted sum of n 
threats which map to that SO category. In addition, a weight 
that represents the relative importance of a given SO to a 
particular organization and/or business vertical is also 
necessary and their sum always adds up to 1. This 
framework adopts a wide-band Delphi method [18], using 
rankings based on expert opinion about the likelihood and 
consequence of threats, as a scientific means to collect the 
information necessary for assessing security risks. The 
advantage of this quantitative approach of risk assessment is 
that it enables vendors, customers and regulation agencies 
the ability to comparatively assess the relative robustness of 
different Cloud vendor offerings and approaches in a 
defensible manner. However, the challenge and difficulty of 
applying this approach is the meticulous collection of 
historical data for threat events probability calculation, 
which requires data input from those to be assessed Cloud 
computing platforms and their vendors. 
In [5], a SEmi-quantitative BLO-driven Cloud Risk 
Assessment (SEBCRA) approach that is aware of the 
Business-Level Objectives (BLOs) of a given Cloud 
organization is presented. The approach is designed for a 
Cloud Service Provider (CSP) to improve the achievement of 
a BLO, i.e., profit maximization, by managing, assessing, 
and treating Cloud risks. The core concept on which this 
approach is based is that “Risk Level Estimation for each 
BLO is proportional to the probability of a given risk and its 
impact on the BLO in question”.  Once risk has been 
assessed, the Risk Treatment sub-process defines potential 
risk-aware actions, controls, and policies to conduct an 
appropriate risk mitigation strategies, such as, avoid the risk, 
by eliminating its cause(s), reduce the risk by taking steps to 
cut down its probability, its impact, or both, accept the risk 
and its related consequences or transfer or delegate the risk 
to external organizations. In an exemplary experimentation, 
the risk assessment approach demonstrates that it enables a 
CSP to maximize its profit by transferring risks of 
provisioning its private Cloud to third-party providers of 
Cloud infrastructures. This risk assessment approach can be 
extended to tackle scenarios where multiple BLOs are 
defined by a CSP and also work as an autonomic risk-aware 
scheduler, which will be based on business-driven policies 
and heuristics that help the CSP to improve its reliability. 
The work in this paper focuses on a framework that 
supports risk assessment at the Cloud service deployment 
and operation phases. It supports not only service and 
infrastructure providers, but a wide range of scenarios such 
as Cloud bursting and Cloud brokerage as well.  
III. 
A RISK ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK 
Risk assessment allows improving the foundations of the 
Cloud infrastructure to help manage and anticipate the risks 
or opportunities: 
 
Helping to provide a framework for identifying the 
risks that present threats to the Cloud. 
 
Facilitating discussion among the various partners 
during the development process. 
 
Foresee potential dangers or risks before they occur and 
implement mitigation strategies to compensate for 
them. 
 
Building an infrastructure for monitoring these risks 
over time and identifying new risks when they arise.  
In Cloud computing, risk needs to be considered at all 
phases of interactions and investigated at each service stage 
in relation to the assets which need to be protected. Two 
stakeholders are involved: Service Providers (SP) during the 
service deployment and operation, and the Infrastructure 
Providers (IP) during admission control and internal 
operations. In OPTIMIS, various use cases will be 
considered for depicting a Cloud scenario as discussed in 
Section V. These use cases will affect the assets involved as 
well as the kind of interactions taking place presenting new 
challenges for risk assessment.  
In addition to the different use cases and interactions, risk 
will be assessed based on categories which will help to 
manage it and the mitigation strategies to be applied. For 
instance all risks associated with service level agreements 
(SLAs) can be identified as legal issues and would thus need 
mitigation strategies from the legal realm.  
In addition to identifying the risk categories, each risk 
item will be assessed thanks to a level of impact and 
likelihood. For simplicity, the risk level can be labeled in the 
range from 1 to 5 to show its intensity (1-very low, 2- low, 3- 
medium, 4- high, 5-very high). The risk level will help 
manage the risk items from most threatening to the least 
impact helping with the mitigation strategies to be adopted 
later. This information will be available in the risk inventory. 
A. Service Provider 
A service provider is responsible for matching the end-
user requirements with the correct IPs to ensure the required 
demand is met. To achieve this, the SP needs to be risk 
aware of each IP and ranks them accordingly. 
121
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

 
 
Figure 1. Service Provider – Risk Assessment Components. 
 
Figure 1 shows the various components the SP will use to 
fulfill its purpose - a Confidence Service (comprising a Risk 
Assessor and a provider assessor), a risk inventory and a 
Historical Database for recording past SLA transactions. The 
confidence service will take into account the various risks of 
working with the different IPs accessing the providers. This 
will be part of the Service Deployment Optimizer (SDO). 
The SDO will make these decisions based on a stored 
database of history of working with the different IPs and the 
risk inventory associated with the different assets involved. 
A risk inventory is a simple database of risks associated with 
each asset, their vulnerabilities and threats. This would also 
contain risk mitigation strategies following risk assessment. 
All these factors will be accessed by the SDO to choose an 
efficient selection of the infrastructure provider to run the 
deployed service. 
B. Infrastructure Provider 
Performing risk assessment at this level increases the 
performance and quality of the IP. When the SP assesses the 
IP, the IP would also be assessing the service to be deployed. 
It will determine an estimated risk if it were to accept the 
SLA taking into account fault tolerance mechanisms and 
actions following an SLA violation, in turn improving the 
IP's reliability and quality of service.   
The SP would send a service manifest request to the IP 
containing the feasibility of admitting the new service, with 
respect to current infrastructure load, predicted future 
capacity, as well as risk. This helps the IP to determine 
where to place the virtual machines (VMs) by combining its 
local management policy with the functional and non-
functional requirements.  
Figure 2 depicts the structure of the IP risk assessment 
components. The consultant service takes into account the 
risk assessor and the database to estimate the risk. This may 
use data mining tools on the previous history of events of 
running similar services or working with the same SP. The 
consultant service can also have access to all the monitoring 
information keeping the IP on track with the changes.  This 
data can be static or dynamic in nature about its resources 
and the current service execution.  
 
  
Figure 2. Infrastructure Provider – Risk Assessment Components. 
 
Examples of such information are the current workload, 
system 
outages, 
temporary 
performance 
shortages, 
monitored network traffic, experts' availability, or general 
information regarding the number of services to operate. The 
monitored data helps to determine bottlenecks in the IP’s 
infrastructure so that the provider can improve its capacity 
planning, administration, and management of its resources. 
This leads to higher, cost-effective productivity of virtualized 
resources [21][22]. 
C. Risk Inventory 
Various research areas such as business have developed 
risk inventories for determining how certain risks can be 
managed and evaluated to be brought up to an acceptable 
level. Most of the steps towards creating and refining of a 
risk inventory differ in relation to their purpose and context 
in which they are applied. A set of processes are identified to 
create and manage a risk inventory for the implementation of 
the framework:  
1. Determine which use case scenario to focus on. 
2. Determine the areas of interaction in the Cloud. 
Interaction takes place at various levels such as end-user 
to service provider or service provider to infrastructure 
provider. During each of these levels an SLA is agreed 
between parties and its fulfillment monitored. 
3. Identify the assets involved which need to be protected 
from external or internal dangers (risk), as well as the 
vulnerabilities and threats these assets may have during 
operation. 
4. Identify the risk triggering factors for these assets. 
5. Identify the relationships between assets and various 
factors or events which may lead to risk mitigation. 
Therefore the risk mitigation strategy would depend on 
the use case, asset at risk, and the event which may lead to 
activate the risk mitigation strategy to reduce it. Risk may 
also be dynamic and change depending on the situation and 
activities in the Cloud. These could be changes in policies, 
transactions etc. This introduces an additional dimension to 
the risk mitigation strategies which may vary with time. 
122
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

D. Risk Assessment Models and Risk Categories 
Risk assessment also depends on the time of operation 
during the Cloud service lifecycle. This allows the risk level 
to change over time. Various risk models can then be 
introduced to choose relevant mitigation strategies related to 
concrete situations and recognized threats. The risk models 
being investigated for this purpose are as follows: 
 
Probabilistic Risk Model - Risk is a compound of the 
probability of a problem occurring and the impact of the 
problem occurring. The probability would depend on the 
frequency of past problems over time. 
 
Possibilistic Risk Model – using stochastic processes 
such as Gamma distributions to predict the failure of a 
physical machine, Virtual Machine (VM) etc.  
 
Hybrid Risk Model – A combination of the two above 
models to predict and assess the risk on the probability 
of occurring events. Hybrid risk models allow different 
kinds of risks to be measured. This is because certain 
aspects can have a numerical probability attached to it 
for the risk actually occurring, but some events may 
have a dynamic nature to them, as certain exposures 
may lead to various relationships among the variables to 
actually propagate the risk. 
Such models have been the focus of the work in [19] to 
enable a Grid provider to identify infrastructure bottlenecks 
(considering physical machines only) and mitigate potential 
risk, 
in 
some 
cases 
by 
identifying 
fault-tolerance 
mechanisms to prevent SLA violations. Moreover, a Grid 
broker provides the functionality to evaluate the risk 
associated with such provider by incorporating provider 
reliability into the risk models in order to verify the 
expected integrity of a provider’s guarantees when they 
make any SLA offer [23]. 
  
Risk Category: Technical 
Asset identified: Hardware 
Vulnerability of asset: Poor maintenance 
Threat to asset: Unresponsive system 
Resulting risk item: Reduction in availability 
Risk Likelihood: Low (2) [Range 1-5] 
Risk Impact: Medium (3) [Range 1-5] 
Resulting Risk level: Product of risk likelihood and risk 
impact [Range 1-25]  
Risk event: Hardware failure 
Resulting risk mitigation: Duplicate data, maintain 
hardware 
 
Risk Category: Policy 
Asset identified: SLA 
Vulnerability of asset: Lack of jurisdiction information 
Threat to asset: Breach in data confidentiality 
Resulting risk item: Changes in jurisdiction 
Risk Likelihood: Very high (5) [Range 1-5] 
Risk Impact: High (4) [Range 1-5] 
Resulting Risk level: Product of risk likelihood and risk 
impact [Range 1-25]   
Risk event: Redeployment of data 
Resulting risk mitigation: Seek legal advice 
 
Risk Category: General 
Asset identified: Security 
Vulnerability of asset: Unprotected password 
Threat to asset: Unrestricted access to data 
Resulting risk item: Data leaks 
Risk Likelihood: High (4) [Range 1-5] 
Risk Impact: High (4) [Range 1-5] 
Resulting Risk level: Product of risk likelihood and risk 
impact [Range 1-25]   
Risk event: System hacks 
Resulting risk mitigation: Encrypting data 
 
Risk Category: Legal 
Asset identified: SLA 
Vulnerability of asset: Illegal clauses in the contract  
Threat to asset: Sued 
Resulting risk item: Ongoing legal dispute 
Risk Likelihood: Low (2) [Range 1-5] 
Risk Impact: High (4) [Range 1-5] 
Resulting Risk level: Product of risk likelihood and risk 
impact [Range 1-25]   
Risk event: Negligence 
Resulting risk mitigation: Audit SLAs 
 
 
Figure 3. Examples of Risk Categories. 
 
The risk models under investigation will be applied to 
assess the risk on a number of groups of risks or categories. 
The various risk categories identified, with an example of an 
associated risk are: 
 
Technical – Hardware, VM failure 
 
Policy – Data jurisdiction policies or other issues which 
match requirements and considerations (prior to 
deployment). 
 
General – Various general issues such as security, data 
applications or processes (as assets to be protected 
during the different phases of the cloud lifecycle). 
 
Legal – SLA issues 
An example of each of category is presented in Figure 3. 
E. Risk Mitigation Strategies 
Following the assessments on various risk factors and 
identification of associated mitigation solutions, where 
possible, appropriate mitigation strategies will be decided to 
implement these solutions.  In general, mitigation strategy 
can be risk avoidance, limitation, retention, transfer and 
acceptance [11]. Within the context of our work, risk 
avoidance and limitation are the main strategies to be applied 
and the selection and execution of mitigation solutions will 
be considered as an optimization problem.  
Since the nature of mitigation is to take precautionary 
actions before the occurrence of risk, time constraint and cost 
of a mitigation solution are key factors for deciding which 
mitigation strategies to choose and how to deploy them. 
When multiple risk factors need to be mitigated at the same 
time, it will be more complex to make an optimized decision 
under time and cost constraints. One example is that a set of 
123
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

risk mitigation tasks with known, arbitrary execution times, 
need to be implemented by some identical high level risk 
mitigation solution executers by a given deadline. The 
problem is to schedule all of the mitigation tasks onto the 
least number of executers so that the deadline is met. This is 
a classic One-Dimensional Bin Packing problem in particular 
and combinatory optimization problem in general. Hence, 
this work is investigating optimization algorithms to help 
make decisions for scenarios as illustrated in these examples. 
IV. 
A RISK ASSESSMENT SOFTWARE TOOLKIT 
One of key design principles of a risk assessment 
software toolkit is to make it a self-contained independent 
functional component that is able to perform for 
Infrastructure Providers (IPs) and Service Providers (SPs) 
and be adopted, in either full or in part, by higher level Cloud 
management and control software system for higher level 
optimization purposes such as SP’s brokerage for multiple 
IPs.  
Following the logical structure of the risk assessment 
framework described in Section III, the toolkit is designed to 
physically consist of two independent parts: SP Risk 
Assessment Tool (SPRAT) and IP Risk Assessment Tool 
(IPRAT).  For the SPRAT, its high level functions (e.g., 
evaluate the reliability of a specific IP offer) are mainly 
exposed by its external interfaces defined in its Confidence 
Service sub-component. Other lower–level functions such as 
the evaluation of the risk associated with an IP’s offer and 
evaluation of IP’s profile is provided by the external 
interfaces of the Risk Assessor sub-component and the 
Provider Assessor sub-component respectively. The Risk 
Inventory and Historical Database sub-components are 
private to the SPRAT and no external interfaces are provided 
by them. The Risk Inventory is designed as a knowledge 
base to consist of facts, scenarios, and reasoning rules for 
risk assessments related decision-making activities of the 
SPRAT. 
For the IPRAT, its high level functions (e.g., evaluate the 
risk fulfilling a given service manifest of a specific SLA) are 
mainly exposed by its external interfaces defined in its Risk 
Assessor sub-component. Other lower–level functions such 
as data-mining of past failure events in an IP are provided by 
the Consultant Service sub-component. These lower-level 
functions are not purely private for the IPRAT. The Risk 
Inventory and Historical Database sub-components are also 
private to the IPRAT and no external interfaces are provided 
by them. For the IPRAT, its Risk Inventory is designed as a 
knowledge base to consist of facts, scenarios, and reasoning 
rules that are related to lower level hardware and software 
resources. The Historical Database sub-components is also 
private to the IPRAT. In addition, IPRAT’s Monitoring sub-
component includes two parts: one is the risk event detection 
and alarm part, and the other one is the lower-level hardware 
and 
software 
runtime 
status 
collectors. 
From 
the 
implementation perspective, the second part can be based on 
a third-party data monitoring and collection software, such as 
Nagios [12], as a plug-in, and will depend on the scalability 
and efficiency of it. 
V. 
USE CASES IN THE CONTEXT OF OPTIMIS 
In the OPTIMIS toolkit, risk is analyzed in the context of 
three dimensions: use case, actor and time. The toolkit 
tackles five Cloud uses cases that are in various stages of 
realization in the current Cloud ecosystem. They are: i) 
Private, ii) Bursting, iii) Multi-Cloud, iv) Federated and v) 
Brokerage [6]. These use cases have various implications 
for OPTIMIS as the differing goal of each contribute to 
what vulnerabilities an asset may have and thus its 
associated risk factors. The different Business Level 
Objectives of the SP and IP actors play a part in deciding 
the importance of risk because the execution of high-level 
strategies alter the importance and applicability of risk in a 
given situation. In addition, the lifecycle of a Cloud service 
adds a temporal aspect to risk assessment. Cloud Service 
Lifecycle 
is 
comprised 
of 
three 
phases: 
Service 
Construction, Service Deployment and Service Operation. 
At Service Construction a service is developed, 
composed and configured. This entails packaging the core 
elements of a service and its dependencies together, the 
configuration of the service manifest that describes the 
functional parameters of each core element within the 
service and preparation of the VM images used to run the 
service. The Service Deployment phase sees the deployment 
of a service onto an IP. An IP is selected using a filter 
mechanism to decide, using Trust, Risk, Eco-efficiency and 
Cost (TREC) factors, which IP is most suitable to use for a 
given service manifest. 
Finally at Service Operation, a service begins execution 
on a selected IP and is continually monitored. 
A. Optimis Cloud Use Cases 
The use cases are outlined in the following subsections 
and illustrated in Figure 4 which provides the vision of the 
OPTIMIS Cloud ecosystem. 
1) Private Cloud 
In the Private Cloud use case an SP and IP within the 
same administrative domain cooperate to provision 
resources for one or more services using internal 
infrastructure. 
2) Cloud Bursting 
In the Cloud Bursting use case an IP at some point 
during the operation of a service may require additional 
capacity to manage increases in demand above that which 
its local infrastructure can accommodate. This requires an IP 
to initiate the SLA negotiation process with another IP. 
3) Multi-Cloud 
The Multi-Cloud use case is an extension of the Cloud 
Bursting use case where by an IP may make use of multiple 
IPs to provision additional resources. The use case can be 
distinguished from bursting in regards to the IP selection 
mechanism used, which evaluates the functional and non-
functional requirements of the service manifest and chooses 
the most appropriate IP for a given component of a service. 
4) Federated Cloud 
 
124
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

 
 
Figure 4: Interactions between Actors on a per Use Case Basis: (a) 
Federation, (b) Private, (c) Multi-Cloud, (d) Brokerage, and (e) Bursting. 
 
In the Federated Cloud use case an IP provides resources 
for an SP on behalf and across a collective of IPs working in 
collaboration. This use case differs from the Multi-Cloud 
use case as the IPs have previously entered into a mutual 
SLA between all members of the federation before coming 
into contact with the SP. 
5) Cloud Brokerage 
The Cloud Brokerage use case sees the addition of a third 
actor into the Cloud ecosystem the Broker. The broker acts 
as an intermediary that facilitates the Cloud Lifecycle and 
adds value through maintaining a historic database of its 
encounters with SPs and IPs providing a mechanism to 
gauge the past performance of an actor and its ability to 
adhere to SLAs. 
B. Stages of Risk Assessment in the Use Cases 
Taking into consideration the Cloud Service Lifecycle in 
the context of the Risk Assessment Tools, assessment will 
be performed at many stages and will be reliant on the 
specific use case. Figure 5 depicts the general view of risk 
assessment in all the different use cases in OPTIMIS. The 
risk assessment stages will be dependent on the use cases 
being represented. The different use cases will influence the 
different actors allowing similar risk assessment between 
them. In the case of the private cloud, the actors involved 
were the Service Provider and the Infrastructure Provider 
(as shown in Figure 5). In the cases of Cloud bursting, 
federated and multi-Cloud, this will allow further actors to 
be 
involved 
depicting 
infrastructure 
provider 
and 
infrastructure provider interactions. 
There are six action stages which are dependent on the 
interaction of an SP and IP and what tasks it is performing 
and will dictate what risk models and input data are utilized 
in the assessment. 
 
 
Figure 5: Risk Assessment Steps 1-11 in the Different Use Cases. 
 
The six action stages are as follows: 
 
Action 1: The sender, before sending an SLA 
request to an IP, assesses the risk of dealing with all 
known IPs. 
 
Action 2: An IP receives an SLA request and 
assesses the risk of dealing with the SP from which 
the request came from. 
 
Action 3: The IP assesses the risk of the SLA from 
the sender and evaluates the risk associated with the 
service manifest. 
 
Action 4: The sender then receives the IPs SLA 
offer and assesses the risk associated against other 
IP SLA offers. 
 
Action 5: The sender performs continual risk 
assessment at Service Operation, monitoring service 
level non-functional QoS metrics such as response 
time. 
 
Action 6: The receivers perform continual risk 
assessment at Service Operation, monitoring low 
level events from the infrastructure such as risk of 
VM failure. 
For the private cloud the 6 stages in Figure 5 will be 
from steps 1-6 in which each of the 6 actions take place. The 
order in which each of the action stages is (Step 1-Action 1), 
(Step 2 -Action 2), (Step 3-Action 3), (Step 4-Action 4), 
(Step 5-Action 5) and (Step 6-Action 6). 
In Cloud Bursting use case four further stages of risk 
assessment occur between the IP1 and IP2 that replicate the 
risk assessment performed by the SP in the Private Cloud 
use case, where by IP1 takes on the negotiation roles of the 
SP to facilitate the acquisition of additional resources. The 
additional number of action stages is (Step 7-Action 1), 
(Step 8 -Action 2), (Step 9-Action 3), (Step 10-Action 4), 
(Step 11-Action 6). 
In the Federated Cloud use case, due to the collaborative 
nature of the IPs and the assumed prior SLA between the 
members of the federation, this use case is a simplification 
of Cloud Bursting with the exception that any number of IPs 
125
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

can be burst to and a single IP resumes the role of being the 
point of entry into and controller of the federations. This 
means no risk assessment is necessary in regards to risk 
assessment steps 7 to 10 of the Cloud Bursting use case. 
Therefore there are only Steps 1-6 with an additional Step 
11. 
Finally, in the Multi-Cloud use case the missing steps of 
risk assessment in the Federated Cloud use case are 
necessary as IP1 is required to select and negotiate with 
several IPs. Therefore it will use all the steps from Step 1-11 
for its risk assessment in multi-cloud scenario. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
      This paper presents various methodologies being 
designed and developed for performing risk assessment on 
both SP and IP levels. The main contributions of the work 
are the design and implementation of an effective and 
efficient risk assessment framework (methodologies of risk 
identification, evaluation, mitigation and monitoring) for 
Cloud service provision. Four risk categories, namely legal, 
technical, policy, and general have already been identified. 
SP and IP risk models are being investigated in conjunction 
with a risk inventory for Cloud computing specific to 
OPTIMIS through various use cases: private cloud, cloud 
bursting, 
multi-clouds, 
federated 
cloud, 
and 
cloud 
brokerage. This inventory is populated with Assets, 
Incidents/Risk Scenarios and Impact/Consequences, as well 
as associated mitigation strategies. The novel risk 
assessment models will be built and developed as a 
combination of probabilistic, possibilistic and hybrid 
models to suit each risk category identified in the risk 
inventory.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially supported by the EU within 
the 7th Framework Programme under contract ICT-257115 - 
Optimized Infrastructure Services (OPTIMIS). 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Morali and R. J. Wieringa, Risk-Based Confidentiality 
Requirements Specification for Outsourced IT Systems, pp. 199-208, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
18th 
IEEE 
International 
Requirements 
Engineering Conference, 2010, DOI 10.1109/RE.2010.30. 
[2] A. Morali and R. J. Wieringa, Risk-Based Confidentiality 
Requirements Specification for Outsourced IT Systems (ex-tended 
version), Technical Report TR-CTIT-10-09, Centre for Telematics 
and Information Technology, University of  Twente, 2010. 
[3] C. S. Yeo and R. Buyya, Integrated Risk Analysis for a Commercial 
Computing Service in Utility Computing, Journal of Grid Computing, 
Volume 7, Number 1, pp. 1-24, ISSN: 1570-7873, Springer, 
Germany, March 2009. 
[4] M. Luo, L. J. Zhang, and F. Lei, An Insurance Model for 
Guaranteeing Service Assurance, Integrity and QoS in Cloud 
Computing, pp. 584-591, Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE International 
Conference on Web Services, DOI 10.1109/ICWS.2010.113. 
[5] J. O.  it , M. Ma as, and J. Guitart, Towards Business-driven Risk 
Management for Cloud Computing, pp. 238-241, Proceedings of the 
2010 International Conference on Network and Service Management 
– CNSM 2010. 
[6] A. J. Ferrer, F. Hernandez, J. Tordsson, E. Elmroth, C. Zsigri, R. 
Sirvent, J. Guitart, R. M. Badia, K. Djemame, W. Ziegler, T. 
Dimitrakos, S. K. Nair, G. Kousiouris, K. Konstanteli, T. Varvarigou, 
B. Hudzia,  A. Kipp, S. Wesner, M. Corrales, N. Forgo, T. Sharif, and 
C. Sheridan, OPTIMIS: a Holistic Approach to Cloud Service 
Provisioning, in the Proceedings of the 1st International Conference 
on Utility and Cloud Computing (UCC 2010), Chennai, India, 
December 2010. 
[7] K. Djemame, I. Gourlay, J. Padgett, K. Voss, and O. Kao, Risk 
Management in Grids, In R. Buyya and K. Bubendorfer, editors, 
Market-Oriented Grid and Utility Computing, pp.  335–353. Wiley, 
2009. 
[8] R. Alsoghayer and K. Djemame, Probabilistic Risk Assessment for 
Resource Provision in Grids, pp. 99-110, in the Proceedings of the 
25th UK Performance Engineering Workshop, Leeds, UK, July 2009. 
[9] J. 
A. 
Zachman, 
"A 
Framework 
for 
Information 
Systems 
Architecture", IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL 26. NO 3, 1987. 
[10] J. Heaney, D. Hybertson, A. Reedy, S. Chapin, T. Bollinger, D. 
Williams, and M. Kirwan, Jr. Information Assurance for Enterprise 
Engineering, in Proceedings of PLoP, Monticello, Illinois, 8-12 
September 2002. 
[11] G. Stoneburner, A. Goguen, and A. Feringa, Risk Management guide 
for Information Technology Systems, NIST Special Publication 8-00-
30 
[12] Nagios <http://www.nagios.org> 30.06.2011 
[13] P. Saripalli and B. Walters, QUIRC: A Quantitative Impact and Risk 
Assessment Framework for Cloud Security , pp. 280-288, In the 
Proceedings of the IEEE 3rd International Conference on Cloud 
Computing, 2010 
[14] X. Zhang, N. Wuwong., H. Li, and X. J.  Zhang, Information Security 
Risk 
Management 
Framework 
for 
the 
Cloud 
Computing 
Environments, pp. 1328-1334, in the Proceedings of the 10th IEEE 
International Conference on Computer and Information Technology, 
2010 (CIT 2010)  
[15] IDC Cloud Computing Survey <http://blogs.idc.com/ie/?p=210> 
30.06.2011 
[16] ENSIA Report on Cloud Computing Security Risk Assessment 
<http://www.enisa.europa.eu/act/rm/files/deliverables/Cloud- 
computing-risk-assessment> 30.06.2011 
[17] M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Griffith, A. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski, 
G. Lee, D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, and  M. Zaharia, Above 
the Clouds: A Berkeley View of Cloud Computing, Technical Report. 
University of California at Berkeley, 2009. 
[18] H. A. Linstone, The Delphi Method: Techniques and Applications. 
Addison-Wesley, 1975. 
[19] K. Djemame, J. Padgett, I. Gourlay, and D. Armstrong, Brokering of 
Risk-Aware Service Level Agreements in Grids, Concurrency and 
Computation: Practice and Experience, 2011. 
[20] The Risk Management Standard, Institute of Risk Management, The 
Association of Insurance and Risk Managers, National Forum for 
Risk Management in the Public Sector, Volume 2008, 21st August, 
2002. 
[21] Optimis Consortium, Architecture Design, WP 1.1: Requirements 
Elicitation, 
2010 
<http://www.optimis-project.eu/publications> 
30.06.2011. 
[22] Optimis Consortium, Architecture Design, WP 1.2: Reference 
Architecture, 
2010 
<http://www.optimis-project.eu/publications> 
30.06.2011. 
[23] C. Carlsson, Risk Assessment for Grid Computing with Predictive 
Probabilities and Possibilistic Models, in proceedings of the 5th 
International Workshop on Preferences and Decisions, Trento, Italy, 
April, 2000. 
126
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

