Cloud Security and Security Challenges Revisited
Fabian S¨uß1, Marco Freimuth1, Andreas Aßmuth1, George R S Weir2 and Bob Duncan3
1Technical University of Applied Sciences OTH Amberg-Weiden, Amberg, Germany,
Email: {f.suess | m.freimuth | a.assmuth}@oth-aw.de
2University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK, Email: george.weir@strath.ac.uk
3University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK, Email: robert.duncan@abdn.ac.uk
4
Abstract—In recent years, Cloud Computing has transformed
local businesses and created new business models on the Internet–
and Cloud services are still ﬂourishing. But after the emphatic
hype in the early years, a more realistic perception of Cloud
services has emerged. One reason for this surely is that today,
Cloud Computing is considered as an established and well-
accepted technology and no longer as a technical novelty. But
the second reason for this assessment might also be numerous
security issues that Cloud Computing in general or speciﬁc Cloud
services have experienced since then. In this paper, we revisit
attacks on Cloud services and Cloud-related attack vectors that
have been published in recent years. We then consider successful
or proposed solutions to cope with these challenges. Based on
these ﬁndings, we apply a security metric in order to rank all
these Cloud-related security challenges concerning their severity.
This should assist security professionals to prioritize their efforts
toward addressing these issues.
Index Terms—Cloud Security; Threat; CVSS.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cloud security risks have been widely discussed in re-
cent publications by different security specialists, e.g., by
the Cloud Security Alliance. [1] Since Cloud services are
provided over the Internet, most well-known attacks against
web applications are threats against Cloud services, too. In
addition, the characteristics of Cloud Computing amplify such
existing vulnerabilities and there exist new security challenges
that arise from the properties of Cloud services. In order to
provide an overview of signiﬁcant security threats in Cloud
Computing, we have grouped the different security issues. In
this paper we consider attack vectors against:
• Cloud infrastructures,
• transportation of data to and from the Cloud and
• a client’s connection to Cloud services and data.
After a brief description of these respective attack vectors in
Sections III to V, we provide some hints and best practice
solutions to prevent or reduce the impact of these incidents.
In order to help professionals understand the severity of the
associated security ﬂaw, we rate these issues using the Com-
mon Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS). [2] [3] For those
readers who are not familiar with CVSS, a brief introduction
is given in Section II. Having rated the listed attack vectors,
we give a ﬁnal conclusion and outlook in Section VI.
II. COMMON VULNERABILITY SCORING SYSTEM
CVSS is an open framework intended to describe the
properties and impact of information security threats and
attack vectors. It provides standardised vulnerability scores
that are used, for example, in the Common Vulnerability and
Exposure (CVE) list or in the National Institute of Standards
and Technology’s National Vulnerability Database (NVD). To
compute a score using CVSS, three metric groups have to be
taken into account, Base, Temporal and Environmental, each
consisting of a set of metrics. The Base metric group addresses
the intrinsic characteristics of a vulnerability that are constant
over time and do not depend on speciﬁc environments. TA-
BLE I shows the two sets of metrics within the Base metric
group, the Exploitability metrics and the Impact metrics. In
the following sections, the listed abbreviations will be used
for the corresponding metrics.
TABLE I. BASE METRIC GROUP. [3]
Exploitability metrics
Impact metrics
Attack Vector (AV)
Conﬁdentiality Impact (C)
Attack Complexity (AC)
Integrity Impact (I)
Privileges Required (PR)
Availability Impact (A)
User Interaction (UI)
Scope (S)
The Temporal metric group describes time-dependent, but
environment-independent factors of a vulnerability and con-
sists of three metrics: Exploit Code Maturity (E), Remediation
Level (RL) and Report Conﬁdence (RC) (cf. Table II). Finally,
TABLE II. TEMPORAL METRIC GROUP. [3]
Exploit Code Maturity (E)
Remediation Level (RL)
Report Conﬁdence (RC)
the Environmental metric group addresses properties of a
vulnerability that are relevant and unique to a certain envi-
ronment. Using these context-speciﬁc metrics, scores of the
Base metric group or Temporal metric group can be ampliﬁed
or reduced according to a given setup or scenario. Since we
intend to give an overview of Cloud security threats, we do
not address environmental speciﬁcs and therefore just compute
CVSS scores for the Base and Temporal metric groups.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

When the metrics are assigned values, the equations of
CVSS compute a score ranging from 0.0 (not vulnerable), 0.1
to 3.9 (low), 4.0 to 6.9 (medium), 7.0 to 8.9 (high) and 9.0
to 10.0 (critical). For more detailed information about CVSS,
we refer to [2] [3].
III. ATTACKS AGAINST THE CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE
A. Denial of Service
A (Distributed) Denial of Service ((D)DoS) attack against a
Cloud service provider (CSP) is the cyber criminals attempt to
prevent clients from accessing their data or services operated
in the Cloud. This can be achieved by ﬂooding the Cloud
providers web access with nonsense requests until the servers
cannot distinguish between authorised and unauthorised re-
quests and will stop working as a result of the load that leads
to the server running out of computing resources. In February
2018, Github was attacked using a so-called memcached
DDoS. This means there were no botnets involved, but instead
the attackers leveraged the ampliﬁcation effect of a popular
database caching system known as memcached. The attackers
ﬂooded memcached servers with spoofed requests and were
able to generate incoming trafﬁc for Github at the rate of
1.35 Tbps. [4] Another variant of a DoS attack could, for
instance, be an unplanned shutdown of computing resources
due to human error.
DDoS attacks can be started remotely, e.g., over the Internet
(AV:N) (cf. TABLE III), without needing special privileges
(PR:N) and the complexity of the attack is low (AC:L). No user
interaction is needed (UI:N). Usually, DDoS attacks target one
speciﬁc domain, website or service and therefore we assume
the scope of the attack does not cause additional security
issues (S:U). In practice, this might not be true for all DDoS
attacks and depending on the kind of service under attack,
other resources might be affected too. DDoS attacks do not
target conﬁdentiality or integrity (C:N, I:N), but availability
(A:H).
Concerning the temporal metrics, it can be stated that this
kind of attack is well-known (RC:C) and attackers know
how to perform DDoS attacks (E:H). On the other hand,
there are many best practice measures to deal with DDoS
attacks (RL:O). Specialized ﬁrewalls, for example, can detect
TABLE III. CVSS SCORE FOR DDOS ATTACKS.
Base metrics
Score
AV:N
AC:L
PR:N
UI:N
7.5
S:U
C:N
I:N
A:H
Temporal metrics
Score
E:H
RL:O
RC:C
7.2
uncommon behaviour and block the incoming trafﬁc from
speciﬁc sources. [5] Newer implementations use techniques of
artiﬁcial intelligence in order to perform anomaly detection.
[6] In addition, load balancing techniques enable CSPs to
distribute incoming trafﬁc over different gateways.
This leads to a Base metrics score of 7.5 and a Temporal
metrics score of 7.2, which both mean severity “high”.
B. Malware infection
Like any other computer system, Cloud Computing re-
sources are vulnerable to malware infections. The impact
of the infection depends on the variety of the malware.
For example, an infection by ransomware where data gets
encrypted by the attacker would deny users access to their own
data, whereas an infection by a keylogger or a rootkit would
probably lead to unauthorized access due to stolen credentials.
As the Securonix Threat Research Team reported, it only
takes minutes before automated attacks against a new exposed
IP address begin. The attack itself ranges from attempts
to install crypto mining software to irrecoverably deleting
databases after the adversary gains access to the system. Both
Linux and Windows operating system machines are being
attacked. [7]
The most common way to become infected by one of these
types of malware is by an unpatched software vulnerability
being exploited by an attacker, e.g., when a user opens the
malicious attachment of an email (AV:N) that will allow the
attacker access (S:C) to the victim’s system. The exploit itself
can be found easily (AC:L) on special databases like the CVE
website. [10] In order to exploit weaknesses of the targeted
system, the malware needs higher privileges (PR:H) and the
user also needs to actively click and run the exploit (UI:R).
After an attacker has access to a system, integrity (I:H),
conﬁdentiality (C:H) and availability (A:H) can no longer be
guaranteed.
As stated before, an attacker can use pre-built malware kits
(E:F) making it easy to generate the malware. Workarounds
after patches have been released are usually only temporary
because, ﬁrst of all, they need to be implemented regularly
and secondly, they can only ﬁx known issues and are also
only available for software under maintenance (RL:W). On the
other hand, many of these security issues are demonstrated by
security researchers in special scenarios (RC:C).
This leads to a high severity, both for the Base (8.4) and
the Temporal metrics group (8.1). There are counter measures
TABLE IV. CVSS SCORE FOR MALWARE INFECTION.
Base metrics
Score
AV:N
AC:L
PR:H
UI:R
8.4
S:C
C:H
I:H
A:H
Temporal metrics
Score
E:F
RL:W
RC:C
8.1
against these kinds of attacks like hardening the environment,
for example, by rolling out a patch management that keeps
the operating system and the application software up to date.
Additionally, ﬁrewalls and anti-malware software should be
the ﬁrst line of defence to tackle this high threat. Isolation of
highly threatened applications, e.g., by using sandboxing, is
another efﬁcient countermeasure that should be considered.
C. Unauthorized access
In this scenario, an attacker or a user has unauthorized
access to another user’s data or services. This is mostly
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

achieved by stealing (see Subsection III-B, keylogger) or
cracking weak passwords. After the adversary has successfully
logged in with the user’s credentials, he can abuse all the user’s
services or steal their data. Additionally, more sophisticated
attacks like virtual machine escape, when an intruder breaks
out of the limitations of a virtual resource in order to get
access to other users’ resources, are a serious threat due to
the necessary wide use of shared resources by virtualisation
techniques.
To give an example, we refer to the marketing company
Exactis which leaked a database containing personal informa-
tion of users with about 340 million records. [8] The incident
occurred because the database was publically accessible over
the Internet. The relevant web server could easily be found
using the search engine ‘Shodan.’ [11] Shodan is not spe-
cialized in ﬁnding web content but systems attached to the
Internet according to, for instance, the services these provide.
This makes it especially helpful for attackers when searching
for vulnerable (Cloud) systems.
Since the goal of the attack is to log on remotely with
a legitimate user’s credentials, the attacker is not limited to
physical access to a system (AV:N). The attack complexity
on the other hand is considered high (AC:H) because it needs
signiﬁcant technical understanding of the system, e.g., in order
to escape a virtual machine’s limitations, or psychological
skills in order to get credentials using social engineering
techniques. As the scope of this attack is to get unauthorized
access, it will not be changed (S:U) and user privileges are
not required (PR:N) just as user interaction (UI:N). Once an
attack provides access to a system, all three security goals,
conﬁdentiality (C:H), integrity (I:H) and availability (A:H),
can no longer be guaranteed. This is also the reason why this
attack has a high base score of 8.1, although it might by very
complex to successfully run it.
A way to counter this attack on the credential side is to en-
force minimum password requirements along with two-factor
authentication (RL:W). Additionally, a single user should only
TABLE V. CVSS SCORE FOR UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS.
Base metrics
Score
AV:N
AC:H
PR:H
UI:N
8.1
S:U
C:H
I:H
A:H
Temporal metrics
Score
E:F
RL:W
RC:C
7.7
have as limited access permissions as needed. Virtual machine
escape on the other hand is harder to tackle, and the defence
strategy is mainly to have different layers of security enabled,
along with an up-to-date patch management.
Encrypting data stored in the Cloud and keeping the decryp-
tion key(s) stored on another platform is also a good approach
to tackle unauthorized data ﬂow. Exploitations on the social
engineering or virtual machine sides have been seen in the past
(E:F) and detailed reports are available (RC:C). This lowers
the temporal score compared to the base score to 7.7, but this
attack scenario is still a serious (high) threat.
D. Data loss
Data loss describes the event when data is irrecoverably lost
by, for example, an environmental catastrophe or a mistaken
user interaction. Another scenario in which data might get lost
is when data is encrypted but the keys are deleted by accident.
Backups should never be accessible over the Internet, so we
assume that if an attacker wants to delete data irrecoverably,
he needs to have local access to the storage and backup
system (AV:L). We assume the attacker does not need special
privileges (PR:L). The complexity of the attack is quite low
(AC:L), the scope remains unchanged (S:U) and no user
interaction is needed (UI:N). Conﬁdentiality is not affected at
all (C:N), but integrity (I:H) as well as availability are highly
affected as we assume that the data can not be recovered or
reconstructed.
One of the most catastrophic data losses in recent years
was probably the unrecoverable deletion of databases from the
popular code managing platform GitLab. [12] In early 2017,
an engineer wanted to test a new database model for which
he set up multiple postgres SQL servers. During the test an
abnormally high load occurred causing the new database to
stop while performing a backup. For some technical reasons,
the backup failed. In the end, only data from a later date could
be recovered leading to the loss of recent pulls of about 5,000
projects.
In order to deal with data loss, services and data should
be operated redundantly, whenever possible not only within
the same data centre but also in different locations. A proper
backup strategy that includes the testing of all backups is
strongly recommended. Since this effectively and reportedly
reduces the impact of data loss, we rate this as an “ofﬁcial
ﬁx” (RL:O). There are numerous reports of attacks that lead
TABLE VI. CVSS SCORE FOR DATA LOSS.
Base metrics
Score
AV:L
AC:L
PR:L
UI:N
7.1
S:U
C:N
I:H
A:H
Temporal metrics
Score
E:F
RL:O
RC:C
6.6
to data loss (E:F) and most of them can be reproduced easily
(RC:C).
This assessment leads to a score of 7.1 for the Base metrics
group (high) and a temporal score of 6.6 (medium). This em-
phasises that well-known counter-measures, like storing data
redundantly or limiting access to backups, work effectively in
practice. The risk of data loss should not be underestimated
though.
IV. ATTACKS ON THE TRANSPORTATION SIDE
A. Snifﬁng / Man in the Middle attacks
Snifﬁng means that the adversary is eavesdropping on the
communication channel. By observing a client’s communica-
tion to a Cloud service, the goal of the attacker is to retrieve
valuable information. In a so-called Man in the Middle attack,
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

communication from a client to a Cloud service is routed
through the attacker. Encrypted trafﬁc might be decrypted by
the adversary in order to get the information, re-encrypted
and sent to its destination. To give an example, due to mis-
conﬁguration leading to allowing public writes to S3 buckets,
unauthorised persons could write content to another party’s
Cloud storage. [9]
Since the attack takes place between the client and the
Cloud, the adversary needs access to the adjacent network
(AV:A). In cases when communication is not encrypted end to
end, this attack scenario is trivial. But even if mechanisms like
Transport Layer Security (TLS) are enabled, an attacker is still
able to trick (SSL Stripping) the client in order to disable the
security efforts. We rate the attack complexity as low (AC:L).
Therefore, TLS should always be used along with a technique
called HTTP Strict Transport Security (HSTS), which enforces
the use of encryption between client and server and makes the
attack harder. As stated in the example, a misconﬁguration
could also lead to a Man in the Middle attack. The attack
usually takes place without the user’s knowledge (PR:N,
UI:N). Depending on the data sniffed, the scope can change
and could lead to a break in the conﬁdentiality (C:H), as well
as integrity (I:H). We assume that the attacker wants to stay
TABLE VII. CVSS SCORE FOR SNIFFING / MAN IN THE MIDDLE.
Base metrics
Score
AV:A
AC:L
PR:N
UI:N
8.1
S:U
C:H
I:H
A:N
Temporal metrics
Score
E:F
RL:O
RC:C
7.5
unnoticed and therefore does not interrupt the communication
(A:N). This makes the base score 8.3 and is considered high.
There is an ofﬁcal ﬁx (RL:O) to tackle this attack scenario,
namely the use of TLS along with HSTS as described above.
But since there is functional exploitation code available (E:F)
and detailed reports about this attack exist, the temporal score
(7.7) still remains high.
B. Rerouting
This attack is similar to a Man in the Middle attack. But
unlike the attack described above, the attacker usually cannot
access plaintext (C:L, I:L) data. The adversary reroutes the
packets either on the client or server side (AV:L) in order to
prevent successful transmission. The attacker’s goal is to make
the services operated by the Cloud unavailable (A:H) leading
to a Denial of Service. Neither special privileges (PR:N) nor
user interaction (UI:N) is needed, but the goal of making the
attacked service unavailable remains unchanged (S:U). Since
the attacker needs access to the provider’s or the customer’s
gateway, the complexity is considered high (AC:H).
As an example, Microsoft’s Cloud services were unavailable
for several days due to a failure of a public DNS provider,
leading to DNS requests targeting Microsoft’s Cloud server
failing. [13] Putting the base values together, a medium value
(6.2) shows that the effects of this attack are controllable.
Although this attack can easily be discovered (unlike the
snifﬁng approach described above), it can be hard to overcome
TABLE VIII. CVSS SCORE FOR REROUTING ATTACKS.
Base metrics
Score
AV:L
AC:H
PR:N
UI:N
6.2
S:U
C:L
I:L
A:H
Temporal metrics
Score
E:F
RL:W
RC:R
5.7
(RL:W). The best effort would be trying to prevent an attacker
from getting access to the local or adjacent network. The
attacker has access to a wide range of functional exploitation
code (E:F), the attacking vectors are also reasonable (RC:R).
This leads to a temporal score of 5.7.
V. ATTACKS AGAINST THE CLIENT
A. Malware infection
As discussed in Subsection III-B, this attack vector is
considered on both sides, the client as well as the server. The
means attackers use for infection are similiar, and the same
applies to potential counter measures. Since the Cloud or the
Internet in general offer an easy way for multiple users to work
together from all over the world, this beneﬁt can be abused
by attackers to infect a lot of clients by successfully attacking
a single client (S:C).
Reports about upcoming, new malware can be seen almost
daily. For example, we consider an Android malware that was
reported on 15th June 2018. This malware is specialized as
it is multi-functional. It exploits banking details, it stores all
characters entered using the on-screen keyboard and has the
ability to encrypt the complete device. [15]
The CVSS score is equivalent to the score for malware
on the (Cloud) servers. An attacker only needs to send
malware via email (AV:N), for example, to infect an end
user’s device. The attack complexity is quite low (AC:L)
as there are pre-built toolkits available on the Darknet. [14]
A privileged (PR:H) users’ action is mandatory (UI:R), the
TABLE IX. CVSS SCORE FOR MALWARE INFECTION.
Base metrics
Score
AV:N
AC:L
PR:H
UI:R
8.4
S:C
C:H
I:H
A:H
Temporal metrics
Score
E:H
RL:T
RC:C
8.1
scope can change (S:C) based on the details exposed and all
three security goals, conﬁdentiality (C:H), integrity (I:H) and
availability (A:H) have to be rated as high, leading to a base
score of 8.4.
As the example above indicates, functional code exists (E:H)
and numerous attacks have been seen in recent years (RC:C).
Positively for the user, simple actions are available to deal with
this risk at least temporarily (RL:T), like compliance rules for
a required minimal security level in order to access Cloud
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

services using a certain client, should be enforced as well as
hardening the client’s environment. The severity of this threat
is still high as a temporal score of 8.1 indicates.
B. Unauthorised data access
Just as described above, attackers might try to steal user cre-
dentials in order to access data without permission. But there
are several other examples that might lead to unauthorised
access as well. A user might mistakenly be granted higher
permissions or a CSP might still process customer data, even
after that data has been marked to be deleted by the customer,
e.g., in older backups.
On 4th September 2018, for instance, an attacker accessed
the upload mechanism of the Google Chrome extension
“MEGA”. He added malware code to the extension to steal
users’ passwords and upload these to the attacker’s server. The
malware-embedded software was distributed by the normal
update process. [16]
The metrics are similar to unauthorised data access on the
Cloud side, but limited by the fact that the effects are lower, as
a single user usually does not have full access to all the data
stored in the Cloud. Additionally, an attacker needs access to
the victim’s (local) network (AV:L) and data that is stored in
the Cloud can be restored more easily (A:L). This leads to a
lower base score of 7.7.
In addition to that, it is also easier to protect a single client
than the complete Cloud infrastructure of a CSP, although new
TABLE X. CVSS UNAUTHORIZED DATA ACCESS ATTACKS.
Base metrics
Score
AV:L
AC:H
PR:L
UI:N
7.7
S:C
C:H
I:H
A:L
Temporal metrics
Score
E:H
RL:T
RC:C
7.4
counter-measures have to be adopted constantly in order to
deal with more advanced threats (RL:T). A simple way to
reduce the attack surface of such attacks is to enforce a strong
password policy or even better two-factor authentication. The
maturity of the attack vector, on the other hand, has to be
rated higher (E:H) since more malware exists for clients than
for Cloud systems. This leads to a temporal score of 7.4.
VI. CONCLUSION
Attacks against Cloud infrastructures are multifaceted. They
range from Denial of Service attacks to more complex attempts
where an attack tries to get unauthorised access. In any
discussion about the risk of a Cloud infrastructure, not only
the Cloud provider’s side should be considered but also the
transportation of data as well as the security of the endpoints
connected to the services and data operated by the Cloud. The
CVSS scoring helps companies to identify the most critical
security ﬂaws. Based on the attack vectors and vulnerabilities
described in the previous sections, we used the Temporal
metrics score to rank these security challenges (cf. Table XI).
This table only contains security problems for the Cloud
TABLE XI. RANKING OF THE MOST SEVER CLOUD SECURITY
CHALLENGES.
Rank
Security challenge
Score
1
Malware infection (Cloud infrastructure)
8.1
2
Unauthorised access
7.7
3
Man in the Middle attacks
7.5
4
DDoS attacks
7.2
5
Data loss
6.6
6
Rerouting
5.7
infrastructure and the data connection between clients and
the Cloud services. These are the aspects a CSP has under
their sole control and from a customer’s perspective, these are
the most important properties that should be addressed when
a contract with a CSP is negotiated. In a more specialised
setting, e.g., for a Cloud-based SCADA (supervisory control
and data acquisition) system, the situation might be easier
because of the smaller number of potentially different clients.
Vulnerabilities or attacks targeting speciﬁcally the client
side are hard to deal with for most CSPs. The clients are
usually not managed or controlled by the CSP but by the
customers themselves. If a CSP offers a multi purpose Cloud
service that should be usable by any customer and any
device, it is hard to deal with all potential vulnerabilities
of all possible combinations of client applications and op-
erating systems. Nevertheless, it is highly recommended not
to support “ancient” client software (applications as well as
operating systems) for which security updates have ofﬁcially
been discontinued. However, the security challenges for clients
described in Section V, malware infections (8.1) and unautho-
rised data access (7.4), both have to be considered as highly
severe. Therefore, customers are advised to install security
patches as soon as those are available and also to have a proper
strategy for access control.
In order to obtain a scoring of the discussed security
challenges for a unique environment, we suggest to add the
metrics of the Environmental metric group according to the
given scenario. On the Internet, there are several CVSS 3.0
calculators available, like the one provided by the Forum of
Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST) [18]), that can
be used to do the calculations easily.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Bavarian Research
Alliance (BayFOR) for funding several visits of the partners
involved in this paper. This funding deﬁnitely helped to
develop joint research and teaching activities.
REFERENCES
[1] Cloud Security Alliance, Ed., The Treacherous 12, Top Threats to Cloud
Computing + Industry Insights, 2017.
[2] P. Mell, K. Scarfone and S. Romanosky, “Common vulnerability scoring
system”, IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 4, no. 6, 2006.
[3] FIRST.Org,
Inc.,
2015,
“Common
Vulnerability
Scoring
System
v3.0,
Speciﬁcation
Document”,
URL:
https://www.ﬁrst.org/cvss/
cvss-v30-speciﬁcation-v1.8.pdf [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[4] L. Hay Newman, “GitHub Survived the Biggest DDoS Attack Ever
Recorded”, wired.com, 2018.03.01 [accessed: 2019.04.12]
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[5] A. Khadke, M. Madankar and M. Motghare, “Review on Mitigation of
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) Attacks in Cloud Computing” in
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Control (ISCO), January 7–8, 2016, Coimbatore, India. IEEE,
Nov. 2016, pp. 1–5, ISBN: 978-1-4673-7807-9.
[6] S .Alzahrani and L. Hong, “Detection of Distributed Denial of Service
(DDoS) Attacks Using Artiﬁcial Intelligence on Cloud” in Proceedings
of the 2018 IEEE World Congress on Services (SERVICES), July 2–7,
2018, San Francisco, USA. IEEE, Oct. 2018, pp. 36–36, ISBN: 978-1-
5386-7374-4.
[7] L.
Jaffee,
“Cloud
infrastructure
exposed
by
multivector,
multi-
platform malware attacks prevalent, mass scale”, SC Media, January
1st,
2019,
URL:
https://www.scmagazine.com/home/security-news/
cloud-infrastructure-exposed-by-multivector-multi-platform-malware-
attacks-prevalent-mass-scale/ [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[8] A. Greenberg, “Marketing Firm Exactis Leaked a Personal Info Database
With 340 Million Records”, wired.com, June 27th, 2018, URL: https:
//www.wired.com/story/exactis-database-leak-340-million-records/ [ac-
cessed: 2019.04.12]
[9] D. Olenick, “Misconﬁgured Amazon S3 Buckets allowing man-
in-the-middle
attacks”,
SC
Media,
November
2nd,
2017,
URL:
https://www.scmagazineuk.com/misconﬁgured-amazon-s3-buckets-
allowing-man-in-the-middle-attacks/article/1473869
[accessed:
2019.04.12]
[10] CVE database, URL: https://cve.mitre.org/cve/search cve list.html [ac-
cessed: 2019.04.12]
[11] Shodan
search
engine,
URL:
https://www.shodan.io/
[accessed:
2019.04.12]
[12] GitLab,
“Postmortem
of
database
outage
of
January
31”,
February
10th,
2017,
URL:
https://about.gitlab.com/2017/02/10/
postmortem-of-database-outage-of-january-31/ [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[13] G.
Born,
“Microsoft
calls
DNS-Problems
solved”,
February
12th,
2019,
URL:
https://www.borncity.com/blog/2019/02/12/
microsoft-meldet-dns-probleme-als-behoben-11-2-2019/
[accessed:
2019.04.12]
[14] Bruno, “DIY Ransomware Kits Accessible on the Dark Web”,
February
18th,
2018,
URL:
https://darkwebnews.com/dark-web/
ransomware-diy-kits/ [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[15] D.
Palmer,
“This
new
Android
malware
delivers
banking
trojan,
keylogger
and
ransomware”,
June
15th,
2018,
URL:
https://www.zdnet.com/article/this-new-android-malware-delivers-
banking-trojan-keylogger-and-ransomware/ [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[16] C.
Nguyen,
“Hacked
Chrome
extension
disguised
as
legitimate
version
steals
logins”,
May
9th,
2018,
URL:
https://www.digitaltrends.com/computing/mega-cloud-storages-chrome-
extension-hacked-to-steal-your-passwords/ [accessed: 2019.03.03]
[17] Westf¨alische
Nachrichten,
Ed.,
“Bagger
legt
Telekommunikation
lahm” (Excavator paralyses telecommunication), May 29th, 2018,
URL:
https://www.wn.de/Muenster/Stadtteile/Mecklenbeck/3320424-
Kein-Telefon-kein-Internet-Bagger-legt-Telekommunikation-lahm
[accessed: 2019.04.12]
[18] Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST), Ed., “Com-
mon Vulnerability Scoring System Version 3.0 Calculator”, URL: https:
//www.ﬁrst.org/cvss/calculator/3.0 [accessed: 2019.04.12]
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

