 
The Business Model of Cloud Storage
Jincai Chen, Minghui Lai, Yangfeng Huang, Kun Yang, Gongye Zhou 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology - Wuhan, China 
jcchen1@sohu.com ; firefly727@qq.com ; huyfaeng@163.com ; hustyk@163.com ; zhougongye@126.com 
 
Abstract—The traditional service model of cloud storage is 
that the service providers supply both the storage capacities 
and data storage services through the Internet to the clients. 
The obvious disadvantage of this model is that the data of the 
same customer stored in multiple cloud storage providers can 
not interact with each other. This paper adds a new layer to 
this model. The new model consists of StaS (Storage as a 
Service) User, StaS Provider and Cloud Storage Provider, 
which can solve the above problem. It also possesses some 
other advantages, such as Cloud Storage Providers need not 
care about the market and how customers use their services, 
different customers can use the cloud storage services in 
different security levels as they need. This paper also discusses 
the functions of different modules at StaS Provider layer and 
analyzes two architectures of cloud storage at Cloud Storage 
Provider layer.  
Keywords-cloud storage; StaS; business model 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays the growth of data is just like flood 
overflowing. Enterprises, governments, the non-profit 
organizations and consumers are facing more and more stern 
challenges, such as data storage, data management, data 
protection, data excavation and so on (especially in the data 
storage). The traditional storage devices and storage 
methods have no ability to deal with such a huge data 
quantity. The birth of cloud storage can alleviate the 
pressure of the storage of mass data. 
We can say that the birth of cloud computing have made 
cloud storage. Cloud storage develops very quickly on the 
basis of cloud computing. We all know that cloud 
computing is provided and researched by some well-known 
companies. So the technology of cloud storage mainly take 
some cloud storage products of some well-known 
companies as representative, such as Amazon’s S3 (Simple 
Storage Service), Nirvanix’s SDN, EMC’s Atmos, IBM’s 
Blue Cloud and Microsoft’s Live Mesh [1-3]. 
These cloud storage products have their own advantages 
and disadvantages. Customers can choose different cloud 
storage products according to their needs. With the 
appearance of various cloud storage products, a serious 
problem occurred. Customers can not use multiple cloud 
storage services provided by different cloud storage 
providers because of different pricing standards, different 
access interfaces and different storage forms of data at the 
same time. SNIA has found this problem, so it began to do 
something on the relevant standard of cloud storage in 2009 
[4]. SNIA presents a standard about Cloud Data 
Management Interface (CDMI) in September 2009 [4]. The 
version 1.0 of CDMI was released in 2010. The main 
content of this standard is the data access mode, data 
organization and management, classification and metadata 
management and data security in the cloud storage system. 
This standard has an undoubtedly huge promotion on the 
development of cloud storage and the compatibility of 
different cloud storage products. 
As enterprises have an enthusiasm to cloud storage, more 
and more researchers do academic research on cloud storage. 
The main research content is as follows: the management of 
data in cloud [5-7], the architecture of cloud storage [8-10], 
the security of cloud storage [11], the migration of data in 
cloud system [12] and so on.  
The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. Section 2 
simply introduces the business model of cloud storage and 
its advantages. Section 3 introduces the details of StaS 
Providers Layer and the function of each module. Section 4 
compares two architectures of Cloud Storage Providers, P2P 
architecture and Master-Slave architecture, in control way, 
fault tolerant and load balancing. Section 5 makes a 
conclusion.  
II. 
BUSINESS MODEL OF CLOUD STORAGE 
Patterson has provided the Business Model of Cloud 
Computing [13], which consists of SaaS User, SaaS 
Provider and Cloud Provider as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. 
The Business Model of Cloud Computing [13] 
So SaaS (Software as a Service) Provider can provide 
cloud computing service without any expensive hardware 
storage devices, and they only try their best to exploit the 
parallel software, whereas Cloud Provider only needs to 
manage their own cloud computing system and try their best 
to enable the cloud storage system to be more reliable,  
available, secure and effective. The advantages of this model 
are that Cloud Provider has no need to take care about 
market and customers. So cloud computing will develop 
more quickly and spread more widely. 
In fact, the business model of cloud computing can be 
also applied to cloud storage, which consists of StaS User, 
74
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

 
StaS Provider and Cloud Storage Provider; nevertheless, the 
StaS here is Storage as a service (for distinguishing from 
Software as a Service, note that all StaS of this paper behind 
is referred to Storage as a Service.) and the Figure is as 
follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this Business Model of Cloud Storage, Cloud Storage 
Provider only needs to manage the cloud storage system 
effectively, such as the deployment, the architecture, fault-
tolerant and the interface which is provided to StaS Provider, 
etc. StaS Provider needs not to own enormous storage 
devices. However, it owns infinite storage capacity which 
can be assigned to StaS User. StaS Provider should have the 
functions as follows: managing the information of StaS User, 
purchasing storage space from different cloud storage 
providers, mapping this physical space to a logical space for 
StaS User through Virtual technology, providing different 
customers with different security levels. 
The advantages of this business model of cloud storage 
include the following: 
1. StaS User can interact with their data which is stored 
in multiple cloud storage systems provided by different 
cloud 
storage 
companies 
through 
promoting 
data 
interoperability to the StaS Provider layer. Because StaS 
Provider can call the corresponding interfaces functions of 
the cloud storage system, multiple physical spaces of 
different cloud storage providers can be added to a StaS 
User’s logic space, which is just like mounting multiple 
disks. 
2. StaS Provider can provide different StaS Users with 
different security levels. The higher security level is, the 
higher the price is. The reason why the previous cloud 
storage can not occupy the market is that cloud storage can 
only provide high security and the price is expensive. Many 
customers, such as general customers, do not need such a 
high security level. So they lose a lot of customers.  
3. Owing to StaS Providers can concentrate storage 
space belonged to multiple Cloud Storage Providers, StaS 
Providers can own as much storage capacity as they want. 
4. It is not necessary for Cloud Storage Providers to pay 
much attention to market and customers. Cloud Storage 
Provider in the traditional model maybe have to care about 
one million customers, whereas in this model   maybe only 
care about one or several customers who are StaS Providers. 
They only need to pay all their attention to the design and 
management of cloud storage system (such as the 
arrangement, the architecture, the secure mechanism and so 
on). 
III. 
STAS PROVIDER 
The details of this business cloud storage model are as 
follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Figure 3 we can see that StaS Provider Layer own 
many modules. The functions of each module are as follows: 
Figure 3.   The Detail Business Cloud storage Model 
 
Figure 2.   The Business Model of Cloud Storage 
Interface 
and 
Information 
Management(IIM):This 
module provides interface for StaS User and manages the 
information of customers. Also it should monitor the risk of 
customers’ application. Only in the none-risk case, the 
system will allow customers to apply for space. The last 
function of this module is the management of the logical 
store space. 
Accounting:This 
module 
manage 
the 
status 
of 
customers` login. After a customer logs in, he/she should get 
the information data from the module of Interface and 
Information Management and then Accounting will make a 
map between customer’s login and the information of his 
data (the information of data is equivalent to the customer’s 
logical storage space). 
Virtual Management(VM):This module manages and 
monitors the below logical storage space. When StaS 
Provider apply for storage space from Cloud Storage 
Provider through the module of Space Apply and Release, 
VM need to map the newly applied physical space to the  
logical space and manage it. When StaS User applies for 
some storage spaces, VM need to maintain available spaces 
for each customer. Of course, there is an assumption that 
Cloud Storage Provider can provide high availability (Even 
if there are server crashed in Cloud Storage Provider layer, 
there should be corresponding alternative server and the map 
with Virtual Mapping Mechanism can not change). 
Security Control(SC):Different customers have different 
requirements for the security of their data. For example an 
enterprise demands a very high security level, whereas 
common customer does not need such a high security level. 
So StaS Provider can provide different security levels for 
75
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

 
different customers through SC. When a customer logs in 
StaS Provider, he/she should choose the security level 
through SC. 
Price:This module is used to calculate the cost of 
customers. The traditional model of cloud storage do not 
own the layer of StaS Provider, so customers can not interact 
with their data stored in multiple cloud storage providers 
because of the different pricing standards and the different 
access interfaces. But customers can do this in this model. 
Because this module can calculate the cost of customers 
according to corresponding cloud storage manufacturer’s 
charging standard. So customers can use storage space of 
different manufacturers, which is just like mounting disk. 
Read and Write Control(RWC):This module can let 
customers use multiple storage services provided by 
different cloud storage manufacturers. We all know that 
there are different interfaces and storage forms (such as file, 
database, block and so on) among different cloud storage 
services. RWC can shield these differences. When 
customers access their data, they only need to send the 
access demand, the logical space of data, and the 
corresponding manufacturer’s name to RWC. Then RWC 
will call corresponding access interface. 
Space Application and Release(SAR):This module is 
used to apply for or release space from the layer of Cloud 
Storage Provider. When applying to the new space, it should 
finish the additional logical space mapping with the above 
VM. When releasing the space, it should cut the logical 
space with VM. 
Virtual Mapping Mechanism(VMM):This module only 
map physical space to logical space and the above VM take 
charge of the management of this logical space. If we do not 
care about other modules, we can abstract the system as 
Figure 4. We can see that the space of all physical storage 
devices is mapped to a huge logical storage space and 
customers apply for logical space from StaS Provider.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Now suppose that the total logical capacity is 1024TB 
and the average size of each customer purchase is 1 TB. So 
the number of customers StaS Provider can hold is 1024 at 
most. If there are any more new customers who want to 
purchase logical storage space, StaS Provider have to 
purchase more physical storage space from Cloud Storage 
Provider. Are there any methods which can tolerate that 
some customers continue to buy logical space from StaS 
Provider and by which StaS Provider have no need to 
purchase physical space from Cloud Storage Provider? 
Meanwhile we promise that each online customer’s storage 
space is the same size as they have purchased. 
In fact, there are two important statuses. Firstly, the 
possibility that all the customers are online is very small, or 
we can say that the number of online customers is just a 
certain amount of total customers. Secondly, the storage 
space that customers purchased will not be used up 
completely. For these two reasons, we can solve the above 
problems. We can recycle the unused storage space of the 
offline customers (Note: we just recycle it temporarily. If 
customers are online again, we will assign the space of the 
same size to them from other unused space) and allow 
online customers or new customers to purchase this space. If 
we do this, the system of the above example can hold more 
than 1024 customers.  
For example, suppose that the average online rate is two-
thirds and the average use rate of customers` space is two-
thirds, then we can hold at least 110 customers to buy 
storage space of 1TB practically, according to  
113.78.
23)
23)* 1(
1024* 1(
=
−
−
 
We just simply suppose the average online rate and the 
average use rate of space. If we want to do further research 
in this aspect, we can analyze the discipline of the customers 
(the average online rate or offline rate) and how much the 
average use rate of space is, we can hold the largest number 
of customers. Of course, we should pay attention to the 
number of spare capacity of the system and the present risks. 
We can create an optimization model with these parameters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If we take this mechanism, StaS Provider back up a 
certain space for emergency (the total space that online 
customers purchased is larger than the total space that StaS 
Provider can assign).The details are as shown above. 
Figure 5.  The Space Recycling Mechanism 
   
 
Figure 4.  Abstract of  Virtual Mapping 
We can add the size of this emergency backup space to 
the above optimization model. But this mechanism has a 
high demand for the virtual technology and the management 
76
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

 
of space is a little complex. Of course, this is a very good 
mechanism. 
IV. 
CLOUD STORAGE PROVIDER 
As the real physical storage devices provider, Cloud 
Storage Provider should provide StaS Provider layer with 
high availability of services. It not only provides reading and 
writing interfaces, but also needs to ensure the security of 
data and the availability. As it should try to improve the 
efficiency, there would involve a lot of technologies. Now 
we will discuss Cloud Storage Provider as follows: model, 
architecture and instance. 
A. Model 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compared with traditional storage systems, cloud storage 
is a complex system. It includes not only the hardware, but 
also the network equipment, the storage equipment, servers, 
applications, public access interfaces, access networks and 
so on. It provides data storage and business access services 
through the application software. Cloud Storage can be 
divided into two Layers: Basic Management Layer and 
Storage Layer. 
1) 
Storage Layer 
Storage Layer is the most basic part of the Cloud Storage 
Structure. Storage devices can be FC storage devices, also 
can be IP storage devices, such as NAS and iSCSI. Storage 
devices in the Cloud Storage Network are often located in 
different regions, and even different countries. The nodes 
can be linked together through the storage network and the 
storage network can be SAN, NAS, FC-SAN, etc. 
Storage Device Management System is on the top of 
storage devices. It can mask the differences between various 
physical storage devices. So it can achieve storage devices 
logical, management virtualization, multi-link redundancy 
management, 
and 
hardware 
status 
monitoring 
and 
troubleshooting. 
2) 
Basic Management Layer  
This layer is the key part of the cloud storage system and 
is also difficult to realize. Basic Management Layer make 
multiple storage devices to work together, the external 
provision of service and provide better data access 
performance through the cluster, the distributed file system 
and the grid computing technologies. 
Data encryption stored in the cloud will not allow 
unauthorized user access, while a variety of data backup and 
disaster recovery technology can guarantee that the data in 
the cloud storage will not be lost and the data will be safe 
and stable. 
B. Architecture 
 Cloud storage network provides data backup, data 
migration and other operations through the internal network, 
and cloud storage services through the external network. 
Cloud storage system is a new storage system. In order to 
deal with immense data generated everyday. Generally 
speaking, when we build a cloud storage system, we should 
consider several aspects as follows: 
 
Figure 6.  Cloud Storage Model 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Cloud Storage Architecture 
 
Expand the capacity: When increasing the capacity of 
the cloud storage system, we should be able to provide 
services continually, add the new storage nodes to the 
original storage pool automatically, and do not need too 
much duplication and complex configuration. 
Reliability and Availability: Storage node failure is 
normal, not abnormal. When the storage node fails, ensure 
that we can provide cloud storage services continually, and 
the data in the cloud storage is not lost. 
Management: Cloud storage networks include thousands 
of storage nodes, how to manage so many nodes effectively 
will become a key to how to build architecture successfully. 
Costs: Because the cloud storage system has the same 
service interface with the tradition network storage system,   
it can be integrated into the existing storage system 
conveniently and do not require any structural change in the 
existing system. It can greatly reduce the cost of the 
deployment of the cloud storage system. 
C. Cloud storage architecture instance 
At present, there are two forms of typical cloud storage 
architecture, Master-Slave architecture and P2P architecture. 
Each company can select a model according to their 
characteristics. Each architecture has its own advantages and 
77
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

 
disadvantages, we will discuss control way, fault tolerance 
and load balancing as follows. 
1) 
Master-Slave architecture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Control way 
This structure consists of a master server and many 
storage nodes; data storage format is a multi-dimensional 
map of the sparse structure.  Data (including the index, log, 
and record data) is ultimately stored in the distributed file 
system.  Data is assigned to each node by master server, 
which monitors the status of every storage node and storage 
load balancing between nodes. The client read the index file 
stored in the master server by the pre-reading and cache 
technology. This Master-Slave model has an obvious 
disadvantage. There is a single point of failure. In order to 
avoid the master became the bottleneck of system 
performance and reliability. We need remote backup for 
master. However, there is an obvious advantage of this 
architecture. The system can be easily controlled, easily 
maintained, easily added a host to it, and there are no data 
consistency problems. 
b) Fault-tolerant 
 As the data is stored in many normal PC, the machine 
failure is normal, not abnormal. Usually, the data will have 
more than one copy. The copies are stored in different 
machines, different racks, and even different data centers. 
When one machine failed, the system can provide data 
service continually to ensure high availability. 
If a data need N copies, of course, N can be configured 
by the user .Generally speaking, N=3. When the data is 
written to the storage node, according to relative algorithm, 
the system will write N-1 copies to other N-1 designated 
storage nodes. So it can ensure that every data has multiple 
copies stored in cloud storage system. The location 
information of the data and copies will be saved in the 
master server. When the clients accesse their data, at first, 
they need visit metadata stored in master server to get 
location information. Then according to the location 
information, the client can access the corresponding data 
storage nodes to read their data. So when the individual 
storage node fails, the system can still guarantee the integrity 
of the data, and client can still read their data. In addition, in 
order to recover data, when a machine fails, the master 
server gets the copy from other normal machine and 
transport the copy to the abnormal machine. 
Since location information of all kind of data are stored 
in the master server. In order to ensure the high availability 
of data, there will be a metadata backup. 
 
Figure 8.  Master-Slave Architecture 
c) Load balancing 
According to the load information migrate data, master 
server monitor the load information of every storage node. 
2) 
P2P Architecture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Control way 
 
Figure 9.   P2P Architecture 
This architecture uses an improved DHT as its basic 
storage structure. The most important characteristic of this 
architecture is that the data are distributed on every storage 
node uniformly. Each storage node can communicate with 
each other .The data can be transported among the various 
nodes and detected if the data is in fault status. The   
advantage of this storage structure is that it has no single 
point of failure, and no master node control, but has self-
management ability. The disadvantage is that there is data 
consistency problems, and inconvenient when adding the 
host to this system. 
b) Fault-tolerant 
The data stored in this structure uses redundant storage 
strategy as well as in the Master-Slave structure. We can use 
Dynamo’s [14] strategy of redundant copies for reading and 
writing. It defines three parameters N, R, W.  N represents 
the number of copies that each records. W represents the 
number of copies for each process of writing. R represents 
the number of copies for each reading. As long as R+W>N, 
we can read the latest copies. The number of R and W can 
be configured by us. We can update the lower version of 
data while we read the higher version of data. Thus we can 
handle the data consistency problem easily and adjust the 
demand of the high reading and high writing flexibly. 
In addition, we can use Cassandra's [15] fault detection 
and recovery strategies, which determine the survival state 
of every storage node not by a BOOL value. Instead the 
failure detection module emits a value which represents a 
78
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

 
suspicion level for each of monitored nodes. This value is 
defined as Φ [16]. According to the size of this value, the 
system detects mal functions. The performances of Accrual 
failure detector in accuracy and speed are very good; they 
can be adjusted to different network environment and server 
load environment. 
c) Load balancing 
Because the structure of DHT uses a way that the data is 
distributed evenly across the different nodes, there are no hot 
issues. Access pressure of every storage node is balanced. 
We can also use virtual node like Dynamo. When the 
machine has high performances, it can be configured with 
more virtual nodes. While the machine has low 
performances, it can be configured with less virtual nodes. 
The number of virtual node configured in each machine is 
determined by the machine’s performance.  Heterogeneous 
machines can be easily managed, and the load of each 
machine is also more balanced. The number of virtual nodes 
should be far greater than the number of physical machine. 
Many virtual nodes correspond to a physical machine. When 
we add a new machine to the system, we need not re-HASH, 
but just need to move some virtual nodes to this new 
machine. So it significantly reduces the amount of data 
moved. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper adds the StaS Provider layer to the business 
model of cloud storage. This model can solve the problem 
that customers can not interact with their data stored in 
multiple cloud storage providers because of the different 
pricing standards and the different access interfaces.  The 
key research contributions of this work include: 
 
• 
We add the StaS Provider layer to the traditional 
model of cloud storage. So the new model of cloud 
storage is consisted of StaS User, StaS Provider and 
Cloud Storage Provider and Advantages of this 
model is discussed.  
 
• 
The functions of the different modules at StaS 
Provider layer (such as virtual management. security 
control and so on) are discussed and a virtual 
mechanism which can hold more capacity for 
customers by recovering the unused space of the 
offline customers is provided. 
 
• 
The model of the Cloud Storage Provider layer is 
provided and some relevant functions which should 
be provided by it are discussed. Two practical 
architectures are provided, one kind is the 
architecture of Master-Slave, and another kind is the 
architecture of P2P. We have compared them in the 
following three aspects: control mode, fault-tolerant 
and load balancing. 
 
The prototype system of the business model of cloud 
storage mentioned above has been building. Our next work 
is to test and analyze the performance of the system, 
practically and theoretically 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors thank Mr. Ming Chen and Ms. Ning Wang 
for their helpful discussions. This work was supported by 
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 
60773189), the National Basic Research Program of China 
(No. 2004CB318201), and the Program for Changjiang 
Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (No. 
IRT-0725). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
http://aws.amazon.com/s3/. 06/15/2010. 
[2] 
http://www.nirvanix.com/. 06/15/2010. 
[3] 
http://www.emc.com/products/detail/software/atmos.htm. 06/15/2010. 
[4] 
SNIA, 
"Cloud 
Data 
Management 
Interface," 
Version1.0. 
http://www.sina.org/tech_activities/standards/curr_standards/cdmi/. 
06/15/2010. 
[5] 
Raghu Ramakrishnam, “Data Management in the Cloud,” 2009 IEEE 
International Conference on Data Engineering. pp. 5-5, April, 2009. 
[6] 
ZHAN Ying and SUN Yong, “Cloud Storage Management 
Technology,” 2009 Second International Conference on Information 
and Computing Science. pp. 309-311, May 21-22, 2009. 
[7] 
Beng Chin Ooi, “Cloud Data Management Systems: Opportunities 
and Challenges,” skg, pp. 2-2, 2009 Fifth International Conference 
on Semantics, Knowledge and Grid, 2009. 
[8] 
Wenying Zeng, Yuelong Zhao, Kairi Ou, and Wei Song, “Research 
on Cloud Storage Architecture and Key Technologies,” 2009 
International Conference on Computer Sciences and Convergence 
Information Technology. pp. 1044-1048. 2009. 
[9] 
Ke Xu, Meina Song, Xiaoqi Zhang, and Junde Song, “A Cloud 
Computing Platform Based on P2P,” 2009 IEEE International 
Symposium on IT in Medicine & Education (TIME2009). pp. 427-
432. 
[10] Sanjay Chemawat, Howard Gobioff, and Shun-Tak Leung, “The 
Google File System,” In 19th Symposium on Operating Systems 
Principles, pp. 29-43, Lake George, New York, 2003. 
[11] Christian Cachin, Idit Keidar, and Alexander Shraer, “Trusting the 
Cloud,” 2009ACM SIGACT News, Volume 40, Issue 2, pp. 81-86. 
2009. 
[12] Dmitry L. Petrov and Yury S. Tatarinov, “Data migration in the 
scalable storage cloud,” 2009 International Conference on Ultra 
Modern Telecommunications & Workshops. pp. 1-4.  
[13] David Patterson, Michael Armbrust, Armando Fox, etc, “Above the 
Clouds: A Berkeley View of Cloud Computing,” Technical Report 
No.UCB/EECS-2009-28, 
UC 
Berkeley 
Reliable 
Adaptive 
Distributed Systems Laboratory. February 10, 2009. 
[14] Giuseppe DeCandia, Deniz Hastorun, and Madan Jampani, etc, 
“Dynamo:  Amazon’s highly available key-value store,” In SOSP, pp. 
205-220, 2007. 
[15] Avinash Lakshman and Prashant Malik, “Cassandra: A Structured 
Storage System on a P2P network,” PODC `10 Proceeding of the 
29th ACM SIGACT-SIGOPS Symposium on Principles of 
Distributed Computing. pp. 5-5. 
[16] Xavier Defago, Peter Urban, Naohiro Hayashibara, and Takuya 
Katayama, “The Φ accrual failure detector,” In RR IS-RR-2004-010, 
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, pp. 66-78,  
2004. 
79
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

