Could Block Chain Technology Help Resolve the
Cloud Forensic Problem?
Yuan Zhao∗,Bob Duncan†
Business School
University of Aberdeen, UK
Emails: ∗y.zhao@abdn.ac.uk,†robert.duncan@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract—Many cloud users are blindly heading into a potentially
devastating regulatory disaster zone. Given the shortcomings of
the cloud due to the cloud forensic problem, this is likely to
mean many cloud users will be unable to be compliant with
the forthcoming EU General Data Protection Regulation when it
comes into effect on 25th May, 2018. We consider the possible
use of a crypto-currency based mechanism to address the as yet
unsolved cloud forensic problem. Crypto-currencies are becoming
a global phenomenon, and gaining more attention from media,
venture capitalists, ﬁnancial and government institutions. We fo-
cus on the operational risk and the market risk related to crypto-
currencies, especially the dominating Bitcoin. The operational
risk encompasses the actions that undermine the technological
infrastructure and security assumptions of crypto-currencies.
We discuss how the implementation of block chain technology
could improve the efﬁciency of ﬁnancial infrastructure, as well
as the inevitable vulnerabilities of operational risk of software,
open-source governance, and code maintenance. The market risk
associated with crypto-currencies denotes the ﬂuctuation in the
exchange rate between crypto-currency and other currencies or
ﬁnancial asset classes. We summarise the literature ﬁndings on
the co-movement of crypto-currencies with different currencies,
indices, and commodities, to show the role of crypto-currency
as a commodity, currency, or a speculative investment under
portfolio diversiﬁcation theory. In the light of the robustness of
this approach, we consider whether the underlying block chain
technology could, in turn, be practically applied to addressing
the cloud forensic problem. This paper looks at the pros and
cons of the blockchain/bitcoin approach, the potential beneﬁts
offered versus the additional resource costs involved, the increased
latency necessarily introduced and considers whether there is any
mileage in using such an approach to secure cloud forensic trails.
Keywords–Cloud forensic problem; GDPR; Blockchain/bitcoin
technology.
I.
INTRODUCTION
All computing systems are constantly under attack, and for
traditional networked computer systems, this presents a serious
challenge to ensure a high level of security and privacy can
be maintained. For cloud systems, these challenges increase
exponentially, due to the increase in complexity in software,
and the multiplicity of layers and actors involved in modern
cloud ecosystems.
There remains one serious, but as yet, unresolved chal-
lenge, namely the cloud forensic problem. This problem arises
where an attacker breaches a cloud system and becomes an
intruder, whereby there is nothing then to prevent that intruder
from escalating privileges and removing all trace of their
incursion by deleting or modifying the forensic trail identifying
all their actions and routes into the system. Needless to say,
they are perfectly happy to remain hidden in the system, where
they can carry on stealing information, while continuing to hide
their presence.
This is about to become particularly problematic for com-
panies who both use cloud, and are liable to fall under the
jurisdiction of, and therefore require to be compliant with, the
forthcoming EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
[1]. Those who use cloud will by default be unable to meet
compliance requirements. Given the punitive level of possible
ﬁnes for non-compliance (up to the greater of e20million
or 4% of last year’s global turnover), this is likely to have
a considerable impact on companies who are unable to be
compliant.
Given the widespread convenience of cloud use for a great
many companies, it is likely that this fact will place them at
a competitive disadvantage once the GDPR goes live on 25th
May. Given the long lead time required, the enormous costs
involved, and the level of expertise needed to securely set up
such systems, moving back to distributed network systems is
unlikely to present a feasible option for many companies, who
will effectively be “sitting ducks” once the legislation takes
effect on 25th May 2018.
Therefore, it is imperative that a viable solution be found
in the meantime, and as quickly as possible. For this paper,
we take a look at the latest global phenomenon of crypto-
currencies, and the technologies they use to ensure security.
Security for all ﬁnancial systems takes an necessary ultra high
level priority in all ﬁnancial companies. They are subject to an
incredible range of risks, and we believe it may be worthwhile
looking at the operational risk which encompasses the actions
that undermine the technological infrastructure and security
assumptions of crypto-currencies, as well as the market risk
related to crypto-currencies.
We start by examining the cloud forensic problem to
understand why it is such a challenge for cloud users to
become compliant with the GDPR in Section II. Next, we
turn to crypto-currencies and consider operational risk in
such systems in Section III. In Section IV, we conside the
implications of market risk, while in Section V, we look at the
co-movement of crypto-currencies with different currencies,
indices, and commodities, to show the role of crypto-currency
as a commodity, currency, or a speculative investment under
portfolio diversiﬁcation theory. In Section VI, we consider the
robustness of this approach for dealing with security issues. In
Section VII, we discuss our ﬁndings and consider future work,
and in Section VIII, presents our conclusions.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

II.
THE CLOUD FORENSIC PROBLEM AND GDPR
COMPLIANCE
All computer systems are continuously subject to attack,
and cloud systems are no exception. It is certainly the case
that no system is immune to attack, and that is particularly
true for cloud systems. During the past decade, a great many
research papers have allowed a far greater level of security and
privacy to be achieved in cloud systems. However, despite all
that effort, no solutions have yet been found to address the
cloud forensic problem.
This problem arises once an attacker compromises a cloud
system, thus gaining even a small foothold. Once embedded
in a system, the attacker becomes an intruder and seeks to
escalate privileges until they can access and delete, or modify,
the forensic logs in order to hide all trace of their incursion into
the system. This allows them to retain a long term foothold
within the system, thus allowing them to help themselves to
whatever data they wish.
Many companies do not retain records of which database
records have been accessed, and by whom, meaning that once
a breach occurs, the ability of the company to be able to report
which records have been accessed, copied, modiﬁed, deleted or
ex-ﬁltrated from the system becomes an impossible task. This
results in non-compliance with the GDPR, meaning exposure
to potentially punitive levels of ﬁnes.
To achieve compliance with the GDPR, all companies must
ﬁrst be able to report a breach within 72 hours of discovery.
The global average time for all companies between breach and
discovery in 2012 was an average of 6 months [2] [3]. This
had improved to some 4 weeks by 2016 [4] — still far short
of what is needed to understand what has been going on with
the intruders while they were undiscovered.
In the light of cloud use, and in particular the Internet
of Things (IoT), this raises the question of just how feasible
complying with such a time threshold might be. Where a
company uses cloud, the company is breached and it has made
no special arrangements to ensure the safety of forensic and
audit trail data, the 72 hour deadline is moot, since in the
ﬁrst place, it will have no means of knowing that it has been
breached, so will have nothing to report, since the requirement
is to report within 72 hours of discovery. However, once
discovery does occur, there will be no realistic prospect of
that company ever ﬁnding out just which records have been
compromised. When the forensic and audit trail is gone — it
is gone!
The IoT, of course, brings a whole new suite of problems
to bear, not least of which is the general insecure level of
devices, their small resource level, yet high throughput level
of data. some of which may be lost in transit. The issue might
not be so much with the data lost from IoT devices, rather
than with the ability of attackers to easily compromise the
devices, thus allowing them access via corporate networks to
other more valuable devices in the system. We do not address
the IoT within the scope of this paper, but do recognise that
any company using IoT devices will require to take special
measures to ensure GDPR compliance can be achieved.
Where a company does not take these special measures
to safeguard their forensic and audit trail data, they will be
less likely to be able to discover the occurance of the breach.
Shoud they by chance manage to discover the breach, they
would certainly be in a position to report it with 72 hours of
discovery, they will simply struggle to be able to report what
has been compromised, meaning they will be liable for some
level of ﬁne.
Obviously, the longer an intruder has available to spend
inside a company system, the more information they will
be able to acquire, and the more potential damage they can
cause. While the GDPR was changed from “... within 72
hours of a breach occurring...” to a much less stringent “...
within 72 hours of discovery ...”, this rather misses the point
that if a company cannot discover a breach within 72 hours
of the breach occurring, how will they possibly be able to
discover that is has arisen at all, let alone what data has been
compromised once the intruder has deleted all forensic and
audit trails?
So, not being able to discover that a breach has arisen,
while not putting the company technically in breach of the
GDPR, it will certainly make it extremely difﬁcult to enable
them to report which records have been compromised once
discovery actually occurs. This means the non-compliance
will necessarily become far more serious, thus enlarging the
exposure to risk of steeper ﬁnes.
While there is no speciﬁc requirement to encrypt data,
there is certainly a strong recommendation that this should take
place, and within a reasonable time. Encryption and decryption
keys should not be stored on the cloud instance. Failure to
address these issues will certainly lead to steeper ﬁnes in the
event of a breach.
As all ﬁrms involved in ﬁnancial services are generally
subject to greater attack than many other market sectors, it is
worth taking a look at how they address security requirements.
We believe there may be some merit in considering crypto-
currencies, since as a new entrant to the market, there is more
likelihood that their security approach, being designed from
the beginning, might offer better prospects.
III.
OPERATIONAL RISK OF CRYPTO-CURRENCIES
Operational risk referrers to the action that undermines
the technical infrastructure and security assumptions relating
to crypto-currencies. The vulnerabilities related to crypto-
currencies can be found in operator errors and security ﬂaws.
And most importantly, the Bitcoin platform also faces potential
vulnerabilities from protocol designs. Operational insecurity
has been addressed by Moore and Christin [5], who suggests
that fraudulence is an issue among cryptocurencies. Exchanges
acts as de facto banks, but almost half of them ceased operation
due to the resultant impact of security breaches. However, these
exchanges failed to reimburse their customers after shutting
down. As an alternative approach, other users have instead
deposited their Bitcoins in a digital wallet which has also
become a target for cyber-criminals.
A small number of theoretical papers written by computer
scientists address the mining pool protocols and anonymity.
Miners opted out for the pool in long rounds, in which a
potential block will be shared with large groups. Based on
a peer-to-peer network layer, Babaioff et al. [6] argue that
the current Bitcoin protocols do not provide an incentive for
nodes to broadcast transactions. This is problematic, since
the system is based on the assumption that there is such an
incentive. Instead, by focusing on block mining protocol, Eyal
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

and Sirer [7] show that mining is not incentive-compatible
and that so-called “selﬁsh mining” can lead to higher revenue
for miners who collude against others. Houey [8] observed
that larger blocks are less likely to win a block race when
including new transactions into blocks. Karame, Androulaki
and Capkun [9] analysed the security of using Bitcoin for
past payments, and found that double-spending attacks on fast
payments succeed with overwhelming probability and can be
mounted at lower cost unless appropriate detection techniques
are integrated in the current Bitcoin implementation. Regarding
the double-spending and selﬁsh mining attacks, Kogias et
al. [10] proposed the usage of ByzCoin as a novel protocol
to optimise transaction commitment and veriﬁcation under
normal operation while guaranteeing safety and liveness under
Byzantine (It leveraged scalable collective signing to commit
Bitcoin transactions irreversibly within seconds) faults.
The protection of online privacy and anonymity arises and
are both addressed in the literature. Christin [11] examined the
anonymous online marketplace in crypto-currencies. Böhme et
al. [12] examined what can be learned from Bitcoin regarding
Internet protocol adoption. Many studies analysed the public
bitcoin transaction history and found a set of heuristics that
help to link a Bitcoin account with real word identities.
Androulaki et al. [13] quantiﬁed the anonymity in a simulated
environment and found that almost half of the users can be
identiﬁed by their transaction patterns. Using two examples,
Bitcoin and Linden Dollars, the report focuses on the impact of
digital currencies on the use of ﬁat money. Gans and Halaburda
[14] analysed the economics of private digital currencies,
but they explicitly focus on currencies issued by platforms
like Facebook or Amazon (that retain full control), and not
decentralized currencies like Bitcoin. Dwyer [15] provided
institutional details about digital currency developments. The
security, privacy and anonymity issue related to Bitcoin has
been addressed by Krombholz et al. [16], in which they
surveyed 990 Bitcoin users to determine Bitcoin management
strategies and identiﬁes how users deploy security measures to
protect their keys and Bitcoins. They found that about 46% of
participants use web-hosted solutions to manage Bitcoins, and
over 50% use such solutions exclusively.
Among all the potential causes for operational risk, the
denial-of-service attack is the prominent form by Böhme et
al. [12], which entails swamping a target ﬁrm with messages
and requests in such volume that either mining pools or
exchanges become very slow and unusable. This type of attack
is especially effective on the Bitcoin ecosystem because of its
relative simplicity of monetising the attacks.
IV.
MARKET RISK OF CRYPTO-CURRENCIES
Market risk via price ﬂuctuation in the exchange rate is
inevitable for users holding Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
Figure 1 shows the average US dollar-Bitcoin exchange rate,
along with its trading volume. It is clear that the market
volatility is tremendous for Bitcoin, leading to a high potential
market risk.
There are also some attentions from the literature focusing
on the price dynamics and speculative bubbles in the crypto-
currency markets. Cheah and Fry [18] claimed that the crypto-
currencies are prone to substaintial speculative bubbles, and
they found that the fundamental value of Bitcoin is zero, by
examining the daily clothing prices of Bitcoin from 2010 to
Figure 1. A Comparison Between Price and Volume [17].
2014. A more recent study is conducted by Blau [19], which
emphasised that high volatility of Bitcoin is not related to the
speculative activities in this period. The volatility of Bitcoin
has been analysed by Katsiampa [20]), Cheah and Fry [18],
and many others.
There is no conclusive ﬁnding on whether the Bitcoin is
a speculative investment asset or a currency. Glaser et al.
[21] suggest users treat Bitcoin as speculative assets rather
than a type of currency. The diversiﬁcation beneﬁts offered
by Bitcoin is also studied by Briére, Oosterlinck and Szafarz
[22]. They found Bitcoin can offer diversiﬁcation beneﬁts after
looking into the correlation between Bitcoin and other asset
classes. Gandal and Halaburda [23] examined the exchange
rates of different virtual currencies to observe the co-movement
and identify the opportunities or triangular arbitrage. But they
found little opportunity based on daily closing prices. Yermack
[24] analysed changes in Bitcoin price against ﬁat currencies
and concludes that its volatility undermines its usefulness as
currency. To be qualiﬁed as a currency, Bitcoin needs to serve
as an intermediary of exchange, as a unit of account and store
value. Also, they have been proved not to be able to function
as those by Bariviera et al. [25].
V.
CO-MOVEMENT OF CRYPTO-CURRENCIES AND
PORTFOLIO THEORY
Despite extensive studies on the economics aspects of
cryptocurrencies, there are relatively fewer studies conducted
on analysing the inter-linkage of cryptocurrencies with other
ﬁnancial assets. A number of papers have analysed the ability
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

of cryptocurrencies, usually Bitcoin, to act as safe havens or
hedges mentioned by a series of papers such as [26]–[28].
Dyhrberg [26] analysed the hedge properties of Bitcoin using
a selection of explanatory variables such as gold (cash and
future), the dollar-euro and dollar-pound exchange rates and
the the Financial Times Stock Exchange 100 (FTSE 100)
Index. The results of the GARCH model [29] showed that
Bitcoin can be used in hedging against the dollar and the UK
stock market, showing similar hedging capabilities to gold. In
Figure 2, we see how a basket of crypro-currencies compare
with each other based on price.
Figure 2. A Co-Movement View of Crypto-Currencies Based on Price [17].
Bouri, Azzi and Dyhrberg [28] used a quantile regression
approach to analyse the relationships between the Bitcoin
and global uncertainty. The ﬁndings demonstrate that at the
longer frequencies VIX have strong negative impact on Bitcoin
returns, while at the shorter frequencies uncertainty does have
positive and signiﬁcant impacts only on high quantiles. This
implies that Bitcoin can hedge against global uncertainty at
short investment horizons and in the bull regime only. Another
study by them in 2017 investigated interrelationships between
Bitcoin and the world equity indices, bonds, oil, gold, the
general commodity index and the US dollar index using
the bivariate DCC model by Engle [30]. The results show
limited evidence of hedging and safe haven properties of the
Bitcoin; however, Bitcoin still can be an effective diversiﬁer.
In Figure 3, we see how a basket of crypro-currencies compare
with each other based on volume.
Figure 3. A Co-Movement View of Crypto-Currencies Based on Volume
[17].
VI.
THE ROBUSTNESS OF THIS APPROACH FOR
SECURITY ISSUES
The design of Bitcoin presents distinctive risks that differ
from other payment methods and thus pose security issues
related to operational risk, market risk, and contagion risks
with other cryptocurrencies.
The operational risk occurs when certain actions under-
mines the technical infrastructure and security assumption of
crypotocurrencies, such as fraudulence of exchanges, min-
ing pool inefﬁciency, double spending attacks, and online
anonymity.
The market risk lies in the unpredictable ﬂuctuations in the
price of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. As an agent for
the storage of value and price goods, the sharp movement of
exchange rate of Bitcoin will also cause liquidity issues.
The contagion risk arises when the comovement of price
of a bundle of croptocurrencies becomes inevitable. This will
cause potential issues for portfolio diversiﬁcation, despite their
innovations and efﬁciencies. For instance, the Litecoin con-
ﬁrms transactions four time faster than Bitcoin, which is more
useful for the retail use and other time-sensitive transactions.
NXT [31] reduces the electronic and computational burden of
Bitcoin mining by replacing the proof-of-work mining with
proof-of-stake, assigning block chain duties in proportion to
coin holdings. Zerocash [32], which is not yet operational, will
seek to improve privacy protections by concealing identiﬁers in
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

the public transaction history. Peercoin [33] allows a perpetual
1% annual increase in the money supply.
We can see from what we have looked at, that from
a security perspective, in principal, Blockchain technology
provides a potentially robust approach to solving this problem.
However, in looking at a number of real world instances, we
can see that there are potential issues that must be considered.
Attacks, such as Denial of Service (DOS) attacks, can prove
lethal to both functionality and performance, although Tripathi
et al. [34] have suggested a workaround to mitigate this
particular issue.
The majority of successful attacks are perpetrated against
the storage and containment technology in use, often utilising
social engineering or in a recent case, holding of BitCoin
owners to ransom until their BitCoins are transferred to the
criminal perpetrators.
There are clear core strengths contained in Blockchain
technology, but there are practical concerns to be considered.
The lack of a clear economic methodology to pay for the use of
the technology presents a major concern, as does the volatility
of the crypto-currencies inextricably linked to it.
However, if we strip away the currency component, and
focus only on the Blockchain technology, putting the ﬁnanc-
ing of processing distributed ledger transactions onto a solid
ﬁnancial basis, with sufﬁcient distributed resources to ensure
a robust enough environment can be built to sustain the whole
process, there might be a way to move forward.
There needs to be a sufﬁcient incentive for distributed
ledger providers to provide a highly secure, robust and low
latency mechanism to deliver the means to record irrefutable
transactional data rapidly enough to provide a high performing
system. It is certainly the case that the use of some Blockchain
based mechanism to protect cloud instances could prove a very
useful means of doing so. However, it is also obvious that if
the Blockchain ledgers are run within the same cloud instance
as the system they are trying to protect, then we would be
asking for trouble.
The obvious solution to this issue would be to truly
distribute the Blockchain instances to a sufﬁciently diverse
number of locations, such as to make it difﬁcult for an attacker
to compromise all, or a sufﬁciently large number of the ledgers
to be able to force a permanent illicit change to their own
advantage.
On the other hand, while the increased number of dis-
tributed ledgers can signiﬁcantly increase the security, it will
also increase the cost and the latency of processing transac-
tions.
VII.
DISCUSSION
Thanks to the major weakness posed by the cloud forensic
problem, the potential to lose both the audit trail and the
forensic trail means that recording the data we require to
remain compliant with the GDPR becomes a vitally important
task for us. The use of a distributed ledger holds great promise
for us. The thinking behind the Blockchain approach affords
us with huge redundancy, meaning that an attacker will have
to compromise a great many of the distributed ledgers before
they can have any impact on the ledger contents. Some would
see this as too much redundancy. We would view this as just
enough to provide the required assurance. This can therefore
provide us with a very strong assurance that the consensus
across the ledgers will deliver a high level of comfort as to
the veracity of the contents. So, while this represents a big
drawback for some, for us, it represents a major advantage!
Some point to the huge volumes of processing generated
by the Blockchain process as used in Bitcoin, suggesting that it
would be too computationally expensive for our purposes. We
take a different view. Because it is a crypto-currency and highly
volatile, Bitcoin is subject to transactional volumes measuring
in multi-trillions per year. By stripping out the crypto-currency
aspect from the equation, we also remove the need for such
extreme volumes of transactional data, rendering the approach
very manageable for any size of company.
Some express concerns at the impact of selﬁsh miners. We
take the view that by removing the need for mining from
the equation, and instead having the processing carried out
by credible parties for economic cost, this will remove any
incentive to try to mess with the system in this way. All
processors would be paid at the same rate for the job they
perform, so there would be no means available to them, nor
any incentive, to try to improve on that.
Yet others point to the dangers of Distributed Denial of
Service (DDoS) attacks. Given that there will be no direct
ﬁnancial advantage to be gained by attacking these Blockchain
ledgers, the volume of attacks will likely be lower. For a large
attack to be ﬁnancially viable, there has to be a huge ﬁnancial
incentive before it becoms worthwhile to spend the kind of
money it takes to perpetrate such an attack.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
It is clear that for any company using cloud, it will prove
virtually impossible to achieve compliance with the GDPR in
the event of a security breach due to the, as yet unresolved,
Cloud Forensic Problem. Discovering this fact after a cyber
breach will not be grounds for mitigation from the regulator
after the fact. It will be far too late by then. Therefore, cloud
users who require to be compliant with the GDPR will have
to take steps now to be thoroughly prepared ahead of time.
We have looked at the Operational Risk and the Market
Risk of crypto-currencies as well as considering the co-
movement of crypto-currencies in the light of portfolio theory.
Many of these risks arise through the perceived mass value
attributable to these crypto-currencies and the mass transac-
tional processing volumes implicit in their operation. Clearly,
by removing the currency aspect from the equation, we can
eliminat a huge portion of the risk. We accept that all risk will
not be removed, but there will be a signiﬁcant reduction in
risk levels involved.
Our proposal will be to use the underlying concept of a
distributed ledger to ensure we are in a position to retain
some element of both audit trail and forensic trail data to
allow us to meet the compliance requirements of the GDPR,
which would othrwise be impossible in the event of a breach.
There will be a need to carry out some serious testing in order
to ﬁnd a satisfactory equilibrium between security, privacy,
performance, reliability, accessability and the accountability
we require for GDPR compliance.
To that end, we plan to conduct a pilot case study on how
the technical aspects might be implemented in order to meet
all the required goals to ensure compliance can be achieved.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

This will run around a miniature cloud system, offering both
cloud-based and non-cloud based ledgers to assess what the
optimum conﬁguration might be.
REFERENCES
[1]
EU, “EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),” 2017. [Online].
Available: http://www.eugdpr.org/ [Retrieved: December 2017]
[2]
PWC, “UK Information Security Breaches Survey - Technical Re-
port 2012,” London, Tech. Rep. April, 2012. [Online]. Available:
www.pwc.com www.bis.gov.uk [Retrieved: December 2017]
[3]
Trustwave, “2012 Global Security Report,” Tech. Rep., 2012.
[4]
Verizon, “2016 Verizon Data Breach Report,” Tech. Rep., 2016.
[5]
T. Moore and N. Christin, “Beware the middleman: Empirical analysis
of Bitcoin-exchange risk,” in International Conference on Financial
Cryptography and Data Security. Springer, 2013, pp. 25–33.
[6]
M. Babaioff, S. Dobzinski, S. Oren, and A. Zohar, “On bitcoin and red
balloons,” in Proceedings of the 13th ACM conference on electronic
commerce. ACM, 2012, pp. 56–73.
[7]
I. Eyal and E. G. Sirer, “Majority is not enough: Bitcoin mining is
vulnerable,” in International Conference on Financial Cryptography and
Data Security. Springer, 2014, pp. 436–454.
[8]
N. Houy, “The Economics of Bitcoin Transaction Fees.” GATE WP
1407 Université de Lyon, Groupe d’Analyse et de Théorie Economique
(GATE), February. [Online] Available: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2400519
[Retrieved: December 2017]
[9]
G. O. Karame, E. Androulaki, and S. Capkun, “Double-spending fast
payments in bitcoin,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on
Computer and communications security. ACM, 2012, pp. 906–917.
[10]
E. K. Kogias et al., “Enhancing bitcoin security and performance with
strong consistency via collective signing,” in 25th USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 16). USENIX Association, 2016, pp.
279–296.
[11]
N. Christin, “Traveling the silk road: A measurement analysis of a large
anonymous online marketplace,” in Proceedings of the 22nd international
conference on World Wide Web. ACM, 2013, pp. 213–224.
[12]
R. Böhme, N. Christin, B. Edelman, and T. Moore, “Bitcoin: Eco-
nomics, technology, and governance,” The Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives, vol. 29, no. 2, 2015, pp. 213–238.
[13]
E. Androulaki, G. O. Karame, M. Roeschlin, T. Scherer, and S. Capkun,
“Evaluating user privacy in bitcoin,” in International Conference on
Financial Cryptography and Data Security. Springer, 2013, pp. 34–51.
[14]
J. S. Gans and H. Halaburda, “Some economics of private digital
currency,” in Economic Analysis of the Digital Economy. University of
Chicago Press, 2015, pp. 257–276.
[15]
G. P. Dwyer, “The economics of Bitcoin and similar private digital
currencies,” Journal of Financial Stability, vol. 17, 2015, pp. 81–91.
[16]
K. Krombholz, A. Judmayer, M. Gusenbauer, and E. Weippl, “The other
side of the coin: User experiences with bitcoin security and privacy,” in
International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security.
Springer, 2016, pp. 555–580.
[17]
Coindesk,
“Coindesk,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.coindesk.com/ [Retrieved: December 2017]
[18]
E.-T. Cheah and J. Fry, “Speculative bubbles in bitcoin markets? an
empirical investigation into the fundamental value of bitcoin,” Economics
Letters, vol. 130, 2015, pp. 32–36.
[19]
B. M. Blau, “Price dynamics and speculative trading in bitcoin,”
Research in International Business and Finance, vol. 41, 2017, pp. 493–
499.
[20]
P. Katsiampa, “Volatility estimation for bitcoin: A comparison of garch
models,” Economics Letters, vol. 158, 2017, pp. 3–6.
[21]
F. Glaser, K. Zimmermann, M. Haferkorn, M. C. Weber, and M. Siering.
“Bitcoin—Asset or Currency? Revealing Users’ Hidden Intentions.”
Proceedings of the 22nd European Conference on Information Systems,
Tel Aviv, June 2014.
[22]
M. Brière, K. Oosterlinck, and A. Szafarz, “Virtual currency, tangible
return: Portfolio diversiﬁcation with bitcoin,” Journal of Asset Manage-
ment, vol. 16, no. 6, 2015, pp. 365–373.
[23]
N. Gandal and H. Halaburda, “Can we predict the winner in a market
with network effects? competition in cryptocurrency market,” Games,
vol. 7, no. 3, 2016, p. 16.
[24]
D. Yermack, “Is Bitcoin a real currency? An economic appraisal,”
National Bureau of Economic Research, Tech. Rep., 2013.
[25]
A. F. Bariviera, M. J. Basgall, W. Hasperué, and M. Naiouf, “Some
stylized facts of the Bitcoin market,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
and its Applications, vol. 484, 2017, pp. 82–90.
[26]
A. H. Dyhrberg, “Bitcoin, gold and the dollar–a garch volatility analy-
sis,” Finance Research Letters, vol. 16, 2016, pp. 85–92.
[27]
A. H. Dyhrberg, “Hedging capabilities of bitcoin. is it the virtual gold?”
Finance Research Letters, vol. 16, 2016, pp. 139–144.
[28]
E. Bouri, G. Azzi, and A. H. Dyhrberg, “On the return-volatility
relationship in the bitcoin market around the price crash of 2013”.
Economics: The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal, 11:1–16.
[29]
T. Bollerslev, “Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedastic-
ity,” Journal of econometrics, vol. 31, no. 3, 1986, pp. 307–327.
[30]
R. Engle, “Dynamic conditional correlation: A simple class of multi-
variate generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity models,”
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, vol. 20, no. 3, 2002, pp. 339–
350.
[31]
NXT,
“NXT
Platform,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://nxtplatform.org/ [Retrieved: December 2017]
[32]
Zerocash,
“Zerocash,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
http://zerocash-
project.org/ [Retrieved: December 2017]
[33]
Peercoin, “Peercoin,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://peercoin.net/
[Retrieved: December 2017]
[34]
S. Tripathi, B. Gupta, A. Almomani, A. Mishra, and S. Veluru, “Hadoop
based defense solution to handle distributed denial of service (ddos)
attacks,” Journal of Information Security, vol. 4, no. 03, 2013, p. 150.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

