Company Management Approaches — Stewardship or Agency: Which Promotes Better
Security in Cloud Ecosystems?
Bob Duncan
Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
Email: bobduncan@abdn.ac.uk
Mark Whittington
Accounting and Finance
University of Aberdeen
Email: mark.whittington@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract—Historically, companies have been managed under the
principles of agency theory. There is evidence to suggest that the
complexity of modern computing systems, and in particular cloud
computing systems, has become so convoluted that the principles
of agency theory can no longer cope. We suggest that the adoption
of stewardship theory for cloud security can present a possible
credible alternative that can deliver much better results for the
security of all cloud users, particularly in the long run.
Keywords–Stewardship; agency; management; security; cloud
computing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Modern information systems have evolved considerably
over the past four decades, leading to the development of
complex, highly distributed information systems and the need
to police them properly. The need to address traditional secu-
rity issues of conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability (CIA)
has increased this complexity further, due to the need for
scalability and redundancy. As a consequence, despite the
beneﬁts offered by Moore’s Law [1], costs have increased
signiﬁcantly. The statutory and regulatory environment is also
ever increasing in reporting requirements, responsibilities and
complexity, leading to an ever increasing additional cost bur-
den. Fines for non-compliance are increasing year on year as
regulators take a more and more aggressive approach. One
regulator in the UK, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA)
[2] has so far levied ﬁnes of £1,427,943,800 during 2014.
Contrast this with the level of ﬁnes levied by their predecessor,
the Financial Standards Authority (FSA) [3], ﬁve years ago of
£34,800,000.
Cloud computing offers the possibility of a substantial
economic beneﬁt to ﬁrms, yet at the same time, increases
complexity and risk further. This results in an interesting
dilemma. On the one hand, potential cost savings of 50 -
90% [4] are possible, which is highly attractive, but on the
other hand, complexity can increase exponentially, placing
signiﬁcant increasing risk on business and government alike.
The practice of achieving compliance with recognised
security standards is spreading. While this is a good idea
in principle, in practice it may not provide the assurance
being sought. The multiplicity of security standards currently
available, and in particular, the lack of consensus on cloud
security standards presents a difﬁcult challenge. Compliance
does not necessarily ensure protection. The procedures in use
for achieving accreditation often vary enormously, with no
real requirement for a rigorous approach. Checklists are often
favoured over a deep and searching approach to security stan-
dards compliance [5], and there is generally no requirement
for regular review.
Given the potential multiplicity of actors and the complexi-
ties of their relationships with each other in cloud ecosystems,
it is clear that simple traditional agency relationships (where
each actor looks to their own short term ends) will no longer be
able to handle fully the security implications for users of these
ecosystems. There is a clear need for developing a stronger
mechanism to ensure users of such ecosystems can be assured
of the security of their information.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: in
Section II, we discuss three main barriers to effective cloud
security; in Section III, we consider the merits of agency versus
stewardship; in Section IV, we demonstrate how each impact
on cloud security; and in Section V, we discuss our conclusions
and future work.
II.
THE CHALLENGES
We discuss three main challenges to be overcome when
considering information security in the cloud - standards
compliance, the limitations on management of agency theory
and the sheer complexity of cloud ecosystems.
A. Standards
The recent development and rapid evolution of cloud
ecosystems presents a far more rich and complex security
environment than existing security mechanisms were designed
to cope with. There is a danger that continued reliance on
existing standards will lead to real weaknesses in systems
which can be vulnerable to exploitation. The challenge here
is to develop a means of identifying potential exposure in as
comprehensive a manner as possible, yet be sufﬁciently ﬂexible
to adapt with a dynamically changing information ecosystem
environment. There are a number of cloud security standards
which have recently evolved, but the problem is, which
standard should be used? Should it be the Association for
Retail Technology Standards (ARTS) [6], the Cloud Security
Alliance (CSA) [7], the Cloud Standards Organisation (CSCC)
[8], the Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF) [9], the
European Union Agency for Network and Information Security
(ENISA) [10], the European Telecomminications Standards
Institute (ETSI) [11], the Federal Risk and Authorization
Management Program (FedRamp) [12], Generally Accepted
Privacy Principles (GAPP) [13], the Global Inter-Cloud Tech-
nology Forum (GICTF) [14], the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) [15], the ITU Telecommunication Stan-
dardization Sector (ITU) [16], the National Insitute of Stan-
dards and Technology (NIST) [17], the Organization for the
Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS)
[18], the Open Cloud Consortium (OCC) [19], the Open Grid
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Forum (OGF) [20], the Object Management Gropu (OMG)
[21], the Payment Card Industry (PCI) [22] or the Storage
Networking Industry Association (SNIA) [23], to name but
a few? None of these standards provides a comprehensive
level of complete security — there is no “one size covers all”,
which also presents a limitation. Even compliance with every
single standard will not guarantee complete security, which,
in turn, presents yet another disadvantage [24]. While the
universal implementation of such standards is often perceived
as a laudable aim, there is a fundamental ﬂaw where new
computing technology is concerned, namely that the pace
of evolution of new technology far outstrips the capability
of international standards organisations to keep up with the
changes [25]. In addition to which, latest estimates [26] suggest
that over 200,000 new malware threats are being developed
globally every day. We addressed this in earlier work [38][24].
B. Agency
Another issue arises where the principals of companies
utilise the principles of corporate governance [27][28], based
on agency theory. Jensen and Meckling [29] recognized that
while both principal and agent were utility maximizers, they
would not necessarily always have the same alignment of
goals. Further, the agent is more likely to have complete
knowledge, whereas the principal’s generally is incomplete,
and this can disadvantage the principal, or at least require
the expenditure of additional sums to try to safeguard the
position of the principal. Over time, agents, having complete
information, can make more decisions which do not fully
beneﬁt the principal, resulting in better utility for themselves.
It is very rare that the goals of principal and agent will
perfectly align, thus gaining mutual satisfaction, and this is the
fundamental ﬂaw agency theory highlights. The business en-
vironment is constantly changing, as are corporate governance
rules, with more emphasis now being placed on responsibility
and accountability [30], social conscience [31], sustainability
[32][33], resilience [34] and ethics [35]. We focus on this
challenge in this paper.
C. Complexity
Yet another issue is the increasing complexity which new
technology brings, and the ever increasing potential exposure
to risk brought about by a failure to grasp the signiﬁcance
of risks arising as a result of this increase in complexity
[36]. Traditional distributed information systems present a
multiplicity of technical layers, each of which must interact
with one or more other layers. Rather than simplifying this
process, cloud introduces yet more layers. There is Infras-
tructure, Platform and Software as a Service (IaaS, Paas and
SaaS), each of which can be operated by different actors.
Cloud brokers may also be involved, leading to yet more
layers, yet more complexity, yet more risk. Thus, there is a
need for a more agile, effective, approach to address these
issues. Another hurdle to be overcome is the cross disciplinary
nature of today’s corporate world. There is more cross-over
between disciplines than in the past, which means no single
discipline can effectively deal with all the issues arising from
the use of cloud technology [37]. Existing security paradigms
have not kept pace with the rapidity of development, change
and complexity in modern information ecosystems. There is a
danger that continued reliance on existing models will lead
to real weaknesses in systems which can be vulnerable to
exploitation. The challenge here is to develop a means of
addressing these weaknesses at a conceptual level which can be
demonstrably more robust than existing mechanisms currently
in place. We address this challenge in our future work.
III.
AGENCY VS STEWARDSHIP
In order to compare the relative merits of agency against
stewardship, it is necessary to understand more clearly what
each is and how they work. In the following sub sections, we
outline a deﬁnition of each and their limitations, followed by
a comparison.
A. The Agency Theory of Management
Management has been a focus of academic study for a
great many years. Initially, companies were managed by their
owners, which is still the model today for many ﬂedgling
small businesses. Over time, companies grew larger and larger,
resulting in their becoming too large for an individual to be
able to provide them with sufﬁcient capital to meet their needs
and cover their potential liabilities. The root of this problem
can be traced back to the modern corporation, as discussed by
Berle and Means [39], creating a separation between ownership
and control of wealth. While owners would generally prefer
to manage and control their own companies to maximize their
own utility for themselves, the large scale of the “modern
corporation” puts information management, massive capital
needs and economic obligations far beyond the reach of the
individual. This increase in size, and capital requirements,
led to companies being managed by professional managers
(agents) on behalf of the company owners (principals) which
led to the development of agency theory.
B. The Deﬁnition of Agency Theory
Jensen and Meckling [29] provide us with a deﬁnition
of agency theory: “We deﬁne an agency relationship as a
contract under which one or more persons (the principal(s))
engage another person (the agent) to perform some service on
their behalf which involves delegating some decision making
authority to the agent. If both parties to the relationship
are utility maximizers, there is good reason to believe that
the agent will not always act in the best interests of the
principal. The principal can limit divergences from his interest
by establishing appropriate incentives for the agent and by
incurring monitoring costs designed to limit the aberrant
activities of the agent. In addition in some situations it will
pay the agent to expend resources (bonding costs) to guarantee
that he will not take certain actions which would harm the
principal or to ensure that the principal will be compensated
if he does take such actions”.
Some examples of this relationship are:
•
The electorate (principal) and government (agent);
•
Shareholders (principal) and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
(agent);
•
Employers (principal) and employees (agent);
•
Contractee (principal) and contractor (agent).
There is not a single relationship within a company. Rather
the relationship cascades through the organisation and into
the outside world. Thus, for example, shareholder to chief
executive ofﬁcer (CEO), CEO to business managers, busi-
ness managers to staff, company to suppliers, customers to
company, cloud user to cloud service provider and every sub
contracted relationship.
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

C. The Limitations of Agency Theory
Jensen and Meckling recognised that while both principal
and agent were utility maximisers, they would not necessarily
always have the same alignment of goals. Further, the agent is
more likely to have complete knowledge, whereas the principal
generally has incomplete knowledge, and this can disadvantage
the principal, or at least require the expenditure of additional
sums to try to safeguard the position of the principals. Over
time, agents, having complete information, can make more
and more decisions which do not fully beneﬁt the principals,
resulting in better utility for themselves. It is very rare that the
goals of principal and agent will perfectly align, resulting in
mutual satisfaction, and this is both the fundamental insight
and ﬂaw in relying upon agency for successful delegation.
D. The Stewardship Theory of Management
The implications of agency theory, agents adhering to
the terms of their contract without necessarily achieving the
principal’s desired outcomes, are problematic and the literature
has considered the more principle-based stewardship approach.
This has been discussed over several decades, across a num-
ber of disciplines, such as accounting [40][41], management
research [42][43][44], information stewardship [45][46], where
Pym et al speciﬁcally focus on cloud stewardship, and in natu-
ral resource management [34], where Chapin et al demonstrate,
using a systems view, the beneﬁts of the stewardship approach,
as does Kao [47].
E. The Deﬁnition of Stewardship Theory
Davis [43] provides a good deﬁnition of stewardship the-
ory:
“In stewardship theory, the model of man is based
on a steward whose behavior is ordered such that pro-
organizational, collectivistic behaviors have higher utility than
individualistic self-serving behaviors. Given a choice between
self-serving behavior and pro-organizational behavior, a stew-
ard’s behavior will not depart from the interests of his or
her organization. A steward will not substitue or trade self-
serving behaviors for cooperative behaviors. Thus, even where
the interests of the steward and the principal are not aligned,
the steward places higher value on cooperation than defection
(terms found in game theory). Because the steward perceives
greater utility in cooperative behavior and behaves accord-
ingly, his or her behavior can be considered rational.
According to stewardship theory, the behavior of a steward
is collective, because the steward seeks to attain the objectives
of the organization (e.g., sales growth or proﬁtability). This
behavior in turn will beneﬁt principals such as outside owners
(through positive effects on proﬁts on dividends and share
prices) and also pricipals who are managerial superordinates,
because their objectives are furthered by the steward. Stew-
ardship theorists assume a strong relationship between the
success of the organization and the principal’s satisfaction. A
steward protects and maximises shareholders’ wealth through
ﬁrm performance, because, by so doing, the steward’s utility
functions are maximised”.
F. The Limitations of Stewardship Theory
The limitations found in agency theory do not apply in
stewardship theory. Since the utility of the steward is ﬁrmly
in alignment with the utility of the principals, this removes
the temptation to make decisions solely for the beneﬁt of the
steward. Any decision that beneﬁts the principals will also
beneﬁt the steward, and conversely any decision that beneﬁts
the steward will also beneﬁt the principals. The only proviso
here is the need to provide a sufﬁcient means to incentivise
the business manager to become a steward, rather than a self-
serving agent.
G. Stewardship Synergy with Cloud Ecosystems
There is a natural synergy between stewardship and cloud
ecosystems [48]. Cloud ecosystems are dependent on the
building and maintaining of robust relationships between all
the actors in the ecosystems [49]. This dependency arises
out of a need for sustainability, resilience and ethicality. In
order for a greater take up of cloud usage, there needs to
be trust and a mutual accountability between all the actors
involved. The multiplicity of actor relationships and this need
for responsibility and accountability means that the traditional
agency approach cannot succeed. The cloud ecosystem is too
rich an environment for the agency approach to be able to
succeed, whereas stewardship is tailor made to handle this level
of complexity [50].
The EU recognizes the existence of this complexity in
relationships, especially with regard to information security
in the cloud, and has produced a working paper [51] for
discussion on the subject. The ISO 27000 standards, while
they address the notion of security, are not yet sufﬁciently
well developed to fully cover these issues. There is no doubt
they will be expanded to cover these issues in time. They do
recognise the existence of corporate outsourcing, but as yet this
has not been fully adapted to cover all the modern extensions
of this mechanism, including off-shoring and cloud.
We believe a stewardship approach represents an ideal
mechanism to address the shortcomings which presently exist.
This approach may provide a useful means to help businesses
to adopt cloud more readily, to better reap the beneﬁts and
economies offered, while maintaining a better grasp of the
security implications associated with such a move.
H. Why the Time is Right for Change
The culmination of years of self-serving behaviour on the
part of managers has led to more extreme agent behaviour
[52]. Also, it leads to a short term view of running a business,
and this can work against the long term sustainability of
the business and impact adversely on resilience. It can also
lead to driving managers into behaving less ethically due to
these pressures to perform in the short term. Equally, the
agency behaviour of large scale shareholders has helped to
encourage this behaviour in managers, as these shareholders
are frequently looking for the best short term returns. Thus,
the effects of greed by both managers and certain shareholders
seem to take agency theory to a logical extreme. There is no
mechanism in agency theory to deal with the broad themes of
sustainability, resilience and ethicality. It is no coincidence that
this behaviour is particularly prevalent in the banking industry.
During the past 15 years, Enron and other scandals led to
the passing of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act [53] in the United States
of America (USA). In 2008, the banking crisis arrived, with
all the attendant fall out. There have been countless corporate
frauds of some magnitude, such as the Madoff scandal. There
is a perception among shareholders that the prescriptions to
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

deal with agency theory no longer work to reign in the worst
excesses of corporate management [52].
Indeed, in the ﬁve years prior to the ﬁnancial crisis of
2008, the annual report of the Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS)
made much of their stewardship of the business. In the 2007
annual report [54] published in spring 2008, the then Sir Fred
Goodwin used stewardship language in his Group Chief Execu-
tive’s review, stating “Our results demonstrate the resilience of
the Group in the face of testing circumstances.” These claims
of stewardship were clearly a sham, as that resilience rather
catastrophically ran out on 7 October 2008.
Corporate managers themselves are beginning to see the
effect their “fat cat” bonuses and incentive schemes are having
on shareholders, to the point that many are now voluntarily
agreeing to reduce or even give up their entitlement, especially
where the business does not perform so well. Shareholders are
looking for a return to “the good old days”, when corporate
managers were looked on as honourable people, who put
the interests of the business ﬁrst, and their own interests
second. In essence, they embodied many of the core values
of stewardship.
I.
Agency vs Stewardship Summary
In Table I, we can see the major differences between
agency and stewardship, the psychological and situational
mechanisms involved.
Since the utility of the steward is in alignment with the
utility of the principal, this removes the temptation to make
decisions solely for the beneﬁt of the steward. Any decision
that beneﬁts the principal will also beneﬁt the steward. The
stakeholders and relationships in a business are not, of course,
limited to managers and shareholders. Customers, suppliers,
government, audit ﬁrms and even the local communities are
stakeholders in the business. As noted above, in corporate
governance today, we see much more consideration being
given to the the notion of corporate social responsibility,
resilience, sustainability and an ethical approach to doing
business. There is certainly more pressure on managers in
today’s business world to take a more outward view of their
actions, potentially leading to a more responsible stewardship
approach. There is an ever growing appetite for more account-
ability in business, being driven by shareholders, government,
customers, suppliers, auditors and the general public alike.
TABLE I. A COMPARISON OF AGENCY AND STEWARDSHIP[43]
Agency Theory
Stewardship Theory
Model of man
Economic man
Self-actualizing man
Behaviour
Self-serving
Collective serving
Psychological Mechanism
Motivation
Lower order/economic
Higher order needs
needs (psychological,
(growth, achievement,
security, economic)
self-actualization)
Social Comparison
Extrinsic
Intrinsic
Other managers
Principal
Identiﬁcation
Low value committment
High value committment
Power
Institutional (legitimate,
Personal (expert, referent)
coercive, reward)
Situational Mechanism
Management Philosophy
Control oriented
Risk orientation
Control oriented
Involvement oriented
Time frame
Short term
Long term
Objective
Cost control
Performance enhancement
Cultural Differences
Individualism
Collectivism
High power distance
Low power distance
It is clear that the culmination of years of self-serving
behaviour on the part of business managers has led to agency
behaviour moving beyond its own limitations. It would seem
the fundamental ﬂaw with agency theory is that it cannot cope
with unbridled greed. Also, it leads to a short term view
of running a business, and this can work against the long
term sustainability of the business and impact adversely on
resilience. It can also lead to driving managers into behaving
less ethically due to these pressures to perform in the short
term. Equally, the agency behaviour of large scale shareholders
has helped to encourage this behaviour in managers as the
shareholders are frequently looking for the best short term
returns.
Thus, the effects of greed on both the part of managers and
shareholders push agency theory beyond its capabilities. There
is no mechanism in agency theory to deal with sustainability,
resilience and ethicality. At the time agency theory was de-
veloped, such concerns were of little relevance, but in today’s
business world, that is no longer the case.
In Table II, we can see how the major differences between
adopting agency and stewardship affect the relationship be-
tween the manager and the shareholders.
TABLE II. A PRINCIPAL-MANAGER CHOICE MODEL[43]
Principal’s Choice
Agent
Steward
Minimize Potential
Agent Acts
Costs
Opportunistically
Agent
Mutual Agency
Principal is Angry
Relationship
Principal is Betrayed
Manager’s
1
2
Choice
3
4
Principal Acts
Maximize Potential
Steward
Opportunistically
Performance
Manager is Frustrated
Mutual Stewardship
Relationship
Manager is Betrayed
Where manager and shareholder both adopt the agency
approach, there can be mutual satisfaction as long as their
respective goals are in alignment, but, as has already happened
in many cases, over time this can lead to a mutually destructive
relationship developing.
Where manager and shareholder adopt an opposite ap-
proach, with one adopting an agency approach and the other
adopting a stewardship approach, there will be a disparity
between the outcomes for each, regardless of which adopts
which position.
Where both manager and shareholder alike are prepared to
adopt a stewardship approach, their joint goals are much better
aligned, and the extreme pressures and destructive nature of the
short-term approach can be set aside. This mutually beneﬁcial
approach also serves to handle the additional requirements of
sustainability, resilience and ethicality for the business, which
will beneﬁt both parties. This allows for a long-term view to
be developed by all concerned, which will result in a far better
outcome for everyone.
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

IV.
IMPACT ON CLOUD SECURITY
So, the question is how does management approach impact
on cloud security?
Cloud service providers (CSP) have developed their cloud
business models using agency theory. Standard service level
agreement (SLA) offerings from the major players basically
ignore accountability, assurance, audit, compliance, integrity,
privacy and security, merely offering availability as the focus
of their measure of performance. The onus for measuring
and proving unacceptable performance is neatly passed to the
customer, which, with the inclusion of some suitably deeply
buried clauses in the small print, assures the buck invariably
never stops with the CSP.
Of course it is possible to negotiate an SLA to include
these missing measures, but you can be sure the cost of good
corporate lawyers and the increased service costs involved
will decimate any potential cost savings offered by the cloud
paradigm. Since such costs would, in any event, only be
affordable by the largest corporations, this puts most small
and medium-sized enterprises (SME) and sole traders at a
commercial disadvantage.
This is clearly worrying in today’s climate of increasing
punitive regulatory ﬁnes for privacy and security breaches and
the potential negative impact on business costs and the knock-
on negative impact on share values. Taken against a backdrop
of an ever expanding threat environment, it is clear that positive
action is needed globally.
Compliance with security standards can be viewed as an
agency reaction by company management to protect them from
being sued by their own principals for failing to implement
proper security. Since current standards are neither complete,
nor up to date, compliance with these standards cannot ensure
security [24].
In Table III, we can see how the Cloud User - CSP Choice
Model can lead to an improvement in this situation. CSPs can
no longer afford to “stick their heads in the cloud” when it
comes to information security. There is no “I” in team. Every
actor in the cloud ecosystem needs to contribute towards better
security for society as a whole. Growth in global security
breaches increased by more than twice the rate of global gross
domestic product (GDP) increase during 2014 [55]. Failure to
tackle this issue means this situation will only get worse.
TABLE III. CLOUD USER-CSP CHOICE MODEL[43]
Cloud User(Principal)’s Choice
Cloud User(Agent)
Cloud User(Steward)
Minimize Potential
CSP Acts
Costs
Opportunistically
CSP(Agent)
Mutual Agency
Cloud User is Angry
Relationship
Cloud User is Betrayed
Security is fair
Security is poor
CSP’s
1
2
Choice
3
4
Cloud User Acts
Maximize Potential
CSP(Steward)
Opportunistically
Performance
CSP is Frustrated
Mutual Stewardship
Relationship
CSP is Betrayed
Security is poor
Security is good
Every actor in the cloud ecosystem is responsible for
maintaining good security. That means in addition to top
management, middle and lower management must equally be
committed, as must all the company’s employees. Company
suppliers and company customers too must play their part.
A major component of the cloud ecosystem is of course the
service providers who provide every element of the system,
whether they are providing IaaS, PaaS, SaaS or some other
aspect “as a service”. All actors must be prepared to be ac-
countable for ensuring a proper level of security is maintained
and every relationship has the potential to be managed as an
agency or stewardship one. Service providers must be prepared
to ensure SLAs can be re-written to more fairly spread risk and
accountability between all the actors to ensure better security
of the whole. Company auditors must also recognise the risk
involved in the use of cloud systems and must be more vigilant
to ensure areas of weakness are highlighted and dealt with
properly in good time. The threat environment is not going to
improve for the better any time soon.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Thus, we can see that every member of the cloud ecosystem
needs to be more aware of their role within the system.
Each has their part to play. There are a great many potential
weaknesses in cloud ecosystems. While these can be identiﬁed
and addressed to ensure proper levels of security can be
achieved and maintained, there is no doubt that as long as the
agency approach persists, with all the actors pursuing their own
agendas, it will be extremely difﬁcult to achieve a satisfactory
level of security.
It is certainly the case that the extremes of agency be-
haviour can lead to lower levels of security being achieved
within cloud ecosystems. Conversely, a stewardship approach
can lead to a more robust security stance, which can provide
additional resilience and sustainability in the long run for
a company. Given the rapidly evolving nature of the threat
environment, it is no longer a question of if a company will
be compromised, but rather it is a question of when, and for
how much? There is also the question of how much damage
a compromise will do to the reputation of the company, and
the possible impact on the share price.
We would argue that a shift from agency behaviour to
a stewardship approach can go a long way to reducing the
major weaknesses inherent in an agency approach to security in
cloud ecosystems. We would also argue that following decades
of corporate excess brought about by the worst of agency
behaviour, it would be appropriate for corporate management
to consider taking a step change in their outlook towards a
stewardship based management style. This would not only
promote long term sustainability and resilience of companies,
but would lead to a more honest approach to information
security. We would further argue that this will require a
signiﬁcant change in attitude from the cloud service providers,
leading to the development of better security oriented SLAs,
which will improve the approach to security for all actors
within the cloud ecosystem.
The next step is to consider how a stewardship approach,
requiring a high level of trust, can be encouraged as seem-
ing practical rather than na¨ıve; this will inevitably require
increased transparency and the welcoming of high quality
monitoring by all sides.
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

REFERENCES
[1]
G. E. Moore, “Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits,”
Electronics, no. April 19, 1965, pp. 114-117.
[2]
FCA, “Fines Table - 2014,” 2014. [URL]: http://www.fca.org.uk/ﬁrms/
being-regulated/enforcement/ﬁnes retrieved: Jan 2015
[3]
P. Taylor, “FSA ﬁnes double to record 35m in 2009,” 2009. [URL]:
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/ﬁnance/newsbysector/banksandﬁnance/
6852385/FSA-ﬁnes-double-to-record-35m-in-2009.html retrieved: Jan
2015
[4]
P. Mell and T. Grance, “Effectively and Securely Using the Cloud
Computing Paradigm,” Tech. Rep., 2009.
[5]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Reﬂecting on Whether Checklists
Can Tick the Box for Cloud Security.” in Cloud Comp. Tech. Sci.
(CloudCom), 2014 IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Singapore: IEEE, 2014, pp. 1-6.
[6]
ARTS, “Association for Retail Technology Standards,” 2014. [URL]:
https://nrf.com/resources/retail-technology-standards-0
retrieved:
Jan
2015
[7]
CSA, “Security Guidance for Critical Areas of Focus in Cloud,” Cloud
Security Alliance, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[8]
CSO, “Cloud Standards,” 2013. [URL]: http://cloud-standards.org/ re-
trieved: Jan 2015
[9]
DMTF, “Distributed Management Task Force: Standards and Technol-
ogy,” 2014. [URL]: http://www.dmtf.org/standards retrieved: Jan 2015
[10]
ENISA, “A Security Analysis of Next Generation Web Standards,”
2013. [URL]: http://www.enisa.europa.eu/ retrieved: Jan 2015
[11]
ETSI, “European Telecommunications Standards Institute,” 2014.
[URL]: http://www.etsi.org/standards retrieved: Jan 2015
[12]
FedRamp, “FedRamp,” 2014. [URL]: http://cloud.cio.gov/fedramp re-
trieved: Jan 2015
[13]
CPA/CA, “Generally Accepted Privacy Principles,” Tech. Rep., 2009.
[14]
GICTF, “Global Inter-Cloud Technology Forum,” 2012. [URL]: http:
//www.gictf.jp/index\ e.html retrieved: Jan 2015
[15]
ISO.org, “ISO/IEC 27000:2009 - Information technology - Security
techniques - Information security management systems - Overview and
vocabulary,” ISO.org, Geneva, Switzerland, Tech. Rep., 2009.
[16]
ITU, “ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector,” 2014. [URL]:
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/publications/Pages/default.aspx
retrieved:
Jan 2015
[17]
NIST, “NIST Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information
Systems and Organizations,” Natioinal Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology, Gaithersburg, MD, Tech. Rep. February, 2012.
[18]
OASIS, “Organization for the Advancement of Structured Informa-
tion Standards,” 2014. [URL]: https://www.oasis-open.org/standards re-
trieved: Jan 2015
[19]
OCC,
“Open
Cloud
Consortium,”
2014.
[URL]:
http:
//opencloudconsortium.org/working-groups/ retrieved: Jan 2015
[20]
OGF, “Open Grid Forum,” Tech. Rep.
[21]
OMG-CC, “Object Management Group,” 2014. [URL]: http://www.
cloud-council.org/ retrieved: Jan 2015
[22]
P. S. S. Council, “Data Security Standard Requirements and Security
Assessment Procedures,” PCI Security Standards Council, Tech. Rep.
November, 2013.
[23]
SNIA, “Cloud Data Management Interface,” Tech. Rep., 2010.
[24]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Compliance with Standards, Assurance
and Audit: Does this Equal Security?” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Secur. Inf.
Networks.
Glasgow: ACM, 2014, pp. 77-84.
[25]
G. T. Willingmyre, “Standards at the Crossroads,” StandardView, vol. 5,
no. 4, 1997, pp. 190–194.
[26]
Kaspersky, “Global Corporate IT Security Risks : 2013,” Tech. Rep.
May, 2013.
[27]
S. Ross, “The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal’s Problem,”
Am. Econ. Rev., vol. 63, no. 2, 1973, pp. 134-139.
[28]
M. Eisenhardt, “Agency Theory : An Assessment and Review,” Acad.
Manag. Rev., vol. 14, no. 1, 1989, pp. 57-74.
[29]
M. C. Jensen and W. H. Meckling, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial
Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,” J. ﬁnanc. econ.,
vol. 3, no. 4, 1976, pp. 305-360.
[30]
M. Huse, “Accountability and Creating Accountability: a Framework
for Exploring Behavioural Perspectives of Corporate Governance,” Br. J.
Manag., vol. 16, no. s1, Mar. 2005, pp. S65-S79.
[31]
A. Gill, “Corporate Governance as Social Responsibility: A Research
Agenda,” Berkeley J. Int’l L., vol. 26, no. 2, 2008, p. 452.
[32]
C. Ioannidis, D. Pym, and J. Williams, “Sustainability in information
stewardship: Time Preferences, Externalities and Social Co-Ordination,”
in WEIS 2013, 2013, pp. 1-24.
[33]
A. Kolk, “Sustainability, Accountability and Corporate Governance:
Exploring Multinationals’ Reporting Practices,” Bus. Strateg. Environ.,
vol. 17, no. 1, 2008, pp. 1-15.
[34]
I. F. Stuart Chapin, G. P. Koﬁnas, and C. Folke, Principles of Ecosys-
tem Stewardship: Resilience-Based Natural Resource Management in a
Changing World.
Springer, 2009.
[35]
S. Arjoon, “Corporate Governance: An Ethical Perspective,” J. Bus.
Ethics, vol. 61, no. 4, Nov. 2005, pp. 343-352.
[36]
E. Zio, “Reliability engineering: Old problems and new challenges,”
Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf., vol. 94, no. 2, Feb. 2009, pp. 125-141.
[37]
M. Dlamini, J. Eloff, and M. Eloff, “Information security: The moving
target,” Comput. Secur., vol. 28, no. 3-4, May 2009, pp. 189-198.
[38]
B. Duncan, D. J. Pym, and M. Whittington, “Developing a Conceptual
Framework for Cloud Security Assurance,” in Cloud Comp. Tech. Sci.
(CloudCom), 2013 IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Bristol: IEEE, 2013, pp. 120-125.
[39]
A. A. Berle and G. C. Means, The Modern Corporation and Private
Property, 1932.
[40]
F. y. Gjesdal, “Accounting for Stewardship,” J. Account. Res., vol. 19,
no. 1, 1981, pp. 208-231.
[41]
V. O’Connell, “Reﬂections on Stewardship Reporting,” Account. Hori-
zons, vol. 21, no. 2, Jun. 2007, pp. 215-227.
[42]
L. Donaldson, “Stewardship Theory or Agency Theory: CEO Gover-
nance and Shareholder Returns,” Aust. J. Manag., vol. 16, no. June 1991,
1991, pp. 49-65.
[43]
J. H. Davis, F. D. Schoorman, and L. Donaldson, “Toward a Stewardship
Theory of Management,” Acd. Mgt. Rev., vol. 22, no. 1, 1997, pp. 20-47.
[44]
C. E. Crutchley and R. S. Hansen, “A Test of the Agency Theory of
Managerial Ownership, Corporate Leverage, and Corporate Dividends,”
Financ. Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, Jan. 1989, pp. 36-46.
[45]
P. S. Licker, “Application Stewardship: A User Responsibility Approach
to Post-Implementation Application Performance,” MIS Q., 2010, pp.
151-157.
[46]
D. Pym, M. Sadler, S. Shiu, and M. C. Mont, “Information Stewardship
in the Cloud : A Model-Based Approach,” Proc. CloudComp, 2011, pp.
1-20.
[47]
R. Kao, Stewardship Based Economics.
World Scientiﬁc, 2007.
[48]
A. Baldwin, D. Pym, M. Sadler, and S. Shiu, “Information Stewardship
in Cloud Ecosystems: Towards Models, Economics, and Delivery,” 2011
IEEE Third Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. Technol. Sci., Nov. 2011, pp.
784–791.
[49]
D. Pym, M. Sadler, S. Shiu, and M. C. Mont, “Information Stewardship
in Cloud Computing,” Int. J. Serv. Sci. Manag. Eng. Technol., vol. 1,
no. 1, 2010, pp. 50-67.
[50]
C. Ioannidis, D. Pym, and J. Williams, “Fixed Costs , Investment
Rigidities , and Risk Aversion in Information Security : A Utility-
theoretic Approach,” 2013, pp. 1-16.
[51]
EU, “Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in Europe,”
2012. [URL]: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=
SWD:2012:0271:FIN:EN:PDF retrieved: Jan 2015
[52]
J. Harris, “Whats Wrong with Executive Compensation? Jared,” J. Bus.
Ethics, vol. 85, no. 1, 2009, pp. 1-22.
[53]
SOX, “Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002,” p. 66, 2002. [URL]: news.ﬁndlaw.
com/hdocs/docs/gwbush/sarbanesoxley072302.pdf retrieved: Jan 2015
[54]
RBS, “Royal Bank of Scotland Group Annual Report Year Ending
2007,” Royal Bank of Scotland, London, Tech. Rep., 2007.
[55]
PwC, “The Global State of Information Security,” PwC, Tech.
Rep., Jan. 2015. [URL]: http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/consulting-services/
information-security-survey/download.jhtml retrieved: Jan 2015
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

