Guidelines for Increasing the Adoption of Cloud Computing within SMEs  
 
Marius MARIAN 
Department of Computers and Information Technology 
University of Craiova 
Craiova, Romania 
marius.marian@cs.ucv.ro 
Ileana HAMBURG 
Institut Arbeit und Technik 
Westfälische Hochschule 
Gelsenkirchen, Germany 
hamburg@iat.eu
 
 
Abstract — This document is part of a larger effort meant to 
define a set of guidelines useful for the fast adoption of cloud 
computing and social media technologies within small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs) in European Union. The topic 
under scrutiny is how SMEs should approach and what they 
should do when embracing these new technologies, and also 
what to know about their potential impact on the SMEs 
businesses.  
Keywords: SME, guidelines, cloud computing.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cloud computing is not a new technology, but rather a 
natural evolution of efficient using and combining several 
modern technologies.  Computing power, data storage and 
internetworking resources have all been put into a novel 
context and consequently, transformed into services (either 
separately or taken together). The paradigm in cloud 
computing is based on an old commercial approach – on-
demand pay per use – in which you better rent a service for a 
specific period of time instead of buying the support 
infrastructure (utilities included), building a solution and 
administering it all by yourself.  The cloud service providers 
(CSPs) promise reliable and configurable resources, made 
available promptly to consumers with a minimum effort and 
involvement on their behalf.  
Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) are – as everyone 
else is – interested in reducing costs, and remaining 
competitive. Also, green computing is getting momentum 
and SMEs are targeting the issue too.  Cloud computing is 
able to offer solutions to these aspects obviously for a price; 
the pay per use approach encourages a responsible behavior 
and maximum efficiency for what concerns consumption of 
resources and energy. In order to decide whether to pay that 
price and go all the way through, SMEs need guidance and 
knowledge of what are the best practices when approaching 
cloud computing technologies. This paper is about a work in 
progress on this topic emphasizing the importance of cloud 
computing for SMEs and the necessity to provide SMEs 
decision makers with guidelines and best practices. 
II. 
MOTIVATION 
SMEs are socially and economically important, since 
they represent 99% of all enterprises in the EU, employ more 
than 90 million people, and contribute to entrepreneurship 
and innovation [1], [2]. In Germany alone, there are about 
3.2 million SMEs, most of them regionally anchored. 
Significant international, social and economic changes like 
globalization, market competition, technological innovation, 
the European Union enlargement, and particularly, the last 
financial crises affect the situation of SMEs; they need 
innovative and sustainable approaches to survive and be 
competitive. But most of European SMEs have shortage of 
financial resources and of skilled staff, no sustainable ICT 
(Information and Communication Technologies) strategies, 
have difficulties with the management of missing 
knowledge, and a low transfer of knowledge to improve the 
effectiveness of their work tasks, have not enough 
knowledge of policies of communication and cooperation in 
research and production. SME staff is often frustrated of 
constantly missing out on critical internal information due to 
complicated existing collaboration tools requiring users a lot 
of work to search out information necessary to their daily 
work tasks and other needs [3], [4]. 
Last developments in cloud computing and a most 
structured approach to social media in the work place can 
change this situation. The managers can select employees to 
form individual teams for given business activities, the teams 
can work together with a greater efficiency, and employees 
can seek expert advice across departments, share, and 
download updated documents. The real-time collaboration 
supported by the new approach of cloud computing and 
social media enables individuals and teams to reduce the 
time previously wasted searching through inboxes or in file 
servers for important documents or content. Two studies 
carried out in Germany (within the European-funded projects 
ReadiSME – http://www.readisme.com, and NetKnowing 
2.0 – http://www.netknowing.com) show that about 70% of 
SMEs use standard software what is an advantage because 
most services offered by CSPs are standard.  
But in connection with Software as a Service (SaaS – see 
also section III) [5], the results of the studies show that 30% 
of ICT sector SMEs use SaaS, 75% of SMEs from other 
sectors did not have plans for using SaaS till the end of 2011. 
Some causes that are often mentioned are that in many 
SMEs, particularly small ones, there is only one decision 
maker, there are security problems of outsourcing (85%), 
there is a lack of trust in what concerns the CSP (75%), there 
are concerns related to the integration of SaaS with the 
existing ICT in the company (30%), there is no support for 
large bandwidth Internet connectivity in the company 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

(81.2%), there are no precise rules in the company about the 
issue of social media and social networks. 
European Network and Information Security Agency 
(ENISA) is also conducting a security risk assessment of 
cloud computing technologies aimed at giving advice to 
SME's on the most important risks in adopting cloud 
computing technologies, as well as ways to address those 
risks. The timeframe of the survey was prolonged from 2010 
to 2012 and will investigate in deep the actual needs, 
requirements and expectations of the SMEs for cloud 
computing services. Up to now the ENISA survey [1] 
(published and updated regularly) focused on topics such as 
the driving forces towards adopting the cloud, the size and 
the geo-location of the company, the cloud models, types, 
and services of potential interest, the possible use of multiple 
CSPs, the recovery options in case of disasters and incidents, 
and obviously the main concerns facing such a paradigm 
shift.  
III. 
CLOUD COMPUTING SERVICES FOR SMES 
In literature, there are clearly delimited three main 
classes of cloud computing services. Additionally, there exist 
other newly-defined classes that appeared as variants or 
reinterpretations of the main classes. Therefore, we have 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service 
(PaaS), Software as a Service (SaaS). All these services are 
available remotely via some communication channel and will 
require a payment for use (even though there are some free 
services available, especially in what concerns e-mail and 
social media web-based applications). 
The first service made available by most CSPs was IaaS. 
In practice, it is a complete virtual machine running a 
specific operating system.  For SMEs the suspicion regarding 
the multi-tenancy/sharing of resources is alleviated since the 
level of control and the possibility to define perimeters of 
resources among tenants is easier to achieve with this class 
of service. As said, the fundamental unit in IaaS is the virtual 
machine that is in most cases a server. A CSP may provide 
depending on the specific business of a customer four 
subclasses of IaaS: vendor-managed private cloud, dedicated 
hosting, hybrid hosting, and cloud hosting.  
In a vendor-managed private cloud, the client rents a 
number of physical servers placed in the same area of the 
data center so that they are as separate as possible with other 
hardware and internetworking. This IaaS configuration is the 
most expensive but also it is considered the most secure. The 
flexibility and scalability of the solution are poor therefore 
an SME should be able to estimate and know in advance the 
needed infrastructure. All changes up the scale are slow and 
require interaction and timely scheduling with the CSP. This 
scenario works best for large enterprises building their own 
data centers and not for SMEs. 
Dedicated hosting is for clients requiring one or more 
physical servers anywhere within a data center, available on-
demand. In this service configuration, even though the 
hardware and internetworking is mixed with other servers 
from the data center, a particular SME will not share its 
rented servers with any other tenant in the CSP cloud. This is 
less expensive than the previous configuration and is both 
scalable and flexible as long as the CSP provisioning of 
resources is well handled for the peak periods. 
An intermediate service configuration between the two 
above is hybrid hosting. With it, a client pays for a mix of 
costly physical servers (they may be occasionally required to 
be located in the same perimeter within the CSP’s data 
center) and some inexpensive virtual server instances. The 
sensitive data and the applications of the SME run on the 
physical servers, while the rest of the data is stored in the 
virtual servers. The solution is flexible and dynamically 
scalable when it comes to renting more virtual server 
instances during peak hours. Physical servers may be rented 
but only if the customer accepted them to be anywhere 
within the CSP’s data center. 
The last IaaS configuration is what everyone expected 
from the cloud, technical and environmental efficiency. Lots 
of virtual server instances available on-demand with a high 
degree of scalability and flexibility in use, and at a very low 
price. The reverse of the medal is that a customer shares all 
the hardware and internetworking resources with the other 
tenants. A security and privacy perimeter can be achieved 
only at virtual server instance. It is the best commercial offer 
for SMEs and start-ups. SMEs may want to consider it since 
they do not have the capital and (perhaps, they are not 
willing to invest in) the know-how for the hardware-software 
infrastructure and management. Start-up companies find 
themselves in a happy scenario with the cloud since this 
could be a perfect business incubator at a very low initial 
investment cost. 
PaaS is the second class of services in which SMEs may 
acquire only the specific platform they need. It is an 
extension of the IaaS to accommodate the middleware and to 
improve the performance in using it. It may be for example a 
web development platform containing the web/application 
server, the integrated development environment, the 
associated 
database 
and 
all 
additional 
utilities 
for 
development and testing. The tenants are sharing a large part 
of the middleware, and the CSPs can no longer distinguish 
some clear perimeters among them. Problems typically 
appear when the middleware is not as robust as expected or 
the shared databases are not well configured. The downside 
of this happening is that one customer may influence 
negatively the quality of the PaaS observed by the others.  
Many European-based SMEs and start-up companies in 
the field of IT development and research may be interested in 
renting such highly customized platforms at acceptable low 
costs. Highly interested could be for example start-up firms 
working to deliver mobile applications for the extremely 
crowded market of smart mobile devices. They could then 
use this cloud service and produce and eventually sell their 
own on-line SaaS applications. Careful attention should be 
paid by the SMEs to service level agreements (SLA), to 
protection mechanisms enabled by the CSP for its tenants, 
and to business continuity (BCP) and disaster recovery plans 
(DRP). 
SaaS is the third main class of services, and with it CSPs 
offer SMEs the possibility of acquiring on-demand usage-
time for different types of software services. This includes a 
wide range of applications: office tools, graphic utilities, data 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

storage facilities, etc. SaaS is dynamically scalable, device 
independent (giving no access to the hardware for the tenant) 
and most of the applications are collaborative, allowing thus 
multiple users to share documents and work on them 
concurrently. Adding social media services through SaaS can 
only enhance this collaboration. The most common problems 
with this type of service are generated by the authentication 
mechanism, the management of authentication credentials by 
end users, the access control, the lack of securely tunneled 
communications, or intrinsic faults with the web applications 
used.  
A. Advantages 
They can be summarized in remote accessibility, 
flexibility, 
scalability, 
security, 
and 
environmentally 
friendly. Flexibility and scalability means that SMEs will 
only pay and use the resources they need and for the time 
they need them. CSP promise that provisioning and de-
provisioning of resources will be transparent and easy to 
handle. Then, accessibility means that the business of the 
SME is no longer restricted to a particular location. Actually, 
for certain areas of business this is even more beneficial for 
the employees could work remotely and thus telecommuting 
and contributing to green computing. Most internal company 
servers use only approximately 30% of their capacity while 
in a large cloud data center the percentage of utilization goes 
up to circa 80% [8]. On a European scale this means that 
energy and consequently, carbon footprint reductions can be 
made. Furthermore, recent research in the field of 
microprocessors (e.g. Intel Atom, AMD Geode, VIA C7, 
etc.) proves that cloud computing users may use lower-
power computers that are performing sufficiently to run 
cloud applications, thus cutting down the electricity bills and 
individual carbon emission footprints. Security as strange as 
it may sound has now a better chance to be well 
implemented (right from the start) than in any previous 
computing approach. In fact, Security as a Service is gaining 
momentum 
since 
it 
may 
represent 
a 
worldwide 
implementation of security standards, frameworks and 
regulations that will eventually minimize the existing 
security implementation differences or absence. 
B. Concerns and challenges 
First concern for SMEs is raised by the multi-tenancy 
property of the cloud. As we have seen, there are ways to 
counter 
this 
concern 
by 
acquiring 
only 
particular 
configurations of IaaS. Then, there is the performance and 
quality of the services offered by the CSP. On this issue, 
SMEs adopting the cloud into their business should carefully 
elaborate on the SLAs signed with the CSP. Another security 
concern is that users with administrative privileges on the 
side of the CSP might take an unauthorized look at their data. 
Procedures, frameworks, agreements and audits may 
facilitate a reasonable level of trust between SMEs and CSP. 
Associated with this last point are also de-provisioning of 
data and the way in which data are handled when SMEs are 
leaving the cloud plus the data geo-location. Data geo-
location might create legal and compliance problems for 
SMEs when the CSP is not clear about where they have their 
facilities. A Buy European approach would settle in a 
positive manner this issue in tandem with a stimulus offered 
to CSPs to have their installations on EU territory only [9].  
IV. 
CLOUD ADOPTION RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SMES 
In what follows we will try to delineate some of the 
major areas of interest for SMEs when approaching the 
cloud. This set of cloud adoption guidelines that will be 
devised for European SMEs are based on the Security 
Guidance of CSA (Cloud Security Alliance) [10], ENISA 
cloud analyses, and Jericho Forum commandments [11], and 
will further elaborate on other areas of interest for SMEs. 
The cited documents are broad and thorough analyses of the 
subject. We believe that SMEs in particular would be better 
supported and encouraged to take advantage of the cloud if 
there were some specific documents containing the best 
practices and the guidelines for adopting the cloud into their 
business.  Furthermore, standards, frameworks, benchmarks 
and regulations at EU level would help refining these 
guidelines and perhaps, they will also benefit from the ideas 
contained in these guidelines. CSA contributions in what 
concerns cloud security and privacy (Trusted Cloud 
initiative, Cloud Control Matrix, and Certification of Cloud 
Security Knowledge) are giving hints that this is the 
direction to be followed. 
European SMEs are small in number of people employed 
(up to a maximum of 250 persons). It goes without saying 
that they would primarily invest their capital in improving 
their business process (production, services, etc.) and they do 
not always have the know-how to manage in-house the IT 
support infrastructure. In fact, ENISA found out that 
European SMEs are interested first of all in avoiding capital 
expenditure in hardware, software, IT support, information 
security (68.1% of the respondents). On the second place 
were the scalability and flexibility of required IT resources 
(63.9%), and on the third position were business continuity 
and disaster recovery capabilities (52.8%). ENISA survey 
proved that the highest percentage of SMEs willing to move 
into   
The SMEs decision makers must understand well and 
fast what differences exist among different cloud computing 
solutions available on the market, what their costs are, what 
the security and privacy impacts are, and how their 
availability and acquisition may add value to their particular 
business. Decision factors must also decide what really 
matters for the SME business from a data security and 
privacy stand point and if there are any guarantees from the 
CSP to ensure data security and privacy (if possible, 
cryptography should be ubiquitous in the cloud or negotiated 
when performance reasons demand so, such that all data at 
rest or in transit be encrypted). This preliminary analysis 
must be performed just before initiating any other step. A 
related questionnaire for the decision makers would greatly 
simplify putting the things in context and providing some 
quick analytical results.  
Certifications and benchmarking of the various CSPs 
would also be helpful. CSP transparency and openness for 
external auditing of their internal processes is also a sign of 
trust and a great control mechanism for SMEs. Auditing 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

preserves the level of trust of customers, and SMEs should 
investigate negotiate and pay attention to the terms agreed in 
contracts and SLAs concerning audit, monitoring, event log 
reviews, physical inspection of the CSP facilities, etc. 
Special attention will be paid within the guidelines also 
to the legal and compliance implications of moving into the 
cloud for the SMEs. Proposals must be drafted towards a set 
of common practices to be followed when signing contracts 
and 
accepting 
SLAs. 
Awareness 
and 
dissemination 
instruments (social media) will be used to publish and bring 
into discussion the findings and real-case SME cloud 
migration scenarios. Cloud migration must be investigated 
not only at the first adoption of the paradigm, but also for 
cases when an SME decides to switch and move from one 
CSP to another. This investigation has legal, financial (on 
short and long terms) and technical implications related to 
deleting the data from the former cloud. Third trusted party 
audits and confidentiality agreements must be enforced. 
ENISA found out that SMEs are mainly concerned with 
confidentiality of the corporate data, privacy, integrity and 
availability of services and data. It is important that SMEs 
rest assured by the CSP that their data will be private, 
available, and untouched. SMEs will have to answer 
themselves if they are ready to plan and enforce business 
continuity in cooperation with the CSP. Incident response 
and disaster recovery are related topics for which both CSPs 
and SMEs will have to agree upon and put in practice. A 
collection of best practices related to these topics will be 
shared among SMEs.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
It is expected that the European SMEs will lead the 
global economic trend of adopting cloud computing 
paradigm within their daily businesses. EU Commission 
should further investigate through ENISA the need for a 
clear legislation in the field of cloud computing as a public 
utility of the following decade. Thus, a European Network of 
Clouds can be built upon, and also, participating third party 
CSPs could certify their services on various levels of 
compliance with that EU cloud legislation. This would 
encourage SMEs since trust is the base for economic 
development and creating new opportunities. 
We strongly believe that the cloud adoption by SMEs 
could be further accelerated by establishing at least a set of 
guidelines including some recommendations and a book of 
good practices at European level. In our research, we have 
not found anything similar so far. 
Our next effort is thus aimed to developing a short 
practical guide for using cloud computing and social media 
within European SMEs and to discuss these guidelines by 
conducting focused interviews with all the partners from the 
NetKnowing 2.0 project. A second step will be to 
disseminate these guidelines at European level also by using 
the social media-based platform developed within the same 
project and to organize moderated forums for discussing 
(and further improving) the guidelines and other issues 
concerning this topic. Last step is trying to apply the results 
and findings in SMEs from project partner countries and to 
identify specific areas of organizational improvements both 
within European-based CSPs and SMEs consuming the 
cloud-based services. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the strategic grant 
POSDRU/89/1.5/S/61968, Project ID61968 (2009), co-
financed by the European Social Fund within the Sectorial 
Operational Program Human Resources Development 2007 
– 2013. 
The studies have been carried out within the innovation-
transfer projects ReadiSME and NetKnowing 2.0 supported 
by the EU LLP Leonardo da Vinci sub-programme.  
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Hamburg, “Supporting cross-border knowledge transfer 
through virtual teams, communities and ICT tools”,  in Robert 
J. Howlett (ed.) “Innovation through knowledge transfer”, 
Springer, 2011, Berlin, Germany, pp. 23 – 29. 
[2] G. Attwell, D. Dirckinck-Holmfeld, P. Fabian, A. Kárpáti, P. 
Littig, “E-Learning”, in “e-Learning in Europe – Results and 
Recommendations”, 
Thematic 
Monitoring 
under 
the 
European Union Leonardo da Vinci Programme, 2003, Bonn, 
Germany. 
[3] T. Hall, I. Hamburg, “Readiness for knowledge management, 
methods und environments for innovation”, in Emma O'Brien, 
Seamus Clifford, Mark Southern, (eds.): “Knowledge 
management for process, organizational and marketing 
innovation: tools and methods”, Hershey Information Science 
Reference, 2011, pp. 1 – 15.  
[4] I. Hamburg, “eLearning 2.0 and social, practice-oriented 
communities to improve knowledge in companies”, in Ortiz 
Bellot, G., Sasaki, H., Ehmann, M. & Dini, C. (eds.), 
Proceedings of The Fifth International Conference on Internet 
and Web Applications and Services (ICIW 2010), May 9 – 
15, 2010, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 411 – 416. 
[5] T. Haselmann, G. Vossen, “Software-as-a-Service in Small 
and Medium Enterprises: An Empirical Attitude Assessment”, 
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Web 
Information Systems Engineering (WISE 2011), Springer, 
October 12 – 14,  2011, Sydney, Australia. 
[6] ENISA, “An SME Perspective on Cloud Computing – A 
Survey,” 
November 
2009, 
available 
on-line 
at 
http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/risk-
management/files/deliverables/cloud-computing-sme-survey.  
[7] R. Harms, M. Yamartino, “The economics of the cloud for the 
EU public sector”, Microsoft white paper, November 2010, 
available 
at 
http://www.microsoft.eu/Portals 
/0/Document/EU_Public_Sector_Cloud_Economics_A4.pdf . 
[8] J. Stanley, K.G. Brill, J. Koomey, „Four Metrics Define Data 
Center Greennes”, Uptime Institute white paper, 2007, 
available at http://uptimeinstitute.org/wp pdf/(TUI3009F) 
FourMetricsDefineDataCenter.pdf . 
[9] F. Etro, „The Economic Impact of Cloud Computing on 
Business Creation, Employment and Output in Europe”, 
International Think-Tank on Innovation and Competition 
(INTERTIC), Review of Business and Economics, 2009, 
available at http://www.intertic.org/Policy Papers/CC.pdf 
[10] Cloud Security Alliance, „Security Guidance for Critical 
Areas of Focus in Cloud Computing”, versiunea 3.0, 2011, 
available 
at 
https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/guidance/ 
csaguide.v3.0.pdf 
[11] Jericho Forum, „Jericho Forum Commandments”, available at 
http://www.opengroup.org/jericho/commandments_v1.2.pdf
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

