Cloud Computing Services Potential Analysis 
An integrated model for evaluating Software as a Service 
 
Giuseppe Ercolani 
Universidad de Murcia - Facultad de Comunicación y Documentación 
Campus Universitario de Espinardo - 30100 - Murcia, Spain 
e-mail: giuseppe.ercolani@um.es 
 
Abstract— This paper address, in a practical and integrated 
model, a possible solution of issues concerning the Software as 
a Service (SaaS) introduction and evaluation. A selective top-
down analysis is proposed to guide the overall assessment. The 
construction of the Potential Adoption Index (PAI), in the last 
stage of the process, aims to facilitate the evaluation and 
comparison process of the acceptance of this technology by 
evaluating: the functional requirements, the total cost of 
ownership (TCO) and the related concerns and benefits from 
technical and business perspective. 
Keywords-Cloud Computing; SaaS; adoption; evaluation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, the term cloud computing has been used 
to identify an evolution paradigm in the computer industry. 
This refers to a set of advanced technologies that affect 
the focus of the organizations and businesses in plan, 
management and use of its technology infrastructure in the 
near future.  
As noted by [1] the base of the cloud computing is the 
evolution of three phenomena: virtualization, grid computing 
and web services  
The increasing bandwidth availability of Internet 
connection and the accessibility from mobile and portable 
devices has encouraged the spread of applications created for 
this environment and the access to available resources 
exclusively through internet (both often offered free of 
charge for a basic or private usage). 
In this way everyone can connect to a website with a 
browser, fill out a form to access the service, select the 
available options, the most convenient form of payment and 
start working with the program or service contracted, without 
requiring a server, Information Technology (IT) staff, 
software licenses, installing applications or arrange a 
backups strategy. 
Still, despite the availability of SaaS solution, the main 
question is that if it is convenient to adopt a solution based 
on cloud computing. 
This article examines the pros and cons described in 
scientific literature and the potentials that this form of 
computing may have inside an enterprise. 
The topic of this research may be found in the line of 
"Technology adoption and implementation research" in the 
business-technology framework defined by [2]. 
An integrated model for calculating the Potential 
Adoption Index (PAI) will be presented in order to quantify 
the benefits and disadvantages of cloud computing adoption. 
The PAI, which includes the evaluation of features, 
benefits and concerns from the business perspective and the 
technical fit from cloud experts’ viewpoint, indicates the 
overall adoption utility level. 
The structure of the paper is as follows. Firstly, the term 
cloud computing will be referenced. Then an integrated 
model analysis is presented in three stages. The computation 
of the PAI synthesizing, in a numerical result, benefits and 
disadvantages of adopting a cloud computing SaaS solution. 
A numerical example is presented in order to explain the 
construction of the PAI and the interrelation between the 
different elements of the model. 
II. 
TOP-DOWN SELECTIVE ANALYSIS 
There are a multitude of definitions of cloud computing 
as in [2], [3], and [4] the one taken as a reference for this 
paper is the one proposed by [5]. 
The proposed evaluation model for the development of 
the PAI, consists of three consecutive steps, related to each 
other, in order to consider: 
A. a functional analysis, that explores the features of the 
SaaS solution the company would like to implement/ 
deploy or integrate; 
B. an economic analysis, that quantifies the costs of 
implementation and maintenance; 
C. an attribute analysis, that evaluates characteristics, 
benefits and concern also needed for the PAI 
calculation. 
The top down process, guide the reader from a rough 
overall assessment to a more defined quantification of the 
analytical aspects of the Saas analyzed. 
 
A. Functional analysis: identifying cloud candidate  
Primarily the company must decide which business 
functions want to move into the cloud and the type of data 
that will be stored and shared in order to be able to monitor, 
develop, analyze and use these actions for their growth, 
implementing services that meet business needs. 
If there is at least one alternative to consider in order to 
facilitate the comparison between different products “white 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

papers”, reviews or comparisons papers, that examine the 
functional features of the programs offered by the providers 
could be downloaded. 
In addition, most of the SaaS providers, normally, offer 
full product evaluation for a limited period of time which 
facilitates the analysis and comparison without any 
installation or additional cost. Other providers allow some 
interaction with the support staff, via email, chat or phone for 
free. This helps the evaluation of the products offered and to 
clarify the software functionalities. 
For 
an 
adequacy 
SaaS 
selection, 
the 
software 
functionalities are first inspected because some of the 
features of Cloud Computing do not lend themselves to an 
easy customization [3], [6], and multitenant application 
customization should be made through configuration [7]. 
In this stage, the suggested methodology (see Table I) 
include to: 
• 
Identify one or more Saas solutions available on the 
market for the specific aspect that the company 
would like to implement (Collaboration, CRM, ERP, 
SFA, etc.); 
• 
Identify the functionalities that are required for the 
company, tagging each of them with a label 
“Required”, “Nice to have” and “Not required”; 
• 
After having investigated the specific functionality 
in any specific SaaS or using professional experts for 
the specific software, mark each of the functionality 
attribute with a tag indicating if is it available: 
 
“Yes”;  
 
“Yes but need to be configured”;  
 
“Yes can be customized”;  
 
“Not Available”  
Candidates for the functional evaluation are key users, 
managers-owners and product experts. 
TABLE I.  
FUNTIONAL SUITABILITY TABLE IN SUPPORT OF 
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS WITH QUALITATIVE ORDINAL SCALE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Each level of suitability will have an immediate 
repercussion at this stage (e.g., if a required functionality is 
not available imply the rejection of the Saas solution) or in 
will be penalized/rewarded in the further assessment (e.g., in 
the economic analysis with integration and customization 
costs evaluation). 
The main purpose of this process is to verify the overall 
fit of the analyzed SaaS package to meet the functional 
requirements needed by the company. 
This relatively simple process helps formal selection of a 
SaaS without any deep or wide expertise in Cloud 
Computing. This aims at reducing the number of candidates 
by selecting some of them very quickly based on a brief 
review of key functionality and company needs. This also 
keeps additional costs to a minimum level and stays in line 
with specific characteristics of cloud computing. 
At the end of the first stage will be one or more programs 
offered as SaaS that should be at least functionally 
compatible with the essential requirements of the company, 
with an explicit level of integration and customization 
required for its adoption. The essential requirement 
identified, which will need configuration or customization, 
will be economically estimated in the next phase. 
 
B. Economic analysis: identifying the costs 
An assessment could be obtained using the Total Cost of 
Ownership (TCO) formulation proposed by [8] based on the 
combination of three costs types, in order to determine the 
financial impact of SaaS adoption. 
Alternatively the proposed TCO method in [9], where a 
mathematical modeling of cost types is introduced along 
with a case study, could be used for the same purpose. 
The identified economic values will be evaluated within 
the financial dimension in the next phase (attribute analysis). 
 
C. Attribute analysis and the Potential Adoption Index 
(PAI) calculation 
The evaluation of attributes as features, benefits and risks 
associated with a SaaS solution will be analyzed in order to 
calculate the "Potential Adoption Index" (PAI). 
In order to determine the SaaS benefits and concern the 
taxonomies proposed in [10] has been used to generate an 
evaluation matrix: 
• 
the three main dimensions of cloud related benefits 
(deployment advantages, financial savings, and 
functional aspects) have been integrated with the 
main cloud characteristics (on demand self-services, 
broad network access, resource polling, rapid 
elasticity, measured services) in Table II; 
• 
the three main dimensions of cloud related concerns 
(alignment with existing operating model in 
organization, 
management 
and 
control 
of 
organizational data and services, and legal aspects) 
have been incorporated in Table III. 
For each dimension, underlying category and attributes 
has been specified to improve the level of detail to offer a 
more analytic evaluation. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

In Table II are exposed the essential characteristics of 
cloud computing, with cloud deployment, financial and 
functional benefits. 
TABLE II.  
ASSESSING KEY FEATURE AND MAJOR BENEFITS 
ASSOCIATED WITH THE CLOUD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The financial dimension in the category saving will be 
used if the SaaS solution replaces a non-cloud application 
(dismission) with identifiable economies or if a different 
deployment method (other than public cloud) is adopted in 
order to evaluate the economies from moving some of the 
company resources (IT staff, hardware, infrastructure, 
maintenance, energy, management) in the cloud provider 
domain. 
Table III includes the list of concerns attributes 
evidenced when implementing a cloud computing solution. 
TABLE III.  
ASSESSING KEY FEATURE AND MAJOR BENEFITS 
ASSOCIATED WITH THE CLOUD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

The evaluation of cloud computing characteristics 
included in Table II, looks to verify the need for this new 
technology for the company while the supplier's ability to 
provide a product according to the commonly accepted basic 
general requirements. In fact, quite often, for marketing 
reasons and without considering the essential features, web-
based solutions are advertised as cloud computing solution, 
also known as "cloud washing" [11]. 
Two columns, “Weight” and “Rating”, must be evaluated 
to measure the relevant factors in cloud computing 
environment during the SaaS product evaluation analysis: 
• 
"Weight": considers the importance, relevance or 
interest 
of 
the 
company 
to 
the 
examined 
characteristic in a Cloud Computing context to meet 
the business needs (with a decimal valuation 
between 0 and 1, with 0="not important" and 
max.value < 1). The total sum of the values given in 
this column for the two tables must be equal to 1.  
Candidates for evaluation are stockholders having 
reviewed the functional and economic analysis 
results of the Saas under evaluation. 
• 
"Rating": estimates the SaaS solution predisposition 
of addressing the specific attribute in conformity 
with the specific company context (with values 
between 1 and 4. With the following evaluations 
1="compliance is poor", 2="the compliance is less 
than average ", 3="above average ", 4="top"). 
Candidates for evaluation are SaaS experts having 
analyzed the functional and economic analysis 
results of the Saas under evaluation. 
A third column "Weight * Rating" or calculated weighted 
score contains the multiplication result between the "Weight" 
and "Rating" of each row. 
The "Potential Adoption Index" (PAI) is the result of the 
sum of the weighted score calculated (column "Weight * 
rating") in Table II and Table III. 
Regardless the number of aspects analyzed (or rows) and 
included in Table II and Table III, the PAI may range from a 
minimum of 1 and a maximum of 4. The total average score 
is 2.5. 
If the PAI value exceeds 2.5 this means there is a positive 
balance between economic components, characteristics, risk 
factors and benefits of cloud computing in the adoption of 
the analyzed SaaS solution for the particular company. The 
results, in the proposed example presented in Table III, PAI 
= 2.71 indicates this event. 
In case of multiple comparison, the Saas solution with 
the highest PAI indicates the product that has greater 
potential for the company. 
III. 
CONCLUSIONAND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents an integrated top-down selective 
analysis for calculating the PAI index representing the 
adoption potential of a SaaS solution for a company.  
Functional analysis, economic analysis (TCO) and a 
detailed attribute analysis are evaluated and linked together 
in the integrated model. 
These attributes (characteristic, benefit and concern) are 
estimated from stakeholders for their specific relevance in 
regard to the company and the cloud environment; and from 
SaaS experts for their willingness to generate benefits that 
could be made in the specific business context. 
The joint result determines the PAI value, which could be 
conveniently used to select or assess the SaaS adoption. 
The presented framework has not been tested or applied 
in any real case study. After these preliminary findings, in 
order to confirm the validity of the proposed solution a more 
in depth study should be conducted. A case study or other 
research strategy must also be completed and the results need 
to be verified and validated. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. G. Carr, “The End of Corporate Computing,” MIT Sloan 
Management Review, vol. 3, 2005, pp. 67–73. 
[2] S. Marston, Z. Li, S. Bandyopadhyay, J. Zhang,, and A. 
Ghalsasi, “Cloud computing — The business perspective,” 
Decision Support Systems, vol. 1, 2011, pp. 176–189, 
doi:10.1016/j.dss.2010.12.006. 
[3] W. Sun, X. Zhang, C. J. Guo, P. Sun, and H. Su, “Software as 
a Service: Configuration and Customization Perspectives,” 
Proc. IEEE Congress on Services Part II, 2008, pp. 18–25, 
doi:10.1109/SERVICES-2.2008.29. 
[4] S. Leimeister, M. Böhm, C. Riedl, and H. Krcmar, “The 
Business Perspective of Cloud Computing: Actors, Roles and 
Value Networks,” ECIS 2010 Proceedings, 2010, Available 
at: http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2010/56 [retrieved: 03, 2013]. 
[5] P. Mell and T. Grance “The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing,” 2011. 
[6] C. P. Bezemer, and A. Zaidman, “Multi-tenant SaaS 
applications: maintenance dream or nightmare?” Proc. Joint 
ERCIM Workshop on Software Evolution (EVOL) and 
International Workshop on Principles of Software Evolution 
(IWPSE), ACM, 2010, pp. 88–92, doi:10.1145/1862372. 
1862393. 
[7] M. Nitu, “Configurability in SaaS (software as a service) 
applications,” 
ACM 
Press, 
2009, 
pp. 
19-26, 
doi: 
10.1145/1506216.1506221. 
[8] S. Bibi, D. Katsaros, and P. Bozanis, “Business Application 
Acquisition: On-Premise or SaaS-Based Solutions?” IEEE 
Software, 29(3), 2012, pp. 86–93, doi:10.1109/MS.2011.119. 
[9] B. Martens, M. Walterbusch, and F. Teuteberg, “Costing of 
Cloud Computing Services: A Total Cost of Ownership 
approach,” Proc. of the Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, 2011, pp. 1563–1572. 
[10] P. Géczy, N. Izumi, and K. Hasida, “Cloudsourcing: 
managing cloud adoption,” Global Journal of Business 
Research (GJBR), vol. 6, 2012, pp. 57–70. 
[11] A. Adamov and M. Erguvan, “The truth about cloud 
computing as new paradigm in IT,” Proc. International 
Conference 
on 
Application 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication Technologies (AICT 2009), 2009, pp. 1–3, 
doi:10.1109/ICAICT.2009.5372585. 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

