 
 
A Comparison Study of Information Security Risk Management Frameworks in 
Cloud Computing 
 
Mohammed Alnuem 
Information Systems Department 
King Saud University 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
Email: malnuem@ksu.edu.sa 
 
 
Hala Alrumaih, Halah Al-Alshaikh 
Information Systems Department 
Al Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
Emails: {hala.alrumaih, halah.al-alsheikh} 
@ccis.imamu.edu.sa 
 
 
Abstract—Nowadays, cloud computing is an emerging concept 
in the Information Technology (IT) industry. Cloud computing 
is not a new technology, but is a new way of using or delivering 
resources. It also enhances the efficiency of computation by 
providing centralized databases, memory processing and on 
demand network access. Consequently, cloud computing has 
become an important platform for companies to build their 
infrastructures upon. It allows organizations to use Internet-
based services so that they can reduce start-up costs, lower 
capital expenditures, use services on a pay-as-you-use basis, 
access applications only as needed, and quickly reduce or 
increase capacities. If companies are thinking of taking 
advantage of cloud-based systems, they will have to seriously 
re-assess 
their 
information 
security 
risk 
management 
strategies. In recent years, numerous risk management 
frameworks based on information security have been proposed 
to manage the risk of cloud computing.  This paper discusses 
how information security risk management is related to the 
cloud computing environment. It also presents seven different 
information security risk management frameworks that cover 
all of cloud service models and deployment models. These 
frameworks are classified according to coverage area of the 
framework.  Moreover, the paper sheds light on some 
suggestions that may help cloud users. These suggestions are 
related to information security risk management in cloud 
computing and were obtained through a comparison made in 
this paper between the presented frameworks. 
Keywords-Cloud Computing; Risk Management Framework; 
Information Security. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recently, cloud computing has gained extensive 
attention, but the trust and security issues of cloud 
computing have prevented businesses from fully accepting 
cloud platforms. The security risks are associated with each 
cloud delivery model, cloud architecture and security 
controls involved in a particular cloud environment [1]. One 
security assessment tool that can reduce the threats and 
vulnerabilities and mitigates security risks is a risk 
management framework [2]. 
Conducting information security risk management is the 
core element of an Information Security Management 
System (ISMS). ISO 27001 is the international best practice 
standard for ISMS [3]. ISO/IEC 27000 provides policies, 
standards, 
guidelines 
and 
procedures 
for 
initiating, 
implementing, maintaining and improving information 
security management within an organization [4]. An 
information security policy consists of roles, responsibilities 
and defining the scope of information that must be protected 
across the cloud [5]. Standards ensure security consistency 
across the cloud and usually contain security controls 
relating to the implementation [5]. Guidelines consist of 
recommended, non-mandatory controls that help and 
support standards. Procedures consist of step-by-step 
instructions to assist workers in implementing the various 
policies, standards and guidelines [5]. Risk management 
frameworks can be based on one or more of the ISO 27001 
information security framework requirements. 
 This paper focuses on presenting some information risk 
management frameworks for better understanding the 
critical areas in the cloud computing environment. The rest 
of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents an 
overview of cloud computing. Section 3 introduces 
information security risk management features. Section 4 
reviews 
seven 
different 
information 
security 
risk 
management frameworks for cloud. Section 5 shows a 
comparison between the risk management frameworks, 
while Section 6 concludes this study. while Section 6 
concludes this study. 
II. 
OVERVIEW OF THE CLOUD AND ITS 
FEATURES 
Cloud computing moves the tasks and the resources 
from a local computer onto the larger computing center, 
which is shared among a large number of users and 
distributed on the Internet. The cloud system resource is 
transparent, as neither the application nor the user knows the 
location of the resource.   Cloud resources are provided as a 
service on an as needed basis. Moreover, the user can decide 
to only pay for what they use [6]. Cloud computing include 
five 
key 
characteristics 
of 
on-demand 
self-service, 
ubiquitous network access, location independent resource 
pooling, rapid elasticity, and measured service [7]. 
According to Buyya et al.  [8] the cloud computing has the 
following definition “Cloud is a parallel and distributed 
computing system consisting of a collection of inter-
connected and virtualized computers that are dynamically 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
provisioned and presented as one or more unified computing 
resources based on Service-Level Agreements (SLA) 
established through negotiation between the service 
provider and consumers [8].” Vaquero et al. stated that 
“clouds are a large pool of easily usable and accessible 
virtualized resources (such as hardware, development 
platforms and/or services) [9]”, where the resources can be 
dynamically reconfigured to adjust to a variable load (scale), 
allowing also for an optimum resource utilization. There are 
three cloud delivery models, as follows: Software as a 
Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) [6][7]. 
 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): Providing a 
working environment as per user wish and demand 
without manages or controls the infrastructure they 
simply control the storage and applications. One 
IaaS example is Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud 
(EC2). 
 
Software as a Service (SaaS): Cloud providers 
offer application software as on-demand services.. 
Examples of SaaS are Flickr, Google Docs, Siri, 
Amazon and Cloud Drive. 
 
Platform 
as 
a 
Service 
(PaaS): 
Provides 
infrastructure 
where 
you 
can 
create 
new 
applications. Consumer deploys their applications 
on the cloud computing system and controls their 
applications but they do not manage servers and 
storage. Examples of PaaS are Google App Engine, 
Amazon Web services. 
Cloud computing is further divided into private cloud, 
public cloud and hybrid cloud, according to the different 
deployment models [6][7]. 
 
Private Cloud: Private cloud is deployed for a 
particular organization and security can be created 
easily. Private clouds are virtualized cloud data 
centers inside a firewall. Private cloud refers to 
internal data centers of a business or other 
organization not made available to the general 
public. 
 
Public Cloud: Public cloud runs on the Internet and 
security is very complex. Public clouds are 
virtualized data centers outside of the firewall and 
resources are available to the consumer on demand 
over the public Internet. 
 
Hybrid Cloud: Hybrid cloud is a composition of 
two or more clouds and that are bounded by 
standard or proprietary technology. Hybrid clouds 
combine the character of both public and private 
clouds. 
A new type of cloud deployment models offers Cloud 
Computing resources and services to mobile devices called 
Mobile Cloud Computing. Khan et al. defined mobile cloud 
computing as “an integration of cloud computing 
technology with mobile devices to make the mobile devices 
resource-full in terms of computational power, memory, 
storage, energy, and context awareness [10]”. 
However, in cloud computing the security situation is 
very different as the hardware, software and application data 
can be deployed and stored by the cloud providers. 
Therefore, to solve security problems that are occur in cloud 
computing there are some risk management frameworks can 
be used to secure the data transmitted, ensure the integrity of 
the applications and increase trust between users and service 
providers, etc. [11]. 
III. 
INFORMATION SECURITY RISK 
MANAGEMENT  
Recently, cloud computing has gained considerable 
attention. Due to the involvement of many technologies 
including networks, databases, operating systems, resource 
scheduling, transaction management, concurrency control 
and memory management, various security issues have been 
highlighted as arising in cloud computing [12]. Indeed, 
security remains a major roadblock for organizations 
looking to reap the cost and efficiency benefits of the cloud. 
Table I summarizes cloud computing features and their 
corresponding security implications [13]. 
 
 
TABLE I. SECURITY IMPLICATIONS OF CLOUD FEATURES 
Feature 
Security Implication 
Outsourcing 
Users may lose control of their data. Cloud providers may use customers’ data in a way that 
has not been agreed upon in the past. 
Extensibility and Shared 
Responsibility 
There is a tradeoff between extensibility and security responsibility for customers in different 
delivery models. 
Virtualization 
There needs to be mechanisms to ensure strong isolation, mediated sharing and 
communications between virtual machines.  
Multi-tenancy 
Issues like access policies, application deployment, and data access and protection should be 
taken into account to provide a secure multi-tenant environment. 
Service Level Agreement 
The main goal is to create a negotiation mechanism for the contract between providers and 
consumers of services. 
Heterogeneity 
Different cloud providers may have different approaches to providing security and privacy 
mechanisms. This will generate integration challenges. 
 
As more organizations start to move their IT operations 
to the cloud, risk management remains a top concern. Risk 
management is the systematic application of management 
policies, procedures and practices to the tasks of 
establishing the context, identifying, analyzing, evaluating, 
treating, monitoring and communicating risk. It allows IT 
managers to balance the operational and economic costs of 
protective measures and achieve gains in mission capability 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
by protecting the IT systems and data that support their 
organizations’ missions. Risk management encompasses 
three processes: risk assessment, risk mitigation and risk 
evaluation [14].  
Risk assessment is the determination of a quantitative or 
qualitative output from risk analysis process [2]. It has four 
major processes. Likelihood determination process indicates 
the probability vulnerability that may be exercised within 
the construct of the associated environment. Impact analysis 
process determines the adverse impact resulting from a 
successful 
threat 
exercise 
of 
vulnerability. 
Risk 
determination process finds the risks and opportunities that 
impact on the associated environment using risk exposure 
formula and matrix. Control recommendations process 
provides the process and recommend controls that could 
mitigate or eliminate the identified risks. Risk mitigation 
refers to prioritizing, implementing and maintaining the 
appropriate risk-reducing measures recommended from the 
risk assessment process [14]. Cloud provider must develop 
Risk Treatment Plans (RTP) with multiple options 
(avoidance, transfer, retention, reduction and acceptance) 
[2]. The outcomes of RTP should be incorporated into 
service agreements because different models of cloud 
computing have various ways to mitigate vulnerabilities and 
threats. Risk evaluation is a continual process for 
implementing a successful risk management program [14]. 
It initiates specific follow-on actions as part of a 
comprehensive continuous monitoring program. 
Well-planned risk management activities will be crucial 
in ensuring that information is simultaneously available and 
protected 
[15]. 
A 
well-structured 
risk 
management 
framework, when used effectively, can help management 
identify appropriate controls for providing the essential 
security capabilities to protect users’ information, which is 
of high importance. 
IV. 
INFORMATION SECURITY RISK 
MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORKS IN CLOUD 
This section provides a review of seven different 
information security risk management frameworks for cloud 
computing which can be used to secure the data transmitted, 
ensure the integrity of the applications and increase trust 
between users and service providers. The information 
security risk management frameworks in this study have 
been classified according to the coverage area of the 
framework, and fall into the following: information security 
risk management frameworks for security evaluation in 
cloud 
environments, 
analyzing 
the 
risks 
in 
cloud 
environments and frameworks based on security policies. 
A. Cloud Environments Security Evaluation Frameworks 
Zhang et al. [2] have presented an information risk 
management framework for better understanding critical 
areas of focus in the cloud computing environment, to 
identify a threat and vulnerability by means of Deming 
Cycle. It is covers all of cloud service models and 
deployment models. The framework has seven processes, 
including: selecting relevant critical areas, and strategy and 
planning under the architecting and establishing the risk 
management program (PLAN) phase. Risk analysis, risk 
assessment and risk mitigation under the implement and 
operate (Do) phase, and then the assessing and monitoring 
program, and risk management review under the monitoring 
and review (Check, Act) phase. In selecting relevant critical 
area process, the authors enumerated twelve domains as 
areas of concern for cloud computing. At least one critical 
area that is relevant has to be selected before moving to the 
next process. The strategy and planning process is 
performed in collaboration with selecting relevant critical 
area to ensure plans effectively identify critical areas of 
focus and provide management with clear choices for 
resource allocation and optimization. Risk analysis process 
allows management to examine all currently identified 
threat and vulnerability concerns. Risk assessment is the 
following step that has four major processes–likelihood 
determinations, impact analysis, risk determination and 
control recommendations. Cloud providers must develop 
(RTP) with multiple options (avoidance, transfer, retention, 
reduction and acceptance) through risk mitigation process. 
The organization subsequently initiates specific follow-on 
actions as part of a comprehensive continuous monitoring 
program. Finally, a review is performed to develop a 
program effectiveness grid that is can be used first to 
establish a baseline, then set goals and objectives and 
evaluates progress. 
However, the framework of Xie et al. in [11] pays more 
attention to how to increase the trust between users and 
service providers. This framework is composed of five basic 
processes: user requirement self-assessment, cloud service 
providers desktop assessment, risk assessment, third-party 
agencies’ review and continuous monitoring [11]. At the 
user requirement self-assessment phase, the user should 
determine the required cloud computing model and security 
level. In the desktop assessment, the historical security 
status should be analyzed as should the potential risk of 
cloud service providers. The risk assessment of cloud 
provider includes seven stages: the preparation of risk 
assessment, 
asset 
identification, 
threat 
identification, 
vulnerability identification, existing security measures, risk 
analysis and risk assessment documentation. The third-party 
agencies review stage it is necessary to employ third-party 
agencies to review the procedure and to ensure security of 
cloud services.  Through the previous stages, there is a need 
for a continuous monitoring process to monitor the ongoing 
risk assessment [11]. 
Popa et al. [16] explained the security issues related to 
private data and mobile cloud applications in detail. They 
proposed a mobile computing applications security 
framework called Secure Mobile-Cloud (SMC). It had to 
fulfill the following features: to make sure that the security 
of data is achieved when it is transmitted between the 
components of the same mobile application, also it had to 
verify the integrity of the applications either at the time of 
installation or updating on the mobile device. This solution 
takes into consideration the following constraints: mobile 
device energy, data sensitivity and users’ options. The 
proposed framework best fits into SaaS layer of the cloud 
service delivery model by providing security services such 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
as confidentiality and integrity. SMC framework has several 
components running in the cloud and on the mobile. There 
are five kinds of managers: Mobile Manager, Mobile and 
Cloud 
Security 
Manager, 
Optimization 
Manager, 
Application Manager and Policy Manager, where each 
manager has a well-defined functionality. The framework 
also contains also the security components deployed on both 
cloud and mobile devices. 
B. Cloud Environments Security Analysis Frameworks 
Tanimoto et al. [17] identified various risk factors from 
a user’s viewpoint by using the Risk Breakdown Structure 
(RBS) method. The risk analysis method is based on a risk 
matrix. Tanimoto et al. proposed a risk management 
framework that classified the risks into risk transference, 
risk mitigation, risk acceptance and risk avoidance, then 
categorized the problems in cloud computing according to 
these four classifications. Since risk transference problems 
tend to come from the cloud service provider, risks 
classified into risk mitigation tend to involve regulatory 
compliance of the cloud service provider, such as 
specification, authentication, etc. Risks in risk acceptance 
tend to be based on external factors, such as laws, while the 
risks in risk avoidance tend to be caused by different 
specifications of the cloud service provider and users [17]. 
Alhomidi and Reed [18] presented a resource 
independent framework for security risk analysis as a 
service (SRAaaS) suitable for IaaS model of cloud 
computing. The results of the analysis recommend a range 
of plans that can be used directly by cloud users to enforce 
the protection of their Virtual Machines (VMs), as the 
fundamental unit of IaaS, against possible attacks. The 
resource independence allows the SRAaaS to scan any kind 
of resources in the IaaS cloud so the framework can be 
extended to provide analysis for other types of IaaS 
resources, such as networks or storage. In addition, the 
framework reduces the need to consistently access the VMs 
or interrupt the processes and services running on each VM 
because time-consuming tasks in the risk analysis can be 
performed offline in the cloud. SRAaaS framework consists 
of seven steps [18] and only the first step has to be 
accomplished online while the further steps are performed 
offline. VM Vulnerability Scanning step aims to check all 
software and applications as well as the VM’s connections 
and ports. Attack Graph Generation step visualizes how an 
attacker could exploit the VM by showing the attack paths 
generated using an attack graph generation tool. Risk 
Assessment Model step analyzes the produced attack graph 
by computing the most likely attacks, the highest-risk 
attacks and the highest loss attack. Security Control 
Selection step aims to help cloud users or providers with the 
selecting suitable and cheapest security controls that protect 
the VM from threats. Genetic Algorithm Optimization step 
simplifies the full attack graph to a smaller graph 
representing the most critical attack path. Analysis Results 
step describes potential vulnerability threats so the cloud 
user has an overall view of the existing security risks. 
Finally, Security Recommendations step reports a group of 
recommendations for the cloud user to make appropriate 
decisions regarding the security of the VM, including a list 
of required security controls and the total cost of the 
security controls as well as the cost of each control. 
C. Frameworks Based on Security Policies 
SecureCloud has been proposed by Takabi et al. [7]. It is 
a comprehensive security framework for cloud computing 
environments that preserves cloud security using identity 
management models and access control models. The 
framework consists of various modules to handle security 
and trust issues of cloud computing environments. The 
modules deal with issues such as access control to provide 
the security and privacy specification and enforcement 
functionality, policy integration among multiple clouds to 
integrate access policies of different policy domains and 
define global access policies, secure service that is 
responsible for secure service discovery, composition and 
provisioning. In addition, these modules cover issues like 
trust management, which is responsible for negotiation, 
establishment, and evolution of bidirectional trust between 
different clouds and between a cloud and its users, semantic 
heterogeneity to check the correctness of the integrated 
policies among policies from different clouds and identity 
management which is responsible for authenticating users 
and services based on credentials and characteristics. 
Zhao [4] introduced a risk management framework 
based on aligning policies relating to organization's IT 
policies and standards and security management to fit with 
the cloud computing model. The security solutions provider 
may need some standards and guidelines to evaluate the 
cloud service provider against regulatory requirements. 
Some of the standards, frameworks and guidelines such as 
ITIL, Statement on Auditing Standards (SAS), ISO/IEC 
27000 standard series, Control Objectives for Information 
and Technology (COBIT) framework, Data Security 
Standard (PCI DSS), Cloud Security Alliance Cloud 
Controls Matrix (CCM) and others. This framework found 
that to build a model of security management in any cloud 
service provider, it is necessary to start by identifying the 
asset for the cloud deployment then evaluating the risk for 
the asset [4]. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
In this section, the previous information security risk 
management frameworks are compared according to the 
ISO 27001 framework, and the classification that was 
presented previously in this study. 
The comparison based on different indications such as 
cloud 
service 
models, 
deployment, 
framework 
concentration, and determine which   ISO 27001 
requirements the framework based on. 
A. Cloud Environments Security Evaluation Frameworks 
By examining the prior cloud environments security 
evaluation frameworks, it is clear that the frameworks of 
Zhang et al. [2] and Xie et al. [11] focus on user 
perspectives to evaluate cloud environment security. The 
two frameworks can fit on all of cloud service models and 
deployment models. Both frameworks concentrate on 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
denoting where the user should specify the process 
information 
of 
the 
cloud 
computing 
service, 
and 
determining the necessary cloud computing model as well 
as security level, at the first stage in the their frameworks. In 
Xie et al.’s framework, before assessing the risk of service 
provider, users have to evaluate cloud service providers’ 
plans, analyze the historical security status and, furthermore, 
acquire the potential risk of the cloud service providers. The 
risk assessment in the framework of Zhang et al. has two 
processes, risk analysis and risk assessment to identify the 
threats and vulnerabilities then determine the likelihood that 
a potential vulnerability could be applied and its impact. In 
addition both frameworks have monitoring process. As part 
of assessing cloud provider, specific follow-on actions are 
initiated 
for 
a 
continuous 
monitoring 
program 
of 
effectiveness after the RTPs are implemented. According to 
the framework requirements in ISO 27001, both frameworks 
implement information security management based on 
procedures. Moreover, the Zhang et al. framework was 
developed in a standard quality management (PDCA) cycle 
of continuous improvement, based on evolving standards of 
ISO 27001.   The other framework that evaluates cloud 
environment security works on a mobile cloud application 
called Secure Mobile-Cloud (SMC) [16]. This framework 
fits in the SaaS layer only. SMC framework aims to secure 
data 
communication 
between 
the 
same 
application 
components. In SMC framework, there are five different 
kinds of managers and security components on the mobile 
side and cloud side.   All of these managers have their own 
functions to analyze and evaluate risks. This framework is 
also based on procedures according to the framework 
requirements in ISO 27001.  
B. Cloud Environments Security Analysis Frameworks 
Regarding the presented cloud environment security 
analysis frameworks, both Tanimoto et al. [17] and 
Alhomidi and Reed [18] found that cloud computing 
security has not been sufficiently investigated, although 
cloud computing services have. As a result, they developed 
a number of frameworks capable of analyzing the security 
risks and extracting of risk factor in the cloud computing 
environment. In [17], the authors analyzed and extracted 
risks of utilizing cloud computing by using the Risk 
Breakdown Structure (RBS) method. RBS is a typical risk 
Aanalysis method of the project management method. 
Meanwhile, SRAaaS framework [18] provided a mechanism 
for risk analysis using attack graph, which is an important 
tools 
used 
to 
present 
the 
relationships 
between 
vulnerabilities. Furthermore, Tanimoto et al. started the 
analysis process by identifying various risk factors from a 
user’s viewpoint, then classified risks using risk matrix 
method that classified risks into four kinds risk avoidance, 
risk mitigation, risk acceptance, and risk transference. 
Finally, it developed countermeasures individually to satisfy 
extracted risks and then detailed the risk management 
proposals for each classification. On the contrary, SRAaaS 
framework, which is suitable for IaaS model of cloud 
computing, consists of seven steps. It starts with 
vulnerability scanning step to check all software and 
applications, as well as connections and ports. Then it ends 
with the security recommendations step that reports a group 
of recommendations for the cloud user in order to make 
appropriate decisions regarding the security; this includes a 
list of required security controls and the total cost of the 
security controls as well as the cost of each control. The 
framework in [17] is based on procedures according to the 
framework requirements in ISO 27001. Alternatively, 
SRAaaS framework recommends a range of guidelines that 
can be used by cloud users to enforce the protection of their 
services and systems against possible attacks, according to 
the framework requirements in ISO 27001. 
C. Frameworks Based on Security Policies 
Looking into the introduced frameworks that are based 
on security policies, Takabi et al. [7] and Zhao [4] evolved 
frameworks based on aligning various policies and 
standards relating to information security risk management 
frameworks, in order to fit with the cloud computing model. 
SecureCloud framework [7] was built based on the existing 
research on multi-domain policy integration and the secure 
service composition. The framework consists of various 
modules to handle the security and trust issues of cloud 
computing environments. The important module in 
SecureCloud framework is policy integration in the cloud 
that should be able to address challenges such as semantic 
heterogeneity, secure interoperability and policy evolution 
management. On the other hand, Zhao’s framework 
supports standards aligning of one cloud service provider.  It 
found that the building of a model of security management 
in any cloud service provider starts with identifying the 
asset for the cloud deployment then evaluating risk for the 
asset. Accordingly, both frameworks are based on policies 
according to the framework requirements in ISO 27001.  
The following Table II represents a summary of the 
comparison of the previous information security risk 
management frameworks: 
 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
TABLE II.  SUMMARY OF THE COMPARISON BETWEEN SOME INFORMATION SECURITY RISK MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORKS 
              
Criteria 
 
Framework 
        Name 
Coverage area 
Cloud service 
and deployment 
models 
Concentration 
Framework 
Requirements in 
ISO 27001 
Zhang et al. [2] 
Cloud 
Environments 
Security 
Evaluation 
Fit in all of cloud 
service and 
deployment 
models 
Identify the threats and vulnerabilities 
and its impact of using the cloud. 
Based on 
procedures and 
standard 
Xie et al. [11] 
Cloud 
Environments 
Security 
Evaluation 
Fit in all of cloud 
service and 
deployment 
models 
Users have to evaluate cloud service 
providers’ plans, analyze the historical 
security status and, acquire the potential 
risk of the cloud service providers. 
Based on 
procedures 
SMC 
framework[16] 
Cloud 
Environments 
Security 
Evaluation 
Fits in the saas 
layer 
Have five different kinds of managers 
and security components on the mobile 
side and cloud side. 
Based on 
procedures 
Tanimoto et al. 
[17] 
cloud 
environment 
security analysis 
Fit in all of cloud 
service, 
deployment 
models 
Analyzed and extracted risks of 
utilizing cloud computing by using the 
Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) 
method. And  using risk matrix method 
that classified risks into four kinds of 
risks. 
Based on 
procedures 
Alhomidi and 
Reed [18] 
cloud 
environment 
security analysis 
Fits in iaas 
model. 
Provided a mechanism for risk analysis 
using attack graph to present the 
relationships between vulnerabilities. 
Based on 
guidelines. 
Takabi et al. [7] 
Based on 
Security Policies 
Fit in all of cloud 
service, 
deployment 
models 
Handle the security and trust issues of 
cloud computing environments by using 
various modules. 
Based on policies. 
Zhao [4] 
Based on 
Security Policies 
Fit in all of cloud 
service, 
deployment 
models 
Identifying the asset for the cloud 
deployment then evaluating risk for the 
asset. 
Based on policies. 
 
VI. 
RESULT 
After reviewing seven information security risk 
management 
frameworks, 
this 
study 
makes 
some 
suggestions related to information security risk management 
in cloud computing. The organizations that have decided to 
move to cloud computing have to define the benefits and 
risks of cloud computing and implement processes to 
manage security risk. The information security risk 
management policies should comply with an organization's 
IT policies and standards to protect the confidentiality, 
integrity and availability of information security. The study 
observes some of the main processes that are needed to 
manage security risks. The first step in risk management is 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
assessment of the cloud service provider to evaluate the 
cloud service plans and analyze the historical security status. 
The second step entails a risk analysis of cloud provider by 
identifying the assets, threats and vulnerabilities. Risk 
assessment is the third process in the implementation of risk 
management. Risk assessment means assessing security 
incidents from two dimensions, i.e., the likelihood and the 
adverse impact of an incident.  After the risk management 
plans are implemented, there is a need for follow-on actions 
as part of a comprehensive assessment and continuous 
monitoring program for effectiveness. Moreover, the study 
acquires different recommendations that may help cloud 
providers and customers with choosing between the existing 
information security risk frameworks. It is important to 
specifying the cloud service models and deployment 
models, the purpose of the framework, and whether there is 
a need for one or more cloud environments/providers. 
Moreover, there is a need to specify the framework 
requirements based on the basic framework requirements in 
ISO 27001: policies, standards, guidelines and procedures. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
Cloud computing has the advantages of high efficiency 
and low costs, as well as scalability. As the march of cloud 
computing continues, security issues have appeared. Indeed, 
the investigations in the cloud computing environment have 
mainly focused on the service side, while the security side 
has not been sufficiently looked at. This study presented and 
compared 
seven 
different 
information 
security 
risk 
management frameworks that covered all of cloud service 
models and deployment models. The comparison was 
undertaken according to the framework requirements in ISO 
27001 and the coverage area of the frameworks that were 
presented in this study. Moreover, the paper sheds light on 
some suggestions related to the information security risk 
management in cloud computing. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] CPNI Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure, 
“Information Security Briefing 01/2010 Cloud Computing,” 
pp. 36, March 2010. 
[2] X. Zhang, N. Wuwong, H. Li, and X. Zhang, “Information 
Security Risk Management Framework for the Cloud 
Computing Environments,” 2010, pp. 1328–1334. 
[3] ISO/IEC 27001 - Information security management, retrieved 
from: http://www.iso.org/ accessed in 4/5/2014 
[4] G. Zhao, “Holistic framework of security management for 
cloud service providers,” in Industrial Informatics (INDIN), 
2012 10th IEEE International Conference on, 2012, pp. 852–
856. 
[5] P. Johnson, “What are Policies, Standards, Guidelines and 
Procedures? | MindfulSecurity.com – The Information 
Security Awareness Resource.” accessed in 20/4/2014 
[6] W. Liu, “Research on cloud computing security problem and 
strategy,” in Consumer Electronics, Communications and 
Networks (CECNet), 2012 2nd International Conference on, 
2012, pp. 1216–1219. 
[7] H. Takabi, J. B. D. Joshi, and G.-J. Ahn, “SecureCloud: 
Towards a Comprehensive Security Framework for Cloud 
Computing 
Environments,” 
Computer 
Software 
and 
Applications Conference Workshops (COMPSACW), 2010 
IEEE 34th Annual , pp. 393–398. 
[8] R. Buyya, C. S. Yeo, S. Venugopal, J. Broberg, and I. 
Brandic, “Cloud computing and emerging IT platforms: 
Vision, hype, and reality for delivering computing as the 5th 
utility,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 25, no. 6, 
Jun. 2009, pp. 599–616. 
[9] L. M. Vaquero, L. Rodero-Merino, J. Caceres, and M. 
Lindner, “A break in the clouds: towards a cloud definition,” 
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 39, 
no. 1, 2009, pp. 50–55. 
[10] A. U. R. Khan, M. Othman, S. A. Madani, and S. U. Khan, 
“A Survey of Mobile Cloud Computing Application Models,” 
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 1, 
2014, pp. 393–413. 
[11] F. Xie, Y. Peng, W. Zhao, D. Chen, X. Wang, and X. Huo, “A 
risk management framework for cloud computing,” in Cloud 
Computing and Intelligent Systems (CCIS), 2012 IEEE 2nd 
International Conference on, 2012, vol. 1, pp. 476–480. 
[12] K. Hamlen, M. Kantarcioglu, L. Khan, and B. Thuraisingham, 
“Security Issues for Cloud Computing:,” International 
Journal of Information Security and Privacy, vol. 4, no. 2, 
2010, pp. 36–48. 
[13] H. Takabi, J. B. D. Joshi, and G.-J. Ahn, “Security and 
Privacy Challenges in Cloud Computing Environments,” 
Security & Privacy, IEEE Nov.-Dec. 2010, vol.8, no.6, 
pp.24,31. 
[14] S. R. Vallabhaneni, Corporate Management, Governance, 
and Ethics Best Practices. John Wiley & Sons, 2008. 
[15] ISACA, “Cloud Computing: Business Benefits with Security, 
Governance and Assurance Perspectives,” An ISACA 
Emerging Technology White Paper, pp 7. 
[16] D. Popa, M. Cremene, M. Borda, and K. Boudaoud, “A 
security framework for mobile cloud applications,” in 
Roedunet International Conference (RoEduNet), 2013 11th, 
2013, pp. 1–4. 
[17] S. Tanimoto, M. Hiramoto, M. Iwashita, H. Sato, and A. 
Kanai, “Risk Management on the Security Problem in Cloud 
Computing,” in Computers, Networks, Systems and Industrial 
Engineering (CNSI), 2011 First ACIS/JNU International 
Conference, pp.147,152. 
[18] M. A. Alhomidi and M. J. Reed, “Security risk analysis as a 
service,” in Internet Technology and Secured Transactions 
(ICITST), 2013 8th International Conference for, 2013, pp. 
156–161. 
 
  
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

