E-Marketplace for Cloud Services 
 
Claudio Giovanoli, Prasad Pulikal, Stella Gatziu Grivas 
Institute for Information Systems 
University of Applied Science Northwestern Switzerland 
Olten, Switzerland 
{claudio.giovanoli, stella.gatziugrivas}@fhnw.ch 
{prasad.pulikal}@students.fhnw.ch 
 
 
 
Abstract— With the advent of Cloud Computing and the 
advantages it brings to businesses, there is a keen interest by 
businesses to adopt these technologies from a strategic 
advantage viewpoint. This growing interest throws up a 
challenge to businesses to identify solutions and providers that 
fits their requirements. It becomes difficult for them to locate 
and evaluate services provided by multiple Cloud Service 
Providers. This is exactly where the concept of an Electronic 
Marketplace for Cloud Services (EMPCS) would fit in. The 
Cloud Services Brokerage (CSB) or an intermediary is an 
enhanced type of EMPCS that simplifies the process further by 
a single-point, aggregated and customized solution. Using 
research literatures for reviewing existing models of an 
Electronic Marketplace (EMP) or Electronic Markets (EM) 
this research tries to identify core components that form part 
of a “state of the art” intermediary based EMP designed 
specifically for a Cloud Services. 
Keywords: cloud services marketplace, cloud service broker, 
cloud services marketplace reference model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Cloud Computing is rapidly changing the way IT 
services and products are offered. These services are 
currently evolving and will continue to evolve further with 
the ever-increasing services and type of products being 
offered by various cloud service providers. Enterprises are 
forced to rethink their strategies for building an IT 
infrastructure and cloud services are helping them by 
keeping things simple. Organizations can in a way outsource 
the hassle of building and maintaining their internal IT 
infrastructure to specialized cloud service providers. It is 
difficult to find a single source for the varying cloud service 
requirements of an enterprise. Many cloud service providers, 
serve very specific cloud areas (e.g. Software as a Service 
(SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), Infrastructure as a 
Service (IaaS) etc.) or type of cloud and they vary a great 
deal in terms of their specifications, pricing and other detail 
models. One option is for the enterprises to deal with 
multiple cloud vendors and service providers. This 
fragmentation will lead to complexities in terms of 
integration, maintaining and consuming these services.  
An important challenge will be in identifying various 
service providers who cater to specific needs and 
requirements of an enterprise [1]. One approach will be to 
identify providers from a directory or yellow pages catering 
to these kinds of services. Another approach will be the use 
of an E-Marketplace catering specifically to this kind of 
services. Generic EMP’s like Amazon and Ebay, deal with a 
wide variety of products or physical goods. Making a deal on 
such marketplaces is generally as simple as searching, 
analyzing and buying. In some cases it is also possible to do 
some bidding or negotiations before you finalize a deal.  An 
EMPCS works on the same line. Although a simple 
marketplace where Cloud Users and Cloud Vendors strike 
deals for Cloud Services still does not address issues related 
to the fragmentation of such services. Enterprises still have 
to deal with the integration and maintenance of such services 
in case of multiple vendors and providers. This brings in the 
need for an intermediary or broker who would further 
simplify the consumption of Cloud Services [2].  This kind 
of a technology partner for enterprises is called the Cloud 
Services Broker or the Cloud Services Brokerage (CSB). The 
CSB or an intermediary improves upon the idea of an 
EMPCS by providing a single-point, aggregated and 
customized solution and owns the responsibility of security, 
governance and quality of all the services provided.  Early 
pioneers in the role of CSB’s are Jamcracker [13], Parallels 
[19] and AppDirect [20]. Various researches carried out by 
Buyya [3] and Gartner Inc. [2], have highlighted some 
detailed and useful information related to the role and model 
for a CSB.  
The focus within this paper is twofold, firstly to research 
existing models of EMP’s and secondly to identify processes 
and components that are required to build a state of the art 
model for EMPCS from a CSB point of view.  
 The contribution of this research paper is to identify the 
key activities that go within a CSB and also a proposed 
modification to the “Reference Model for Electronic 
Markets” (RM-EM) by Schmid & Lindemann [6] to suit the 
needs of a CSB. The newly proposed modification is keeping 
in mind the transactional phases that occur within a CSB 
model.  
Section II, gives an overview on the concept of an EMP. 
Section III, presents an overview of existing reference 
models in the same area. Section IV, describes the findings 
on models that detail the core processes and activities that 
are part of an EMP model. After describing briefly Cloud 
Services in Section V, keys difference between an EMP and 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

an EMPCS are described in Section IV. We also discuss our 
findings related to current CSB models in the same section. 
A proposal related to the suggested modifications in the RM-
EM to suit a “state of the art” CSB model will be presented 
in Section VII. The paper concludes with Section VIII. 
 
II. 
ELECTRONIC MARKETPLACE 
An Electronic Marketplace or E-Marketplace (EMP) 
refers to an online market environment over the Internet 
where both sellers and buyers act as market players to 
exchange goods and services.  
EMP’s are broadly categorized into different types 
according to their ownerships or governance [1]. These types 
are: 
a. 
Private Marketplace - owned by an individual 
company, which focus on connecting buyers and 
sellers to the marketplace.  
b. Public Marketplace - described as a free marketplace 
or Business-to-Business (B2B), is often owned by 
third party organization.  
c. 
Consortia Marketplace - created as a result of 
competitive companies from same industry and 
having same set of products and services.  
d. Community Marketplace - owned by multiple 
participants with varied backgrounds. 
 
There are three main functions of a marketplace: 
 
a. 
Matching of buyers and sellers - This is the major 
function within a marketplace. The products have to 
be aggregated and their features, specifications 
detailed so it becomes easy for a buyer to search 
and compare the products according to his needs. 
b. Facilitate the exchange of information, goods, 
services, and associated payments - Logistics, 
payment settlement, communication and tracking 
fall under this functionality. 
c. 
Providing an infrastructure that enables the 
efficient functioning of the market - Following of 
legal laws, government rules and regulations to 
allow the smooth functioning of the marketplace is 
a feature of this functionality. 
 
 
III. 
REFERENCE MODEL FOR AN E-MARKETPLACE  
A Reference model is a framework for understanding 
significant relationships among the entities of some 
environment, and for the development of consistent 
standards or specifications supporting that environment. A 
reference model is based on a small number of unifying 
concepts and is an abstraction of the key concepts, their 
relationships, and their interfaces both to each other and to 
the external environment may be used as a basis for 
education and explaining standards to a non-specialist [5]. 
Further to this a reference model also forms the basis of 
designing specific models for actual implementation in 
reality. 
The RM-EM defines three phases of a Market 
Transaction. They are depicted in Figure 1, and defined as 
follows: 
a. 
Information Phase: is the phase of information 
gathering or evaluation phase of requirements and 
products from various sellers. It includes all analysis 
done to check the suitability of a product to a 
customers needs. The information phase lasts until 
products are chosen and an offer is received. 
b. Agreement Phase: in this phase the conditions, 
pricing and other delivery related issues are 
negotiated. This phase ends with the signing of a 
legal contract between the customer and the 
supplier. 
c. 
Settlement Phase: involves the delivery and 
payment of the final goods according to the 
agreement. Furthermore, it involves information 
about payment, logistics (transport, warehousing), 
Information Transmission, tracking and tracing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The existing RM-EM proposed by Schmid & Lindemann 
[6] consists of four layers and three phases. As shown in 
Figure 2, each layer represents a view for EMs. It consists of 
two dimensions.  The horizontal dimension contains the 
three phases of market transactions, and the vertical 
dimension refers to the four layers or views (Business, 
Process, Transaction and Infrastructure). The upper two 
views represent the focus on organizational aspects and the 
two lower views represent the technological aspects of 
implementing such services. 
Figure 1: Phase Model of E-Market Transactions [6] 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
 
 
Selz and Schubert [7] define a similar model, which goes 
on to add an additional phase after the Settlement Phase 
called the “Communication phase” to phases of an E-
Commerce transaction.  
 
 
IV. 
MODEL FOR AN E-MARKETPLACE 
Taking the RM-EM into account, we first look at the 
second layer in the model, i.e. the Process View, and we 
identify processes that are part of this view. 
 
Before discussing models of a generic EMP, various 
activities or functions that are carried out within an EMP 
have to be explained. 
 
An EMP system performs the following functions or 
services [8]: 
• 
Organize the seller product Information 
• 
Organize the buyer needs and preferences 
• 
Facilitate commerce Transactions between the 
buyers and sellers  
• 
Provide a flexible environment for multiple 
intermediaries to participate in the flow and 
monitoring of the commerce transactions. 
 
Although there are many types of EMP’s, and each type 
will have a set of activities associated with it, many of the 
activities are common across all the EMP’s. These common 
activities can be classified as follows [9]: 
• 
Content publishing tools   
• 
Access management, authentication   
• 
Bid/ask trading   
• 
Auctions, on-sale   
• 
Catalogs, Custom catalogs   
• 
Parametric Search   
• 
Product Configurators   
• 
Aggregation   
• 
Supplier Management 
• 
Order Processing   
• 
Invoicing   
• 
EDI integration 
• 
Event notification 
• 
Fulfillment   
• 
Business Rules facility  
• 
Payment facility  
• 
Workflow  
• 
Reporting   
• 
Integration to Back Office  
 
A simplified list of processes (Marketing, Catalog 
Management, Order processing, Fulfillment and Settlement) 
form part of the model from Fingar, Kumar & Sharma  [9]. 
There will be more functional processes required for 
running an EMP, but the above-defined processes form the 
core functions of an EMP. Figure 3 shows a graphical 
representation of an application framework for an EMP with 
above mentioned processes and their relation to external 
customers. Table 1 goes a step further and reveals various 
activities within these processes. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Processes within Electronic Markets [9] 
 
1. Marketing: The Marketing process within an EMP 
involves all activities like identifying segments, 
products, building brand awareness and attracting 
customers. Defining target vendors and customers, 
promoting awareness; strategies for attracting new 
customers 
and 
customer 
retention 
are 
some 
functionalities, which play an important role in the 
marketing process of an EMP. A typical EMP has to 
identify the areas or specialized segments it prefers to 
work with, e.g. being clothing, sport, housing, 
electronics etc. A generic EMP caters to multiple fields 
and carries a larger number of products. The next stage 
is identifying and attracting the vendors or sellers who 
fit the segment description. Additionally, the process 
Figure 2: Reference Model for Electronic Markets [6] 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

involves identifying customers, segments, business or 
government agencies that would be interested in such 
field and attracting them to start using the EMP service. 
Advertising also forms a highly important activity 
within this process. As in a real world retailing market, 
building brand awareness and attracting customers is an 
important aspect with online markets. Furthermore, an 
EMP business has to analyze customer-buying 
behavior, industry trends and adapt its strategy 
accordingly. E.g. a customer who has recently bought a 
car from an automotive EMP will definitely be 
interested in accessories related to his car. A 
personalized marketing strategy that caters to existing 
customers and their recent buying behavior is definitely 
one of the activities that will stand out in a highly 
competitive industry. An intelligent system that predicts 
customer behavior will be an attractive prospect for a 
marketing process within an EMP. 
2. Catalog Management: refers to the various aspects of 
aggregation of different products into a structured and 
consistent way.  A new Vendor who is trying to sell his 
product through an EMP should have simple interface 
through which he can select product categories and 
features. For a customer who is trying to buy a product, 
it should be very simple to search and find a product 
according to his need. For segments with complex 
products and requirements, an ontology based approach 
for generating product classification is very useful. 
Shared and agreed ontology provides common, flexible, 
and extensible definitions of products and requirements 
for matchmaking and subsequent business processes 
[12].  
3. Order Processing: in this process, users finalize a 
product that fits their requirement and then go on to 
order it. This process starts with the product being 
added into the shopping cart and is followed by 
functionalities 
like 
the 
customer 
authentication, 
gathering the billing and shipping information, 
calculating the cost involved in shipping and addition of 
taxes to the cost and more. Finally, the customer 
proceeds to confirm the order. If online, the billing 
methods are authenticated and an electronic receipt is 
sent to the customer via his email; additionally, the 
receipt can be retrieved via his account within the EMP. 
Also, part of the process is providing a feature for the 
customer to track his orders from within his account. 
4. Fulfillment or Logistics: Right after the order is 
completed, it moves onto the fulfillment or logistics 
stage. It involves initiating the logistics related to 
packing and shipping a product to the customer. It starts 
with informing the external vendor of the order and 
shipping details. Once the order is shipped, the vendor 
updates the status into the EMP’s system and it shows 
up within the customer account and can be tracked 
regularly. 
5. Settlement: The settlement process involves clearing or 
settling of payments with the merchant banking if credit 
card transactions are involved. If other payment 
methods are involved for, e.g. payment on delivery, a 
receipt confirmation and updating of the payment status 
into the EMP system are activities that need to be 
performed. A major activity in this process will be also 
the settling of dues with the external vendors or 
supplier. This can be instant settlement once order is 
shipped or can be done at regular intervals, e.g., 
monthly or quarterly. 
 
In addition to these processes some EMP models specify 
an additional process related to customer support, though, in 
the above model, this activity is included within the 
settlement process. More and more companies have a strong 
customer support service, which helps in building a 
reputation among existing customers. This in turn results in 
satisfied customers who use the services again. 
 
 
TABLE 1: PROCESSES AND ACTIVITIES WITHIN ELECTRONIC 
MARKETPLACES [9] 
 
PROCESS 
ACTIVITIES 
Marketing 
! 
Merchandising 
! 
Advertising 
! 
Brand & Service Awareness 
! 
Promotion Strategy 
! 
Personalized Cross & up-selling 
! 
Trend Tracking& Analysis 
Catalog Management 
! 
Ontology / Catalog Classification 
! 
Content Publishing 
! 
Catalog Management 
! 
Catalog searching  
! 
Availability checking 
! 
Price and feature comparison 
! 
Personalization 
Order Processing 
! 
Shopping Cart 
! 
Approval and Authorization 
! 
Inventory Update 
! 
Tax and Cost Calculation 
! 
Shipping Estimates. 
! 
E-Receipts 
! 
Order status/ tracking 
Fulfillment 
! 
Warehouse Integration 
! 
Vendor Communication 
! 
Packaging and Shipping 
! 
Inventory Updating 
! 
Reporting  
Settlement 
! 
Invoicing 
! 
Payment Processing 
! 
BackOffice Integration 
Support 
! 
Helpdesk 
! 
Payment issue resolutions 
! 
Returns 
 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

V. 
CLOUD COMPUTING SERVICES 
Cloud Computing or Cloud Services refers to a delivery 
mechanism through which on demand computing resources 
are delivered to end user terminals (Personal Computers, 
Mobiles, Tablets, etc.), generally over the internet. Cloud 
Services have some major characteristics or advantages that 
set them apart from the traditional form of computing. 
Firstly, the user pays by usage, secondly, it is scalable or 
elastic, i.e., users can upgrade a service anytime they require 
more resources and thirdly, it is completely hosted and 
managed by the Cloud Service Provider (CSP), i.e. the user 
only requires an internet connection and a computer to 
access the service. Cloud Services can be broadly classified 
in three major categories: 
1. Software as a Service (SaaS) 
2. Platform as a Service (PaaS) 
3. Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) 
 
With technological advances more and more services are 
moving into the cloud and so the categories of cloud 
services have been expanding. New forms of emerging 
Cloud Services are Database as a Service (DBaaS), 
Communication as a Service (CaaS), Network as a Service 
(NaaS), Gaming as a Service (GaaS) etc. Most of these 
emerging forms of Cloud Services can however be broadly 
classified into the above-defined categories. 
 
VI. 
 E-MARKETPLACE FOR CLOUD SERVICES AND CLOUD 
SERVICE BROKERAGE 
Taking our research further from generic EMP’s to 
specific EMP’s tailored for Cloud Services or EMPCS, we 
identified existing models related to this segment.  
Garg, Buyya, and Vecchiola [10] have proposed a design 
for a market exchange framework called “Mandi” which 
allows consumers and providers to trade computing 
resources according to their requirements. The primary aim 
of Mandi is to provide a marketplace where the consumer’s 
resource requests and the provider’s compute resources can 
be aggregated, and matched using different market models.  
 
The main components defined in the Mandi architecture 
are: 
1. User Services 
• 
Registration Service: a user has to register before 
accessing the services of the exchange. The user 
details are stored in the database layer and are used 
for the purpose of authentication. 
• 
Authorization/ Authentication Service: service to 
authenticate a user and provide him access to 
eligible services. 
• 
Resource Service: allows a customer to search and 
find services that fit his requirement.  
• 
Auction Service: service required in case of bidding 
marketplace and allows the user to join in any 
auction and place his bid. 
2. Core Services 
• 
Meta-Broker Service: this service manages every 
single auction. It conducts the auction and all 
related activities. 
• 
Database Service: storage service, which maintains 
all the information and stores data to every single 
activity within the system, e.g. product details, user 
details, user bids, auction details, winner details 
and more. 
• 
Reservation Service: reserves the service and 
confirms to the service provider of the customers 
interest. 
• 
Accounting Service: stores the trading information 
of the user, like bids, successful and failed. 
 
Before going ahead in detailing the models for an 
EMPCS, some major differences between EMP’s and 
EMPCS’s will have to be explained. The one major 
difference is the type of products that are traded within these 
marketplaces. On one side through an EMP consumers buy 
or sell physical goods that will be shipped to us, while 
within EMPCS there are no physical goods. It is all virtual 
services that are bought and sold through an EMCPS. This 
reduces some activities like packing, shipping and logistics 
involved in delivering these goods. Another major factor of 
differentiation is that the services traded through EMPCS 
are not one-time deals. Rather, after buying of services, the 
services themselves need to be managed, maintained and 
updated by the trader or by the intermediary managing the 
EMPCS. So in a way it is long-term relation between the 
customer and the Services Provider. In case of a one time 
payment or deal based cloud product, there still has to be a 
support and other help provided to the user. Another major 
difference we identified through our research on this subject 
is that with such a new technology and multiple service 
providers, it is difficult for the customer to identify all the 
services he requires. Cloud Services requirement detailing, 
identification, discovery, integration and maintenance will 
always remain a major issue for customers due to non-
standardized features, description and type of these services. 
This is exactly where the role of an intermediary or Cloud 
Services Brokerage (CSB) comes into play.  
A CSB service gives the customer a solution for this exact 
problem with a single point, aggregated and personalized 
solution that fits well with the requirements of a customer 
needs. A Cloud Broker allows enterprises to put together 
services as required from a varied choice of service 
providers, platforms and cloud types. They also make it 
easier for the customer because they provide a simple and 
standardized single point interface. 
 
 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Plummer et al. [17] define three types of CSB’s: 
1. Aggregation Brokerage: delivers multiple services 
to 
enterprises. 
No 
additional 
feature 
or 
functionality is provided from the brokerage. They 
simply aggregate and provide the services. Simple 
market places, App Stores, etc., fall under this 
category. GetApp [18], a cloud marketplace for 
SaaS applications, is a classic example of such a 
brokerage. 
2. Integration Brokerage: this type of brokerages 
involves sourcing of varied type of services that are 
integrated at the broker's end and provided as a 
packaged service to the customers, enterprises or 
end-users.  
3. Customization Brokerage: involves a personalized 
or customized integrated service, which adds or 
modifies functionalities or services to enhance its 
functionality. It also involves consulting and other 
services related to implementing the cloud strategy 
of an organization. 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Cloud Services Broker Model [13] 
 
 By definition, a cloud broker is a third-party individual or 
business that acts as an intermediary between the purchaser 
of a cloud computing service and the sellers of that service. 
In general, a broker is someone who acts as an intermediary 
between two or more parties during negotiations. The CSB 
is an enhanced type of electronic marketplace for Cloud 
Services, which aggregate multiple service providers in a 
single location for customers to evaluate and buy Cloud 
Services. It also simplifies various other processes of 
maintaining, administration, billing and payment between 
external vendors and customers. Examples of CSB services 
are: Jamcracker [13] see also Figure 4, Ensim [14], 
Deutsche Börse Cloud Exchange [15] etc. 
To begin, processes that form part of such frameworks 
will be listed. Many of the existing models of CSB inherit 
processes from the earlier model of EMP as described. At a 
higher level, processes such as Marketing, Catalog 
Management, Order Processing, and Fulfillment (minus 
logistics) form an integral part of a model for EMPCS. 
Additional 
processes 
like 
Self-Servicing, 
Services 
Administration, Billing, Metering & Chargeback and 
Support are also important from a CSB viewpoint. Figure 5 
provides a graphical view of the above-mentioned processes 
within a CSB platform. 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Processes in a CSB platform [16] 
 
The processes and features we discussed above are 
described in detail in an online article by A. Mauro [16]. 
Figure 6 provides a graphical representation of the 
workflow between these processes. 
 
 Service Catalog: this is similar to the catalog management 
feature in generic EMP’s. It involves aggregation of content 
from external vendors or suppliers. This aggregated content 
is presented in a simplified format, which makes it easier for 
the customer to search, compare and finalize required 
services. An ontology-based approach is highly important 
here as Cloud Services vary in type and distribution so it 
becomes difficult to classify these Cloud Services into a 
single catalog. With such a new platform, there are very few 
standard classifications or ontologies to refer to and hence 
this presents a new area of research altogether.  
Integration: all external Cloud Services have to be 
integrated into the CSB platform so it is easier for customers 
to request a service that combines multiple providers. It 
provides the user with a single point access to combined 
services as per their needs. Also, billing and administration 
of services can be centralized into one single console once 
integrated. From an IT implementation point of view, the 
Vendors have to add specific API’s provided by CSB 
platforms for billing and administration into their Cloud 
Services 
Provisioning: a central console for controlling services, 
and user provisioning is an integral part of this process. 
Also part of this process is the policy based automated 
provisioning. 
Authentication and Authorization: Single Sign-On (SSO) 
uses a federated identity that provides access to all services 
with a single password. Roles-based authorization and 
access control provides granular control of cloud services 
access based on user role and privileges, password policy 
enforcement: enables uniform password policy across the 
enterprise 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Administration: administration of users accessing the 
service is part of this process. All activities related to user 
management, like new users registration, existing user 
management, deletion, updating of user details come under 
this process. 
Reporting: reporting, notification, and usage statistics are 
part of this process. Customers can access all these details 
form the Management Console of their account. 
Support: general helpdesk activities including submission 
of tickets, FAQ, knowledgebase, notifications and alerts are 
part of this process. Additionally, for a first level support the 
customer can be assisted directly by the service provider.  
Billing: all the billing procedures take place within this 
process. The customer can access all details regarding the 
services, usage, components and costs related to these 
services. This process should accommodate “Pay Per 
Usage” type of billing. All usage reports can also be 
accessed to view the billing calculation on the console. 
Payment and settlement services are also integrated into the 
platform for billing.  
 
 
 
Figure 6: Workflow of a CSB Platform [13] 
 
VII. PROPOSED REFERENCE MODEL OF A CLOUD SERVICES 
BROKERAGE 
Through the research on the Cloud Services and related 
EMPCS, it becomes obvious that the basic difference 
between an EMP and an EMPCS is more related to the final 
phase from the phase model of transactions in Section III of 
this paper. In an EMP, the products that are sold or bought 
are physical products or services and mostly the transactions 
in such cases end with the final settlement phase. Once the 
product is delivered and the payment is completed the 
transaction ends. In case of an EMPCS, there are no 
physical products that are traded. Rather, these are virtual 
computing services. Also, in case of an EMPCS, the 
settlement or the final phase is not the end of the 
transaction. Rather, it is the beginning of business 
relationship between the customer and cloud service 
provider.  
Hence, a modification of the RM-EM to suit a CSB 
service is proposed. According to our proposal, within the 
Reference 
Model 
for 
Electronic 
Marketplaces 
a 
Relationship Phase can replace the Settlement Phase. This 
Relationship Phase at the Transaction View includes a 
centralized console that is responsible for all activities 
related to service delivery, administration, maintenance 
subscription, billing, management of the cloud service and 
support. The Relationship Phase continues as long as there 
is business relation between the customer and Service 
Provider. Figure 7 below describes the proposed changes.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Proposed Reference Model for an EMPCS and CSB 
 
Core activities within a “state of the art” CSB from our 
research findings are: 
! 
Integration 
! 
Catalogue Management 
! 
Self Service & User Provisioning 
! 
User Authentication and Administration 
! 
Analytics & Reporting 
! 
Billing – Including Pay per Usage. 
! 
Support (Technical helpdesk & Generic support)  
 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The current research findings have thrown some good 
insights into how a state of the art on Electronic Marketplace 
for Cloud Service should be modeled in real world. In 
general, many of the processes involved in a generic EMP 
are also part of an EMPCS model. However, to make an 
EMPCS or a CSB successful in the real world, activities like 
platform 
integration, 
centralized 
administration, 
maintenance, reporting, technical helpdesk, standardized 
billing also have to be included so that the user experience 
does not suffer because of the varied and complex Cloud 
Services available in the market. Most of these activities fall 
within the final phase, i.e. the Relationship Phase that 
replaces the Settlement Phase from RM-EM proposed by [6]. 
Some other major improvements we can suggest through our 
findings and analysis, are firstly, an ontology based approach 
for classifying the varied Cloud Services which gains a lot of 
importance within an EMPCS much more that a generic 
EMP. A standardized ontology for Cloud Services is 
definitely an important factor for organizations wanting to be 
successful as Cloud Service Brokers. Much more research is 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

needed into such an approach. Secondly, intelligent systems 
that simplify the matching of customer needs to available 
products and search suggestions, also will add a lot to such a 
service. In terms of performance, such a system could 
decrease the customer’s service evaluation time compared to 
current EMPCS.  Intelligent agents within such systems can 
also ease out the human intervention required during 
integration of new services into a CSB platform.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Sundareswaran et al. , “A Brokerage-Based Approach for Cloud 
Service Selection”; IEEE Fifth International Conference on Cloud 
Computing, 2012, pp. 558-565. 
[2] 
Gartner Inc. , “Three types of Cloud Brokerage will enhance Cloud 
Services”, Gartner Incorporate, Stamford: 2009. 
[3] 
R. Buyya et al. , “Cloudbus Toolkit for Market-Oriented Cloud 
Computing”, Manjrasoft Pty Ltd, Melbourne, Australia, 2012. 
[4] 
C. Standing, P. E. D. Love, R. Stockdale, and D. Gengatharen.        
"Examining the Relationship Between Electronic Marketplace 
Strategy 
and 
Structure", 
IEEE 
Transaction 
on 
engineering 
management, vol. 53, no. 2, 2006, pp. 297. 
[5] 
D. Sawyer and L. Reich, “The Open Archival Information System: A 
Model 
for 
Preserving 
Digital 
Information”, 
2003, 
Tutorial 
Presentation: National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA). 
[6] 
B. Schmid and M. Lindemann, "Framework for Specifying, Building, 
and Operating Electronic Markets”, in International Journal of 
Electronic Commerce, Vol. 3, No. 2, Formal Aspects of Digital 
Commerce, Winter, 1998/1999,  pp. 7-21. 
[7] 
D. Selz and P. Schubert, “Web Assessment –A Model for the 
Evaluation and the Assessment of successful Electronic Commerce 
Applications”, 1998. 
[8] 
J. Sairamesh et al. , "E-Marketplaces: Architecture, Trading Models, 
and Their Role in Bandwidth Markets." transactions 6, no. 2, 1999, 
pp. 3-4. 
[9] 
P. Fingar, H. Kumar and T. Sharma, "21st Century Markets: From 
places to spaces". First Monday (Online) , vol. 4, no. 12, Available: 
http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/707/617. 
14.04.2014. 
[10] S. K. Garg, R. Buyya and C. Vecchiola, “Mandi: a market exchange 
for trading utility and cloud computing services”, 2011. 
[11] A. Umar, “Third Generation Distributed Computing Environments”, 
2004,  pp. 2-24. 
[12] D. K. W. Chiu et al. , “How Ontologies Can Help in an marketplace.” 
In: ECIS 2005 Proceedings, 2005, Table 1, pp. 2. 
[13] Jamcracker: 
http://www.jamcracker.com/product/jamcracker-
platform. 06.12.2013. 
[14] Ensim Automation Suite: http://www.ensim.com/. 30.01.2014. 
[15] Deutsche Börse Cloud Exchange, Zilch S. , Factsheet “The Worlds 
first 
vendor 
neutral 
Marketplace 
for 
IaaS 
resources”, 
http://dbcloudexchange.com/media/20140217_DBCE_Factsheet_engl
ish.pdf. 17.02.2014. 
[16] A. 
Mauro, 
“Jamcracker 
Cloud 
Broker 
Enabler”, 
http://vinfrastructure.it/2013/08/jamcracker-cloud-broker-enabler/. 
01.08.2013. 
[17] C. D. Plummer et al. , “Cloud Services Brokerage Is Dominated by 
Three Primary Roles”, Gartner, November 2011. 
[18] GetApp:  http://www.getapp.com. 06.12.2013. 
[19] Parallels: http://www.parallels.com. 06.12.2013. 
[20] AppDirect: http://www.appdirect.com 06.12.2013. 
 
 
 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

