Sociology View on Cloud Computing Value: 
Actor Network Theory Perspective 
 
Cheng-Chieh Huang/National Taiwan University 
Information Management Department of Management 
School 
Taipei, Taiwan 
e-mail: d94725007@ntu.edu.tw 
Ching-Cha Hsieh/National Taiwan University 
Information Management Department of Management 
School 
Taipei, Taiwan 
e-mail: cchsieh@im.ntu.edu.tw
 
 
Abstract—This article argues cloud computing value is 
generated through dynamic interactions of IT artifacts, 
services, organizations and their interests. From actor network 
theory, it illustrates Amazon, Google, and IBM, Microsoft 
cloud computing value networking and translation, inscription 
in their actor-network. Further implications such as cloud 
computing transactions types, standards, economics, and 
hybrid cloud trends are discussed. 
Keywords-cloud computing; actor network theory; IT value 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since Carr published “IT Doesn‟t Matter” article in 
Harvard Business Review, causing scholars‟ attention to 
reconsider information technology and its business value. 
Carr described that IT becomes a kind of commodity like 
water or electricity, IT is no longer valuable. Cloud 
computing transfers IT artifact into the service like water or 
electricity, realizes the Carr„s concepts. However, cloud 
computing is also considered as the strategic weapon helping 
enterprises to lower the cost, increase their competitiveness. 
Does cloud computing matter or not?  
Past literature on IT and business value divided into the 
two kinds of causality inferences. One is called technology 
determination, considers that, IT as strategic resource, or 
innovative tool, the specific IT can create value of 
organizations 
[5][6][7]. 
Another, 
called 
organization 
determination, considers that IT aligned with organization 
strategy, can increase competitiveness [8][9][10].  
But, as regards cloud computing, it seems brings the 
opportunities of technical innovation, but not all organization 
can all enjoy the interests immediately. It seems that IT and 
organization value generation are not for instance, the simple 
causality influence in this place [2].  
In addition, cloud computing is not only the technology 
innovation but also service innovation. If not considering the 
service model but prosperities of IT artifact, neglected the 
important part of cloud computing. 
In this article, we argue that cloud computing value is 
generated through dynamic interactions of IT artifacts, 
services, organizations and their interests.  Using sociology 
theory, actor network theory (ANT) [14] as a lens, we 
illustrate Amazon, Google, IBM, and Microsoft cloud 
computing development cases to demonstrate different 
business values generation processes. Finally, implications to 
future 
cloud 
computing 
technology 
and 
services 
development are proposed. 
In the following section, we first review the literature of 
cloud computing and actor network theory. Second, we 
describe our methodology. Third, the four case stories are 
illustrated. Fourth, we present analysis and discussion and 
fifth, we identify contributions, limitations and suggestions 
for future research. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A.  Cloud Computing 
Cloud Computing refers to the applications or IT 
resources delivered as services over the internet;  also, to the 
hardware and systems software in that datacenters that 
provides those services. Although it is popular, but definition 
of cloud computing is diversity [3][4]. Vaquero et al. give it 
more careful definition [4]: 
 
Clouds are a large pool of easily usable and accessible 
virtualized resources (such as hardware, development 
platforms and/or services). These resources can be 
dynamically re-configured to adjust to a variable load 
(scale), allowing also for an optimum resource utilization. 
This pool of resources is typically exploited by a pay-per-use 
model in which guarantees are offered by the Infrastructure 
Provider by means of customized SLAs (p.51) 
 
From this definition, it describes that cloud computing 
not only the enabled-technology but also the service model. 
Retrospect to the evolution history of cloud computing, 
the cloud computing was the co-evolution from the service 
innovation and technology innovation (see Fig. 1). That is, 
while we consider cloud computing, it is not pure the 
technology artifact but service included. 
That is, measuring cloud computing value cannot only 
derive from their IT characteristics but also its services or 
economic model. Cloud computing is a kind of techno-
economic network (TEN) that Callon mentioned [13]. 
 
145
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

 
Figure 1.  Evolution of cloud computing 
 
Moreover, 
cloud 
services 
and 
cloud 
computing 
technology form  a new ecosystem which allied with cloud 
services providers, cloud infrastructure operators, and cloud 
technology-enabled providers. Cloud computing includes 
technology, services, actors and their interests. 
B. Actor Network Theory 
Actor Network Theory (ANT) was developed in the 
sociology of science and technology [14]. ANT helps to 
describe how actors form alliances and involve other actors 
and use non-human actors (artifacts) to strengthen such 
alliances and to secure their interests. ANT consists of two 
concepts: translation and inscription. 
When an actor-network is created, consists of four 
processes of translation [15]: 
 
 
Problematization: The focal actors define interests 
that others may share, establishes itself as 
indispensable resources in the solution of the 
problems they have defined. They define the 
problems and solutions and also establish roles and 
identities for other actors in the network. As a 
consequence, focal actors establish an “obligatory 
passage point” for problem solution which all the 
actors in an actor-network must pass. 
 
Interessement: The focal actors convince other actors 
that the interests defined by the focal actors are in 
fact well in line with their own interests. Through 
interessement the developing network creates 
sufficient incitement to both lock actors into 
networks. 
 
Enrollment: Enrollment involves a definition of roles 
of each of the actors in the newly created actor-
network. It also involves a set of strategies through 
which focal actors seek to convince other actors to 
embrace the underlying ideas of the growing actor-
network and to be an active part of the whole project.  
 
Mobilization: The focal actors use a set of methods 
to ensure that the other actors act according to their 
agreement and would not betray. With allies 
mobilized, an actor network achieves stability. 
 
In addition to the four stages of translation, the process of 
inscription is critical to building networks, as most artifacts 
within a social system embody inscriptions of some interests. 
As ideas are inscribed in technology and as these 
technologies diffuse in contexts where they are assigned 
relevance, they help achieve socio-technical stability. 
Through ANT, we can understand how the focal case 
companies generate values through networks and inscribe 
their interests into their cloud computing technology and 
services. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
In this paper, we use the case study methodology [11] to 
examine the cloud computing and its business value. We 
choose four firms, two are internet service firms (Amazon, 
Google), and two are technology vendors firms (IBM, 
Microsoft). These four firms are famous with their using 
cloud computing. We collected documentary data included 
their cloud computing development histories, news, 
company reports, successful cases and independent analysis 
reports such as IDC, Gartner, and Ovum [12]. We also 
interviewed with their high level managers to talk about their 
strategies and values of cloud computing. All interview 
manuscripts are recorded. 
Further, we use the events analysis and ANT theory to 
understand cloud computing value generation processes. 
IV. 
CASE STUDY 
A. Amazon 
Amazon was established in 1994, the headquarter is 
located in Seattle of U.S. Amazon relied mainly on engaging 
in the online bookstore's selling in early days, then flowers, 
software, electronic goods, toy and other and retailed goods 
later. Amazon becomes first 500 big online retail businesses 
in America. The profits generated by Amazon are about 24 
billion dollars in 2009.  
The development of cloud services of Amazon begins 
with 2003 and offers web services for its e-commerce 
partners first. For example, partners want sell music CD in 
Amazon‟s online restores, listing the latest music purchase 
ranks and buyers‟ comments in order to promote the 
marketing of its CD and sell. The partners use Amazon‟s 
web services offered to develop the promotion web site.  
Amazon 
gradually 
transfers 
their 
internal 
IT 
infrastructure to cloud service serve their partners. For 
example, storage (S3), server computing resources (EC2) 
and even business process of e-commerce, such as 
fulfillment process (FWS), payment process (FPS), the 
personnel matching process (Mechanical Turk). 
Through the cloud computing development histories of 
Amazon, we understand that Amazon early is to offer 
website designing or developing tools to help its partners to 
sell on Amazon online store. After developing various kinds 
of services, Amazon strengthens the whole competitiveness 
of supply chain operation efficiency with her partners. 
Hosting
ASP
Utility
Computing
Web Technology
•Computing Power
•Network Bandwidth
Web 
commercialization
Distributed
Computing
Grid
Computing
Cloud 
Computing
peer-to-peer
technology
virtualization
Multi-tenancy
Service 
Model
Enabled
Technology
Service Model Innovation
Technology Innovation
•Web 1.0
•Web 2.0
Pay-by-use
Outsourcing
•Green IT
•Mobile Computing
146
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

B. Google 
Google was established in 1998, the headquarters located 
in California of U.S.  Relying on searching engine to attract 
commercial advertisement, Google becomes the biggest 
search engine company in the world. The Google earns about 
23.6 billion dollars in 2009.  
The active one in recent years of Google carries on every 
tactics overall arrangement, including: merge YouTube, 
developing cell-phone operating system, Android ,Google 
Chrome browser, Google Earth and cloud services etc., 
attracted attention by the market.  
Google‟s clouds services raise from Google API 
development in 2005. The main purpose of Google API is to 
let consumers log in their websites frequently, in order to 
increase the web traffics, strive for the advertiser to put their 
advertisement on Google websites. 
Later, Google begins to develop various types of cloud 
services, for instance: Google Docs, Google Finance, Google 
Spreadsheets, Google APE, etc., in order to offer consumers 
and website designers. 
For Google, the search engine traffics equal to money 
(traffic=$). That is, a series of services are developed and 
companies merge are to rely mainly on improving the traffics. 
For example, Google API, Gmail, Google Apps, Google 
APE, with attracting website designers or consumers in order 
to attract advertisers to carry on more advertisement . 
YouTube or Open Social API acquired and merged or linked 
social community websites in order to get popularity then 
increasing the traffics. Android operating system cell-phone, 
Google Chrome can hope for operating system and browser 
interface on new developing handheld devices of leading 
factor, ethnicity offering handheld devices to surf the net that 
has already made the service of Google can be more 
convenient, connect the flow fetched in order to increase its 
other equipment.  
For Google, cloud services support Google‟s “traffic 
equals to money” strategy, that attract more net friends on 
her search engine, then get more profits from advertisers. 
C. IBM 
IBM was established in 1924, regard making enterprise 
information hardware, such as electronic calculator, large-
scale mainframe, the first generation of personal computer, 
etc. Recently, she moves towards more service and software 
providers to big enterprises.  
The development of cloud service was introduced by 
IBM to help her small independent software vendors (ISVs) 
partners located worldwide using IBM‟s server or storage 
through internet. These ISVs do not need invest 
hardware/software and can develop software through IBM‟s 
platform. Later, IBM developed their cloud computing 
technology into products that support their enterprise 
customers to build up the cloud services. Further, IBM 
provides online cloud services to realize their cloud 
computing technology.  
IBM attempts to use the cloud computing technology 
products and leverage their consulting services and software 
implementation experiences in the large-scale enterprise's 
market and then explores small and medium enterprises and 
on-line service companies market.  
Take her cloud services implementation experiences in 
UPS for example, IBM combined cloud services with their 
software implemented in UPS. IBM supported their 
customers, UPS and also touched UPS‟s online partners. It is 
so-called two-sided market strategy includes the large-scale 
enterprise software service market that IBM has already 
deeply engaged and new developing medium and small-scale 
online service companies.  
For IBM, cloud services and technology play a bridge 
role to explore on-line and small medium enterprise (SME) 
markets opportunities. 
D. Microsoft 
Microsoft was established in 1983, it is early in leading 
position which occupies operating system and suit software 
on the PC of MS-DOS operating system, MS-Office with 
successful series promptly.  
It was about 58 billion dollars that Microsoft earns in 
2009. Among them in the suit software / the commercial suit 
software, the camp of Office series accepts and accounts for 
all software camp to accept more than ninety percent.  
Microsoft realizes that trends moving towards online 
services, PC or on-promise software is no longer the only 
choice. So, on one hand, Microsoft defends tenaciously and 
already has status of operating system, software on PC; on 
the other hand it can combine the various terminal devices 
and offer the software, on-line services.  
This is the concept of “software plus services" or ”3 
screens and a cloud" that Microsoft announced her strategy 
in 2009. For Microsoft, the cloud services or cloud 
computing technology help her transit to the new "network 
operating system" smoothly from combing their traditional 
on-promise software. 
 
V. 
 ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Cloud Computing Value Networking 
Callon described techno-economic network (TEN) as “a 
coordinated set of heterogonous actors which interact more 
or less successfully to develop, produce, distribute and 
diffuse methods for generation goods and services.” From 
Callon‟s point of view, the economic value is generated from 
actors, intermediaries (no-human), translation and their 
relationships [13]. 
From the four cases described above, we can understand 
that different companies interpret that different opportunities 
of cloud computing, and align their different strategies and 
try to generate their values. 
For them, the cloud computing is not only the technology 
artifacts, but also services, service models and their 
customers and partners. It generates value through 
heterogonous actors with IT, services through networking 
activities. We call that they “networking IT/service value” 
(see Fig. 2). Followings are the explanations: 
 
Amazon: Cloud computing services are innovated 
from their internal IT, originally support their 
147
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

business process. Then, Amazon enrolls their e-
commerce partner‟s adopting their web services, and 
then cloud services embedded in their daily business 
process. Amazon strengthens their business values 
through the partners‟ networks formed by IT and 
cloud services. 
 
Google: Google‟s cloud services, IT products, tools 
all support their business strategy, the traffic equals 
to money. Moreover, these services, products 
leverage each other, and then intensify whole 
network values. 
 
IBM: Cloud services originally support IBM‟s small 
independent software vendor (ISV) partners to 
leverage 
IBM‟s 
software/hardware 
resources 
through internet. Then, IBM strengthens his 
technology products, then transfers to cloud services 
to support their secondary market, online/SME 
customers. The cloud services bridge a new market. 
 
Microsoft: Microsoft leverages cloud services to 
complement her on-promise software, and strength 
their device product‟s value. Microsoft tries to enroll 
her customers to their value network. 
 
B. Translation and Inscription of Cloud Computing 
Although these four case companies try to form their 
actor-network mentioned above, but they still on their 
different translation stages (see Table I). For example, 
Amazon enrolls her online store partners into the actor-
network and stabilizes network by embedding supply chain 
processes into their technology. Amazon‟s online store 
partners are not easy to betray because of locked operation 
processes in cloud computing technology and services. 
Although Google enrolls their customers but still considers 
how to stabilize their customers using their services. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Value networking of case companies 
IBM coordinates with Amazon and Google to connect 
the online SME markets and interest her ISVs partners to 
join the actor-network. Microsoft is also on his way 
persuading her ISVs to join actor-network. 
Through ANT lens, we also can understand these four 
foal companies inscribe their ideas and strategies into their 
cloud computing technology and services (see Table I). For 
example, Amazon inscribes efficient supply chain processes 
into their cloud commuting technology for their online store 
partners. In the future, Amazon will release more technology 
and services combined with supply chain processes. IBM 
inscribes their connection ideas into cloud computing 
technology and services. She tries to use cloud computing 
technology to connect online SME markets and traditional 
enterprise markets. Google inscribes everything online into 
their services and Microsoft tries to defense their on-promise 
software markets. 
 
C. Implications to Cloud Computing Values and 
Technology/Services Development 
Regarding our cases in this study, these companies‟ 
inscribes their ideas or strategies into cloud computing 
technology or services. Are the properties of technology or 
service model possible to provide to other actor-network? 
For examples, Amazon‟s cloud computing is for online 
commerce, short, stateless transactions, it will not be suitable 
for 
long, 
stateful 
traditional 
enterprise 
transactions. 
Moreover, these cloud computing services are easy to scale 
out to many servers. But the traditional enterprise business 
services are suitable to single virtualization machine. That is, 
the cloud computing technology will be more diversity and 
suitable for their services usage and contexts. 
Second, it is not easy to have the de facto or open cloud 
computing standard, because these focal companies try to 
develop their own technology or services and generate their 
actor-network values. But they need expand their networks 
to enroll more members. That is, brokering services or 
middleware technology development prop sects well. 
Third, it seems the cost down of IT resources the most 
popular considerations in cloud economics. But from our 
analysis above, business values are the key for actors to join 
the network. For example, Amazon‟s e-commerce partners 
get value from their operation process efficiency. UPS joins 
IBM‟s network, because of integrating her physical logistic 
process and online services.  
Fourth, business values or business models are keys to 
enroll members to join cloud computing actor-network. That 
is, the focal companies will blur boundaries between on-line 
services and cloud computing services (pay-by-usage) model, 
on-promise software and services. It also means that will 
hybrid traditional enterprise technology and cloud computing 
technology as commerce solutions. 
 
 
 
 
 
Internal
business
process
operation
performance
partner‟s
web site
cloud services
partner‟s
business
process
cloud services
2
1
4
3
5
6
Internal IT
cloud
service#1
cloud
service#1
IT#1
product#1
business
strategy
b. Google
a. Amazon
cloud services 
ISVs partners
IT products
, org strategy
ISVs, SI partners
online partners
(ex: Google)
cloud services 
online/SME
customers
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
c. IBM
d. Microsoft
cloud services 
customers
devices 
on-promise IT products,
org strategy 
1
1
2
2
2
3
148
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

TABLE I.  
TRANSLATION AND INSCRIPTION OF CLOUD COMPUTING 
Focal 
Company 
Translation 
Inscription 
Amazon 
Problemaitziaion, 
Interessement, 
Envrollment 
Mobilization 
Efficient supply  
chain process 
Google 
Problemaitziaion, 
Interessement, 
Envrollment 
Services on line 
IBM 
Problemaitziaion, 
Interessement 
Smart Services 
 connection 
Microsoft 
Problemaitziaion, 
Interessement 
Software plus  
Services 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this article, we discuss the cloud computing value and 
future technology/service development through ANT theory. 
We argue that cloud computing values generated through 
networking of IT, services, organizations and their interests. 
We also implicate cloud computing technology and services 
will be more diversity, hybrid and suitable for their services 
usage and contexts. 
This paper is limited to the four company cases analysis. 
Future research can conduct more companies‟ cases, and 
analyze more detail activities and other actors‟ responses and 
their inscriptions, translations in their actor-networks. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  N. G. Carr, “IT doesn‟t matter,” Harvard Business Review, pp. 41-49, 
2003. 
[2]  M. L. Markus, and D. Robey, “Information technology and 
organization change: casual structure in theory and research,” 
Management Science,  pp. 583-598, 1988. 
[3]  M. Armbrust,  A. Fox, R. Griffith,  A. D. Joseph, R. Katz, A. 
Konwinski, G. Lee, D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, and M. 
Zaharia, “Above the clouds: A Berkeley view of cloud computing,” 
http://radlab.cs.berkeley/edu/, pp. 1-23,  2009. 
[4]  L. M. Vaguero, L. Rodero-Merino, J. Caceres, and M. Lindner, “A 
break in the blouds: Toward a cloud definition,” ACM SIGCOMM 
Computer Communication Review, pp. 50-55, 2009. 
[5]  K. Lyytinen, and G. M. Rose, “The disruptive nature of information 
technology innovations: The case of internet computing in systems 
development organizations,” MIS Quarterly, pp. 557-595, 2003. 
[6]  N. Melville, K. Kraemer, and V. Gurbaxani, “Review: Information 
technology and organization performance: An integrative model of IT 
business value,” MIS Quarterly, pp. 283-322, 2004. 
[7]  T. Ravichandran, and C. Lertwongsatien, “Effect of information 
systems resources and capabilities on firm performance: A resource-
based perspective,” JMIS, pp. 237-276, 2005. 
[8] M. Benaroch, S. Shah, and M. Jeffery, “On the valuation of 
multistage information technology investments embedding nested real 
options,” JMIS, pp. 239-261, 2006. 
[9] J. F. Fairbank, G. Labianica, H. K. Steensma, and R. Metters, 
“Information processing design, choices, strategy, and risk 
management performance,” JMIS, pp. 293-319, 2006. 
[10]  T. A. Byrd, B. R. Lewis, and R. W. Bryan, “The leveraging influence 
of strategic alignment on IT investment: An empirical examination,” 
Information & Management, pp. 308-321, 2006. 
[11]  R. K. Yin, Case Study Research, Design and Methods, 2nd edition, 
CA : Sage Publications, 1994. 
[12]  G. McCulloch, Documentary Research in Education, History and the 
Social Sciences, London: Routledge Falmer , 2004. 
[13]  M. Callon, “Techno-economic networks and irreversibility,” in A 
Sociology of Monsters: Essays on Power, Technology, and 
Domination, J.  Law (ed.). New York: Routledge, 1991, pp. 132-164. 
[14] M. Callon, and B. Latour, “Unscrewing the big Leviathan”, in 
Advances in Social Theory and Methodology, K. Knorr-Cetina, and 
A.V. Cicourel, (eds.). London: Routledge & Kegan, 1981, pp. 277–
303. 
[15]  M. Callon, “Some elements of a sociology of translation: 
Domestication of the scallops and the fishermen of St. Brieuc Bay”, 
iin Power, Action and Belief,  J. Law, (ed.). London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul, 1986, pp.197–233. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
149
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

