Eliciting Risk, Quality and Cost Aspects in
Multi-cloud Environments
Victor Munt´es-Mulero and Peter Matthews
CA Technologies
CA Labs Europe
Email: {Victor.Muntes, Peter.Matthews}@ca.com
Aida Omerovic
SINTEF
Oslo, Norway
Email: aida.omerovic@sintef.no
Alexander Gunka
BOC Information Systems
Austria
Email: alexander.gunka@boc-eu.com
Abstract—With the increasing number of providers offering
cloud-based services, new opportunities arise to build applications
capable of avoiding vendor lock-in issues. Such applications
are developed in multi-cloud environments that allow replacing
services with those offered by alternative providers. While this
may improve quality and provide independence from a single
cloud service provider, it also brings new risks. Being able to
assess risks and those quality aspects that are speciﬁcally related
to multi-cloud environments is essential in order to design reliable
applications based on the use of cloud services. Although a lot of
work has been done to study risks and quality aspects for cloud
services, this is usually focused in single-provider scenarios. In
this position paper, we discuss several risks and quality aspects
that are speciﬁcally related to multi-cloud environments.
Keywords- Multicloud, Risk assessment, Quality predic-
tion, Cost prediction
I.
INTRODUCTION
Many applications and Cloud Service Providers (CSPs)
replicate or combine services from multiple clouds or multi-
clouds (also called cloud mashups [9]) to avoid the risk of ven-
dor lock-in. New architectures, technologies, and standards are
being proposed to support collaboration among multiple cloud
systems [1], [2], [6], [7]. Although direct collaboration among
applications hosted by different clouds is still restricted [9],
the adoption of these proposals will improve the ease of
migration from one provider to another and increase open
competition. Nevertheless, the current environment already
offers many opportunities for collaboration among services
offered by different providers without requiring standards or
important changes to the delivery model.
In multi-cloud environments, it is essential to provide tools
that guide multi-cloud application architects to choose the ser-
vices providing the necessary quality and ensuring acceptable
level of risk. Previous work has focused on describing quality
aspects and metrics to measure the suitability of a cloud service
from a multi-dimensional perspective. An example of this
is the Service Measurement Index (SMI) [10], a framework
designed to allow for quick and reliable comparison of IT
business services. SMI establishes the basis for comparing
isolated services in regard of several categories such as for
instance accountability, agility or assurance. However, they do
not explicitly analyze these aspects in a multi-cloud context.
Based on this quality aspects and other factors, model-
based decision making system help application designers to
choose the cloud components that better ﬁt their needs. Some
of these major factors include functional and non-functional
properties, as well as cost and the added value. A trade-off
between such factors is the basis for decision making. This
trade-off is particularly complex between the non-functional
factors, the variable parts of the architecture, and the cost of
the selected solutions. The variability, as well as incomplete
information or knowledge, are also sources of risk. Since
functional requirements are less ﬂexible and speciﬁed rather
early, and since the added value is strongly related to functional
properties, the factors that are tuneable and highly interrelated
are risk, quality and cost.
In this paper, we discuss the risks related to cloud services
in a multi-cloud environment, the quality aspects that are spe-
ciﬁc to that environment and make some cost considerations.
We analyze three important issues which are essential in multi-
cloud environments: interoperability issues between services
offered by different providers, the ease of migration from a
current service to a new equivalent service, and the security
issues that arise from the fact that conﬁdentiality, integrity,
availability, etc. does not depend on a single provider.
This paper is organized as it follows. Section II presents
related work. Section III brieﬂy describes multi-clouds es-
cenarios and describes the aspects considered in this paper.
Section IV presents a summary of quality aspects to be
considered. Section V provides a brief description of costs
that must be taken into account in this type of environment.
In Section VI, we discuss risks that must be considered in a
multi-cloud. Finally, Section VII presents the conclusions and
draws some future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
As a basis for the elicitation of the adequate quality
characteristics, the software product quality standard ISO/IEC
9126 deﬁnes quality as the totality of features and character-
istics of a software product that bear on its ability to satisfy
stated and implied needs. The ISO 9126 standard provides
an established speciﬁcation of decomposed quality notions
with their qualitative and quantitative deﬁnitions. The standard
deﬁnes a quality model for external and internal quality, and for
quality in use. The characteristics of the internal and external
quality model are functionality, reliability, usability, efﬁciency,
maintainability and portability. These are in turn decomposed
into a total of 34 sub-characteristics.
SMI [10] is a standardization effort from the Cloud Ser-
vices Measurement Index Consortium (CSMIC) consisting of
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Fig. 1: Examples of two different multi-cloud scenarios
academic and industry organizations. The Service Measure-
ment Index (SMI) uses a series of characteristics and measures
to create a common means to compare different services from
different suppliers. The characteristics are categorized as Us-
ability, Performance, Agility, Security and Privacy, Financial,
Assurance and Usability. Each of these characteristics has a
number of measures that can be used to evaluate the risk in
using a service. For example in the accountability category
one of the measured attributes is Compliance and another is
Service-Level Agreements (SLA) veriﬁcation both of which
can be used to create a risk measure for the service and the
provider. The work presented in this paper is based both on
the ISO standard and SMI conclusions.
In order to enable risk monitoring based on indicators
or metrics, there is a need not only to identify the relevant
indicators, but also to understand how to relate the indicators
to potential risks, and how to aggregate the monitored values
into risk levels [5]. In this paper, we identify both risks
and quality aspects related to multi-cloud environments. To
our knowledge, none of the previous work has been focused
on jointly analysing risk, quality and costs in a multicloud
environment.
III.
MULTI-CLOUD SPECIFIC NEEDS AND CHALLENGES
We deﬁne a multi-cloud application as any piece of soft-
ware using several cloud services hosted by two or more differ-
ent providers. Usually, two different scenarios are considered
when referring to multi-cloud environments. Figure 1 depicts
these two cases. In the ﬁrst case (a), an application is replicated
to improve resilience, and may also be used to avoid vendor
lock-in. This means that the application has two independent
instances using the same type of cloud services (A, B, C in the
ﬁgure) in two different cloud providers. In the second case (b),
a single instance of the application runs different cloud services
hosted by two or more cloud providers. In this latter case,
it is also possible to replicate services to ensure availability.
This would also imply synchronization. Because of the need
for high interoperability between services offered by different
providers, scenario (b) is in general more complex to manage
and may potentially involve larger risk compared to (a). In fact,
scenario (a) may be considered a particular case of scenario
(b). Because of this, we focus on scenario (b) in this paper.
The use of multiple cloud services from multiple providers
adds a new dimension of complexity to an already complex
cloud computing scenario. Heterogeneity caused by the ex-
istence of independent providers that have created their own
business models, protocols, processes and formats generates
an increasing number of risks to be taken into account when
creating a new application using a multi-cloud strategy. In
this paper, we emphasize three essential aspects that must be
considered in a multi-cloud environment:
•
Heterogeneity of services offered by different
providers results in reduced interoperability: the
lack of standard interfaces for services in different
clouds and the creation of independent proprietary
systems by each provider, make multi-cloud environ-
ments very heterogeneous. Interoperability problems
may range from technical issues, such as messaging
interfaces or quality of service, to semantic, orga-
nizational or legal issues. This heterogeneity is an
important risk to consider at design time, since it will
inﬂuence the capacity of an application architect to
decide between one service and another. In terms of
quality, a service will be highly interoperable with
other systems if it can be combined in collaboration
with many other services, from the same or other cloud
service providers.
•
Migration between services offered by different
CSPs is an essential operation to ensure the com-
pliance with the application requirements: one of
the most common reasons to deploy an application in
a multi-cloud environment may include increasing the
cloud service catalog and increasing the capacity of
users to migrate from one service to another in case
the requirements on the application are not fulﬁlled.
We call this capacity replaceability, and it represents
the ease to migrate from one service to another to
replace the ﬁrst one. It will be essential to decompose
migration processes from one cloud service to another
into several ﬁner-grained steps, and analyze the quality
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

aspects to be considered in the process.
•
Security threats are increased in multi-cloud com-
puting environments: increasing the number of ser-
vices and providers, will increase the complexity of
the overall system and the number of potential attacks.
Control over customers data decreases, especially
because of potential migration between services of
different providers. The continuous communication
of data between services in different clouds may
also result in storing data in intermediary less secure
external storage systems, increasing the overall vul-
nerability and potentially compromising conﬁdential
information. In terms of data privacy, multitenancy
makes it more difﬁcult to guarantee conﬁdentiality of
sensitive information.
These three aspects have been selected and prioritized after
several interviews with industrial and academic partners. They
have been chosen based on experience and from studying
different migration processes. They represent three essential
requirements in a multi-cloud environment: coordination be-
tween services offered by different providers, capacity to re-
place a service by another one, and the increase of complexity
in the system increasing possible points of failure in terms of
security. Note that, we do not claim this to be a comprehensive
list of possible aspects to analyze, but we believe they are a
good starting point to establish the basis to deﬁne risk and
quality in multi-clouds.
IV.
QUALITY ASPECTS IN MULTI-CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS
In this section, we analyze those quality aspects related to
the issues detected in Section III that must be considered in
a multi-cloud environment: interoperability, replaceability and
security. Figure 2 summarizes the quality aspects considered
related to these three issues.
A. Interoperability
The interoperability problems of cloud services in the con-
trolled environment of a single CSP, are exacerbated by mixing
services from different providers and may imply incompat-
ibilities in other areas of a mixed service implementation.
From the point of view of a developer, it will be important
to know the degree of interoperability of a certain service
with respect to other services it must interact with. Figure 3
depicts the scenario studied in this case. Figure 2 divides these
incompatibilities in four different areas: technical, semantic,
organizational and legal. The Technical interoperability quality
aspects refer to the capacity of two or more services offered by
different providers to communicate through common protocols
and to jointly guarantee a certain quality of service. For
instance, possible indicators that might be used to evaluate
the degree of technical interoperability might be the number
of standardized interfaces that can be compared towards the
total number of interfaces used by the service, or the average
recovery time of the service or other performance aspects.
Semantic aspects refer to aspects related to the data syntax
consistency and the data quality. These data related aspects are
relevant for interoperability since only two or more services
offering mechanisms to guarantee global data properties might
be combined in the same application. Organizational aspects
Fig. 3: Interoperability in a multi-cloud environment: services
offered by different providers interacting with each other.
indicate how adaptable a service is to several work processes.
Since each of these work processes might be established by
different providers, it is important that a service in a multi-
cloud environment is adaptive to ﬁt the requirements of each
work process in each case. Changes in a work process may
require changes in a speciﬁc cloud service that is already
used. In a migration process, choosing a new cloud service
candidate to replace an existing service may depend on the
capacity of this new service to adapt to the existing work
process. Compliance with existing cloud service standards in
terms of role and functionality of that speciﬁc cloud service
will be essential to ensure good organizational interoperability.
Regarding legal aspects, we focus on regulatory compliance.
Compliance in this case may be understood as a list of laws
that are observed by the service provider. Some may be
mandated by the customer such as Sarbanes-Oxley [8], some
by government, e.g. Data Protection act [3]. It is the presence
or absence of compliance that is of interest. A purchasers
compliance ofﬁcer will provide a number of regulations that
any service would have to observe and these would be part of
the requirements gathering.
Several aspects are likely to be difﬁcult to measure. A
good example is the number of standards in the communication
capability aspect. Standards for cloud service communications
are evolving and several attempts have been made to create an
agreed list of them. NIST has a list of recommended standards
and the European Commission has created a Cloud Standards
Coordination (CSC) that is being administered by ETSI [4].
The requirements of multi-cloud applications may need some
or all of the relevant standards to be adhered to.
B. Intercloud Replaceability
Migration is an essential operation linked to multi-cloud
environments. The capacity of a software architect to redesign
an application and replace existing services by other services
with the same or similar functionalities deﬁnes in fact the
realism of considering cloud mashups. For instance, a cloud
database service may integrate application building tools that
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Fig. 2: Quality aspects related to multi-cloud environments
might be used by our system, such as APIs based on web
services standards. If the other services interacting with this
cloud database service assume that these tools exist, moving
to a new cloud database that it does not provide these tools
will require reengineering part of our system and it may have
an unaffordable cost. In this subsection, we deﬁne and analyse
the migration process to ﬁnd the quality aspects that make
a service easy to migrate from. We focus on the case where
a service is replaced by one or more services offered by a
different cloud provider. We consider two situations:
•
The current cloud service does not fulﬁll the require-
ments of the system: this may happen for instance
when the service is updated or modiﬁed, when the
amount of information handled by the application
grows making it impossible to comply with certain
pre-established SLAs, etc. Usual examples may range
from a variation in the cost that makes the service not
competitive compared to other services of the same
type, to a change in policies and functionalities that
affects security, availability, resilience, or any other
important aspect.
•
The requirements of the system have changed: one
or more cloud services may not fulﬁll these new
requirements and need to be replaced.
Figure 4 depicts a generic process of service-to-service
migration. First, a cloud service is selected for migration.
Depending on the reason for migration, it may be necessary
to review the requirements deﬁned at design-time. After this,
one or more new candidate cloud services must be selected.
In order to simplify this step, Figure 4 considers a single
candidate in the process. Once we have found a candidate
target service to migrate to, we can export both data and
the conﬁguration from the original service. At this point, it
is usually necessary to enter an intentional contract with the
new service provider. In some cases, it will be also necessary
to inform the old service that we are initiating a process to
retire it. In this situation, the old service and the new one
may be active at the same time during the testing and training
process. This will depend on the availability requirements of
the application migrating one of its cloud-based components.
In the next step, it is important to adjust or deﬁne a new
workﬂow for the application. This might be necessary if the
new service is not perfectly compatible with the old one or if
the application was redesigned in a way that the workﬂow
was altered. After this, we can start preparing the testing
environment and the new service. Usually, the testing process
will be divided in several phases.
In general, it is necessary to carry out functionality and
performance testing in a test environment. In this situation,
data needs to be kept synchronised. Following successful
functionality and performance testing, the service may move
to a modiﬁcation of A/B testing so that the application is
tested with the new service in production before switching
over completely. In case requirements are not satisﬁed, we
must start the process again. If they are fulﬁlled, we can start
the users training process and eliminate the old service if this
is still active. Once this has been done, the application can be
deployed again using the new cloud service.
Figure 2 shows several quality aspects related to replace-
ability. Possible indicators of quality related to intercloud
replaceability may include the number of proprietary conﬁgu-
rations that can be exported or imported based on a standard
format, completeness, precision and relevance of tests, time
required to migrate large amounts of data, etc.
C. Security
Preserving security becomes more complex in a multi-
cloud environment. Trust among the different cloud service
providers is essential. It is difﬁcult to handle the heterogeneity
of the different security rules established by each provider,
making it complex to monitor security policies in composite
services. Besides, an additional challenge involves data and
identity privacy preservation when several services from dif-
ferent providers collaborate.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Fig. 4: Description of a generic migration process
In Figure 2, we classify quality aspects related to security
in the usual areas: conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability, non-
repudiation, accountability and authentication and authoriza-
tion. In order to preserve data privacy, it is crucial to establish
agreements with other providers on the level of privacy of
data and identities. Trust in general must be guaranteed by
explicit agreements or shared protocols between providers.
An alternative solution involves using reliable proxies for
communication, but services still need to be able to establish
agreements on the ﬂy and secure delegation with these proxies.
Finally, it will be important to evaluate services depending on
the need to store data in public storage system in order to share
this data with other services. In this case, data are exposed to
a larger number of threats
V.
COST IN MULTI-CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS
Besides risk and quality, we consider another essential
dimension: cost. SMI and other previous proposals describe
cost-related aspects in cloud computing environments. In a
multi-cloud environment, an extra cost appears that may be
also considered in the decision-making process: the cost of
migration. Migrating from one cloud service to another may
involve several economic costs that must be considered at
design time. These costs may depend on the personnel involved
in the migration process, the cost incurred by keeping the
old and the new cloud services running in parallel during the
migration process, the cost of the hardware or other resources
necessary to perform the migration, or the cost of training the
users of the application (note that this cost is also necessary
in other situations, but it is usually unavoidable in a migration
process).
VI.
SPECIFIC RISKS IN MULTI-CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS
In this section, we sketch a list of possible potential risks
that may be found in a multi-cloud system. These risks are
based on the analysis of the elicited quality aspects that make
multi-cloud environments different from clouds provided by a
single provider.
1) Risk of unexpected lack of replacement and consequent
vendor lock-in: a certain cloud service may not fulﬁll require-
ments, or requirements may change. In this situation a different
service may be needed but it may not be possible to ﬁnd a
new service provided by another vendor which is interopera-
ble with the other services of the system. Two theoretically
equivalent services might differ in several relevant aspects.
The heterogeneity between different CSPs is usually high as
they typically use proprietary interfaces and conﬁgurations.
Services are also highly integrated with lower-level services
offered by the same CSP. Examples of this may be lack of
common SLA enforcement systems, use of non-compatible
technologies, lack of compatibility in the communications
protocol, lack of shared mechanisms to ensure data consistency
and quality, the existence of services which are not strictly
equivalent and miss some important functionalities, or the lack
of services compliant with certain regulations. If this problem
appears and the need for migrating from the original service is
real, this may even force the migration of other services apart
from the service which is not compliant with requirements.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

2) Risk of new security breaches due to the increased
complexity of the system and new communications: data needs
to ﬂow from one service to another, hosted by different
providers. This creates new points of failure and potential
security issues. For instance, this may be caused by the lack of
shared security protocols and data integrity mechanisms, lack
of forensic mechanisms to be compliant with regulations, the
lack of shared authentication systems, etc.
3) Risk of non-viable migration due to migration costs and
complexity: a developer may not be aware of the cost and
complexity of migrating from a certain service chosen to be
part of the application to other similar services (see Figure 4).
This might become a risk if it is necessary to migrate from that
service to another one. As we have discussed, a usual problem
in a migration process is the lack of compatible data formats,
making it necessary to perform transformations that require
time and resources. A related problem might be the lack of
information of the new service regarding a certain quality
aspect. In this case, uncertainty may also impact a migration
process negatively. Note also, that a technical aspect to be
considered is whether two services are implemented using the
same technology, which might also be a blocking factor for
a fast and easy migration. Complexity in the setup migration
may also be an important problem. Beyond compatibility in
terms of data storage and access, the conﬁguration of a cloud
service may also be essential to guarantee the compliance
with user requirements. An excessively complex migration
of conﬁgurations between two services may also result in
a time-consuming and expensive migration process. Besides,
ease of testing a service and total downtime are two aspects
that may largely impact the suitability of a certain migration.
Several possible methodologies may be used for developing
and support this testing. For instance, modiﬁed A/B may be
used where only one service is changed and a number of
different grades of testing are performed. Finally, depending on
the requirements of the application, it might be necessary for
the two cloud services, the original one and the replacement,
to coexist during a certain period of time, during the testing
process of the migration. Complexity to synchronize data
between the two services might make the coexistence difﬁcult
and using the new service as a hot backup of the ﬁrst is
inefﬁcient.
4) Risk of costs unpredictability: by using services from
different providers, it may become more and more complex to
predict costs.
5) Risk of lack of provider interest in collaboration:
business agreements are usually required for two CSP to
collaborate. For instance, the service delivery model requires
customers to register to a service. Because of this, a service
in a certain CSP will not allow customers from other CSPs to
use it without going through the necessary registration process,
unless the right agreements are put in place. Besides, vendors
may try to retain customers at any cost to be more competitive.
Contracts and other legal issues may be blockers to migrate
from one service to an equivalent one. In other words, there
is a risk of unfair customer retention and consequent vendor
lock-in.
6) Risk of unavailability of evidences in case of fraudulent
actions: this is a potential risk that may be caused by the lack
of forensic tools and global tracking mechanisms.
7) Risk of lack of negotiation on SLAs: large organizations
using a single supplier can negotiate terms. SMEs or compa-
nies using multiple services from multiple vendors are unlikely
to have the power or the time to negotiate. This will create an
increasingly unstable cost and terms and conditions problem.
Note that a more formal risk analysis might be performed
to consider this a ﬁnal list of risks.
VII.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this position paper, we have discussed some essential as-
pects to establish the necessary baseline for a decision support
method aimed at facilitating the selection of cloud services
and providers in a multi-cloud environment. In particular, we
argue that risk, quality and cost are among the main factors in
such a selection process. We believe that a trade-off analysis
between risk, cost and quality based on a consolidated view
of the three will provide a useful basis for a decision maker in
assessing the possible choices through a cost-beneﬁt analysis.
For this, we have reported the results of an elicitation of the
risk, cost and quality aspects that are speciﬁc to multi-cloud
environments. We argue that security, interoperability and ease
of migration are among the main quality aspects in a multi-
cloud environment.
Beyond this initial analysis, we plan to develop a compre-
hensive study on risk and quality aspects to be considered in a
multi-cloud. With this, we aim at creating a decision support
tool able to help multi-cloud applications architects to design
their systems. This tool will be implemented based on a new
methodology that integrates risk, quality and cost dimensions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been conducted as a part of the MODA-
Clouds project (Grant Agreement FP7-318484) funded by the
European Commission within the 7th Framework Programme.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Bernstein and D. Vij, Intercloud Security Considerations, Proc. 2nd
Intl Conf. Cloud Computing (CloudCom 10), IEEE Press, 2010, pp. 537-
544.
[2]
R. Buyya et al., Market-Oriented Cloud Computing: Vision, Hype, and
Reality of Delivering Computing as the 5th Utility, Proc. 9th IEEE/ACM
Intl Symp. Cluster Computing and the Grid (CCGRID 09), IEEE CS,
2009, pp. 599-616.
[3]
Data Protection Act 1998.
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/29/contents
[4]
European
Telecommunications
Standards
Institute
(ETSI).
http://www.etsi.org
[5]
Ligaarden, O. S.: A Framework for Analyzing and Monitoring the Impact
of Dependencies on Quality. PhD thesis, University of Oslo (2013)
[6]
M.P. Papazoglou and W. van den Heuvel, Blueprinting the Cloud, IEEE
Internet Computing, Nov./Dec 2011, pp. 74-79.
[7]
B. Rochwerger et al., ReservoirWhen One Cloud Is Not Enough, Com-
puter, Mar. 2011, pp. 44-51.
[8]
Sarbanes-Oxley
Act
of
2002
(Pub.L.
107204,
116
Stat.
745,
enacted
July
30,
2002).
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-
107publ204/html/PLAW-107publ204.htm
[9]
Singhal, M.; Chandrasekhar, S.; Tingjian Ge; Sandhu, R.; Krishnan,
R.; Gail-Joon Ahn; Bertino, E., ”Collaboration in multicloud computing
environments: Framework and security issues,” Computer, vol.46, no.2,
pp.76-84, Feb. 2013
[10]
Cloud Services Measurement Index Consortium: CSMIC Website
http://csmic.org/. Accessed, March 2013
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

