 
Efficient Virtual Machine Consolidation Approach Based on User Inactivity 
Detection 
 
Jan Fesl  
 Institute of Applied Informatics  
Faculty of Science 
University of South Bohemia 
České Budějovice, Czech Republic 
email: jfesl@prf.jcu.cz 
 
Vineet Gokhale 
 Institute of Applied Informatics  
Faculty of Science 
University of South Bohemia 
České Budějovice, Czech Republic 
email: vgokhale@prf.jcu.cz 
Marie Feslová 
 Institute of Applied Informatics  
Faculty of Science 
University of South Bohemia 
České Budějovice, Czech Republic 
email: dolezm05@prf.jcu.cz 
 
 
Abstract—Large cloud architectures consist of numerous 
high-performance servers, each hosting a multitude of Virtual 
Machines (VMs). Naturally, the server resources for processing 
and storage are shared among VMs, which, in turn, could be 
simultaneously accessed by several authorized users. Resource 
reallocation takes place after a session terminates. However, 
failure of systematic session termination causes blockage of 
resources resulting in severe under-utilization. In order to 
mitigate such scenarios, one needs to efficiently detect user 
inactivity for timely release of the resources. This is a non-trivial 
task. To this end, we propose a hybrid resource-desktop 
monitoring technique, which involves capturing of user 
interaction with the client computer, in addition to monitoring 
the client-server network activity. The rationale behind this 
approach is that even in case of lightweight applications, the user 
interactions cause continuous changes in the visual contents 
being displayed. Periodic screenshots of the client screen and 
network activity between client and server provide crucial 
information about the user inactivity. Our preliminary 
investigation suggests that such self-organizing virtualization 
infrastructure is a promising direction for the design of modern 
cloud-based services.   
 
Keywords – cloud; consolidation; neural network. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Cloud-based provisioning of memory and computational 
resources has proved to be one of the profound inventions of 
modern-day computer science. Such resources are typically 
available for usage to clients round the clock. One such 
example of cloud-based applications is Virtual Machine 
(VM). Entities known as virtualization servers host multiple 
VMs, hosted on, allowing multiple users to share the server 
resources simultaneously. Typically, the resources allocated 
to a VM are pre-configured by the system administrator. The 
degree of resource utilization of a VM depends solely on the 
type of applications being executed by its clients. Naturally, 
when the resources are underutilized it makes sense to re-
allocate them to other VMs hosting more resource demanding 
applications. Moreover, very often, it is imperative to relocate 
certain VMs to another virtualization server with spare 
resources for optimization of power consumption. Such live 
migration of VMs, as well as re-allocation of resources across 
VMs in the same virtualization server is commonly referred 
to as consolidation. 
 
After the completion of a virtual session, the virtualization 
server consolidates the resources tied to the inactive VMs to 
other VMs. However, in a vast majority of cases the human 
user leaves the session without properly terminating it, 
resulting in severe underutilization of the server resources. In 
order to mitigate such sub-optimal utilization of resources, 
one needs to monitor the utilization of VM, and be able to 
distinguish between durations of user activity and inactivity. 
In case of active VM, the resource configuration remains 
unchanged, whereas for instances of substantially long user 
inactivity, the VM can be characterized as inactive and 
subsequently subjected to the resource reallocation process.   
 
Once a VM is characterized as inactive, it can be 
hibernated or powered off. Occasionally, if all the VMs in a 
virtualization server are relocated or powered off, the entire 
virtualization server itself can be hibernated. This step 
dramatically reduces the overall power consumption. In an 
earlier work, we proposed a novel consolidation technique 
[1]. However, literature also contains a fair volume of work 
in this domain; see, for example, [12]-[14]. 
 
The detection of state (active, inactive) of a VM is a non-
trivial problem, since it is characterized by complex 
combinations of a gamut of parameters. The existing works 
take into account the parameters like memory and processor 
consumption of VM, network throughput of VM, login 
metadata, among others. Although the aforementioned works 
demonstrate that these parameters characterize the VM-state 
fairly well, we identify two more parameters that can be used 
for VM-state detection with higher efficiency and reliability - 
VM screenshot variations and VM-client network traffic 
profile. In this paper, we propose a novel scheme for reliable 
detection of VM-state that integrates the proposed new 
parameters with the existing ones in order to efficiently detect 
the current VM-state with high reliability. Our scheme treats 
VM as a black box, in the sense that no virtual machine 
introspection [2] needs to be done. All parameters used for 
VM-state detection are retrieved directly from hypervisors or 
external network devices. This simplifies the design 
considerations significantly.  
 
The organization of the paper is as follows. In Section II, 
we provide an overview of the existing literature relevant to 
our work. In Section III, we describe in detail our approach 
for characterization of the VM state, and in Section IV, we 
explain our proposed approach for inactivity detection of 
VMs. We present preliminary measurements in Section V, 
and finally state our conclusions in Section VI.   
II. RELATED WORK 
VM-state detection is a topic that is actively being researched 
in the recent past; see, for example, [3]-[6]. Literature 
suggests that there exist primarily three main approaches of 
VM-state detection as follows. 
A. Utilization-based approach: This approach is the most 
intuitive of all. The VM monitor, known as hypervisor, is able 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

to provide certain information on the run-time behavior of a 
VM. The VM characteristics (VMC) are mostly represented 
as 4-D vector of items. 
VMC = {CPU utilization [%], memory utilization [MB], 
network throughput [Mbit/s], and I/O operation count 
[number]}. 
 
The existing works use a subset of VMC parameters for 
VM-state detection. Solution like Pulsar [7], which is a part 
of OpenStack-Nova, uses just only the CPU utilization. When 
the CPU utilization is below a specific threshold, the system 
marks the VM as “inactive”. Another scheme [8] leverages 
CPU utilization, memory utilization, and network throughput 
for determining the state of a VM. 
B. Rule-based approach: This approach means that the data 
center operators define some set of heuristics, which help to 
identify the unused virtual machine. Typical example of such 
approach implementation is the NetFlix service Janitor 
Monkey [9].  The similar approach is used in the next 
solution, which is called Poncho [10]. In Poncho, the rules are 
not defined as global, but only for a specific workload. 
C. Graph-based approach: This approach has been inspired 
by some programming languages like Java, C# or Python. 
Such languages use virtual environment for the execution of 
byte code compiled applications. Their garbage collectors for 
automated memory management identify objects “to be 
cleaned” by examining object references. The resource 
dependencies are mostly represented by acyclic graphs. In 
many cases, standalone cloud resources – having no 
dependency on other cloud resources – cannot necessarily be 
identified as unused resources by only using resource 
dependencies. In other words, some VMs can cooperate with 
others, but this situation cannot be easily represented in the 
graph. Some graph-based systems are Pleco [4] and Garbo 
[5].  
III. CHARACTERIZATION OF VM-STATE 
In this section, we describe in detail the rationale behind the 
selection of important features for characterization of the 
VM-state and explain the VM-state detection metric for each 
feature. 
A. Resource utilization of VM: Many existing works [7][8] 
in the literature have experimentally demonstrated that 
monitoring the local resources of VM like CPU and RAM 
usage, as well as the overall network activity can characterize 
the VM-state detection fairly accurately. In this work, we 
adopt the strategies proposed by the aforementioned prior 
works. Let C denote CPU usage of VM, M denote the ratio of 
memory currently being utilized to total memory capacity of 
VM. Let N denote the current network throughput related to 
maximal network throughput. The overall VM utilization (U) 
can then be expressed as shown Eq. (1). 
𝑈 = 
1
(1 − 𝐶)(1 − 𝑁)(1 − 𝑀) 
(1) 
B. Client-VM network activity: In order to optimally utilize 
the communication network between client and VM, any 
standard terminal service, like Remote Desktop Protocol 
(RDP) and Secure SHell (SSH), transfers only incremental 
information. For example, when the user continuously 
interacts with the VM, the contents to be displayed to the 
client change relentlessly, and hence large number of packets 
are exchanged. On the other hand, when the changes are 
insignificant, packets are transmitted occasionally. For 
instance, when the user is reading a document with 
negligible/less amount of mouse scrolling, the displayed 
contents remain predominantly unchanged. Since no 
significant information needs to be exchanged, the packet 
transmissions are sparse. On the other hand, if a multimedia 
file is being played at VM, irrespective of the display contents 
packets need to be constantly exchanged. Note that the overall 
network activity discussed previously subsumes the network 
activity between client and VM. However, it should be noted 
that some activities, like installation of software updates at 
VM that generate substantial network activity, may not be of 
interest from the client’s perspective. Therefore, monitoring 
the network activity between client and VM, in addition to 
overall network activity, provides fine-grained network 
information which can be utilized in precisely characterizing 
the current state of VM. Terminal service activity can be 
expressed as follows. TRh is an empirically set number of 
packets, which must be reached for flow activity detection. 
TRh is an empirical value related to a specific time interval (t). 
The overall measurement time consists of K number t 
intervals. For each t interval, can be measured current count 
of packets Ct. If Ct < TRh then such TI is marked as “inactive”. 
The total inactivity T [%] can be deduced as shown in Eq. (2).  
𝑇 =  # 𝑜𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑠
# 𝑜𝑓total 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑠
 
(2) 
Necessary information about the traffic from network devices 
alike 
switches 
or 
routers 
can 
be 
provided 
via 
NETFLOW/IPFIX protocol, which does not affect the routers 
performance. 
C. VM screenshot: We refer to the contents of the VM that 
are currently being displayed to the client. The Hypervisor 
creates a VM screenshot from the content of virtual graphic 
card memory. The idea behind using VM screenshot as an 
important parameter in VM-state detection is that whenever 
the user interacts actively with VM, the display contents keep 
changing continuously. Therefore, as a preliminary the 
differential information in consecutive screenshots can be 
utilized to detect the VM-state. Screenshots with same 
dimensions are generated periodically by the Hypervisor. Let 
Sk denote the kth screenshot. It is important to remark that our 
approach considers only the differential information in 
consecutive screenshots, and not the actual display contents 
themselves. This also reduces the computational load 
significantly. Let Dk denote the differential information 
between Sk+1 and Sk as shown in Eq. (3).   
𝐷𝑆(𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝐶(𝑥, 𝑦) − 𝑃(𝑥, 𝑦)
(3) 
An example of differential screenshot can be seen in Figure 
1. From single differential screenshots, it is possible to 
assemble the sequence of differential screenshots. 
 
We created a supervised learning-based classifier which is 
capable of analyzing if a screenshot change indicates the 
activity/inactivity of the user, as shown in Figure 2. For the 
analysis, we used deep convolutional network, which is able 
automatically to take into the account the position of change 
- for example clock on the desktop taskbar can cause the 
misinterpretation. 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
Fig. 1: Pixel differential image, which serves as an input for deep 
convolutional network. Such neural networks are able to detect the change 
and position of change as well.  
 
 
Fig. 2: Deep convolutional network used for image change classification is 
able to take into the account the position of change. 
All differential screenshots from DS are being classified by 
the neural network. The result of classification is N-1 D 
vector of values, which expresses the probability (PI) of user 
inactivity for every screenshot as shown in Eq. (4).  
 
 
 
 
PI = {PI1, PI2, …, PIN} 
 
   (4) 
 
The average probability (P) for entire period can be computed 
as shown in Eq. (5). 
𝑃 = (
1
𝑁 − 1) ∗ ∑ 𝑃𝐼𝑖
𝑁−1
𝑖=1
(5) 
 
P value is used in the decision three, which will be described 
in the next section. 
IV. VM-STATE DETECTION 
In this section, we present the description of the design and 
working principle of the proposed VM-state detection 
scheme.  
 
In Figure 3, we present the architecture of a typical 
distributed virtualization infrastructure, along with the 
proposed VM-state detection elements. The clients connect to 
their respective VMs via a specific terminal service, like RDP 
or SSH. All these connections go via an IPFIX-enabled router 
and are monitored by a firewall. In order to relieve the VMs 
of monitoring the traffic stream from VM to clients, we use 
IPFIX [11] - a standard protocol for capturing network flows 
crossing the routers. The router can capture specific flow 
information, and subsequently report to VM Consolidator 
(VMC) - the principal component of the architecture. VMC 
coordinates with VMs and virtualization servers in order to 
receive vital parameters necessary for characterization of 
VM-state discussed in Section III. The possibility to see user 
screen must be supported by hypervisor.  
 
As mentioned previously, we consider the following 
parameters for detection of the current state of VM: user-
induced on-screen changes, network activity between client 
and VM, processing and memory resource consumption of 
VM, and overall network activity of VM. We now move to 
the characterization of VM-state based on the measurement 
of the aforementioned parameters. We propose a hierarchical 
VM state detection technique based on learning via ANN that 
classifies the current state of the VM through the 
aforementioned parameters using the decision tree shown in 
Figure 4. 
 
Let pn and pTn denote the decision metric and the 
corresponding threshold at the nth stage of the decision tree. 
In the first stage, we take the VM screenshot variation as the 
evaluation parameter for decision making. On-screen visual 
changes refer to the changes reflecting on the VM screen 
when the user interacts with the virtual computer. Therefore, 
if on-screen changes are significantly high, then the VM is in 
use with higher likelihood. If p1 < pT1 (indicating that VM 
screenshot variations are significant), we treat this as the 
sufficient condition to infer that the VM is active. Hence, 
further analysis is unnecessary, thereby relieving the 
monitoring node (MN) of resource-heavy computations. If p1 
≥ pT1 (indicating negligible variations), we trigger subsequent 
stages of analysis.  
 
Fig. 3: Architecture of the proposed distributed virtualization infrastructure 
featuring clients, VMs, virtualization servers, VM consolidator, and IPFIX-
enabled router. 
 
In the second stage, we consider the client-VM network 
traffic profile, in addition to p1 for characterizing the VM-
state. If p2 < pT2 (indicating that the network activity is 
significant), then we infer that the VM is in active state. 
However, if p2 ≥ pT2 (indicating negligible network activity), 
we move to the last stage of analysis. 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
Fig. 4: Decision tree illustrating the working of proposed hierarchical VM 
state detection. pn denotes the probability of VM being inactive as per the 
parameters considered in nth stage.  
 
 
 
 
In the last stage, we consider the resource utilization profile 
of VM for the decision making. If p3 < pT3 (indicating that the 
resource utilization is significant), then we infer that the VM 
is in active state. However, if p3 ≥ pT3 (indicating negligible 
resource utilization), we conclude that the VM is in inactive 
state. This results in the hibernation of VM, and subsequent 
re-allocation of the resources across other VMs located in the 
virtualization server. 
V. MEASUREMENTS 
In this section, we report a preliminary measurement of 
packet count from VM to client for demonstrating the proof-
of-concept of the proposed VM-state detection. We initiated 
a session between a VM and a client. In order to be able to 
notice the packet count variation between client and VM, we 
divide the user interaction into three types - active, semi-
active, and passive. In active interaction, the user 
continuously performs certain tasks on VM through I/O 
devices. In semi-active interaction, the user only plays a 
multimedia content in VM, but performs no other interaction 
through input devices. Finally, tin passive interaction, the 
user simply reads a document without scrolling through it. 
Figure 5 presents the histogram of transmitted packets 
recorded during the session.  
 
Fig. 5: Architecture of the proposed distributed virtualization infrastructure 
featuring clients, VMs, virtualization servers, VM consolidator, and IPFIX-
enabled router. 
 
We ask the user to perform active, semi-active, and passive 
interactions sequentially. In the first part of the plot, it can be 
seen that the packet count is significantly high indicating 
dense packet transmissions between VM and client during 
active interaction. Next, the packet transmissions are 
relatively sparse but non-negligible, indicating considerable 
traffic during semi-active interaction. Finally, the packet 
transmissions are near-zero indicating negligible traffic 
during passive interaction. This suggests that monitoring the 
traffic profile between VM and client could play a crucial role 
in accurately and efficiently determining the VM-state. 
 
As a next step of this work, we plan to implement the 
proposed scheme on a real cloud infrastructure and compare 
its performance with state-of-the-art techniques in the 
domain. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we proposed a novel VM-state detection 
strategy in which two new parameters were introduced - VM 
screenshot and VM-client traffic profile. We described how 
these new parameters can improve up on the state-of-the-art 
techniques. We proposed the architecture of our scheme, and 
also proposed the usage of deep convolutional neural network 
for classification of VM-state. Through preliminary 
measurements, we demonstrated that monitoring the network 
activity between VM and client could lead to efficient 
performance. In the next phase of the project, we intend to 
perform extensive verification of our proposal and also 
improve the neural network classifier. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Technological Agency of 
Czech Republic for financing the current research, and Mr. 
Jiří Cehák for his assistance in system administration and 
management. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Fesl, J. Cehák, M. Doležalová, and J. Janeček, “New approach for 
virtual machines consolidation in heterogeneous computing systems”, 
International Journal of Hybrid Information Technology, vol. 9, pp. 321–332, 
2016. 
[2] K. Nance, B. Hay, and M. Bishop., “Virtual Machine Introspection: 
Observation or Interference?”, IEEE Security & Privacy, 6(5), pp. 32–37, 
September 2008. 
[3] K. Kim, S. Zeng, Ch. Young, J. Hwang, and M. Humphre, “iCSI: A Cloud 
Garbage VM Collector for Addressing Inactive VMs with Machine 
Learning”, IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering, 2017. 
[4] Z. Shen, Ch. C. Young, S. Zeng, K. Murthy, and K. Bai, “Identifying 
Resources for Cloud Garbage Collection”, 12th International Conference on 
Network and Service Management (CNSM), Montreal, 2016. 
[5] B. Zhang, Y. Al-Dhuraibi, R. Rouvoy, F. Paraiso, and L. Seinturier 
“CloudGC: Recycling Idle Virtual Machines in the Cloud”, IEEE 
International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E), Vancouver, 2017. 
[6] N. Cohen and A. Bremler-Barr., “Garbo: Graph-based Cloud Resource 
Cleanup”, ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC ’15), Kohala 
Coast, Hawaii, USA, August 2015. 
[7] D. Breitgand et al. “An Adaptive Utilisation Accelerator for Virtualized 
Environments”, 2nd IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering 
(IC2E ’14), Boston, MA, USA, March 2014. 
[8] T. Wood, P. Shenoy, A. Venkataramani, and M. Yousif, “Black-box and 
Gray-box Strategies for Virtual Machine Migration”, 4th USENIX 
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI ’07), 
Cambridge, MA, USA, April 2007. 
[9] Netflix, Janitor Monkey, 
https://github.com/Netflix/SimianArmy/wiki/Janitor-Home, available 
online, Jan. 2015. 
[10] S. Devoid, N.  Desai, and L Hochstein, “Poncho: Enabling Smart 
Administration of Full Private Cloud”, 27th USENIX Large Installation 
System Administration Conference (LISA ’13), Washington D.C., USA, 
November 2013. 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[11] IPFIX protocol specification, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7011, 
available online, Sep. 2013. 
[12] F. Farahnakian, P. Liljeberg, and J. Plosila, “Energy-Efficient Virtual 
Machines Consolidation in Cloud Data Centers using Reinforcement 
Learning”, 22nd Euromicro International Conference on Parallel, 
Distributed, and Network-Based Processing, 2014. 
[13] Z. Cao and S. Dong, “An energy-aware heuristic framework for virtual 
machine 
consolidation 
in 
Cloud 
computing”, 
The 
Journal 
of 
Supercomputing, Volume 69, Issue 1, pp 429–451, Springer, 2014. 
[14] E. Feller, L. Rilling, C. Morin, “Energy-aware ant colony-based 
workload placement in Clouds”, Proceeding GRID’11 proceedings of the 
2011 IEEE/ACM 12th international conference on grid computing. IEEE 
Computer Society, Washington, DC, pp 26–33, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

