Development of a Process-oriented Framework for Security Assessment of
Cyber Physical Systems
Katrin Neubauer
Dept. Computer Science and Mathematics
Ostbayerische Technische Hochschule
Regensburg, Germany
email: katrin1.neubauer@oth-regensburg.de
Rudolf Hackenberg
Dept. Computer Science and Mathematics
Ostbayerische Technische Hochschule
Regensburg, Germany
email: rudolf.hackenberg@oth-regensburg.de
Abstract—Cloud Computing and Internet of Things (IoT)
inﬂuence the constantly growing networking of systems. Both
belong to Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) are highly networked
systems. The increasing establishment of CPS creates new chal-
lenges and further security and data protection aspects arise.
Existing frameworks for security assessment are not suitable
for CPS. The requirement criteria for CPS are scalability, real-
time, performance, functional safety and volatility. Data security
has so far been evaluated by the two-level trust model (secure
and insecure). This trust model is not suitable for CPS. The
reasons for this are the large amount of data and the wide
variety of data types. This paper presents the required criteria
for security assessment of CPS, the development of the Process-
oriented Framework for Security Assessment of Cyber Physical
Systems and the application of the security model. The Process-
oriented Framework for Security Assessment of Cyber Physical
Systems includes the steps analysis of the application, security,
scalability and real-time assessment and automated mapping of
security measures.
Keywords—Cyber Physical System; security assessment; security
analysis; Internet of Things; Smart Grid.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) are the next generation of
engineered systems. Cloud Computing and Internet of Things
(IoT) have an impact on networking in industrial environments
and daily life. The digital age is inﬂuenced by SMAC tech-
nologies. Social, mobile, analytics and Cloud Computing are
the SMAC technologies. Digitalization describes the socioe-
conomic process and digitization means the technical process
[1]. CPS results from the networking of SMAC technologies.
The digitalization of the economy and industry is progress-
ing continuously. One example is the digitalization of the
energy sector. The implementation of intelligent electricity
meters (so-called smart meters) is creating the necessary com-
munication infrastructure. The most important component is
the gateway (Smart Meter Gateway, SMGW), which serves as
the central communication unit [2]. Cost and beneﬁt analyses
have shown that the construction and operation of this infras-
tructure are too expensive for the application ”smart metering”
[3]. For this reason, the infrastructure is being opened up for
other divisions and services, such as value-added services. The
networking of everyday life in your own home is summarized
under the term Smart Home. By networking different sensors
and devices, daily life is supported. IoT describes sensors and
devices which have a connection to the internet. For example,
value-added services can represent the connection of Smart
Home or Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) services. Services
like Smart Home and AAL are made possible by IoT devices.
By mapping value-added services to the Smart Grid in-
frastructure, the topics IoT and Smart Grid are linked. This
combination creates a highly scalable and volatile system. This
leads to a higher volume of data of varying quality, devices
and users supplying and accessing data and a high number of
participants. One challenge is that the structure of existing
architectures is changing and/or expanding. If the existing
architectures grow into a highly scalable and volatile system,
they must be reconsidered in terms of security.
The existing process models are limited to the analysis
of information systems in companies or are models for the
development of software under the aspect of security. The
consideration and analysis (security modeling and assessment)
of highly scalable, volatile systems are not carried out within
this frameworks. For future systems, which have the property
of being highly scalable and volatile, an appropriate framework
for security modeling must be developed. This means, data
security according to the requirements of scalability, real-time
and a consideration of the overall-process should be repre-
sented by the new framework. The aim is the development
of a Process-oriented Framework for Security Assessment of
Cyber Physical Systems.
The paper is structured as follows. Section II covers the
related work. In Section III, we describe the CPS and discuss
the topic of security. In the next session, the development of a
Process-oriented Framework for Security Assessment of Cyber
Physical Systems is performed and Section V, describes the
application example. Finally, the conclusion and future work
are given.
II. RELATED WORK
The state of the art is examined with regard to the following
question: Which approaches or frameworks are available for
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

security modeling of processes in highly scalable, volatile
systems or in CPS.
There are best practice approaches for security assessment.
These are ISO/IEC 27000:2018 [8] or the BSI-Standards (BSI-
Standards 200-1, 200-2 and 200-3 [5]–[7]). Main focus of this
security frameworks are the assessment of the business process
of a company.
The security modeling is based on a two-level trust model.
This means, there are two categories of data: worthy of
protection and no worthy of protection [13].
In [9]–[12], security is considered during the development
process of software. Another approach are security by design
and privacy by design. Security and data protection are already
considered during the development process.
Security and privacy considerations for Smart Grid extended
by value-added service (e.g., AAL, IoT devices), with a focus
on survey and research challenges are shown in [14] and [15].
In [16]–[18], the security and communication analysis of an
extended Smart Grid infrastructure are shown.
A survey of literature on security and privacy of CPS is done
in [19]. The publication provides an overview of the ﬁelds of
application and identiﬁes threats and vulnerabilities. In [20],
the security analysis is shown on the basis of the different
layers (perception layer, transmission layer, application layer).
In summary, these models for security modeling as well
as the two-level trust model are not suitable for CPS and
high scalable, volatile systems. The models for the security
assessment shown, the business process of a company, the
software development process and sub-processes of a company
are considered. The security and privacy assessment of CPS
are open questions.
III. CYBER PHYSICAL SYSTEMS
CPS are systems in which computing, communication, and
control technologies are integrated [21]. There are differ-
ent types of CPS. In this publication, CPS is described as
follows. In CPS, information and software components are
combined with mechanical components. The data transfer,
data exchange, monitoring and control takes place via the
internet and is done in real time. Components are mobile
and movable installations, devices and machines, embedded
systems and networked objects (IoT). CPS can be described
by the following characteristics [22].
• Direct connection between physical world and digital
world
• Innovative system functions through information, data
and function integration
• Functions integration: multi-functionality
• Soft to hard time requirements
• Extensive interaction networks of sensors or actuators
• Networking within the systems and externally
• Dedicated user interfaces: Strong integration in action
sequences
• Use under often difﬁcult physical boundary conditions
• Long-term operation
• Automation, adaptivity and autonomy
• High requirements to:
– Functional security
– Access security and data security
– Reliability
– High cost pressure
The application ﬁeld of CPS are production, logistics, mobility,
energy and distribution. Smart Grid is a variant of CPSs. The
characteristics of future systems are highly scalable, volatile,
high data volume and different types of data. For example,
the use case ”data logging electricity” shows us that the data
ﬂaw from ﬁnal consumers to the energy supplier. This means
for high scalability, two million participants and 192 million
consumption values per day. If we have a look inside the
communication, there is a data transfer every 15 minutes.
This describes the volatility. The next characteristic is high
data volume. For example, two million participants generating
22 gigabyte data per day. Different types of data means the
diversity of data, like customer data, power consumption or
IP address. Further ﬁeld of application of the Smart Grid
infrastructure are Smart Home, gas, water and value-added
service.
Security must also be considered by CPS. Until now, the
focus has been on robustness and performance. CPSs are fast-
growing systems in which personal and sensitive data are also
transferred. Furthermore, existing systems and architectures
are extended by this. These systems are difﬁcult to deﬁne.
Security assessment already carried out must be renewed. The
requirement criteria for security assessments of CPS are the
following.
• Data security
• Scalability
• Real-time
• Performance
• Functional safety
• Volatility
The security assessment of CPS must be developed according
to this requirement criteria.
IV. DEVELOPMENT OF A PROCESS-ORIENTED
FRAMEWORK FOR SECURITY ASSESSMENT OF CYBER
PHYSICAL SYSTEMS
In the ﬁrst step, the requirement criteria data security (DS),
scalability (SC) and real-time (RT) are focused. In the context
of security modeling of CPS, all three must be considered.
The security assessment results from the description of the
process by this criteria and is deﬁned as follows: usecaseprocess
= (DS, SC, RT). The result of the security assessment depends
from the description of the process. The framework for the
security assessment is as follows. At ﬁrst, the analysis of the
process and infrastructure and also the data and information.
The next step is the security assessment against the criteria
DS, SC and RT. The last step is the automated mapping
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Figure 1. Process-oriented Framework for Security Assessment of Cyber
Physical Systems
of the model based on the use case process and assignment
of security measures. Further requirements are performance,
functional safety, volatility and connectivity. These are not yet
considered in the current work status. Figure 1 describes the
Process-oriented Framework for Security Assessment of Cyber
Physical Systems. The use case is divided into processes.
The process is evaluated against the criteria DS, SC and RT.
A process description is derived and an automated selection
of security measures is possible. The security measures are
evaluated by the criteria DS, SC and RT. In the following
subsections, the individual characteristics of the tuple are
described.
A. Data security
The 4-Level-Trust-Model for safety-critical systems is a
model for security assessment of CPS. Classically, the data
are divided into two categories - secure and insecure. This
describes the classical security model. The 4-Level-Trust-
Model for safety-critical systems is one option of the role-
based trust model for safety-critical systems [23]. In the new
4-Level-Trust-Model for safety-critical systems the data are
categorized in 4 categories. The categorization depends on the
requirements analysis for CPS. The 4-Level-Trust-Model for
safety-critical systems are deﬁned as follows.
1) Category: non sensitive data
• All data that do not contain any personal reference
or have been made anonymous.
• There are no effects of damage or damage that has
occurred for the affected person.
• The security level is low.
2) Category: high sensitive data I
• All data which, through the combination of several
data in category 2 and 3, have a personal reference,
but do not have a direct reference themselves (e.g.,
network status data).
• The damage effects are limited and manageable.
Any damage that has occurred is relatively easy to
heal for the affected person.
• The security level is minimal.
3) Category: high sensitive data II
• All data which, through the combination of a further
data in categories 2 and 3, have a personal reference,
but do not have a direct reference themselves (e.g.,
status data of a meter).
• The impact of the damage can be assessed as
signiﬁcant by one person. Damage that has occurred
for the person affected can be healed with increased
effort.
• The security level is intermediate.
4) Category: high sensitive data III (personal data)
• All data that are personal data or data worth pro-
tecting according to the Federal Data Protection Act
(e.g., name, address).
• The effects of the damage have reached an existen-
tially threatening, catastrophic extent. Damage that
has occurred to the affected person cannot be healed.
• The security level is high.
The division into four categories is due to the fact that
different data are transferred. Data are transferred which are
anonymised or does not allow any personal reference (non
sensitive data). Furthermore, data are transmitted which are
personal data or sensitive data (high sensitive data III). In
addition, there is a further database, which is to be classiﬁed
in two categories (high sensitive data I and high sensitive data
II). Table I shows the 4-Level-Trust-Model for safety-critical
systems with the coding and the security level. The 4-Level-
Trust-Model for safety-critical systems permits to consider the
security assessment of data.
TABLE I. EVALUATION CRITERIA DATA SECURITY
category
description
security level
coding
1. Category
non sensitive data
low
0
2. Category
high sensitive data I
minimal
1
3. Category
high sensitive data II
intermediate
2
4. Category
high sensitive data III
high
3
With the 4-Level-Trust-Model it is possible to evaluate data
and information of use case in CPS with regard to security. By
subdividing the data worthy of protection, a further gradation
between personal data and sensitive data is made. With this
model, appropriate security measures can be selected.
B. Scalability
The next criteria is SC. SC describes the number of partic-
ipants. Participants are understood as users and devices. The
scalability is divided in 4 categories (compare Table II).
TABLE II. EVALUATION CRITERIA SCALABILITY
description
coding
≤ 1
0
2 ≤ 100
1
101 ≤ 10.000
2
≥ 10.001
3
The selection of the criteria is based on the Smart Grid use
case. ”≤ 1” corresponds to one participant and ”2 ≤ 100”
corresponds to a networked household. A residential unit is
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

mapped with the values ”101 ≤ 10.000”. The entire network
is described with the value from ”≥ 10.001”.
C. Real-time
Another criteria is RT. The RT capability of a system means
that a system must react to an event within a given time frame.
Table III shows the division into 4 categories.
TABLE III. EVALUATION CRITERIA REAL-TIME
description
coding
≤ 1 sec
0
2 sec ≥ 1 min
1
1 min ≥ 15 min
2
≥ 15 min
3
The time speciﬁcations correspond to the requirements from
the Smart Grid use case. Critical values are the requirement for
real time (≤ 1 sec) as well as the transmission of measurement
data in 15 minute intervals.
D. Summary
With the Process-oriented Framework for Security Assess-
ment of Cyber Physical Systems it is possible to evaluate the
process of use case in CPS regard to DS, SK and RT. With the
achievement of this result, the appropriate security measures
can be selected.
V. USE CASE EXAMPLE
Secure Gateway for Ambient Assisted Living (SEGAL)
is a publicly funded research project and describes a value-
added service. The aim of the project is the development
of the SEGAL service, based on the use of AAL devices
(IoT devices) and the Smart Grid infrastructure. AAL data
collected within an AAL environment are recorded manually
and automatically by sensors and forwarded to an external
control center for processing. The AAL environment consists
of digital assistants (Alexa or Google Home Mini, etc.),
AAL-Devices (sphygmomanometer, heart rate monitor, etc.)
or Smart Home devices (smoke detector, thermostat etc.).
The communication takes place via a SMGW. The SMGW
is connected to the AAL-Hub. The AAL-Hub connects the
sensors, managed the communication with the gateway and
the resulting data are aggregated.
A. Analysis of the application
The ﬁrst step is the analysis of process, infrastructure, data
and information. The use case SEGAL is divided into the
following process:
• Process 1: Initialize device
• Process 2: Delete device
• Process 3: Update
• Process 4: Transmit data
• Process 5: Transmit emergency data
In the context of further analysis, we regard to the pro-
cesses ”process 1: initialize device” and ”process 5: transmit
Figure 2. Process 1: Initialize device
Figure 3. Process 5: Transmit emergency data
emergency data”. In case of ”process 1: initialize device”, the
following data are transmitted (compare Figure 2).
• ID user
• Information about the AAL device
• ID AAL device
• ID SMGW
In case of ”process 5: transmit emergency data”, the fol-
lowing data are transmitted (compare Figure 3).
• ID user
• Sensor values (AAL device)
• Emergency data (sensor values)
• ID AAL device
• ID SMGW
B. Security assessment
The next step is the security assessment. The security
assessment is divided in DS, SK and RT.
1) Data security: The data security assessment for process
1: initialize device is the third category ”high sensitive data”
(compare Table IV). ID user, information about the AAL
device, ID AAL device and ID SMGW are no personal data,
but data which have in combination of a further data in
categories 2 and 3, have a personal reference, but do not have
a direct reference themselves.
The data security assessment for process 5: transmit emer-
gency data is the third category ”high sensitive data” (compare
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Table IV). ID user, sensor values, emergency data, ID AAL
device and ID SMGW are no personal data, but data which
have in combination of a further data in categories 2 and 3,
have a personal reference, but do not have a direct reference
themselves.
TABLE IV. OVERVIEW: DATA SECURITY
process
category
description
security
level
coding
1
3. Category
high sensitive data II
intermediate
2
5
3. Category
high sensitive data II
intermediate
2
2) Scalability: If we consider the scalability in process 1:
initialize device, we ﬁnd out that we have between 2 and
100 participants (compare Table V). The coding of the criteria
scalability for the process 1: initialize device is ”1”.
The scalability of process 5: transmit emergency data is ”1”
(compare Table V). There are participants between 2 and 100
participants.
TABLE V. OVERVIEW: SCALABILITY
process
description
coding
1
2 ≤ 100
1
5
2 ≤ 100
1
3) Real-time: The requirement real-time of ”process 1:
initialize device” is not given and the coding is ”2” (compare
Table VI).
In case of ”process 5: transmit emergency data” the require-
ment real-time is given (compare Table VI). The coding of
process 5 is ”0”.
TABLE VI. OVERVIEW: REAL-TIME
process
description
coding
1
1 min ≥ 15 min
2
5
≤ 1 sec
0
4) Summary: The result of the assessment is the following
description of the respective processes.
• SEGALprocess1 = (2,1,2)
• SEGALprocess5 = (2,1,0)
The evaluation provides a statement about how security
critical the process is and a statement about SC and RT
requirements. The example of the use case SEGAL illustrates
that the difference can be seen in the RT requirement, while
maintaining the same level of DS and SC. This must be taken
into account when selecting suitable security measures.
C. Automated mapping of security measures
The last step is the automated assignment of the appropriate
security measures. The security measures are also evaluated
according to the CPS requirement criteria. The evaluation of
security measures using the example of authentication is work
in progress.
Figure 4. Use case SEGAL
D. Summary
With this example, it can be shown that the evaluation of
DS and SC is the same. The difference between the use cases
is the RT requirement. With the result obtained, appropriate
security measures can be selected for the use case. Security
measures, such as authentication, must be selected based on
the real-time requirement criterion (compare Figure 4).
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented the problem of security in future
highly scalable and volatile systems. Based on the requirement
criteria we developed the Process-oriented Framework for
Security Assessment of Cyber Physical Systems. The model
consists of the following steps: analysis of the application,
security assessment, automated mapping of security measures.
We showed the application of the model using the SEGAL use
case. The use case showed us the necessity, different evaluation
of security in CPS.
The Process-oriented Framework for Security Assessment
of Cyber Physical Systems is a new framework for security
assessment of CPS. With this model it is possible to evaluate
use cases and processes in highly scalable, volatile systems and
to select security measures such as authentication in a targeted
manner. The model is intended to provide practical assistance
in the evaluation of processes and use cases in highly scalable,
volatile systems. The next steps are the automation of the
framework, the deﬁnition of the security measures and the
extension of the framework with the criterion performance,
functional safety and volatility.
REFERENCES
[1] C., Legner, et al., Digitalization: Opportunity and Challenge for the
Business and Information Systems Engineering Community, Bus Inf
Syst Eng 59, pp. 301–308, 2017.
[2] M. Irlbeck, Digitalisierung und Energie 4.0 – Wie schaffen wir die
digitale Energiewende?, Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden GmbH, pp.
135-148, 2017.
[3] Ernst u. Young GmbH, Kosten-Nutzen-Analyse fuer einen ﬂaechendeck-
enden Einsatz intelligenter Zaehler, 2013.
[4] ISO/IEC Information Technology Task Force, ISO/IEC 27000:2018
Information technology — Security techniques — Information security
management systems — Overview and vocabulary, 2018.
[5] Federal
Ofﬁce
for
Information
Security
(Germany),
BSI-
Standard
100-1
Managementsysteme
fuer
Information-
ssicherheit
(ISMS),
2008,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/Publikationen/
ITGrundschutzstandards/BSI-Standard 1001.pdf?
blob=publicationFil
e&v=2 [retrieved: 08, 2020].
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[6] Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security (Germany), BSI-Standard
200-2
IT-Grundschutz
Methodology,
2017.
Available
from:
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/Grundschutz/
International/bsi-standard-2002 en pdf.pdf?
blob=publicationFile&v=
1 [retrieved: 08, 2020].
[7] Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security (Germany), BSI Standard
200-3: Risk Analysis based on IT Grundschutz, 2017. Available from:
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/Grundschutz/
International/bsi-standard-2003 en pdf.pdf?
blob=publicationFile&v=
2 [retrieved: 08, 2020].
[8] ISO/IEC Information Technology Task Force, ISO/IEC 27000:2018
Information technology — Security techniques — Information security
management systems — Overview and vocabulary, 2018.
[9] R. Matuleviˇcius, et al., Adapting Secure Tropos for Security Risk
Management in the Early Phases of Information Systems Development,
International Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineer-
ing, pp. 541-555, 2008.
[10] P. Bresciani, A. Perini, P. Giorgini, F. Giunchiglia, and J. Mylopoulos,
Tropos: An Agent-Oriented Software Development Methodology, Au-
tonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 8, pp. 203–236, 2004.
[11] D. Mellado, C. Blanco, and L. Sanchez, A systematic review of se-
curity requirements engineering, Computer and Standards & Interfaces,
Volume 32, Issue 4, pp. 153 – 165, 2010.
[12] L. Compagna, P. El Khoury, A. Krausov´a, F. Massacci, and N. Zannone,
How to integrate legal requirements into a requirements engineering
methodology for the development of security and privacy patterns, Artif
Intell Law 17, pp. 1–30, 2008.
[13] K. Boroojeni, M. Amini, and S. Iyengar, Smart Grids: Security and
Privacy Issues, Springer International Publishing, 2017.
[14] F. Dalipi and S. Y. Yayilgan, Security and Privacy Considerations for
IoT Application on Smart Grids. Survey and Research Challenges, IEEE
4th International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud
Workshops (FiCloudW), pp. 63-68, 2016.
[15] M. Yun and B. Yuxin, Research on the architecture and key technology
of Internet of Things (IoT) applied on smart grid, International Confer-
ence on Advances in Energy Engineering, pp. 69-72, 2010.
[16] B. Genge, A. Beres, and P. Haller, A survey on cloud-based software
platforms to implement secure smart grids, 49th International Universi-
ties Power Engineering Conference (UPEC),pp. 1-6, 2014.
[17] S. Bera, S. Misra, and J. Rodrigues, J.P.C: Cloud Computing Applica-
tions for Smart Grid. A Survey, IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 26
(5), pp. 1477-1494, 2015.
[18] Y. Simmhan, A. G. Kumbhare, B. Cao, and V. Prasanna, An Analysis
of Security and Privacy Issues in Smart Grid Software Architectures
on Clouds, IEEE 4th USENIX International Conference on Cloud
Computing (CLOUD), pp. 582-589, 2011.
[19] A. Humayed, J. Lin, F. Li, and B. Luo, Cyber-Physical Systems
Security—A Survey, IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4, no. 6,
pp. 1802-1831, 2017.
[20] Y. Ashibani and Q. H. Mahmoud, Cyber physical systems security:
Analysis, challenges and solutions, Computers & Security, Volume 68,
Pages 81-97, 2017.
[21] K. Kim and P. R. Kumar, Cyber–Physical Systems: A Perspective at the
Centennial, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 100, no. Special Centennial
Issue, pp. 1287-1308, 2012.
[22] M. Broy, Cyber-Physical Systems — Wissenschaftliche Herausforderun-
gen Bei Der Entwicklung, Cyber-Physical Systems acatech DISKU-
TIERT, pp. 17-32, 2010.
[23] K. Neubauer, S. Fischer, and R. Hackenberg, Work in Progress: Se-
curity Analysis for Safety-critical Systems: Smart Grid and IoT, ARCS
Workshop, 32nd International Conference on Architecture of Computing
Systems, pp. 1-6, 2019.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

