Managing Forensic Recovery in the Cloud 
 
George R. S. Weir 
Department of Computer and Information Sciences 
University of Strathclyde 
Glasgow, UK 
e-mail: george.weir@strath.ac.uk 
 
Andreas Aßmuth and Nicholas Jäger 
University of Applied Sciences 
OTH Amberg-Weiden  
Germany 
e-mail: {a.assmuth,n.jaeger}@oth-aw.de 
Abstract— As organisations move away from locally hosted 
computer services toward Cloud platforms, there is a 
corresponding need to ensure the forensic integrity of such 
instances. The primary reasons for concern are (i) the locus of 
responsibility, and (ii) the associated risk of legal sanction and 
financial 
penalty. 
Building 
upon 
previously 
proposed 
techniques for intrusion monitoring, we highlight the multi-level 
interpretation problem, propose enhanced monitoring of Cloud-
based systems at diverse operational and data storage level as a 
basis for review of historical change across the hosted system 
and afford scope to identify any data impact from hostile action 
or ‘friendly fire’. 
Keywords-Cloud security; forensic readiness; multi-level 
interpretation; secure data retention. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
For many individuals, the primary use of Cloud computing 
is remote data storage. Presently, most major online Cloud 
service providers offer such storage. Apple users may engage 
iCloud as a supplement to local storage capacity and as an 
emergency backup for system configuration. Among similar 
service offerings we find Google Drive, Microsoft OneDrive 
and Amazon Drive. 
Dropbox and its freemium business model, where users 
may register for a free account with a limited storage size and 
an option for more storage capacity and additional features for 
paid subscriptions, is also very popular. The broad appeal and 
immediate benefits from services of this type are apparent 
from the proliferation of such offerings, as underlined by the 
fact that many home broadband contracts include a measure 
of Cloud storage as standard. Thus, “BT Cloud is a free service 
for BT Broadband customers that allows you to securely back 
up, access and share your precious files and folders” [1]. 
Home broadband users will often rely on their remote storage 
and backup facility with little recognition that Cloud services 
are in operation. 
Despite the apparent speed with which consumers have 
adopted Cloud-based services, there is recognition that 
security issues can arise in the Cloud setting just as in the 
context of locally hosted systems [2]-[5]. When occasional 
security issues are reported in the media, the greatest concern 
may be the availability and privacy of their data [6].  
In the following, we outline the characteristics of risks that 
need to be accommodated in terms of forensic readiness.  
Firstly, we consider security risks arising from the network 
context, before focussing specifically on security issues in the 
Cloud setting. In section IV, we describe the concept of digital 
forensic readiness and, in Section V, explore the implications 
of applying this important aspect to the context of Cloud 
services. We conclude by recommending greater attention to 
the requirements of Cloud forensic readiness, particularly with 
regard to the issue of multi-level interpretation. To this end, 
we propose enhanced monitoring of Cloud-based systems at 
diverse operational and data storage levels, as well as 
deployment of several previously advocated techniques for 
enhancing the security and resilience of recorded forensic 
readiness data. 
II. NETWORK SECURITY RISKS 
Addressing security risks is a familiar issue in the context 
of networked computing. In non-Cloud systems, the principal 
ingredients in management responses to security take three 
general forms: 
 
• 
System hardening 
 
• 
Software defences 
 
• 
Data backup 
 
Firstly, system hardening is an attempt to render known 
threats ineffective. This includes ‘conventional’ measures that 
reduce vulnerability, such as authentication, identity 
management and access control [7], as well as acting to 
disable unnecessary services, applying regular software 
updates (patches) and gauging of the relevance and associated 
risks from newly published exploits [8]. Modern Operating 
Systems have also been adapted to meet known cyber threats. 
Counter measures, like address space randomisation, 
mandatory access control or maybe sandboxing, are state of 
the art. In addition, advanced users might even build their own 
operating system and use selected kernel parameters to further 
harden their system. The second variety of response to address 
Application 
Middleware 
Operating System 
Hardware 
Figure 1. Layer-based model of a computing system 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

security issues is the application of software defences. This 
ranges from antivirus provision to firewalls and may also 
include some variety of intrusion detection, usually rule-based 
[9] or anomaly-based [10].  
Any computing system may be described by a simple 
layer-based model as depicted in Figure 1. Obviously, security 
on any higher layer strongly depends on access control 
mechanisms of lower layers. Even if users or service providers 
only aim for access control on a higher level to secure their 
application, these access control mechanisms in practice are 
more complex than those on lower layers. In addition, 
vulnerabilities or inadequate configuration on lower levels 
may lead to bypassing security measures on higher layers. 
Therefore, appropriate countermeasures are necessary on all 
layers. 
A third security measure is the provision of regular data 
backup, as a means of ensuring that any system failure or 
intrusion does not result in irretrievable data loss.  
III. CLOUD SECURITY RISKS 
Perhaps unsurprisingly, Cloud configurations are subject 
to levels of security risk that go beyond those affecting 
conventional networked computer systems. In consequence, 
the security measures outlined above may not be sufficient in 
the Cloud setting. In elaborating this claim, the Cloud issues 
are best illustrated with reference to the differing Cloud 
service offerings [11]: 
• 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS); 
• 
Platform as a Service (PaaS); 
• 
Software as a Service (SaaS). 
These models for Cloud service provision are helpfully 
elucidated by Gibson et. al. [12], as follows:  
 
• 
“IaaS provides users with a web-based service that 
can be used to create, destroy, and manage virtual 
machines and storage. It can be used to meter the use 
of resources over a period of time, which in turn, can 
be billed back to users at a negotiated rate. It 
alleviates the users of the responsibility of managing 
the physical and virtualized infrastructure, while still 
retaining control over the operating system, 
configuration, and software running on the virtual 
machines” [op. cit., p. 199].  
• 
“Platform-as-a-Service providers offer access to 
APIs, programming languages and development 
middleware which allows subscribers to develop 
custom applications without installing or configuring 
the development environment” [op. cit., p. 200].  
• 
“Software-as-a-Service gives subscribed or pay-per-
use users access to software or services that reside in 
the cloud and not on the user’s device” [op. cit., p. 
202]. 
Clearly, our earlier noted approaches to system security 
are also applicable to Cloud-based systems. With an eye 
specifically on Cloud security, we can consider how each of 
these service offerings may be at risk and what precautions 
may be anticipated in response to these risks.  
 
1. Infrastructure as a Service 
This kind of service seems most prone to the types of 
exploit that one would expect with conventional networked 
computers, principally, because, in most cases, such virtual 
machines will be presented to the Internet as networked hosts. 
Here, the customer is deploying a virtual machine with 
associated Operating System and on-board software 
applications. This raises the prospect of vulnerabilities at 
network level, as well as application level issues, e.g., with 
Web systems and Database servers, Cross-Site Scripting 
(XSS) or SQL injections.  Denial of service attacks are also a 
legitimate concern, especially since this kind of attack can 
achieve enormous bandwidths by using IoT devices for their 
purpose [13]. For these reasons, system hardening (especially, 
defending against known vulnerabilities) and software 
defences are appropriate for IaaS, including precautions such 
as anti-malware, firewalls, and Intrusion Detection Systems. 
Provision of these features may be the responsibility of the 
Cloud Service Provider (CSP), who determines what OS and 
defensive capabilities are made available. In some settings, the 
customer may be in a position to bolster the native defences 
on the virtual system provided by the CSP.  
In similar vein, data backup is likely to be required by the 
IaaS customer. Indeed, the protection of customer data may 
jointly be the concern of the customer and the CSP.  The 
former may enable off-Cloud backup, to avoid a single source 
of failure. While the CSP may also offer data backup to a 
separate Cloud data storage facility. 
Despite reasonable expectation of such measures, there are 
indications that Cloud software infrastructure components are 
not always adequately secured from known vulnerabilities at 
the virtual machine level [14]. 
 
2. Platform as a Service 
Computing facilities afforded to the customer of PaaS, are 
limited to the development of specific middleware or 
functional components. These services employ technologies 
such as Docker [15], Containers [16], DevOps [17] and AWS 
Lambda [18], in order to host customer-defined remote 
functionality. From a Cloud customer perspective, system 
hardening seems to be irrelevant in this context in relation to 
the host Operating System. On the other hand, any code 
developed for use on the Cloud platform must be protected 
from illicit operations, e.g., process hijacking, output 
redirection or the elevation of privileges.   
Software defences of the variety outlined above seem less 
relevant to the PaaS context since the operations supported by 
the middleware are limited to specific data processing and do 
not afford full operating system access or modification. The 
primary concern should be the operational effectiveness and 
resilience of the customer-defined operations. Clearly, such 
services may also be impaired through illicit access, e.g., 
stealing authentication details in order to alter code on the host 
system. Managing this area of concern lies primarily in the 
hands of the Cloud customer, with the assumption that the 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

CSP will prevent unauthorised access to customer account 
details. 
 
3. Software as a Service 
SaaS provides the Cloud customer with remote access to 
third-party data processing facilities via micro-services [19], 
or RESTful services [20]. Aside from network level attacks, 
such services should be protected from most other security 
concerns by having the host system hardened and equipped 
with suitable software defences. From the customer 
perspective, so long as their remote Cloud services operate 
effectively, without interruption or data loss, there would 
seem to be little cause for concern.  Of course, the risk of 
aberrant customer-side behaviour may arise through social 
engineering exploits or disgruntled employee actions. 
This summary of security concerns affecting the three 
varieties of service has treated each Cloud model as an 
isolated networked computing facility.  In reality, since the 
essence of Cloud provision is the virtualisation of services, our 
overview lacks one further important consideration, i.e., the 
possibility of service impairment as a result of activity at 
adjacent, upper or lower levels of the Cloud implementation.  
Clearly, any security aspects that affect the operational 
resilience of the underlying Cloud infrastructure is of direct 
concern to the CSP and can have a knock-on effect upon 
customer services.  The underlying Cloud technology, i.e., the 
hardware and software configurations that provision our three 
Cloud models, may be subject to attack or deliberate 
manipulation in a fashion that impinges detrimentally upon 
the Cloud services supported by that particular hardware and 
software ensemble. This may be construed as a service attack 
‘from below’. The scope for such attacks are precisely the 
characteristic exploits that may affect any networked host 
(listed earlier). 
Attacks ‘from the side’ are a growing concern in Cloud 
security. ‘Side channel attacks’, originate with co-hosted 
customers who manipulate the behaviour of their virtual 
system to influence the behaviour of the host system and 
thereby affect co-hosted customers.  Several studies suggest 
that such ‘co-tenancy’, an essential feature of IaaS and PaaS, 
carries dangers.  Thus, “Physical co-residency with other 
tenants poses a particular risk” [21], such as “cache-based 
side-channel attacks” [22], and “resource-freeing attacks 
(RFAs)” in which “the goal is to modify the work- load of a 
victim VM in a way that frees up resources for the attacker’s 
VM” [23].  Most worrying are contexts where one customer’s 
‘malicious’ virtual machine seeks to extract information from 
another customer’s virtual machine on the same Cloud 
platform [24]. Such risks to Cloud facilities are fundamental 
to their service provision.  
A final attack vector that threatens some Cloud systems is 
‘from above’. In this case, poorly implemented virtual systems 
may afford scope for customers to ‘break free’ of their virtual 
system and access or directly affect the underlying Operating 
System or middleware/hypervisor. Clearly, it must be ensured 
that there is no information leakage from virtual machines and 
that attackers or malicious customers are not capable of 
breaking out of the virtual machine and gaining access to the 
host OS or the virtual machines of other customers [25]. 
The characteristics of these Cloud service offerings with 
associated security measures and the likely risk conditions are 
captured in Figure 2. The prospect of action from one Cloud 
user affecting another is described as intra-platform 
interference. 
IV. DIGITAL FORENSIC READINESS 
The numbers of cases of network intrusion and data breach 
are on the rise: “there is a massive increase in the records being 
compromised by external hacking – from roughly 49 million 
records in 2013 to 121 million and counting in 2015” [26].  
 
Service 
model 
Main 
features 
Security 
Measures 
Risks 
Infrastructure  
(IaaS) 
Virtual 
machines, 
Operating 
systems, 
Storage, 
Software 
applications 
System 
hardening, 
Software 
defences, 
Data 
backup 
Social 
engineering, 
Intrusion, 
Malware, 
Denial of 
service, 
Elevation of 
privileges, 
Intra-
platform 
interference 
Platform  
(PaaS) 
APIs, 
Programming 
languages, 
Development 
middleware, 
(Containers, 
Dockers, 
AWS 
Lambda, 
DevOps) 
 
System 
hardening, 
Software 
defences 
Social 
engineering, 
Elevation of 
privileges, 
Intra-
platform 
interference, 
Information 
leakage  
Software  
(SaaS) 
Remote 
applications, 
Micro-
services, 
RESTful 
services 
System 
hardening, 
Software 
defences 
Social 
engineering, 
Intra-
platform 
interference 
 
Figure 2. Summary of features, security measures and risks 
 
One positive effect of this growth in unauthorized data 
access is the raised awareness of digital forensics (DF) and a 
marked change in its perception from a solely post-event 
reactive investigative tool to a pro-active policy to establish 
intelligence capabilities in advance of any incidents.  This 
change in role reflects the concept of digital forensic 
readiness.  Thus, “Pro-active DF management must ensure 
that all business processes are structured in such a way that 
essential data and evidence will be retained to ensure 
successful DF investigations, should an incident occur” [27, 
p.18]. 
One might define digital forensic readiness as ‘having 
facilities in place to ensure the comprehensive capture and 
retention of all system event and user activity data that would 
be required post-incident in order to determine the precise 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

nature of any data-loss, system modification or system 
impairment that results from intrusion, system misuse, or 
system failure”. 
Naturally, this concept of digital forensic readiness is 
equally applicable to Cloud systems and novel techniques 
have been proposed to facilitate the data collection that this 
entails [28]. Yet, the Cloud context introduces particular 
problems with respect to forensic readiness. 
V. CLOUD FORENSIC RECOVERY 
Forensic readiness in the Cloud is complicated by the 
variety of contexts in which Cloud services are deployed and 
the diversity of software settings in which security risks may 
arise. 
Forensic 
readiness 
must 
accommodate 
these 
complexities and, in turn, this suggests that a single 
infrastructure-based digital forensic readiness solution may be 
infeasible. 
The primary reason for concern is the need to capture 
relevant data on system operation at the various operational 
levels of the Cloud system and any potential interaction across 
these levels.  This means capturing program logs, system logs 
and user activity logs.  In any end-customer Cloud facility, the 
data protected may not extend beyond any currently live 
information and data held in associated database systems.  The 
ready recycle capability of Cloud services also has 
implications for the persistence of digital forensic evidence. 
An intrusion that steals data from a virtual machine and then 
seeks to reset that machine may well succeed in destroying 
evidence of the intrusion, thereby removing any forensic 
traceability on the nature and quantity of stolen data. 
Neither is it sufficient to provide each distinct operational 
layer of Cloud systems with its own comprehensive forensic 
readiness.  At best, this condition will allow for forensic data 
recovery for that operational layer.  But there is no one-size-
fits-all solution that can capture all state, interaction and 
performance data such as would ensure full Cloud forensic 
recovery.  In fact, this insight reveals a fundamental problem 
that may impact upon Cloud forensic readiness. 
There are parallels here with issues in distributed systems 
and software architecture.  Thus, “distributed software 
systems are harder to debug than centralized systems due to 
the increased complexity and truly concurrent activity that is 
possible in these systems” [29, p. 255]. Regardless of whether 
the Cloud setting is truly distributed in its realisation, its 
interconnected software functional layers represent a unique 
challenge when attempting to interpret the relationship 
between events or changes actioned at one functional level 
and the operational impact of such changes on other functional 
aspects of the services afforded by that Cloud.  
When considering Cloud systems, from the perspective of 
software architecture there may be an assumption of ‘a 
component- and message-based architectural style’ in which 
there is ‘a principle of limited visibility or substrate 
independence: a component within the hierarchy can only be 
aware of components “above” it and is completely unaware of 
components which reside “beneath” it’ [30, p.825]. 
This multi-level interpretation problem is complicated by 
the fact that events considered anomalous at one level of 
service offering may arise through actions considered 
legitimate at a ‘lower’ level of software implementation.  
From the digital forensic readiness perspective, this underlines 
the requirement to go beyond capture of significant events 
across the Cloud service software and functional levels, since 
significance is an aspect that may cross the boundaries 
between such layers in the system as a whole. A hypothetical 
example may clarify this issue. 
A CSP customer may contract access to specific functional 
components (e.g., a Web service).  The operational 
characteristics of the service are under the control of the CSP 
and not the customer.  An authorised employee of the CSP 
may modify the algorithmic process and thereby affect the 
outcome of any service use by the customer.  While a change 
in operational behaviour of the service (i.e., an anomaly) may 
eventually be detected by the customer, there may be no 
anomalous activity evident at the level of CSP employee 
activity. The focus of subsequent forensic investigation may 
light initially on the nature of customer activity, since this is 
where the anomaly is apparent, but proper understanding of 
the issue requires that events across different functional levels 
of the Cloud system be apprehended. 
An informative view on this issue may be borrowed from 
Granular 
Computing 
[31], 
which 
aims 
to 
develop 
computational models of complex systems, such as human 
intelligence.  A key characteristic of this work is that it 
‘stresses multiple views and multiple levels of understanding 
in each view’ [op. cit., p.85]. Here, the emphasis is upon 
‘holistic, unified views, in contrast to isolated, fragmented 
views. To achieve this, we need to consider multiple 
hierarchies and multiple levels in each hierarchy’ [op. cit., 
p.88]. 
Our proposal for adequate Cloud forensic readiness has 
two components.  Firstly, there is a requirement for data 
capture.  This is the obvious need to record any data at each 
layer of Cloud facility that may have a role to play in 
subsequent digital forensic analysis.  Secondly, the captured 
data must be stored off the system being monitored in a 
manner that both ensures the integrity of the logging and 
minimises the likelihood that the stored data can be 
compromised, either as a result of hostile action or ‘friendly 
fire’. 
To achieve adequate data capture, we require ‘state 
information’ and data management across differing levels of 
any Cloud service, from the lowest software level up to the 
most abstracted ‘user facing’ software component.  On their 
own, such records will not be sufficient to fully capture the 
potential interplay of differing software levels.  For this 
purpose, subsequent digital forensic analytics will be required 
in order to establish a multi-dimensional representation of 
event chronology.  This means that timestamps from events 
and data captured at different software levels of abstraction 
will be correlated to determine how events across the Cloud 
system are related.  
Our requirement for secure and resilient log storage can 
build upon default system logging that will be present within 
the Cloud implementation but this must be supplemented to 
achieve log reliability.  
Instead of using centralised log servers, which of course 
are attractive targets and easy to spot for attackers, we propose 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

a different approach. In order to prevent adversaries from 
manipulating log files to hide their tracks, we use chained 
Message Authentication Codes (MACs) for each entry to the 
log file on each node. If state-of-the-art MACs are used, this 
makes it impossible to delete or manipulate text in the log 
files. Next, each node uses secret sharing techniques as 
proposed by Adi Shamir [32] to divide the log file into parts. 
These parts are then sent to random other nodes which store 
these log data. Even if an adversary succeeds in taking over 
some of the nodes, he will need a certain number of these 
fragments to reconstruct the log data. But since for each log 
entry different nodes are chosen randomly as stated before, the 
attacker effectively needs to control the whole Cloud 
ecosystem to stay hidden.  Further information on this solution 
can be found in our previous paper [33]. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
As organisations move increasingly away from locally 
hosted computer services toward Cloud-platforms, there is a 
corresponding need to ensure the forensic integrity of such 
instances. The primary reasons for concern are (i) the locus of 
responsibility, and (ii) the associated risk of legal sanction and 
financial penalty. In the first place, while Cloud service 
providers (CSPs) are responsible for the availability and 
robustness of their commercial offerings, they will not be 
responsible for the management of such services by their 
customers, nor for the data security associated with customer-
level use of the Cloud services.  Responsibility for these 
aspects resides with the CSP’s customers, whose data 
processing and data management are built upon the purchased 
Cloud services. In the second place, legislative demands on 
data protection, such as the forthcoming EU General Data 
Protection Regulation, will require companies to notify all 
breaches within 72 hours of discovery, or face significant 
financial penalty.  
These concerns can be addressed and the business risk 
mitigated through development of forensic readiness in 
customer-level Cloud systems. We have argued that this 
requires a range of logging and data capture facilities across 
the Cloud system software infrastructure that maintain the 
possibility of tracking activity at different levels of software 
abstraction (the multi-level interpretation problem). Our 
second proposition is that such digital forensic readiness must 
be combined with techniques to ensure that logged data is 
incorruptible and robust.  We have previously proposed 
techniques for intrusion monitoring that ensure log data 
credibility and provide robust decentralised log storage and 
recovery for post-hack scenarios [33].  
REFERENCES 
[1] British 
Telecom 
Customer 
Support, 
Available: 
http://bt.custhelp.com/app/answers/detail/a_id/41948/~/what-
is-bt-cloud%3F. [Accessed: Dec. 29, 2017]. 
[2] M. Nanavati, P. Colp, B. Aiello, and A. Warfield, “Cloud 
security: A gathering storm”, Communications of the ACM, 
57(5), pp. 70-79, 2014. 
[3] S. S. Tirumala, H. Sathu, and V. Naidu, “Analysis and 
prevention of account hijacking based incidents in cloud 
environment”, 
In 
Proc. 
International 
Conference 
on 
Information Technology (ICIT), pp. 124-129, 2015. 
[4] M. Zhou, R. Zhang, W. Xie, W. Qian, and A. Zhou, “Security 
and privacy in cloud computing: A survey”, In Proc.  Sixth 
International Conference on Semantics Knowledge and Grid 
(SKG),  pp. 105-112, 2010. 
[5] Y. Chen, V. Paxson, and R. H. Katz, “What’s new about cloud 
computing security”, University of California, Berkeley Report 
No. UCB/EECS-2010-5 January, 20, 2010. 
[6] BBC 
News, 
Available:  
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-29076899. [Accessed: 
Dec. 29, 2017]. 
[7] H. Takabi, J. B. Joshi, and G. J. Ahn, ”Security and privacy 
challenges in cloud computing environments”, IEEE Security 
& Privacy, 8(6), pp. 24-31, 2010. 
[8] M. Carroll, A. Van Der Merwe, and P. Kotze, “Secure cloud 
computing: Benefits, risks and controls”, In Proc. Information 
Security South Africa (ISSA), 2011, pp. 1-9, 2011. 
[9] K. Ilgun, R. A. Kemmerer, and P. A. Porras, “State transition 
analysis: A rule-based intrusion detection approach”, IEEE 
transactions on software engineering, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 181-
199. 1995. 
[10] P. Garcia-Teodoro, J. Diaz-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and 
E. Vázquez, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: 
Techniques, systems and challenges”, Computers and Security, 
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 18-28, 2009. 
[11] P. Mell and T. Grance, “The NIST definition of cloud 
computing”, 
NIST, 
2011. 
Available: 
http://faculty.winthrop.edu/domanm/csci411/Handouts/NIST.
pdf. [Accessed: Dec. 29, 2017]. 
[12] J. Gibson, R. Rondeau, D. Eveleigh, and Q. Tan, “Benefits and 
challenges of three cloud computing service models”, In Proc. 
Fourth International Conference on Computational Aspects of 
Social Networks (CASoN), pp. 198-205, 2012. 
[13] H. Sweetland Edwards, “How Web Cams Helped Bring Down 
the Internet, Briefly”, Time Magazine, 25th October 2016. 
Available: 
http://time.com/4542600/internet-outage-web-cams-
hackers. [Accessed: Dec. 29, 2017]. 
[14] S. Zhang, X. Zhang, and X. Ou, “After we knew it: empirical 
study and modeling of cost-effectiveness of exploiting 
prevalent known vulnerabilities across IAAS cloud”, In Proc. 
9th ACM symposium on Information, computer and 
communications security, pp. 317-328, 2014. 
[15] S. Dhakate and A. Godbole, “Distributed cloud monitoring 
using Docker as next generation container virtualization 
technology”, In Proc. Annual IEEE India Conference 
(INDICON), pp. 1-5, 2015. 
[16] C. Pahl and B. Lee, “Containers and clusters for edge cloud 
architectures--a technology review. In Proc. 3rd International 
Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud (FiCloud), 
pp. 379-386, 2015. 
[17] A. Balalaie, A. Heydarnoori, and P. Jamshidi, “Microservices 
architecture enables DevOps: migration to a cloud-native 
architecture”, IEEE Software, 33(3), pp. 42-52, 2016. 
[18] M. Villamizar et al., “Infrastructure cost comparison of running 
web applications in the cloud using AWS lambda and 
monolithic and microservice architectures. In Proc. 16th 
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and 
Grid Computing (CCGrid), pp. 179-182, 2016. 
[19] D. Namiot and M. Sneps-Sneppe, “On micro-services 
architecture”, International Journal of Open Information 
Technologies, 2(9), pp. 24-27, 2014. 
[20] H. Han et al., “A RESTful approach to the management of 
cloud infrastructure”, In Proc. IEEE International Conference 
on Cloud Computing,. CLOUD'09., pp. 139-142, 2009. 
[21] Y. Zhang, A. Juels, A. Oprea, and M. K. Reiter, “Homealone: 
Co-residency detection in the cloud via side-channel analysis”, 
In Proc. IEEE Symposium on  Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 
313-328, 2011. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[22] Y. Zhang, A. Juels, M. K. Reiter, and T. Ristenpart, “Cross-
tenant side-channel attacks in PaaS clouds”. In Proc. ACM 
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications 
Security, pp. 990-1003, 2014. 
[23] V. Varadarajan, T. Kooburat, T., Farley, T. Ristenpart, and M. 
M. Swift, “Resource-freeing attacks: improve your cloud 
performance (at your neighbor's expense)”, In Proc. ACM 
conference on Computer and communications security, pp. 
281-292, 2012. 
[24] Y. Zhang, A. Juels, M. K. Reiter, and T. Ristenpart, “Cross-
VM side channels and their use to extract private keys”, In 
Proc. ACM conference on Computer and communications 
security, pp. 305-316, 2012. 
[25] T. Vateva-Gurova, N. Suri, and A. Mendelson, “The Impact of 
Hypervisor 
Scheduling 
on 
Compromising 
Virtualized 
Environments”, In Proc. IEEE International Conference on  
Computer 
and 
Information 
Technology; 
Ubiquitous 
Computing and Communications; Dependable, Autonomic and 
Secure Computing; Pervasive Intelligence and Computing 
(CIT/IUCC/DASC/PICOM), pp. 1910-1917, 2015. 
[26] Security Week, “Data Breaches by the Numbers”, Available: 
http://www.securityweek.com/data-breaches-numbers. 
[Accessed: 
Dec. 29, 2017]. 
[27] C. P. Grobler and C. P. Louwrens, “Digital forensic readiness 
as a component of information security best practice”, In Proc. 
IFIP International Information Security Conference, pp. 13-
24,  Springer, Boston, MA, 2007. 
[28] V. R. Kebande and H. S. Venter, “A Cloud Forensic Readiness 
Model Using a Botnet as a Service”, In Proc.  the International 
Conference 
on 
Digital 
Security 
and 
Forensics 
(DigitalSec2014), pp. 23-32, The Society of Digital 
Information and Wireless Communication, 2014. 
[29] P. C. Bates and J. C. Wileden, “High-level debugging of 
distributed systems: The behavioral abstraction approach”, 
Journal of Systems and Software, 3(4), pp. 255-264, 1983. 
[30] N. Medvidovic, R. N. Taylor, and E. J. Whitehead Jr, “Formal 
modeling of software architectures at multiple levels of 
abstraction”, ejw, 714, pp. 824-837, 1996. 
[31] Y. Yao, “Perspectives of granular computing. In Proc. IEEE 
International Conference on Granular Computing, Vol. 1, pp. 
85-90, 2005. 
[32] A. Shamir, “How  to  share  a  secret”,  Communications  of  the 
ACM, vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 612-613, 1979. 
[33] G. R. S. Weir and A. Aßmuth, “Strategies for Intrusion 
Monitoring in Cloud Services”, In Proc. Cloud Computing 
2017, The Eighth International Conference on Cloud 
Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization, IARIA, Athens, 
Greece, 2017. 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

