A Survey of Multiple Clouds: Classification,
Relationships and Privacy Concerns
Reem Al-Saidi
School of Computer Science
University Of windsor
Windsor, Canada
Email:alsaidir@uwindsor.ca
Ziad Kobti
School of Computer Science
University Of windsor
Windsor, Canada
Email:kobti@uwindsor.ca
Abstract—When major Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) net-
work with other CSPs, they show a predominant area over
cloud computing architecture, each with different roles to serve
user demands better. This creates multiple clouds computing
environments, which overcome the limitations of cloud computing
and bring a wide range of benefits (e.g., avoiding vendor lock-in
problem). Numerous applications can use various multiple clouds
types depending on their specifications and needs. Deploying
multiple clouds under hybrid or public models has introduced
various privacy concerns that affect users and their data in a
specific application domain. To understand the nuances of these
concerns, the present study conducted a survey to identify the
various classifications of multiple clouds types and then extend
the cloud entities’ relationships to behave in different multiple
clouds settings. The survey results outline users’ privacy and data
confidentiality concerns in multiple clouds types under public and
hybrid deployment models.
Keywords-multi-cloud;
federated
cloud;
cross-federated
cloud; hybrid federated cloud; inter-cloud; cloud interop-
erability; privacy; trust.
I. INTRODUCTION
Utilizing numerous clouds has emerged as an alternative
way to improve cloud computing capacity for massive and
real-time data [1] [2]. Collaboration and communication be-
tween clouds, known as ”Cloud Interoperability” will improve
data reliability and resource availability, resulting in high-
quality services [3]. Moreover, allowing clouds to connect
brings further benefits to the cloud users by avoiding vendor
lock-in and getting access to widely distributed resources
across different clouds with good performance and legislation-
compliant services to the users [3]–[6]. Different applications
which produce huge amounts of data realize the importance of
multiple clouds to outsource their data and services for better
processing and analysis. For example, in the Internet of Things
(IoT) applications outsourcing the data to different clouds
for further processing overcomes the devices’ limited storage
and processing capacities [2]. The devices are connected to
the internet clouds to accommodate the massive amount of
the produced data by each device; processing the data at the
edge provides low latency, efficient computation capabilities,
and storage capacities [2]. Despite multi-cloud’s resource
availability, data reliability and scalability [3]–[6], maintaining
cloud interoperability while preserving users’ privacy and
data security is still a significant challenge [3]. Without the
users’ consent, their data can be stored in another CSPs with
different access rules and data processing requirements [7]–
[10]. Furthermore, it becomes difficult to guarantee that data
is effectively protected through its entire life-cycle, including
data creation, storage, processing, transfer, and deletion; dif-
ferent CSPs may have different security policies, methods, and
procedures for data processing and storage [7]. It is also more
challenging to guarantee the consistency of security policies
across all CSPs during data transfer and access, and protect the
data against potential threats [16]–[18]. Moreover, identifying
the access roles and sharing privileges among different CSPs
while maintaining user-sensitive attribute without performance
degradation is another critical concern while deploying multi-
ple clouds [22].
Different application domains benefit from multiple clouds
deployments [2] [19] [20] [22]. In the health era, various health
institutions can share their data and collaborate with other
researchers and healthcare professionals, enabling real-time
collaboration and improving personal health and treatments
[22].
While multi-cloud facilitates seamless data exchange and
sharing across different health institutions, it also raises pri-
vacy and security concerns concerning data access and sharing
processes [58]–[61] [63], [64]. Unauthorized and unrestricted
access could expose patient information, compromising pri-
vacy and confidentiality. Moreover, the unrestricted data shar-
ing beyond the intended purpose increases privacy risks and
the potential for data misuse. Considering the privacy and se-
curity issues across various cloud deployment models through
different applications reduces the data disclosure risks and
highlight the possibilities of applications vulnerabilities.
Without question, user privacy and data security are of
the highest importance in the digital age and have attracted
much more attention with the adoption of multiple clouds
computing. The success of such adoption towards building
trustworthy multiple clouds environments is primarily driven
by cloud user privacy and data security [9] [10].
There is no generalization for specific security and privacy-
preserving approaches in the multiple clouds. It is mainly
based on a specific context and the entities involved under
a specific multiple clouds type.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-044-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2023 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

The main contributions of this survey are the following:
• Show the classification of multiple clouds types from the
state-of-the-art work.
• Investigate the challenges for public and hybrid deploy-
ment models in multiple clouds types.
• Extend the single cloud entity’s relationships to behave
in different types of multiple clouds environment.
• Identify the privacy concerns in the multi-cloud, feder-
ated, cross-federated, and inter-cloud under public and
hybrid deployment models at some application domains.
The rest of this survey is organized as follows: In Section
II, we introduce different types of multiple clouds and their
corresponding classification. In Section III, we highlight dif-
ferent difficulties and challenges associated with the various
multiple clouds deployment models. In Section IV, we extend
the cloud entities relationships to behave under different kinds
of multiple clouds. In Section V, we explain the privacy issues
in different multiple clouds types under hybrid deployment
model. Where appropriate, we reflect these privacy concerns
on some applications. Moreover, we highlight the main chal-
lenges of different cloud types under specific deployment
models. In the end, in Section VI, we summarize the survey
work and show the future directions.
II. MULTIPLE CLOUDS CLASSIFICATION
Multiple clouds mean the connection of more than one
cloud. It is similar somehow to the set of an inter-connected
cloud of clouds. In [4], they introduced the inter-connected
global clouds of clouds, it is called the ”Inter-Cloud”, in which
clouds interact and share the resources and the underlying
infrastructure to meet the user’s on-demand requests. Inter-
cloud dynamically allows the management of resources and
distributes the loads among different clouds for better resource
utilization and service performance. Most researchers consider
multiple clouds the same as inter-cloud [1] [11] [12]. Both are
classified into multi-cloud and federated cloud based on how
clients interact with the clouds.
Inter-cloud is defined as a ”maximal set of inter-connected
clouds so that no other organization exists outside the inter-
cloud domain” [12]. However, some researchers consider inter-
cloud as a federated cloud [13] while others [12] claim that
the federated cloud is a type of inter-cloud. In [13], they
stated the main differences between federated and inter-cloud;
the federated cloud is a pre-requisite to the inter-cloud. In a
federated cloud, all federated members would have a common
perceptive of the applications deployment process [29] [30]
while the inter-cloud is based on standards and open interfaces
[13]. Federated cloud promises to deploy in different fields,
including the academic domain, by building the community
cloud with grid computing [19] [20] [28]. Others [16] consider
federated cloud as a multi-cloud with a hybrid deployment
model.
Inter-cloud is classified into multi and federated clouds [11]
[12]. Multi-cloud defines in [15] as ”an evolution of cloud
computing where different services like Software as a Service
(SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Infrastructure as a
Service (IaaS) are provided based on the organization demands
from various cloud service providers”.
Multi-cloud enterprises can get services from more than one
CSP. It highlights two subcategories: the hybrid and rain cloud
[16]. In a rain cloud, each cloud member completes a Service
Level Agreement (SLA) with other members enabling differ-
ent members to work together when data get too large for any
of them to handle [17]. SLA works only in a single or private
organization, and it is not reliable under public cloud systems
[17] [45]. Based on the resources and service provisioning by
the broker, multi-cloud is classified into two implementation
categories: services and libraries [18]. The federation term
refers to the organizational structure where multiple enterprises
have set up collaborative agreements known as ”Federated
Level Agreements (FLA)” [19].
The federation facilitates the adoption of cloud computing
within different companies; the private cloud is built internally
within the enterprises’ scope and connected when necessary to
the public cloud for on-demand resource leasing [14] [19] [20].
The federation should be capable of allowing location-free
virtual applications deployment across federated sites. These
applications can migrate from one site to another partially
or completely [19]–[21]. The objective of the federation is
to allow collaboration and resource sharing among different
cloud providers. It is more appropriate to deploy the federated
cloud when a few businesses are willing to cooperate and share
their resources to serve the cloud user better [19]–[21].
Signing FLA is simpler when there are a few organizations,
it gets challenging when there are several. The user access to
the CSP is transparent; which means that users benefit from the
federated cloud without being aware of which cloud provider
supports the service [21]–[23]. Federation construction among
different service providers has many benefits (e.g., increasing
the economy of scale, efficient use of the resources and assets,
and expansion of providers capabilities) [23]. Maintaining
security, privacy, and independence between the federation
members is necessary for trustworthy cloud federation con-
struction. There are two types of federated cloud: horizontal
federation and cross-cloud federation [1] [24].
The horizontal federation takes place on one level of the
cloud stack, e.g., the application stack. Customers may profit
from lower costs and better performance, while providers
may offer more sophisticated services [1] [23]–[26]. The
disadvantage of the horizontal federation is the lack of services
scalability and diversity, it can not dynamically meet the
changing customers’ needs in the application.
Most CSPs that offer comparable services are horizontally
federated; the members of the federation offer slightly different
services. Thus, limiting the ability of the federated members
to scale once user demands for new services increase. Further-
more, while CSPs compete with one another to increase their
benefits and reputation, they are reluctant to pool resources or
work together in specific contexts, thus limiting the diversity
of services offered [23]–[26].
From the developer’s point of view, the infrastructure man-
agement of federated cloud is easy to develop and maintain
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-044-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2023 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

through the different federation members via a standard Ap-
plication Programming Interface (API) [11].
The federation achieves a traffic load balancing among the
members to accommodate unusual spikes in resource demands
[23] [24]. Moreover, building a federation is less costly than
each organization expanding its infrastructure [1] [23] [24].
Implementing a federated cloud overcomes the vendor lock-in
problem associated with a single cloud and provider integra-
tion concerns [24]. However, federation still suffers from the
contention problem where in [27]–[30] addressed the issue and
suggested a solution accordingly.
There are many challenges with the federation construction
(e.g., performance and disaster recovery through co-location
and geographic distribution, expressing the FLA requires
translating the abstract requirements to understandable proper-
ties for effective organization implementation, and supporting
the vertical expansion of the service layer [24]).
In the cross-cloud federation [6], two or more unfamiliar
CSPs agree to collaborate during run time. It provides dynamic
and diverse benefits to CSPs for expanding their service at run
time to better serve the users changing demands. Still, the main
challenge in the cross-cloud federation is building the chain
of trust from the cloud user to the home cloud, followed by a
series of foreign cloud-transitive trust [1]. Another challenge
is finding a standardized interface for resource access among
cloud domains each with different architectures, policies, and
implementations [6].
In [1], they show the several phases of the cross-cloud
federation, starting from the discovery of another CSP, called
”Foreign Cloud,” that wishes to share its federated resources.
The home CSP triggers the need for resource leasing as
it can not serve the user’s requests. The foreign CSP has
the minimum user specifications, it will lease its additional
federated resource, and be part of the federation construction.
The foreign CSP can either have the same requested service
forming the intralayer or can pass the request through its
stack and delegate the process to the middleware to install
the required service forming the interlayer [26].
A Cross-Cloud Federation Manager (CCFM) is the trusted
party that makes the negotiations with the foreign cloud,
starting from the discovery and resource matching ending with
the resource access. CCFM bridges the gap between different
service providers through various stages [1] [6].
In conclusion, several perspectives exist on classifying mul-
tiple clouds; some consider federated clouds as inter-cloud
[13]. Others disagree and claim that federated cloud is a type
of inter-cloud [12]. The following classification outlines our
categorization of multiple clouds; the inter-cloud is the main
category of multiple clouds, classified into multi-cloud and
federated clouds. The federated cloud has two main subtypes:
horizontal federation and cross-cloud federation.
From our perspective, Figure 1 summarizes the classifica-
tion of different cloud types.
Figure 1: Multiple clouds classification.
III. DIFFICULTIES WITH MULTIPLE CLOUDS DEPLOYMENT
MODELS
Multiple clouds consist of different elements that can be
varied based on specific cloud types and application domains
[30]. Moreover, there are different deployment models, includ-
ing private cloud, public cloud, hybrid cloud, and community
cloud [31]. Each deployment model implemented among dif-
ferent types of multiple clouds introduces a wide variety of
challenges [32].
Private cloud [21] [31] [32] is a specific computing infras-
tructure owned and controlled by an organization (enterprise)
to serve a group of users in a specific application domain. It
can be classified in two main categories:
• Cloud portfolio, in which more than private cloud belongs
to the same organization share the same private cloud
infrastructure. They didn’t compete with each other as
they belong to the same organization domain. They can
easily initiate cooperation requests with each other and
increase the organization revenues [12].
• Independent, a separate cloud each with its own infras-
tructure and resources and not forming a part of cloud
portfolio [21] [32] .
Generally, the private cloud has several challenges and
issues including vendor lock-in, trust, security and privacy,
cost, scalability and availability [21] [32]. Public cloud [33]–
[35] in which prominent vendors and well-known service
providers support a wide range of competing services in the
marketplace. The services are available to a wide range of
interested users upon subscription. The public cloud deploy-
ment model supports a multi-tenant feature of cloud computing
where different users can share the same pool of storage
infrastructure [33]–[36] [46].
Still, deploying the public cloud faces different challenges
and concerns [31] [32] [34]–[36], mainly the trust issue
becomes the most evident one under the uncertainty and loss
of control in the multiple clouds environment. Building trust
in the public cloud towards their users will assure them about
their data confidentiality and cloud provider commitment and
ethical behavior. Implementing a secure infrastructure while
keeping the privacy of user attribute and data with a high level
of assurance is the first step towards building a trustworthy
multiple clouds environment. However, the communication
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-044-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2023 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

between private and public clouds forms a hybrid deployment
model known as “Cloud bursting” in which a private cloud
can extend its resource by initiating a request to an external
provider as it can’t serve its user demands [37]. Even de-
ploying the hybrid model shows promise of enabling cloud
interoperability and scalable services provisioning, it still faces
many challenges and issues [37]–[40]. The main challenges
and concerns in hybrid deployment model are:
1. Trust [38] [39] : trusted entities like a broker or middleware
facilitate communication among cloud entities and monitor
resource provisioning and access processes between private
and public clouds. Cloud users should trust the public cloud
provider as they will lose control over their outsource data and
services running over the public cloud. A high degree of trust
is required so that more users can join a public provider and
benefit from its services and applications.
2. Security and privacy [40]: different security regulations
and privacy compliance control user data and cloud provider
behavior. Due to the lack of user control and the high level of
users’ uncertainty about the public cloud’s commitment. Dif-
ferent privacy and security techniques should be implemented
during all data life cycles highlighting different contexts and
scenarios.
On the community cloud deployment, resources are owned
and controlled by different cloud providers in the community
[41]. It has a security and privacy concerns as same as the
other deployment models [41].
IV. ENTITIES’ RELATIONSHIPS ON MULTIPLE CLOUDS
NIST [42] defined the cloud’s five main components: cloud
users/consumers, providers, carriers, auditors, and brokers.
Each of these entities has different tasks based on a specified
setting. We will consider the same entities in the context of
multiple clouds and extend their interactions and relationships
to behave in a distributed manner. Multiple clouds consist
mainly of cloud user(s), cloud provider(s), cloud auditor(s),
cloud trusted party as broker(s) or identity providers (IdPs),
and cloud carrier(s).
The entities have a context relationship determined by user
activities and the type of multiple clouds in use. They have the
same definition provided by NIST [42] with some extensions
to accommodate the distributed nature of multiple clouds. The
elements form the multiple clouds, and their definitions [42]
are listed below:
1) Cloud user/consumer(s) are an enterprise, or individuals
with internet access looking for better services to meet
their demands.
2) Cloud providers/ data center(s) are vendors that offer
different types of services (platform, infrastructure, stor-
age, software, artificial intelligence functionalities) on
different domains. It supports cloud users with different
service and resource leasing based on a pre-defined
signed agreements.
3) Cloud-trusted entities facilitate a reliable service deliv-
ery between users and providers or among providers
Figure 2: Multiple clouds types entities relationship.
themselves. The trusted entities vary based on the type
of cloud, e.g., brokers used in the federated, inter-cloud,
and cross-cloud federation with an intermediate role.
The trusted entities can assist the customer in selecting
the most suitable service, manage the dimensionality,
heterogeneity, and user uncertainties towards their data
and the CSPs [43].
Brokers in inter or meta cloud can handle the dis-
covery of suitable resources and subsequent data life
cycle management [11]. In the context of a cross-cloud
federation, the trusted party CCFM is used in the dis-
covery, resource matching, and authentication between
home and foreign clouds when the first is saturated
in its resources [25]. IdPs act as trusted entities in
the cross-cloud federation to establish trust and secure
communication between home and foreign clouds for
resource access and sharing [1] [25].
4) Cloud auditor(s) perform an assessment of services, per-
formance and security to comply to the regulations and
the pre-defined agreements between different entities in
the cloud.
5) Cloud carrier(s) support the connectivity and transfor-
mation of the cloud services in the underlying network
infrastructure across different clouds.
The last two entities are also mentioned in [44]. Different
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-044-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2023 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

types of relations control the communication among multiple
clouds entities. We use a formula notation to analyze the
interactions and relations between various cloud entities under
different types of multiple clouds, which facilitates describing
the inputs, outputs, and transformations that take place during
a specific interaction. Moreover, the formula notation will
provide a structured model approach to describe sophisticated
scenarios in multiple clouds [42] [44]. The relation depends on
a specific application context and the corresponding multiple
clouds type deployed. Figure 2: (A, B, C, D) shows the
different entities’ relationships under different multiple clouds
type. A and B describe entities relationship in the multi-cloud
with a hybrid deployment model. C illustrates the cross-cloud
federation entities relationship, and finally, D represents the
federation entities interaction relationship.
The following are the main entities and notations that used
in explaining the four main relations depicted in Figure 2.
Main entities: cloud user(s), cloud provider(s), cloud
broker(s), middle ware, cloud auditor(s) and cloud carrier(s).
Notation: cloud user i (Ui), cloud provider i (CPi), relation
ij R(ij): U(i)
=⇒
CP(j) a relation from user i to cloud
provider j, where i ∈ {1, 2, 3, . . . , n}, j ∈ {1, 2, 3, . . . , m}
and n, m ∈ (N). N is the set of natural numbers.
It does not necessarily for n and m to be equal due to the
cloud multi-tenancy feature [46].
A. Multi-cloud setting: individual user access a public cloud
service provider.
Cloud users contact different cloud providers for better
services provisioning and extra resources access. They can
request various services from various CSPs to satisfy users’
demands and needs. Equation (1) represents Ri between Ui
and CPj
Ui =⇒ CPj
(1)
, where U(i) represent an individual user. Moreover, the
SLA controls the communication and the amount of leased
resources between cloud users and CSPs. Also, a private cloud
that needs extra resources to run its application and better meet
its clients’ needs can initiate a request to the public cloud.
Figure 2: (A) demonstrates user 1 accessing a resource from
a public cloud provider using an electronic device.
Trusted entities can be involved to monitor communication
as a broker or middleware [45]. Cloud carriers and auditors
are applied to assess the service delivery, the privacy and
security compliance while supporting the connectivity for
the underlying network infrastructure [42]. These have same
rules as the single cloud, they can be replicated through the
multiple clouds architecture design to behave in a distributed
environment and avoid single point of failure. Noted that a
cloud provider can serve different users at the same time,
meeting a multi-tenancy feature of the cloud [46].
B. Multi-cloud setting: enterprise with its own private cloud
access a public cloud service provider.
Users can be an individual working in an organization
that holds its own private cloud. However, at specific point of
time the private cloud could ask for extra resources or services
from a well known cloud vendor, public cloud. This forming
a hybrid cloud known as ”Cloud Bursting” [37].
Equation (2) represents Rij between CPi and CPj.
CPi =⇒ CPj
(2)
However, a cloud provider can serve different users requests
at the same time in a sharing and distributed environment
maintaining the multi-tenancy feature. Figure 2: (B) shows
user 2,the enterprise, running its own private cloud access
resources from public cloud.
C. Cross cloud federation.
A cloud provider that lacks resources at specific point of
time, home cloud, can dynamically request and get access to
the resources from foreign cloud. IdP acts as a trusted point
between home and foreign clouds for a secure communication
and resource access. A CCFM is another involved trusted party
for resource discovery, matching and authentication between
the two clouds [1]. The contract for the communication obli-
gation and rules are established dynamically and monitored
by the cloud auditor or another motioning technique based on
the cloud setting. Cloud auditors assess the service delivery
performance and the compliance to the signed agreements.
The cloud carrier supports the connectivity for the underly-
ing network infrastructure. Figure 2: (C) shows the entities
relationship in a cross-cloud federation where user 1 access
can not be satisfied by his/her home cloud. Thus, initiated a
dynamic request to foreign cloud that might serve user request.
Equation (3) represents a dynamic relation denoted by RijD
between CPi (home cloud) and CPj (foreign cloud) [Cross-
cloud federation].
CPi(Home) =⇒ CPj(foreign)
Dynamic
(3)
D. Cloud federation.
In a federated cloud, when a cloud provider has a shortage
on it resources and limitation in it underlying infrastructure
to run an application, it can statically sign an agreement
with another provider to overcome the resource shortage and
limitation on its underlying infrastructure [19]–[21], forming
a federation.
A cloud broker facilitates collaboration and monitoring
across different federation members [43] [45]. Cloud auditors
assess the service delivery performance and the compliance
to the signed agreements. The cloud carrier supports the
connectivity for the underlying network infrastructure.
Figure 2: (D) shows the entities relationship in a cloud
federation where user 3 can transparently access different
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-044-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2023 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

services offered by federated members.
Users’ access can be transparently served by any federation
members that statically pre-signed an agreement regulating
their communication and service provisioning. Equation (4)
represents a static relation denoted by RijSt between CPi and
CPj.
CPi =⇒ CPj
Static
(4)
V. PRIVACY CONCERNS IN DIFFERENT TYPES OF MULTIPLE
CLOUDS
Privacy concerns become the most critical challenge in
multi-cloud while maintaining cloud interoperability. In this
section, we will explore the privacy concerns raised by
various types of multi-cloud.
A. Multi-cloud with hybrid deployment model
Many enterprises with private cloud infrastructure access
different services offered from various public cloud providers.
The enterprises get many benefits; avoid vendor lock-in with
better and cost-effective resource provisioning to their users,
greater flexibility, increased efficiency, and more scalability
[30] [38]. We assume no trusted parties are deployed with
this model as it is difficult to establish and maintain trust
and its corresponding relationship in the open, distributed
and changing multiple clouds environment. Other privacy
challenges include setting the regulations, pre-defined agree-
ments, policies construction, cloud provider commitments,
risk management, and ethical behavior towards the involved
entities. We focus on user privacy as they are the main actors in
the multi-cloud setting. However, the multi-cloud with hybrid
deployment model, from our point of view, raises two primary
users’ privacy concerns:
1) Users’ authentication and access privacy.
Users’ have to authenticate themselves to access their
outsourced data and different services from the public cloud
providers. Users can be an individual with their own electronic
device, denoted in Section IV by Ri relation, or users can be
enterprises with their own private cloud where access are from
private cloud to hybrid cloud, denoted in Section IV by Rij.
However, the authentication process reveals user identities,
locations, habits and attributes to the cloud provider. There
is no guarantee for cloud providers’ ethical behavior towards
cloud users and their corresponding attributes. Attackers can
also monitor user behaviors and access patterns to derive
sensitive information about the users and their valuable assets.
In the Cloud-based Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANET),
each sensor node gathers real-time vehicle information and
monitors its traffic route—all of this information is outsourced
to the cloud to provide different cloud services [75]. Moreover,
the sensor nodes can communicate with each other. The com-
munication messages are aggregated to broadcast to a specific
group of users in the VANET framework [76]. Through the
various forms of communication, each vehicle must indepen-
dently authenticate itself to sensor nodes to access a particular
service. A typical vehicular communication message contains
the vehicle’s location, direction, and speed. The malicious
entity might extract crucial driver information from those
communications and use it to impersonate other vehicles
identity and deliver false messages that could cause collisions
and, at worst, the loss of human lives. Moreover, an intelligent
transportation system needs access to the vehicle’s location to
generate real-time traffic reports and suggest various Points Of
Interest (POI) [75] [76]. For such a purpose, driver semantic
data for the visited places and current locations had to be
extracted. These sensitive details reveal the user’s lifestyle and
routine. Keeping the privacy of the vehicle or sensor node’s
identity and information during the communication while
enabling each node to authenticate itself privately without
disclosing its associated information is cruical in VANET [77].
To sum up, the main privacy concerns in the multi-cloud
setting are user authentication and access privacy, which entail
identity, attributes, access patterns, and location privacy. These
privacy issues are reflected during the vehicle authentication
and communication procedure in the cloud-based VANET.
Additionally, creating a traffic report in VANET necessitates
access to the vehicle’s location, which can reveal user habits.
2) Users’ data security.
Users’ lose control over their outsourced data. If it is
transfer in plain format, it will be posed to a different type of
disclosure and attacks. Also, it can be easily modified, which
affects its integrity and completeness. Encrypted data before
outsourcing to maintain its confidentiality adds extra load to
the enterprise side, which usually has limited performance
capacities and storage space. Moreover, the encryption of the
data requires pre-communication between private and public
clouds to set private and public keys in the case of public
key techniques. More advanced cryptographic techniques (e.g,
full homomorphic encryption [57]) are used to encrypt the
data to permit operations over the outsource encrypted data.
However, those advanced techniques add extra complex-
ity to the infrastructure which could affect the application
usability and performance. Moreover, users’ data transferred
through other cloud providers could face different policies and
access procedures. Another privacy concern is the operation
performed by authorized entities over the outsourced data.
Querying the data stored in distributed database cloud stor-
age poses various privacy concerns. We demonstrate query pri-
vacy in the multi-cloud genomic application. Many authorized
researchers and health organizations query the outsourced
encrypted genome data stored in different cloud databases.
The query statement searches a cloud database first to meet
specific criteria stated in the conditional part of the query and
get the result back.
The query details include contents (e.g., conditional part
and indices position), outcome, target, and user access pattern.
In the context of genomic data, knowing any query contents
by unauthorized or malicious entities will reveal sensitive
information (e.g., in the genomic sequence, the location of
a specific DNA pattern will indicate the type of patient
disease). The specific pattern and location detected in the
patient determine the classification of the disease in some
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-044-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2023 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

forms of diabetes, such as Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the
Young (MODY) [72]. In [73] [74], they succeeded in securely
querying private in genomic datasets to discover which spe-
cific genomic alterations are associated with a disease, thus
increasing the availability of these valuable datasets. Ensuring
the privacy of the query so that the cloud provider will not be
able to deduce any information from the query except what
is allowed to do, and the researcher will not know any other
information on the genomic database. Finally, choosing the
most appropriate privacy-preserving techniques that could be
applied efficiently, securely, and scalably when inquiring about
genomic data is crucial in the genomic domain.
To summarize, user data security entails its confidentiality,
integrity, availability, and access rights management, which
are other critical privacy concerns in the multi-cloud hybrid
deployment model. Moreover, different privacy concerns can
be determined based on a specific application context, data
sensitivity, application requirements, and entities involved in
a particular cloud type.
B. Federated cloud.
1) Horizontal federation architecture.
Cloud providers set pre-defined rules and policies to inte-
grate and establish a federation [1] [19]–[22]. The established
regulations, policies, and trust govern the communication
between federation members. Users get a wide variety of
services from the federation transparently, denoted in Section
IV by RijSt. However, this type of federation is usually static;
if the user wants service outbound to the federation capacities,
the user request is denied [1] [19]–[22]. There is also a
high possibility of malicious attacks during the members’
communication, thus affecting the confidentiality of data and
threatening user privacy [47]. Also, there is no guarantee that a
subset of federation members collude to extract user-sensitive
information.
Moreover, there are many security challenges in construct-
ing a federated cloud [48], which are the longer chain of trust,
limited audibility, risk of malicious service components, and
liability and legal issues. The users in federated cloud and
inter-cloud will face the same privacy concern as those on the
multi-cloud hybrid deployment model. Integration of end-to-
end security and privacy implementation in the federated cloud
is the undergoing research area which is challenging to balance
the efficiency and security in the federation implementation
[47].
2) Cross-federated cloud and inter-cloud.
When a user wants a service not supported by the cloud
provider in which customer is subscribed to and trusted,
the cloud provider can collaborate on-fly with another cloud
provider to satisfy the user’s demands. The corresponding
relation denoted in Section IV by RijD. The CCFM is the
trusted party that starts the resource discovery process till
finding the appropriate cloud provider that best matches the
request. Ending with the authentication between the home and
foreign cloud providers to facilitate the access and resource
provisioning processes [1].
The dynamic discovery put the involved entities at high risk
in the open and untrusted multiple clouds environment. As
there is no pre-defined trust in the dynamic discovery between
the cloud providers, maintaining the dynamic trust, in that
case, is becoming challenging. Different doubts surrounded
trust itself: What is trust? Is it a vulnerability to the system or
not? What is the type of trust that could establish? What are
the trust requirements and specifications in a dynamic context?
What are the relationships between trust, risk, and assurance
levels? Is trust enough to guarantee user privacy? What metrics
are required to implement a privacy preservation approach in
the inter-cloud and cross-federated cloud?
Moreover, identifying the risks will help mitigate unde-
sirable circumstances that threaten user privacy. However,
the risk will still depend on a specific context and what is
considered valued and require a higher protection mechanism
during the dynamic discovery, resource provisioning and ac-
cess process. Identifying the relationships between trust and
risk facilitates dynamic discovery decisions to federate or not
[49] [50]. Cross-cloud federation shows its applicability in a
wide range of domains starting from research and academia,
engineering and construction, financial and industry, real-time
data processing, and online gaming [1].
Inter-cloud facilitates the dynamic discovery of the re-
sources in a wider scale domain. Within the federated identity
management, user access different federated services and
resources. Trust is an essential factor within the federated
members to transparently satisfy the user better demands (e.g.,
a proxy certificate is used for trust implementation in the grid
computing [51]).
Single sign-on (SSO) application under inter-cloud enables
users to authenticate only once and get access to different
web services located at other clouds without the need to
be re-authenticated again. Different standard protocols were
established in the SSO [52]. The two most popular are Security
Assertion Markup Language (SAML 2.0) [53], and OpenID
connect [54], each of them with its specifications and format
[53] [54]. However, each generates an authentication/access
token to delegate the authentication on behalf of the user. The
authentication delegation allows access to specific attributes
identified in the access token [55]. These protocols should
prevent any impersonation and other malicious activities per-
formed by the IdP (e.g., monitoring user access and link-
ing user identities to different activities offered by service
providers). Still, securing these protocols against attacks is
challenging in web cloud domain. Many attacks are reported
[56].
C. The hybrid deployment model under a federated cloud.
Integrating federated cloud with hybrid deployment
model known as ”Hybrid Federated Cloud Computing,” which
allows interoperability across different federations. The main
objective of this type is to provide an environment with seem-
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-044-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2023 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

TABLE I: PRIVACY CONCERNS IN MULTIPLE CLOUDS TYPES.
Cloud
Deployment model
Privacy
Application
type
Public
Private
Hybrid
concerns
Multi-cloud
✓
• Identity privacy.
• Location privacy.
• Access pattern privacy.
• Query privacy.
• Data and access privacy.
• VANET.
• Genomic domain.
Federated cloud
✓
• Risk of dynamic discovery.
• Authentication privacy.
• Access privacy.
Bio-informatic with SSO.
Horizontal federation
✓
✓
✓
• Trust between federation members:
– No collude federated members.
– longer chain of trust.
• Identity privacy.
• Risk of malicious service components.
• Liability and legal issues.
• Limited audibility.
Small organizations.
Cross-federated and inter-cloud
✓
• Identity privacy.
• Attribute privacy.
• Token access privacy.
• Access and authorization privacy.
SSO (SAML 2.0, OIDC protocols)
ingly limitless computational resources, processing power,
and storage space that can effectively meet user demands
[52] [58]–[61]. In the bio-informatics domain, a bioNimbus
[60] [61] is a federated cloud platform in which different
independent, heterogenous, private/public/hybrid clouds are
collaborated to support other bio-informatics applications. It
maintains the internal configuration and privacy policies for
each federation member.
BioNimbus supports on-demand resource provisioning in an
efficient, flexible, fault tolerance, and scalable way under the
hybrid horizontal federation deployment model [60]–[63]. It
integrates different bio-informatic workflows for identifying
differentially expressed genes in cancer tissue.
Various bio-informatics centers can benefit from the feder-
ation collaboration to access other data and have extra storage
in a distributed, transparent, and fault tolerance way [62]
[64]. The security, including authentication, authorization, and
confidentiality, can be implemented in the hybrid federated
cloud without adding extra dependency among the federation
members through the standard SSO protocols OpenID and
OAuth [64]. The user authenticates through their federation
provider and gets access to other federation members. The
access control list governs the access process based on the
federation pre-signed federation agreement.
In [63], they suggest using the attribute-based access control
for the bioNimbus operating under a federated cloud, which
effectively guarantees that eligible users can only access
resources without impacting the authorization response back
time. However, when a federation requests additional resources
from other public clouds or federations, privacy issues related
to authentication and access should be addressed. These issues
also include the risk of dynamic discovery and creating a
new connection with an unknown federated cloud or cloud
provider. Different projects [61] [63] [65]–[71] were imple-
mented for bio-informatics applications under a federation
cloud environment. Table I summarizes the privacy concerns
within different multiple clouds types concerning various
applications.
VI. CONCLUSION
The main goal of multiple clouds is to maintain cloud
interoperability, allowing different clouds to communicate
and interact to provide cloud users with a wide variety of
resources and high-quality services. Moreover, multiple clouds
get around a single cloud architecture limitation by allowing
users to access various resources without being stuck to a
specific cloud provider. There are different types of multiple
clouds: cross-cloud, rain cloud, horizontal federation cloud,
and federated cloud. Various applications deploy the cloud
type that matches their specifications under public or hybrid
deployment models.
Privacy is still of utmost importance in the digital world
and has become vital for adopting different kinds of multiple
clouds under a specific application domain. The success of
multiple clouds adoption and a trustworthy environment is
primarily driven by cloud security and preserving cloud users’
privacy. The results of the present study’s survey provide
classifications of multiple clouds types and outline the most
common multiple clouds taxonomy. The challenges for public
and hybrid deployment models were investigated under differ-
ent kinds of multiple clouds. For example, the most common
concerns under the hybrid deployment model were privacy, se-
curity, and trust. However, the relationships that connect single
cloud entities no longer suit the multiple clouds architecture;
thus, for the purposes of the present study, the relationships
were extended from a single cloud to behave under different
kinds of multiple clouds in a distributed manner. As privacy is
a key consideration when deploying multiple clouds, the study
introduced different privacy concerns in various applications
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-044-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2023 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

that deploy a specific type of multiple clouds.
For example, the bio-informatic domain deploys a hybrid
federated cloud, which raises authentication and access privacy
concerns. Also, an SSO web application that deploys a cross-
federated cloud will pose token access privacy, identity, and
attributes privacy. The privacy concerns outlined in the study
underscore the need to examine more applications that use
multiple clouds and show the current solutions for handling
these privacy issues. Moreover, a supplementary survey should
explore the potential of developing new techniques for privacy
preservation in multiple clouds.
Acknowledgments: We acknowledge the support of the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC [funding reference number 03181]). We also ac-
knowledge the input from Dr. Mahdi Daghmehchi Firoozjaei,
School of Computer Science, University of Windsor.
REFERENCES
[1] U. Ahmed, I. Raza, and S. A. Hussain, “Trust evaluation in cross-cloud
federation: Survey and requirement analysis,” ACM Computing Surveys,
vol. 52, no. 1. Association for Computing Machinery, Feb. 01, 2019. doi:
10.1145/3292499.
[2] B. Varghese, N. Wang, S. Barbhuiya, P. Kilpatrick, and D. S. Nikolopou-
los, “Challenges and Opportunities in Edge Computing,” in Proceedings
- 2016 IEEE International Conference on Smart Cloud, SmartCloud
2016, Dec. 2016, pp. 20–26. doi: 10.1109/SmartCloud.2016.18.
[3] D. Bernstein, E. Ludvigson, K. Sankar, S. Diamond, and M. Morrow,
“Blueprint for the intercloud - Protocols and formats for cloud com-
puting interoperability,” in Proceedings of the 2009 4th International
Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services, ICIW 2009,
2009, pp. 328–336. doi: 10.1109/ICIW.2009.55.
[4] K. Keahey, M. Tsugawa, A. Matsunaga, and J. Fortes, “Sky comput-
ing,” IEEE Internet Comput, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 43–51, 2009, doi:
10.1109/MIC.2009.94.
[5] S. Shetty, A. P. Manu, V. Kumar, and C. Antony, ”Need of Multi-Cloud
Environment and Related Issues: A Survey,” Journal of Xian University
of Architecture & Technology, vol. 12, pp. 78-87, 2020.
[6] A. Celesti, F. Tusa, M. Villari, and A. Puliafito, “How to enhance cloud
architectures to enable cross-federation,” in Proceedings - 2010 IEEE 3rd
International Conference on Cloud Computing, CLOUD 2010, 2010, pp.
337–345. doi: 10.1109/CLOUD.2010.46.
[7] S. Subashini and V. Kavitha, “A survey on security issues in ser-
vice delivery models of cloud computing,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 34, no. 1. pp. 1–11, Jan. 2011. doi:
10.1016/j.jnca.2010.07.006.
[8] “Computer
Communications
and
Networks.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.springer.com/series/4198. Accessed: March 2, 2023.
[9] M. A. AlZain, E. Pardede, B. Soh, and J. A. Thom, “Cloud com-
puting security: From single to multi-clouds,” in Proceedings of the
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2012, pp.
5490–5499. doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2012.153.
[10] N. Thillaiarasu and S. Chenthurpandian, “Enforcing security and
privacy over multi-cloud framework using assessment techniques,”
in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Intelli-
gent Systems and Control, ISCO 2016, Oct. 2016. pp. 1-6, doi:
10.1109/ISCO.2016.7727001.
[11] Y. Elkhatib, ”Mapping cross-cloud systems: Challenges and opportuni-
ties,” in 8th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Cloud Computing
(HotCloud 16), pp. 1-5, 2016.
[12] N. Grozev and R. Buyya, “Inter-Cloud architectures and application
brokering: Taxonomy and survey,” Softw Pract Exp, vol. 44, no. 3, pp.
369–390, Mar. 2014, doi: 10.1002/spe.2168.
[13] A. N. Toosi, R. N. Calheiros, and R. Buyya, ”Interconnected cloud
computing environments: Challenges, taxonomy, and survey,” ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 1-47, 2014.
[14] M. R. M. Assis and L. F. Bittencourt, “A survey on cloud federa-
tion architectures: Identifying functional and non-functional properties,”
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 72. Academic
Press, pp. 51–71, Sep. 01, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.jnca.2016.06.014.
[15] D. Gurusamy and T. K. Elemo, “Direct-cloud, multi-cloud, and
connected-cloud – terminologies make a move in cloud computing,”
International Journal of Innovative Technology and Exploring Engi-
neering, vol. 8, no. 9 Special Issue 2, pp. 386–393, Jul. 2019, doi:
10.35940/ijitee.I1083.0789S219.
[16] J. Hong, T. Dreibholz, J. A. Schenkel, and J. A. Hu, “An Overview
of Multi-cloud Computing,” in Advances in Intelligent Systems and
Computing, 2019, vol. 927, pp. 1055–1068. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-
15035-8-103.
[17] S. Kathuria, ‘A survey on security provided by multi-clouds in cloud
computing’, International Journal of Scientific Research in Network
Security and Communication, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 23–27, 2018.
[18] D. Petcu, ‘Multi-cloud: expectations and current approaches’, in Pro-
ceedings of the 2013 international workshop on Multi-cloud applications
and federated clouds, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[19] L. Chouhan, P. Bansal, B. Lauhny, and Y. Chaudhary, “A Survey
on Cloud Federation Architecture and Challenges,” in Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems, vol. 100, Springer, 2020, pp. 51–65. doi:
10.1007/978-981-15-2071-6-5.
[20] R. Buyya, J. Broberg, and A. M. Goscinski, Cloud computing: Principles
and paradigms. John Wiley and Sons, 2010, pp. 393-410
[21] J. Hong, T. Dreibholz, J. A. Schenkel, and J. A. Hu, “An Overview
of Multi-cloud Computing,” in Advances in Intelligent Systems and
Computing, 2019, vol. 927, pp. 1055–1068. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-
15035-8-103.
[22] B. Fabian, T. Ermakova, and P. Junghanns, ”Collaborative and secure
sharing of healthcare data in multi-clouds,” Information Systems, vol.
48, pp. 132-150, 2015.
[23] M. R. M. Assis, L. F. Bittencourt, and R. Tolosana-Calasanz, “Cloud fed-
eration: Characterization and conceptual model,” in Proceedings - 2014
IEEE/ACM 7th International Conference on Utility and Cloud Comput-
ing, UCC 2014, Jan. 2014, pp. 585–590. doi: 10.1109/UCC.2014.90.
[24] T. Kurze, M. Klems, D. Bermbach, A. Lenk, S. Tai, and M. Kunze,
‘Cloud federation’, Cloud Computing, vol. 2011, pp. 32–38, 2011.
[25] L. Mashayekhy, M. M. Nejad, and D. Grosu, “A Trust-Aware
Mechanism for Cloud Federation Formation,” IEEE Transactions
on Cloud Computing, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1278–1292, 2021, doi:
10.1109/TCC.2019.2911831.
[26] D. Villegas et al., “Cloud federation in a layered service model,” in
Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 2012, vol. 78, no. 5, pp.
1330–1344. doi: 10.1016/j.jcss.2011.12.017.
[27] M. A. Salehi, A. N. Toosi, and R. Buyya, ”Contention management
in federated virtualized distributed systems: implementation and evalu-
ation,” Software: Practice and Experience, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 353-368,
Mar. 2014.
[28] H. A. Imran et al., ‘Multi-cloud: a comprehensive review’, in 2020 IEEE
23rd International Multitopic Conference (INMIC), 2020, pp. 1–5.
[29] A. N. Toosi, R. N. Calheiros, R. K. Thulasiram, and R. Buyya, “Resource
provisioning policies to increase IaaS provider’s profit in a federated
cloud environment,” in Proc.- 2011 IEEE International Conference on
HPCC 2011, pp. 279–287. doi: 10.1109/HPCC.2011.44.
[30] M. Singhal, S. Chandrasekhar, T. Ge, R. Sandhu, R. Krishnan, G. J. Ahn,
and E. Bertino, ”Collaboration in multicloud computing environments:
Framework and security issues,” Computer, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 76-84,
Feb. 2013.
[31] T. Diaby and B. B. Rad, “Cloud Computing: A review of the Concepts
and Deployment Models,” International Journal of Information Tech-
nology and Computer Science, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 50–58, Jun. 2017, doi:
10.5815/ijitcs.2017.06.07.
[32] L. Savu, “Cloud computing: Deployment models, delivery models,
risks and research challanges,” in 2011 International Conference on
Computer and Management, CAMAN 2011, 2011. doi: 10.1109/CA-
MAN.2011.5778816.
[33] W. Jansen and T. Grance, “Guidelines on security and privacy in public
cloud computing,” Gaithersburg, MD, 2011. doi: 10.6028/NIST.SP.800-
144.
[34] P. Hofmann and D. Woods, “Cloud computing: The limits of public
clouds for business applications,” IEEE Internet Comput, vol. 14, no. 6,
pp. 90–93, Nov. 2010, doi: 10.1109/MIC.2010.136.
[35] K. Ren, C. Wang, and Q. Wang, “Security challenges for the public
cloud,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 16, no. 1. pp. 69–73, Jan. 2012.
doi: 10.1109/MIC.2012.14.
[36] S. Islam, M. Ouedraogo, C. Kalloniatis, H. Mouratidis, and S. Gritzalis,
“Assurance of Security and Privacy Requirements for Cloud Deployment
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-044-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2023 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Models,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, vol. 6, no. 2, pp.
387–400, Apr. 2018, doi: 10.1109/TCC.2015.2511719.
[37] T. Guo, U. Sharma, P. Shenoy, T. Wood, and S. Sahu, “Cost-aware cloud
bursting for enterprise applications,” in ACM Transactions on Internet
Technology, 2014, vol. 13, no. 3. doi: 10.1145/2602571.
[38] V. Viji Rajendran and S. Swamynathan, “Hybrid model for dynamic
evaluation of trust in cloud services,” Wireless Networks, vol. 22, no.
6, pp. 1807–1818, Aug. 2016, doi: 10.1007/s11276-015-1069-y.
[39] J. Abawajy, ‘Establishing trust in hybrid cloud computing environments’,
in 2011IEEE 10th International Conference on Trust, Security and
Privacy in Computing and Communications, 2011, pp. 118–125.
[40] C. Lin and V. Varadharajan, ‘A hybrid trust model for enhancing security
in distributed systems’, in The Second International Conference on
Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES’07), 2007, pp. 35–42.
[41] A. Marinos and G. Briscoe, ‘Community cloud computing’, in Cloud
Computing: First International Conference, CloudCom 2009, Beijing,
China, December 1-4, 2009. Proceedings 1, 2009, pp. 472–484.
[42] F. Liu et al., ‘NIST cloud computing reference architecture’, NIST
special publication, vol. 500, no. 2011, pp. 1–28, 2011.
[43] A. Elhabbash, F. Samreen, J. Hadley, and Y. Elkhatib, “Cloud brokerage:
A systematic survey,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 51, no. 6. Associ-
ation for Computing Machinery, Jan. 01, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3274657.
[44] A. Ghorbel, M. Ghorbel, and M. Jmaiel, ‘Privacy in cloud computing
environments: a survey and research challenges’, The Journal of Super-
computing, vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 2763–2800, 2017.
[45] T. Halabi and M. Bellaiche, “A broker-based framework for standard-
ization and management of Cloud Security-SLAs,” Comput Secur, vol.
75, pp. 59–71, Jun. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2018.01.019.
[46] H. AlJahdali, A. Albatli, P. Garraghan, P. Townend, L. Lau, and J. Xu,
‘Multi-tenancy in cloud computing’, in 2014 IEEE 8th international
symposium on service oriented system engineering, 2014, pp. 344–351.
[47] R. Kumar, S. · Jitendra, A. · Sanjeev, S. · Narendra, S. Chaudhari, and
· K K Shukla Editors, “Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems 100.”
[Online]. Available: http://www.springer.com/series/15179
[48] K. Bernsmed, M. G. Jaatun, P. H. Meland, and A. Undheim, “Thunder in
the Clouds: Security challenges and solutions for federated Clouds,” in
CloudCom 2012 - Proceedings: 2012 4th IEEE International Conference
on Cloud Computing Technology and Science, 2012, pp. 113–120. doi:
10.1109/CloudCom.2012.6427547.
[49] P. Arias Cabarcos, F. Almen´arez, F. G´omez M´armol, and A. Mar´ın, “To
federate or not to federate: A reputation-based mechanism to dynamize
cooperation in identity management,” Wirel Pers Commun, vol. 75, no.
3, pp. 1769–1786, Apr. 2014, doi: 10.1007/s11277-013-1338-y.
[50] P. Arias-Cabarcos, F. A. Rez-Mendoza, A. Mar´ın-L´opez, D. D´ıaz-
S´anchez, and R. S´anchez-Guerrero, “A metric-based approach to assess
risk for ‘On cloud’ federated identity management,” Journal of Network
and Systems Management, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 513–533, Dec. 2012, doi:
10.1007/s10922-012-9244-2.
[51] M. Ogawa and L. Xin, “Proxy Certificate Trust List for Grid
Computing Time-Sensitive Pushdown Systems View project Proxy
Certificate Trust List for Grid Computing.” [Online]. Available:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/252163600. Accessed: March
2, 2023.
[52] V. Radha and D. H. Reddy, “A Survey on Single Sign-On Tech-
niques,”
Procedia
Technology,
vol.
4,
pp.
134–139,
2012,
doi:
10.1016/j.protcy.2012.05.019.
[53] E. Maler et al., ‘Security and privacy considerations for the oasis security
assertion markup language (saml) v2. 0’, Language (SAML), vol. 2, p.
0, 2005.
[54] C. Mainka, V. Mladenov, J. Schwenk, and T. Wich, “SoK: Single Sign-
On Security - An Evaluation of OpenID Connect,” in Proceedings - 2nd
IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy, EuroS and P 2017,
Jun. 2017, pp. 251–266. doi: 10.1109/EuroSP.2017.32.
[55] H. Gomi, “Dynamic identity delegation using access tokens in fed-
erated environments,” in Proceedings - 2011 IEEE 9th International
Conference on Web Services, ICWS 2011, 2011, pp. 612–619. doi:
10.1109/ICWS.2011.30.
[56] M. Ghasemisharif, A. Ramesh, S. Checkoway, C. Kanich, J. Polakis,
and A. Ramesh, Open access to the Proceedings of the 27th USENIX
Security Symposium is sponsored by USENIX. O Single Sign-Off,
Where Art Thou? An Empirical Analysis of Single Sign-On Account
Hijacking and Session Management on the Web O Single Sign-Off.
[57] C. Gentry, A fully homomorphic encryption scheme. Stanford university,
2009.
[58] R. Gallon, M. Holanda, A. Ara´ujo, and M. E. Walter, ‘Storage policy
for genomic data in hybrid federated clouds’, in Advances in Bioin-
formatics and Computational Biology: 9th Brazilian Symposium on
Bioinformatics, BSB 2014, Belo Horizonte, Brazil, October 28-30, 2014,
Proceedings 9, 2014, pp. 107–114.
[59] M. Rosa et al., “BioNimbuZ: A federated cloud platform for bioinfor-
matics applications,” in Proceedings - 2016 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine, BIBM 2016, Jan. 2017, pp.
548–555. doi: 10.1109/BIBM.2016.7822580.
[60] C. A. L. Borges, H. v. Saldanha, E. Ribeiro, M. T. Holanda, A. P. F.
Araujo, and M. E. M. T. Walter, “Task scheduling in a federated cloud
infrastructure for bioinformatics applications,” in CLOSER 2012 - Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Cloud Computing and
Services Science, 2012, pp. 114–120. doi: 10.5220/0003932801140120.
[61] A. P. Heath et al., “Bionimbus: A cloud for managing, analyzing and
sharing large genomics datasets,” Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 969–975, Jan. 2014, doi:
10.1136/amiajnl-2013-002155.
[62] D. Lima et al., “A storage policy for a hybrid federated cloud platform:
A case study for bioinformatics,” in Proceedings - 14th IEEE/ACM In-
ternational Symposium on Cluster, Cloud, and Grid Computing, CCGrid
2014, 2014, pp. 738–747. doi: 10.1109/CCGrid.2014.102.
[63] H. H. D. P. M. Costa, A. P. F. de Ara´ujo, J. J. C. Gondim, M. T. de
Holanda, and M. E. M. T. Walter, ”Attribute based access control in
federated clouds: A case study in bioinformatics,” in 2017 12th Iberian
Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI), pp. 1-7,
June 2017.
[64] H. Saldanha et al., “Towards a Hybrid Federated Cloud Platform
to Efficiently Execute Bioinformatics Workflows,” in Bioinformatics,
InTech, 2012. doi: 10.5772/50289.
[65] B. Langmead, K. D. Hansen, and J. T. Leek, “Cloud-scale RNA-
sequencing differential expression analysis with Myrna,” 2010. [Online].
Available: http://genomebiology.com/content/11/8/R83
[66] C. Hoffa et al., “On the use of cloud computing for scientific work-
flows,” in Proceedings - 4th IEEE International Conference on eScience,
eScience 2008, 2008, pp. 640–645. doi: 10.1109/eScience.2008.167.
[67] D. P. Wall, P. Kudtarkar, V. A. Fusaro, R. Pivovarov, P. Patil, and P. J.
Tonellato, “Cloud computing for comparative genomics,” 2010. [Online].
Available: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/259
[68] R. Li et al., “SNP detection for massively parallel whole-genome
resequencing,” Genome Res, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1124–1132, Jun. 2009,
doi: 10.1101/gr.088013.108.
[69] B. Pratt, J. J. Howbert, N. I. Tasman, and E. J. Nilsson, “Mr-Tandem:
Parallel x!Tandem using Hadoop MapReduce on Amazon web ser-
vices,” Bioinformatics, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 136–137, Jan. 2012, doi:
10.1093/bioinformatics/btr615.
[70] L. Zhang, S. Gu, Y. Liu, B. Wang, and F. Azuaje, “Gene set analysis in
the cloud,” Bioinformatics, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 294–295, Jan. 2012, doi:
10.1093/bioinformatics/btr630.
[71] B. Lang, I. Foster, F. Siebenlist, R. Ananthakrishnan, and T. Freeman,
“A flexible attribute based access control method for grid computing,”
J Grid Comput, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 169–180, 2009, doi: 10.1007/s10723-
008-9112-1.
[72] M. Najam, R. U. Rasool, H. F. Ahmad, U. Ashraf, and A. W. Malik,
“Pattern Matching for DNA Sequencing Data Using Multiple Bloom
Filters,” Biomed Res Int, vol. 2019, 2019, doi: 10.1155/2019/7074387
[73] M. Akg¨un, A. O. Bayrak, B. Ozer, and M. S¸. Sa˘giro˘glu, “Privacy
preserving processing of genomic data: A survey,” Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, vol. 56. Academic Press Inc., pp. 103–111, Aug. 01, 2015.
doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.05.022
[74] S. Simmons, C. Sahinalp, and B. Berger, “Enabling Privacy-Preserving
GWASs in Heterogeneous Human Populations,” Cell Syst, vol. 3, no. 1,
pp. 54–61, Jul. 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.cels.2016.04.013.
[75] S. Sharma and A. Kaul, “A survey on Intrusion Detection Systems and
Honeypot based proactive security mechanisms in VANETs and VANET
Cloud,” Vehicular Communications, vol. 12. Elsevier Inc., pp. 138–164,
Apr. 01, 2018.
[76] K. Sarwar, S. Yongchareon, J. Yu, and S. Ur Rehman, “A Survey on
Privacy Preservation in Fog-Enabled Internet of Things,” ACM Comput
Surv, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 1–39, Jan. 2023, doi: 10.1145/3474554.
[77] I. Ali, A. Hassan, and F. Li, “Authentication and privacy schemes
for vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs): A survey,” Vehicular Com-
munications, vol. 16. Elsevier Inc., pp. 45–61, Apr. 01, 2019. doi:
10.1016/j.vehcom.2019.02.002.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-044-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2023 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

