 
Analysis of Virtual Networking Options for Securing Virtual Machines 
Ramaswamy Chandramouli 
Computer Security Division, Information Technology Laboratory 
National Institute of Standards & Technology 
100 Bureau Drive, Gaithersburg, MD, USA 
E-Mail: mouli@nist.gov 
  
Abstract – Virtual Machines (VMs) constitute the primary 
category of resources to be protected in virtualized 
infrastructures. Out of the two types of protection for VMs – 
Host-level and Network-level – it is the approaches for the 
Network-level protection that are different in virtualized 
infrastructures as compared to those for non-virtualized 
environments. This is due to the fact that the VMs are end 
nodes of a virtual network as opposed to being end nodes of a 
physical network. In this paper, we provide a detailed analysis 
(in terms of advantages and disadvantages) of some of the key 
approaches for two Network-level protection measures for 
virtualized infrastructures – Network Segmentation and 
Traffic Control using Firewalls. The choice of these two 
Network-level protection measures is due to the fact that they 
form the foundation for the network configuration of the entire 
virtualized infrastructure. We also provide the overall 
conclusions from the analysis in the form of recommended 
deployment choices based on approaches for these two 
network-level protection measures for securing VMs. 
Keywords - Virtual Machine; VLAN; Hypervisor; VXLAN; 
Virtual Firewall. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
     Virtualized hosts (also called hypervisor hosts) are 
increasingly deployed in data centers because of efficiency, 
scalability 
and 
cost 
considerations. 
The 
virtualized 
infrastructure resulting from the deployment of virtualized 
hosts has three main categories of components - Hypervisor 
Software, Virtual Machines (VMs) and Virtual Networking 
components such as Virtual Network Interface Cards 
(vNICs), Virtual Switches and Virtual Firewalls.  
     Out of the three categories of components above, the 
VMs constitute the fundamental resource to be protected in 
a virtualized infrastructure, since they are the compute 
engines on which business/mission critical applications of 
the enterprise run. These VMs are virtual counterparts of 
physical servers and hence just like their physical 
counterparts, security for these VMs has to be provided 
through host-level and network-level measures. These 
measures may also vary depending upon whether the overall 
virtualized infrastructure (in which the VM resides) is used 
for in-house enterprise applications or for offering cloud 
services to external entities (e.g., Infrastructure as a Service 
Public Cloud). We provide a brief overview of the two types 
of protection mentioned above. (a) Host-level protections 
required for VMs include features for robust authentication, 
access using secure access protocols and secure session 
establishment. The mechanisms required for providing these 
features are no different for VMs compared to their physical 
counterparts (i.e., physical servers). (b) Network-level 
protections required for VMs are feature-wise similar to 
those that are required by their physical counterparts. 
However, the mechanisms or approaches required for 
providing these protections are different due to the fact that 
the VMs are end nodes of a virtual network as opposed to 
being end nodes of a physical network. 
     For any type of datacenter infrastructure (virtualized or 
non-virtualized), there is a general consensus that the 
following are some of the key Network-level protection 
measures [1]. They are: (a) Network segmentation or 
isolation, (b) Traffic control using firewalls, (c) Creating 
Redundant communication pathways, and (d) Traffic 
Monitoring and Prevention using IDS/IPS. 
     Out of the above four network-level protection measures, 
the first two - Network Segmentation and Traffic Control 
using Firewalls - form the foundation for the network 
configuration of the entire virtualized infrastructure. Hence, 
in this paper, we have chosen to focus on different 
approaches or mechanisms used for these two network-level 
protection measures, by performing a detailed analysis of 
the advantages and disadvantages of each of the approaches.  
95
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

     Before we describe the organization of the rest of the 
paper, a few observations regarding our chosen network-
level protection measures in the context of virtualized 
infrastructure are in order. In a virtualized infrastructure, the 
distinguishing networking environment is the virtual 
network. Hence the network segmentation approaches 
discussed in this paper have to involve some virtual network 
components such as virtual switches. Similarly, a viable 
approach for traffic control using firewalls has to use a 
virtual firewall instead of a physical firewall. In Section II, 
we focus on two network segmentation approaches and 
discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each. Control 
of virtual network traffic using two different types of virtual 
firewalls and the advantages and disadvantages of each are 
analyzed in Section III.  In Section IV, we provide the 
overall conclusions from the analysis, in the form of 
deployment choices based on approaches for the two 
network-level protection measures for securing VMs.  
II. NETWORK SEGMENTATION IN VIRTUAL 
NETWORKS 
     The approaches to network segmentation in the context 
of virtualized infrastructures are the same as those used in 
physical network with some variations (these variations are 
underlined in our description below): (a) Using a 
combination of firewalls – the firewalls used are virtual 
firewalls (as opposed to a physical firewall) and are 
implemented as Virtual Security Appliance (VSA) and 
hosted on security hardened VMs with multiple Virtual 
Network Interface cards (vNICs). Each vNIC may be 
connected to a different network segment [2]. (b) Isolated 
network segments created as logical segments on top of a 
physical network segment – one is the VLAN approach that 
is based on tagging packets and switch ports with a unique 
identifier called VLAN ID, and the other is overlay-based 
virtual networking technology that creates an overlay 
network by encapsulating packets with IDs depending upon 
the type of overlay technology. Both approaches (VLAN 
and Overlay) rely on the capabilities in virtual switches of 
the virtualized host.  
     The three approaches for network segmentation in 
virtualized infrastructures outlined above are discussed in 
Sections A, B and C below. After a brief description of each 
approach, an analysis of each approach is provided with the 
relative advantages and 
disadvantages. Where ever 
applicable, the distinct advantage of a particular approach is 
also brought out. 
A. Network Segmentation Using a Combination of Firewalls 
     Let us now consider a virtualized host with 4 VMs – 
VM1, VM2, VM3 & VM4. We can form a network segment 
(say a DMZ) using two virtual firewalls, one each on any 
two VMs - say VM1 & VM4. These firewalls are VM-based 
Virtual Security Appliances residing on VMs defined with 
multiple vNICs – each one connected to a different network 
segment. The firewall in VM1 then will have one vNIC 
connected to an external network (say the public Internet)  
of the enterprise and  the other vNIC connected to the DMZ 
segment in the virtualized network within a virtualized host.  
Correspondingly the firewall in VM4 has to have one vNIC 
connected to the internal network of the enterprise and the 
other vNIC connected to the DMZ.  The vNIC connection to 
the DMZ (from both firewall VMs - VM1 & VM4)  is 
established by their pathway to an internal-only virtual 
switch. This internal-only virtual switch has no uplink 
connection to any physical NIC of the virtualized host and 
hence traffic from any VM connected to it cannot travel 
directly outside the virtual network segment (not to speak of 
outside the virtualized host). The internal-only switch can 
only forward traffic directly to VMs connected to it - say 
VM2 &, VM3. All incoming and outgoing traffic into the 
VMs connected to the internal-only virtual switch whose 
source/target is an internal/external network, has to go 
through the firewall in VM1 or in VM4. The firewalls in 
VM1 & VM4 thus form the gatekeepers for the virtual 
network segment (i.e., DMZ). 
A.1 Analysis 
     The advantages of network segmentation within the 
virtualized network of a virtualized host using a 
combination of virtual firewalls are: (a) Simplicity of 
Configuration:  It can be configured with commodity 
firewall VSAs hosted on multi-vNIC VMs. (b) Flexibility 
within a Virtualized host: More than one isolated network 
segment can be created within the virtual network of the 
virtualized host by simply adding another firewall VM.  
     The limitations of this approach to network segmentation 
in a virtualized network are the following: (a) The logical 
network segment created inside a virtualized host can 
neither be extended to the physical network of the data 
center nor to the virtual network in another virtualized host 
(since segmentation is obtained by virtual firewalls inside 
the virtualized host). This makes the approach to network 
segmentation non-scalable. (b) A consequence of creating a 
non-scalable  network segment is that the migration of a VM 
in the network segment to any other virtualized host (due to 
96
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

performance or availability or load balancing reasons) is out 
of the question, unless a network segment (with identical 
configuration) exists on the target virtualized host.  
 B. Network Segmentation Using Virtual LAN (VLAN) 
Technology 
     The second approach to network segmentation in 
virtualized 
infrastructures 
is 
broadcast-containment 
networking technologies, such as VLAN. The requirement 
for this is that the hypervisor should have capabilities to 
define virtual switches that are VLAN-aware [3][4].  The 
segmentation is obtained by assignment of an identifier 
called the VLAN ID to one or more ports of a switch and 
connecting the VMs designated for that VLAN segment to 
those ports. VMs on one VLAN can only communicate 
directly with VMs on the same VLAN and a router is 
needed for communication between VMs on different 
VLANs [5]. Assignment of a VM to a particular VLAN can 
be based on the application tier it is hosting (e.g., Web 
Server, DBMS server, etc.) or the client to which the VM 
belongs (in cloud data centers). These VLAN-capable 
virtual switches (VS) can perform tagging of all packets 
going out of a VM with a VLAN tag (depending upon 
which port it has  received the packet from) and can route an 
incoming packet with a specific VLAN tag and MAC 
address to the appropriate VM by sending it through a port 
whose VLAN ID assignment equals the  VLAN tag of the 
packet. An example of a VLAN-based virtual network 
segmentation inside a virtualized host is given in Figure 1. 
B.1 Analysis 
     The advantages of a VLAN-based network segmentation 
approach are: (a) Network segments can extend beyond a 
single virtualized host (unlike the segment defined using 
virtual firewalls) since the same VLAN ID can be assigned 
to ports of virtual switches in different virtualized hosts. (b) 
The number of network segments that can be configured is 
reasonably large since a single virtual switch can typically 
support 64 ports and the 12-bit VLAN ID address space 
enables creation of 4000 VLAN segments. 
     The 
disadvantages 
of 
VLAN-based 
network 
segmentation approach are: (a) The configuration of the 
ports in the physical switch attached to a virtualized host 
must exactly match the VLANs defined on the virtual 
switches inside that virtualized hosts. This results in tight 
coupling between virtual network and physical network of 
the data center.  The consequence of this tight coupling is 
that the port configuration of the physical switches has to be 
frequently updated since the VLAN configuration of the 
virtual network of the attached virtualized host may 
frequently change due to migration of VMs among VLANs 
as well as among virtualized hosts. (b) Another consequence 
of frequent migration of VMs among VLANs, as well as 
among virtualized hosts is that the VLAN configuration of 
ports in the physical switch may not match with that of the 
connected virtualized host. This may result in a situation 
where a particular hypervisor (or a virtualized host) may end 
up processing messages for every VLAN on the network, 
even when it is not hosting any active VM belonging to that 
VLAN [6] and (c) Segments created using broadcast-
containment technologies cannot be allowed to have a large 
span since they will result in greater traffic in the overall 
data center due to multicast and broadcast traffic. But 
greater VM mobility (due to load balancing and availability 
reasons) may require VLANs with a large span resulting in 
an undesirable phenomena called VLAN sprawl [6].  
C. Network Segmentation Using Overlay-based Virtual 
Networking Technology  
     In the VLAN-based approach, the logical network 
segments were created on a physical LAN using portgroups 
of virtual switches inside virtualized hosts. These logical 
network segments did span multiple virtualized hosts. The 
total number of these segments possible is limited to around 
4000 due to the 12 bit address space of VLAN ID. Another 
limitation is the lack of independence between the physical 
and virtual networking infrastructure, since the port 
configuration of the physical switches attached to the 
virtualized hosts have to be consistent with the VLANs 
defined on the port groups of virtual switches inside those 
virtualized hosts. The overlay-based virtual networking 
approach to network segmentation overcomes these two 
limitations in the following two ways [7].  
 
 
 
97
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
 
Figure 1 - VLAN-based Network Segmentation 
 
 
(a) Overlay-based virtual networking technologies have a 
larger address space enabling larger number of virtual 
network segments. An example is the 24 bit VXLAN ID of 
the VXLAN overlay scheme that can enable 16 million 
virtual network segments to be defined, and (b) The overlay 
schemes by their definition, create a logical Layer 2 network 
(called the overlay network) over the physical Layer 3 
backbone of the data center  (called the underlay network). 
Since this scheme does not warrant any modifications to the 
physical network, it provides physical-logical network 
independence. As already alluded to, overlay-based virtual 
networking schemes achieve segmentation by creating a 
logical Layer 2 network over the physical Layer 3 network. 
The overlay network is created by encapsulating a native 
Layer 2 packet with another Layer 2 identifier. There are 
three common encapsulation schemes – VXLAN, GRE and 
STT [8].    
    Let us now look at the encapsulation process in VXLAN 
[9] through components shown in Figure 2. The Ethernet 
frame  originating from a VM, that just holds the MAC 
address of the destination VM is encapsulated in two stages: 
(a) First with the 24 bit VXLAN ID (virtual Layer 2 (L2) 
segment) to which the sending/receiving VM belongs and 
(b) Second, with the source/destination IP address of the 
VXLAN tunnel endpoints called VTEPs. [10]. VTEPs are 
logical network endpoints (nodes) for the encapsulated 
VXLAN packets and they reside in the kernel of a 
hypervisor. A VXLAN-encapsulated packet originates at the 
VTEP in the kernel of the hypervisor where the source VM 
resides (carrying the VTEP’s address as the source IP 
address) and terminates at the VTEP in the kernel of the 
hypervisor where the destination VM resides (carrying this 
VTEP’s address as the destination IP address). Thus, we see 
that VXLAN encapsulation enables creation of a virtual 
Layer 2 segment that can span not only different hypervisor 
hosts but also different IP subnets within the data center. 
C.1 Analysis 
     The advantages of  a network segmentation approach 
based on Overlay-based networking technology are: (a)  
98
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
Figure 2 – Overlay-based Virtual Network Segmentation 
 
 
Because of independence between the virtual network and 
the physical network, there is greater VM mobility 
compared to a VLAN- based virtual network environment, 
(b) The physical-logical network independence, together 
with the bigger overlay segment ID address space (e.g., a 
VXLAN ID is 24 bits as opposed to 12 bit VLAN ID 
allowing for 16 million segments compared to 4096 for 
VLAN), makes the overlay based network segmentation 
infinitely scalable. Another factor contributing to scalability 
of the overlay scheme is that the encapsulating frame is an 
IP/UDP packet. Hence, the number of virtual network 
segments is limited only by the size of IP subnets that can be 
defined within the data center and not by the number of 
ports in virtual switches as in the case of VLAN-based 
network segmentation.  Further, by using internal, non-
routable IP addresses for VMs (using DHCP and NAT 
capabilities) running within virtualized hosts, the number of 
virtual networks that can be realized is even higher and (c)  
The VLAN scheme uses the Spanning Tree Routing 
Protocol to forward packets, VXLANs can use the ECMP 
protocol of Layer 3 [11], thus efficiently utilizing all 
available network links in the network fabric of the data 
center. 
    The disadvantage of a network segmentation approach 
based on Overlay-based networking technology  is that it 
requires large mapping tables in each virtual switch level in 
order to generate overlay packets – since the MAC address 
of the destination VM could be located in any IP subnet and 
any host in the data center.  Building these mapping tables 
using just a flooding technique is inefficient. Hence, a 
control plane needs to be deployed in the virtualized 
infrastructure to populate the mapping tables for use by the 
overlay packet generation module in the hypervisor. This 
creates an additional layer of control and adds to the 
complexity of network management [11]. 
III. TRAFFIC CONTROL IN A VIRTUAL NETWORK 
     Traffic control in a virtual network can be performed 
using either a virtual firewall or a physical firewall. 
However, in a virtualized infrastructure, the computing 
nodes (whose incoming/outgoing traffic needs to be 
controlled) are VMs and are end nodes of a virtual network. 
Hence, the deployment of a physical firewall will require the 
traffic from the virtual network to be diverted into the 
physical network (where the physical firewall resides) and 
 
 
99
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

then back into the virtual network. This extra route travelled 
by communication packets will result in latency and 
consequently reduced performance of applications hosted on 
VMs. Hence, in this paper, we consider only virtual 
firewall-based solutions for traffic control in virtual 
networks for securing VMs. 
     Earlier in this paper (Section 2), we saw that two or more 
virtual firewalls can be used to create network segments in a 
virtual network. Since the focus of this Section is on traffic 
control, we are going to analyze the use of virtual firewalls 
only for controlling inter-VM traffic. 
     Inter-VM traffic can be of two kinds: the traffic between 
two VMs residing on the same virtualized host (either 
connected to the same or different virtual switches) and 
traffic between two VMs hosted on different virtualized 
hosts. Traffic between two VMs residing on the same 
virtualized host can only be enabled  if each VM has at least 
one vNIC (a VM can have multiple vNICs just like a 
physical server can have multiple physical network interface 
cards or network adapters) connected to a common virtual 
switch. This is due to the fact that two virtual switches in a 
virtualized host cannot be connected to each other. 
Although, theoretically, a pathway between two VMs on the 
same virtualized host can be establishing by routing the 
traffic from one VM (say VM1) to the physical network 
(through one physical NIC) and back into the same 
virtualized host (through another physical NIC) to the target 
VM (say VM2), this is not a viable option in most 
situations, due to the latency issue referred to above. Of 
course, for enabling traffic between two VMs residing on 
two different virtualized hosts, the traffic has to travel from 
the virtual network (in the originating virtualized host) 
where the originating VM resides, through the physical 
network of the data center and back again into the virtual 
network of the target VM (in the target virtualized host). 
     Virtual firewalls come in two flavors: (a) VM-based – 
this class of virtual firewalls, comes packaged as a virtual 
security appliance on a specially-configured VM and (b) 
Hypervisor Kernel-based – this class of firewalls operates as 
a kernel loadable module in the kernel of the hypervisor. 
A. Traffic Control using VM-based Firewalls 
     A VM-based firewall, as the name indicates, is a firewall 
software that runs in a VM. It can be installed as a software 
module on a guest VM already running in a virtualized host 
or it can be packaged as a virtual security appliance on a 
specially prepared VM instance. Its location within the 
virtual network of a virtualized host is critical as its function 
is to monitor, drop or forward packets between sets of VMs 
belonging to different security zones. This is the reason that 
this class of firewalls is called bridge-mode firewalls as it 
also acts as a bridge between zones (since the only link 
between VMs connected to two different virtual switches is 
through a VM with vNICs connected to both virtual 
switches). 
A.1 Analysis 
     The advantage of VM-based firewall for traffic control is 
that since it is available as a Virtual Security Appliance, it is 
easy to deploy and configure in a virtualized host. Its initial 
location within the virtual network of the virtualized host is 
relatively easy as it is dictated by the layout of the security 
zones based on the various virtual switches and this type of 
firewall only monitors and filters packet flows between one 
virtual switch and another. 
     The disadvantages of VM-based firewalls are: (a) It 
cannot monitor and filter traffic flowing between two VMs 
connected to the same virtual switch, (b) Its performance is 
limited by the number of virtual CPU cores allocated to the 
VM it is residing or packaged in, and (c) All traffic flowing 
into and out of all portgroups and virtual switches associated 
with zones pertaining to this firewall, has to be redirected to 
this firewall causing unnecessary traffic (a phenomena 
called Traffic Trambones [12]). 
 
B. Traffic Control using Hypervisor Kernel-based Firewalls 
     Hypervisor kernel-based firewalls are also called 
hypervisor-mode firewalls and VM NIC firewalls. These 
firewalls install as a hypervisor module along with a VSA, 
the latter used purely for initial configuration (and re-
configuration) for the hypervisor module. Hence, the main 
firewall functions of monitoring and packet filtering are 
done in the hypervisor kernel-module with the VM hosting 
the VSA portion playing the role of a Control or Service 
VM. Logically residing between a VM vNIC and the 
hypervisor virtual switch, this type of firewall provides a 
vNIC-level firewall enforcement point for traffic to and 
from VMs. Thus they can be used for selectively protecting 
a given subset or all the VMs in a host or a cluster. Because 
of the visibility at the vNIC level, these firewalls can protect 
traffic flowing between two VMs connected to the same 
virtual switch, unlike the bridge-mode firewalls.  Another 
distinguishing feature of this type of firewalls is that the 
firewall 
does 
not 
require 
any 
changes 
100
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

to the virtual network configuration inside a virtualized host 
(such as additional network pathways for redirecting traffic 
to the VM hosting firewall) or modification to IP addresses 
of VMs. 
B.1 Analysis 
     The advantages of hypervisor kernel-based firewalls are: 
(a) Their performance is of an order of magnitude much 
higher than bridge-mode firewalls since they perform packet 
inspection from within the kernel at native hardware speeds 
rather in a VM where the performance is limited by the 
capacity of virtual CPU allocated to it [13], (b) These 
perform monitoring at the VM NIC (vNIC) level and hence 
all firewall rules (or ACLs) and state are logically attached 
to the VM interface. Hence these rules and state move with 
the VM when it migrates from one virtualized host to 
another, thus providing continuity of security protection for 
a VM irrespective of its location [12], and (c) 
Implementations that support firewall rules at a higher level 
of abstraction than IP addresses or ports, can be used to 
filter packets at data center, host cluster and port group 
levels. 
     The disadvantages of hypervisor kernel-based firewalls 
are: (a) This class of firewalls works as a managed kernel 
process and is therefore neither a VM resident program nor 
is part of the virtual network of the hypervisor. Hence 
conventional management tools having access only to VMs 
or virtual networks cannot be used to monitor this class of 
firewalls and (b) Some of the implementations of this class 
of firewall support only 5-tuple based rules (Source and 
Destination IP Address, Source and Destination Ports and 
Protocol). They do not support higher level abstractions 
such as Security Groups, Zones or Containers. However, 
some of the latest offerings do support firewall rules based  
On higher level abstractions and flow statistics as well. 
 
IV. SUMMARY & CONCLUSIONS 
    In this paper, we performed a detailed analysis of two 
network segmentation approaches and two virtual firewall 
types 
for 
the 
protection 
of 
VMs 
in 
virtualized 
infrastructures. Comparing the features of the two network 
segmentation techniques, we find that the only distinct 
advantage that overlay-based network segmentation (such as 
VXLAN) holds over the VLAN-based approach is its 
infinite scalability. Hence, unless the number of VMs in the 
data center is in the order of thousands, the VLAN-based 
approach provides a satisfactory outcome in terms of 
performance and for meeting the goal of securing VMs. 
Because of this, the VLAN approach is economically 
justifiable in many environments. Further justification 
comes 
from 
the 
fact 
that 
overlay-based 
network 
segmentation schemes require sophisticated virtual switches, 
large mapping tables and the overhead of creating a control 
plane using SDN controllers. 
     Analyzing the relative advantages and disadvantages of 
the two firewall types – VM-based and hypervisor kernel-
based – we find that the hypervisor kernel-based firewall is 
superior to the VM-based one in terms of three features. 
They are: (a) Performance (executes in the hypervisor kernel 
instead of in a VM), (b) Reduced network traffic (no 
diversion of traffic needed from various switches to the VM 
hosting the firewall) and, (c) Firewall rules are associated 
with the VM interface (since it is placed between a VM NIC 
and the virtual switch) and move with VM. The third feature 
is very critical from the point of view of the security of the 
VM, since it provides continued protection to it even when 
it migrates to different virtualized hosts or host clusters 
within the data center, without any additional re-
configuration. It is this overwhelming security assurance 
feature that makes the hypervisor kernel-based firewall, the 
security 
software 
of 
choice 
in 
many 
virtualized 
infrastructures. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Shackleford, Virtualization Security – Protecting Virtualized 
Environments, Wiley Publishing Inc, Indianapolis, IA, USA, 2013  
[2] “DMZ Virtualization with VMware Infrastructure”. [Online]. 
http://www.vmware.com/files/pdf/dmz_virtualization_vmware_inf
ra_wp.pdf [retrieved: Jan, 2016]. 
[3] “MAC Bridges and Virtual Bridged LANs”. [Online]. 
https://www.ietf.org/meeting/86/tutorials/86-IEEE-8021-
Thaler.pdf [retrieved: Dec, 2015]. 
[4] “IEEE 802.1Q Virtual LANs (VLANs)”. [Online]. 
http://www.ieee802.org/1/pages/802.1Q.html 
 [retrieved: Dec, 2015]. 
 
 
[5] A. Hameed, and A. N. Mian, “Finding Efficient VLAN 
Topology for better broadcast containment,”  
Third International  Conference on the Network of the Future 
(NOF), Gammarth, Nov 2012, pp.1-6. 
[6] Introduction to Virtualized Networking. [Online]. 
http://www.ipspace.net/Introduction_to_Virtualized_Networking 
[retrieved: Dec, 2015].  
[7] Overlay Virtual Networking. [Online]. 
http://www.ipspace.net/Overlay_Virtual_Networking 
[retrieved: Dec, 2015].  
 
101
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[8] “Overlay Virtual Networking and SDDC”.  [Online]. 
http://my.ipspace.net/bin/list?id=xSDNOverlay  
[retrieved: Jan, 2016].  
[9] “Virtual eXtensible Local Area Network (VXLAN): A 
Framework for Overlaying Virtualized Layer 2 Networks over 
Layer 3 Networks”. [Online].     https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7348 
[retrieved: Jan, 2016].  
[10] “VXLAN Overview: Cisco Nexus 9000 Series Switches”. 
[Online]. 
http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/collateral/switches/nexus-
9000-series-switches/white-paper-c11-729383.pdf 
[retrieved: Dec, 2015].  
[11] “Scaling Overlay Virtual Networks”. [Online]. 
http://content.ipspace.net/get/Scaling%20Overlay%20Virtual%20
Networks.pdf 
[retrieved: Jan, 2016].  
[12] Virtual Firewalls. [Online]. 
http://www.ipspace.net/Virtual_Firewalls [retrieved: Dec, 2015].  
[13] Virtual Firewall. [Online]. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_firewall 
[retrieved: Dec, 2015].  
 
 
 
 
102
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

