Blockchain Challenges for Cloud Users
Yuan Zhao∗,Bob Duncan†
Business School
University of Aberdeen, UK
Emails: ∗y.zhao@abdn.ac.uk,†robert.duncan@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract—Blockchain presents a new paradigm for delivering a
very robust audit trail through the use of distributed ledger
technology. There is the potential to provide a high level of
security while keeping costs under control. There are, of course,
many challenges, which are speciﬁc to cloud computing, and
these must be identiﬁed and addressed before the right level of
security can be achieved. Failure to achieve proper security will
negate the beneﬁts of the technology and also expose companies
to massive potential ﬁnes. We investigate what these challenges
are and suggest a means of ensuring how these challenges can be
met in order to mitigate any potential exposure of cloud users.
We address this in the context of a company who wishes to use a
cloud based accounting system and must be compliant with the
European Union General Data Protection Regulation.
Keywords–Cloud forensic problem; GDPR; Blockchain/bitcoin
technology.
I.
INTRODUCTION
All computer systems are the subject of continuous attack,
no matter to which market sector they might belong. No system
is immune to attack. For traditional networked computer sys-
tems, this presents a serious challenge to ensure a high level of
security and privacy can be maintained, but for cloud systems,
these challenges increase exponentially, due to the increase
in complexity in software, and the multiplicity of layers and
actors involved in modern cloud ecosystems. There are many
challenges to address in order to be able to ensure compliance
can be achieved.
Yet, there remains one serious, and as yet unresolved
challenge, namely the Cloud Forensic Problem [1], which is
likely to prove a serious barrier to achieving any robust level
of security and privacy for any company. When an attacker
succeeds in gaining even a temporary foothold in a cloud
based system, their primary goal will be to escalate privileges
until they are able to eliminate the forensic trail, which
logged their incursion into the system, thus, allowing them
to bury themselves deep so as to become a more permanent
intruder, lying undetected inside the victim’s system. With
cloud systems, there is nothing to prevent this from happening.
The intruder is usually perfectly happy to remain hidden in the
system, where they can carry on stealing information for as
long as they wish with relative impunity. Formerly, the intruder
was usually happy to get in and out quickly, but now, long term
surveillance can be a far more lucrative proposition for them.
This presents a particularly problematic dilemma for com-
panies who fall under the jurisdiction of, and, therefore, require
to be compliant with, the European Union (EU) General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) [2], and where they also use
cloud. By default, those who use cloud will be unable to meet
the stringent compliance requirements. With the maximum
punitive level of possible ﬁnes for non-compliance being up to
the greater of e20million or 4% of last year’s global turnover
[2], this will certainly have a considerable potential impact
on those companies who are unable to meet the compliance
requirements.
With the widespread convenience, instant access to re-
sources, relatively low operating cost, and no requirement for
capital expenditure, cloud systems provide companies with a
huge incentive for cloud use. Many companies have already
committed substantially to this paradigm, thus, exposing them
to the impact of non-compliance. One option would be to
convert back to conventional distributed network systems, but
taking into account the long lead time needed, the massive
costs involved, and the level of expertise that will be required
to securely set up such systems, this move back to distributed
network systems is unlikely to be either an economic or even
a viable option. Equally, it is also not an option to do nothing.
Thus, it is imperative for all cloud users that an alternative
solution be found in the meantime, as quickly as possible,
and preferably one that might be as simple as possible to
implement. In this paper, we look at the use case of a company
trading throughout the EU, who wish to use a cloud based
accounting software programme and will be subject to and
required to comply with the GDPR. They will quite rightly be
concerned about the implications of non-compliance this plan
might have on their ability to comply with the GDPR.
We are interested in examining the potential offered by
Blockchain - the underlying technology that provides the
secure backbone of crypto-currencies. We start by examining
the potential weaknesses in the use of blockchain in cloud
environments in Section II. Next, we consider the potential
impact of those weaknesses for cloud users in Section III. In
Section IV, we consider how to resolve those cloud blockchain
weaknesses, while in Section V, we consider how to set up a
robust architecture to address the use case scenario we just
introduced. In Section VI, we discuss our ﬁndings, and in
Section VII, we present our conclusions.
II.
BLOCKCHAIN WEAKNESSES FOR CLOUD USERS
It is certainly the case that no computing system is immune
to attack, with this being particularly relevant for cloud based
systems. During recent years, some really good research from
authors on accountability [3], compliance [4], privacy [5]–[8],
risk [9], security [10]–[13], and trust [14]–[16], which has
ensured that a far greater level of security and privacy has been
achieved in cloud systems. Despite all these good efforts, no
solution has yet been developed and implemented to properly
address the cloud forensic problem.
Every attacker seeks to compromise a cloud system to
gain even a small foothold. They will then attempt to escalate
privileges to allow them to access forensic and audit trails,
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

to allow them to delete or modify such records as they need
to hide their route into the system. At this point the attacker
becomes an intruder, allowing them to remain hidden and lie
undetected for long periods of time, free to help themselves to
any data they choose. To achieve compliance with the GDPR,
companies must be able to report a breach within 72 hours of
discovery. The global average time for all companies between
breach and discovery in 2012 was an average of 6 months [17]
[18]. This had improved to some 4 weeks by 2016 [19] — still
far short of what is needed to understand what has been going
on with the intruders while they remained undiscovered.
It is obvious that the longer an intruder can remain hidden
inside a company system, the more information they can
acquire, or the greater the potential damage they can perpetrate.
During 2017, following some serious lobbying, the GDPR was
changed from “... within 72 hours of a breach occurring...” to a
much less stringent “... within 72 hours of discovery ...”, this
rather misses the point that if a company cannot discover a
breach within 72 hours of the breach occurring, how can they
possibly discover it has arisen at all, let alone what data has
been compromised after the intruder has deleted all forensic
and audit trails? The reality of this backward step in the
regulation, was that companies suddenly ‘switched off’ their
attentions to improving cyber security, and this is evidenced by
the fact that average times between breach and discovery had
by the end of 2017, rather sadly returned to the levels of ﬁve
years ago [20]. Unfortunately, many companies do not retain
the access records that record which database records have
been accessed, since many database conﬁgurations routinely
turn off such functions by default in order to minimise the
need for storage. This results in the situation whereby, once a
breach occurs, the company will no longer have the means to
be able to report which records have been accessed, copied,
modiﬁed, deleted or ex-ﬁltrated from their system. This means
non-compliance with the GDPR, which in turn means exposure
to potentially punitive levels of ﬁnes by the regulator.
Taking into account the high data volumes associated with
cloud use, and in particular the Internet of Things (IoT), this
raises the question of just how feasible complying with such a
time threshold might be. For cloud users where the company
is breached, and where it has made no special arrangements
to ensure the safety of forensic and audit trail data, the 72
hour deadline becomes a moot point as it will have no means
of knowing that it has been breached. Also, once discovery is
made occur, there will be no realistic prospect of that company
ever ﬁnding out just which records have been compromised.
Once the forensic and audit trails are gone — they are gone
forever.
A greater concern is likely to emerge where IoT is used,
bringing a new range of problems to bear, not least being the
general insecure level of devices, their small resource level,
yet capable of generating high levels of data throughput. some
of which may be lost in transit. Each device may be quite
small, yet once the volume is scaled up with thousands of
other devices, the impact they can create can rise exponentially.
A good example of this is the mass Distributed Denial of
Service (DDoS) attack perpetrated using surveillance cameras
compromised by the Mirai virus [21][20]. The problem is not
so much with the data lost from these IoT devices, rather than
the fact that attackers can so easily compromise the devices,
allowing them access via corporate networks to other more
valuable devices in the system. Where a company does not take
special measures to safeguard their forensic and audit trail data,
they will be less likely to be able to discover the occurrence
of the breach. If, by chance, they should manage to discover
the breach, they would certainly be in a position to report it
within 72 hours of discovery, but will simply struggle to be
able to report what has been compromised, meaning they will
be liable for some higher level of ﬁne.
The general attitude by corporates now seems to be that
they can forget about screening for the presence of intruders,
and simply deal with the reporting once discovery takes place.
Again they miss the point of the beneﬁt that comes from rapid
discovery - the longer the intruder remains inside the system,
the more the damage they can do, and the greater the level of
ﬁne the regulator can levy. This means that non-compliance
will necessarily become far more serious, thus, enlarging their
exposure to the risk of much steeper ﬁnes.
While, under the GDPR there is no speciﬁc requirement to
encrypt data, there is a very strong recommendation that this
should take place, be carried out properly and completed within
a reasonable time. Encryption and decryption keys should not
be stored on the cloud instance. Failure to address these issues
will certainly provide grounds for a much increased level of
ﬁnes in the event of a breach. Thus, cloud use imposes the
above weaknesses on the use of any cloud based system before
considering any use of software.
As all ﬁrms involved in ﬁnancial services are generally
subject to a much greater level of attack than many other
market sectors, it is worth taking a look at how they address
security requirements. We believe there may be some merit in
considering the approach taken with crypto-currencies, since
as a new entrant to the market, there is more likelihood that
their security approach, having security designed in from the
beginning, might offer better prospects for success, as opposed
to the approach taken by more traditional ﬁnancial institutions.
Turning to crypto-currencies, vulnerabilities relating to
crypto-currencies are mostly found in operator errors and
security ﬂaws. Equally, the Bitcoin platform also faces poten-
tial vulnerabilities from protocol designs. Moore and Christin
addressed operational insecurity in [22], who suggest that
fraudulence is an issue among crypto-currencies. Exchanges
act as de facto banks, but almost half of them ceased operation
due to the impact of security breaches, failing to reimburse
their customers after shutting down. As an alternative ap-
proach, other users instead deposited their Bitcoins in a digital
wallet. Naturally, these too became a target for cyber-criminals.
A small number of theoretical papers have been written by
computer scientists, which address mining pool protocols and
anonymity. Miners opted out of the pool in long rounds, where
a potential block would be shared with large groups. Babaioff
et al. [23], based on a peer-to-peer network layer, argued that
the current Bitcoin protocols do not provide any incentive for
nodes to broadcast transactions. This is problematic, since the
whole system is based on the assumption that this incentive
will form a core element. Eyal and Sirer [24], focus instead
on the block mining protocol and demonstrate that mining is
not incentive-compatible. They further suggest that so-called
“selﬁsh mining” can result in higher revenue for miners who
collude against others. Houey [25] observed that larger blocks
are not as likely to win a block race where new transactions
are included into blocks.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Protection of online privacy and anonymity is an issue and
both are addressed in the literature. Christin [26] examined
anonymity in the online marketplace in crypto-currencies.
Böhme et al. [27] examined Internet protocol adoption to see
what could be learned from Bitcoin. Many of these studies
analysed the public bitcoin transaction history. They were able
to ﬁnd a set of heuristics that can help to link a Bitcoin account
with real word identities. Androulaki et al. [28] quantiﬁed
anonymity in a simulated environment and found that almost
half of the users can be identiﬁed by their transaction patterns.
Using two examples, Bitcoin and Linden Dollars, their report
focuses on the impact of digital currencies on the use of
ﬁat money. Gans and Halaburda [29] analysed the economics
of private digital currencies, but their explicit focus was on
currencies issued by platforms like Facebook or Amazon
(that retain full control), and not decentralized currencies like
Bitcoin. Dwyer [30] provided institutional details about digital
currency developments. The security, privacy and anonymity
issue related to Bitcoin has been addressed by Krombholz et
al. [31], in which they surveyed 990 Bitcoin users to deter-
mine Bitcoin management strategies and identiﬁes how users
deploy security measures to protect their keys and Bitcoins.
They found that about 46% of participants use web-hosted
solutions to manage Bitcoins, and over 50% use such solutions
exclusively.
The denial-of-service attack is the one of the most promi-
nent forms addressed by Böhme et al. [27], which entails the
attacker swamping a target ﬁrm with messages and requests in
such volume that either mining pools or exchanges become
very slow and unusable. This type of attack is especially
effective on the Bitcoin ecosystem because of its relative
simplicity of monetising the attacks.
Karame, Androulaki and Capkun [32] looked at using
Bitcoin for fast payments and after analysis, found that double-
spending attacks on fast payments succeed with overwhelm-
ing probability and could be mounted at lower cost unless
appropriate detection techniques were integrated in the current
Bitcoin implementation. With regard to the double-spending
and selﬁsh mining attacks, Kogias et al. [33] proposed the
use of ByzCoin as a novel protocol to optimise transaction
commitment and veriﬁcation under normal operation, while
guaranteeing safety and liveness under Byzantine (it leveraged
scalable collective signing to commit Bitcoin transactions
irreversibly within seconds) faults.
There is also some attention from the literature focusing on
the price dynamics and speculative bubbles in crypto-currency
markets. Cheah and Fry [34] claimed that crypto-currencies
are prone to substantial speculative bubbles, and they found
that the fundamental value of Bitcoin is zero, by examining
the daily clothing prices of Bitcoin from 2010 to 2014. A more
recent study is conducted by Blau [35], which emphasised
that high volatility of Bitcoin is not related to the speculative
activities in this period. The volatility of Bitcoin has been
analysed by Katsiampa [36]), Cheah and Fry [34], and many
others.
There is no conclusive ﬁnding on whether Bitcoin is a
speculative investment asset or a currency. Glaser et al. [37]
suggest users treat Bitcoin as speculative assets rather than a
type of currency. The diversiﬁcation beneﬁts offered by Bitcoin
is also studied by Briére, Oosterlinck and Szafarz [38]. They
found Bitcoin can offer diversiﬁcation beneﬁts after looking
into the correlation between Bitcoin and other asset classes.
Gandal and Halaburda [39] examined the exchange rates of
different virtual currencies to observe the co-movement and
identify the opportunities or triangular arbitrage. But they
found little opportunity based on daily closing prices. Yermack
[40] analysed changes in Bitcoin price against ﬁat currencies
and concludes that its volatility undermines its usefulness as
currency. To be qualiﬁed as a currency, Bitcoin needs to serve
as an intermediary of exchange, as a unit of account and store
value. Also, they have been proved not to be able to function
as those by Bariviera et al. [41].
In [42]–[44], we considered the possible use of distributed
ledger technology as a means of providing a robust mechanism
for securing cloud applications. We examined the largest
successful crypto-currency attacks and concluded that the
link with crypto-currencies attracted greater attention from
attackers than would otherwise be the case. In every case of
these successful attacks, the inherent strength of the blockchain
algorithm behind these companies was never in question.
Rather, the success of the attacks came down to successful
exploitation of mostly human weaknesses, poor decisions, poor
management, neglect and sheer inexperience.
While not a blockchain speciﬁc risk, cloud operational
weaknesses need to be considered, especially if we wish to
include any element of cloud in our solution. We can consider
these items in Table II:
TABLE I: CLOUD OPERATIONAL WEAKNESSES c⃝2019
ZHAO and DUNCAN
Item
Description
CSP
Using an inexperienced CSP can introduce
unexpected weaknesses
Backup, Redundancy
These issues should be at the
and Recovery
core of any CSP decision
Internal Control
Proper internal control is vital
Weaknesses
to minimise access weaknesses
CSP Hardware
CSP needs to keep hardware up to date
& Environment
as well as software running on them
Tailored Cloud
Using “off the shelf” cloud solutions
Deployment
can leave weaknesses
Use of standard CSP offerings
Use of a standard cloud offering
for Specilised industries
where the business is highly specialised
such as Financial Services
presents a weakness
We cannot simply decide to use cloud in any solution with-
out ﬁrst examining their inherent weaknesses and addressing
them properly.
We concluded that by removing the link to any crypto-
currency, that the underlying blockchain technology could be
a very robust way to secure cloud use through the provision
of extremely robust audit trails. However, by removing the
link to crypto-currencies, this also removes the incentive for
“data miners” to spend time and resources on carrying out the
necessary work to make the technology work. We suggested
an alternative to this would be to create and utilise a ‘paid
service’ to have this work carried out professionally to ensure
the strength of the public distributed ledger is preserved.
There might also be an alternative to that solution, whereby
a company in effect provides its own ‘professional service’ to
maintain a secure record of the audit trail, and we will consider
this as a possibility here. To conclude this section, it is clear
that the weaknesses lie, not in the blockchain process, but in
the use of cloud systems themselves, and we will consider what
the impact of these weaknesses will be in the next section.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

III.
IMPACT OF WEAKNESSES FOR CLOUD USERS
It is likely that by removing the crypto-currency element,
leaving only the blockchain element, we can at one fell swoop
eliminate the vast majority of weaknesses from the equation,
and at the same time remove the attraction and incentive for
attackers. This will leave us to address the cloud weaknesses
that will need to be dealt with.
The Cloud Forensic Problem This is a huge potential
problem unless special arrangements are in place, e.g., a secure
forensic and audit trail is maintained. Failure to do this means
there is nothing to prevent an attacker becoming a resident
intruder, after which, they will have access to all data. This
could lead to huge potential ﬁnes in the event of a breach.
The Internet of Things IoT devices used for any purpose
by cloud users present a considerable risk, mainly due to the
often cheaply made devices with little or no security, often
vulnerable to the Mirai virus, which can allow attackers to
gain access to systems and to further compromise the main
PC and server network due to the porting of the Mirai virus
to be able to attack Windows computers [20], [21]. This can
expose many other systems to attack, leading to potentially
huge ﬁnes.
The Need for Proper Monitoring Simple monitoring and
analysis of system logs will go a long way to mitigate the well
known exploits currently in active use by attackers. Failure to
carry out this essential task can result in the company failing to
spot attacks, leading to non-compliance and subsequent ﬁnes.
Not Using Encryption Under the EU GDPR, the use
of encryption is not mandatory. That does not mean it is a
good idea not to use it. In the event of a breach where any
unencrypted data is leaked, the ﬁne level will be very high.
In addition, there is a requirement to notify every single data
subject whose data has been compromised. For a large data
leak, this could be very time consuming to do, and in the event
that the company cannot determine what data details have been
compromised, then a higher ﬁne could apply.
Cloud Operational Weaknesses
Each of these cloud operational weaknesses, if not properly
addressed, can lead to attackers gaining entry to important
systems, leading to non-compliance and huge ﬁnes.
Thus, we can see that leaving these weaknesses unad-
dressed is not an option. In the next section, we consider how
we might address these issues in a simple and straightforward
way to substantially reduce the exploitation rise.
IV.
HOW WE MIGHT RESOLVE THESE WEAKNESSES
There is no doubt that these weaknesses must be addressed,
and we advocate doing so in as straightforward a manner as
possible.
The Cloud Forensic Problem There has been some
interest in addressing the cloud forensic problem [43]–[50],
with some easy to implement and use suggestions. The key
suggestions are the need for a solid and permanent audit trail
and system logs through installing an off-cloud immutable
database to store a tamperproof record of the required trans-
actions.
The Internet of Things Great care will need to be taken if
IoT devices are to be used. Strong authentication, and robust
Intrusion Detection and Intrusion Protection systems should be
installed. It would also be prudent to block access by default
to all requests originating from the IoT devices and network.
The Need for Proper Monitoring A permanent mon-
itoring system needs to be in place, which can carry out
appropriate analytics to detect any anomalous behaviour that
occurs on a day to day basis.
The Need to Use Encryption Encryption is a good thing
to consider [51], but there are caveats – ﬁrst, the encryption
and de-cryption keys must not be kept on the cloud instance.
The encryption should be carried out ofﬂine in the cloud users’
own systems before being transferred to cloud. Done properly,
this can provide serious mitigation to the new EU GDPR ﬁne
levels, because if an intruder does get into the cloud system, all
they get is meaningless data. With strong levels of encryption,
it becomes practically impossible to crack [52]. The regulator
will not require data subjects to be notiﬁed where the data leak
is in encrypted format.
Cloud Operational Weaknesses Resolution
TABLE II: CLOUD OPERATIONAL WEAKNESSES RESO-
LUTION c⃝2019 ZHAO and DUNCAN
Item
Description
CSP
Using a market-leading well established CSP who are
familiar with legal and regulatory requirements for
safeguarding customer data and other sensitive data
Backup, Redundancy
Backup, redundancy, and recovery are at the core of
and Recovery
the decision to use an outsourcing vendor with
highly redundant and resilient data centres designed for
mission-critical applications
Internal Control
Internal controls and security processes must ensure
Weaknesses
customer information is appropriately segregated and
protected by industry-standard compliance policies
CSP Hardware
Leading cloud providers continuously improve their
& Environment
hardware environments to ensure the latest versions
of operating systems are installed and use agile software
development to deploy feature/function releases on an
accelerated basis
Tailored Cloud
The use of tailored cloud deployment options to meet
Deployment
your speciﬁc needs including private clouds solely
deployed on your behalf, or a hybrid cloud consist-
ing of shared hardware but segregated data storage
would be a prudent move
Use of standard CSP
Providers with ﬁnancial services domain
offerings for Special-
expertise reduce complexity and risk for
ised industries such as
Financial Institutions with their extensive
Financial Services
knowledge of global standards, communications
protocols and ﬁle formats
CSP Global Support
Cloud providers with global support centres can
Centre
provide 24 x 7 support in multiple languages,
ensuring your international clients and regional
ofﬁces have access to the support resources required
as problems arise
Outsourcing portions of your information technology in-
frastructure can free up internal IT resources to focus on
strategic initiatives and new product development
Conventional Cloud weaknesses Naturally, conventional
cloud weaknesses must not be forgotten. These revolve around
the Business Architecture of a company, which comprises a
combination of People, Process and Technology [17].
•
People Risk Mitigation People are generally seen as
the weakest link in any company, and are particularly
prone to social engineering attacks. The company
needs to keep abreast of these attacks and ensure
all people in the company are regularly trained to
understand the risks.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

•
Process Risk Mitigation Processes are often well
documented, but also can be woefully out of date.
Attackers know to exploit these areas, sometimes in
conjunction with social engineering attacks. OWASP
[53]are taking a more informed view of dealing with
these kinds of attacks.
•
Technology Risk Mitigation This is where companies
are exposed to highly technical attacks. The CSA [54]
has done some good work on identifying these risks,
as well as offering good strategies to mitigate the risks.
It would certain be a prudent move to test the company
cloud systems against the OWASP and CSA vulnerabilities to
ensure all discovered vulnerabilities are patched. In the next
section, we will look at how to address the resolution of the
use case we introduced in the introduction.
V.
ADDRESSING THE USE CASE
Let us return to the use case we introduced at the beginning.
The ﬁrst requirement the company has is to properly secure
their main cloud instance on which their cloud accounting
system is to run, using all the recommendations we made in
Section IV. That will set the scene for a robust environment
in which to operate their main business. An essential part of
this architecture will be to incorporate the recording of audit
and forensic data in an off-cloud immutable database.
The next requirement is to decide on how many blockchain
servers the company will seek for the purpose of redundancy.
Each blockchain server should be set up in the same secure
way as outlined for the main cloud server, but with the addi-
tion of the appropriate blockchain algorithms. The preference
would be for each blockchain server to be hosted using a
different CSP host, again following all the recommendations
made in Section IV.
This architecture will provide the basic needs to run the
accounting system software, together with an immutable audit
and forensic trail. Each of the blockchain servers will have
the same security and redundancy. Once the required number
of blockchain servers have been set up, the whole system
will offer an extremely high level of redundancy. The more
robustness is required, it is simply a case of adding more
blockchain servers. The more there are, the more challenging
it becomes for an attacker to overturn the consensus between
all the blockchain servers, and the more robust the system
becomes.
VI.
DISCUSSION
Because of the major weakness posed by the cloud forensic
problem, i.e., the potential to lose both the audit trail and
the forensic trail means that recording the data we require to
remain compliant with the GDPR becomes a vitally important
task for us. The use of a distributed ledger holds great
promise. The thinking behind the Blockchain approach affords
us with huge redundancy, meaning that an attacker will have
to compromise a great many of the distributed ledgers before
they can have any impact on the ledger contents. Some would
see this as too much redundancy. We would view this as just
enough to provide the required assurance. This can therefore
provide us with a very strong assurance that the consensus
across the ledgers will deliver a high level of comfort as to
the veracity of the contents. So, while this represents a big
drawback for some, for us, it represents a major advantage.
Some would suggest that the huge volumes of processing
generated by the Blockchain process as used in Bitcoin,
would be too computationally expensive for our purposes. We
disagree. Because it is a crypto-currency and highly volatile,
Bitcoin is subject to transactional volumes measuring in multi-
trillions per year. By stripping out the crypto-currency aspect
from the equation, we also remove the need for such extreme
volumes of transactional data, rendering the approach very
manageable for any size of company.
VII.
CONCLUSION
We have considered blockchain weaknesses for cloud users,
and identiﬁed the fact that the major risks lie with the crypto-
currencies attached to them. This risk can be eliminated by
removing the crypto-currency from the equation. There are
more risks attached to cloud use for users to contend with,
and we have shown how to approach dealing with those risks.
Our proposal will be to use the underlying concept of a
distributed ledger to ensure we are in a position to retain
some element of both audit trail and forensic trail data to
allow us to meet the compliance requirements of the GDPR,
which would otherwise be impossible in the event of a breach.
There will be a need to carry out some serious testing in order
to ﬁnd a satisfactory equilibrium between security, privacy,
performance, reliability, accessibility and the accountability
we require for GDPR compliance. However, it is clear that
few current systems can offer anything close to this level of
robustness.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Duncan, “FAST-CFP: Finding a Solution To The Cloud Forensic
Problem,” in The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing,
GRIDs, and Virtualization, 2018, p. 3.
[2]
EU, “EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),” 2017. [Online].
Available: http://www.eugdpr.org/ [Retrieved: March 2019]
[3]
S. Pearson, “Towards Accountability in the Cloud,” IEEE Internet
Comput., vol. 15, no. 4, jul 2011, pp. 64–69.
[4]
N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, M. C. Mont, and R. Ko, “A Toolkit for
Automating Compliance in Cloud Computing Services,” Int. J. Cloud
Comput., vol. x, no. x, 2014, pp. 45–68.
[5]
C. Millard, I. Walden, and W. K. Hon, “Who is Responsible for ’Personal
Data’ in Cloud Computing? The Cloud of Unknowing, Part 2,” Leg.
Stud., vol. 27, no. 77, 2012, pp. 1–31.
[6]
N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, and M. C. Mont, “Towards Natural-
Language Understanding and Automated Enforcement of Privacy Rules
and Regulations in the Cloud: Survey and Bibliography,” Analysis, 2011,
pp. 1–9.
[7]
S. Pearson, “Taking account of privacy when designing cloud computing
services,” Proc. 2009 ICSE Work. Softw. Eng. Challenges Cloud Comput.
CLOUD 2009, 2009, pp. 44–52.
[8]
L. J. Sotto, B. C. Treacy, and M. L. Mclellan, “Privacy and Data Security
Risks in Cloud Computing,” World Commun. Regul. Rep., vol. 5, no. 2,
2010, p. 38.
[9]
Y. Y. Haimes, B. M. Horowitz, Z. Guo, E. Andrijcic, and J. Bogdanor,
“Assessing systemic risk to cloud-computing technology as complex
interconnected systems of systems,” Syst. Eng., vol. 18, no. 3, 2015,
pp. 284–299.
[10]
J. Bacon et al., “Information Flow Control for Secure Cloud Comput-
ing,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 11, no. 1, 2014, pp. 76–89.
[11]
C. Chang and M. Ramachandran, “Towards Achieving Data Security
with the Cloud Computing Adoption Framework,” IEEE Trans. Serv.
Comput., vol. 9, no. 1, 2016, pp. 138–151.
[12]
D. Pym and M. Sadler, “Information Stewardship in Cloud Computing,”
Int. J. Serv. Sci. Manag. Eng. Technol., vol. 1, no. 1, 2010, pp. 50–67.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[13]
T. Takahashi, Y. Kadobayashi, and H. Fujiwara, “Ontological Approach
toward Cybersecurity in Cloud Computing Categories and Subject De-
scriptors,” in Sci. Technol., 2010, pp. 100–109.
[14]
R. K. L. Ko et al., “TrustCloud: A framework for accountability and
trust in cloud computing,” Proc. - 2011 IEEE World Congr. Serv. Serv.
2011, 2011, pp. 584–588.
[15]
R. K. L. Ko, B. S. Lee, and S. Pearson, “Towards achieving account-
ability, auditability and trust in cloud computing,” Commun. Comput.
Inf. Sci., vol. 193 CCIS, no. PART 4, 2011, pp. 432–444.
[16]
M. Felici, “Cyber Security and Privacy: Trust in the Digital World and
Cyber Security and Privacy EU Forum 2013 Brussels, Belgium, April
18-19, 2013 Revised Selected Papers,” in Commun. Comput. Inf. Sci.
Springer International Publishing, 2013, vol. 182 CCIS, pp. 77–88.
[17]
PWC, “UK Information Security Breaches Survey - Technical Re-
port 2012,” London, Tech. Rep. April, 2012. [Online]. Available:
www.pwc.com www.bis.gov.uk [Retrieved: March 2019]
[18]
Trustwave,
“2012
Global
Security
Re-
port,”
Tech.
Rep.,
2012.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.trustwave.com/Resources/Library/Documents/2012-
Trustwave-Global-Security-Report/ [Retrieved: March 2019]
[19]
Verizon,
“2016
Verizon
Data
Breach
Re-
port,”
Tech.
Rep.,
2016.
[Online].
Available:
https://regmedia.co.uk/2016/05/12/dbir2016.pdf[Retrieved
:
March2019]
[20]
Verizon,
“Verizon
Security
Breach
Report
2017,”
Tech.
Rep.,
2017.
[Online.
Available:
https://www.ictsecuritymagazine.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017-Data-Breach-Investigations-Report.pdf [Retrieved:
March 2019]
[21]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Cyber Security for Cloud and the
Internet of Things: How Can it be Achieved?” Cybersecurity Inst. Eng.
Technol., vol. Cybersecur, no. September, 2017, pp. 1–39.
[22]
T. Moore and N. Christin, “Beware the middleman: Empirical analysis
of Bitcoin-exchange risk,” in International Conference on Financial
Cryptography and Data Security. Springer, 2013, pp. 25–33.
[23]
M. Babaioff, S. Dobzinski, S. Oren, and A. Zohar, “On bitcoin and
red balloons,” in Proceedings of the 13th ACM conference on electronic
commerce. ACM, 2012, pp. 56–73.
[24]
I. Eyal and E. G. Sirer, “Majority is not enough: Bitcoin mining is
vulnerable,” in International Conference on Financial Cryptography and
Data Security. Springer, 2014, pp. 436–454.
[25]
N. Houy, “The economics of Bitcoin transaction fees,” GATE WP, vol.
1407, 2014.
[26]
N. Christin, “Traveling the silk road: A measurement analysis of a large
anonymous online marketplace,” in Proceedings of the 22nd international
conference on World Wide Web. ACM, 2013, pp. 213–224.
[27]
R. Böhme, N. Christin, B. Edelman, and T. Moore, “Bitcoin: Eco-
nomics, technology, and governance,” The Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives, vol. 29, no. 2, 2015, pp. 213–238.
[28]
E. Androulaki, G. O. Karame, M. Roeschlin, T. Scherer, and S. Capkun,
“Evaluating user privacy in bitcoin,” in International Conference on
Financial Cryptography and Data Security. Springer, 2013, pp. 34–51.
[29]
J. S. Gans and H. Halaburda, “Some economics of private digital
currency,” in Econ. Anal. Digit. Econ. University of Chicago Press, 2015,
pp. 257–276.
[30]
G. P. Dwyer, “The economics of Bitcoin and similar private digital
currencies,” J. Financ. Stab., vol. 17, 2015, pp. 81–91.
[31]
K. Krombholz, A. Judmayer, M. Gusenbauer, and E. Weippl, “The other
side of the coin: User experiences with bitcoin security and privacy,” in
International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security.
Springer, 2016, pp. 555–580.
[32]
G. O. Karame, E. Androulaki, and S. Capkun, “Double-spending fast
payments in bitcoin,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on
Computer and communications security. ACM, 2012, pp. 906–917.
[33]
E. K. Kogias, P. Jovanovic, N. Gailly, I. Khofﬁ, L. Gasser, and B. Ford,
“Enhancing bitcoin security and performance with strong consistency
via collective signing,” in 25th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 16). USENIX Association, 2016, pp. 279–296.
[34]
E.-T. Cheah and J. Fry, “Speculative bubbles in bitcoin markets? an
empirical investigation into the fundamental value of bitcoin,” Economics
Letters, vol. 130, 2015, pp. 32–36.
[35]
B. M. Blau, “Price dynamics and speculative trading in bitcoin,”
Research in International Business and Finance, vol. 41, 2017, pp. 493–
499.
[36]
P. Katsiampa, “Volatility estimation for bitcoin: A comparison of garch
models,” Economics Letters, vol. 158, 2017, pp. 3–6.
[37]
F. Glaser, K. Zimmermann, M. Haferkorn, M. C. Weber, and M. Siering,
“Bitcoin-asset or currency? revealing users’ hidden intentions,” 2014.
[38]
M. Brière, K. Oosterlinck, and A. Szafarz, “Virtual currency, tangible
return: Portfolio diversiﬁcation with bitcoin,” Journal of Asset Manage-
ment, vol. 16, no. 6, 2015, pp. 365–373.
[39]
N. Gandal and H. Halaburda, “Can we predict the winner in a market
with network effects? competition in cryptocurrency market,” Games,
vol. 7, no. 3, 2016, p. 16.
[40]
D. Yermack, “Is Bitcoin a real currency? An economic appraisal,”
National Bureau of Economic Research, Tech. Rep., 2013.
[41]
A. F. Bariviera, M. J. Basgall, W. Hasperué, and M. Naiouf, “Some
stylized facts of the Bitcoin market,” Phys. A Stat. Mech. its Appl., vol.
484, 2017, pp. 82–90.
[42]
Y. Zhao and B. Duncan, “Could Block Chain Technology Help Resolve
the Cloud Forensic Problem?” in Cloud Comput. 2018 Ninth Int. Conf.
Cloud Comput. GRIDs, Virtualization, no. February. Barcelona, Spain:
IARIA, 2018, pp. 39–44.
[43]
Y. Zhao and B. Duncan, “Fixing the Cloud Forensic Problem with
Blockchain,” Int. J. Adv. Secur., vol. 11, no. 3&4, 2018, pp. 243–253.
[44]
Y. Zhao and B. Duncan, “The Impact of Crypto-Currency Risks on the
Use of Blockchain for Cloud Security and Privacy,” in 7th Int. Work.
Secur. Priv. Perform. Cloud Comput. (SPCLOUD 2018), 2018, p. 8.
[45]
B. Duncan, M. Whittington, and V. Chang, “Enterprise security and
privacy: Why adding IoT and big data makes it so much more difﬁcult,”
in Proc. 2017 Int. Conf. Eng. Technol. ICET 2017, vol. 2018-Janua,
2018.
[46]
B. Duncan, “Can EU General Data Protection Regulation Compliance
be Achieved When Using Cloud Computing?” in Cloud Comput. 2018
Ninth Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. GRIDs, Virtualization, no. February.
Barcelona, Spain: IARIA, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[47]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Can Forensic Audit Help Address
the Cloud Forensic Problem in Light of the Requirements of the Forth-
coming European Union General Data Protection Regulation?” in Cloud
Comput. 2018 Ninth Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. GRIDs, Virtualization,
no. February. Barcelona, Spain: IARIA, 2018, pp. 84–89.
[48]
B. Duncan and Y. Zhao, “Risk Management for Cloud Compliance with
the EU General Data Protection Regulation,” in 7th Int. Work. Secur. Priv.
Perform. Cloud Comput. (SPCLOUD 2018), Orleans, France, 2018, p. 8.
[49]
B. Duncan, A. Happe, and A. Bratterud, “Using Unikernels to Address
the Cloud Forensic Problem and help Achieve EU GDPR Compliance.”
[50]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “The Complexities of Auditing and
Securing Systems in the Cloud — is there a Solution and will the GDPR
move it up the Corporate Agenda?” Int. J. Adv. Secur., vol. 11, no. 3&4,
2018, pp. 232–242.
[51]
V. Chang, M. Ramachandran, Y. Yao, Y. H. Kuo, and C. S. Li, “A
resiliency framework for an enterprise cloud,” Int. J. Inf. Manage.,
vol. 36, no. 1, 2016, pp. 155–166.
[52]
T. Pasquier, B. Shand, and J. Bacon, “Information Flow Control for a
Medical Records Web Portal,” Cl.Cam.Ac.Uk, 2013, pp. 1–8.
[53]
OWASP,
“Open
Web
Application
Secu-
rity
Project,”
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Cloud_Security_Project
Accessed: 28/03/2019
[54]
CSA,
“Cloud
Security
Alliance,”
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/ [Retrieved: March 2019]
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

