Proactive Performance Optimization of IT Services Supply-Chain Utilizing a 
Business Service Innovation Value Roadmap 
Short Paper for a work-in-progress 
Ethan Hadar 
Corporate Technical Strategy, 
Distinguished Engineer 
Senior Vice President 
CA Technologies, Inc. 
Herzelia, Israel 
ethan.hadar@ca.com 
Jason Davis 
Sr Principal Services Architect 
CA Technologies, Inc. 
Berkshire, GB 
jason.davis@ca.com 
 
Donald F. Ferguson 
Chief Technology Officer, 
Distinguished Engineer 
Executive Vice President 
CA Technologies, Inc 
New York, NY 
donald.ferguson@ca.com 
 
Abstract— Business investment in IT is increasingly linked 
to IT delivering new or enhanced services that leverage the 
capabilities of the cloud. The challenge that IT faces 
especially in cloud environment, is to continuously assess 
and proactively optimize the performance and quality of 
supporting IT services being delivered.  This evaluation 
must be performed in the context of the overall Service 
Level Agreements (SLA) of the composite application and 
subsequently, the underlying dynamic compound IT 
services. Our paper presents a proactive optimizer solution 
that provides on-going service improvement driven by the 
regular evaluation alternatives of the performance if 
individual services.  Through a Business Service Innovation 
value roadmap, the Enterprise Architect can model and 
assemble candidate services for composite applications and 
automatically use tools to deploy and assure the 
performance of the composite application. Using our 
solution, over time the architect can manage the composite 
application by comparing the quality delivered against 
simulated alternatives and make recommendations for 
change.   Consequently, using the solution presented in this 
paper, IT changes are aligned to the challenge to leverage 
the constantly improving quality of supply-chain IT service 
while maintaining or reducing costs. 
 
Keywords: 
Business 
Service 
Innovation; 
cloud 
optimization; cloud quality; IT services supply-chain 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In cloud computing, competition among service 
providers is affecting the flexibility and dynamics of 
possible combinations of underlying services within the 
IT 
Service 
supply-chain. 
This 
flexibility 
enables 
proactive, predictive optimization for both cost reduction 
and revenue increase [4] of the underlying supporting 
services. 
Business transactions flow through the composite 
application underlying services and supporting hardware 
and software resources. Leveraging cloud computing, 
these services can conceptually be replaced with smart 
self-service and automation tools [5].  
The composite application owner’s challenge is to 
constantly innovate and improve their business service 
quality while reducing cost. The owner can achieve this 
goal by proactively adapting and optimizing the 
composite application’s underlying supply-chain services, 
and 
composite 
IT 
systems. 
 
The 
optimization 
recommendations are considered based on qualified and 
quantified metrics. Through frequent recalculation, this 
dynamic adaptation can drive down Operational and 
Capital Expenditure (OPEX and CAPEX), raise Service 
Level Agreements (SLA) quality, and adhere to increased 
security and privacy compliance needs [1][7].  
 
This paper suggests a system that assists the Enterprise 
Architect in replacing existing IT supply-chain cloud 
services according to business needs. The suggested 
refactoring changes (replacements) to existing IT services 
and process are based on configured goals for improving 
internal SLA. The system utilizes services from internal 
and external, private and public clouds (SaaS, PaaS and 
IaaS).  
Section 2 of this paper presents the conceptual 
lifecycle framework, the Business Service Innovation 
upon which our system is structured. Section 3 presents 
the value for consumers and users of our solution. Section 
4 details the necessary conceptual elements, followed by 
Section 5 that describes the technical modules that 
implement this solution. Section 6 highlights the value of 
our solution with associated needs for extensions and 
future work. 
 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
In previous work, we proposed a data store that 
contains normalized metrics of the services quality based 
on a Complex Event Processing (CEP) engine [3].  
The CEP system is extended in this paper into the 
“proactive performance optimizer” solution that compares 
and proposes alternatives to the underlying services of the 
IT supply-chain. The proposed system’s main principles 
follow a predetermined Business Service Innovation value 
roadmap (Figure 1), which structures our systems’ 
management steps.  
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

The Business Service Innovation steps are Model-
Assemble–Automate-Assure and overall Manage the 
evolution, interwoven with IT Security.  
The detailed steps are: 
1. Model and Assemble a list of applied service 
elements (composite IT systems and composite 
applications), and present alternative options to 
the supporting supply-chain services (candidate 
services). 
2. Automate the deployment and Assure the quality 
all underlying services (the ones that participate 
in the composite application, as well as the 
candidate services that are not currently part of 
the composite applications but could replace an 
existing service.) 
3. Manage, regularly evaluate the quality and 
indicate/highlight if an alternative candidate 
service is superior to the one currently in use, as 
compared to predefined filter and search criteria. 
4. Return to the first step, and accept or reject 
(manually or automatically) the recommended 
changes by remodeling the change. 
Less common proactive optimization for reducing 
costs will be to replace a single element with high 
performance attributes that have a high cost, due to the 
nature of the high quality SLA, with a lower quality one.  
This might be the case when this instance (service) is 
coupled with other transactions, which have a much lower 
aggregated SLA due to other services and components. 
The overall SLA is the lowest common denominator, 
therefore paying a high price for a quality service that 
does not get used could be considered wasteful.  
This example illustrates just one dimension of 
optimization, in which the cost alternative of the 
underlying services that participate in a composite 
transaction can be replaced at any given point in time.  
Naturally, there are many other dimensions for 
proactive optimization such as increasing availability, 
improving load, increasing speed for change, better 
robustness and more. Compliance and liability as well as 
and insurance coverage are additional examples for 
improvement and replacement [6]. 
 
III. 
THE SYSTEM VALUE 
Unlike existing process and composite application 
design systems that structure a service or a process from a 
stable state environment point of view, the proposed 
system constantly improves and evolves a flexible 
business process. The system operates in a cloud-
computing environment that is categorized by a changing 
environment and service composition possibilities, due to 
an open market and ease of change.  In addition, the 
proactive optimization system is applicable for non-cloud 
services as well, and offers the same solution in a system 
that does not change as often as cloud alternative. 
 
 
Figure 1: Business Service Innovation value roadmap  of the 
proactive optimizer. 
 
Thus, the proactive optimization of cloud service 
performance aspects provides several unique value 
propositions.  
• 
Ongoing suggestions for changes to existing well-
designed solutions that could be improved through 
modifications to underlying services (proactive 
optimization). 
• 
Notifying the designer of plausible alternatives for 
existing consumed services. 
• 
Improvement of a monitored service which may be 
applicable for a certain customer, but considered 
inappropriate for a different customer due to 
consumer-specific SLA and quality goals.  
• 
The solution couples the abilities to monitor and 
compare thresholds of public cloud services (or any 
service for that matter) with predetermined service 
levels of consumers, as well as scanning alternative 
similar services for optional replacements.  
• 
Apply an agile approach for regular incremental and 
iterative improvement of processes composite 
applications in production. 
• 
Rationalize the change of the entire portfolio of 
composite 
application 
based 
on 
an 
overall 
aggregated quality rather than on the underlying 
single service. 
IV. 
CONCEPTUAL STRUCTURE 
This paper presents a refactoring service that 
continuously monitors possible underlying IT services 
within the context of a supply-chain of IT services, 
supporting a composite application. Based on complex 
event processing (CEP) and predefined threshold metrics, 
refactoring service triggers assessment of the suggested 
changes to the optimized services.  The system’s main 
modules are SLA thresholds and triggers, and the 
detection of needed/recommended change. 
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

A. SLA Thresholds and Triggers 
The SLA’s that are associated with the supplied 
services that are part of the overall composite application 
determine the level of aggregated service or SLA that can 
be achieved. Improvement of the SLA for an overall 
service is driven by the SLA’s or OLA’s (operation level 
agreement) that relate to the underlying service. The 
system can either monitor a single most impactful 
supplied service as a candidate for improvement, or, 
monitor the overall SLA/OLA [6] with a mathematical 
weighting of the individual contribution of each supply-
chain IT service. With a focus on improving the overall 
service, rather than a single service, the system provides a 
mechanism that allows the user to set goals for SLA 
improvement on the overall composite application, and 
sub-divide it in to the internal services derived 
OLA/SLA/goals. In the case of self-adaptation, these rules 
will trigger a suggestion for a change to a service, in the 
form of a Change Recommendations or external Service 
Design process. 
B. Detection of change in Quality of Service using  
Complex Event Processing 
The Complex Event Processing engine continuously 
scans internal and external clouds for detection of quality 
changes to composite elements such as SaaS, IaaS or 
PaaS that make up an overall composite application. 
These monitoring tools for service assurance scan for 
alternatives for improved metrics values.  
Once data is collected, the CEP [3] system correlates 
the information gathered using specific formulas to 
determine the overall improvement or degradation of 
quality of service that is being delivered.  
C. What-if modeler 
For each of the proposed alternatives, an aggregated 
overall potential SLA is presented. Several of these 
alternatives can be presented and maintained in the 
modeler component that captures the structure of the 
composite application, presenting, over time, the trends 
and possible quality levels. 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION STRUCTURE 
This section presents the implementation modules and 
a prototypical usage scenario to the solution according to 
the Business Service Innovation value roadmap (Figure 
2).  
 
A. The implemenation modules  
The participating modules [2] are: 
 
• 
CA AppLogic - constructs and test composite IT 
systems that support the composite application. 
The module defines the architecture structure and 
IT system physical dependency, load balancing, 
and network configurations. 
• 
CA Service Operations Insight (CA SOI) – 
monitors internal cloud services and implements 
the CEP system. This module also defines the 
behavioral dependency of the supplied services 
and measured SLA/OLA. 
• 
CA Application Performance Management Cloud 
Monitor (CA APM) - monitors external cloud 
services. 
• 
CA Business Service Insight– presents alternative 
suggestions for change based on measured 
reported metrics of the vendors as well as 
aggregated statistics based on surveying users. 
• 
CA Automation Suite for Clouds – automates the 
changes 
in 
infrastructure 
provisioning 
and 
capacity. 
• 
CA IT Process Automation Manager (CA 
ITPAM) – supports automation of changes in 
more complex structures, triggering federated 
identity provisioning, or incident management. 
• 
CA 
Performance 
Optimizer 
- 
providing 
preconfigured optimization capacity changes to 
private datacenter (for infrastructure services). 
 
 
B. A prototypical usage scenario  
In order to realize the connectivity between the 
modules, consider prototypical activation by an Enterprise 
Architect.  
In this scenario, the enterprise architect selects 
services, denoted as “atomic services” for use in the 
composite applications. The services are selected from a 
list in CA APM Cloud Monitor and CA Business Service 
Insight (external services) and from a list of infrastructure 
components (CA AppLogic). The infrastructure services 
are combined using the CA AppLogic modeler. The 
integrated external IT services are mapped on a behavioral 
model presented, and later on monitored, by the CA SOI 
modeling tool. The structure of CA SOI Composite 
Application model and the CA AppLogic Composite IT 
System model defines what underlying services are 
candidates for changes. 
 These replaceable services are frequently compared 
with other options that provide the same conceptual 
service, yet, currently provide worse SLA, or cost more. 
CA APM Cloud Monitor and CA Business Service 
Insight provide the list of compared services.  
A comparative “what-if” structure of a potential 
alternative to the composite application is calculated using 
a simulator instance of CA SOI behavioral model. Note 
that this is not the production system version of CA SOI, 
rather a testing system. In this case CA SOI a combination 
of production services as well as alternative underlying 
services. The Enterprise Architect defines the candidate 
services that can be considered for replacement, and limits 
the search space for design alternative. A fully opened 
optimization is not practical, due to contractual 
limitations, as discussed in the next section. 
On a regular basis, the overall SLA for the composite 
application is calculated for the production composite 
application, and is constantly compared to the candidate 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

composite application in which some of the supply-chain 
services are allowed to change. For every permutation 
possible, a relative aggregated SLA is presented to the 
Enterprise Architect, over time.   
 
 
 
Figure 2 – Proactive optimizer Business Solution Innovation  
implementation modules. 
 
 
If over a predefined interval the comparison shows 
improvement, change automation tools can implement an 
architect approved change using either CA Cloud 
Automation suite or ITPAM. 
Accordingly, this procedure is repeatable, assuming 
services are added or removed, as captured on the 
contractual agreements defined in CA Business Solution 
Insight. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
We presented our work-in-progress that provides a 
proactive optimization solution for enabling ongoing 
replacement of IT services in cloud environments. 
Activated according to a Business Service Innovation 
value roadmap, the solution leverages SLA performance 
measurements of existing production level applications 
and their underlying composite IT systems, compared 
against 
simulated 
and 
monitored 
alternatives. 
Consequently, our implemented solution reduced costs 
and/or 
improved 
quality, 
thereby 
addressing 
the 
challenges of the enterprise architect while providing the 
business rational for the change. If the change may be 
applicable to other situations, automation tools can 
activate the change over dynamic and elastic cloud 
environments.  
However, change typically has associated cost and risk 
factors that can impact production systems. As a result, 
change activation should be performed only if the costs 
savings or ROI is higher and associated risk is lower than 
the existing state. With pure dynamic resource allocation 
management 
over 
virtual 
environments, 
these 
considerations can be eliminated.  
The 
system 
does 
have 
its 
limitations; 
the 
computational change is not a complex optimization 
problem as it may be considered. The reason is that not all 
of the supply-chain IT services can change due to 
contractual agreements and limitations of liability. 
However, the complexity is noticeable when overall 
balancing of all the composite applications in the 
enterprise are considered, in particular in the domain of 
mashup and situational applications. Our future research 
work involves handling optimization for composite 
situational applications for the entire enterprise. 
Even more, optimization is subjective to each 
customer, based on financial and quality based needs. 
Different internal consumers may require different service 
levels. As a result, the ability will be to best match a given 
SLA required level with supporting provider, changing 
the proactive optimization to a matchmaking algorithm or 
better yet, feasibility constraints target function. 
Our 
future 
work 
is 
focusing 
on 
providing 
matchmaking 
optimization 
within 
feasibility 
box-
constraints for assigning the best available supply-chain 
services 
VII. REFERENCES 
[1] 
Blum D., Schacter P., Maiwald E., Krikken R., Henry T., Boer 
M., and Chuvakin A., “2012 Planning Guide: Security and Risk 
Management”, G00224667, Burton IT1 Research, 1 November 
2011 
[2]  
CA Web site for tools and products, 
http://www.ca.com/us/products.aspx, last accesed on May 10 
2012 
[3]  
Gal A. and Hadar E., book chapter: “Generic Architecture of 
Complex Event Processing Systems”, in “Handbook of Research 
on 
Advanced 
Distributed 
Event-Based 
Systems, 
Publish/Subscribe and Message Filtering Technologies”, edited 
by Annika Hinze and Alejandro Buchmann, IGI Global press, 
2009 
[4]  
Ferguson D.F. and Hadar E., “Optimizing the IT business supply 
chain utilizing cloud computing”, The 8th International 
Conference on Emerging Technologies for a Smarter World 
(CEWIT2011), page 1-6, Hyatt Regency Long Island, 
Hauppauge, New York, November 2-3, 2011. 
[5]  
Hadar E., Connelly K., and Lagunova O., “Agile Evolution of 
Information Systems Using Model Driven Architecture of IT 
Services”, Proceeding of the “Architecture in an Agile world” 
workshop, October 25, OOPSLA 2009, Orlando, Florida, US, 
2009 
[6]  
Hadar E. and Danielson D.J., “Certified IT services in a box for 
cloud computing environments”, CLOSER 2012, 2nd 
international conference for cloud computing and service 
sciences, Porto, Portugal, 18-21 April 2012. 
[7]  
Hadar E., Hadar I. and Ferguson D.F., “QDSL - Quality Domain 
Specific Language for cloud composite applications”, CLOSER 
2012, 2nd international conference for cloud computing and 
service sciences, Porto, Portugal, 18-21 April 2012. 
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

