A Cloud Application Portal for the Maritime Industry 
 
Bill Karakostas, Takis Katsoulakos 
Inlecom Systems Ltd 
London, UK 
{bill, takis}@inlecom.com 
Stelios Christofi  
EBOS  Technologies Ltd 
Nicosia, Cyprus 
stelios@ebos.com.cy
 
 
Abstract— We propose that enterprise portals and cloud 
management environments should converge, and that such 
convergence should take place from a user centric perspective. 
This 
paper 
describes 
the 
rationale, 
architecture 
and 
implementation of a system that provides user centred oriented 
integration of cloud applications.  The novelty of the approach 
is that applications are not presented to the user in terms of 
their Cloud Application Programming Interface (API), but 
according to the users’ task models. This gives the users fine 
grained control of the applications available to them 
independently of how they are delivered over the Cloud. We 
demonstrate the above concepts with a case study from the 
maritime domain. 
Keywords- 
Enterprise 
portal; 
Cloud 
portal; 
Cloud 
integration; Cloud API; maritime applications. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
An enterprise portal is an application that gives users a 
single point of access to other applications and information 
they need, with the ability to personalize the interface and 
content as they wish. In this way, a portal can help users 
make faster, more informed decisions.  New generation of 
enterprise portals are geared toward supporting applications 
that are hosted in the cloud. In other words, enterprise 
portals are evolving from information gateways into all-
purpose Web platforms that support a wide range of 
business processes.  
The challenge in developing Cloud portals lies in the 
ability to integrate diverse cloud services into a single user 
environment that preserves the users’ effectiveness to carry 
out tasks under their domain of expertise, by virtualising 
and integrating the APIs of diverse cloud services.  Current 
cloud management environments do not support that, 
assuming the users’ familiarity with the API of the cloud 
application/service. 
The system illustrated in this paper integrates virtualised 
applications in a cloud environment. Applications running 
on heterogeneous clouds can be accessed from a single 
portal through a virtualised interface that corresponds to the 
user domain tasks.  
The described system has been developed specifically for 
the needs of the maritime industry. However, the concepts 
and approach are equally applicable to other industries that 
utilize Cloud environments such as retail, finance, and other 
service operations. The structure of the paper is as follows. 
The next section surveys the state of the art in enterprise 
portals and cloud management environments. Section III 
discusses the research challenges and architecture of the 
proposed approach. Section IV presents a prototype that 
applies the proposed approach to the maritime application 
domain. Finally, section V discusses future plans for further 
research and extensions to the proposed idea. 
II. 
LITERATURE SURVEY 
A. Enterprise Portals 
Many enterprise portals today enable website and 
application development, document management and 
collaboration. Several portals now integrate with content 
management 
systems, 
or 
otherwise 
offer 
content 
management functionality and integration with mobile 
devices, rich media and social media. However, the external 
applications accessed by such portals, are increasingly been 
delivered as services on some Cloud, something that has 
been coined the cloudification of legacy applications in Yu 
et al [1]. Thus, the problem of integrating external 
applications into an enterprise portal environment, these 
days, equals to the problem of connecting to and integrating 
services delivered by heterogeneous clouds. 
The importance of Cloud service management through 
portals has also been acknowledged by the European Union 
Information 
and 
Communications 
Technology 
(ICT) 
Research Programme, which has funded number of projects 
in the ICT space of  APIs, mashups and marketplaces, such 
as projects Multi-Modal Situation Assessment and Analytics 
Platform (mOSAIC) and Morfeo 4CaasT. 
B. Cloud Management Environments 
Although there is some convergence towards the use of 
communication protocols, i.e. with Resource State Transfer 
(REST) over http been the preferred method, and, less 
frequently, Simple Object Access protocol (SOAP)/Web 
Service Description Language (WSDL), as an alternative 
method), cloud computing services have diverse APIs 
through which they can be accessed. A unified interface to 
provide integrated access to cloud computing services is 
non-existent, currently. Thus, integration of cloud services 
into a unified web-based user interface must be carried out 
by the portal. Virtualisation technologies have a significant 
role to play towards this goal. Not only the Cloud services 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
Figure 1: Architecture of mediator-based virtualization of cloud services 
virtualise the computing environment, but the portal must 
provide a user oriented virtualisation environment for the 
service interfaces. This will virtualise the service interfaces 
in terms of sets of tasks commonly performed by the user.  
Some research towards personalized user environments 
already exists. For example, a paper by Zhang et al [2] 
presents such a system for Windows based on user-
level virtualization technologies. At run-time, the user 
applications stored on a portable device run in a user-mode 
virtualization environment where some resource (registry, 
files/directories, environment variables, etc.) accessing APIs 
are intercepted and redirected to the portable device as 
necessary.  
Users can access their personalized applications and data 
on any compatible computer, without the applications 
actually been installed on that computer. Cloud management 
environments as proposed in Alrokayan and Buya  [3]  place 
emphasis on ease of use, however not necessarily at the user 
task level, by providing a single point from which the user 
can control different cloud environment. For example, the 
Simple Heterogeneous Inter-Cloud Manager (SHINCLOM) 
project by Powell et al [4] is a prototype web-based single 
sign-on inter-cloud management portal that gives users the 
ability to easily configure and launch inter- architecture 
cloud applications and services. However, most current 
approaches do not adopt user task oriented strategies for 
cloud service management. Thus, we propose that enterprise 
portals and cloud management environments. 
 
III. 
ARCHTECURE 
A Research challenge 
The main research challenge in this project is how to 
integrate heterogeneous cloud environments into a unified 
portal, in a user centric fashion, as per Gmelch’s proposal 
[5]. The aim is to present applications to the user not 
according to their native Cloud APIs, but according to the 
user’s task model. This gives the users fine grained control 
of the applications available to them, independently of how 
they are delivered over the different Clouds. In contrast, our 
approach virtualises the cloud application’s API in terms of 
the user’s task model. Thus, the user interacts with the 
Cloud application/service through a virtual API that is 
converted on the fly to the native API of the application. 
The approach is explained in the following sections. 
 
B Application Integration Patterns 
In this research, we opted for a mediator based 
integration approach, as per Hohpe and Woolf [6], as this 
allows the mediation between what the users perceives as 
the characteristics of their tasks, and what the cloud services 
offers to them through their APIs. The matching between 
the two (as well as any mismatches) is handled by the 
mediator. A task analysis method is used to identify tasks 
the user performs in the context of an application, the inputs 
output and control elements to the tasks. The modelling of 
tasks identifies the information elements that need to be 
provided by the application.  A mapping is performed of the 
user task’s input output and control elements to the Cloud  
application’s/service API operations. As illustrated in 
Figure 1, the portal’s mediator matches user actions and 
user visible content to the input and output parameters of the 
external cloud service.  At runtime, the mediator will collect 
user input, convert it to the corresponding API operation 
and submit to the Cloud service. Depending on the style of 
interaction (i.e. synchronous vs asynchronous),  service 
response will be mapped to the output user interface 
elements and immediately displayed to the user, or collected 
as a message to be delivered to the user’s inbox.  
C .Dynamic User Interface-Synchronous Communication 
In this option, the Cloud application/service has to operate 
in a synchronous mode. The portal administrator configures 
the endpoint universal resource locator (URL) of the 
service. When a user wants to utilize the application, the 
Portal is responsible for dynamically creating a user 
interface, using the cloud service interface description 
(WSDL), and return to the user a data entry form to be used 
for the interaction with the service. Thus, communication 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

with the service is synchronous and the response to the user 
is presented immediately after the submission of the request.  
 
 
 
                       Figure 2: List of user applications 
 
Figure 3: Application configuration by the portal administrator 
D.Dynamic User Interfaces-Communications through 
Access Points 
In asynchronous communications, the portal provides a 
messaging facility to allow users to communicate with the 
Cloud application. The portal also provides a message 
queuing facility  for applications to exchange messages with 
the portal. The portal’s messaging system handles in-order 
and exactly-once delivery, required for a consistent and 
complete presentation of service response messages to the 
users’ inboxes. The portal administrator configures the XML 
Schema (XSD) of the message that will be exchanged and 
also how unique identifiers will be generated for its message. 
When a user invokes the cloud service, the Portal 
dynamically creates a user interface using the provided XSD, 
and returns to the user a data entry form to be used for the 
interaction with the service. When the service returns a 
response, a notification is presented to the user’s workspace 
environment.  
User 
applications 
are 
configured 
by 
the 
portal 
administrator who specified the user visible parts of the 
application as well as the characteristics of the external 
cloud service (Figure 3). This allows user interfaces to be 
auto-generated as shown in Figure 4. 
IV. 
PROTOTYPE 
As explained already, the emphasis of the described 
prototype portal is on user centricity. Each user is given a 
set of applications to work with, organized into categories 
that are intuitive in the user’s domain (i.e. maritime) and 
role specialization (for example, as recruiter of ship crew).  
Every time users log in to the portal they are presented with 
the list of available applications, as shown in the screenshot 
of Figure 2. With a single sign on to the portal, users can 
access all applications assigned to them. From their home 
page, users also have the ability to search for a particular 
application based on various fields such as the application 
name, description etc. Moreover, users can customise their 
view of existing applications. As shown in Figure 2, the 
users receive notifications from applications they have 
invoked in an asynchronous manner.  
As illustrated in Figure 4, users interact with the external 
application through an auto-generated interface. In the 
screenshot of Figure 4, the user accesses an external service 
that selects ship crew that meet certain criteria. User input 
will be automatically converted to the expected API 
parameters of the external Cloud service. All user interface 
elements (labels and field values) in the above example are 
generated automatically from the user task model. 
 
 
 
   Figure 4: An end user application with a dynamically generated interface. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK 
 
Shipping oriented portals are web-based communities 
which allow customers, intermediaries (e.g. forwarders) and 
carriers to communicate through a single portal for booking, 
tracking and tracing, 
documentation 
functions, 
etc. 
However, these portals offer a fixed set of functionalities 
and  interfaces that assume specific user tasks. The approach 
described here presents several business and technical 
benefits, over them. With portal interfaces that adapt to user 
tasks, training costs can be significantly reduced,  as the 
users do not have to learn the interface of several new 
applications. User satisfaction also improves, as the users 
feel comfortable in using applications whose interface 
matches the tasks they carry out in their domain of 
expertise. As new Cloud applications and services in a 
particular domain, emerge the users can access them 
seamlessly while maintaining a consistent interface. 
However, there are also some restrictions in the current 
prototype and further areas of possible improvement. For 
start, a one to one mapping between a user task and a Cloud 
application/service is assumed. It is also assumed that the 
user tasks are independent from each other, while in practice 
these tasks are often joined in a user oriented workflow. It 
would be desirable to allow users to specify not only tasks 
but process workflows as perceived by them. Ideally, this 
would have to be done via a graphical environment. 
Integration of external cloud applications/services into this 
workflow would had to be carried out by the portal, as the 
Cloud applications are by definition application/process 
agnostic. Thus, the mediation manager discussed in this 
paper would also have to become a workflow manager.  
The next area of improvement concerns the portal 
administrator’s 
development 
environment. 
This 
environment 
is 
currently 
form 
based, 
where 
the 
administrators are given options to configure user profiles as 
well as the profiles of the external cloud services and 
applications. Generation of dynamic interfaces and 
messaging communications are handled by portal’s internal 
services. A fully fledged development environment, would 
allow portal developers and administrators more flexibility 
in configuring access and integration with external Cloud 
services and further customisation of the end user options. 
This could be achieved by a system level scripting language 
such as those used by other Cloud management 
environments. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Research reported in this paper was partially supported 
by the EU under Project eMAR (Grant Number 265851 DG 
MOVE). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Yu, D. ; Jian W. ; Hu, B. ;  Liu, J .; Zhang, X. ; He, K. ; 
Zhang, L-J. A Practical Architecture of Cloudification of 
Legacy Applications. IEEE World Congress on Services 
(SERVICES), 2011 pp 17-24.  
[2] 
Zhang, Y. ;  Wang, X. ; Su, GHL ; Wang, D. Portable 
desktop applications based on user-level virtualization. 
Computer Systems ACSAC 2008. 13th Asia-Pacific 
Architecture Conference, pp 1-6. 
[3] Alrokayan, M. & Rajkumar B.  A web portal for 
management of aneka-based MultiCloud environments. 
Proceeding AusPDC '13 Proceedings of the Eleventh 
Australasian Symposium on Parallel and Distributed 
Computing 2013- Volume 140, pp 49-56. 
[4] 
Powell, C.; Munetomo, M. ; Wahib, A. ; Aizawa, T. 
Constructing a Robust Services-Oriented Inter-cloud Portal 
Based on an Autonomic Model and FOSS IEEE/ACM 6th 
International Conference on Utility and Cloud Computing 
(UCC), 2013, pp 458-463,  
[5] 
Gmelch, O. User-Centric Application Integration in 
Enterprise Portal Systems .  Josef Eul Verlag GmbH– 31 Jul 
2012 
[6] 
Hohpe, G. & Woolf, B. Enterprise Integration Patterns: 
Designing, Building, and Deploying Messaging Solutions– 
Addison Wesley Signature October 20, 2003 
 
.  
 
 
 
 
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

