Impact of Cloud Computing on Enhancing the Use of Renewable Energy 
 
Kwa-Sur Tam 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering 
Virginia Tech 
Blacksburg, Virginia, U.S.A. 
Email: ktam@vt.edu 
 
 
Abstract — Renewable energy has been identified as one of the 
disruptive technologies that have the potential for massive 
impact on the society for the coming years.  A major concern 
for using renewable energy such as solar photovoltaics and 
wind is its variable nature.  The importance of this concern is 
increasing in recent years as the penetration levels of 
renewable energy have been increasing rapidly in the electric 
power grids worldwide.  Forecasting is a major tool that can be 
used to address the variable nature of renewable energy.  
Cloud Computing provides the enabling technology to handle 
the complexity of renewable energy forecasting and can 
enhance more widespread and more effective utilization of 
renewable energy.  This paper presents the new applications of 
using Cloud Computing to enhance the use of renewable 
energy through the achievement of two goals.  The first goal is 
to present a Cloud Computing-enabled renewable energy 
forecasting 
system--the 
FaaS 
(Forecast-as-a-Service) 
framework--to demonstrate the technical feasibility. Based on 
the service-oriented architecture (SOA), the FaaS has been 
successful in generating user-specified solar or wind forecast 
on demand and at reasonable costs.  Using the FaaS as the 
starting point, the second goal of this paper is to present from a 
broader perspective the potential impact of Cloud Computing 
on the use of renewable energy.  Cloud Computing, coupled 
with other technology trends, supports the development of new 
applications and business models that could flourish the 
renewable energy industry. 
 
Keywords – Cloud Computing; services; service-oriented 
architecture; forecasting; renewable energy; cyberinfrastructure. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Providing almost unlimited computing resources on a 
pay-per-use basis, Cloud Computing provides new options 
for data-intensive and computation-intensive applications.  
Cloud computing not only makes possible the completion of 
complex computational tasks within shorter time frames but 
also enables such capabilities to be available at affordable 
costs.  This paper describes the impact of Cloud Computing 
on the use of renewable energy. 
Renewable energy has been identified as one of the 
disruptive technologies that have the potential for massive 
impact on the society for the coming years [1].  A major 
concern for using renewable energy such as solar 
photovoltaics and wind is its variable nature.  The 
importance of this concern is increasing in recent years as the 
penetration levels of renewable energy have been increasing 
rapidly in the electric power grids worldwide.  Forecasting is 
a major tool that can be used to address the variable nature of 
renewable energy.  Based on the forecast information, 
variability can be accommodated on the power supply side 
by implementing measures such as generation scheduling 
and storage backup, and on the power consumption side by 
implementing demand-side management and demand 
response programs.  Accurate forecasting of renewable 
energy will provide important contribution to the realization 
of smart grid and enable more widespread and efficient 
utilization of renewable energy.  Cloud Computing provides 
the enabling technology to handle the complexity of 
renewable energy forecasting.  
This paper presents the new applications of using Cloud 
Computing to enhance the use of renewable energy through 
the achievement of two goals.  The first goal is to present a 
Cloud Computing-enabled renewable energy forecasting 
system--the FaaS (Forecast-as-a-Service) framework--to 
demonstrate the technical feasibility. Based on the service-
oriented architecture (SOA), the FaaS has been successful in 
generating user-specified solar or wind forecast on demand 
and at reasonable costs.  The FaaS framework can be used 
as a software-as-a-service (SaaS) to provide prospecting or 
operational forecast for solar or wind power systems.  It can 
also be used as a platform-as-a-service (PaaS) to develop 
more capabilities or more customized functionalities. 
Using the FaaS as the starting point, the second goal of 
this paper is to present from a broader perspective the 
potential impact of Cloud Computing on the use of 
renewable energy.  Cloud Computing, coupled with other 
technology trends, supports the development of new 
applications and business models that could flourish the 
renewable energy industry. 
This paper offers contributions that are different from 
those reported in existing literature.  Although both the FaaS 
and the CloudCast [2] are concerned with forecasting, FaaS 
is different from CloudCast not only in terms of the services 
provided but also in terms of the underlying design.  Efforts 
to bring together service-oriented architecture and Cloud 
Computing have been reported in the literature [3][4].  FaaS 
is different from these efforts in that FaaS also addresses 
service pricing issues.  There are patterns for object-oriented 
software design [5] and patterns for SOA service design [6].  
The FaaS Framework may be viewed as the preliminary 
version of a Cloud Computing pattern for on-demand 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

quantitative forecasting processes.  By improving the 
flexibility and economics of renewable energy forecasting 
services, FaaS also achieves the goal of Services Computing 
[7]. 
Section II presents the concepts and implementation of 
the FaaS framework and the forecasting results generated.  
Broader impact of Cloud Computing on the use of 
renewable energy is discussed in Section III.  Conclusions 
are contained in Section IV. 
 
II. CLOUD-ENABLED FORECASTING SYSTEM 
As shown on the top of Figure 1, a quantitative 
forecasting process may be grouped into four major steps: 
problem definition; data collection; analysis and model 
formulation; and forecast generation. .  Using the principles 
of service-oriented architecture (SOA), each of these major 
steps can be performed by a composite service.  Figure 1 
shows the layered organization of a SOA framework used in 
the FaaS framework for the forecasting of renewable 
energy.  Services in the Service Layer consist of the 
fundamental and agnostic services that are not coupled to 
any specific application.  They perform tasks such as data 
transfer over the Internet (Transfer Tools services), 
statistical analysis (Statistical Tools services), forecasting 
(Forecast Tools services), etc.  Many of these basic services 
are used in both the wind and the solar power forecasting 
processes. 
On top of the Service Layer are the Composite Service 
and Workflow Layer.  The External Data Collection 
Framework (EDCF) is responsible for gathering relevant 
data from different sources over the Internet.  These data are 
available from a variety of sources: federal agencies, 
national databases and archives, private organizations, 
universities, data vendors and equipment vendors.  From 
these sources, different types of data are rendered in 
different formats: satellite images, sensor measurement data, 
computer model data, vendor product data, etc.   
The Internal Data Retrieval Framework (IDRF) 
processes and analyses the externally collected data and 
stores the results as internal data for future uses.  The 
Forecast Generation Framework (FGF) generates the 
pertinent forecast of either wind or solar power at the 
location specified by the user.  The FaaS controller serves to 
organize the entire forecast process and orchestrates 
different services to implement the workflow. 
Each of the major steps shown on top of Figure 1 is 
performed by a composite service: the EDCF for data 
collection; the IDRF for the support of analysis and model 
formulation; the FGF for forecasting and the FaaS controller 
for problem definition and overall coordination. 
The EDCF, IDRF, FGF and the FaaS controller are all 
composite services designed by applying SOA principles 
[6][8].  They are implemented by using the Windows 
Communication Foundation (WCF) [9], Microsoft Azure 
and .NET technologies [10].   
 
EDCF
IDRF
FGF
.NET 
Services
Data Collection
Analysis and Model Formulation
Forecasting
Problem Definition
·   ·   ·
Internal 
Data
Sources
External
Data
Sources
Foundation 
Tools
Transfer
Tools
Forecast 
Tools
     FaaS Controller
Service Layer
Statistical 
Tools
Composite Service Layer
 
 
Figure 1.   A SOA-based framework for the forecasting process 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.   Implementation of the FaaS framework using Windows Azure 
 
Figure 2 shows the implementation of the FaaS system 
using the Windows Azure Cloud Computing platform.  To 
initiate a forecast process, a user through a web page 
specifies the renewable energy source (solar or wind), the 
location (latitude and longitude), the kind of forecasting 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

services 
(prospecting 
or 
operational), 
uncertainty 
quantification (with or without), and whether characteristics 
of energy conversion equipment (such as a particular model 
of a solar panel or a wind turbine from a list of 
manufacturers) should be included in the computation to 
make the forecast more realistic.  Based on the customer-
specified forecast request, the FaaS controller formulates a 
workflow consisting of all the tasks that need to be 
performed. 
If relevant data are not available in the internal database 
(bottom layer in Figure 1), the FaaS controller informs the 
EDCF to obtain the needed data from external sources over 
the Internet and store the collected data in the Azure Blob 
storage.  The FaaS system keeps a database of external data 
sources in a Meta Data Repository (MDR).  MDR stores 
information about what kind of data a data source provides, 
the web address, the protocol for data access and the data 
format.  Based on the metadata from the MDR, the EDCF 
initiates a data collection process to gather data for the 
location (or the nearest location) requested by the user from 
the pertinent data source.  The EDCF utilizes the Transfer 
Tools services (shown in Figure 1) and other basic services 
to accomplish the external data collection process. 
The IDRF takes the raw data from the Azure Blob 
storage, performs data analysis and stores the results in the 
Azure Table storage in the standardized formats for which 
the forecasting models are designed.  As a composite 
service, the IDRF utilizes the appropriate services based on 
the metadata for the raw data.  For example, the Statistical 
Tools service is used to generate statistics for long term 
historical data analysis.  The Discrete Fourier Transform 
service is used to generate frequency domain components. 
Using data prepared by the IDRF and stored in the Azure 
Table storage, the FGF generates the forecast based on the 
user’s request.  Different forecasting methods are 
implemented as services and used by the FGF.  The forecast 
results are emailed to the user. 
Because of the variety of information involved in the 
FaaS framework, it is important to have a well-organized 
Meta Data Repository (MDR) and an effective Meta Data 
Repository Management System (MDRMS) [11].  EDCF, 
IDRF, FGF and the FaaS controller all interact with the 
MDR through the MDRMS. 
Figure 3 shows an example of the results provided by the 
FaaS system in response to a request for solar power 
forecast for operational planning purpose.  The forecast is 
performed at the user-specified location in terms of latitude 
and longitude.  If data is not available internally or 
externally for the requested location, data for the nearest 
location with data will be used to generate the forecast and 
the user will be notified of this distance.  For example, 
Figure 3 shows that the distance between the requested and 
actual location for the forecast is 2.52 km.  A number of 
basic services have been developed for tasks such as the 
computation of distances based on longitude and latitude 
coordinates, calculation of sky clearness index (KD in 
Figure3), statistical analysis of data, etc.  Figure 3 shows 
that the day ahead solar energy forecast is 6.036 kWh/m2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.   An example of forecast results in response to a request 
 
Due to the complexity of SOA, the costs of SOA-based 
projects are difficult to estimate although there have been 
attempts to do so [12][13].  This project attempts to develop 
a method to price services so that a customer has the option 
to decide whether to proceed with the forecast request after 
viewing the estimated cost.  The approach taken by the FaaS 
adopts the divide-and-conquer concept and product pricing 
concepts [14]. 
The price of each service is computed by using a 3-step 
process. 
Step 1: Calculate the total cost by combining the cost of 
manpower for software development, the cost of resources 
utilized, etc., and imposing an overhead rate and indirect 
costs.   
Step 2: Estimate the expected number of usage of this 
service over a time horizon before the next major update.   
Step 3:  Divide the total cost computed in step 1 by the 
expected number of usages in step 2 to obtain the service 
price per usage.  
When services are combined to form composite services, 
the prices of constituent services are included in the cost of 
resources utilized.  All the costs and prices are updated 
periodically after more usage 
information becomes 
available. 
You requested operational forecast data. 
Time of Report Delivery    
     3/24/2013 7:04:47 PM GMT 
Time of Request            
     3/24/2013 7:04:44 PM GMT 
 
Cost                       
 
   16.68 dollars 
 
Location: Name        
 
   Blacksburg, Virginia 
 
Latitude   37.217 
   Latitude you entered     37.2 
 
Longitude  80.417 W 
   Longitude you entered  80.4 W 
 
State Code   
 
 
VA 
 
Source of Renewable Energy  
 
Solar 
 
Solar Panel:   
Vendor       
Sun Power 
                
 
Model        
SPR-200-WHT-U 
                
 
Efficiency      
16.08 % 
 
Distance between requested and actual location:      2.52 km 
 
Day-ahead Forecasted Energy Production:     6.036 kWh/m^2 
 
KD : 
0.705 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

To implement this pricing method, each service is 
equipped with two endpoints – one endpoint is used for 
technical functionalities and the second endpoint is used for 
pricing purposes.  When a service is consumed because of 
its technical functionalities, the pricing endpoint of the same 
service will also be incorporated into the overall pricing 
workflow.  When a certain mission is accomplished by a 
sequence (or workflow) of services, not only the technical 
requirement is met but the associated price of accomplishing 
the mission is also calculated. 
Using the economic endpoints of all services involved, 
the FaaS controller estimates the cost for the request and 
send the cost estimate to the requester.  If the requester 
accepts the estimated cost, the requester will provide the 
email address to which the forecast results will be sent.  The 
FaaS system will then perform the required tasks in the 
cloud and deliver the forecast results over the Internet after 
the work is complete. 
Figure 3 shows that the estimated cost for that particular 
forecast request is US$ 16.68.  Table I shows an example of 
the overall solar forecasting cost and the costs of the 
composite services for project prospecting and operational 
planning, respectively.  The prices for prospecting forecasts 
are usually higher than those of the operational forecasts 
because they involve data over longer time horizons and 
utilize more computational resources.  Results of this project 
indicate that the costs of prospecting forecasts are in the 
range of US$ 60-80 per request while the costs for 
operational forecasts are in the range of US$ 10-20 per 
request.  Additional services, 
such as 
uncertainty 
quantification, can be requested for additional prices in the 
order of a few dollars.  These costs are much lower than the 
monthly or annual subscription fees charged by current 
renewable energy forecast service vendors. 
Figure 4 shows the application of the FaaS system to 
solar power forecasting.  A similar diagram can be drawn to 
show the application of the FaaS system to wind power 
forecasting.  As shown in the upper half of Figure 4, a large 
volume of data is needed for solar power forecasting.  These 
data are available from a variety of sources that provide data 
of different types and in different formats.  The EDCF is 
designed to obtain data of different types from various 
sources over the Internet and store them in the Azure Blob 
storage.  The IDRF processes the raw data into a unified 
format useful for the different forecasting methods 
implemented as services.  This two-step process is the 
approach adopted by the FaaS system to handle big data.  
FaaS demonstrates that automated collection and processing 
of large amount of data in various formats and from 
different sources is a unique capability provided by Cloud 
Computing. 
As shown in the lower half of Figure 4, this framework 
delivers different types of forecasts to different types of 
users.  There are potential users who want forecasts of 
future solar power production to support the making of 
investment decisions.  Current users of solar power need to 
know the short-term forecasts to make arrangement for 
operation.  Electric utilities need to know the solar power 
forecast with quantified uncertainty to properly plan for 
their operation.  The FaaS system delivers a variety of user-
specified forecast results over the Internet to meet forecast 
needs at reasonable costs.  On-demand delivery of user-
specified services at different levels of details for various 
kinds of applications is another unique capability provided 
by Cloud Computing. 
 
TABLE I.  
AN EXAMPLE OF THE COSTS OF FORECASTING SERVICES 
 
 
Power
Companies
Solar 
Photovoltaics 
Power
Producers
Forecast Generator Framework
(FGF)
External Data Collection Framework
(EDCF)
Azure
Platform
Potential
Solar 
Photovoltaics
Users/Producers
Sources of
Weather 
Information 
Sources of
Measurement
Data
Solar 
Photovoltaics 
Power
Users
FaaS 
Controller
Sources of
Historic 
Data
Sources of
Photovoltaic
System
Information
Internal 
Data
Retrieval
Framework
(IDRF)
Internal
Data
Sources
 
 
Figure 4.   Application of FaaS to solar energy forecasting 
 
III. 
IMPACT OF CLOUD COMPUTING 
Renewable energy forecasting is data-intensive and 
computation-intensive. 
 
Providing 
almost 
unlimited 
computing resources on demand, Cloud Computing 
provides new options for the computation and delivery of 
different kinds of services, and opens up new opportunities 
for entrepreneurs to establish new business models.  
Creativity and innovativeness of entrepreneurship will add 
Forecast 
Type 
Service 
Cost  
(US $) 
Overall Cost  
(US $) 
 
Project  
Prospecting 
  
EDCF 
10.55 
 
62.89 
IDRF 
32.02 
FGF 
20.32 
FGF   
(with UQ) 
 
22.87 
 
65.44 
Operational 
Planning 
  
EDCF 
3.84 
 
13.92 
IDRF 
3.06 
FGF 
7.02 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

new impetus to enable more widespread utilization of 
renewable energy and will hasten the fulfillment of its 
potential to meet the energy needs of human society. 
Depending on what responsibilities are shifted to the 
cloud, current and potential users of renewable energy can 
choose a service model and a deployment model most 
appropriate for their respective situations.  SaaS provides 
flexibility and cost effectiveness.  An organization only 
needs to connect to the forecast application software 
through a Web browser and use it, without the hassle and 
expense of developing, implementing, or supporting it.  
FaaS is an example of such an application. 
The FaaS framework enables different users to specify 
and pay for only the forecast services they need on demand.  
Cloud-based systems, such as the FaaS, are especially 
meaningful to individuals and small companies that would 
like to consider using renewable energy but lacks the 
resources to obtain forecast information that fits their 
particular needs.  Cloud-based systems, such as the FaaS 
framework, can provide a broad impact by removing some 
barriers for more widespread use of renewable energy.  
Although some government agencies and large research labs 
that have substantial computing resources have the 
capability to perform similar computational tasks as those 
described in this paper, these organizations do not provide 
on-demand forecasting services at affordable prices to the 
general public, especially for customized services at 
customer-specified locations.  A few commercial vendors 
provide forecasting services but they usually demand higher 
prices and long-term commitment.  Since a Cloud-based 
system, such as the FaaS system, can provide customized 
forecast services on an on-demand pay-only-what-you-need 
basis, it plays an important role in making renewable energy 
forecasting widely accessible and affordable for current and 
potential renewable energy users. 
The use of PaaS is appropriate when new capabilities 
need to be developed for a particular application.  Generic 
services delivered with the PaaS can increase the speed of 
development and reduce costs.  FaaS can function as a PaaS 
and provide these benefits by making its underlying services 
(developed as SOA services) available to developers to 
build new composite services and application-specific 
services as well as workflows.  Users that want to use FaaS 
as PaaS have access to the service libraries to develop new 
capabilities by using/modifying/adding SOA services. 
Forecasting renewable energy availability is even more 
important for isolated power systems because the forecasts 
enable the system operators to better prepare and manage 
the balance between the load demand and the power 
generation.  Convenient and cost-effective access to 
accurate renewable energy forecasting can encourage the 
use of renewable energy especially in rural areas where it is 
expensive to build electric power transmission and 
distribution infrastructures.  Efforts by the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture to develop wireless broadband access in 
small and medium-sized communities would enable the 
availability of Cloud-based forecast systems, such as the 
FaaS system, to many new renewable energy users. 
Internet access is essential for the benefits of Cloud 
Computing to materialize.  Mobile Internet technology, 
consisting largely of smartphones and tablets, has been 
undergoing fast growth in recent years not only in 
developed countries but even more remarkably in 
developing countries.  Because of the prohibitive cost of 
building conventional wired infrastructure in developing 
countries, wireless Internet is expected to grow very rapidly 
in the coming years [15].  In parallel to this development, 
Cloud-based forecasting services delivered over mobile 
Internet are especially useful for the development of 
distributed renewable energy systems in developing 
countries where electric power grids have not been 
extensively developed, especially in rural areas. 
Due to the advance in technologies such as miniature 
sensors and wireless networks, Internet of Things (IoT) will 
be widely adopted especially in health care, infrastructure 
and public-sector services in the coming years [16].  By 
using sensors to gather information which is then 
transmitted using wireless networks, IoT is bringing 
significant improvement to remote monitoring.  With more 
information gathered by using IoT on a continual basis, the 
number of information sources shown in the upper portion 
of Figure 4 will increase significantly.  Because of the 
amount of data generated, Cloud Computing technologies 
have been suggested to merge with IoT to form the Cloud of 
Things (CoT) [17].  CoT combines two of the twelve 
disruptive technologies that will transform life, business, 
and the global economy in the coming years [1].  Renewable 
energy forecasting and effective utilization of renewable 
energy can benefit greatly from the information collected by 
using IoT and processed/analyzed by using CoT.  The FaaS 
system presented in this paper may be viewed as an early 
version of a more comprehensive CoT system along this 
trend. 
Urbanization is an important factor to be included in the 
planning for sustainability.  Currently more than half of the 
world population lives in the cities.  Urban areas of the 
world are expected to absorb almost all the future 
population growth while at the same time drawing in some 
of the rural population.  To handle the issues caused by 
growing urbanization, cities need to be transformed into 
“smart cities” that manage their resources (including 
renewable energy sources) efficiently.  Internet of Things 
and Cloud Computing are enabling technologies that can 
increase the “smartness” by increasing the cities’ awareness 
of its environment and situations.  Along this direction, the 
ClouT project has been initiated as a collaborative project 
jointly funded by the 7th Framework Programme of the 
European Commission and by the National Institute of 
Information and Communications Technology of Japan.  
Cloud-based data collection and analytic systems, such as 
the FaaS system, will play an important role in smart cities 
in the future. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

In the future, the FaaS framework may be expanded 
into an even more powerful Cyber-Infrastructure For 
Renewable Energy (CIFRE) as shown in Figure 5.  CIFRE 
will serve as a focal point for obtaining and sharing data and 
information, upgrading models by using new and shared 
data, sharing different kinds of SOA services to build new 
applications, combining forecasts obtained from using 
different approaches and from different forecasters, 
collaboration 
and 
cooperation 
between 
different 
combinations of stakeholders, education and training, etc.  
Cloud Computing will be instrumental in the development 
and deployment of CIFRE. 
 
Cyber Infrastructure For Renewable Energy 
(CIFRE)
DATA
SERVICES
Researchers
Forecasters
Educators
Electric Car Owners
Renewable Energy 
Users
Microgrid Operators
Entrepreneurs
Farmers
Others
Utilities
 
 
Figure 5.   CIFRE (Cyber infrastructure for renewable energy) in the cloud 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presents a Cloud Computing-enabled 
renewable energy forecasting system--the FaaS (Forecast-
as-a-Service) framework.  Based on the service-oriented 
architecture, the FaaS has been successful in generating 
user-defined solar or wind forecast on demand at reasonable 
costs.  FaaS demonstrates that Cloud Computing offers two 
unique capabilities in the forecasting of renewable energy.  
The first one is automated collection and processing of large 
amount of data in various formats and from different 
sources.  The second one is on-demand delivery of user-
specified services at different levels of details for various 
kinds of applications. 
A service pricing method that equips each service with a 
technical endpoint and an economic endpoint has been 
developed for the FaaS framework.  When a mission is 
accomplished by a workflow, not only the technical 
requirement is met but the associated price is also calculated 
by using this method. 
The broader impact of Cloud Computing on the use of 
renewable energy is presented.  Coupled with mobile 
internet and Internet of things, Cloud Computing supports 
the development of new applications such as Cloud of 
things, smart cities, CIFRE and more widespread utilization 
of renewable energy in the rural areas. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This work is partially supported by the U.S. National 
Science Foundation under Grant 1048079.  Contribution 
from Rakesh Sehgal is acknowledged. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Manyika, et al., Disruptive Technologies: Advances That 
Will Transform Life, Business, And The Global Economy, 
McKinsey Global Institute, 2013. 
[2] D. Krishnappa, D. Irwin, E. Lyons and M. Zink, “CloudCast: 
Cloud 
Computing 
for 
short-term 
weather 
forecasts”, 
Computing in Science & Engineering, pp. 30-37, 2013. 
[3] Y. Wei, K. Sukumar, C. Vecchiola, D. Karunamoorthy and R. 
Buyya1, “Aneka cloud application platform and its integration 
with Windows Azure”, Chapter 27, Cloud Computing: 
Methodology, Systems, and Applications, CRC Press, 2011. 
[4] W. Tsai, X. Sun and J. Balasooriya, “Service-Oriented Cloud 
Computing Architecture”, Seventh International Conference 
on Information Technology, pp. 684-689, 2010. 
[5] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, J. Vlissides, Design Patterns 
Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software, Addison-
Wesley, 1995. 
[6] T. Erl, SOA Design Patterns, Prentice Hall, 2009. 
[7] J. Zhao, M. Tanniru, L. Zhang, “Services computing as the 
foundation of enterprise agility: Overview of recent advances 
and introduction to the special issue”, Information System 
Front, Vol. 9, pp. 1–8, 2007. 
[8] T. Erl, SOA Principles of Service Design, Prentice Hall, 2008. 
[9] J. Lowy, Programming WCF Services, Third Edition, 
O’REILLY 2010. 
[10] D. Chou, et al., SOA with .NET & Windows Azure, Prentice 
Hall, 2010. 
[11] D. Marco and M. Jennings, Universal Meta Data Models, 
Wiley Publishing Inc., 2004. 
[12] L. Yusuf, et al., “A Framework for Costing Service-Oriented 
Architecture (SOA) Projects Using Work Breakdown 
Structure (WBS) Approach”, Global Journal of Computer 
Science and Technology, Vol. 11, Issue 15, pp. 35-47, 2011. 
[13] Z. Li and J. Keung, “Software Cost Estimation Framework for 
Service-Oriented Architecture Systems using Divide-and-
Conquer 
Approach”, 
Proc. 
Fifth 
IEEE 
International 
Symposium on Service Oriented System Engineering, pp. 47-
54, 2010. 
[14] H. Snyder and E. Davenport, Costing and Pricing in the 
Digital Age, Library Association Publishing, 1997. 
[15] Wireless Internet Institute, The Wireless Internet Opportunity 
for Devel oping Countries, World Times Inc, 2003. 
[16] P. Parwekar, ”From Internet of Things towards Cloud of 
Things”, Proceedings, 2nd International Conference on 
Computer and Communication Technology (ICCCT-2011), 
pp. 329 – 333,  2011. 
[17] M. Aazam, et al., “Cloud of Things: Integrating Internet of 
Things and Cloud Computing and the issues involved”, 
Proceedings 11th International Bhurban Conference on 
Applied Sciences & Technology (IBCAST), Islamabad, 
Pakistan, pp. 414-419,  2014. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

