Risk Analysis of the Cloud Infrastructure of Smart Grid and Internet of Things
Katrin Neubauer
Dept. Computer Science and Mathematics
Ostbayerische Technische Hochschule
Regensburg, Germany
email:
katrin1.neubauer@oth-regensburg.de
Sebastian Fischer
Secure Systems Engineering
Fraunhofer AISEC
Berlin, Germany
email:
sebastian.ﬁscher@aisec.fraunhofer.de
Rudolf Hackenberg
Dept. Computer Science and Mathematics
Ostbayerische Technische Hochschule
Regensburg, Germany
email:
rudolf.hackenberg@oth-regensburg.de
Abstract—Cloud Computing (CC), Internet of Thing (IoT)
and Smart Grid (SG) are separate technologies. The digital
transformation of the energy industry and the increasing digi-
talization in the private sector connect these technologies. At the
moment, CC is used as a service provider for IoT. Currently in
Germany, the SG is under construction and a cloud connection
to the infrastructure has not been implemented yet. To build
the SG cloud, the new laws for privacy must be implemented
and therefore it’s important to know which data can be stored
and distributed over a cloud. In order to be able to use future
innovative services, SG and IoT must be combined. For this, in
the next step we connect the SG infrastructure with the IoT.
A potential insecure device and network (IoT) should be able
to transfer data to and from a critical infrastructure (SG). In
detail, we focus on two different connections: the communication
between the smart meter switching box and the IoT device and
the data transferred between the IoT and SG cloud. In our
example, a connected charging station with cloud services is
connected with a SG infrastructure. To create a really smart
service, the charging station needs a connection to the SG to
get the current amount of renewable energy in the grid. Private
data, such as name, address and payment details, should not
be transferred to the IoT cloud. With these two connections,
new threads emerge. In this case, availability, conﬁdentiality and
integrity must be ensured. A risk analysis over all the cloud
connections, including the vulnerability and the ability of an
attacker and the resulting risk are developed in this paper.
Keywords—Smart Grid; Internet of Things; security analysis;
safety-critical infrastructure; cloud computing
I. INTRODUCTION
The increasing use of digital systems is changing our world.
This development is driven among other things by Internet of
Things (IoT), Smart Grid (SG) and Cloud Computing (CC)
technology. IoT, SG and Cloud are separate technologies. The
digital transformation of the energy industry and the increasing
digitalization in the private sector, connect these technologies.
Future SG are highly networked systems. In order to be able
to use future innovative services, IoT, SG and CC must be
joined.
The integration of SG (intelligent energy supply system)
is creating a new IT infrastructure in Germany for the trans-
mission of data. For smart metering, an intelligent measuring
system (iMSys) will be integrated in the future. The iMSys
consists of a basic meter (smart meter) and the smart meter
gateway (SMGW) [1]. The changeover is not only taking
place in Germany, but also in other European countries. The
pioneers are countries like Italy or Sweden. However, these
roll-outs highlight the risks with regard to safety and security.
Attacks on power grid control system via the internet represent
a growing threat.
The increasing digitalization and networking of all kind of
devices (charging station, sensors, household appliances, etc.)
is known as IoT. The devices get a communication interface
and are connected to the internet (directly or via a gateway).
This increasing networking of different devices creates new
challenges, like scalability. A service which until now had to
manage only a few devices gets new users on a large scale.
These new users are not always available or disappear just as
quickly. It must be possible to react ﬂexibly to this volatility.
Smart services are required for future application “SG and
IoT”. Cloud platforms are needed to use these services. The
cloud platform can be described as a data hub. In this case,
we have two cloud platforms. The IoT cloud from the IoT
infrastructure and Smart Grid cloud (SG cloud) are used for
data storage, analysis and new services.
In order to develop new innovative services in SG, such as
value-added service, IoT, SG and must be combined. For this,
we connect the SG infrastructure with the IoT. A potential
insecure device and network (IoT) should be able to transfer
data to and from a critical infrastructure (SG). By connecting
the systems, new risks and attack vectors arise. These inﬂuence
the security objectives - availability, conﬁdentiality, integrity
and, additional, privacy. In this case, more and more data is
generated and more data accesses take place. This leads to
new requirements for authentication and authorization.
This paper will explore the problems that arise in the
networking of IoT, SG and CC. The aim is to identify
new threats and problems and additional deﬁne technical and
organizational requirements for future systems. The paper is
structured as follows. Section II describes the related work.
Section III introduces our architecture, while Section IV
analyzes the security, followed by a conclusion in Section VI.
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

II. RELATED WORK
IoT devices can be protected with known principles, but they
also have to be implemented by the manufacturers. According
to the current state, the most frequent security gaps can
be closed with already known methods. It is important for
research to respond to new challenges.
The ﬁrst challenge is the scarce resources of IoT devices.
Already known encryption algorithms need to be adapted
or changed to work more effectively and operate acceptably
with low-performance hardware (e.g. PRINCE [2]). Another
possibility is to redevelop suitable algorithms (e.g. Secure IoT
- SIT [3]).
At the moment, insecure devices are in use and therefore,
solutions must be found to continue the operation. For ex-
ample, several companies (including IBM) have developed
a special DNS server (Quad9 DNS Privacy and Security
Service), which should ensure the security as well as privacy
of the IoT devices. Quad9 automatically blocks requests to
infected sites. As a last challenge, manufacturers must be
“forced” to improve IT security. This can be accomplished
by guidelines and certiﬁcations.
The Smart Grid Architecture Model (SGAM) is a European
architecture model that was developed in the context of the
European standardization mandate M/490. It serves for the
visualization, validation and structuring of SG projects from
the beginning of the project as well as for the standardization
of SG. In general, it is used for architecture development in the
SG at different organizational levels. In this context, security
is regarded as a cross-cutting topic and is not explicitly
considered [4]. An analysis of the architecture in the SG shows
that the architectural models of the countries differ in principle.
The architecture models are mostly based on the SGAM. In
Germany, the SG itself is regulated by the speciﬁcations of the
Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security (BSI) and is regarded
as the state of the art (communication) [5]. The BSI was
commissioned by the legislator to develop speciﬁcations for
a SMGW in order to guarantee a secure infrastructure for
intelligent measuring systems [6]. The intelligent measuring
systems will be integrated into a communication network. The
central element is the smart meter gateway as a communication
unit [16]–[18]. In [14] and [15], there are the security and
privacy considerations for IoT application on SG with a focus
on survey and research challenges presented. It gives an
overview about SG and IoT application on SG and identiﬁes
some of the remaining challenges and vulnerabilities related
to security and privacy.
There are several publications [20]–[22] covering the subject
security and privacy in SG and cloud applications. The focus
of this publication is additionally the security and communi-
cation analysis of SG, IoT and CC in Germany.
Open questions with no related work, not exclusively in the
scientiﬁc community, are the handling of data when they leave
the “SG”, requirements for authentication and authorisation in
future SG-IoT-cloud application and how to deal with service
provider who access data (service charging station) in critical
infrastructures.
III. ARCHITECTURE CHALLENGES FOR SMART GRID AND
IOT
The SG reference architecture consist of the Local Metro-
logical Network (LMN), the Wide Area Network (WAN) and
the Home Area Network (HAN). The communication takes
place through the SMGW. The SG infrastructure is extended
with a SG cloud. This SG cloud enables additionally appli-
cation for smart metering. For new applications and services,
the existing architecture is extended with IoT devices. The
IoT architecture consists of a device or sensor, connected via
gateway to the router and the IoT cloud. The collected data is
stored centrally on a server. This data is available to the user
if rhequired. Figure 1 shows the uniﬁcation of the architecture
the cloud application on SG and IoT.
Figure 1. Architecture Cloud Application on Smart Grid with IoT
A. Application Example
In our example, a charging station with an IoT cloud
is connected to a smart home. The home includes a smart
meter, which is connected to the SG infrastructure and the
corresponding SG cloud (Figure 1). To create a really smart
service, the charging station needs a connection to the SG to
get the current amount of renewable energy in the grid. This
enables the possibility to load the car at the best times and
supply the grid with stored energy from the car to stabilize it.
The easiest way of getting these information is by connecting
the two clouds (e.g. using predeﬁned APIs).
B. Communication between Smart Grid and IoT
For a more detailed analysis, it is important to know, which
data is stored on the IoT cloud and the SG cloud. In chapter
“IV-C Communication between devices” this information is
used to determine the risks of the communication between the
two clouds.
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

1) Communications data Internet of Thing: The following
data is stored in the IoT cloud:
• Connected car
• Sum of energy consumption
• Current energy consumption / supply
• History of energy consumption / supply
• Time to load the car
• User Data
– Name
– E-Mail
The connected car and the history can be used to create a
proﬁle of the user. This includes the times, the user is normally
at home or at work. This data is private data and should be
protected.
2) Communications data Smart Grid: The following data
is generated and stored in the SG cloud:
• Information about the smart meter (ID, IP-Address)
• Current energy consumption
• Current price for electricity
• Information about the customer
– Name
– Address
– Payment details
The information about the smart meter or the current energy
consumption can be used to create a proﬁle of the household
(user). This is partly equal to the proﬁle of the connected car,
but can be extended to the whole household an therefore other
people. In conclusion, like the connected car data, this data is
also private data and should be protected.
IV. SECURITY ANALYSIS FOR SAFETY-CRITICAL SYSTEMS
The security analysis starts with the description of the attack
vectors. From these vectors, the threads are derived. In the
next step, the risk is shown for every thread, based on the
ability of the attacker and the possible damage. Finally, two
practical examples show the potential danger in our example
architecture.
A. Attack vector Smart Grid and Internet of Thing
New attack vectors are emerging as a result of increasing
networks (e.g. IoT and SG). IoT devices are potentially inse-
cure. An attack is an unauthorized attempt to gain access [7].
If we analyze the previously described architecture with regard
to potential attacks that inﬂuences the target of authenticity,
current threats and gaps arise. Inspired by Hutle, the attack
vector can be divided into the following categories (cf. Sichler
2014 [8] and Babar 2010 [9]).
1) Hardware manipulation attacks (physical attacks): With
physical access to the device, the hardware and software can
be changed. Malware installation is likely, which can lead to
data manipulation and modiﬁcation. At worst, a shutdown of
the energy grid is possible or sensitive data (from the IoT cloud
or SG cloud) can be manipulate. Furthermore, it is possible
that, e.g. IoT services (IoT cloud), fail.
2) Software manipulation attacks: With integration of mal-
ware (on embedded software) or exploiting vulnerabilities (for
example buffer overﬂow, code injection), the software can
be changed. These attacks describe a targeted manipulation
(energy supplier, user, etc.). At worst, a shutdown or manipu-
lation of the energy grid or data manipulation and modiﬁcation
(energy supplier or at home) are possible. Additionally, the
Cloud platforms (IoT cloud and SG cloud) can be manipulated
and fail.
3) Network-based attacks: Identity theft, denial of service,
cascading malware propagation (Business IT & Plant Control)
and monitor, trafﬁc analysis (passive attacks) are possible
network-based attacks. At worst, personal damage to users,
customers and the manipulation of the energy grid or the the
cloud platforms are possible.
4) Privacy related attacks: Privacy related attacks can
be, for example, collecting user-speciﬁc data (for example
listening the communication). At worse, personal damage to
customers or energy supplier are possible.
5) Conclusion: The analysis of the attack vectors shows us
the following risks:
• manipulation of measured values and time
• manipulation of the communication between IoT cloud
and SG cloud
• misuse of energy data and/or sensitive data
• sabotage of the power grid
• sabotage of mobility (example: charging station)
The IoT device, IoT infrastructure with an IoT cloud, smart
meter, smart meter gateway, switching box, SG cloud and
gateway administrator can be attacked in the architecture (cf.
Figure 1). Summary, the security of the grid is dependent on
the security of the information and communication from cloud
application of IoT and SG.
B. Security threats: Infrastructure Smart Grid and Internet of
Things
Table 1 covers a risk analysis for both, the IoT cloud and the
SG cloud. It includes the ability of an attacker and potential
damage. This leads to a risk for the associated attack. If an
attacker needs a lower ability, it’s more likely that someone
uses the attack [10]. In the SG, the strict speciﬁcations lead
to a high security and therefore the attacker must be advanced
(high ability). If the attacker gets access to private data or can
damage a big part of the SG, the damage is classiﬁed as high
(e.g. DDoS attack on SG). For example, a medium ability and
a high damage lead to a high risk [19].
The table shows that low to medium abilities are needed
to attack an IoT device and its cloud. These vulnerabilities
can have big impacts on the security of the SG (damage and
risk). The IoT devices can be attacked easily to change the
behaviour. Against wrong loading times (not much renewable
energy is currently produced), the smart meter is completely
exposed. It’s not possible to prevent a device from loading,
without limiting the comfort for the user. Other attacks, like
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

TABLE I. risk analysis for the IoT and SG cloud
DDoS
Ability of an attacker: low
A DDoS attack can be performed with a botnet at low cost.
Damage: IoT: medium, SG: high
If the SG is unable to broadcast the current amount of energy in the grid,
all the connected cars start charging. In the worst case, this can lead to a
shutdown of the grid. The damage is medium for the IoT because at the
moment not much electric cars are available.
Risk: medium / high
The risk is medium to high because it’s easy to attack and the damage is
medium / high.
Malware
Ability of an attacker: IoT: low, SG: high
The attacker needs to ﬁnd a vulnerability in the software to install a
malware. In the insecure IoT, this is easily possible, because the most
cheap devices never get an update. In the SG it’s high because of the
strict regularization.
Damage: IoT: medium, SG: high
The damage for the grid is medium if the IoT device is attacked (the
reasons are similar to DDos). If an attacker gets access to the SG,
the damage is high, because he can shutdown the critical infrastructure.
Risk: IoT: medium, SG: medium / high
For both IoT and SG, the risk is medium. In IoT, it’s likely to happen,
but the damage is similar to DDoS (medium) and in the SG, the ability
of an attacker has to be high, so it’s medium to high, because
the damage can be high.
Broken Authentication
Ability of an attacker: IoT: low, SG: high
The broken authentication is similar to the malware. An IoT device is not
secure at all and the SG is regulated.
Damage: IoT: medium, SG: high
Similar to malware.
Risk: IoT: medium, SG: medium / high
Similar to malware.
Broken Encryption
Ability of an attacker: IoT: low, SG: high
Similar to malware.
Damage: low / medium
The data, transferred to the network, is not critical for running the SG
(low), but the privacy of an user can be exposed (medium).
Risk: IoT: medium, SG: low
Because it’s easy to attack in the IoT and the privacy can be exposed, the
risk is medium in the IoT. With nearly no damage, the risk is low in SG.
Data leakage
The data leakage is similar to the broken encryption and therefore
the same rating is used:
Ability of an attacker: IoT: low, SG: high
Damage: low / medium
Risk: IoT: medium, SG: low
Data manipulation
Ability of an attacker: IoT: low, SG: high
Data manipulation can be performed easily in the IoT cloud and is
difﬁcult in the SG network (cf. broken authentication).
Damage: IoT: low, SG: medium
If an attacker can manipulate some data in the IoT cloud, the SG is
nearly not affected. If it happens in the SG, the attack can lead to
more damage, but only for a part of the user (the hacked ones).
Risk: IoT: low, SG: medium
This risk is low for IoT and medium for the SG.
Hardware manipulation
Ability of an attacker: IoT: medium, SG: high
To get on the hardware of the clouds, an attacker needs a lot ability,
even in the IoT case.
Damage: IoT: medium, SG: high
The damage is medium in the IoT, because with the hardware attack,
only one IoT manufacturer is affected. In the SG, it could lead to
an shutdown of the grid.
Risk: medium
The risk is medium for the IoT and SG. The damage on the SG is high,
but it’s difﬁcult to attack the SG cloud hardware.
a denial of service attack or a direct attack on the smart
meter, can be detected and prevented by the right software
(e.g. ﬁrewall or intrusion detection system). In conclusion,
the communication between IoT devices and the smart meter
should only be possible through a secure layer.
C. Communication between clouds
An IoT device and the IoT infrastructure are currently
highly insecure [11]. The charging station or the IoT cloud can
be hacked by an attacker (see risks above). The “SG device” is
a secure device. For example, the SMGW is a certiﬁed device.
The communication between the two clouds should be
transparent to the user and developed under the aspects of
security and privacy by design. Both contain private data and
only the user should allow an exchange. By default no data
should be transferred.
Example 1: The user can register his IoT device in the IoT
cloud only with a valid E-Mail address and a username. No
further information is needed. The IoT provider only knows
that this username has loaded his car 20 times per month. By
exchanging data with the smart meter, detailed information
(name, address) about the user can be transferred. Now it is
possible to identify the user.
Example 2: The energy service provider doesn’t need any
information of the connected car of the user. But with addi-
tional information from the IoT charging station, it is possible
to tell when the user is at home or if he gets visited by another
person with an electric car. This part is very important. A third
user can be tracked with his car, without knowing it.
The security analysis and the application example shows us
problems and challenges of communication in cloud applica-
tion on IoT and SG. A growing problem is the authentication
and authorization. The analysis of the system shows that
more and more data is being generated in the single systems,
because they receive data from the other ones. This data
differs in origin, need for protection, purpose, quality and
volume. A further point is the constantly growing number of
users who have access to the system or to the data. Users
cannot only be individuals, but also devices, such as meters,
sensors, etc. new risks, threats and attack patterns arise from
the further development of the system. The question arises
as to which requirements for authentication and authorization
must be deﬁned for future systems.
D. Requirements - authentication and authorization
The technical and organizational requirements can be de-
rived from the application example and security analysis. The
focus of the requirements is on authentication and authorisa-
tion. The security analysis shows us the weakness of com-
munication. Future systems must be better protected against
unauthorised access. The deﬁned requirements are necessary
for future development of authentication and authorization
mechanism for cloud applications on SG and IoT.
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

The technical and organizational requirements of authenti-
cation and authorization mechanism for cloud applications on
SG and IoT are deﬁned as follows:
1) Availability: authentiﬁed and authorized users can access
or use resources under deﬁned conditions
2) Interoperability: user can be individuals and devices
3) Evidence: proof of access to the data or system to be
protected
4) Performance: SG and IoT are a volatile systems
5) Scalability: SG and IoT are highly scalable systems
6) Device and user authentication: distinction should be
made between device and user authentication
7) Data-Management: simple and cost-efﬁcient manage-
ment of authentication and authorisation information
8) Update-Management: ability to change information (e.g.
device or device number)
9) Maintenance: simple and cost-efﬁcient upkeep and
maintenance of the system
Current authentication and authorization mechanisms are no
longer sufﬁcient for the deﬁned requirements of authentication
and authorization mechanism for cloud applications on SG and
IoT. One important reason is the weakness of communication.
Another reason is the increasing communication and data
exchange. A new model is needed for authentication and
authorization for cloud applications on SG and IoT. With
this new model, the classical security model must also be
reinterpreted. In the classical security model, the data is
divided into two categories (secure and insecure).
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We introduced an application example of a connection
between SG and IoT. A charging station with an own cloud,
connected to the smart meter gateway. These connection cre-
ates new attack vectors and threads. For example, an attacker
can use an unsecured device like the charging station to get
access to the highly secured SG network. This is critical,
because of the different information stored on both clouds. The
energy provider stores payment information and the amount
of consumed energy, the IoT cloud information about the
charging times. These private information should be strongly
protected and not combined.
The application example and the security analysis shows
us new attack vectors and threads and challenges of com-
munication in IoT and SG. In this paper, we focus the
problem with authentication and authorization mechanism for
cloud applications on SG and IoT. Current authentication and
authorization mechanisms are no longer sufﬁcient for the
deﬁned requirements. The reason for this is the increasing
communication and data exchange. This leads to an increased
overhead in the classical security model. The question arises
as to which framework can be used for the new requirements
for authentication and authorization. An option is to develop
a new role-based trust model for safety-critical systems. In
order to develop a more ﬂexible model, the new approach
has to integrate several data categories. To protect the data,
the different information need a classiﬁcation and a clear
mechanism to ensure that they are only accessed by authorized
users. For this task, a new Role-based trust model for Safety-
critical Systems should be implemented. With this model, the
occurring problems, like data exchange, can be addressed.
The different data, stored by the clouds, can be classiﬁed and
secured by adding an extra layer for the access. The role-based
access control model ensures an efﬁcient administration of the
rights. This model is still a work in progress and the next steps
will be to implement and to evaluate it.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Irlbeck, Digitalisierung und Energie 4.0 Wie schaffen wir die digitale
Energiewende?, Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden GmbH, pp. 135-148,
2017.
[2] H. Kim and K. Kim, Toward an Inverse-free Lightweight Encryption
Scheme for IoT, Conference on Information Security and Cryptography,
2014.
[3] M. Usman, I. Ahmed, M. I. Aslam, S. Khan, and U. A. Shah, SIT: A
Lightweight Encryption Algorithm for Secure Internet of Things, CoRR
abs/1704.08688, 2017.
[4] M. Uslar, C. Rosinger, and S. Schlegel, Application of the NISTIR 7628
for Information Security in the Smart Grid Architecture Model (SGAM),
VDE Kongress, 2014.
[5] Bundesamt fuer Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik, Technische
Richtlinie, BSI TR-03109, 2015.
[6] P. Peters and N. Mohr, Digitalisierung im Energiemarkt: Neue Chancen,
neue Herausforderungen, Energiewirtschaftliche Tagesfragen, pp. 8-12,
2015.
[7] C. Eckert, IT-Sicherheit, Konzepte - Verfahren - Protokolle, Boston De
Gruyter, 2012.
[8] R. Sichler, Smart und sicher
geht das?, Springer Fachmedien Wies-
baden, pp. 463-494, 2014.
[9] S. Babar, A. Stango, N. Prasad, J. Sen, and R. Prasad, Proposed
embedded security framework for Internet of Things (IoT), Electronic
Systems Technology (Wireless VITAE), 2010.
[10] L. ben Othmane, H. Weffers, and M. Klabbers, Using Attacker Capa-
bilities and Motivations in Estimating Security Risk, Symposium On
Usable Privacy and Security, 2013.
[11] The OWASP Foundation, Internet of Things Project, IoT Vulnerabilities,
2019.
[12] M. Lipp, et al., Meltdown: Reading Kernel Memory from User Space,
27th USENIX Security Symposium, 2018.
[13] P. Kocher, et al., Spectre Attacks: Exploiting Speculative Execution,
CoRR abs-1801-01203, 2019.
[14] F. Dalipi and S. Y. Yayilgan, Security and Privacy Considerations for
IoT Application on Smart Grids. Survey and Research Challenges, IEEE
4th International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud
Workshops (FiCloudW), pp. 63-68, 2016.
[15] M. Yun and B. Yuxin, Research on the architecture and key technology
of Internet of Things (IoT) applied on smart grid, International Confer-
ence on Advances in Energy Engineering, pp. 69-72, 2010.
[16] V. C. Gungor, et al., A Survey on Smart Grid Potential Applications and
Communication Requirements, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 9 (1), pp. 28-42,
2013.
[17] X. Li, et al., Securing smart grid. Cyber attacks, countermeasures, and
challenges, IEEE Commun. Mag. 50 (8), pp. 38-45, 2012.
[18] C. Wietfeld, C. Muller, J. Schmutzler, S. Fries, and A. Heidenreich,
ICT Reference Architecture Design Based on Requirements for Future
Energy Marketplaces, 1st IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid
Communications, pp. 315-320, 2010.
[19] The OWASP Foundation, OWASP Risk Rating Methodology, 2019.
[20] B. Genge, A. Beres, and P. Haller, A survey on cloud-based software
platforms to implement secure smart grids, 49th International Universi-
ties Power Engineering Conference (UPEC),pp. 1-6, 2014.
[21] S. Bera, S. Misra, and J. Rodrigues, J.P.C: Cloud Computing Applica-
tions for Smart Grid. A Survey, IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 26
(5), pp. 1477-1494, 2015.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[22] Y. Simmhan, A. G. Kumbhare, B. Cao, and V. Prasanna, An Analysis
of Security and Privacy Issues in Smart Grid Software Architectures
on Clouds, IEEE 4th USENIX International Conference on Cloud
Computing (CLOUD), pp. 582-589, 2011.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

