 
 
Mobile Cloud and Grid Web Service in a Smart City 
 
Jong Won Park, Chang Ho Yun, Hae Sun Jung, Yong Woo LEE (Corresponding Author) 
School of Electrical & Computer Engineering 
The Smart City (Ubiquitous City) Consortium, the University of Seoul 
Seoul, South Korea 
emails: {comics77, touch011, banyasun, ywlee}@uos.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract— Smart City is a future city that heavily utilizes 
information and communication technology and allows the 
users to use the smart city services anytime, anywhere and 
with any accessing devices. In our smart city called UTOPIA, 
which has 3 tiers architecture, such as the smart city infra, the 
smart city middleware called SOUL and the smart city portal, 
administrators as well as citizens, can use smart phones, tablet 
personal computers, and other modern mobile devices to 
utilize smart city services through the smart city portal. Since 
big data are usually processed in real-time to provide smart 
city services, it is not easy at all to give the mobile cloud and 
grid web services in a smart city. In this paper, we introduce 
our mobile cloud and grid web services in a smart city, show 
some venues and explain the mechanisms of the cloud and grid 
web service in SOUL and UTOPIA. 
Keywords-Smart (Ubiquitous) City; Cloud Computing; Grid 
Computing; Web-Service. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recent advances in information and communication 
technology has enables us to build smart cities, future cities 
which are converged outputs of modern information and 
communication technology, urban engineering technology 
and other modern science and engineering technologies. 
In the smart city, citizens do not feel alone and are not 
isolated in a huge modern city anymore but become a real 
owner of the city by being provided by the rich smart city 
service. Indeed, the smart city is toward the city which is of 
the citizen, by the citizen and for the citizen. 
Ubiquitous city is a kind of smart city and tries to give 
users freedom of using the smart city service by allowing 
user to access the smart city service anytime, anywhere and 
with any accessing devices. Thus, administrators as well as 
citizens should be able to use smart phones, tablet personal 
computers, and other modern mobile devices to enjoy smart 
city services in the smart city.  
Smart city covers a wide range of areas, such as 
environment, accident, facility, etc., deals with huge volumes 
of data usually and analyzes or/and converges a wide range 
of data to create meaningful information often in real-time. 
All these requirements are not easy at all to be satisfied and 
really challenging tasks. We have used state-of-the-art cloud 
computing and Grid computing technology to find our 
solutions.  
We have been developing a paradigm of the smart city 
called UTOPIA [1]. It has a unique 3 tiers architecture and 
consists of the smart city infrastructure, the smart city 
middleware called SOUL and the smart city portal 
[1][2][3][4].  
UTOPIA is based on a unique smart city Middleware 
called SOUL, which does brain role of the smart city; thus, 
we call it soul. It has an important part of the solutions for 
the mobile cloud and grid web services in UTOPIA. It 
manages the big data to provide smart city services in the 
environment of heterogeneous hard-wares, heterogeneous 
operation systems, and heterogeneous networks in UTOPIA.  
UTOPIA provides user friendly web portal which is 
connected to SOUL, the smart city middleware [2][3]. For 
example, a user can use two dimensional or three 
dimensional visualization services in the portal. The portal 
supports a variety of smart phones. The wide and popular use 
of mobile phone brings the era of mobile service.  
Grid computing has brought us the era of cloud 
computing and now mobile cloud computing is a very 
attractive state-of-the-art technology. With mobile cloud 
computing, smart phones and tablet personal computer are 
now expanding their territories beyond their limitations in 
computing power, data storage and software [5]. 
UTOPIA enables users to use services anytime, 
anywhere and with any device, thus, supports mobile devices 
and provides mobile cloud and Grid web services.  
This paper introduces our mobile cloud and grid web 
services in UTOPIA, shows some venues and explains the 
architecture and principle of UTOPIA and SOUL and the 
mechanisms of the cloud and grid web service in SOUL. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces 
UTOPIA and SOUL. Section 3 presents the Mobile Cloud 
and Grid Web Services. Section 4 explains the architecture 
and operational principle of the cloud and grid computing 
platform. Section 5 explains related works and compares 
them with our work. Finally, Section 6 gives the conclusion. 
 
II. 
UTOPIA  
The Smart City Consortium for Seoul has been leading 
the five million smart city project funded and supported by 
Seoul Metropolitan Government of Korea since 2005. It 
includes SK Telecom, LG CNS, etc., as industry members, 
and the laboratories from many well-known Korea 
Universities in Seoul as academic members.  
We have developed a smart city paradigm called 
UTOPIA as shown in Figure 1. UTOPIA consists of 3 tiers, 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
such as the smart city portal tier, the smart city middleware 
tier and the smart city infrastructure tier [1]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The three tier paradigm of UTOPIA for the Smart City. 
The Smart City Infrastructure Tier includes sensors 
networked through USN, video cameras, GPS and appliances, 
and so on. It plays the role of a human body in a human 
being. The Smart City Middleware Tier, which we call 
SOUL, plays the role of soul or brain in a human being. The 
smart city portal tier provides web services and enables us to 
use mobile cloud and grid web service. It makes the other 
two layers transparent to users since users do not have to 
know their internals. 
III. 
MOBILE CLOUD AND GRID WEB SERVICES  
UTOPIA provides many intelligent services for the 
various kinds of applications. Some typical mobile cloud and 
grid web services are introduced in this section, as examples 
in UTOPIA. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Typical Mobile Cloud and Grid Web Services in UTOPIA. 
Some typical mobile cloud and grid web services are 
shown in Figure 2. The class of the mobile cloud and grid 
web service is largely divided into two parts. There are 
“Application Management” which is classified into the 
“Environment Information Manager” and the “Accident 
Manager”, and “System Management” which is classified 
into the “Smart City Infrastructure Manager”, “Cloud 
Manager”, and “Grid Manager”. 
“Application Management” is an interface to deal with 
applications in SOUL. Environment Information Manager of 
Application Management System displays air pollution 
information, noise information and water quality information 
by using 2D/3D visualization functions in SOUL. “Accident 
Manager” of “Application Management” can provide fire 
accident management information, such as an evacuation 
path for emergency due to fire accident. 
“System 
Management” 
consists 
of 
“Smart 
City 
Infrastructure Manager”, “Cloud Manager” and “Grid 
Manager”. “Infrastructure Manager” is a system component 
of SOUL to manage smart city infrastructure, such as 
Ubiquitous Sensor Network (USN), scalable video streaming, 
ad-hoc networking. Privileged users can control them 
through mobile web service. SOUL includes the cloud 
platform which is implemented with OpenNebula for big 
data processing in UTOPIA [6]. “Cloud Manager” is used to 
manage the “Cloud platform: of SOUL [5]. SOUL supports 
Grid resource management to process big data in real time 
with distributed computing resources. The Grid resource 
management system contains real time performance 
monitoring subsystem, process management subsystem with 
resource brokering, account management subsystem, unified 
file transfer management subsystem and access Grid 
management subsystem [7]. “Grid Manager” in “System 
Management” provides user interface to the Grid resource 
management system in SOUL [8][9]. 
A. Environment Information Manager 
The “Environment Information Manager” shows noise 
information, air-pollution information and water quality 
information which are converged with GIS (Geographical 
Information System) map. Figure 3a shows snapshots of 
“Environment Information Manager”. 
“Noise” menu shows noise data and the 2D/3D noise 
map of a selected specific area that is generated by SOUL. 
To generate the noise map, SOUL uses cloud computing 
platform and Grid Computing platform. For the cloud 
computing, MapReduce is used [10][11][12]. The noise map 
can be visualized in 2D and 3D. As shown in Figure 3a and 
2b, a user can select a specific zone and would see the noise 
level data and the noise map. The noise map shows the noise 
level distribution with specific color marks according to the 
predefined noise level which can be adjusted by users.  
“Air pollution” menu shows the air pollution data and the 
2D/3D air pollution map. SOUL also uses cloud computing 
platform which uses MapReduce in order to process the 
massive air pollution data and generate the air pollution map 
[13]. SOUL uses the 3D GIS data model that is based on the 
2D GIS topology in order to make the 3D air pollution map. 
It enables users to use 3D spatial queries, analyses as well as 
the 3D visualization. A user can also select a specific zone 
for the visualization of the air pollution map and would see 
the air pollution level data and the air pollution map. The air 
pollution map shows the air pollution level distribution with 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
specific color marks according to the predefined air pollution 
level which can be adjusted by users. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 3.  Snapshots of the Environment Information Manager of 
UTOPIA in a smartphone : (a) A Noise Monitoring, (b) A 2D/3D Noise 
Map. 
“Water Quality” menu supports tele-monitoring and tele-
management [14][15]. Administrators of the smart city can 
monitor quality and quantity of water, observe the 
circumference in the canals, the waterways, the rivers, and 
the dams. They can control the water pumps, gates of canals, 
waterways, and dams remotely through mobile cloud and 
grid web service. 
B. Fire Accident Manager 
“Fire Accident Manager” informs administrator and 
citizen of UTOPIA the occurrence of fire event and optimal 
evacuation paths, and calls the most appropriate internal 
services of UTOPIA among services available at the 
situation.  
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 4.  Snapshots of the Fire Accident Managerof UTOPIA in a 
smartphone: (a) A GIS map provided by the Fire Accident Monitoring, (b) 
An Evacuation path provided by the Fire Accident Monitoring. 
Sensors report the data through ubiquitous sensor 
network to SOUL and SOUL infers the fire event using the 
sensed data [16]. When a fire event is inferred, SOUL calls 
context-aware services and sends the administrator the fire 
alarm through the mobile cloud and grid web service.  
“Fire Accident Manager” shows the fire accident place in 
the GIS map as shown in Figure 4a. Figure 4b shows the 
current fire accident location in the fire accident building and 
an optimal evacuation route from a selected room in the 
building to exit safely.  
C. Cloud Manager 
UTOPIA Mobile cloud and grid web service is the 
world’s first approach to implement the cloud and grid 
platform into a smart city middleware so that the users can 
monitor the smart city and execute smart city services in 
Android based smartphone or tablet personal computers [5].  
The Mobile cloud and grid web service is supported by 
Cloud Infrastructure Manager, Virtual Machine Job Manager, 
SSH client and vnc client. Cloud Infrastructure Manager 
plays the role of VM monitoring, VM template management, 
hosts management, users management and networks 
management. Figure 4 shows how it works in a smartphone 
in two cases.  
Cloud Manager has sub-menus, such as VM Monitor, 
Template Management, Hosts Management, Networks 
Management and Users Management.  
VM Monitor can show the state of virtual machine 
instances, enable users to deploy virtual machine instances in 
virtual machine template and to remove virtual machine 
instance in “Cloud Platform” of SOUL and provides vnc and 
SSH connection interfaces to access virtual machine instance. 
 
(b)
(d) 
Figure 5.  The snapshot of Cloud Manager of mobile cloud and grid web 
service of UTOPIA in a smartphone: (a) VM Monitor, (b) Templet 
management. 
Figure 5a shows the user interface of VM Monitor. 
Deployment of virtual machine instances is made by pre-
defined template image. Template Management manages 
description of template images.  
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
Figure 5b shows the user interface of Template 
Management. Hosts Management manages hosts in the cloud 
platform of SOUL. It can create and delete a host and enable 
and disable the given host.  
D. Grid Manager 
The Grid Manager consists of many components, such as 
real time performance monitoring, process management 
with resource brokering, account management, unified file 
transfer management and access Grid management. These 
components inherited the Grid resource manager of Seoul 
Grid Portal [17]. Figure 6 shows the snapshot of Grid 
Manager of mobile cloud and grid web service in a 
smartphone. 
 
Figure 6.  The snapshot of Grid Manager of mobile cloud and grid web 
service of UTOPIA in a smartphone. 
E. Smart City Infrastructure Manager 
“The Smart City Infrastructure Manager” enables the 
administrator of UTOPIA to do Ubiquitous Sensor Network 
(USN) Management, Scalable Video Streaming, Ad-hoc 
Network Management, Network Management, and so on, in 
SOUL with a smartphone or a tablet personal computer.  
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 7.  The snapshot of operation of components in the Infrastructure 
Manager in a smartphone: (a) USN Manager, (b) Remote Device Manager. 
Figure 7a shows how the USN Manager monitors USN 
in a smartphone. The USN Manager provides the 
administrator of UTOPIA with information, such as sensor 
ID, USN ID, USN topology, sensor working history, MAC 
address, IP address and so on of each sensor so that the 
administrator can manage these devices.  
Figure 7b shows the operation of the Remote Device 
Manager in a smartphone. Functions of SOUL to control 
remote devices in a smartphone are based on Grid 
technologies, such as those in Globus Tele Control Protocol 
(GTCP) and Globus Toolkit 4 [18][19]. 
 
IV. 
CLOUD AND GRID COMPUTING PLATFORM 
 
SOUL is an intelligent ubiquitous middleware which 
manages the Smart City Infrastructure Tier, offers smart city 
services, make a smart decision and give support the smart 
city portal tier. It is composed of four layers, such as 
Common Device Interface Layer, Context-aware Computing 
Layer, Ubiquitous Core Computing Layer and Common 
Application Interface Layer.  
The Common Device Interface Layer (CDIL) provides 
the common device interface to the devices in the Smart City 
Infrastructure Tier. The Context-aware Computing Layer 
(CCL) processes data obtained from the CDIL and provides 
the intelligent context service to The Ubiquitous Core 
Computing Layer (UCCL). It does the intelligent reasoning. 
The UCCL is the core layer and has the cloud and Grid 
computing platform that provides various kind of cloud and 
Grid services. The Common Application Interface Layer 
(CAIL) support applications and provides a set of 
applications, such as the Environment Management, the Fire 
Accident Management, the Traffic Accident Management 
and so on.  
The 4 layers cooperate together so that SOUL can 
provide various services. The administrator can control 
SOUL through the Smart city portal which has user friendly 
interface and provides web services. Furthermore, we added 
mobile and Grid web service providing facilities for the user 
who uses Android based smartphones and tablet personal 
computers [5]. Thus, users of UTOPIA can control and 
manage the SOUL and the smart city infrastructure tier 
easily, comfortably, conveniently and efficiently.  
The mobile cloud and grid web service requires the 
cooperation of Cloud Manager, Virtual Machine Job 
Manager, SSH client and vnc client.  
The Cloud Manager is the interface in the smart city 
portal and enables the smart city administrator to manage the 
cloud computing platform. It performs VM Monitoring, VM 
Template management, host management, user management 
and network management. Figure 8 shows the operation of 
the Cloud Manager. 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
 
Figure 8.  The cooperation of Cloud Manager in the Smart City Portal of 
UTOPIA with SOUL. 
When a user requests the cloud resource to Cloud 
Manager, the Service Broker which is a gateway to the 
UCCL of SOUL processes the request. It calls the Resource 
Manager which manages the computing resource and cloud 
and grid platform in SOUL.  
In order to find computing resources to respond to the 
user request, the Resource Manager queries a request to the 
Cloud Computing Platform and receives the result through 
XML-RPC API of OpenNebula. The Resource Manager 
sends the user request such as creation and deletion of virtual 
machine instance to the Cloud and Grid Computing Platform 
based on the result. The Cloud and Grid Computing Platform 
processes the user request and returns the response to the 
Resource Manager. The Resource Manager sends the result 
to the Service Broker. Finally, the user can see the result 
through Cloud Manager. 
Virtual Machine Job Manager (VMJM) uses MVC model 
which makes the maintenance and extension of code easier 
and reusability better. VMJM executes web service, monitors 
web service, etc. 
The web service can be executed only by authorized 
users and administrators. The user request is passed to the 
Resource Manager through the Service Broker. The 
Resource Manager checks the existence and status of the pre-
created virtual machine instances. If the pre-created virtual 
machine instances exist, they are resumed by the Resource 
Manager. Otherwise, the Resource Manager creates a virtual 
machine from the suitable template. When the virtual 
machine instances are ready, the Service Manager executes 
the requested service on the virtual machine instances and 
sends the status information of the executed service to the 
Service Broker. Finally, the Service Broker sends the 
information and the user can see it through VMJM. 
The operation of the monitoring web service is as follows. 
The user sends the service request to the Service Broker. The 
Service Broker passes the request to the Resource Broker. 
The Resource Broker requests the service list and the service 
status to the Cloud Computing Platform and returns the 
result to the Service Broker. The user can see the monitoring 
information through the Service Broker and the VMJM. 
V. 
RELATED WORKS 
The mobile cloud and Grid web service in smart city 
system, which has the smart city middleware based three tier 
paradigm, is unique since we cannot find any similar work 
like us.  
Mobile cloud computing seems to be attractive since it 
can eliminate the constraints of weakness in computing 
power in mobile devices. H. T. Dinh at el. [20] defines that 
mobile cloud computing is a combination of mobile 
computing and cloud computing. Mobile cloud computing 
can have a variety of service model [21].  
C. Doukas et al. [22] proposed @HealthCloud which is a 
pervasive health care information management system for 
mobile client system that has electronic healthcare data 
storage, update function and retrieval function using cloud 
computing. Its mobile cloud computing does not provide 
cloud management and job management on virtual machine 
through mobile devices.  
E. E. Marinelli [23] introduced Hyrax that is a mobile-
cloud computing platform. It uses Hadoop and runs in 
Android. It has a mobile cloud computing platform. 
J. 
H. 
Christensen 
[24] 
proposed 
development 
methodology for smart mobile applications using Cloud 
computing and RESTful web service. The convergence of 
cloud computing and RESTful web service is similar to ours 
but it is the difference that ours is cooperatively operated 
with other functions in a smart city middleware in a smart 
city paradigm.  
Eucalyptus [25], Globus Nimbus [26], OpenNebula [6] 
are open source cloud tools to construct and manage the 
cloud platform. They provide web interface. They are 
focused on managing cloud infrastructure and do not provide 
web services for the job management on the virtual machine. 
However, we provide the web services. Our mobile cloud 
and grid web service can execute and monitor smart city 
services on virtual machines anytime and anywhere through 
Cloud Manager and Grid Manager.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper introduces mobile cloud and grid web services 
in a smart city paradigm called UTOPIA. UTOPIA has the 3 
tier architecture, such as the smart city portal tier, the smart 
city middleware tier called SOUL and the smart city 
infrastructure tier. 
SOUL has four layers, such as Common Device Interface 
Layer, Context-aware Computing Layer, Ubiquitous Core 
Computing Layer and Common Application Interface Layer. 
And the cloud and Grid computing platform belongs to 
Ubiquitous Core Computing Layer. 
The mobile cloud and grid web services, such as 
Environment Information Manager, Fire Accident Manager, 
Infrastructure Manager, Cloud Manager and Grid Manager 
were explained. We showed that they can be serviced in 
Android smartphone or tablet personal computers. How the 
tree tiers of UTOPIA cooperatively support them was 
described and the internals of the cloud and Grid computing 
platform as well as the principle and architecture of UTOPIA 
and those of SOUL were explained. It is shown that the 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
cloud and Grid computing platform, Cloud Manager and 
Grid Manager process big data in UTOPIA efficiently, easily 
and conveniently. We have a future plan to enrich the mobile 
cloud and grid web services in UTOPIA both in variety and 
quality by adapting new information technologies.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to give thanks to Mr. Cheol Sang Yoon, 
Mr. Kyoung-Gyu Lee, Mr. Eui Dong Hwang and the staffs 
of Seoul Grid Center and the members of Smart (Ubiquitous) 
City Consortium for their contribution to this research. This 
work was supported by the 2011 research fund of the 
University of Seoul (Yong Woo LEE : the corresponding 
author). Patents in Korea and in the United State of America 
are registered and are in pending for the contents of this 
paper. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. S. Jung, C. S. Jeong, Y. W. Lee, and P. D. Hong, “An 
Intelligent Ubiquitous Middleware for U-City: SmartUM,” 
Journal of Information Science and Engineering, vol. 25, 
Issue 2, Mar. 2009, pp. 375-388. 
[2] S. W. Rho, C. H. Yun, and Y. W. Lee, “Provision of U-city 
web services using cloud computing,” Proc. 13th International 
Conference on Advanced Communication Technology 
(ICACT 11), Feb. 13-16 2011, pp. 1545-1549. 
[3] Y. W. Lee and S. W. Rho, “U-city portal for smart ubiquitous 
middleware,” Proc. The 12th International Conference on 
Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT 10), Feb. 7-
10 2010, pp. 609-613. 
[4] J. W. Park, C. H. Yun, S. W. Rho, Y. W. Lee, and H. S. Jung, 
“Mobile Cloud Web-Service for U-City,” Proc. International 
Conference on Cloud and Green Computing (CGC 2011), 
Dec. 12-14 2011, pp. 1161-1065. 
[5] N. Fernando, S. W. Loke, and W. Rahay, “Mobile cloud 
computing: A survey,” Future Generation Computer Systems, 
vol. 29, Issue 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 84-106. 
[6] OpenNebula Homepage, [online], Jan. 2014, Available from: 
http://opennebula.org/. 
[7] Y. W. Lee and P. D. Hong, “A Job Management System for a 
Large Scale Grid System,” Proc. IEEE International 
Conference on Computer and Information Technology 
(ICCIT 07), Oct. 16-19 2007, pp. 291-294. 
[8] Y. W. Lee, “Seoul Grid Portal: A Grid Resource Management 
System for Seoul Grid Testbed,” Proc. Grid and Cooperative 
Computing (GCC 2004), Oct. 21-24 2004, LNCS, vol. 3251, 
Sep. 2004, pp. 899-902. 
[9] P. D. Hong and Y. W. Lee, “Web Service for Seoul Grid 
Testbed,” Proc. IEEE International Conference on Computer 
and Information Technology (ICCIT 06), Sept. 2006, pp. 63-
68. 
[10] J. W. Park, C. H. Yun, S. G. Kim, H. Y. Yeom, and Y. W. 
Lee, “Cloud computing platform for GIS image processing in 
U-city,” Proc. 13th International Conference on Advanced 
Communication Technology (ICACT 2011), Feb. 13-16 2011, 
pp. 1151-1155. 
[11] J. W. Park et al., “Cloud Computing for Online Visualization 
of GIS Applications in Ubiquitous City,” Proc. Cloud 
Computing 2010, Nov. 21-26, 2010, pp. 170-175. 
[12] H. K. Park, Y. W. Lee, S. I. Jang, and I. P. Lee, “Online 
visualization of Urban Noise in Ubiquitous-city Middleware,” 
Proc. The 12th International Conference on Advanced 
Communication Technology (ICACT 2010), Feb. 7-10, 2010, 
pp. 268-271. 
[13] J. W. Park, C. H. Yun, H. S. Jung, and Y. W. LEE, 
“Visualization 
of 
Urban 
Air 
Pollution 
with 
Cloud 
Computing,” Proc. IEEE World Congress on Services 
(SERVICES 2011), July 4-9, 2011, pp. 578-583,. 
[14] H. Han et al., “Management of remote facilities through a 
ubiquitous grid middleware,” Proc. The 11th International 
Conference on Advanced Communication Technology 
(ICACT 2009), Feb. 15-18, 2009, pp. 2291-2294. 
[15] C. H. Yun, H. Han, H. S. Jung, H. Y. Yeom, and Y. W. Lee, 
“Intelligent Management of Remote Facilities through a 
Ubiquitous 
Cloud 
Middleware,” 
Proc. 
IEEE 
2009 
International Conference on Cloud Computing (2009 
CLOUD-Ⅱ), Sept. 21-25. 2009, pp. 65-71. 
[16] C. H. Yun, Y. W. Lee, and H. S. Jung, “An evaluation of 
semantic service discovery of a U-city middleware,” Proc. 
The 
12th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Communication Technology (ICACT 2010), Feb. 7-10, 2010, 
pp. 600-603. 
[17] P. D. Hong and Y. W. Lee, “A Grid portal for grid resource 
information service,” Proc. The 13th International Conference 
on Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT 2011), 
Feb. 13-16 2011, pp. 597-602.  
[18] The Globus toolkit, [online], Jan. 2014, Available from: 
http://www.globus.org/tookit/ 
[19] I. Foster. “Globus Toolkit Version 4: Software for Service-
Oriented Systems,” Proc. The 2005 IFIP international 
conference on Network and Parallel Computing (NPC 05), 
Nov. 30-Dec. 3 2005, pp. 2-13. 
[20] H. T. Dinh, C. Lee, D. Niyato, and P. Wang, “A survey of 
mobile cloud computing: architecture, applications, and 
approaches,” Wiress Communications and Mobile Computing, 
vol. 13, 2013, pp. 1587-1611.  
[21] D. Kovachev, Y. Cao, and R. Klamma, “Mobile Cloud 
Computing: 
A 
Comparison 
of 
Application 
Models,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Engineering 
Technology 
& 
Management Research, Vol. 1, Issue. 1, Feb. 2013, pp. 20-25. 
[22] C. Doukas, T. Pliakas, and I. Maglogiannis, “Mobile 
healthcare 
information 
management 
unitizing 
cloud 
computing and Android OS,” Proc. In Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE on Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society (EMBC 2010), Aug. 31-Sept. 4 2010, pp. 
1037-1040. 
[23] E. E. Marinelli, “Hyrax: Cloud Computing on Mobile Devices 
using MapReduce”, Master Thesis, Department of Computer 
Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Sep. 2009. 
[24] J. H. Christensen, “Using RESTful Web-Services and Cloud 
Computing to Create Next Generation Mobile Applications,” 
Proc. the 24th ACM SIGPLAN conference companion on 
Object oriented programming systems languages and 
applications (OOPSLA 2009), Oct. 25-29 2009, pp. 627-634. 
[25] Eucalyptus: Open Source AWS Compatible Private Clouds, 
[online], 
Jan. 
2014, 
Available 
from: 
https://www.eucalyptus.com/ 
[26] Nimbus, 
[online], 
Jan. 
2014, 
Available 
from: 
www.nimbusproject.org/ 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

