Defining Inter-Cloud Architecture for Interoperability and Integration 
 
 
1Yuri Demchenko, 1Canh Ngo, 1,2Marc X. Makkes, 1,2Rudolf Strijkers, 1Cees de Laat  
1University of Amsterdam 
System and Network Engineering Group 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
e-mail: {y.demchenko, c.t.ngo, delaat}@uva.nl 
2TNO 
Information and Communication Technology  
Groningen, The Netherlands 
e-mail: {marc.makkes, rudolf.strijkers}@tno.nl 
 
Abstract—This paper presents an on-going research to develop 
the 
Inter-Cloud 
Architecture, 
which 
addresses 
the 
architectural 
problems 
in 
multi-provider 
multi-domain 
heterogeneous cloud based applications integration and 
interoperability, including integration and interoperability 
with legacy infrastructure services. Cloud technologies are 
evolving into a common way to virtualize infrastructure 
services and to offer on-demand service provisioning. In this 
way, they add physical/hardware platform independency and 
mobility to the existing distributed computing and networking 
technologies. The paper uses existing standards in Cloud 
Computing, in particular the recently published NIST Cloud 
Computing Reference Architecture (CCRA) as the basis for 
the Inter-Cloud architecture. The proposed Inter-Cloud 
Architecture 
defines 
three 
complimentary 
components 
addressing Inter-Cloud interoperability and integration: multi-
layer Cloud Services Model that combines commonly adopted 
cloud service models, such as IaaS, PaaS, SaaS, in one 
multilayer model with corresponding inter-layer interfaces; 
Inter-Cloud Control and Management Plane that supports 
cloud 
based 
applications 
interaction; 
and 
Inter-Cloud 
Federation Framework. The paper briefly presents the 
architectural framework for cloud based infrastructure 
services provisioning being developed by the authors.  The 
proposed architecture intends to provide a basis for building 
multilayer cloud services integration framework and to allow 
optimised provisioning of computing, storage and networking 
resources. In this way, the proposed Inter-Cloud architecture 
will facilitate cloud interoperability and integration. 
Keywords-Inter-Cloud 
Architecture; 
Cloud 
Computing 
Reference Architecture; Architectural framework for cloud 
infrastructure 
services 
provisioned 
on-demand; 
Cloud 
middleware. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Cloud computing technologies [1, 2] are emerging as 
infrastructure services for provisioning computing and 
storage resources on-demand in a simple and uniform way 
and may involve multi-provider and multi-domain resources, 
including integration with the legacy services and 
infrastructures. Cloud computing represents a new step in 
evolutional computing and communication technology 
development by introducing a new abstraction layer for 
general virtualisation of infrastructure services (similar to 
utilities) and mobility. Current developments in cloud 
technologies demonstrate the need to (1) develop an Inter-
Cloud architecture that provides a common/interoperable 
environment 
and 
definition 
for 
moving 
existing 
infrastructures and infrastructure services into cloud 
environments and (2) integration tools to include existing 
enterprise and campus infrastructures. More complex use of 
cloud infrastructure services, such as in multi-domain 
enterprise environments, require new service provisioning 
and security models that allow on-demand provisioning of 
complex project and group-oriented infrastructure services 
across multiple providers. 
Cloud based virtualisation enables easy upgrade and/or 
migration of enterprise application, including also the whole 
Information Technology (IT) infrastructure segments with 
automation or infrastructure management tools This brings 
significant cost savings compared to traditional infrastructure 
development and management, which requires lot of manual 
work. In particular, applications that use modern SOA 
(Service Oriented Architecture) web services platforms for 
services and integration benefit 
from 
cloud based 
infrastructure services, such as elastic scaling and on-demand 
provisioning. However, their composition and integration 
into distributed cloud based infrastructure will require a 
number of functionalities and services that can be jointly 
defined as Inter-Cloud Architecture. 
This paper presents an on-going research at the 
University of Amsterdam to develop the Inter-Cloud 
Architecture (ICA). The Inter-Cloud architecture addresses 
the problem of (1) multi-domain heterogeneous cloud based 
applications integration and interoperability, including 
integration and interoperability with legacy infrastructure 
services, and (2) intra-provider infrastructure interoperability 
and measurability, and (3) cloud federation. The papers 
refers to the architectural framework for provisioning Cloud 
Infrastructure Services On-Demand  [3] being developed by 
authors as a result of cooperative efforts in a number of 
currently running projects such as GEANT3 [4] and 
GEYSERS [5]. The architectural framework provides a basis 
for defining the proposed Inter-Cloud architecture.  The 
presented paper significantly extends the research results 
initially presented as a poster paper at the IEEE 
CloudCom2011 Conference [6].  
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II provides overview and detailed analysis of the 
ongoing standardisation activities at NIST and IEEE that 
have direct relation with and provide a basis for the proposed 
ICA. Section III describes a basic use case for defining ICA, 
and section provides motivation and defines the main 
components of the proposed Inter-Cloud Architecture. In 
Sections IV the Inter-Cloud definition and requirements are 
described. Section V describes the abstract model for cloud 
based infrastructure services provisioning. Section VI 
describes the Infrastructure Services Modeling Framework 
that provides a basis for complex infrastructure services 
composition and management. The paper concludes with 
future developments in Section VII. 
II. 
CLOUD STANDARDISATION OVERVIEW 
Two standardization activities form the basis of ICA and 
will be analysed in detail. One, the Cloud Computing 
technology and Cloud Computing Reference Architecture 
definition by the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) and two, the IEEE standardisation 
activity to define Intercloud Interoperability and Federation 
framework. Suggestions are provided for the required 
extensions in the context of the proposed Inter-Cloud 
Architecture.  
An overview of the standards that define internal cloud 
management, components design and communications is 
left out. This category of standards is well presented by 
DMTF, SNIA and OGF standards that correspondingly 
define standards for Open Virtual Machine Format (OVF) 
[7], Cloud Data Management Interface (CDMI) [8], and 
Open Cloud Computing Interface (OCCI) [9]. These 
standards are commonly accepted by industry and provide a 
basis for intra-provider infrastructure operation and services 
delivery to customers.  
A. NIST Cloud Computing related standards 
NIST is active in fostering cloud computing practices 
that support interoperability, portability, and security 
requirements that are appropriate and achievable for 
important usage scenarios. Since first publication of the 
currently commonly accepted NIST Cloud definition in 
2008, NIST is leading the internationally recognised activity 
on defining a conceptual and standardised base in Cloud 
Computing. The ongoing publications of their activities 
create a solid base for cloud services development and 
offering: 
NIST SP 800-145, NIST definition of cloud computing [1] 
NIST 
SP 
500-292, 
Cloud 
Computing 
Reference 
Architecture, v1.0 [2] 
DRAFT NIST SP 800-146, Cloud Computing Synopsis and 
Recommendations [10]  
NIST SP500-291 NIST Cloud Computing Standards 
Roadmap [11] 
Draft SP 800-144 Guidelines on Security and Privacy in 
Public Cloud Computing [12]  
 
1) NIST Cloud Computing Reference Architecture 
(CCRA) 
NIST SP 800-145 document defines Cloud Computing 
in the following way: 
“Cloud computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous, 
convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of 
configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, 
storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly 
provisioned and released with minimal management effort 
or service provider interaction. This cloud model promotes 
availability and is composed of five essential characteristics 
(on-demand self-service, broad network access, resource 
pooling. 
rapid 
elasticity, 
measured 
Service), 
3 
service/provisioning models. (Software as a Service (SaaS), 
Platform as a Service (PaaS), Infrastructure as a Service 
(IaaS)), 4 deployment models (public, private, community, 
hybrid clouds).” 
The IaaS service model is defined in the following way: 
“The capability provided to the consumer is to provision 
processing, storage, networks, and other fundamental 
computing resources where the consumer is able to deploy 
and run arbitrary software, which can include operating 
systems and applications. The consumer does not manage or 
control the underlying cloud infrastructure but has control 
over operating systems, storage, deployed applications, and 
possibly limited control of selecting networking components 
(e.g., host firewalls).” 
Figure 1 presents a high level view of the NIST Cloud 
Computing 
Reference 
Architecture 
(CCRA), 
which 
identifies the major actors (Cloud Consumer, Cloud Service 
Provider, Cloud Auditor, Cloud Broker, and Cloud Carrier), 
their activities and functions in cloud computing. A cloud 
consumer may request cloud services from a cloud provider 
directly or via a cloud broker. A cloud auditor conducts 
independent audits and may contact the others to collect 
necessary information.  
 
 
Figure 1. NIST Cloud Computing Reference Architecture (CCRA) [2] 
 
The proposed architecture is suitable for many purposes 
where network performance is not critical but needs to be 
extended with explicit network services provisioning and 
management when the cloud applications are critical to 
network latency like in case of enterprise applications, 
business transactions, crisis management, etc. 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
2) Extending Cloud definition and CCRA for ICA  
NIST CCRA and Cloud Computing definition are well 
suited for describing service, business, or operational 
relations. However, it has limited applicability for design 
purposes, i.e. defining basic functional components, 
interfaces, and layers.  
The recently published CCRA includes the Cloud 
Carrier role, a role typical for telecom operators, which 
provides network connectivity as a 3rd party service. 
Despite the introduction of the Cloud Carrier role, there is 
no well-defined service model how network connectivity as 
a 3rd parte service be achieved. The IaaS cloud service 
model does not explicitly include provisioning of network 
services and infrastructure. One reason is that cloud 
computing has been developed primarily for provisioning 
storage and computing resources in the assumption that 
best-effort Internet connectivity is sufficient. However, this 
situation presents serious limitations for large scale use of 
cloud in enterprise applications that require guaranteed 
network connectivity QoS and low network latency in 
particular.  
Another limitation of the current CCRA is that it is 
unsuitable for defining a security infrastructure and its 
integration with infrastructure services, which can be 
potentially multilayer and multi-domain. 
The following extensions and improvements should be 
made to at least the Cloud IaaS model to meet requirements 
of a wide range of critical enterprise services (other service 
models such as PaaS, SaaS should also allow management 
of network related parameters): 
 
Define a layered cloud services model suitable for 
defining inter-layer and inter-service (functional) 
interfaces, 
 
Define virtualisation of resources and services as cloud 
features (in which virtualisation includes resource 
abstraction, 
pooling, 
composition, 
instantiation, 
orchestration, and lifecycle management), 
 
Include QoS provisioning and user / application control 
over QoS in the network services definition, 
 
Define an infrastructure service that includes the 
following attributes/features: 
o 
Topology 
description 
of 
computing, 
storage 
resources and their interconnection in the network 
infrastructure, 
o 
Infrastructure/topology description format that 
allows topology transformation operations for 
control and optimization (e.g., homomorphic, 
isomorphic, QoS, energy aware etc.). 
In the context of the above definition, cloud 
infrastructure may include:  
• 
Internal cloud provider infrastructure which is provided 
as a service, and  
• 
External or Inter-Cloud infrastructure that can be 
provided by either a cloud operator or a network 
services provider. 
In relation to business/operational aspects, the CCRA 
should be extended to address the following features: 
 
Better definition of the Cloud Carrier role, operational 
model and interaction with other key actors, 
 
Extend the set of basic roles with roles typical for 
telecom operators/providers as Cloud/infrastructure 
Operator, and split Customer role on Customer and 
User as representing customer organization and end-
user. 
B. IEEE Intercloud Working Group (IEEE P2302) 
IEEE P2302 Working Group recently published a draft 
Standard on Intercloud Interoperability and Federation 
(SIIF) [13] proposing an architecture that defines topology, 
functions, 
and 
governance 
for 
cloud-to-cloud 
interoperability and federation.  
Topological elements include clouds, roots, exchanges 
(which mediate governance between clouds), and gateways 
(which mediate data exchange between clouds). Functional 
elements include name spaces, presence, messaging, 
resource ontologies (including standardized units of 
measurement), 
and 
trust 
infrastructure. 
Governance 
elements include registration, geo-independence, trust 
anchor, and potentially compliance and audit. 
However, the proposed approach has very limited scope 
by attempting to address a hypothetical scenario when all 
resources and applications will be located and run in 
multiple clouds and they need to be federated similar to 
Contend Distribution Network (CDN) [14]. The proposed 
architecture tries to replicate the CDN approach but doesn’t 
address the generic problems with interoperability and 
integration of the heterogeneous multi-domain and multi-
provider clouds. 
The proposed solutions are built around extended use of 
the XMPP [15] as a base Intercloud protocol and introduce 
Intercloud Root and Exchange Hosts to support Intercloud 
communications, trust management and identity federation.  
The proposed architecture originated from the position 
paper published by Cisco in 2009 [16] that tried to leverage 
the basic routing and messaging Internet protocols such as 
BGP, OSPF, XMPP to address Inter-Cloud integration and 
interoperability. 
The limitation of the proposed architecture and approach 
is that it tries to closely imitate Internet approach in building 
hierarchical interconnected infrastructure for Internet 
protocol 
based 
services 
to 
support 
Inter-Cloud 
communication. But actually there is no need for such 
additional Inter-Cloud layer or infrastructure because cloud 
applications and infrastructure can use all Internet 
technologies 
directly 
to 
support 
intra-provider 
communications and user-customer-provider or inter-
provider communications, given the appropriate network 
virtualisation and address translation technologies. Cloud 
technologies provide a virtualisation platform for IT and 
network services and allow entire infrastructure instantiation 
together with related protocols and core infrastructure 
services related to control and management functions. An 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

extreme use case that demonstrates the capabilities of cloud 
technologies is to create managed virtual Internets [27] 
using advanced programmable networking concepts [18]. 
III. 
GENERAL USE CASES FOR ICA 
The two basic use cases for Inter-Cloud architecture can 
be considered: large project-oriented scientific infrastructure 
provisioning 
including 
dedicated 
transport 
network 
infrastructure, and periodic semester based educational 
course that requires computer laboratory facilities to setup, 
operated and suspended till the next semester [19]. Both 
cases should allow the whole infrastructure of computers, 
storage, network and other utilities to be provisioned on-
demand, physical platform independent and allow integration 
with local persistent utilities and legacy services and 
applications.  
Figures 2 illustrates the typical e-Science or enterprise 
infrastructure that includes enterprise proprietary and Cloud 
based computing and storage resources, instruments, control 
and monitoring system, visualization system, and users 
represented by user clients.  
 
Control & 
Monitoring
Sc. Instrument
(Manufactrg)
Grid 
Storage T1
Grid CE
Data Filtering
Grid
Storage T0
Grid VO-A
Visuali-
sation
User 
Group A
User
CE
Campus A
Visuali-
sation
User
CE
User 
Group B
Campus B
CE
CE
CE
SE
SE
CSE
CSE CSE
CSE
CloudSE
T1
CE
Processed Data 
Experimental 
Data
Specialist 
Data 
Processing
Project based 
Cloud Infrastructure
Data Filtering
Ctrl&Mngnt
Plane
Figure 2. Project oriented collaborative infrastructure containing Grid based 
Scientific Instrument managed by Grid VO-A, 2 campuses A and B, and 
Cloud based infrastructure provisioned on-demand. 
 
Figure 2 also illustrates a typical use case when two or 
more cooperative users/researcher groups in different 
locations want to use high performance infrastructure. In 
order to fulfill their task (e.g. cooperative image processing 
and analysis) they require a number of resources and services 
to process raw data on distributed Grid or Cloud data centers, 
analyse intermediate data on specialist applications and 
finally deliver the result data to the users/scientists. This use 
case includes all basic components of the typical e-Science 
research process: data collection, data mining, filtering, 
analysis (with special scientific applications), visualisation, 
and finally presentation to the users. 
IV. 
ICA DEFINITION  AND REQUIREMENTS 
The developed Inter-Cloud Architecture should address 
the interoperability and integration issues in the current and 
emerging heterogeneous multi-domain and multi-provider 
clouds that could host modern and future critical enterprise 
infrastructures and applications. 
The proposed ICA should address the following goals, 
challenges and requirements: 
 
ICA should support communication between cloud 
applications and services belonging to different service 
layers (vertical integration), between cloud domains and 
heterogeneous platforms (horizontal integration). 
 
ICA should provide a possibility that applications could 
control infrastructure and related supporting services at 
different service layers to achieve run-time optimization 
(Inter-Cloud control and management functions). 
 
ICA should support cloud services/infrastructures 
provisioning 
on-demand 
and 
their 
lifecycle 
management, 
including 
composition, 
deployment, 
operation, and monitoring, involving resources and 
services from multiple providers.  
Following the above requirements, we define the 
subsequent complimentary components of the proposed 
Inter-Cloud Architecture:  
(1) Multilayer Cloud Services Model (CSM) for vertical 
cloud services interaction, integration and compatibility;  
(2) Inter-Cloud Control and Management Plane (ICCMP) 
for Inter-Cloud applications/infrastructure control and 
management, 
including 
inter-applications 
signaling, 
synchronization and session management, configuration, 
monitoring, run time infrastructure optimization including 
VM migration, resources scaling, and jobs/objects routing; 
(3) Inter-Cloud Federation Framework (ICFF) to allow 
independent clouds and related infrastructure components 
federation 
of 
independently 
managed 
cloud 
based 
infrastructure components belonging to different cloud 
providers and/or administrative domains; this should  support 
federation at the level of services, business applications, 
semantics, and namespaces, assuming special gateway or 
federation services. 
At this stage of research, we define only multi-layer 
Cloud Services Architecture that can be built using modern 
SOA technologies re-factored to support basic cloud service 
models as discussed below and in the following section. 
Future 
research 
on 
ICCMP 
will 
leverage 
User 
Programmable Virtualised Networks (UPVN) [20], and 
Internet technologies such as provided by CDN and 
Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) [21].  
The ICFF can be built using existing platforms for federated 
network access and federated identity management widely 
used for multi-domain and multi-provider infrastructure 
integration.  
Figure 3 illustrates the current relation between basic 
Cloud service models IaaS, PaaS, SaaS that expose standards 
based interfaces to users, services, and applications but use 
proprietary interfaces to the physical provider platform. In 
case the application or service spans multiple heterogeneous 
cloud service providers, cloud services from different service 
models and layers will need to interact. This motivates 
definition of the Inter-Cloud Architecture that is depicted on 
Figure 3b as multilayer architecture with interlayer 
interfaces. 
 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
(a) Current relation between Cloud service models 
 
 
 
(b) current relation between Cloud service models 
 
Figure 3. Inter-Cloud Architecture for Cloud interoperability and 
integration. 
 
In the proposed Inter-Cloud layered service model, the 
following layers can be defined (numbering from bottom 
up): 
(6) Customers and applications, 
(5) SaaS (or cloud applications) as a top cloud layer that 
represents cloud applications, 
(4) PaaS provides middleware services to customers and 
applications (6) or used as a platform for (5), 
(3) IaaS provides infrastructure services to (6) or used for 
hosting cloud platforms (4), 
(2) Cloud virtualisation and management layer (e.g. 
represented by VMWare as virtualisation platform, and 
OpenNebula, OpenStack as cloud management software), 
(1) Physical hardware (e.g. physical servers, network 
devices). 
V. 
ABSTRACT MODEL FOR CLOUD BASED 
INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICES PROVISIONING 
Figure 4 below illustrates the abstraction of the typical 
project or group-oriented Virtual Infrastructure (VI) 
provisioning process that includes both computing resources 
and supporting network that commonly referred as 
infrastructure services. The figure also shows the main actors 
involved into this process, such as Physical Infrastructure 
Provider (PIP), Virtual Infrastructure Provider (VIP), Virtual 
Infrastructure Operator (VIO).  
The required supporting infrastructure services are 
pictured on the left side of the picture and includes functional 
components and services used to support normal operation of 
all mentioned actors. The Virtual Infrastructure Composition 
and Management (VICM) layer includes the Logical 
Abstraction Layer and the VI/VR Adaptation Layer facing 
correspondingly lower PIP and upper application layer. 
VICM related functionality is described below as related to 
the proposed Composable Services Architecture (CSA). 
The proposed architecture is SOA based and uses the 
same basic operational principles as known and widely used 
by SOA frameworks.  Consequently, the proposed 
architecture also provides a direct mapping to the possible 
VICM implementation platforms such as Enterprise Services 
Bus (ESB) [22] or OSGi framework [23]. 
The infrastructure provisioning process, also referred to 
as Service Delivery Framework (SDF), is adopted from the 
TeleManagement Forum SDF [24] with necessary extensions 
to allow dynamic services provisioning. It includes the 
following main stages: (1) infrastructure creation request 
sent to VIO or VIP that may include both required resources 
and network infrastructure to support distributed target user 
groups and/or consuming applications; (2) infrastructure 
planning and advance reservation; (3) infrastructure 
deployment 
including 
services 
synchronization 
and 
initiation; (4) operation stage, and (5) infrastructure 
decommissioning. The SDF combines in one provisioning 
workflow all processes that are run by different supporting 
systems and executed by different actors. 
Physical Resources (PR), including IT resources and 
network, are provided by Physical Infrastructure Providers 
(PIP). In order to be included into VI composition and 
provisioning by the VIP they need to be abstracted to Logical 
Resource (LR) that will undergo a number of abstract 
transformations including possibly interactive negotiation 
with the PIP. The composed VI need to be deployed to the 
PIP which will create virtualised physical resources (VPR) 
that may be a part, a pool, or a combination of the resources 
provided by PIP.  
The deployment process includes distribution of common 
VI context, configuration of VPR at PIP, advance reservation 
and scheduling, and virtualised infrastructure services 
synchronization and initiation, to make them available to 
Application layer consumers.  
The proposed abstract model provides a basis for ICA 
definition and allows outsourcing the provisioned VI 
operation to the VI Operator (VIO) who is from the 
user/consumer point of view provides valuable services of 
the required resources consolidation - both IT and networks, 
and takes a burden of managing the provisioned services. 
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
Figure 4. Main actors, functional layers and processes in on-demand infrastructure services provisioning 
 
It is important to mention that physical and virtual 
resources discussed here are in fact complex software 
enabled systems with their own operating systems and 
security services. The VI provisioning process should 
support the smooth integration into the common federated VI 
security infrastructure by allowing the definition of a 
common access control policy. Access decisions made at the 
VI level should be trusted and validated at the PIP level. This 
can be achieved by creating dynamic security associations 
during the provisioning process. 
VI. 
INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICES MODELING 
FRAMEWORK 
The Infrastructure Services Modeling Framework (ISMF) 
provides a basis for virtualization and management of 
infrastructure services, including description, discovery, 
modeling, composition, and monitoring. In this paper we 
mainly focus on the description of resources and the lifecycle 
of these resources. The described model in this section is 
being developed in the GEYSERS project [5]. 
A. Resource Modeling 
The two main descriptive elements of the ISMF are the 
infrastructure topology and descriptions of resources in that 
topology. Besides these main ingredients, the ISMF also 
allows for describing QoS attributes of resources, energy 
related attributes, and attributes needed for access control. 
The main requirements for the ISMF are, that it should 
allow for describing Physical Resources (PR) as well as 
Virtual Resources (VR). Describing physical aspects of a 
resource means that a great level of detail in the description 
is required while describing a virtual resource may require a 
more abstract view. Furthermore, the ISMF should allow for 
manipulation of resource descriptions such as partitioning 
and aggregation. Resources on which manipulation takes 
place, and resources that are the outcome of manipulation are 
called Logical Resources (LR).  
The ISMF is based on semantic web technology. This 
means that the description format will be based on the Web 
Ontology Language (OWL) [25]. This approach ensures the 
ISMF is extensible and allows for easy abstraction of 
resources by adding or omitting resource description 
elements. Furthermore, this approach has enabled us to re-
use the Network Description Language [26] to describe 
infrastructure topologies. 
B. Virtual Resource Lifecycle 
Figure 5 illustrates relations between different resource 
presentations along the provisioning process that can also be 
defined as the Virtual Resource lifecycle. 
The Physical Resource information is published by a PIP 
to the Registry service serving VICM and VIP. This 
published information describes a PR. The published LR 
information presented in the commonly adopted form (using 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

common data or semantic model) is then used by VICM/VIP 
composition service to create the requested infrastructure 
using a combination of (instantiated) Virtual Resources and 
interconnecting them with a network infrastructure. In its 
own turn the network can be composed of a few network 
segments run by different network providers. 
 
{LR0} -> LR2 
Planning 
Composition
Reservation
LR2 -> VR 
VI Deployment
Physical Resource
Logical Resource
Virtual Resource
Network Segment
Network Segment
LR0
Re-usable
(Published)
PRs
Topology Pool
Network Segment
PR-LR1 
Config&
Instantiation
Registered                           PRs  
Composed                   LRs     
Deployed                   VRs            .
Virtual Infrastructure
PIP1
PIP2
Figure 5. Relation between different resource presentations in relation to 
different provisioning stages. 
VII. FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 
The paper presents an on-going research at the University 
of Amsterdam to develop the Inter-Cloud Architecture (ICA) 
addresses the problem of multi-domain heterogeneous Cloud 
based applications integration and inter-provider and inter-
platform interoperability. 
The presented research is planned to be contributed to the 
Open Grid Forum Research Group on Infrastructure Services 
On-Demand provisioning (ISOD-RG) [27], where the 
authors play active role. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work is supported by the FP7 EU funded Integrated 
project 
The 
Generalized 
Architecture 
for 
Dynamic 
Infrastructure Services (GEYSERS, FP7-ICT-248657) and 
by the Dutch national program COMMIT. 
REFERENCES 
[1] NIST SP 800-145, “A NIST definition of cloud computing”,  [online] 
Available: http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-145/SP800-
145.pdf 
[2] NIST SP 500-292, Cloud Computing Reference Architecture, v1.0. 
[Online] 
http://collaborate.nist.gov/twiki-cloud-
computing/pub/CloudComputing/ReferenceArchitectureTaxonomy/N
IST_SP_500-292_-_090611.pdf 
[3] Generic Architecture for Cloud Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) 
Provisioning Model, Release 1. SNE Techn. Report SNE-UVA-2011-
03, 15 April 2011. [Online] http://staff.science.uva.nl/~demch/ 
worksinprogress/sne2011-techreport-2011-03-clouds-iaas-
architecture-release1.pdf 
[4] GEANT Project. [Online] http://www.geant.net/pages/home.aspx 
[5] Generalised Architecture for Dynamic Infrastructure Services 
(GEYSERS Project). [Online]  http://www.geysers.eu/ 
[6] Demchenko, Y., R.Strijkers, C.Ngo, M.Cristea, M.Ghijsen, C. de 
Laat, Defining Inter-Cloud Architecture. Poster paper. Proc. 3rd IEEE 
Conf. 
on 
Cloud 
Computing 
Technologies 
and 
Science 
(CloudCom2011), 29 November - 1 December 2011, Athens, Greece.  
ISBN: 978-960-93-3482-2 
[7] Open 
Virtualization 
Format 
(OVF), 
DMTF. 
[online] 
http://www.dmtf.org/standards/ovf 
[8] Cloud 
Data 
Management 
Interface, 
SNIA. 
[online] 
http://www.snia.org/cdmi 
[9] GFD.183 
 Open Cloud Computing Interface - Core 
 
[online] http://www.ogf.org/documents/GFD.183.pdf DRAFT NIST 
SP 800-146, Cloud Computing Synopsis and Recommendations. 
[online] 
Available: 
 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/800-
146/Draft-NIST-SP800-146.pdf  
[10] NIST 
SP 
800-146, 
Cloud 
Computing 
Synopsis 
and 
Recommendations. 
 
 
[online] 
Available: 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-144/SP800-144.pdf 
[11] NIST SP500-291 NIST Cloud Computing Standards Roadmap. 
[online] 
Available: 
 
http://collaborate.nist.gov/twiki-cloud-
computing/pub/CloudComputing/StandardsRoadmap/NIST_SP_500-
291_Jul5A.pdf 
[12] Draft SP 800-144 Guidelines on Security and Privacy in Public Cloud 
Computing. 
[online] 
Available: 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-144/SP800-144.pdf 
[13] IEEE P2302 - Standard for Intercloud Interoperability and Federation 
(SIIF). [online] http://standards.ieee.org/develop/project/2302.html 
[14] Leung, K. and Lee, Y. (2011). Content Distribution Network 
Interconnection (CDNI) Requirements. IETF draft, work in progress, 
draft-ietf-cdni-requirement-00.  
[15] RFC3920 Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP): 
Core. [online] http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3920.txt 
[16] Bernstein, D., Ludvigson, E., Sankar, K., Diamond, S., Morrow, M., 
Blueprint for the Intercloud - Protocols and Formats for Cloud 
Computing Interoperability. In  Internet and Web Applications and 
Services, 2009. ICIW '09. Fourth International Conference on, 24-28 
May 2009, Venice, Italy. 
[17] J. D. Touch, Y.-S. Wang, L. Eggert, and G. G. Finn, “A virtual 
internet architecture,” ISI Technical Report, Mar. 2003. 
[18] R. Strijkers, M. Cristea, C. de Laat, and R. Meijer, “Application 
framework for programmable network control,” Advances in 
Network-Embedded Management and Applications, pp. 37–52, 2011. 
[19] Demchenko, Y., J. van der Ham, M. Ghijsen, M. Cristea, V. 
Yakovenko, C. de Laat, "On-Demand Provisioning of Cloud and Grid 
based Infrastructure Services for Collaborative Projects and Groups", 
The 2011 Intern. Conf. on Collaboration Technologies and Systems 
(CTS 2011), May 23-27, 2011, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA 
[20] Meijer, R. J., Strijkers, R. J., Gommans, L., and de Laat, C. (2006). 
User Programmable Virtualized Networks. In e-Science and Grid 
Computing, 2006. e-Science '06. Second IEEE International 
Conference on (p. 43). 
[21] RFC 3945. Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) 
Architecture. [online] http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3945.txt 
[22] D. Chappell, ENTERPRISE SERVICE BUS, O’Reilly, June 2004. 
[23] OSGi Service Platform Release 4, Version 4.2. [online] Available: 
http://www.osgi.org/Download/Release4V42 
[24] TMF Service Delivery Framework. [Online] http://www.tmforum.org 
/servicedeliveryframework/4664/home.html 
[25] OWL 
2 
Web 
Ontology 
Language 
[online] 
Available: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-overview/ 
[26] J. van der Ham, F.Dijkstra, P.Grosso, R. van der Pol, A.Toonk, C. de 
Laat, "A distributed topology information system for optical networks 
based on the semantic web", Elsevier Journal on Optical Switching 
and Networking, Volume 5, Issues 2-3, June 2008, pp. 85-93 
[27] Open Grid Forum Research Group on Infrastructure Services On-
Demand 
provisioning 
(ISOD-RG). 
[Online]. 
http://www.gridforum.org/gf/group_info/view.php?group=ISOD-RG 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

