Mobile Cloud Computing Environment as a Support for Mobile Learning 
Stojan Kitanov, Danco Davcev 
University for Information Science and Technology (UIST) “St. Paul the Apostle”  
Ohrid, Republic of Macedonia  
stojan.kitanov@uist.edu.mk, dancho.davchev@uist.edu.mk 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a new model of mobile distance 
learning system (MDL) in an extended mobile cloud computing 
environment (MCC) by using High Performance Computing 
(HPC) Cluster Infrastructure, as well as some existing 
videoconferencing technologies enriched with mobile and 
wireless devices. This MCC model can be applied everywhere 
where there is need of fast and intensive computing and 
analysis of huge amount of data, such as modeling of 3D 
graphics visualization and animation in ecology, global climate 
solutions, financial risks, healthcare and medical learning, 
decoding genome projects, etc. After the MCC model 
presentation, the experimental system architecture will be 
provided, as well as its possibilities, with particular reference 
to mobile learning environment and its potential issues. In this 
architecture the mobile device may optionally use the open 
source e-learning course management system platform 
Moodle, to access the learning material and the relevant data 
that needs to be transferred to the HPC Cluster Infrastructure 
for further computing. In order to provide higher quality of 
presenting the learning material, the Cisco WebEx application 
will be used to test the distance learning in both fixed and 
mobile environment. Then, a Quality of Experience (QoE) 
evaluation of such mobile distance learning system will be 
provided. Finally, it will be concluded that this MCC model 
that incorporates HPC Cluster Infrastructure can be applied 
anywhere where there is need of fast and intensive computing 
and analysis of huge amount of data which cannot be 
performed by a conventional PC, Laptop or Mobile Device. 
Keywords-Cloud Computing (CC); Distance Learning (DL); 
Mobile Cloud Computing (MCC); Mobile Distance Learning 
(MDL); High Performance Computing (HPC) Cluster.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Together with the explosive and rapid growth of Internet, 
mobile networks, mobile applications, and cloud computing, 
mobile cloud computing is introduced as a potential 
technology for mobile devices. As mobile network 
infrastructures continuously improve, their data transmission 
becomes increasingly available and affordable, and thus they 
are becoming popular clients to consume any internet web-
based applications. Cloud computing provides delivery of 
services, software and processing capacity over internet, 
reducing cost, increasing, automating systems, decoupling of 
service delivery from underlying technology, and providing 
flexibility and mobility of information. Mobile Cloud 
Computing (MCC) integrates the cloud computing into the 
mobile environment and overcomes the obstacles related to 
the performance (battery life, storage, and bandwidth), 
environment (heterogeneity, scalability and availability), and 
security (reliability and privacy) [1]. One future potential 
application of MCC is the Mobile Distance Learning (MDL), 
where the students can get the knowledge from centralized 
shared resources at any place and any time [1], [2]. 
This paper presents a new Model of Distance Learning 
System in Mobile Cloud Computing Environment, by using 
High Performance Computing (HPC) Cluster Infrastructure 
[3], [4] as well as some existing videoconferencing 
technologies enriched with mobile and wireless devices. This 
MCC model can be applied everywhere where there is need 
of fast and intensive computing analysis of huge amount of 
data, such as modeling of 3D graphics visualization and 
animation in ecology, global climate solutions, financial 
risks, healthcare and medical learning, decoding genome 
projects, etc. Then, the experimental system architecture of 
Mobile Distance Learning (MDL) system in Mobile Cloud 
Computing (MCC) environment will be presented. In this 
architecture the mobile device may optionally use the open 
source e-learning course management system platform 
Moodle [5], [6] to access the learning material and the 
relevant data that needs to be transferred to the HPC cluster 
infrastructure for further computing. In order to provide 
higher quality of presenting the learning material, this 
architecture uses Cisco WebEx application [7], as well as 
some existing videoconferencing technologies enriched with 
mobile and wireless devices such as smart phones, or tablets. 
The main contribution of the paper is the Quality of 
Experience (QoE) evaluation of such MDL system in MCC 
environment. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section II summarizes 
the related work. Section III presents the new model of 
distance learning system in mobile cloud computing 
environment. Section IV provides the system architecture of 
MDL in MCC environment. Section V gives an overview of 
the Quality of Experience (QoE) aspects of MDL in MCC 
environment. Section VI presents the QoE evaluation 
scenarios, while Section VII gives the comparison QoE 
evaluation results for MDL in MCC environment with 
respect to the Distance Learning (DL) in the conventional 
CC Environment. Finally, Section VIII concludes the paper 
and provides information about future work.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Cloud computing in mobile platforms has invoked a new 
wave of evolution in the rapidly developing mobile world. 
Many mobile devices such as smart phones, PDAs, tablets, 
pockets PC have been added to the Mobile Cloud Computing 
(MCC) Environment.  Today these mobile cloud applications 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

(like Google’s Map, Gmail for iPhone, and Cisco’s WebEx 
on iPad and iPhone, etc.) are already available [8]. 
The Mobile Cloud Computing Forum defines MCC as 
follows [1], [9]: 
“Mobile Cloud Computing at its simplest refers to an 
infrastructure where both the data storage and the data 
processing happen outside of the mobile device. Mobile 
cloud applications move the computing power and data 
storage away from mobile phones and into the cloud, 
bringing applications and mobile computing to not just 
smartphone users but a much broader range of mobile 
subscribers”. 
Mobile Cloud Computing will provide many benefits for 
cloud computing, mobile network operators, such as 
increased reach, reduced costs, and reduced reliance on 
hardware and software equipment. Mobile cloud computing 
has many advantages among the few listed below: 
• 
Sharing information and applications without the 
need of complex and costly hardware and software 
since computations are run in the cloud [10]; 
• 
Enhanced features and functionalities of mobile 
devices through new cloud applications [10]; 
• 
Ease of access and development since the access 
point to mobile cloud computing is through a 
browser and not a mobile operating system [10]; 
• 
Cheaper for cloud computing vendors to build 
mobile cloud applications because of access to all 
mobile devices, i.e. one application can be shared 
and accessed by many mobile device users [10]; 
• 
Broader reach, since mobile cloud applications can 
be accessed through a browser, the cloud computing 
applications can be reached by all mobile device 
users, as long as the mobile device has an internet 
access [10];  
• 
Extending battery lifetime for mobile devices [1], 
[11], [12], [13]; 
• 
Improved data storage capacity and processing 
power since MCC enable mobile 
users to 
store/access the large data on the cloud through 
wireless networks [1], [14], [15], [16], [17]; and 
• 
Improved reliability since data and computer 
applications are stored and backed up on a number 
of computers [1], [18], [19].  
However, there are still many obstacles for MCC, 
including 
service 
availability, 
mobility 
management, 
security, privacy, energy efficiency, etc. These problems 
must be carefully addressed before MCC could become 
completely operational.  
Mobile Distance Learning is seen as one of the potential 
future applications of MCC [1], [2]. Mobile Learning (m-
learning) is one of the applications that can be supported by 
MCC. Traditional m-learning applications have limitations in 
terms of high cost of devices and network, low network 
transmission rate, and limited educational resources [20], 
[21], [22]. Cloud-based mobile learning (m-learning) 
applications are introduced to solve these limitations. For 
example, utilizing a cloud with the large storage capacity and 
powerful processing ability, the applications provide learners 
with much richer services in terms of data (information) size, 
faster processing speed, and longer battery life.  
One MCC model that is made up of complex network 
and relationships of and in between Infrastructure Providers, 
Application/Services Providers, End-Users and Developers 
all producing and/or consuming applications and/or services 
on internet is given in [23]. Of a particular interest in this 
model are the developers that offer their applications and 
services on the web via Software as a Service (SaaS) models 
running on other’s hardware (HW) and software (SW) 
infrastructure providers. However since MCC can be applied 
in many areas, this model is too general and does not specify 
any details about MCC implementation.  
Microsoft has proposed an HPC Server and Cloud 
Platform [24]. This platform uses Windows HPC Server 
2008 Service Pack 1 that enables service oriented, HPC jobs 
to be executed as a service using Windows Azure datacenter. 
High Performance Computing (HPC) gives analysts, 
engineers, and scientists the computation resources they need 
to make better decisions, fuel product innovation, speed 
research and development, and accelerate time to market. 
Some examples of HPC usage include: decoding genomes, 
animating movies, analyzing financial risks, streamlining 
crash test simulations, modeling global climate solutions, 
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and other highly 
complex problems. However this platform is specified only 
for Conventional Cloud Computing Environment.  
Therefore, we propose a new Mobile Cloud Computing 
Model for Mobile Distance Learning that uses HPC cluster 
infrastructure. The advantage of the presence HPC cluster 
infrastructure in the MCC model is that it can be used in 
situations where the necessary computing cannot be 
performed by a mobile device, or a conventional PC, or 
laptop. This model is described in the next section. 
III. 
MOBILE CLOUD COMPUTING MODEL 
Our proposed Mobile Cloud Computing Model for 
Mobile Distance Learning is given on Fig. 1. This Model 
incorporates High Performance Computing (HPC) Cluster 
Infrastructure. The communication between the end-user 
devices (terminals) and the HPC Center is in a cloud 
computing environment due to the various service requests.   
The terminals can be connected to the HPC Cluster 
Infrastructure inside the University Local Area Network 
(LAN), or they can be connected on external network 
(internet). The University Moodle Platform Server (Moodle 
Course Management System) [5], [6] hosts educational 
resources and it is connected on the University LAN. The 
user may access the Moodle platform directly from the 
University LAN or through the Internet in order to collect the 
necessary data that needs to be computed by the HPC center. 
Alternatively, the data that needs to be computed can be 
collected by the HPC cluster infrastructure throughout the 
University LAN if the data is too large and cannot be 
collected by the mobile terminal. When the user wants some 
data to be computed by the HPC cluster infrastructure it 
sends request to the HPC center. When the HPC 
acknowledges the request it receives the data directly from 
the user terminal or from the University Moodle Platform. 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
Figure 1.  Mobile Cloud Computing (MCC) Model with High Performance Computing (HPC) for Mobile Distance Learning (MDL) 
The user can access the HPC center either from University 
LAN, or directly from internet, through the HPC 
Management System (HPC Controller). The HPC Controller 
manages the authorized access to the HPC Center, and it is 
directly connected on both passive and active server. Like 
that a redundancy is provided in case the active server goes 
Out Of Service (OOS). The passive and the active servers are 
connected to the Load Balancer, which determines which 
server is active. The Load Balancer also determines which 
server needs to manage the load (either the active, or both), 
i.e. the incoming service request from the user.  
Both active and passive servers are connected to the 
storage area network and the cluster network infrastructure. 
The server takes additional data from the storage area 
network that needs to be processed (computed), and then it 
forwards all the necessary data to the cluster network 
infrastructure for further computing. The cluster network 
infrastructure consists of N interconnected computer nodes. 
One of these nodes is the main node, or master node, and it 
determines which nodes should perform the computing of 
data. Like that parallel processing is enabled. Once the data 
computation is completed, the final information is sent back 
to the user. If the master node fails to operate normally, then 
another node becomes master node. Like that a redundancy 
among the nodes is achieved.  
The advantage of this model is that it offers new services 
on mobile devices, as a special benefit from using the HPC 
center within the mobile cloud environment. In our case, we 
have provided many statistical calculations connected to the 
MDL by using HPC center. HPC Cluster infrastructure is 
useful in situations where the necessary computing cannot be 
performed by a mobile device, or a conventional PC, or 
laptop. Another advantage of this model is that it provides 
service continuity, or seamless mobility as the user 
handovers from external network to the University Local 
Area Network.  
The next section will present the Experimental System 
Architecture for m-learning that supports Mobile Cloud 
Computing. In order to provide higher quality of presenting 
the learning material, the Cisco WebEx application will be 
used as an end-user application on the mobile devices.  
IV. 
Experimental System Architecture 
The experimental system architecture for Mobile 
Distance Learning (MDL) that supports Mobile Cloud 
Computing (MCC) with High Performance Computing is 
given on Fig. 2. According to this architecture the University 
classroom is connected to the University Moodle Server 
Platform, internet and HPC Platform. The University 
Classroom usually should have the following equipment: PC, 
or laptop, microphone, speakers, tablet, webcam, projector, 
and a monitor, or screen. At the University Classroom the 
instructor presents and delivers the content of the learning 
material to the students in a classical manner, or via internet 
to the students that are at home, at work, or simply they are 
mobile (on the road). The students that are at home, or at 
work connect to the course by using their PC, or laptop using 
the high speed internet from their home, or their office. On 
the other hand, the mobile students (students on the road) use 
their mobile devices (mobile smartphones, or tablets) to 
connect to the course via their mobile networks (such as 
GPRS, UMTS, HSPA, WiFi, WiMAX or LTE).   
The University Moodle Server Platform provides 
possibility to host the digital educational resources, which 
can be accessed by the instructor and all students either 
locally, or throughout internet connection. Additionally all 
students, as well as the instructor over the internet can access 
the University Moodle Server Platform to collect, or 
download the data that needs to be computed and to forward 
it to the HPC platform, for huge amount of data processing 
in a cloud computing environment. Alternatively, the HPC 
cluster infrastructure may download the necessary data from 
the University Moodle Platform, when it receives a request 
from the authorized user. In the HPC platform, the HPC 
controllers process the users’ requests. The HPC Data center 
provides the hardware and software facility, as well as the 
infrastructure for cloud computing service providers. At the 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
Figure 2.  Mobile Cloud Computing (MCC) System Architecture with High Performance Computing (HPC) for Mobile Distance Learning (MDL) 
HPC Data centers, several servers are linked with high speed 
networks to provide services requested by users.   
Particularly the overall theoretic performance of the HPC 
cluster in Macedonia is 9 TFlops, and achieved peak 
LINPACK performance is 7.776 TFlops, that is 86% 
efficiency. It consists of 84 computational blade servers with 
2 Six core L5640 CPUs and 24 GB RAM. The 6 
management servers have also 2 Six core L5640 CPUs and 
24 GB RAM, four of which act as storage servers and are 
connected in a failover configuration to a Serial Attached 
Small Computer System Interface (SCSI) storage with 
60x600 GB Dual channel Serial Attached SCSI (SAS) disks. 
The HPC cluster provides possibility for deployment of any 
needed library, or software pack for any research 
community.    
One potential application that delivers the information 
(learning content) from the course lecturer to the distance 
student and vice versa with a very high presenting quality is 
the Cisco WebEx application. WebEx suite, compared to 
other tools, offers a broad range of Web conferencing, and 
content sharing [25]. No software download is required for 
participants, and WebEx will run on any Internet server, or 
mobile devices such as smart phones, or tablets.  A summary 
of WebEx Key features is given in [26].  
WebEx can be used for different educational scenarios. 
For example the WebEx Whiteboard is a suitable tool for 
teachers in distance learning sessions. Also there is a 
possibility of annotations of the browser’s application while 
sharing a map. WebEx is also a suitable tool for sharing and 
highlighting medical images in Telemedicine. WebEx offers 
possibility for sharing a presentation, where either can be 
used the WebEx annotation tools, or better the Power point 
annotation tools that are available in the presenter mode.  
V. 
QUALITY OF EXPERIENCE (QOE) ASPECTS OF MDL IN 
MCC ENVIRONMENT 
Mobile Distance Learning in a Mobile Cloud Computing 
Environment can be tested on both QoS and QoE aspects. 
Below is provided a short description for each of these 
aspects.  
QoS refers to the technical aspects. It is defined as the 
ability of the network to provide a service at an assured 
service level. QoS encompasses all functions, mechanisms 
and procedures in the network and the terminal that ensure 
the provision of the negotiated service quality between the 
User Equipment (UE) and the Core Network (CN). QoS is 
measured, expressed and understood in terms of networks 
and network elements, which usually has little meaning to a 
user. The reliability in service concerns throughput, delay, 
jitter and loss in data during transmission of data; service 
availability, security in terms of authentication as well as 
authorization, coverage area, and service setup time of the 
related bearer service; service retain ability, in general 
characterizes connection losses [27].  
QoE refers to the perception of the user about the quality 
of a particular service, or network, i.e. it depends on 
customer satisfaction in terms of usability, accessibility, 
retain ability and integrity of the service. QoE means overall 
acceptability of an application, or service, as perceived 
subjectively by the end-user. Quality of Experience includes 
the complete end-to-end system effects (client, terminal, 
network, 
services 
infrastructure, 
multimedia 
learning 
content, etc.). Overall acceptability may be influenced by 
user expectations and context.  
However, the overall QoE (user perception) is influenced 
by both technical performance of the network (QoS aspects) 
and the non-technical aspects of the service. QoE refers to 
the personal feelings of the customer about the quality of a 
service, and it expresses using perceptive words like ‘good’, 
‘excellent’, ‘poor’ [28]. 
Since High Speed reliable and secured internet access is 
used at the University Campus Network it can be assumed 
that the network has excellent technical performances, .i.e. 
no QoS technical issues are present. Therefore the main 
focus in this paper is directed towards the non-technical 
aspects of QoE evaluation of the mobile distance learning 
system in MCC environment, and its comparison to the 
conventional distance learning system in CC environment.  
The QoE will be evaluated through answering the survey 
questions by the participants after the completion of the 
distance learning course. The survey consists of the 
following questions: 
• 
What is the user’s satisfaction in using the system 
from quality of presentation of learning documents? 
• 
Is it easy to understand the presented concept? 
• 
Did the user focus very easy to the presentation? 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
Figure 5.  A Screenshot from the testing of WebEx on International 
Distance Learning Conference 
 
Figure 6.  HTC Sensation as a Part of the Learning System 
 
Figure 3.  iPhone 4 as a Part of the Learning System 
 
Figure 4.  iPad as a Part of the Learning System 
• 
How interactive is the system for communication 
with the presenter, asking the questions, etc.? 
• 
Did the user find the Human Computer Interaction 
(HCI) friendly for himself/herself? 
• 
How available is the learning system to the user? 
• 
Did you find the usage of High Performance 
Computing (HPC) Center useful? 
VI. 
QOE EVALUATION SCENARIOS 
In order to provide the QoE evaluation results (section 
VII), the system has been tested in the following two 
environments: the Distance Learning (DL) system in the 
conventional Cloud Computing (CC) environment and MDL 
system in MCC environment. These two scenarios are 
described in subsections A and B.   
A. QoE Evaluation of DL System in a Convetional CC 
Envrionment 
The test of WebEx Communication System for the DL 
system in the Conventional CC Environment was performed 
in the following two distance learning conference scenarios: 
Local Conference and International Conference. This 
corresponds to the scenario Student at Home, Student at the 
Office, or Student in a Distant Classroom, described in Fig. 
2. The test was performed in the following two conference 
scenarios: the local scenario and the international scenario.  
The local distance learning conference was performed 
locally within the University in Ohrid, in order to verify 
whether the WebEx can be used for distance learning, as 
well as to discover the possibilities and features of WebEx. 
The international distance learning conference was 
performed between the University for Information Science 
and Technology from Ohrid, Macedonia and the Norwich 
University from Vermont, USA. A screenshot from this test 
is given on Fig. 3. It can be noticed that during this test there 
was a course presentation about Network Security prepared 
by the University of Norwich. Students were able easily to 
follow the presentation, to ask questions, or to exchange 
some ideas using the WebEx features. Several professors and 
students participated from both Universities.  
Both scenarios were several times performed and were 
successfully completed. 
B. QoE Evaluation of MDL System in MCC Environment 
After the successful tests in subsection A, the WebEx 
Application was tested in a MDL System. This scenario 
corresponds to the mobile students’ category (a situation 
when the students are on the road), described in Fig. 2. In 
order to perform the tests of this scenario one user used the 
following mobile devices: Motorola Milestone, HTC 
Sensation, iPhone 4 and iPad. The tests were successfully 
performed locally within the University, or regionally 
between the cities Ohrid and Skopje, at a distance of around 
175 km. Screenshots from these tests are given on Fig. 4, 5, 
and 6.  
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
Figure 7.  Comparison of QoE Evaluation Results in % 
VII. COMPARISON OF QOE EVALUATION RESULTS 
The survey questions were answered by 30 students that 
participated in the distance learning sessions of both CC and 
MCC environment. They answered the questions after their 
participation in the distance learning course. For simplicity 
we made the answers to have two options: ‘good’ or ‘bad’, 
i.e. ‘yes’, or ‘no’. Each student’s vote for each question has a 
weight of 10/3 by 30 participants. A summary of the QoE 
evaluation results is given in Fig. 7. The following things can 
be concluded. 
The mobile devices provide higher and easier availability 
of the MDL system in MCC environment, since the 
conventional DL system in CC environment cannot provide 
the learning content for the mobile students. Additionally the 
usage of High Performance Computing (HPC) Center is 
more useful for MDL system in MCC environment, rather 
than DL in CC environment. HPC Cluster infrastructure is 
useful in situations where the necessary computing cannot be 
performed by a mobile device, or a conventional PC, or 
laptop. This MCC model can be applied everywhere where 
there is need of fast and intensive computing and analysis of 
huge amount of data, such as modeling of 3D graphics 
visualization and animation in ecology, global climate 
solutions, financial risks, healthcare and medical learning, 
decoding genome projects, etc.  
Additionally, the following was concluded. For the DL 
system in CC environment was noticed a perfect 
communication, without any delay, or noise interference, 
since a high speed secured reliable internet access was used.  
For the MDL system in MCC environment the network 
may not have good performances if the user uses the network 
on a high speed train. Additionally, the mobile devices have 
limited capabilities compared to conventional Laptop, or PC. 
Laptop, or PC can provide audio and video conversation, 
chat, and data sharing option. The tablet (iPad) supports 
audio and video conversation, and chat. The mobile phone 
supports audio conversation and chat. Currently data sharing 
(content sharing) from the mobile devices is not supported. 
These constraints are due to the capabilities of the mobile 
devices as well as the features that are supported by the 
current WebEx version. However, the smart phone and the 
tablet (iPad) can only view the data (content) that is shared 
from a PC or Laptop. This is sufficient for mobile students 
(students on the road) to listen, to view and follow the 
lecture, since it not expected from them to make any 
presentation.  
VIII. Conclusion and Future Work 
This paper provided a new Model of Distance Learning 
System in Mobile Cloud Computing environment, by using 
High Performance Computing (HPC) Cluster infrastructure, 
as well as some existing videoconferencing technologies 
enriched with mobile and wireless devices. After the 
introduction and the related work, the new MCC model was 
presented. Then new system architecture was proposed for 
the Mobile Distance Learning System in Mobile Cloud 
Computing Environment that uses the Internet Access. Then 
some QoE aspects of such distance learning system were 
addressed. Finally QoE evaluation was performed by 
comparing the MDL system in MCC environment with 
respect to the DL system in CC environment. It was 
concluded that mobile devices provide higher and easier 
availability of MDL system in MCC environment, since the 
conventional DL system with CC environment cannot 
provide the learning content for the mobile students. The 
smart phone and the tablet (iPad) can only view the data 
(content) that is shared from a PC, or Laptop, which is 
sufficient for the mobile students (students on the road). 
They have to listen, to view and to follow the lecture, since it 
is not expected from them to make any presentation. 
Additionally, the usage of High Performance Computing 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

(HPC) Center is more useful for the MDL system in MCC 
environment, rather than for the DL system in CC 
environment. HPC Cluster Infrastructure is useful in 
situations where the necessary computing cannot be 
performed by a mobile device, or a conventional PC, or 
laptop. This MCC model can be applied everywhere where 
there is need of fast and intensive computing and analysis of 
huge amount of data, such as modeling of 3D graphics 
visualization and animation in ecology, global climate 
solutions, financial risks, healthcare and medical learning, 
decoding genome projects, etc. 
In future, we plan to address some additional issues for 
the MCC, such as, Low Bandwidth, that could be solved 
with 4G (5G) and/or Femtocells, Network Access 
Management, QoS (from technical point of view such as 
network delay by using cloudlets, clonecloud, etc.), billing 
and standardization of the interface. However our main 
interest is to provide more services on a Software as a 
Service (SaaS) basis for mobile learners and/or more 
efficient MDL by using HPC center. We plan to include 
services based on simulation, or experiments performed by 
the HPC center on behalf of mobile users, particularly in 
healthcare and medical education and learning, where 
extremely is necessary to perform quick data analysis of 3D 
medical images. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Many special thanks to the respected Dr. Frank Vaneck 
and Dr. Phil Susmann from Norwich University, Vermont, 
USA for their participation in this international distance 
learning educational project. Also many special thanks to 
Aleksandar Karadimce, Dijana Nikolovska and Daniela 
Boshnakoska, and all UIST students for their support during 
this project.  
REFERENCES 
[1] T. H. Dihn, C. Lee, D. Niyato, and P. Wang, “A Survey of Mobile 
Cloud Computing: Architecture, Applications, and Approaches,” 
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing – Wiley, 
DOI:10.1002 WCM/1203, pp. 1 – 38, 11 October 2011. 
http://www.eecis.udel.edu/~cshen/859/papers/survey_MCC.pdf 
[retrieved: 05, 2012] 
[2] N. M. Rao, C. Sasidhar, and V. S. Kumar, “Cloud Computing 
Through Mobile Learning,” (IJACSA) Internationa Journal of 
Advanced Computer Science and Applications, Vol 1, No. 6, pp. 42 – 
46, December 2010.  
[3] High Performance Computing, Coraid solutions. 
http://www.coraid.com/solutions/high_performance_computing 
[retrieved: 05, 2012] 
[4] Maryland CPU-GPU Cluster Infrastructure. 
http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/research/GPU/facilities.html  
[retrieved: 05, 2012] 
[5] Moodle, Course Management System. www.moodle.org  
[retrieved: 05, 2012] 
[6] Course Management Site of the University for Information Science 
and Technology, Ohrid, Macedonia. http://uistmoodle.servehttp.com/ 
[retrieved: 05, 2012]   
[7] Cisco WebEx website. http://www.webex.com [retrieved: 05, 2012] 
[8] S. S. Qureshi, T. Ahmad, K. Rafique, and S. U. Islam, “Mobile 
Computing as Future for Mobile Applications – Implementation 
Methods and Challenging issues,” Proceedings of IEEE CCIS, pp. 
467 – 471,  November 2011.  
[9] Mobile Cloud Computing Forum.  
http://www.mobilecloudcomputingforum.com/ [retrieved: 05, 2012] 
[10] M. Tantow, “Cloud Computing and Smartphones,” article in Cloud 
Times, 01 March 2011. http://cloudtimes.org/cloud-computing-and-
smartphones/ [retrieved: 05, 2012] 
[11] A. Rudenko, P. Reiher, G.J. Popek, and G. H. Kuenning, “Saving 
portable computer battery power through remote process execution,” 
Journal of ACM SIGMOBILE on Mobile Computing and 
Communications Review, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 19 - 26, January 1998.  
[12] U. Kremer, J. Hicks, and J. Rehg, “A Compilation Framework for 
Power and Energy Management on Mobile Computers,” in 
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Languages and 
Compilers for Parallel Computing, pp. 115 – 131, August, 2001.  
[13] E. Cuervo, A. Balasubramanian, D. Cho, A. Wolman, S. Saroiu, R. 
Chandra, and P. Bahl, “MAUI: Making Smartphones Last Longer 
with Code offload,” in Proceedings of the 8th International 
Conference on Mobile Systems, applications, and services, pp. 49-62, 
June 2010.  
[14] http://aws.amazon.com/s3/ [retrieved: 05, 2012]  
[15] http://www.flickr.com/ [retrieved: 05, 2012]  
[16] http://www.shozu.com/portal/index.do [retrieved: 05, 2012] 
[17] http://www.facebook.com [retrieved: 05, 2012] 
[18] P. Zou, C. Wang, Z. Liu, and D. Bao, “Phosphor: A Cloud Based 
DRM Scheme with Sim Card,” in Proceedings of the 12th 
International Asia-Pacific on Web Conference (APWEB), pp. 459, 
June 2010.  
[19] J. Oberheide, K. Veeraraghavan, E. Cooke, J. Flinn, and F. Jahanian, 
“Virtualized in-cloud Security Services for Mobile Devices,” in 
Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Virtualization in Mobile 
Computing (MobiVirt), pp. 31 – 35, June 2008.  
[20] X. Chen, J. Liu, J. Han, and H. Xu, “Primary Exploration of Mobile 
Learning Mode under a Cloud Computing Environment,” in 
Proceedings of the International Conference on E-Health Networking, 
Digital Ecosystems and Technologies (EDT), vol. 2, pp. 484 – 487, 
June 2010. 
[21] H. Gao and Y. Zhai, “System Design of Cloud Computing Based on 
Mobile Learning,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International 
Symposium on Knowledge Acquisition and Modeling (KAM), pp. 
293 – 242, November 2010.  
[22] J. Li, “Study on the Development of Mobile Learning Promoted by 
Cloud Computing,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Conference on Information Engineering and Computer Science 
(ICIECS), pp. 1, December 2010.   
[23] Ceo, “On (Mobile) Cloud Computing – Multiple Perspectives to its 
Benefits, 
Drivers, 
and 
Economics,” 
25 
December 
2009. 
http://weblog.cenriqueortiz.com/mobility/2009/12/25/on-mobile-
cloud-computing-angles-to-benefits-drivers-and-economics/ 
[retrieved: 05, 2012] 
[24] Microsoft Server and Cloud Platform (Windows HPC Server 2008 
R2). 
http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/server-cloud/windows-
server/high-performance-computing-hpc.aspx [retrieved: 05, 2012] 
[25] Socialbrite “Virtual Meeting Smackdown! 15 Top Web Conferencing 
Services Compared,” Social Tools for Social Change, 19 January 
2011. 
http://www.socialbrite.org/2011/01/19/comparison-top-web-
conferencing-services/ [retrieved: 05, 2012] 
[26] Cisco WebEx Key Features.  http://www.webex.com/lp/keyfeatures 
[retrieved: 05, 2012] 
[27] D. Sharma, R.K. Singh, “QoS and QoE Management in Wireless 
Communication System,” International Journal of Engineering 
Science and Technology (IJEST), ISSN: 0975-5462, Vol. 3, No. 3, 
pp. 2385 – 2391, March 2011.  
[28] N. Muhammad, D. Chiavelli, D. Soldani and M. Li, “QoS and QoE 
Management in UMTS Cellular Systems,” John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
ISBN: 0-470-01639-6, pp. 1-8, 2006. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

