A Raster SOLAP Designed for the Emergency Services of Brussels Agglomeration 
Kasprzyk Jean-Paul 
SEGEFA 
e-mail: jp.kasprzyk@ulg.ac.be 
Donnay Jean-Paul 
Geomatics Unit 
e-mail: jp.donnay@ulg.ac.be
 
University of Liege 
Department of Geography 
Liege, Belgium
 
Abstract— In order to quickly reach incident locations, 
emergency services have to fairly distribute their resources on 
the territory. This distribution is based on an analysis which 
depends on heterogeneous spatial data like past interventions 
(recurring risk), specific geographical places (sporadic risk), 
road network or socio-economic variables. On the other hand, 
Spatial Online Analytical Processing (SOLAP) tools are 
designed for the collection and the analysis of large spatial data 
sets. In this study, an original raster SOLAP model is 
implemented 
for 
emergency 
services 
of 
Brussels 
agglomeration. It allows decision-makers to freely generate 
risk maps (continuous fields), depending on several dimensions 
(time, intervention type, risk type, etc.), and to compare them 
with the accessibility of firefighters and ambulances. 
Simulations can also be performed on resources locations to 
see their impact on the main accessibility. 
Keywords-GIS; Risk Analysis; Data Warehouse; Fields; 
Firefighting. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In order to quickly reach incident locations, emergency 
services (including firefighters and medical aids) have to 
fairly distribute their resources on the territory. This 
distribution is a complex problem since it has to be adapted 
to a risk model which depends on heterogeneous spatial data 
sets: past interventions, population, buildings, road network, 
etc. 
On the other hand, Business Intelligence [8] and 
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) include efficient 
tools for the collection and the analysis of large amounts of 
spatial data. Amongst them, SOLAP Spatial Online 
Analytical Processing (SOLAP) tools allow decision makers 
to freely explore spatial data warehouses through interactive 
maps, tables or charts [1][2]. The information from SOLAP 
is summarized (aggregated), thus more easily analyzed by 
the decision-makers. The objective of this research is the 
design of a SOLAP adapted to the needs of the emergency 
services of Brussels. Thanks to SOLAP, they should be able 
to easily collect the data and analyze the risk so as to 
adequately deploy their resources in the territory of the 
Brussels agglomeration. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section II is a state of the art about risk analysis for 
emergency services (subsection II-A) and SOLAP including 
explanations about SOLAP basics (subsection II-B). A 
raster SOLAP model adapted to risk analysis is then 
deducted from this review of the literature (research 
hypothesis in subsection II-C). Section III describes the 
raster SOLAP model developed to reach the research 
objective. Its main architecture (subsection III-A) is 
composed on the one hand of a vector data warehouse in 
charge of data collecting/archiving (subsection III-B), and 
on the other hand, of several raster data cubes which allows 
risk calculations by the SOLAP (subsection III-C). The 
SOLAP model is then validated in section IV by the SOLAP 
interface, which allows users to explore raster data cubes 
through interactive risk maps. Section V contains 
conclusions and perspectives of this paper. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
A. Risk Analysis 
Risk can be divided into two distinct categories (and so 
two distincts models): recurring risk and sporadic risks [9]. 
Recurring risk is the probability of incidents, which can 
be estimated from historical interventions. These data are 
mainly characterized by time, space and intervetion type. In 
particular, space can be modeled as a field [3][18] thanks to 
Kernel Density Estimation  (KDE) [13]. It is very popular to 
identify hotspots of punctual events in a continuous space. 
For instance, it is offenly used by police for crime 
prevention [7][8]. Moreover, when points are aggregated 
with KDE, shapes of the hotspots suffer less from the 
Modifiable Areal Unit Problem (MAUP) [25] than with 
spatial aggregations, depending on administrative entities 
(communes, census tracts, etc.). 
Sporadic risk does not depend on incidents frequencies, 
but on specific places that would require important 
resources from emergency services in the event of an 
incident: tunnels, schools, hospitals, etc. Once identified, 
these locations can be incorporated into a multicriteria 
analysis [11] to determine the sporadic risk, by weighting 
the human and material damages incurred in their vicinity.  
In addition to the probabilistic nature of the recurring 
risk, it is possible to study the conditions favoring the 
emergence of the risk, no longer for an operational purpose, 
but for an urban planning objective. Population density, age 
of buildings and other environmental variables can be 
considered in a geographic regression model to explain the 
frequency of incidents [14]. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Once the risk model has been completed, the adequacy 
of the response by the emergency services can be assessed 
by the travel times required by the various concerned 
resources (personnel and specific equipment) to reach the 
claims sites. This step requires an up-to-date and precise 
road graph with average speeds adapted to the emergency 
vehicles.  
B. SOLAP 
A SOLAP server allows decision makers to query data 
hypercubes (also simply called “data cubes”) extracted from 
a data warehouse. Data hypercubes are models of pre-
aggregated data depending on several dimensions (for 
example: month, commune and incident type) [1]: 
combinations of dimension members define facts, and an 
aggregated measure is associated to every fact. For example, 
the combination of January 2016 (member of dimension 
“month”), fire incident (member of dimension “incident 
type”) and Anderlecht (member of geographical dimension 
“commune”) is a fact with an associated number of 
incidents (measure). 
Users navigate into data hypercubes through interactive 
tables, charts or maps. Maps can represent spatial facts 
(defined by at least one geographical dimension like 
communes), and tables/charts can represent non-spatial facts 
(defined by non-spatial dimensions like months, incident 
types, etc.). 
The SOLAP server is able to calculate the measure of 
every possible fact defined at a less detailed level of 
dimensions than the one stored in the data hypercube (for 
example, the number of incidents for the whole year 2016 
instead of January 2016). This typical SOLAP operation is 
called “roll up” (on the time dimension in the previous 
example) and the reverse operation is called “drill down”. 
Filters on dimension members (for instance, facts defined by 
a specific month of the time dimension) are called “slices” 
in the SOLAP vocabulary. 
Despite the heavy calculations that a “roll up” operation 
can require, a SOLAP must show quick results. For this 
purpose, the SOLAP literature proposes different strategies 
[1] like the precomputing of different hypercubes at 
different levels of details or the use of different physical 
structures: 
hypercubes 
modelled 
by 
arrays 
(Multidimensional OLAP or MOLAP) [11], by relational 
tables (Relational OLAP or ROLAP) [20] or both (Hybrid 
OLAP or HOLAP) [13]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Examples of map algebra operators, adapted from [23] 
 
Most of SOLAP tools are only able to use the vector 
model to represent spatial facts on maps [16] [29]. However, 
several researches showed the potential of raster SOLAP 
[17][18] [20][22] [24] [28]. The raster model is well adapted 
to the representation of data which are continuous in space 
(fields). Pixels of a raster can spatially define every type of 
geographical entities while the vector model uses three 
different primitives: point, line and polygon. The physical 
structure of raster is quite similar to MOLAP (arrays of 
data) and so the SOLAP aggregations can easily be 
computed 
by 
raster 
functions 
which 
are 
already 
implemented in most of spatial database management 
systems (DBMS). The most important functions [23] are 
local map algebra (Figure 1a) for aggregations on non-spatial 
dimensions and zonal map algebra (Figure 1b) for 
aggregations on geographical dimensions. Moreover, as the 
X and Y dimensions of space are defined in the 
multidimensional structure of raster SOLAP (a spatial 
member is a pixel) [17][18], any geographical dimension 
(for examples: the communes of Brussels) can be imported 
on the fly as a zone layer during the analysis. 
C. Hypothesis 
This distribution of resources for emergency services is 
a complex problem that requires the design of a risk model. 
As said in subsection II-A, a risk model integrates spatial 
data about recurring risk (historical interventions), sporadic 
risk 
(hospitals, 
schools, 
etc.) 
and 
socio-economic 
characteristics. Then, the risk model has to be confronted to 
the accessibility of emergency service resources. As said in 
subsection II-B, SOLAP tools are very useful for the 
integration and the analysis of large amounts of spatial and 
heterogeneous data, as required by the risk analysis. In 
particular, raster SOLAP has important advantages for this 
study: a continuous representation of a space for recurring 
risk, a single spatial primitive (pixel) for every type of 
geographical entities, etc. Therefore, a raster SOLAP can be 
designed to help emergency services of Brussels to fairly 
distribute their resources on the territory.  
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

III. 
RASTER SOLAP MODEL 
A. Main architecture 
The main structure of the SOLAP is a typical “Business 
Intelligence” architecture (Figure 2). Data are extracted 
from different sources and archived in a spatial data 
warehouse (subsection III-B). At this stage, data are still in 
their native vector format. Then, vector data are used to 
create five raster data cubes (subsection III-C): recurring 
risk for fires, recurring risk for medical aids, sporadic risks, 
accessibility of firefighters and accessibility of medical aids. 
Users can then manipulate these raster cubes in the SOLAP 
interface to compute different risk maps. 
 
   
 
Figure 2. Main architecture of the SOLAP 
 
As 
mentioned 
above, 
spatialized 
variables 
of 
demography, environment, buildings, etc., can also be 
integrated into the SOLAP for urban planning objective, but 
this aspect is not developed here. 
B. Spatial data warehouse 
Some data were directly provided by emergency services 
of Brussels (internal data): 
 
fire stations and departures of ambulances 
georeferenced as points; 
 
past 
interventions 
from 
2012 
to 
2016 
georeferenced as points with time and type (the 
two main categories are fires and medical aids) 
for recurring risk (around 350 000 incidents). 
Some data were obtained from the appropriate suppliers 
or directly downloaded (open data). A first category of these 
external data are the ones defined by emergency services as 
sources of sporadic risk: 
 
school buildings with more than 1000 students 
(around 80 points with an attribute “number of 
students”); 
 
dangerous 
industrial 
sites 
(UE 
Seveso 
directive) with a “risk level” attribute (4 
points); 
 
prisons (2 points); 
 
hospitals with a “number of beds” attribute 
(around 80 points); 
 
main shopping zones with a “type” attribute 
(around 100 polygons) [2]; 
 
tunnels with a length superior to 400m (around 
200 polygons). 
A second category of external data is the road graph of 
Brussels extracted from Open Street Map (OSM) [26]. It 
covers a larger territory than Brussels because the quicker 
path between two points inside Brussels is not always 
entirely included in the city (which is surrounded by an 
important motorway).  Arcs are associated to an average 
speed that was fixed with firefighters of Brussels for each 
road type of OSM. There is a speed for the two crossing 
directions in order to model prohibited directions 
(associated to a very slow speed). Note that OSM road data 
for Brussels are geometrically based on accurate UrbIS data 
which are supplied by Brussels Regional Informatics Centre 
(BRIC) [6]. 
C. Raster Data Cubes 
1) Recurring risk 
Conceptually, the multidimensional structure of a raster 
data cube can be described by a star schema. Figure 3 is the 
star schema for recurring risks. It is characterized by three 
non-spatial dimensions and two spatial dimensions. The 
raster SOLAP model used in this study, including the 
management of KDE, is based on [17][18]. Note that 
recurring risk data cubes about fires or about medical aids 
are described by the same star schema. Only the members of 
the “incident type” dimension are different. 
 
 
Figure 3. Star schema of a recurring risk data cube 
 
Non-spatial dimensions are incident type, hour range (3 
hours) and day of the week. Physically, these dimensions 
are managed as a ROLAP model [20]: a non-spatial fact is 
the record of a fact table and the member of each non-spatial 
dimension describing the fact is stored in a specific attribute 
(incident type, hour range and day of week). The measure of 
the non-spatial detailed fact is stored in a raster attribute. 
The theoretical number of records of the fact table is 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

determined by the Cartesian product of the three non-spatial 
dimensions. For instance, the raster cube for fire recurring 
risk should have 224 records (detailed facts): 4 incident 
types * 8 hour ranges * 7 days of week. This value grows 
exponentially with the number of dimensions. For this 
reason, a raster cube cannot involve too many non-spatial 
dimensions to be able to quickly compute “roll up” 
aggregations. Note that concretely, the number of detailed 
facts can be inferior to the theoretical value if the density of 
the data cube is less than 100% (some detailed facts can 
have a null measure). This is an advantage of the ROLAP 
model, which does not have to store null facts (contrary to 
MOLAP or raster). 
Physically, spatial dimensions (X and Y) are directly 
managed in the ROLAP measure (a raster attribute). At the 
raster level, a spatial fact is a pixel which is characterized by 
a raster measure (the pixel value), a member for X and a 
member for Y. These spatial dimensions members are 
determined by the position of the pixel in the raster array 
like for MOLAP. Therefore, the raster SOLAP model is also 
characterized by MOLAP advantages (fast aggregations on 
arrays) and disadvantages (null pixels have to be stored). 
Note that every raster of the fact table is characterized by 
the same resolution (100 m) and the same spatial coverage 
[16]. 
When a raster cube is created for recurring risks, a KDE 
raster is computed for the ROLAP measure of every non-
spatial fact with the same parameters: resolution of 100 m, a 
quartic KDE function and a KDE bandwidth of 500 m (this 
parameter determines the smoothing of the field).  It has 
been demonstrated [17] that aggregating KDE measures 
with local map algebra is equivalent to the computation of a 
KDE with all the points that should be involved in the 
SOLAP aggregation (if KDE parameters are identical for 
every non-spatial fact). Therefore, maps resulting from 
SOLAP operations on these data cubes are KDE fields of 
recurring risk. They are the result of a simple sum 
aggregation (local map algebra), then normalized to range 
from 0 to 100. An example is given by Figure 4. It is a map 
of recurring risk for indoor fires including all days of the 
week and all hour ranges. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Recurring risk for indoor fires 
 
The other raster data cubes are characterized by a similar 
star schema for the spatial dimensions (resolution of 100 m). 
Consequently, only the non-spatial dimensions and the 
raster measure (pixel value) will be discussed in the 
following subsections. 
2)  Sporadic risks 
The star schema of the raster cube for sporadic risk is 
only characterized by one non-spatial dimension: the source 
of risk. Its dimension members are schools, hospitals, 
tunnels, industrial sites, commercial areas and prisons. 
When punctual entities (schools, hospitals, industrial sites 
and prisons) are rasterized, their spatial shape is a buffer of 
300 m. For zonal entities (tunnels and shopping zones), the 
shape of the native polygons is used. 
The raster measure is a weight reflecting the risk 
generated by the source: 
 
hospitals: number of beds; 
 
schools: number of students; 
 
commercial areas: 1 for secondary poles, 2 for 
primary poles and shopping centers, 3 for “rue 
Neuve” (a very populated shopping street in 
Brussels) [2]; 
 
industrial sites: 1 for “low risk” industries and 2 
for “high risk” industries in the Seveso 
description; 
 
prisons: 1 for all; 
 
tunnels: 1 for all. 
After their rasterisation, these six measures are 
normalized to range from 0 to 100. 
As it is characterized by only one non-spatial dimension 
(source of risk), the fact table for sporadic risk has only six 
non-spatial facts (records). The local map algebra operation 
for the SOLAP aggregation on this dimension is a weighted 
sum for which weights were determined with the Brussels 
fire department: 
 
hospitals: 0.2; 
 
schools: 0.2; 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
commercial areas: 0.1; 
 
industrial sites: 0.15; 
 
prisons: 0.2; 
 
tunnels: 0.15. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Sporadic risk 
 
Figure 5 shows a map of sporadic risks including all 
sources (pixels values are normalized to range from 0 to 
100). 
3) Resources accessibility 
The star schema of the two raster cubes for resources 
accessibilities are also characterized by one non-spatial 
dimension: fire stations for firefighters (first raster cube) 
and departures of ambulances for medical aids (second 
raster cube). The measure of a non-spatial fact is a raster, 
modelling the accessibility of a specific resource. The 
measure of a spatial fact (a pixel value) is the travel time 
from the resource to the pixel location (in minutes). Note 
that in some cases, ambulances can start from fire stations 
too. These particular resources are present in both raster 
cubes (fire stations and ambulances departures). 
When raster cubes are built, measures are calculated in 
this way. For a specific resource (a non-spatial fact), a 
vector routing algorithm calculates a travel time value for 
every node of the OSM graph through the quicker path. 
Then an interpolated value is associated to every pixel of a 
raster covering the region of interest. 
As asked by emergency services, users can choose one 
threshold amongst three different values: 4 minutes, 7 
minutes and 10 minutes. Beyond these thresholds, the 
accessibility of a resource is considered as null. Therefore, 
during the analysis, every pixel exceeding the chosen 
threshold is set to null. After that, remaining pixel values are 
transformed in order to obtain an accessibility index which 
grows when it gets closer to the resource and ranges from 0 
to 100 (1).  
                   
'
(100
*100)
max
p
p 

 
 
     (1) 
In (1), p’ is the new pixel value, p is the original pixel 
value (travel time in minutes) and max is the maximum 
pixel value in the raster. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Accessibility of fire stations with a travel time threshold of 7 
minutes 
 
Finally, the local map algebra operation for the SOLAP 
aggregation on the resource dimension is a weighted sum. 
The weights can be set on the fly by the user in order to 
obtain an accessibility field adapted to previous risk maps. 
They reflect the amount of humans/materials present in the 
fire station or ambulance departure. For instance, Figure 6 
shows an accessibility map of all fire stations with equal 
weights and with a travel time threshold of 7 minutes (pixels 
values are normalized to range from 0 to 100). 
 
IV. 
VALIDATION 
The raster SOLAP for emergency services of Brussels is 
implemented with open source tools only. The spatial 
DBMS PostgreSQL/PostGIS manages the vector data 
warehouses and the raster cubes. SOLAP aggregations are 
implemented with map algebra functions of PostGIS [28]. 
MapServer [21] delivers map results through Web Map 
Services (WMS) which are shown in the SOLAP web 
interface. 
The SOLAP interface allows the user to do “slice” and 
“roll up” operations on the five raster cubes (recurring risk 
for fires and medical aids, sporadic risk, accessibility of 
firefighters and ambulances). It is also possible to add new 
resources and directly see their effect on the accessibility: 
after setting the new location on the interactive map, 
PGRouting (PostGIS extension for routing algorithms) 
calculates all the quicker paths and then PostGIS raster 
builds the new measure in the accessibility raster cube. As 
previously said, weights of fire stations and ambulance 
departures can also be modified on the fly. In addition to the 
risk analysis, emergency services are thus able to perform 
simulations about the spatial distribution of their resources. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

The tool is also designed to easily integrate new data for 
future analysis. The creation of all raster cubes is 
automatized, including recurring risk (a KDE function has 
been implemented in PL/PGSQL language). 
Let’s remember that SOLAP is a powerful tool to easily 
explore data. It gives all the keys that form the basis of a 
complete risk analysis: different sources of risk described 
through time/space dimensions and accessibility of 
emergency services resources. It is then up to the user to 
compare and interpret the different risk maps obtained with 
the SOLAP. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES 
The aim of this research was the design of a SOLAP for 
emergency services of Brussels agglomeration, which have 
to fairly distribute their resources on the territory (fire 
stations and ambulances). After a review of the literature 
about risk analysis and SOLAP, a raster SOLAP model was 
chosen to reach the objective. Following this model, a data 
warehouse was created to collect and archive spatial data 
involved in the risk study of Brussels (historical 
interventions, specific places of risk, road network, etc.). 
Several raster data cubes were then created to model the 
different aspects of the analysis: recurring risk, sporadic 
risk, accessibility of firefighters and ambulances. Finally, 
the model was validated by the implementation of the 
SOLAP architecture and its interface. It allows users to 
freely explore data by applying SOLAP operations (“slices” 
and “roll up”) on raster data cubes through interactive risk 
maps. Moreover, simulations can be performed on resources 
locations and weights (reflecting the amount of present 
human/materials) to see their effect on the main 
accessibility. 
This research highlighted the interest of raster SOLAP 
for risk analysis. In comparison with vector SOLAP (most 
of current SOLAP tools), raster allows a continuous 
visualization of space adapted to the analysis of recurring 
risk through KDE maps. Moreover, all types of spatial 
entities can be described by a single primitive: the pixel. 
Raster SOLAP is quite easy to implement with spatial 
DBMS because raster operations (map algebra) can be 
directly used for data aggregations. More generally, SOLAP 
allows decision makers to proceed to risk analysis in a user-
friendly environment which also includes the automatic 
integration of new data for future analyzes. 
Finally, further improvements could be provided to this 
study. First, it was only possible to set one average speed to 
every arc of the road graph with the available data. This 
does not reflect the real situation of Brussels because the 
important congestion of the road network mainly depends 
on time dimensions: hour of the day and day of the week. 
With richer data, it would be easy to integrate these 
dimensions in raster cubes for accessibility. Secondly, for 
technical reasons, it was not possible to extract the durations 
of interventions from historical data. If it was available, the 
risk analysis could take it into account as a weight for each 
point when KDE measures are computed. Indeed, the 
requisition time of emergency resources is an important 
factor in risk analysis. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to express their thanks to 
SIAMU (“Service d'Incendie et d'Aide Médicale Urgente de 
la Région de Bruxelles-Capitale”) for providing this 
interesting case study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Bédard, “Spatial OLAP”, Forum annuel sur la R-D, 
Géomatique VI: Un monde accessible, Montréal, November 
1997. 
[2] Y. Bédard, “Beyond GIS: Spatial Online Analytical 
Processing and Big Data”,  The 2014 Dangermond Lecture, 
Santa-Barbara, 2014. 
[3] S. Bimonte, Integration of geographic information in data 
warehouses 
and 
online 
analysis: 
from 
modeling 
to 
visualization (Intégration de l’information géographique dans 
les entrepôts de données et l’analyse en ligne: de la 
modélisation à la visualisation), PhD, Institut National des 
Sciences Appliquées de Lyon, Lyon, 2007. 
[4] S. Bimonte and M. A. Kang, “Towards a model for the 
multidimensional analysis of field data, in Proceedings of the 
Fourteenth east European conference on advances in 
databases and information systems”, B. Catania, M. Ivanovic 
and B. Thalheim, Eds. Berlin : Springer-Verlag, 2010, pp. 58-
72. 
[5] Brussels-Capital Region. Retail Observatory 2011, available 
at 
<http://urbanisme.irisnet.be/pdf/observatoire-du-
commerce-2011>, retrieved [January, 2017]. 
[6] BRIC, Brussels Regional Informatics Centre — CIRB-CIBG-
BRIC, 
Available 
at 
<http://cirb.brussels/>, 
[retrieved : 
January, 2017] 
[7] S. P. Chainey, L. Tompson, and S. Uhlig, “The utility of 
hotspot mapping for predicting spatial patterns of crime”, 
Security Journal, vol. 21, 2008, pp. 4-28. 
[8] S. P. Chainey, “Examining the influence of cell size and 
bandwidth size on kernel density estimation crime hotspot 
maps for predicting spatial patterns of crime”, Bulletin of the 
Geographical Society of Liege, vol. 60, 2013, pp. 7-19. 
[9] T. Chee et al., “Business Intelligence systems: state-of-the-art 
review and contemporary applications, Symposium on 
Progress in Information and Communication Technology”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 2009, pp. 96-101. 
[10] P. Chevalier et al, Locating fire stations: An integrated 
approach for Belgium, Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 
Vol. 46(2), 2012, pp. 173–182. 
[11] E. F. Codd, S. B Codd, and C. T. Salley, Providing OLAP 
(On-line Analytical Processing) to User-Analysts: An IT 
Mandate, E.F Codd and Associates, 1993. 
[12] M. N. Demers. GIS Modeling in Raster. New York : John 
Wiley & Sons, 2001. 
[13] M. Di Salvo, M. Gadais, and G. Roche-Woillez, The kernel 
density estimation : methods and tools (L’estimation de la 
densité par la méthode du noyau: méthodes et outils), Lyon : 
Certu, 2005. 
[14] B. Espinasse, Data warehouses: OLAP systems: ROLAP, 
MOLAP and HOLAP (Entrepôt de données: Systèmes OLAP: 
ROLAP, 
MOLAP 
et 
HOLAP). 
Ecole 
Polytechnique 
Universitaire de Marseille,  2013. 
[15] N. Guldaker and P. O. Hallin, Spatio-temporal patterns of 
intentional 
fires, 
social 
stress 
and 
socio-economic 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

determinants: A case study of Malmö, Sweden, Fire Safety 
Journal, Vol. 70, 2014, pp. 71–80. 
[16] Intelli³, available at <http://www.intelli3.com>, [retrieved : 
january, 2017]. 
[17] ISO 19123. Geographic information - Schema for coverage 
geometry and functions, 2005. 
[18] J. P. Kasprzyk, Integration of spatial continuity in the multi-
dimensional structure of a data warehouse – raster SOLAP 
(Intégration de la continuité spatiale dans la structure 
multidimensionnelle d’un entrepôt de données – SOLAP 
raster), PhD, Université de Liège, 2015, Available at 
<http://hdl.handle.net/2268/182360>. 
[19] J. P. Kasprzyk and J. P. Donnay, A raster SOLAP for 
Visualization of crime data fields. GEOProcessing 2016 : The 
Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic 
Information Systems, Applications, and Services, Venice, 24-
28 april 2016, pp. 109-117. 
[20] R. Kimball and M. Ross, The Data Warehouse Toolkit: The 
Definitive Guide to Dimensional Modeling, Third Edition, 
New York : John Wiley and Sons, 2013. 
[21] J. Li, L. Meng, F. Z. Wang, W. Zhang, and W. Cai. “A Map-
Reduce-enabled SOLAP cube for large-scale remotely sensed 
data aggregation”, Computers and Geosciences, vol. 70, 2014,  
pp. 110-119. 
[22] Mapserver 
7.0.0 
beta1 
documentation, 
available 
at  
<http://mapserver.org/>, [retrieved:  march, 2016]. 
[23] R. McHugh, Integration of the matrix structure in spatial 
cubes (Intégration de la structure matricielle dans les cubes 
spatiaux), Master thesis. Université Laval, Québec, 2008. 
[24] J, Mennis, R. Viger, and C. D. Tomlin, “Cubic Map Algebra 
functions for spatio-temporal analysis, Cartography and 
Geographic Information Systems”, vol. 30, no. 1, 2005, pp. 
17–30. 
[25] M. Miquel, Y. Bédard, and A.  Brisebois, “Conception of 
geospatial data warehouses from heterogeneous sources: 
application example in forestry” (Conception d’entrepôts de 
données géospatiales à partir de sources hétérogènes : 
Exemple d’application en foresterie), Ingénierie des Systèmes 
d’Information, vol. 7, no. 3, 2002, pp. 89-111. 
[26] S. Openshaw, The modifiable areal unit problem. Norwick 
(Norfolk), Geo Books, 1983. 
[27] Open Street Map, Open Street Map, Available at 
<https://www.openstreetmap.org/>, 
[retrieved: 
January,  
2017]. 
[28] M. Plante, Towards matrix cubes  supporting on the fly spatial 
analysis in decision support (Vers des cubes matriciels 
supportant l’analyse spatiale à la volée dans un contexte 
décisionnel), Master thesis, Université Laval, Québec, 2014. 
[29] P. Racine and S. Cumming, Store, manipulate and analyze 
raster data within the PostgreSQL/PostGIS spatial database. 
FOSS4G, Denver, September 2011. 
[30] Spatialytics, 
Open 
Source 
GeoBI, 
available 
at  
<http://www.spatialytics.org/>, [retrieved: January, 2017]. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

