Dynamic Scenarios of Trust Establishment in the Public Cloud Service Market 
Soyoung Kim 
Technology Opportunity Research Team 
Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information 
Seoul, Korea 
e-mail: sykim8171@kisti.re.kr  
Junseok Hwang, Jörn Altmann 
Technology Management, Economics and Policy 
Program 
Seoul National University 
Seoul, Korea 
e-mail: Junhwang@snu.ac.kr, jorn.altmann@acm.org   
 
 
Abstract—The adoption of the public cloud by firms and 
individuals has been slowed because of the lack of trust. This 
research seeks the rules of trust establishment between the 
public cloud providers and users through signaling game 
theory, analyses dynamic scenarios in which the pervasive 
distrust arises, and suggests policy guidelines. The theoretical 
analysis results suggest that the most critical task is to make a 
pool of trustworthy public cloud service providers to establish 
an efficient market. The results also show that prudent policy 
design is desirable. Specific case studies and simulations will be 
conducted as further studies. 
Keywords-public 
cloud 
computing; 
trust; 
signaling; 
equilibrium; dynamic. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The public cloud has been a valuable tool for firms and 
individual users to reduce their Information Technology 
costs. A number of public cloud services such as Amazon’s 
AWS or HP’s cloud service have been launched. Even 
telecom vendors, contents providers, web portals and small 
Information Technology solution vendors are participating in 
the race between public cloud services. A few companies 
have been started to compete on price as competition has 
intensified [1]. 
However, the users may not select a cloud service only 
by its price and performance. The criteria for selecting a 
cloud service are not only these two factors. Trustworthiness 
and reliability are also important criteria for selecting a cloud 
service. Therefore, the establishment of trust is one of the 
major challenges for the growth of the public cloud market 
[2]. The users’ concerns about security and privacy threats 
hinder the diffusion of the public cloud [3]. The public cloud 
market now needs policy solutions to address the users’ 
concerns rather than technological solutions [4].  
This study analyses, with game theoretical insights, the 
process of trust establishment and distrust pervasiveness 
when users select a public cloud service. In particular, the 
signaling game is adopted to find several types of the 
equilibrium and to analyze several dynamic paths from 
equilibrium. Policy guidelines are also discussed with the 
dynamic scenarios.  
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The 
next section reviews the related literature. Section III 
proposes the trust signaling game in the public cloud market. 
Section IV investigates the dynamic scenario of trust 
establishment. Section V suggests preliminary results and 
discussion. Finally, Section VI provides a conclusion and a 
future work. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Research on trust establishment and management related 
to cloud services has increased as more kinds of cloud 
computing have been provided to personal users and private 
companies. Researchers have focused on the issues of 
possible risks and threats, such as data loss and personal 
information disclosure [3]. Some researchers have pointed 
out that these risks and threats to security and privacy had 
slowed down the adoption of cloud computing services [5]. 
Some researchers have proposed identity management and 
authentication systems [6] for mitigating those risks and 
threats or have suggested a reputation mechanism based on a 
trust management framework [7]. 
Research on trust management related to network based 
transactions between unknown users has a history of decades 
[8, 9]. These trust management frameworks mostly have 
their theoretical background in game theory, particularly ‘the 
prisoners’ dilemma’ [10]. 
 Another type of game, ‘the signaling game [11]’ would 
be useful to analyze the process that could help a user select 
the most trustworthy (or productive) provider among several 
of them, especially when information asymmetry exists 
between a user and a provider so that a user cannot know the 
exact type of a provider. Several studies adopted the 
signaling game to develop the autonomous agents’ strategies 
for selecting their partners on a network [12, 13]. Most of 
these studies focused on finding the best strategy of an 
individual agent rather than finding policies that make a 
socially efficient equilibrium. 
A particular piece of research in the political science field 
adopted the signaling game to analyze the dynamics of 
general trust in society [14]. It showed how society’s trust 
tends to oscillate between high and low levels in the long run. 
However, the study more focused on scrutinizing in the 
cycles of the general trust levels in a society rather than 
finding a solution to address problems of pervasive distrust. 
Based upon previous research, this paper focuses more 
on finding policies and solutions to make a socially efficient 
equilibrium and to address an emergence of generalized 
distrust. 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

III. 
TRUST SIGNALING GAME IN THE PUBLIC CLOUD 
MARKET 
Recently, the public cloud service market has had a 
number of providers, so it is almost a competitive market. 
Vendors try to increase the probability of being selected by 
users through advertising their performance, service prices, 
or trustworthiness. Users make their decisions based on these 
signals from vendors. This section firstly investigates the 
criteria for the existence of a stable equilibrium when a 
number of providers and users send and receive signals and 
make partnerships. 
A. Process of Trust Establishment 
The criteria for selecting partners for users are price, 
performance, trustworthiness, and so on. This theoretical 
analysis focuses on trustworthiness. 
The process of trust establishment has roughly three steps 
[15]. The first step is when the market initiates before the 
trust develops concretely. A user faces the signaling game 
situation in which a user meets an unknown cloud service 
provider. The provider sends a characteristic signal to the 
user and the user makes a decision of selecting a partner by 
investigating the provider’s signals with proper price. Then 
the connected partners transact or communicate. 
The second step is the process of trust formation. As the 
first step is repeated, the transaction history and a trust 
relationship are accumulated. The total trust level of the 
market can increase or decrease with specific paths of trust 
formation. 
The third step is the steady-state. Once the trust 
establishment reaches a stable equilibrium, a small loss or 
disturbance of trust cannot affect the equilibrium. This study 
focuses on what factors make a successful path from the 
second step to the third step and what factors make the 
transition a failure. 
B. Fundamental Rules of  Trust Establishment 
In the first step, a service provider intends to increase the 
probability of being selected by users by signaling his/her 
trustworthiness in various ways. Simultaneously, a user 
observes those signals and decides whether or not to trust the 
provider. Our previous work briefly analyzed this signaling 
game model and suggested three propositions about 
signaling cost structures and market environment conditions 
in network based transactions [16].  
Service providers, or cloud providers in this case, are 
divided into two types. One type is the good provider who 
observes the promised rules and the other type is the bad 
provider who violates the rules or does damage to the partner. 
The proportion of bad type providers in the total provider 
population is denoted by πB (0 ≤ πB ≤ 1). A provider sends 
signal e (0 ≤ e ≤ 1) to users, and a single signal costs c(e). 
Users are all the same type. A user receives a signal from 
a provider, examines the signal, estimates the type of the 
provider, and suggests a charge for the trustworthy 
transaction, w(e). 
Once the partner and the charge are determined and the 
transaction conducted, the payoff for the user is subsequently 
fixed. The payoff for a user varies with the type of partner. If 
a user meets a good type provider, the user receives the 
proper value of cloud service, v (v ≥ 0) and the provider also 
receives the proper payoff, v. However, a bad type partner 
does not deliver the proper value of cloud service and does 
damage to the user with an amount of ‘L’ (L ≥ 0). Therefore, 
the bad type provider extort the payoff v and the additional 
value L from the user. What is important here is that the user 
cannot be aware of the type of his/her partner. 
The total expected utility for the bad type provider is 
determined by the following equation: uB(e)=v+L+w(e)-cB(e) 
and the for good type provider is determined by the 
following equation: uG(e)=v+w(e)-cG(e). 
Without a signal, the user suggests the fee to the 
unknown provider for the cloud computing service as the 
following equation: w̄  = −πB(v+L)+(1−πB)v = v−πB(2v+L). 
This means the expected payoff for a single transaction. 
In this model, the following three propositions are 
concluded. 
· 
Proposition 1. (The separating equilibrium) When 
the level of trustworthiness of a participant is used as 
the signal, the signal can be effective in 
distinguishing one provider from another, assuming 
the cost of the trust level signaling is sufficiently 
distinct from each other. 
· 
Proposition 2. (The pooling equilibrium) The 
equilibrium in which the two types of providers 
select the same trustworthiness level as a signal is 
not stable if the signaling cost structure is distinct. 
· 
Proposition 
3. 
The 
effectiveness 
of 
the 
trustworthiness level signaling depends on the 
proportion of bad type participants in the market. 
For example, if the trust signaling cost of the bad type 
provider is cB(e)=e and the cost of good type provider is 
cG(e)=γe (0<γ<1), the user distinguishes the good type 
provider from the bad type provider with only their signals, 
as long as the equilibrium signal e* falls into the following 
range in Equation (1). In this equilibrium the good type 
provider selects e=e* and the bad type provider selects e=0. 
 
*
v
v
e
g
£
£
 
(1) 
If two types of provider select their signals in the range 
of Equation (2), they can select the same level of signal as 
equilibrium. However, it is an unstable state. 
 
 
*
(2
)
B
e
v
v
L
p
£
-
+
 
(2) 
Proposition 3 means that the costly signaling regime is 
useful only if the proportion of bad type providers falls into 
the range of Equation (3).   
 
2
2
B
v
v
v
L
v
L
g
< p
<
+
+
 
(3) 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

IV. 
DYNAMIC SCENARIO OF TRUST ESTABLISHMENT 
The trust signaling game described in Section III is a 
static and single round situation. The second process of trust 
establishment is a dynamic process in which the trust 
relationships stay in equilibrium or leave it. 
A.  Potential for a Pareto Improvement in the Equilibrium  
When the separating equilibrium has been reached, the 
equilibrium signal of a good type provider is e* and the 
signaling cost is γe. A bad type provider does not send a 
signal and pay any cost. In a dynamic situation, bad type 
providers gradually leave the market and the ratio of bad 
type providers, πB, decreases.  
If πB decreases down to this level, good type providers 
have incentives to lower their signaling costs so that 
increases the total payoff. In terms of individual rationality, 
the expected payoff of a good type provider if he/she decides 
not to send a signal in this situation is shown in the following 
Equation (4). 
 
( ) | 0
2
(2
)
G
e
B
u
e
v
v
L
p
= =
-
+
 
(4) 
The expected payoff of Equation (4) is more than 2v-γe*. 
There is potential for a Pareto improvement when πB 
decreases gradually. It means that the expected payoff of one 
player can increase without decrease of the other’s expected 
payoff. It reaches the Pareto efficient state when πB finally 
falls to zero. However, users stay with the same payoffs 
because of the assumption of the zero profit condition.  
The situations where providers and users believe each 
other to conduct themselves properly and choose each other 
as partners make the transactions and communications more 
efficient. This is the benefit of an economy of trust. 
B. The Countinuous Needs of Costly Signals 
The Pareto optimum described in the previous subsection 
is not stable, because a good type provider can become a 
traitor or change his/her type in the real world market. Or, a 
newcomer provider of bad type can enter the market.  
When a single bad type provider appears in the market 
with no signaling, πB turns into a higher value than zero. This 
traitor or newcomer can gain a higher payoff than any other 
good type providers with an amount of ‘L’. The users lose 
their payoff by the same amount. The sum of payoffs of all 
market participants does not change; however the share of 
users transfers to the share of traitors or newcomers. 
Once this transformation happens, users calculate the 
proportion of bad type providers again, and introduce the 
price related to the proportion, and finally the market adopts 
the costly signaling regime.  
C. The Dynamics of the Trust Equilibrium Shift 
The last situation of dynamic trust transition is when the 
proportion of bad type providers exceeds the range defined 
by the third proposition of Section III. The separating 
equilibrium with costly signaling is in stable equilibrium; 
therefore users can still distinguish a good type provider 
from a signal only if the value of πB is in the range defined 
by Equation (3). When the damage from a bad type 
provider’s behavior increases exceptionally, the separating 
equilibrium in which the two types of providers select the 
different trustworthiness level as a signal fails to stay stable. 
Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between the dynamic 
states of trust establishment and the proportion of bad type 
providers. Part (a) indicates the possible region of separating 
equilibrium, part (b) is the transition region of separating 
equilibrium and non-signaling pervasive trust and  (c) is the 
market reduction region. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Dynamic states of trust establishment 
V. 
SIMULATION DESIGN AND DISCUSSION 
The dynamics of trust can be more clearly understood 
with a simulation based on parameters which reflect the 
market conditions in the real world. Figure 2 shows the 
causal loop diagram of a dynamic model of trust 
establishment in the public cloud service market. The 
proportion of bad type providers, πB, is the most central 
variable which affects many other variables and receives 
feedback. This variable can be controlled by these exogenous 
variables which are denoted by ‘E’ with policy decisions.  
The ratio of a good type provider’s signaling cost to a 
bad type provider’s cost, γ, affects the signaling costs of two 
type providers and the levels of signals are affected by these 
costs. The probability of being selected by a user and the 
signaling cost affect the utility of a provider as well as the 
non-signaling price, w̄ . The utility of a provider affects the 
entrance and leaving rate of a provider. The amount of 
damage from misbehavior by a bad type provider, L affects 
the utility of a bad type provider 
 
Figure 2.  The causal loop diagram of a dynamic model of trust 
establishment in the public cloud service market 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

The results of designed simulation is expected to show 
the quantitative relationship between the variables which are 
illustrated in the Figure 2. 
It is obvious that non-signaling pervasive trust is the 
optimal state of the market. The second best state is when 
users can easily distinguish the good type providers with 
signaling in the separating equilibrium. The best or second 
best states can be realized by prudent policy design which 
can control several related variables in the causal loop 
diagram. 
The basic condition is to increase the signaling cost for 
bad type providers more than for good type providers. 
Reputation based mechanisms or third party authorization 
mechanisms can be possible methods to increase the 
signaling cost of a bad type provider. 
If the costly signaling is maintained after most of the bad 
type providers have retired, the conversion of good type 
providers into bad ones or the entrance of new bad type 
providers can be blocked. However, costly signaling is 
inefficient when the proportion of bad type providers is 
substantially low. Then, it is worth considering the 
community of good type providers or their agreement for an 
efficient market. Either monitoring and penalty contracts or 
agreements have to exist in such communities [17]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The fundamental rules and dynamic scenario of trust 
establishment are important factors that should influence the 
decision makers in the industry sector or a government 
which intends to promote the public cloud service market. 
The theoretical analysis results of this research suggest 
that the most critical task is to make a pool of trustworthy 
public cloud service providers to establish an efficient 
market. The results also show that prudent policy design, 
which makes signaling costs different for different types of 
providers is desirable. It also shows that even in a 
trustworthy market, minimum monitoring and penalty 
contracts are needed and individual users have to invest in 
security at an optimal level. 
Future work will verify the theoretical model of this 
paper with simulations and specify the dynamic scenarios of 
trust establishment and transition with several case 
investigations into various types of cloud computing services. 
In particular, the presented causal loop diagram will be 
validated and its parameters will be examined. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the KCC (Korea 
Communications Commission), Korea, under the CPRC 
(Communications Policy Research Center) support program 
supervised 
by 
the 
KCA 
(Korea 
Communications 
Agency). (KCA-2012-(11-941-1-005)) 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Larry Dignan, Cloud's price race to zero: Microsoft cuts Azure 
pricing, eyes Amazon, article of www.zdnet.com, March 9, 2012. 
http://www.zdnet.com/blog/btl/clouds-price-race-to-zero-
microsoft-cuts-azure-pricing-eyes-amazon/71246 
[2] S. M. Habib, S. Ries, and M. Mühlhäuser, "Cloud Computing 
Landscape and ResearchChallenges regarding Trust and 
Reputation," in Symposia and Workshops on Ubiquitous, 
Autonomic andTrusted Computing, Xi'an, China, 2010, pp. 
410–415. 
[3] S. Pearson, “Taking account of privacy when designing cloud 
computing services.” In ICSE Workshop on Software 
Engineering Challenges of Cloud Computing, Vancouver, 
Canada, May 2009, pp. 44-52. 
[4] M. Nelson,”The Cloud, the Crowd, and Public Policy,” Issues 
In Science And Technology, vol. 25, no. 4, 2009. 
[5] H. Takabi, J.B.D. Joshi and G.J. Ahn. ”Security and Privacy 
Challenges in Cloud Computing Environments.” IEEE 
Security & Privacy, vol. 8, no. 6, 2010, pp. 24-31. 
[6] L. Yan, C. Rong, and G. Zhao. “Strengthen cloud computing 
security with federal identity management using hierarchical 
identity-based cryptography,”. In The First International 
Conference on Cloud Computing, pp. 167–177, 2009. 
[7] K. Hwang, S. Kulkarni, and Y. Hu, “Cloud Security with 
Virtualized 
Defense 
and 
Reputation-Based 
Trust 
Management,” IEEE Int’l Conf. Dependable, Autonomic, and 
Secure Computing (DASC 09), IEEE CS Press, 2009. 
[8] P. Resnick and R. Zeckhauser, “Trust among strangers in 
Internet transactions: Empirical analysis of eBay’s reputation 
system,” working Paper for the NBERWorkshop on Empirical 
Studies of Electronic Commerce, 2000. 
[9] A. Jøsang, R. Ismail, and C. Boyd, “A survey of trust and 
reputation systems for online service provision,” Decis. 
Support Syst. Vol. 43, 2007, pp. 618–644. 
[10] R. Axelrod, The Evolution of Cooperation, Basic Books: New 
York, 1984. 
[11] A. M. Spence, (1973). “Job market signaling,” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 355–374. 
[12] A. Lopez-Paredes, M. Posada, C. Hernandez, and J. Pajares, 
“Agent based experimental economics in signaling games in 
Complexity and artificial markets,” Lecture Notes in 
Economics and Mathematical Systems, vol. 614, 2008, 
pp.121–129. 
[13] A. Patcha and J. Park, “A Game Theoretic Formulation for 
Intrusion Detection in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks, ” 
International Journal of Network Security, vol.2, no2, 2006, 
pp.131–137. 
[14] T. Ahn, and J. Esarey “A Dynamic Model of Generalized 
Social Trust," Journal of Theoretical Politics, vol. 20, no. 2, 
2008, pp. 151–180. 
[15] M. Head, and K. Hassanein, “Trust in e-Commerce: 
Evaluating the Impact of Third-Party Seals”, Quarterly 
Journal of Electronic Commerce, vol. 3, no. 3, 2002, pp. 307-
325. 
[16] S. Kim, and J. Hwang, “Theoretical Analysis and Simulation 
to Investigate the Fundamental Rules of Trust Signaling 
Games 
in 
Network-based 
Transactions”, 
The 
Third 
International 
Conference 
on 
Future 
Computational 
Technologies and Applications, 2011. 
[17] J. Hwang, S. Kim, H. Kim and J. Park, “An optimal trust 
management method to protect privacy and strengthen 
objectivity in utility computing services,” International 
Journal of Information Technology & Decision Making, vol. 
10, issue 02, 2011, pp. 287-308.  
 
 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

