Understanding the Relationship Between SDP and the Cloud 
Stéphane H. Maes 
Applications and Software, Huawei, Santa Clara, CA, USA 
smaes@huawei.com  
 
Abstract — Notions of SDP (Service Delivery Platform) has been 
widely used in Telcos albeit without a common industry 
understanding. SDP projects have spearheaded next generations 
of Telco service provider (SP) services and their forays into new 
business models. Recently, Telco players tried very actively to 
understand how to take advantage of Cloud Computing to 
improve efficiencies or open new opportunities for them. Today 
most initial activities have often started disconnected from 
Consumer, VAS and Enterprise activities where SDPs are used. 
The main contributions of this paper are in explaining how to 
understand SDPs in the context of Cloud Computing and  in 
positioning Cloud Computing and SDPs from an architecture for 
Telcos that want to reduce cost and complexity and increase 
efficiencies, scalability and availability of existing SDP and 
communication services as well as explore new business models 
with differentiators that could favor Telco SPs  over other more 
conventional cloud providers. Such recommednatiosn and 
blueprints have never been discussed before as far as we know. 
Keywords-component: Service Delivery Platforms, SDP, Cloud 
Computing, IaaS, PaaS, SaaS, Telecommunications, Telcos, SDF, 
OSS, BSS, Services 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Telcos (i.e., Telecommunications operators or Telco SPs in 
this paper) have deployed many variations of SDPs over the last 
decade, sometimes multiple SDPs within a same domain, to 
efficiently offer services including core communications, 
collaboration and multimedia services, content sales and delivery, 
exposure to third parties and reselling, etc. Initially some 
operators have deployed SDPs as one platform per service, 
network (technology) or target market. Today, one can see many 
SDP consolidations around one platform across all networks and 
for all services, including examples of multinational SDPs that 
allow multi-property operators to reduce cost and time to market 
across their multiple local subsidiaries as well as increase the 
application addressable market and therefore attractiveness to 
third party developers.  
 
Still, the absence of similar and sustained SDPs across enough 
Telcos has hurt the attractiveness of SDPs for developers when 
compared to the opportunities opened to them by the internet or 
the recent applications stores for smartphones.  The omnipresence 
of the Internet / web and its fundamentals impacts on the business 
of Telcos, is today forcing Telcos to better compete or cooperate 
with Internet Service Providers. In fact, one can expect that that 
many Telco SPs today will eventually morph their service 
business into similar "SoftCos" (i.e., not really distinguishable 
from many of the Internet service providers like Google, Yahoo, 
Facebook and many others).  
 
In the context, the successes or promises of Cloud Computing 
initiatives driven by companies like Amazon, Google, Yahoo, 
Salesforce.com and Microsoft as well as the offerings of 
companies like IBM, Oracle, VMWare and many open source 
projects have caught the attention of Telcos. Could it really be an 
ideal opportunity for Telcos to develop new business models with 
significant credibility, differentiators and hence chances of 
success? Certainly many Telcos realize that the market is moving 
fast but they still lack validation of the opportunities… 
 
Today many Telcos have some Cloud Computing initiatives, 
proof of concepts, pilots, initial offerings or even production 
services [7].  The industry seems to have learned from the 
mistakes of wall garden Telco-only vertical solutions that failed 
repeatedly in the past (e.g. IMS (IP Multimedia Subsystem) 
[3,4]): most initiatives are built or extend on what we may call as 
IT or Internet clouds … as examplified by Amazon AWS [6] 
(Most projects reuse AWS EC2 or S3 services and possibly a few 
others). 
 
For Cloud Computing Audience, we believe that it is important 
to summarize what an SDP really is before discussing the 
relationship to the cloud and recommending  how “IT or internet 
compatible clouds” can be used or offered by Telcos with 
differentiated features that exploit Telcos strengths.  
II. 
UNDERSTANDING CLOUD COMPUTING AND TELCOS 
In this paper, Cloud Computing refers to Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1 – Anatomy of Cloud Computing. Figure inspired from [1] 
 
Cloud Computing enabless “capabilities available on demand” 
or “on demand offerings” that can respectively support internal 
need or what a customer uses and therefore pays for.  These 
include: 1) IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service) that can provide 
computing infrastructure (e.g. virtualized OS with underlying 
computing HW (CPU) and storage). 2) PaaS (Platform as a 
Service) which include a control plane and an application plane 
with development and execution environments. The associated 
development tools can also be hosted in the cloud (and for 
example accessed through a browser). With PaaS, developers can 
build (web) applications on its SEE/SCE (Service Execution 
Environment / Service Creation Environment) without installing 
any tools on their computer and then deploy those applications 
without any specialized systems administration skills. The control 
plane can provide a combination of features like application 
scalability, 
application 
plane 
and 
infrastructure 
usage 
management shared across many applications (GAE (Google App 
Engine), Force.com) or customizable per application (~ like with 
OSGI bundles an application can be bundle with the SEE bundles 
that it requires). For service providers of complex or critical 
applications (like Telcos), the latter is recommended as it ensures 
easier management and performance assurance while the former 
is more for “consumer” or simpler less critical applications. 3) 
159
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

Software as a Service: software that is deployed over the internet 
or intranet. With SaaS, a provider rents an application to 
customers on demand, through a subscription or a “pay-as-you-
go” model. 
 
As described in Figure 1, a Cloud Computing solution 
can be built on multiple “clouds” configurations: private cloud 
(i.e., in house on demand infrastructure), public cloud (provided 
by other cloud service providers) or combinations of the above. 
The latter illustrates especially well how Cloud Computing can 
allows a service provider to handle peak requirements without 
having to allocate or invest in infrastructure that would otherwise 
remain idle, hence reducing CAPEX requirements. With a PaaS, 
OPEX costs are also further reduced by consolidating the 
development environment and the life cycle management of the 
applications developed on it. 
 
Offering IaaS, PaaS and SaaS open new business models to 
any service providers. PaaS today are only closely closely-held 
and only available as a Public Cloud service. No full fledge PaaS 
exist as a middleware product offering yet. None offer yet the 
customization mentioned above. 
III. 
CLARIFYING THE NOTION OF SDP 
In the absence of an industry accepted definition of SDP, we 
proposed to define a SDP as IT SOA middleware with Telco / 
communications features, capabilities and performances (see 
Figure 2) [5]. A good blueprint of how it should be implemented 
is provided by the OSE (OMA Service Environment) and related 
OMA and ITU work and specifications [2].  
 
 
Figure 2 – Blueprint and positioning in a Telco Environment (or 
generic Service provider environment) of a SDP as Middleware + 
Telco (in fact communications as this works also on internet for ISPs) 
functions, capabilities and performances [5]. 
 
Accordingly, the SDP IT middleware provides communication 
functions (e.g. enablers and SEE/SCE like SIP AS (e.g. JSR 289), 
etc) in a SOA IT middleware (e.g. JEE). The underlying network 
capabilities are exposed as enablers and controlled by these 
enablers through adapters that abstract them from the underlying 
network technologies. Applications, in house or developed by 
third parties are implemented by composition of enablers and / or 
within the SEE/SCE. This way, applications can be network 
technology and equipment vendor independent, future proof and 
convergence, continuity and FMC services are trivial to 
implement [4]. Enablers can be used to expose (Telco) backend 
applications like BSS (Business Support Systems) e.g. CRM, 
Billing Systems and BI and like OSS (Operating Support 
Systems) like network and system management, activation, 
provisioning. In this paper, in the context of a SDP and according 
tour SDP recommendation and blueprint [2, 4, 5], resources 
denote the system exposed and controlled via enablers or 
SEE/SCE (e.g. network elements like location server, SMSC, SIP 
router, IN call control, HSS, HLR, media servers, IVR/Voice 
servers etc, or OSS, BSS functions). SDPs can also be integrated 
with OSS and BSS via end to end SOA business processes as 
described in [5]. 
 
With a SDP, Telcos can:  
• Repurpose, increase, improve or rapidly and efficiently 
develop, with IT software practices, current and next 
generation core services as well as new communications 
services across Telco and Internet Networks. 
• Develop many content (and application or service) delivery 
services that allows operators to play new roles in the Internet 
value chain by becoming reseller, content aggregators, content 
distributors or even content providers towards their users.  
• Asset exposure (to third party) 
o Following the OSE blueprint [2], SDP can be used to expose 
through interfaces of enablers the operator's assets and 
capabilities, like features from the operator’s network, OSS or 
BSS to applications, especially to third party applications. The 
interfaces typically accommodate web services (e.g. SOAP) 
and web 2.0 bindings (e.g. REST) and the SDP ensures that 
the exposure is "controlled" by enforcing policies and SLAs 
on all requests and responses to and from the enablers and 
containers. 
o This enables operators to create “two sided businesses”. 
Conventionally this was for consumer services, but recently 
two sided businesses have proven also very successful to 
increase the role, and revenues, of operators with enterprises. 
Indeed, it allows service providers to resell third party services 
to enterprises bundled with their own communications 
services, therefore increasing revenue opportunities for 
operators and facilitating the distribution for third parties. 
o Both for consumer or enterprise markets, policy controlled 
exposure and two sided business models can enable new 
sources of revenue for operator where they can for example: 
 Monetize their assets  
 Share revenue with third party application / service providers 
 Create businesses for other third party to sell "enablers".  
 The model can be revenue sharing or reselling agreement etc. 
o With enterprises, the approach allows also operators to insert 
themselves in the enterprise value chain  
• Enablers 
expose 
relevant 
function 
ranging 
from 
communications functions like call control, media control, 
multimedia messaging, contextual functions like location, 
presence, OSS functions like device management or system 
provisioning or BSS functions like user or subscriber profile 
management, 
subscription 
management 
or 
account 
management, payment etc. They may also denote reusable 
functions (SOA) or MW exposed services. 
o Some enablers open the possibility of new businesses for 
operators like for example: 
 Payment and account management can enable operators to 
allow third party to bill services against the bill (pre or post-
paid) and therefore provides alternatives to services like pay 
pal.  
 Profile information or derived recommendations or business 
intelligence can be communicated (possibly filtered to 
respect privacy, preferences or regulation)  
• Policy enforcement. A SDP provides advanced policy decision 
capabilities. The can be used to provide ease of control of many 
other assets like: 
o Policy based differentiated traffic QoS 
o Converged charging as policy enforcement 
o Traffic control based on policy enforcement 
o Etc. 
160
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

• Anything else: as an open platform, operators can use the 
service creation and execution of the SDP middleware for any 
other need that they have, thereby enabling them to develop 
new services on par with the IT and internet players.  
o For example, developing recommendations, “ad insertion” and 
“ad warehousing” solutions that can be used to: 
 Subsidize services to better compete against the Internet 
"free" services that are similarly subsidized but differentiated 
with the addressable channels, applications that can support 
ad insertions and accurate ad targeting. 
 Maintain or create relationships with advertiser instead of 
giving them up to Internet advertisement warehouse like 
Google, Yahoo etc. 
 
With the above, operators are able to offer more efficiently 
services and better compete or partner with other IT/ Internet 
service providers. Tellcos can also create new businesses. For 
example: 
• Providers of financial services like mobile banking, payments 
• Providers of hosted platforms for third party services 
• Aggregators or federation of web 2.0 and social network 
services. 
 
These new services and some of the other services described 
above might be considered to be offered to "Internet users" 
instead of just the current Telco subscribers... This might truly 
perfect the transition of the Telco SP to SoftCos (i.e., Telco 
service providers looking better like Internet service providers). 
 
It is worth nothing also that SDP as IT/SOA middleware with 
Communications capabilities are also suitable platforms for other 
Service providers or Enterprises aiming at developing or offering 
communications related services… 
IV. 
SDP, SDF AND OSS/BSS 
SDF (Service Delivery Framework) denotes SOA integration 
of OSS, BSS and SDP and the services running over it. It 
encompasses 
patterns 
like 
EIA 
(Enterprise 
Integration 
Architecture), AIA (Application Integration Architecture) and 
TMF SDF [1].  
 
The integration enables the automation of end-to-end business 
processes across the OSS, BSS and SDP, like "concept to cash", 
"trouble to resolve", etc. Modern SDPs [5] provide such 
integration framework and business processes so that it further 
reduces the time to market of new services and automates all 
business processes surrounding businesses built around the 
services.  
V. 
TELCO SERVICE PROVIDERS AND CLOUD COMPUTING 
 
Telcos like many other players in other industries have observed 
the trends of Cloud Computing and the emergence of new players 
as providers of infrastructure, platform or software on demand [7]. 
It is has been argued that the business models around Cloud 
Computing play well along some of the core expertises of Telco 
like:  
• Offering (often to other businesses) reliable infrastructure (and 
services) integrated with reliable supporting OSS and BSS. 
• Bundling capabilities from their own assets like network QoS, 
Prepackaged OSS, BSS and end to end business processes. 
• Offering communications services that can be considered as 
precursors of SaaS business models (especially towards 
enterprise customers) albeit often today without the "on 
demand" / elastic scalability characterizing Cloud Computing. 
 
Therefore, many Telcos envisage creating successful Cloud 
Computing based businesses (See [7] for details). In fact many 
Telcos have already started to explore or provide such services. 
However, these initiatives have been so far mostly separated from 
their core services businesses and often driven by other 
departments than conventional Telco departments like IT, OSS, 
BSS and Network. With notable exceptions where Cloud 
Computing is provided as internal IT services provided by 
theTelco’s IT department.  
 
 
Figure 3 – Example of Recent Cloud Announcements 
 
In general Telco services are very basic so far with Telco Cloud 
offerings usually added to their existing Hosting Businesses. Most 
are just entering the market, not wanting to compete on low 
margin services: 1) Most Telco Offerings are IAAS versions of 
their hosting businesses as a Phase I. 2) Some Telcos have trials of 
SMB/Enterprise Offerings, including Telstra, SingTel, NTT Data, 
Orange and Telefonica. Orange [8] announced recently its value 
proposition of best in class, simple, secure and easy to pay per use 
managed services on private cloud with storage, security and 
unified communications. 3) Some Telcos have new offerings of 
Storage Clouds like Vodaphone and Orange. 4) Most Telcos are 
still studying what to do including in terms of PaaS and SaaS, 
talking to vendors or sending out RFI’s. They know they need 
more sophisticated business models.  
 
In general the value proposition for Telco is therefore: 1) To 
allows efficiencies & cost savings (e.g. Reduce CAPEX (Elastic 
architecture 
fit 
to 
needs); 
Reduce 
OPEX 
(Consolidated 
management); Green (Reduce power consumption)). 2) Opens 
new business models (e.g. computing / storage services: PaaS, 
IaaS; SaaS reselling; own SaaS (SDP – like Communications 
Services, OSS, BSS, BaaS)). 
VI. 
SDP PATTERNS FOR CLOUD COMPUTING 
 
Today, SDP and Cloud Computing are typically different and 
unrelated stacks, operated by different departments for different 
projects or business models. Can Cloud Computing further help 
evolve the core SDP services business of Telcos? 
 
To combine SDP and Cloud Computing, a few different options 
exist. The most interesting ones as discussed below. 
• SDP as resources (or SDP by the Cloud) where SDP exposes its 
capability in the cloud for applications in the cloud but it is not 
implemented on the cloud. 
 
161
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

 
Figure 4 – “SDP by the Cloud”. 
 
o With this option, the SDP and its components including 
enablers as well as underlying resources abstracted via adapters 
are treated as infrastructure (not cloud based) exposed in IaaS 
or PaaS via its northbound interfaces with appropriate resource 
affinity.  
o The SDP and underlying resources would be expected to 
provide (some) scalability support to efficiently support 
scalable IaaS, PaaS or SaaS here the enablers are used. 
o This option enables Telco operators to add SDP (e.g. 
communications, policies or OSS/BSS) capabilities to a "more 
conventional computing offering", therefore allowing them to 
provide a computing on demand offering while differentiating 
(using their network, SDP, OSS and BSS assets) with respect 
to other "non Telco" providers.  
o This option presents the additional advantage to consist into a 
relatively straightforward integration of an IaaS or PaaS with 
possibly an unmodified existing SDP.  
o However we do not recommend “porting” the SDP to IaaS 
differently from the next option (SDP as a PaaS). The present 
option is rather just a quick way to add communications 
features to Cloud Computing. In particular this approach does 
not allow taking advantage of the SDP integration and 
management via OSS/BSS. 
o CMCC OMP (Open Mobile Platform) follows this pattern. 
• SDP as a PaaS (or SDP on the Cloud) 
 
 
Figure 5 – ”SDP on the Cloud”. 
 
o A SDP, understood as middleware as previously discussed 
([5]), shares its SEE / SCE container(s) with the PaaS (e.g. as a 
same container or as part of a multiple container PaaS). 
Resources as defined in SDP (see [1,5]) are preferably 
implemented in elastic ways (part of IaaS). Resources may of 
course just be non cloud infrastructure, in which case 
scalability may be constrained. 
o Enablers are part of the PaaS functions (and can therefore be 
SaaS) 
o SDP adapters are built on PaaS to provide resource affinity and 
support for elastically scalable resources 
o Applications can be built on SDP as a PaaS as SaaS or as third 
party applications (as today) that may be hosted on PaaS or 
IaaS. 
o This option includes the particular cases where the PaaS is just 
the virtualization of the SDP SEE/SCE running on IaaS. 
o This option enables Telco operators to  
 as previously add SDP differentiating capabilities to 
computing offerings 
 Use Cloud Computing as ways to more efficiently implement 
its SDP and services e.g. By allowing dynamic allocation of 
resources based on load demand 
 Provides a path to integrate the Cloud Computing stack with 
the OSS and BSS, reusing the SDF patterns and capabilities 
provided by the SDP. 
o With such an option, all the services (and enablers) already 
built on SDP (SEE/SCE) can be easily adapted to the new SDP 
as a PaaS platform. 
o Such an option usually requires support for customizable 
control plane as mentioned above. 
• SDP or Enablers as SaaS (SDP in the Cloud): Enablers are built 
one way or another as SaaS than can be used by other services.  
o The SDP can be any hosted scalable platform implementation, 
implemented in many ways including the ways described in the 
previous options or the SDP may not exist and the SDP 
capabilities and functions are re-implemented on IaaS or PaaS. 
 SDF is not immediately available and it needs to be re-
implemented. 
o This option may be suitable for new capabilities that can be 
consisted as enablers or reusable capabilities but are not 
directly "Telco related" e.g. Search, user profile ... However for 
existing enablers, it may not be that advantageous considering 
the previous and following options. 
 This option is especially useful for Telcos to “resell” enablers 
provided by third parties… 
 
 
Figure 6 – Example of “Enablers as SaaS”. 
 
Again all these patterns can be adopted by generic (i.e., non 
Telcos) 
Service 
Providers 
or 
Enterprises 
building 
“Communications” offerings. 
VII. SDF PATTERNS FOR CLOUD COMPUTING 
OSS and BSS integration with SDP provides ways to support: 
• OA&M for life cycle management of the SDP and resources as 
well as applications using or running on it. 
• SDF provides support for end to end business process 
automation across OSS, BS and SDP 
 
With the SDP as a PaaS pattern, the implementation of the PaaS 
can include appropriate interfaces life cycle management / OA&M 
of the services, SaaS, PaaS and IaaS (just as for traditional 
middleware with traditional hardware, OS and applications). 
Therefore, reusing the SDF and OSS/BSS/SDP integration and 
adapting the end to end business processes (e.g. to encompass IaaS 
provisioning on demand and multi-tenancy).  
VIII. BLUEPRINT FOR SDP BASED CLOUD COMPUTING SDP 
 
Telcos should target such a combination or roadmap of the 
above options as appropriate for their objectives and time frame. 
The end target should be a SDP as a PaaS with enablers as part of 
162
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

the PaaS or in the Cloud (SaaS) and new related business models: 
SDP in the Cloud. 
 
With such a SDP as a PaaS (and with our without enablesr as 
SaaS), Telcos can: 1) More efficiently provide SDP and services 
(scalable on demand without requiring acquisition or locking of 
infrastructure to support it). We expect in fact that many target will 
target PaaS solutions that can target multiple underlying 
infrastructures like: i) Private Cloud / Next Generation data center, 
i.e., Private IaaS under the control of the telco, ii) Legacy servers 
and data centers used as private cloud iii) Public cloud (preferrably 
as Private Public Cloud) to support Cloud Burst or allow cheap 
and agile testing environment (while the private assets would be 
sued for production). Some operators in Europe have started 
exploring such models. 2) Provide computing services with 
communications capabilities available to the developers using the 
service.  
 
 
Figure 7 – Evolution of the SDP and the cloud 
 
A. Examples of Evolution between Options 
As an example of tactical solution, consider for example SaaS 
SDP communications applications like PBX or Unified 
communications. They can be built on a JSR 289 (SIP Servlets) / 
JEE 
converged 
container 
that 
is 
virtualized 
and 
managed/distributed on an IaaS, while the media servers, 
conference servers and IVRs are treated first as resources then as 
scalable resources that can then be built on IaaS.  Other “enablers” 
can be provided first by the cloud. Billing, provisioning and 
subscription management are driven from the OSS/BSS (via an 
end to end SOA business processes). 
 
B. BaaS 
BaaS (Business as a Service) illustrates how Telcos can further 
differentiate a Cloud Computing offering based on SDP as a PaaS 
by bundling: 
• An on-demand hosted platform to build and execute 
applications i.e., computing for rent 
• On demand backend business applications to build and run a 
business around the applications: 
o BSS (e.g. CRM, Billing), OSS on demand (as SaaS): i.e., 
applications for rent 
• On demand Customizable pre-build end to end business 
processes across Platform, OSS, BSS: i.e., business processes 
for rent. 
o i.e., Pre-built business infrastructure for Rent. 
 
With a BaaS, third parties can rent, develop and run applications 
and they can also rent a complete backend business infrastructure 
to run the resulting business as well as all the business processes to 
automate their business. In other words, besides renting computing 
and renting say CRM on demand they can rent OSS/BSS on 
demand and their integration to support selling their applications, 
campaigning, billing for usage, analyzing the usage, taking new 
subscriptions, etc. 
 
BaaS is differentiated from conventional IaaS, PaaS and SaaS 
models. Indeed,   
• It is not easy to provide an integrated OSS/BSS/Platform on 
demand. 
• Telco SPs have OSS/BSS assets and end to end Business 
processes. 
IX. 
FUTURE WORKS 
Huawei has numerous SDP deployments with many Telcos 
currently engaging in Cloud Computing initiatives. Many have 
reached the point where the Telcos experiments with the patterns 
and combinations of these patterns described in this paper.  
 
Analysis of lessons learned from such Telco deployments as 
well as implications on IaaS, PaaS and SaaS and SDP technologies 
will be provided in upcoming works. Explicit examples today still 
depend on confidentiality agreements with customers.   
X. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper provides clarification and recommendations on how 
to relate SDP and SDF to Cloud Computing. Different patterns 
that have been discussed are suitable for evolutionary extensions 
of SDP business model to encompass Cloud Computing. 
 
In particular, we emphasized key value propositions that Cloud 
Computing can bring to Telcos in the context of SDP and services, 
including: 
• Efficient implementation of SDP and services with always just 
the resources needed at a given moment. 
• New business model to add computing services to the Telco 
portfolio while being able to successfully differentiate from 
other computing providers 
• BaaS as another differentiated offering that builds on Telco 
expertise and further facilitate third parties to build business 
using the services and assets provided by their Cloud 
Computing service providers. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author wants to thank its colleague at Huawei, 
especially Dr David Bernstein at the Santa Clara Center for the 
discussions that have enabled him to reach this view of the field. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
TMF, “Telemanagement Forum”, URL: http://www.tmforum.org/  
[2] 
OMA, “OSE, OMA Service Environment”, Published by Open Mobile 
Alliance (OMA), URL: http://www.openmobilealliance.org 
[3] 
3GPP. IMS, URL: http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/22228.htm 
and http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/23228.htm. 
[4] 
S. H. Maes, “Pragmatic Approaches to True Convergence with or 
without IMS”, Network Operations and Management Symposium 
Workshops, 2008. NOMS Workshops 2008. IEEE. 
[5] 
S. H. Maes, “Service delivery platforms as IT Realization of OMA 
service 
environment: 
service 
oriented 
architectures 
for 
telecommunications”, WCNC 2007, 2007, IEEE 
[6] 
Amazon, “Amazon Web Services (AWS)”, URL: 
http://aws.amazon.com/. 
[7] 
TMForum Insight Services,  “Cloud Services, Issues and Opportunities 
for Service Providers”, 2010, TMF[1]. 
[8] 
Total Telecom News at URL: 
http://www.totaltele.com/view.aspx?ID=458926, September 2010. 
 
 
 
163
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

