Cloud Compliance Risks
Bob Duncan∗,Yuan Zhao†
Business School
University of Aberdeen, UK
Emails: ∗robert.duncan@abdn.ac.uk,†y.zhao@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract—In the current business climate, there is an ever growing
need for companies to comply with a range of legislation,
regulation and standards. There is also a need for companies
to be transparent in demonstrating that they are in compliance
and due to the nature of certain cloud weaknesses, this can prove
to be problematic. Given the potential magnitude of ﬁnes for non-
compliance, there is a strong incentive for companies to be able to
clearly demonstrate full compliance. In this paper, we investigate
what these challenges are, and suggest a means to resolve these
issues so that cloud users stand a better chance of achieving
compliance and reducing the risk of exposure to huge ﬁnes.
Keywords–Risk management; Cloud vulnerabilities; GDPR com-
pliance.
I.
INTRODUCTION
It is very much the case today that all computing systems
are continuously under attack. Due to the multi-tenancy nature
of cloud computing, this presents additional challenges with
respect to achieving a good level of security and privacy for
all cloud users. Of course this is not the only challenge they
face. Over and above the need to achieve and maintain a high
level of security and privacy for good business reasons, there
is an additional requirement that most are subject to. That
requirement stems from the need to be transparent to a range of
legislative, regulatory and standards bodies, depending on the
industry in which they operate. This requirement is usually
satisﬁed by achieving compliance with the legislation and
regulatory rules they must comply with in order to provide
assurance to the relevant regulators.
We have seen some change in these areas over recent years.
For example, with the ISO Security Standards in the ISO 27000
series, they have quietly been effecting a shift away from the
old “Plan, Do, Check, Act” approach to a new risk based
approach. This seeks to better understand the risks faced by
users wishing to adopt the standards in order to ensure they
adopt the right mitigatory approaches, or at least understand
better the risks they face and are prepared to accept. The
Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) has long being identifying and
recording all cloud vulnerabilities and has been recommending
technical solutions, but now also provide an identiﬁcation of
both the risk faced, as well as the potential impact that a breach
might have on the company.
Regulatory authorities have been evolving in the range
and scope of regulations being implemented across the globe,
and the new EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
which became live on 26 May 2018, now has some serious
teeth to ensure compliance by all companies who fall under
its scope.
There are already a huge range of legislative Acts, which
have been passed across the globe in different jurisdictions
to try to safeguard shareholders and other stakeholders from
the effects of losses arising from poor security. While many of
these are outdated when considering their effectiveness against
cloud issues, there is no doubt that many are going through
an updating process, and there are many more new pieces
of legislation in the pipeline. Many governments are reactive,
rather than proactive, so are often running behind the evolution
of technology.
In Section II, we consider a number of legislative, reg-
ulatory and standards compliance requirements to provide a
ﬂavour of the scale of the problem faced by cloud users, while
in Section III, we consider what kind of challenges are faced
by cloud users when seeking to achieve compliance with these
requirements. In Section IV, we consider how to address these
challenges, and how best to attempt to mitigate the substantial
risks cloud users face. In Section V, we discuss our ﬁndings,
and in Section VI, presents our conclusions.
II.
COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS (LEGISLATION,
REGULATION, STANDARDS)
Legislation, Regulation and Standards — are they not all
the same? The answer to that is no, they are not. We will
use the UK to illustrate the differences. Legislation comes
from Acts of Parliament, which are passed by Government
to ensure behaviour across society as a whole is controlled on
pain of penalty, to ensure the country is run properly and that
all citizens and companies behave in an appropriate manner.
Legislation can include criminal proceedings for the worst
cases, which can include large ﬁnes and even jail sentences.
This can cover the behaviour of citizens, companies, indeed
even other countries who might have belligerent intent. There
will also be legislation to organise how government will
perform certain duties, such as the Taxes Acts, which are
regularly updated to reﬂect the changing resource needs of
the country as a whole. Compliance is mandatory under force
of law.
Regulation has long been used for the control of regu-
lated industries, such as accounting and audit, advertising,
agriculture, charities, competition and markets authority, direct
marketing authority, education, engineering council, environ-
ment agencies, equality and human rights commission, ﬁlm
classiﬁcation, ﬁnancial industries, including banks, insurance,
investments and so on, food production, forensic science,
fundraising, gambling commission, gaming board, gangmas-
ters licensing authority, health, information commissioners
ofﬁce, legal system, other professional organisations, plan-
ning inspectorate, press regulation, Scottish housing regulator,
security industry authority, social care, transport, such as
air, rail, road and sea transportation and, utilities, such as
power generation, petroleum, oil and gas, water and sewage
industries.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

For each of these industries, regulators were appointed
under statute to oversee the industry, and were granted certain
powers to ensure each industry behaved in an appropriate way.
Some had very little power, relying instead on companies
“doing the right thing” rather than using enforcement. Of
course in many cases it became necessary to have additional
powers to ensure proper compliance with the regulations in
place. Sometimes the regulator can only suggest a course of
action, sometimes they have the right to levy sanctions and
ﬁnes, and in worst cases, can withdraw the license for the
company to operate within that regulated industry. Compliance
is mandatory under the terms of the regulations, which are
implemented under the guidance of the regulator.
Standard setting has been around a very long time. It is
intended to provide a blueprint for, in this case, companies
to carry out processes and activities to a common standard
agreed by all to adhere to. Compliance is nowadays a voluntary
process. The incentive for companies to adhere to common
standards is that where large companies are compliant, there
is a knock on impact to the supply chain, which encourages
them to be compliant in order to gain business contracts from
the larger companies. The gain for the larger companies is
that they can trade easily with their peers, and where smaller
companies in the supply chain are also compliant, the large
compliant company gains better comfort in doing business with
the smaller companies, leading to a win win situation for all
who become compliant. This is usually also good news for
the customer, since such compliant companies usually always
perform to a much higher standard than those who are not
compliant.
There is also the possibility of compliance being required
with industry best practice. Some industries have set up their
own body to conduct research into providing ‘best practice’
guidelines for all industry members. In this way, the industry
can be seen to be transparent in its approach to ensuring all
industry body members adhere to high standards of behaviour.
For some companies, this means they will face a raft of
compliance requirements across a broad range of legislation,
regulation, standards and best practice requirements. This
means they will require to implement a means of tracking
their compliance with each measure. This will be an ongoing
requirement.
Of course, all these compliance challenges will not only
be restricted to business issues relating to the industry within
which they operate. Nowadays, there is a huge increase of com-
pliance requirements arising from business use of computer
systems, and in particular the storing of sensitive information,
or data.
If we consider the security and privacy of data, then com-
pliance in the UK would be required with the Data Protection
Act, the EU GDPR, and possibly the ISO/IEC 27000 series
of standards, and perhaps even industry standards, such as the
PCI/DSS industry standard for online payment systems.
Compliance with each will be mandatory. Penalties for non-
compliance can be signiﬁcant. In a recent breach of privacy,
the Information Commissioners Ofﬁce (ICO) — the regulatory
body for the UK, ﬁned Newham Council in London £145,000
for a privacy breach of a small amount of data on 203
individuals whose un-redacted data records, collected by the
Metropolitan Police legally in their ﬁght against crime, was
distributed by the council to 44 groups in contravention of the
Data Protection Act . The French GDPR regulator recently
ﬁned Google $57 million for lack of transparency on giving
clear instructions to new users on what they are signing up for.
The impact of a compliance breach of the ISO/IEC 27000
series will be more subtle. If compliance cannot be maintained,
then the company may not use the ISO/IEC 27000 compliance
logo on all their stationary and websites. The impact from this
will be that other ISO/IEC 27000 compliant companies, will
be less inclined to trade with such a company, which could
result in the loss of signiﬁcant revenues over time. A breach
of say the PCI/DSS industry standard could in a worst case
result in that company having the ability to accept payment
cards to collect cash from customers withdrawn, resulting in
a potential adverse impact on cash ﬂow.
III.
CLOUD COMPLIANCE CHALLENGES
Computer systems are continuously under attack, and cloud
systems are no exception. No computer system is immune to
attack, and that is certainly the case for cloud systems. During
the past decade, a great many research papers, such as [1]–
[14], have made many suggestions, which have improved the
level of security and privacy offered in cloud systems. Despite
these efforts, no complete solutions have yet been found to
resolve the cloud forensic problem.
After an attacker breaches a cloud system, gaining even
a small foothold, and becoming an intruder, their next task
is usually to try to escalate privileges until they can access
and modify, or delete, the forensic log trail to hide all trace
of their incursion into the system. This gives them the means
to dig deep in order to retain a long term foothold within the
system, which allows them to help themselves to whatever data
they wish over time. Their primary goal is to achieve this as
quickly as they possibly can. They are often able to achieve
this task within a very short time frame. This presents a major
compliance challenge.
These attackers and intruders are often aided by the lack
of scrutiny of server logs evident in many corporate systems.
Often, companies neither retain records of which database
records have been accessed, nor by whom. This means that
once breached, the company will no longer have the ability
to understand which records have been accessed, copied,
modiﬁed, deleted or ex-ﬁltrated from the system, meaning they
will be unable to report this incursion to the necessary people
or authorities. This will result in an immediate state of non-
compliance with the GDPR, resulting in a potential exposure
to sanctions or ﬁnes. In order to achieve compliance with the
GDPR, companies must be able to report a breach within 72
hours of discovery.
Globally, the average time for all companies between
breach and discovery in 2012 was an average of 6 months [15]
[16]. This had improved to some 4 weeks by 2016 [17] — still
far short of what is needed to understand what has been going
on with the intruders while they were undiscovered. However,
because the EU changed the requirement to report from within
72 hours of breach arising, to within 72 hours of discovery
of the breach, companies stopped trying so hard, resulting
in time between breach and discovery in 2017 returning to
almost as high as 2012 levels, at just under 6 months [18]. This
relaxation misses the point that the longer an intruder remains
in a system undetected, the more damage or harm they can
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

cause. Considering the fact that encryption is not a requirement
of the GDPR, then in a case where a company chooses not to
encrypt, the damage caused by undetected mass leakage will
very much mean there will be little leeway to claim mitigation
when it comes to the eventual inevitable ﬁne by the regulator.
When a company uses cloud, and particularly, where any
Internet of Things (IoT) use is included, this raises the question
as to just how feasible compliance might really be. Compliance
within such a tight time schedule could be all but impossible.
Where a company using cloud is breached, and particularly
where no special arrangements to ensure the safety of forensic
and audit trail data has been made, the 72 hour deadline
is moot. With no means of knowing that the company has
been breached, there will be nothing to report, exposing the
company to huge potential ﬁnes. Naturally, ignorance of the
fact that a breach has arisen will not be accepted as a mitigatory
factor. Once discovery eventually does occur, usually through
third party sources, there will be no prospect of ever ﬁnding
out precisely which records have been compromised, as once
they are gone, the forensic and audit trails are gone forever.
In the case where a company uses IoT devices, this
can present additional security issues. Most IoT devices are
cheaply made, with minimal resources, and frequently with
insufﬁcient or no security. The biggest issue is not really the
loss of the IoT device data, rather it is the fact that a skilled
intruder can easily leverage these compromised devices to gain
access to other more sensitive systems. Bear in mind that the
Mirai virus started as a simple attack on individual IoT devices,
which progressed to seeking out and leveraging other higher
powered devices at scale to perpetrate massive Distributed
Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, and from there, once Mirai
had been ported to be able to attack Windows machines, to then
penetrate sensitive PC networks. Thus, any company utilising
IoT devices will have a range of additional compliance risks
to face. We do not speciﬁcally address the IoT issues here, but
recognise that any company using any IoT devices must take
special measures to ensure GDPR compliance can be achieved.
Of course, there are additional vulnerabilities to consider.
The business architecture of a company comprises a combi-
nation of people, process and technology [15], not technology
alone. It will be no surprise to learn that attackers have devel-
oped approaches to attack each of these three elements of the
business architecture. People attacks are generally undertaken
through social engineering attacks, which while often relatively
simple to perpetrate, are frequently very successful. Attacks on
business processes have become more of a problem, and this
has been recognised by the Open Web Application Security
Project (OWASP) [19]. They regularly identify weaknesses in
web based systems, mobile systems, cloud systems and IoT
systems. They recommend techniques to mitigate these weak-
nesses. Naturally, there are a great many attacks perpetrated on
the technology of businesses, and the Cloud Security Alliance
(CSA) [20] also maintain a full list of these attacks, what to
do to mitigate them, what the likely impact might be and thus,
how serious the effect on the company.
Every company that does not take special measures to
safeguard their forensic and audit trail data will be at much
greater risk of becoming non-compliant, thus exposing them
to the inevitable breach occurring, leading to the possibility of
huge ﬁnes. Their ability to discover that a breach has occurred,
will be very slim indeed. In the event that they do discover
the breach, they would struggle to understand what they need
to report. This is very likely to be a factor in raising the level
of the ﬁne to which they would be liable.
There is no doubt that the longer an intruder remains hidden
inside a company system, the more damage they are likely to
be able to carry out. Where the company is unable to discover
the breach within 72 hours of occurrence, it is highly unlikely
that they will ever be in a position to discover the breach,
let alone understand which records have been compromised.
With no forensic or audit trails to follow, it will be completely
impossible to determine what to report. However, as will
inevitably happen, the breach becomes public knowledge, at
which point, the regulator will become involved. If it can be
shown that the company was negligent in its approach to safe-
guarding this Personally Identiﬁable Information (PII) of data
subjects, the penalties will doubtless be signiﬁcant. There is no
requirement speciﬁed in the GDPR to encrypt data. However,
there is certainly a very strong recommendation that this should
happen, and within a reasonable time. The regulation also
suggests that encryption and decryption keys should not be
stored on the cloud instance. Failure to implement encryption
properly will certainly lead to stiffer ﬁnes in the event of a
breach.
Thus, we need to consider addressing the following risk
areas:
•
Credit Risk
•
Liquidity Risk
•
Market Risk
•
Operational Risk
◦
Cloud Operational Risk
◦
Cloud Forensic Problem Risk
◦
IoT Operational Risk
◦
Monitoring Failure Risk
◦
No Encryption Risk
◦
Business Architecture Risk
People Risk
Process Risk
Technology Risk
Thus, in the next section, we shall take a look at how cloud
users should address these risks, and will consider whether this
will be adequate for cloud compliance with the GDPR.
IV.
HOW TO ADDRESS AND MITIGATE CLOUD
COMPLIANCE RISKS
Taking a risk based approach is an excellent way to
identify potential exposure to risks. This requires the proper
identiﬁcation of the risks faced by the business, the probability
of the risk materialising, the cost of mitigation against the
ﬁnancial impact should the risk materialise. Identifying and
recognising all the relevant areas of potential exposure is the
ﬁrst step in the process. Companies do not necessarily have to
mitigate every risk, as they might choose to accept any risk if
they believe the have the appetite to do so. We can see that
there will now be a considerable number of categories of risk
to address. We will consider each in turn, with our suggestions
on what should be done to ensure compliance.
1 Credit Risk Credit risk is more frequently an issue in
ﬁnancial institutions where banks, for example, lend money
to companies and individuals. Credit risk is the risk that
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

the borrower will default on their payment. However, all
companies provide lending to their customers in the form
of trade accounts, which offer credit terms, with many using
cloud based accounting systems, and this can add an additional
element of risk to the equation. In addition, where the customer
is an EU resident, the company is required to achieve GDPR
compliance. Also, many companies provide loans to other
companies when they have a huge cash surplus, as they can
often obtain far greater rates of return than currently on offer
from their banks.
2 Liquidity Risk Liquidity risk is the risk that a company
or bank may be unable to meet short term ﬁnancial demands,
otherwise known as ‘running out of money.’ This can arise
due to the difﬁculty of converting some security or hard
asset into cash, from poor management of debtors, or over-
extending through poor cash management. There can be many
other factors which can cause this risk, but the effects can be
catastrophic.
3 Market Risk Market risk is more frequently seen in
ﬁnancial institutions, where banks, for example, experience
losses due to failings in the overall performance of the ﬁnancial
markets in which they are involved. Companies may also
experience losses due to the way they make both short term
and longer term investments of surplus business funds.
4 Operational Risk This area generally addresses all
remaining risks and it is clear that the risks in this area are
growing signiﬁcantly.
4.1 Cloud Operational Risk
•
4.1.1 CSP Risk The use of market leading, expe-
rienced cloud service providers familiar with legal
and regulatory requirements for safeguarding customer
data and other sensitive data;
•
4.1.2 Backup and Recovery Risk Backup, redun-
dancy, and recovery are at the core of the decision
to use an outsourcing vendor with highly redundant
and resilient data centres designed for mission-critical
applications;
•
4.1.3 Internal Control Risk Internal controls and
security processes must ensure customer information
is appropriately segregated and protected by industry-
standard compliance policies;
•
4.1.4 CSP Hardware Environment Risk Leading
cloud providers continuously improve their hardware
environments to ensure the latest versions of oper-
ating systems are installed and use agile software
development to deploy feature/function releases on an
accelerated basis;
•
4.1.5 Tailored Cloud Deployment Risk The use
of tailored cloud deployment options to meet your
speciﬁc needs including private clouds solely deployed
on your behalf, or a hybrid cloud consisting of shared
hardware but segregated data storage would be a
prudent move;
•
4.1.6 IT Outsourcing Risk Outsourcing portions of
your information technology infrastructure can free up
internal IT resources to focus on strategic initiatives
and new product development;
•
4.1.7 Financial Services Risk Providers with ﬁnancial
services domain expertise reduce complexity and risk
for Financial Institutions with their extensive knowl-
edge of global standards, communications protocols
and ﬁle formats;
•
4.1.6 CSP Global Support Center Risk Cloud
providers with global support centres can provide
24 x 7 support in multiple languages, ensuring your
international clients and regional ofﬁces have access
to the support resources required as problems arise.
•
4.2 Cloud Forensic Problem Risk This is a huge
potential problem unless special arrangements are in
place, e.g., a secure forensic and audit trail is main-
tained using a high security immutable database [21]–
[24], and examination of all system access requests to
determine the authority of all users to have authorised
access to the system. Use of intrusion detection and
authentication technology to automate the monitoring
for attack attempts is also necessary [25];
•
4.3 IoT Operational Risk IoT devices used for any
purpose by cloud users present a considerable risk,
mainly due to the often cheaply made devices with
little or no security, often vulnerable to the Mirai virus,
which can allow attackers to gain access to systems
and to further compromise the main PC and server
network due to the porting of the Mirai virus to be
able to attack Windows computers [26][18];
•
4.4 Monitoring Failure Risk We need to understand
the 5 Ws – Who, from Where, When did they access
the database, What did they see, modify, delete or
exﬁltrate from the system [27][28]? This allows us
to infer the Why so that we can understand their
motivation. Simple monitoring and analysis of system
logs will go a long way to mitigate the well known ex-
ploits currently in active use by attackers [24]. Some,
like [29]–[31] propose the use of data provenance to
ensure the integrity of data, with others proposing
a new method of cloud forensic audit to assure the
provenance of the data [32];
•
4.5 No Encryption Risk Encryption is a good thing
to consider [33], but there are caveats – ﬁrst, the
encryption and de-cryption keys must not be kept on
the cloud instance. The encryption should be carried
out ofﬂine in the cloud users’ own systems before
being transferred to cloud. Done properly, this can
provide serious mitigation to the new EU GDPR ﬁne
levels, because if an intruder does get into the cloud
system, all they get is meaningless data. With strong
levels of encryption, it becomes practically impossible
to crack [34] (of course, all this could change with
the development and evolution of quantum comput-
ing, although there is little doubt that once quantum
computing becomes an everyday reality that CSPs will
introduce quantum cloud to address this issue).
•
4.6 Business Architecture Risk
◦
4.6.1 People Risk People are generally seen as
the weakest link in any company, and are par-
ticularly prone to social engineering attacks.
The company needs to keep abreast of these
attacks and ensure all people in the company
are regularly trained to understand the risks.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

◦
4.6.2 Process Risk Processes are often well
documented, but also can be woefully out of
date. Attackers know to exploit these areas,
sometimes in conjunction with social engi-
neering attacks. OWASP are taking a more
informed view of dealing with these kinds of
attacks.
◦
4.6.3 Technology Risk This is where compa-
nies are exposed to highly technical attacks.
The CSA has done some good work on iden-
tifying these risks, as well as offering good
strategies to mitigate the risks.
Many of these issues have been around for many years. In
2011, NASA [35] were one of the early organisations to recom-
mend using a risk based approach for identifying, recognising
and dealing effectively with operational risk, particularly where
complex IT systems are in use.
Failure to deal properly with the above risks could lead to
very serious compliance breaches, which can trigger punitive
levels of the ﬁnes imposed by the regulator. However, these
risks can generate further risks in regard to business diminu-
tion; loss of share value; reputational damage risk; an emerging
era of potentially serious regulatory ﬁnes, the serious expense
of forensic investigations after a breach, and the impact on
business continuity.
V.
DISCUSSION
As is now becoming clear, GDPR compliance will be far
from easy to achieve, and for cloud this will be especially
problematic and challenging. For a great many organisations,
the GDPR brings a great many risks to bear when considering
compliance with the GDPR. They come from a great range
of sources, and the biggest risk of all is likely to come in the
form of failure to recognise just how important it is to identify
and mitigate these risks properly.
There are a great many companies will not be able to
recognise these risks, particularly where they do not have the
ﬁnancial clout to provide the right level of expertise. The result
is that they will be even more exposed than those who do have
the means to recognise and address these risks. There can be
no doubt that these risks are signiﬁcant, and potentially devas-
tating for the company should they fail to achieve compliance
with the GDPR. A law ﬁrm, Cleary Gottlieb [36], provide a
GDPR watch service, where they try to clarify how successful
breaches might be dealt with.
We hope this paper might provide them with a starting
point to consider what is required to achieve compliance, and
what the implications might be for compliance failure. The
steps outlined here are straightforward to implement. The most
important point being that in order to deal with a risk, the
company must ﬁrst recognise the risk, and in order to do that,
must have an understanding of what these risks are and how
they might go about mitigating the potential impact of these
risks.
Companies will need to carry out some serious testing
in order to ﬁnd a satisfactory equilibrium between security,
privacy, performance, reliability, accessibility and the account-
ability we require for GDPR compliance. We plan to conduct
a pilot case study on how the technical aspects might be
implemented in order to meet all the required goals to ensure
compliance can be achieved. This will run around a miniature
cloud system, offering both cloud-based and non-cloud based
systems to assess what the optimum conﬁguration might be.
This will allow us to ascertain how well the cloud-based
solution can match the capability of the non-cloud based
system, after taking into account the impact of the cloud
forensic problem.
VI.
CONCLUSION
For any company using cloud, it is clear that it will prove
impossible to achieve compliance with the GDPR in the event
of a security breach where they have not at least dealt properly
with the as yet unresolved, cloud forensic problem. Claiming
ignorance of this problem following a cyber breach will not
be sufﬁcient grounds for mitigation of the ﬁne by the regulator
after the fact. It will certainly be too late by then. Thus, cloud
users who must be compliant with the GDPR will have to take
steps now to be thoroughly prepared ahead of time.
We have looked at traditional cloud operational risks and
the new risks relating to coping with these unresolved problems
and discussed how to go about resolving them, using wherever
possible simple, yet effective, approaches to ensure a robust
solution that will be both easy to implement and easy to
maintain. By this means, we can eliminate a large amount of
the risk. We accept that all risk will not be entirely removed,
but there is the possibility to make a signiﬁcant reduction in
risk levels involved. More importantly, it will be possible to
demonstrate a high level of compliance with the GDPR to the
regulator in the event of breach arising.
Implementing these proposals should ensure that a healthy
level of compliance can be achieved, without the need for ex-
pensive, complex solutions that could prove highly expensive
to implement and maintain.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Felici, “Cyber Security and Privacy: Trust in the Digital World and
Cyber Security and Privacy EU Forum 2013 Brussels, Belgium, April
18-19, 2013 Revised Selected Papers,” in Commun. Comput. Inf. Sci.
Springer International Publishing, 2013, vol. 182 CCIS, pp. 77–88.
[2]
Y. Y. Haimes, B. M. Horowitz, Z. Guo, E. Andrijcic, and J. Bogdanor,
“Assessing systemic risk to cloud-computing technology as complex
interconnected systems of systems,” Syst. Eng., vol. 18, no. 3, 2015,
pp. 284–299.
[3]
C. Millard, I. Walden, and W. K. Hon, “Who is Responsible for ’Personal
Data’ in Cloud Computing? The Cloud of Unknowing, Part 2,” Leg.
Stud., vol. 27, no. 77, 2012, pp. 1–31.
[4]
R. K. L. Ko et al., “TrustCloud: A framework for accountability and trust
in cloud computing,” Proc. - 2011 IEEE World Congr. Serv. Serv. 2011,
2011, pp. 584–588.
[5]
R. K. L. Ko, B. S. Lee, and S. Pearson, “Towards achieving accountabil-
ity, auditability and trust in cloud computing,” Commun. Comput. Inf.
Sci., vol. 193 CCIS, no. PART 4, 2011, pp. 432–444.
[6]
N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, and M. C. Mont, “Towards Natural-
Language Understanding and Automated Enforcement of Privacy Rules
and Regulations in the Cloud: Survey and Bibliography,” Analysis, 2011,
pp. 1–9.
[7]
S. Pearson, “Taking account of privacy when designing cloud computing
services,” Proc. 2009 ICSE Work. Softw. Eng. Challenges Cloud Comput.
CLOUD 2009, 2009, pp. 44–52.
[8]
S. Pearson, “Towards Accountability in the Cloud,” IEEE Internet
Comput., vol. 15, no. 4, jul 2011, pp. 64–69.
[9]
D. Pym and M. Sadler, “Information Stewardship in Cloud Computing,”
Int. J. Serv. Sci. Manag. Eng. Technol., vol. 1, no. 1, 2010, pp. 50–67.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[10]
T. Takahashi, Y. Kadobayashi, and H. Fujiwara, “Ontological Approach
toward Cybersecurity in Cloud Computing Categories and Subject De-
scriptors,” in Sci. Technol., 2010, pp. 100–109.
[11]
L. J. Sotto, B. C. Treacy, and M. L. Mclellan, “Privacy and Data Security
Risks in Cloud Computing,” World Commun. Regul. Rep., vol. 5, no. 2,
2010, p. 38.
[12]
J. Bacon et al., “Information Flow Control for Secure Cloud Comput-
ing,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 11, no. 1, 2014, pp. 76–89.
[13]
N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, M. C. Mont, and R. Ko, “A Toolkit for
Automating Compliance in Cloud Computing Services,” Int. J. Cloud
Comput., vol. x, no. x, 2014, pp. 45–68.
[14]
C. Chang and M. Ramachandran, “Towards Achieving Data Security
with the Cloud Computing Adoption Framework,” IEEE Trans. Serv.
Comput., vol. 9, no. 1, 2016, pp. 138–151.
[15]
PWC, “UK Information Security Breaches Survey - Technical Re-
port 2012,” London, Tech. Rep. April, 2012. [Online]. Available:
www.pwc.com www.bis.gov.uk [Retrieved:March 2019]
[16]
Trustwave,
“2012
Global
Security
Re-
port,”
Tech.
Rep.,
2012.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.trustwave.com/Resources/Library/Documents/2012-
Trustwave-Global-Security-Report/ [Retrieved:March 2019]
[17]
Verizon, “2016 Verizon Data Breach Report,” Tech. Rep., 2016.
[18]
Verizon, “Verizon Security Breach Report 2017,” Tech. Rep., 2017.
[19]
OWASP,
“Open
Web
Application
Secu-
rity
Project,”
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Cloud_Security_Project
[Retrieved:March 2019]
[20]
CSA,
“Cloud
Security
Alliance,”
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/ [Retrieved:March 2019]
[21]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Cloud cyber-security: Empowering the
audit trail,” Int. J. Adv. Secur., vol. 9, no. 3 & 4, 2016, pp. 169–183.
[22]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Creating and Conﬁguring an Im-
mutable Database for Secure Cloud Audit Trail and System Logging,”
Int. J. Adv. Secur., vol. 10, no. 3&4, 2017, pp. 155–166.
[23]
B. Duncan, “Can EU General Data Protection Regulation Compliance
be Achieved When Using Cloud Computing?” in Cloud Comput. 2018
Ninth Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. GRIDs, Virtualization, no. February.
Barcelona, Spain: IARIA, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[24]
B. Duncan, A. Happe, and A. Bratterud, “Using Unikernels to Address
the Cloud Forensic Problem and help Achieve EU GDPR Compliance.”
in Cloud Comput. 2018 Ninth Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. GRIDs, Virtu-
alization, no. February. Barcelona, Spain: IARIA, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[25]
M. Neovius and B. Duncan, “Anomaly Detection for Soft Security in
Cloud based Auditing of Accounting Systems,” in Closer 2017 - 7th Int.
Conf. Cloud Comput. Serv. Sci., Porto, Portugal, 2017, pp. 1–8.
[26]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Cyber Security for Cloud and the
Internet of Things: How Can it be Achieved?” Cybersecurity Inst. Eng.
Technol., vol. Cybersecur, no. September, 2017, pp. 1–39.
[27]
B. Duncan, M. Whittington, M. G. Jaatun, and A. R. R. Zúñiga, “Could
the Outsourcing of Incident Response Management Provide a Blueprint
for Managing Other Cloud Security Requirements?” in Enterp. Secur.
Springer B. 2016, V. Chang, M. Ramachandran, R. Walters, and G. Wills,
Eds. Springer, 2016, pp. 1–22.
[28]
B. Duncan, A. Bratterud, and A. Happe, “Enhancing Cloud Security
and Privacy: Time for a New Approach?” in Intech 2016, Dublin, 2016,
pp. 1–6.
[29]
T. F. J. Pasquier, J. Singh, J. Bacon, and D. Eyers, “Information Flow
Audit for PaaS Clouds,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Cloud
Engineering (IC2E), 2016, pp. 42–51.
[30]
N. Papanikolaou, T. Rübsamen, and C. Reich, “A Simulation Frame-
work to Model Accountability Controls for Cloud Computing,” CLOUD
Comput. 2014, Fifth Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. GRIDs, Virtualization,
no. c, 2014, pp. 12–19.
[31]
T. F. J. M. Pasquier and J. E. Powles, “Expressing and Enforcing
Location Requirements in the Cloud using Information Flow Control,”
Proc. - 2015 IEEE Int. Conf. Cloud Eng. IC2E 2015, 2015, pp. 410–415.
[32]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Can Forensic Audit Help Address
the Cloud Forensic Problem in Light of the Requirements of the Forth-
coming European Union General Data Protection Regulation?” in Cloud
Comput. 2018 Ninth Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. GRIDs, Virtualization,
no. February. Barcelona, Spain: IARIA, 2018, pp. 84–89.
[33]
V. Chang, M. Ramachandran, Y. Yao, Y. H. Kuo, and C. S. Li, “A
resiliency framework for an enterprise cloud,” Int. J. Inf. Manage.,
vol. 36, no. 1, 2016, pp. 155–166.
[34]
T. Pasquier, B. Shand, and J. Bacon, “Information Flow Control for a
Medical Records Web Portal,” Cl.Cam.Ac.Uk, 2013, pp. 1–8.
[35]
M.
Stamatelatos
and
H.
Dezfuli,
“Probabilistic
Risk
Assessment
Procedures
Guide
for
NASA
Managers
and
Practitioners,”
NASA,
Tech.
Rep.
December,
2002.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.hq.nasa.gov/ofﬁce/codeq/doctree/praguide.pdf
[Retrieved:March 2019]
[36]
Cleary,
“Cleary
Cybersecurity
and
Cyber
Watch,”
Cleary
Gottlieb,
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.clearycyberwatch.com/2018/01/notiﬁcation-data-breaches-
gdpr-10-frequently-asked-questions/. [Retrieved:March 2019]
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

