A Social Network Approach to Provisioning and Management of Cloud Computing 
Services for Enterprises 
Eric Kuada, Henning Olesen 
Center for Communication, Media and Information Technologies 
 Aalborg University 
Copenhagen, Denmark 
kuada@cmi.aau.dk, olesen@cmi.aau.dk 
 
 
 
Abstract - This paper proposes a social network approach 
to the provisioning and management of cloud computing 
services termed Opportunistic Cloud Computing Services 
(OCCS), for enterprises; and presents the research issues 
that need to be addressed for its implementation.  We 
hypothesise that OCCS will facilitate the adoption process of 
cloud computing services by enterprises.  OCCS deals with 
the concept of enterprises taking advantage of cloud 
computing services to meet their business needs without 
having to pay or paying a minimal fee for the services.  The 
OCCS network will be modelled and implemented as a social 
network of enterprises collaborating strategically for the 
provisioning and consumption of cloud computing services 
without entering into any business agreements. We conclude 
that it is possible to configure current cloud service 
technologies and management tools for OCCS but there is a 
need for new approaches that view enterprises as both 
service providers and consumers to facilitate the easy 
implementation of OCCS networks. 
 
Keywords-cloud service brokerage; social networking; and 
opportunistic cloud computing services. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Though faced with several challenges which are 
mostly security and risk management related, cloud 
computing adoption is gaining grounds with enterprises 
[1] because of the flexibility, scalability, elasticity, and 
potential cost savings that it offers to businesses [2]. With 
the 
support 
of 
industry 
analysts 
(e.g., 
Gartner, 
PricewaterhouseCoopers) 
and 
companies 
such 
as 
Amazon, Google, IBM, VMware, Microsoft, Sun, Dell, 
etc., this trend is not expected to change. Additionally, 
Vinod, et al. [3][4] suggest that instead of perceiving 
cloud computing simply as a way to make internal 
Information Technology services cheaper and efficient, 
businesses could take advantage of cloud computing to 
drive business growth by developing a new business 
model which is termed as the extensible enterprise.  
The benefits of cloud computing has caught the 
attention of all stakeholders in research efforts to address 
its challenges to pave the way for an accelerated adoption 
of cloud computing services. There are therefore currently 
numerous research efforts by Information Technology 
industry giants, academic institutions, governments and 
union of countries (e.g., European Union) to promote the 
adoption of cloud computing services [5][6][7]. These 
efforts are resulting in diverse cloud computing service 
offerings from cloud service providers which have left 
enterprise consumers trying to make sense of the offerings 
of service providers. This situation is increasingly 
necessitating the services of a special group of cloud 
service providers that offer brokerage services for 
enterprise consumers on the more fundamental services 
such as Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a 
Service (PaaS), and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) 
provided by cloud service providers.  
This research work proposes a social network 
approach to the provisioning and management of cloud 
computing 
services 
termed 
Opportunistic 
Cloud 
Computing Service (OCCS) that has some resemblance to 
Cloud Service Brokerage (CSB). OCCS deals with the 
concept of enterprises taking advantage of cloud 
computing services to meet their business needs without 
having to pay or paying a minimal fee for the services.  
This innovative approach of OCCS can facilitate the 
adoption process since enterprises will require no 
financial commitments to begin using cloud computing 
services, and discovery of services on an OCCS network 
will be easier in light of how information spreads on 
social networks. Commercial cloud service providers can 
benefit tremendously in the long run by introducing some 
of their services onto such a network; especially new 
services can be introduced onto the OCCS network for a 
period of time to gain popularity before being withdrawn 
later. 
Additionally 
OCCS 
can 
promote 
SaaS 
collaboration, scalability for resource aggregation for 
particular services when needed, fostering of business 
collaboration and further reduction of cost in Information 
Technology services. Since the idea of OCCS will be to 
provide a governance platform and its associated cloud 
management tools with which interested enterprises will 
provision SaaS, PaaS, IaaS and other resources that would 
be used by other interested enterprises, but not necessarily 
create new technologies, the platform is compatible with 
future cloud computing technologies and solutions. 
The remainder of the paper is organised as followers: 
Section II explains the OCCS concept and outlines some 
of the background ideas and concepts that have inspired 
it. Section II also presents cloud service brokerage and 
outlines the similarities of OCCS in functionality with 
CSB. We present the research challenges that must be 
98
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

addressed for the implementation of OCCS in Section III. 
Section IV discusses some unintended advantages that 
could be leveraged from OCCS implementation and 
Section V concludes the paper.     
II. 
OPPORTUNISTIC CLOUD COMPUTING 
SERVICES 
This section begins with an overview of the 
opportunistic cloud computing services concept, an 
outline of some background developments inspiring it, 
then a discussion of its Cloud Services Brokerage features 
and then presents detailed reference architecture for its 
implementation. 
A. Overview 
Opportunistic Cloud Computing Service (OCCS) is a 
social network approach to the provisioning and 
management of cloud computing services for enterprises. 
Previous works that link cloud computing with social 
networks such as [8], looked at leveraging the pre-
established trust formed through friend relationships 
within social networking sites to enable friends to share 
resources; and most other examples use Cloud platforms 
to host social networks or create applications within the 
social network. There is however no literature on a social 
network infrastructure for enterprises currently; and this is 
where OCCS comes in.  OCCS deals with the concept of 
enterprises taking advantage of cloud computing services 
to meet their business needs without having to pay or 
paying a minimal fee for the services. The OCCS network 
will form a social network of enterprises collaborating 
strategically (possibly selfishly or even maliciously) for 
the provisioning and consumption of cloud computing 
services without entering into any business agreements. 
Unlike social networking sites for individual use where 
users creates their own network of friends, in an OCCS 
network,  members do not explicitly create ties with other 
members but these ties comes indirectly through the 
services and resource contribution and consumption 
mechanism. 
This concept is derived from the combination of the 
concepts of peer-to-peer network services and the utility 
model of cloud computing. As in peer-to-peer networks 
where users are both resource providers and consumers, 
the idea will be to provide a governing platform that 
serves as the social networking platform for the 
enterprises and also consisting of interoperable Cloud 
management tools with which interested enterprises will 
provision SaaS, PaaS, IaaS and other resources that would 
be used by other enterprises interested in these services. A 
major challenge besides risk management and security 
issues that such a network will face is how to develop 
incentive schemes that ensure sustainability of the 
network. 
It is anticipated that such a network will not always 
provide all the cloud service needs of an enterprise; hence 
OCCS will also seek to explore the utility model of cloud 
computing for enterprises to consume services provided 
by commercial cloud computing service providers at 
specific times, geographic locations, and Service Level 
Agreement (SLA) requirements for which a utility 
function defined by the enterprise is minimized. Here 
again the framework will try to employ open source 
brokerage tools instead of employing the services of a 
commercial Cloud Service Broker (CSB) for arbitrating 
between the cloud service providers and the enterprises. 
Furthermore, preliminary investigations indicate that 
the OCCS network will not be most ideal for large 
corporation and financial institutions but will be well 
suited for small and medium sized enterprises. There have 
however been indications of larger corporations joining 
an OCCS network mainly as services and resource 
contributors in promoting their businesses.    
Figure 1 shows an overview of the major parts in an 
OCCS network. It consists of two layers – the service 
layer and the management layer. The service layer 
consists of all the services contributed by members. These 
will normally be fundamental cloud services such as 
SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS; but, it can also include value added 
services normally provided by cloud service brokers. The 
management layer consists of two main components – the 
governance component that manages the services from 
members and CSB component that serves as an interface 
between the OCCS network and commercial cloud 
services providers and cloud service brokers. 
OCCS is derived from two main concepts: peer-to-
peer network services and the utility model of cloud 
computing. It however has also been inspired by equally 
important phenomenon such as social network theory, 
social networking, Web2.0, and the open source 
movement. 
Social network theory has been used to examine how 
companies interact with each other, characterizing the 
many informal connections that link executives together, 
as well as associations and connections between 
individual employees at different companies. These 
networks provide ways for companies to gather 
information, deter competition, and even collude in 
setting prices or policies. It forms the basis of the OCCS 
feature of having no formal business agreements between 
the 
participating 
member 
enterprises. 
The 
other 
characteristics of OCCS stem from concepts and ideas 
such as user-generated content, harnessing the power of 
the crowd, architecture of participation, data on a epic 
scale, and openness [9] that characterises Web 2.0, social 
networking and the open source movement. OCCS 
however focus on corporate organisations instead of 
individual users and deals with replacing simple data and 
files as resources with cloud computing services that 
would normally have been provided by commercial cloud 
service providers. 
99
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

 
Figure 1. Major components of an OCCS network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OCCS Network 
 
 
CSP 
 
CSB 
OCCS Network Management Platform 
OCCS governance 
 
Member profiling 
 
Service profiling 
 
Sevice life cyle mgt. 
CSB 
component 
OCCS services from members 
 
 
 
 
B. Cloud Service Brokerage Functionalities  
Cloud services brokerage is a business model where a 
company or other entity adds value to one or more 
(generally public or hybrid, but possibly private) cloud 
services on behalf of one or more consumers of those 
services [10]. The major functionalities that CSB provide 
to enterprises include service aggregation, customization, 
governance, new applications, services billing and 
arbitration, security, and insurance services. The services 
of CSB are becoming increasingly necessary to both 
enterprises and cloud service providers because of their 
different perspectives, objectives, and expectations from 
the cloud computing industry, coupled with the challenges 
enterprises have to deal with in selecting from cloud 
service providers and using the diverse cloud computing 
services. 
An OCCS network consists of two main components - 
a platform for managing the services provisioned by 
members and a brokerage component for interfacing with 
commercial cloud service providers. The OCCS concept 
thus inherently provides new applications, service 
aggregation to multiple consumers, governance, and 
service arbitration and billing. 
 
C. OCCS Architecture 
In light with the principles on which the OCCS 
concept is built – namely: user-generated content, 
architecture of participation and openness; a successful 
implementation of an OCCS network will have to in the 
barest minimum provide the following features 
- 
Support for the management of fundamental 
cloud computing services (SaaS, PaaS, IaaS) 
- 
Support for the management of any arbitrary 
cloud computing service – anything as a service 
(XaaS) 
- 
Interoperability with major cloud computing 
standards 
- 
Interoperability with major cloud computing 
management tools 
- 
Support for future cloud computing technologies 
 
These factors have been considered in the design of the 
OCCS network reference architecture shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
OCCS Services: these consist of all the services and 
resources that have been contributed to the network by 
members. These could be coming from contributing 
member’s data center, private cloud, etc. Services are 
mainly fundamental cloud computing services such as 
SaaS, PaaS, IaaS; and other cloud computing services 
(XaaS) and resources. 
Resource Manager: this together with the cloud 
computing deployment and management tools found in 
the Contributions Component and the Discovery & 
Utilization Component abstract the contributed services 
from the services layer and interface it to the OCCS 
management platform. 
Contributions Component:  it is responsible for 
handling the resource contribution process. Its main 
objective is to simplify and make it easy for members to 
contribute resources to the network. It performs two sub 
functions – providing cloud computing management tools 
and service life cycle management. It thus consists of 
cloud computing deployment and management tools for 
all types of services and resources. The service 
management 
involves 
service 
creation, 
service 
certification and service profiling which includes service 
review and ranking by users and service ranking by 
platform administrators. 
Discovery & Utilization Component:  its role is to 
simplify services and resources discovery and utilization 
process. It performs service recommendation by taking 
service requirements description by members and 
matching these with service properties description by 
contributors together with the profile rank of services. It 
also consists of cloud computing management tools for 
services and resources provisioning and utilization. 
Categorization Component: this component is needed 
to ensure OCCS network supports arbitrary services while 
also ensuring easy management of these services. It is 
responsible for the categories creation process. It handles 
service category creation requests from members which is 
evaluated for approval by the platform administrators; and 
100
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

 
Figure 2. OCCS network Reference Architecture  
Discovery & 
Utilization 
component 
 
Categorization 
component 
Contributions 
component 
 
Governance  component 
 
Membership Mgr. 
 
Cost manager  
QoS & Pseudo SLA 
Manager 
 
CSB component 
 
Business Intelligence Component 
 
OCCS Services 
 
Commercial Cloud 
Services 
Resource Manager 
 
 
also delegates privileges of categories creation given to 
some level of membership.  
Membership Manager: this is the main social 
network user management module for the OCCS network 
management platform. It is responsible for managing 
existing users and the registration of new members 
(enterprises, companies, institutions, etc.). It handles 
membership requests and in cooperation with the 
Governance Component performs company profile 
verification based on data provided by enterprises during 
registration to make decisions on membership approval or 
rejection. 
Incentives Manager: Dynamic re-computation of cost 
in real time to be credited to service contributors and 
debited to resource users. Cost of service or resource 
utilization is dependent on demand. 
QoS & Pseudo SLA Manager: it uses information 
from the Incentives Manager to provide service 
differentiation and pseudo SLA management to members. 
Governance Component: it is the logical module that 
provides supervision for all the other components in the 
OCCS network management platform. It is implemented 
as the interfaces through which platform administrators 
interact with the platform to make governance decision. 
 
Business Intelligence Component: this module is not 
essentially required for the operation of the OCCS 
network but provides means for the gathering of business 
intelligence from the platform and may include for 
example: 
 
Analysis of services contributed, their 
categories, utilization and their profile 
performance 
 
Analysis of member profiles with their 
contributed services and the enterprises that 
are utilizing these services 
 
Analysis of the services and resources 
requests that are  not currently being 
provided by the platform 
CSB Component: it consists of cloud computing 
management tools and processes that interface the OCCS 
network to commercial cloud computing services and 
provide cloud brokerage services to members.  
D. Implementation Strategy for OCCS   
To ensure that the barest minimum features required 
for a successful implementation of a OCCS network is 
met, a typical OCCS network implementation will use the 
feature requirements of  support for the management of 
fundamental cloud computing services, support for the 
management of any arbitrary cloud computing service, 
interoperability with major cloud computing standards 
and cloud computing management tools, and support for 
future cloud management technologies, in selecting a 
suitable cloud management tool (likely a non proprietary 
cloud management tool) which will form the base on 
which other functionalities can be added. The various 
components outlined in the OCCS reference architecture 
in Section III C above can then be developed on this base 
cloud management tool. 
III. 
RESEARCH ISSUES WITH OCCS 
Some of the major challenges of cloud computing 
receiving research attention currently include legal and 
compliance risk management, migration of applications, 
meeting SLA requirements, managing cloud services, and 
security concerns. The introduction of OCCS brings new 
research issues and adds a complexity dimension to some 
of the existing ones. This section outlines some of these 
research issues and the intuitive approaches of addressing 
them, which will have to be researched carefully for the 
successful implementation of OCCS networks. 
A. Sustainability and Pseudo SLA 
The sustainability of an OCCS network revolves 
around the concepts of architecture of participation and 
harnessing the power of the crowd. A potential problem 
that such a network will face is that of free-riding where 
member enterprises will want to only use services on the 
network without contributing [10]. The challenge here 
will be to develop appropriate incentive mechanisms for 
the sustainable operation of the network. 
Another challenge is that of service differentiation and 
service quality management. Unlike conventional cloud 
computing service offerings by commercial service 
101
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

providers, no SLA exist between the participating 
members in an OCCS network, hence such service quality 
differentiation must be handled through the incentive 
mechanisms that will be designed so that when limited 
resources are being contended for by multiple candidates 
those that have supported the system more can be given 
some form of preference.  Additionally, there will be the 
need for transparency in dynamic demands and cost of 
service utilisation. Several research efforts have applied 
game theoretic approach to the modelling of incentives in 
peer-to-peer networks to solve the free-riding problem in 
peer-to-peer networks. [12] presents a resource allocation 
mechanism based on a distributed algorithm to enable 
service differentiation in peer-to-peer networks that also 
increases the aggregate utility in the whole network. 
Work on incentives for sharing in peer-to-peer networks 
by [13] analyzes several different payment mechanisms 
designed to encourage file sharing in peer-to-peer 
systems. The game theoretic approach can be explored in 
the design of incentive mechanisms for OCCS networks 
and the concept of pseudo SLA introduced for service 
differentiation and service quality management.  
B. Reliability and Fault resilience 
An OCCS network will need to provide a certain level 
of reliability to its members under normal operations and 
must be resilient enough to recover from faults. The 
reliability and resilience is however threatened by poor 
quality of services provisioned by members, failure and 
withdrawal 
of 
services 
from 
members, 
and 
the 
introduction of malicious services. Dynamic algorithms 
are required for detection, notification and responding to 
faults and poor quality services. Of particular importance 
is how to respond to faults in the network. A simple 
approach will be to notify service consumers of 
problematic events for them to take their own decisions; it 
may however be necessary to develop mechanisms that 
reassign alternative services to consumers based on 
certain usage policies and preferences indicated by the 
service consumers. The challenge here is the precise 
capturing of the properties of services in service 
descriptors and effectively matching these to the usage 
policies and SLA requirements of potential service 
consumers so that the entire process is transparent to them 
and their customers; and more so this transparency in 
fault handling must be achieved in the context of the fact 
that no SLA exists between the contributors of the 
services and the consumers of these services.     
C. Network Governance 
The purpose of the OCCS network governance will be 
to promote the overall quality of the system. Of particular 
research interest is the development of community 
management enabling technologies for profiling, service 
life cycle management and transparency in the pseudo 
SLA management. Both network members (enterprises) 
and the services they provision will have to be profiled to 
maintain trust in the individual services, member 
enterprises and the entire system platform. For example 
service provisioning will have to be in phases such as 
testing, and various levels of certification through 
continual ranking of services. Both central ranking by the 
platform administrators and peer review ranking by the 
members may have to be adopted. The service ranking 
and certification will need to promote new services from 
good profiled enterprises while quickly identifying 
malicious and poor quality services and revoking their 
certification.  
D. Security 
Security is the ability to protect information and 
information systems from unauthorized access, use, 
disclosure, disruption, modification or destruction and to 
respond and recover in case of a fault or incident. The 
implementation of OCCS will not bring any new technical 
demands on security in terms of confidentiality and data 
integrity apart from what is already necessary in ordinary 
cloud computing implementations. An area of research 
interest however is how to harness the available resources 
on the platform and the collaboration of members in 
combating security threats. If we consider the introduction 
of malicious services onto the OCCS platform, the OCCS 
network governance which includes member profiling, 
service profiling and life cycle management should 
prevent such occurrences. In the event of such an 
occurrence however, the system has to respond and 
recover quickly. It is therefore useful to research into 
mechanisms for harnessing the available resources on the 
platform and the collaborative efforts of members in 
dealing with such a threat. 
E. Other Research Issues 
Some other issues that are of importance and worth 
looking at are regulations and service provisioning.  
Current cloud computing vendor technologies and 
management tools assume distinct roles for the service 
providers and service consumers. But with some cloud 
management tools offering features such as delegated 
control and autonomous virtual enterprises [14]; and 
support for the technologies of most of the major cloud 
solution providers [15], it will be possible to configure 
these cloud management tools for OCCS. There may 
however be a need for new approaches for cloud 
management that view enterprises as both resource 
providers 
and 
consumers 
to 
facilitate 
the 
easy 
implementation of an OCCS network. 
An issue with regulatory authorities for enterprises 
joining the OCCS platform could be that of tax evasion 
implications. This is because enterprises will be offering 
and using services, which are not being paid for and 
hence may not be subject to taxes depending on the 
country in which they are. Also most enterprises have 
internal policies that need adherence, and there may be 
industry specific laws and regulations that they need to 
comply with. Furthermore, different countries have their 
own laws concerning user data handling. Storing data in 
the Cloud therefore presents enterprises and service 
102
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

providers with several risk management challenges. These 
challenges are further compounded by the concept of 
OCCS 
and 
hence 
can 
hamper 
its 
successful 
implementation.   
IV. 
POSSIBLE FUTURE BENEFITS 
This section gives brief discussions on some of the 
unintended benefits that can be leveraged from the 
implementation of an OCCS network. Some of benefits as 
discussed below include platform for new business 
models, promotion of SaaS collaborations, and promotion 
of cloud computing standardization.  
A. Platform for new Business Models 
OCCS can serve as a platform for enterprises to adopt 
new business models such as the extensible-enterprise 
model (deep B2B integration and highly modular web 
services). The adoption of cloud computing by any two 
companies in general reduces the complexities in 
business-to-business (B2B) integration. Companies can 
therefore leverage cloud computing by exposing their 
business processes to potentially large ecosystems of 
partners who often find ways of joining and integrating 
their business processes in the value chain. It is envisaged 
that OCCS will promote the adoption of cloud computing 
by enterprises and hence indirectly promoting such new 
business models. Secondly, enterprises on an OCCS 
network would already have been using similar services 
with similar cloud management tools; this should 
facilitate the integration of their business processes. 
Additionally, the platform can foster the creation of 
new business that will provide commercial cloud 
brokerage services to members on the OCCS network. 
B. Promotion of SaaS collaborations 
The implementation of an OCCS network can 
promote SaaS collaborations. Enterprises on an OCCS 
network are very likely to participate in collaboration 
efforts in the development of software solutions that they 
deem useful to their own business. As an example, a 
construction company in need of a specialized software 
for design simulation that is currently not being provided 
by any member on an OCCS platform can initiate a SaaS 
project to involve other interested members in the 
development of the software which can then be 
contributed to the platform upon completion. Such SaaS 
collaborations could also come about by a member 
enterprise identifying an application of interest and 
providing the development platform with specific tools 
and providing it as a PaaS on the OCCS network; this 
could spark interest in the development of such an 
application by other members and can eventually lead to 
collaboration by interested members in its development. 
C. Promotion of Cloud Computing Standardization  
  As already indicated in Section II C and Section II D,  
a successful implementation of an OCCS network must 
provide support for the management of fundamental cloud 
computing services, support for the management of any 
arbitrary cloud computing service, interoperability with 
major cloud computing standards and cloud computing 
management tools, and support for future cloud 
management technologies. Thus to start with, the OCCS 
concept must carefully follow cloud computing standards; 
the situation is however reversed if OCCS network 
implementations become successful. Thus those standards 
that are dominant on the OCCS platform will then be 
followed closely by cloud management tool developers 
and cloud service providers. This will further promote the 
success of the OCCS platform; and hence the promotion 
of cloud computing standardization and promotion of the 
OCCS implementations will be in a virtuous cycle. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Support for major hypervisors and role-based 
delegated control make it possible to configure current 
cloud computing technologies and management tools for 
OCCS even though they assume distinct roles for the 
service providers and service consumers. There is 
however a need for new approaches to cloud management 
that view enterprises as both resource providers and 
consumers which when complemented with standards for 
interoperability will facilitate the easy implementation of 
an OCCS network. 
Successful implementation of OCCS networks can 
result is some unintended benefits such as serving as a 
platform for new business models, promotion of SaaS 
collaborations, and promotion of cloud computing 
standardization. These benefits together with providing a 
platform for enterprises to start using cloud computing 
services without any initial financial commitment will 
however be possible only if the research challenges 
identified in Section III (namely, developing appropriate 
incentive mechanisms and the associated quality of 
service differentiation, security, reliability and fault 
resilience, network governance and regulatory issues) are 
carefully dealt with.  
 
   
REFERENCES 
[1] Justin Pirie, "Setting the Standards," European Communications, 
pp. 30-31, Autumn 2010. 
[2] Vinod Baya and Randy Myers, "How CFOs should audit the 
cloud balance sheet," PricewaterhouseCoopers Technology 
Forecast, no. 4, pp. 44-53, 2010. 
[3] Vinod Baya and Galen Gruman, "Making the Extensible 
Enterprise a reality," PricewaterhouseCoopers Technology 
Forecast, no. 4, pp. 26-35, 2010. 
103
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

[4] Vinod Baya, Bud Mathaisel, and Bo Parker, "The cloud you 
don’t 
know: 
An 
engine 
for 
new 
business 
growth," 
PricewaterhouseCoopers Technology Forecast, no. 4, pp. 4-13, 
2010. 
[5] OPTIMIS: Optimized Infrastructure Services. (2011, March) 
OPTIMIS. 
[Online]. 
http://www.optimis-project.eu/project      
11-07-2011 
[6] Contrail consortium 2010. (2011, March) Contrail. [Online]. 
http://http://contrail-
project.eu/objectives;jsessionid=E1961F3D98F3B602D34CFC9
445D63DC7 11-07-2011 
[7] RESERVOIR. 
(2011, 
March) 
RESERVOIR. 
[Online]. 
http://www.reservoir-fp7.eu/       11-07-2011 
[8] Kyle Chard, Simon Caton, Omer Rana, Kris Bubendorfer, 
"Social Cloud: Cloud Computing in Social Networks," in 2010 
IEEE 3rd International Conference on Cloud Computing, Miami, 
Florida, 2010, pp. 99 - 106. 
[9] Paul Andeson, "What is Web 2.0? Ideas, technologies and 
implications for education," JISC , JISC Technology and 
Standards Watch Feb. 2007. 
[10] Benoit Lheureux. (2010, December) Gartner Inc. [Online]. 
http://www.gartner.com/it/content/1461800/1461813/december_
2_cloud_services_brokerage_blheureux.pdf         12-07-2011 
[11] Markus Hofmann and Leland R. Beaumont, Content Networking: 
Architecture, Protocols, and Practice, Rick Adams and Karyn 
Johnson, Eds. San Francisco, USA: Elsevier, 2005. 
[12] Richard T. B. Ma, et al, "A Game Theoretic Approach to Provide 
Incentive and Service Differenciation in Peer-to-Peer Networks," 
in SIGMETRICS/Performance’04, New York, NY, USA., June 
12–16, 2004. 
[13] Philippe Golle, Kevin Leyton-Brown, Ilya Mironov, and Mark 
Lillibridge, "Incentives for Sharing in Peer-to-Peer Networks," in 
Springer 
WELCOM 
2001, 
LNCS 
2232, 
Verlag 
Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2001, pp. 75-87. 
[14] Abiquo, 
Inc. 
(2011, 
March) 
abiquo. 
[Online]. 
http://www.abiquo.com/products/features-and-
benefits.php?lang=en        11-07-2011 
[15] enStratus Networks LLC. (2011, April) enStratus. [Online]. 
http://www.enstratus.com/page/1/cloud-providers.jsp               
11-07-2011 
 
104
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

