Challenges and Issues Within Cloud Computing Technology  
 
Omar Ali 
Jeffrey Soar 
School of Management and Enterprise 
Faculty of Business, Education, Law and Arts 
School of Management and Enterprise 
Faculty of Business, Education, Law and Arts 
University of Southern Queensland 
University of Southern Queensland 
Toowoomba-Australia 
Toowoomba-Australia 
Omar.Ali@usq.edu.au 
Jeffrey.Soar@usq.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract-Cloud computing refers to an emerging computing 
model where machines in large data centres can be used to 
deliver services in a scalable manner. It has become popular 
for corporations in need of inexpensive, large scale computing. 
Organizations and government agencies increasingly utilise 
cloud computing architectures, platforms and applications to 
deliver services and meet the needs of their clients. There are 
many challenges and issues such as privacy, security and trust 
that can have major impacts on the information and services 
supported by this technology. This paper summarises the 
technology background and discusses challenges and issues 
that can arise by the use of cloud computing in organizations 
and government agencies.  
 
Keywords-privacy; security; trust; issues; cloud computing. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Information Technology (IT) has been adding significant 
benefits to various aspects of people’s life, either in terms of 
convenience or comfort or entertainment. One of the latest 
developments in the IT industry is cloud computing, also 
known as on-demand computing. This new technology 
provides higher performance at relatively low cost 
compared 
to 
the 
existing 
dedicated 
infrastructures. 
Moreover, it can be applied to larger scale with greater 
reliability. Cloud computing offers a shift in the way 
organizations invest in their IT resources. The new model 
removes the need for organization to invest a substantial 
sum of money for the purchase of limited IT resources that 
are internally managed. Instead, the organization can 
outsource its IT resource requirements to a cloud computing 
service provider and pay per use. 
Cloud computing is a computing model that provides a 
pool of computing resources which users can access through 
the internet. The basic principle of cloud computing is to 
shift the computing from a local computer to the network. It 
offers the capacity to utilize a common collection of 
resources on request. It proves extremely attractive to cash-
strapped IT departments that want to deliver better services 
under pressure. It can offer access to greater infrastructure 
resources 
which 
include 
network, 
server, 
storage, 
application, services and other components, as required, 
without huge investment in purchase, implementation, and 
maintenance. Cloud computing can be deployed either as: 
private cloud (where organizations develop their own 
applications and run their own internal infrastructure), 
community cloud (where the cloud infrastructure is shared 
by 
several 
organizations 
and 
supports 
a 
specific 
community), public cloud (where the cloud infrastructure is 
made available to the general public or a large industry 
group and is owned by an organization selling cloud 
services), or hybrid cloud (where the cloud infrastructure is 
an integration and consolidation of two or more clouds 
which are private, community, or public) [1]. Cloud 
computing offers many advantages for IT organizations. 
There are, however issues and challenges that still exist and 
which must be dealt with. A key concern in adopting cloud 
computing is data security, privacy and trust.  
This paper presented the state-of-the-art of research into 
cloud computing technology and its characteristics. It 
highlighted the main important challenges, barriers and risks 
related to the cloud computing. Also, the paper presented 
some mitigation steps to overcome the challenges and issues 
that discussed. 
 
II. 
CLOUD BACKGROUND 
 
A. Definitions 
Formal definitions have been proposed in both academia 
and industry; however, the one provided by U.S. National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) [2] appears to 
include key common elements widely used in the cloud 
computing environment: 
Cloud computing is a model for enabling convenient, 
on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable 
computing 
resources 
(networks, 
servers, 
storage, 
applications and services) that can be rapidly provisioned 
and released with minimal management effort or service-
provider interaction [2]. 
In order to provide the users with better services, cloud 
computing maintains proper cloud architecture, offers 
various 
deployment 
strategies 
depending 
on 
the 
organization structure and provisioning location, and most 
importantly, takes care of the security issues over a network. 
The four deployment models along with their characteristics 
are depicted in the following flow-chart Figure 1. 
 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
Figure 1.The NIST Cloud Definition Framework [2] 
 On-Demand Self-Service  
A consumer with an instantaneous need in a particular 
timeslot can avail itself of computing resources (e.g., 
network storage and software use) in an automatic (self-
serve) fashion without resorting to human interactions with 
the providers of these resources. 
 Broad Network Access 
These computing resources are delivered over the network 
and used by various client applications with heterogeneous 
platforms (e.g., mobile phones and laptops) situated at a 
consumer's site. 
 Resource Pooling 
In an effort to serve multiple consumers, a cloud service-
provider pools together the computing resources using either 
the multi-tenancy or the virtualisation model “with different 
physical and virtual resources dynamically assigned and 
reassigned according to consumer demand” [2]. The 
motivation for setting up such a pool-based computing 
paradigm lies in two important factors: economies of scale 
and specialisation. The result of a pool-based model is that 
physical computing resources become ‘invisible’ to 
consumers, who, in general, do not have control over or 
knowledge about the location, formation, and origins of 
these resources (Database). 
 Rapid Elasticity 
For consumers, computing resources become immediate 
rather than persistent: there are no up-front commitments 
and contracts as they can use them to scale up whenever 
they want and release them once they finish scaling down. 
As there is provision for infinite computing resources on the 
cloud, there is no limitation in meeting their peak 
requirement of increased consumption any time.  
 Measured Service 
Even though the resources are pooled and shared by 
multiple consumers through a multi-tenancy model, the 
cloud infrastructure is equipped with an appropriate 
mechanism to monitor the usage of computing resources by 
individual consumers. 
The European Network and Information Security 
Agency (ENISA) has defined cloud computing as an “on-
demand service model for IT provision, often based on 
virtualisation and distributed computing technologies” [3]. 
The first academic definition of cloud computing offered by 
[4] is a bit different from the definition provided by the 
ENISA. According to Chellappa [4], cloud computing is “A 
computing paradigm where the boundaries of computing 
will be determined rationale rather than technical”. 
According to Buyyaa et al. [5], cloud computing is “A type 
of parallel and distributed system consisting of a collection 
of interconnected and virtualised computers that are 
dynamically provisioned and present as one or more unified 
computing resources based on the service-level agreements 
established through negotiation between the service 
provider and the customer”. While Vaquero et al. [6] 
proposes the following definition “Cloud is a large pool of 
easily usable and accessible virtualised resources” (e.g., 
hardware, development platforms and services). One can 
reconfigure these resources dynamically to allow the 
optimum utilisation of resources, which can be exploited by 
a pay per use model where the infrastructure provider offers 
a guarantee by means of customised Service Level 
Agreements (SLAs). These different definitions show the 
varied understanding of what cloud computing is from the 
perspectives of different stakeholders such as academics, 
architects, consumers, developers, engineers and managers. 
B. Service/Delivery Models 
The following three service models are used to 
categorize cloud services: 
 Software as a Service  
The SaaS service model enables consumers to use the 
service provider’s applications running on a cloud 
infrastructure [7]. Consumers can access the applications 
using various client devices through a thin client interface 
such as a Web browser (example include, Web-based email) 
[7]. They do not have the access to manage or control the 
underlying cloud infrastructure, that is, network, servers, 
operating systems, storage or even individual application 
capabilities. Consumers do have access to limited user-
specific application configuration settings [2][7][38][39][40] 
[41]. Examples of SaaS include, Salesforce, Netsuite and 
Google Apps. 
 Platform as a Service  
The PaaS service model enables the consumer to deploy 
consumer-created or acquired applications onto the cloud 
infrastructure with the help of programming languages and 
tools the provider supports [7]. As in the SaaS model, the 
consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud 
infrastructure, but can control the deployed applications and 
possibly the application-hosting environment configurations 
[7][41][42][43]. Examples of PaaS include, Microsoft Azure 
service platform, Salesforce-Force.com, Google App engine 
Amazon relational database services and rack space cloud 
sites. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 Infrastructure as a Service  
The IaaS service model provides the consumers with 
processing, storage, network and other fundamental 
computing resources. The consumer can deploy and run 
arbitrary software, including operating systems and 
applications. As with the other two models, the consumer 
cannot 
manage 
or 
control 
the 
underlying 
cloud 
infrastructure but has control over operating systems, 
storage and deployed applications and possibly has limited 
control over select networking components, such as host 
firewalls [2][44][45]. Examples of IaaS include, Amazon S3 
(simple storage service) - EC2 (elastic cloud computing) 
and rack-space cloud servers. 
C. Deployment Models 
More recently, four cloud deployment models have been 
defined in the cloud community: [2][3][7][8][9].  
 Public Cloud 
This model enables the cloud infrastructure to be made 
available to the general public or to a large industry group. 
The cloud service providers have the full ownership of the 
public cloud with its own policy, value, and profit, costing, 
and charging model [8].  Many popular cloud services are 
public clouds, such as Amazon EC2, Google App Engine 
and Force.com. In this model, clients can choose the 
security level they need, and negotiate for SLA [2][8].  
 Private Cloud 
In this model, the cloud infrastructure is deployed solely 
for a single organization. The organization may itself 
manage the infrastructure or outsource it to a third party, 
and the cloud infrastructure may exist in the organization’s 
premises or be based off-premise [8]. The motivation to 
setup a private cloud within an organization has several 
aspects. Firstly, in order to optimize the utilization of 
existing internal resources. Secondly, for security concerns 
including data privacy and trust which makes private cloud 
an option for many firms. Thirdly, data transfer cost from 
local IT infrastructure to a public cloud is even more 
considerable [10]. Fourthly, organizations always require 
full control over mission-critical activities that exists behind 
their firewalls. Lastly, academics often build private cloud 
for research and teaching purposes [2][7][8].   
 Hybrid Cloud 
In this model, the cloud infrastructure is composed of 
two or more clouds (private, community or public) that 
remain unique entities, but are bound together by 
standardized or proprietary technology that enables data and 
application portability (example include, cloud bursting for 
load-balancing between clouds) [2][7]. Organizations use 
the hybrid cloud model in order to optimize their resources, 
to increase their core competencies by margining out 
peripheral business functions onto the cloud, while 
controlling core activities on premise through private cloud. 
The concept of the hybrid cloud aims to address the issues 
of standardization and cloud interoperability [7].  
 Community Cloud 
This model deploys the cloud infrastructure to several 
organizations at the same time and supports a specific 
community that shares similar concerns (example include, 
mission, security requirements, policies and compliance 
considerations). The cloud community forms into a degree 
of economic scalability and democratic equilibrium. The 
cloud infrastructure may be managed by the organizations 
or by a third party and may exist in the organizations’ 
premise or be based off-premise [8]. Cloud services in 
government are generally utilized to reach the citizen using 
various tools such as Internet, Phone, IVR, etc. In particular, 
the citizen, can access information from various department 
including centre, state, and local governments such as Tax, 
Railway, Passport, Immigration and Visa, Central Excise, 
Company Affairs, National ID [8]. 
III. 
CHALLENGES AND ISSUES 
A. Cloud Privacy Issues 
One of the fundamental human rights is that of ‘privacy’. 
From the customer point-of-view in commerce, privacy 
demands complete protection and the appropriate use of 
customers’ personal information [30]. The practice of 
privacy in an organization includes abiding by laws, 
policies, standards and processes in managing the personally 
identifiable information (PII) of individuals. 
‘Privacy’, in the context of the cloud, is not straight 
forward and depends on the type of cloud situation. The 
threat to privacy is minimal in some cloud application areas 
and services for example, services used for processing 
public information. However, the threat is more in services 
that deal with different aspects of data (e.g., collecting, 
transferring, processing, sharing or storing) relating to 
personal information. This warrants adequate measures be 
taken to protect privacy with regard to those services 
dealing with highly sensitive information, especially, 
information relating to location, preferences, 
social 
networks of individuals and personal health data [30] 
[47][48][49]. 
To minimize threat where the potential risk is high, 
customization of such services by including embedded 
tracking and profiling with inter-device communication can 
be implemented [30]. 
Although the public cloud is the preferred economically 
viable architecture, it also poses a threat to privacy because 
customers’ data are handled and managed by the Cloud 
Service Provider (CSP) [30]. In this section researchers 
consider a number of aspects that illustrate the most 
important privacy issues in the public cloud: lack of user 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

control, unauthorized secondary usage, trans-border data 
flow and data proliferation and dynamic provisioning [2][7].  
 Lack of User Control  
In general, cloud computing can be used as three 
delivery models. As mentioned before: IaaS; PaaS and SaaS 
[1]. When using SaaS as a delivery module, the 
responsibility for controlling data belongs entirely to the 
service-provider [30][50]. Hence, the biggest concern for 
the customer is: how can it retain its control on the data 
when information is processed or stored? With this new 
technology, misuse, theft or illegal use always remain 
matters of grave concern because a cloud computing system 
involves the processing of user- sensitive information. 
Moreover, since the technology has not been secured 
through a patent initially, CSP can neither impose ‘no 
accessibility’ to all PII by a third party nor can it conform to 
a request to delete an individual’s personal data. It can be 
difficult to get data back from the cloud and avoid vendor 
lock-in [11][30][47][50]. The problem is even worse when 
many tenants are hosted on the same physical hardware. 
Thus, cloud service providers must ensure the customers 
that their data and applications are secured and the risks are 
mitigated to an acceptable level. Hence, a legal requirement 
that becomes important is that both the cloud provider and 
the customer establish information security systems and 
trustworthiness for each other [12][30].  
 Unauthorized Secondary Usage  
A threat can occur when information is used illegally but 
the standard cloud computing business model states that 
service providers can profit from the authorised secondary 
use of users’ data; In particular, these data are often used to 
target advertisements [13][30][51]. 
 Trans-Border Data Flow and Data Proliferation  
One attribute of cloud computing is data proliferation, 
which is a process that involves several companies and is 
not controlled or managed by the data owner. The vendor 
guarantees the ease of use by facilitating data availability in 
several data centres. Hence, it is very difficult for the vendor 
to ensure that duplication of the data or its backups is not 
stored or processed in a certain authority, and that all these 
copies of data are deleted if such a request is made [30]. 
Due to the dynamic nature of this technology and the 
movement of data, Central Processor (CP) exacerbates the 
trans-border data flow because it can be extremely difficult 
to ascertain which specific server or storage device will be 
used [14][30][52]. 
 Dynamic Provision  
Although many of the problems faced by cloud 
computing are similar to those faced by traditional IT 
outsourcing, because of the dynamic nature of the cloud, the 
existing provisions for addressing the problems in more 
static environments are rendered obsolete or impractical to 
set up and implement in such a short timescale [30]. It is not 
clear which party is responsible (statutorily or contractually) 
for ensuring legal requirements for the protection of 
personal information, and whether appropriate data handling 
standards are set and followed [7][30], or if the third-party 
compliance can be audited effectively with such laws and 
standards. It is also still unclear if the cloud sub-contractors 
involved in processing can be properly identified, checked 
and ascertained as trustworthy, particularly in the dynamic 
environment of cloud computing. It is also unclear what 
rights concerning the data will be acquired by data 
processors and their subcontractors, and whether these are 
transferable to other third parties upon bankruptcy, takeover 
or merger [15]. 
B. Cloud Security Issues 
In a traditional security model, such as a corporate 
firewall, for example, there is self-control over computing 
resources and storing and processing information within a 
set security perimeter. The network provides transit to other 
trusted end hosts, which operate in a similar manner. This 
model has been proven adequate for the original Internet, 
but not for public and hybrid clouds [30]. Since the 
confidential information in the cloud may be processed 
outside the known trusted areas as these computing 
environments often have unsure boundaries with regard to 
the location of storing and processing data, the security 
perimeter becomes blurred. The consumers, on the other 
hand, need to extend their trust to the cloud service 
provider, in order to obtain the service, which in turn can 
give rise to difficulties [30]. 
In addition to the privacy issues discussed previously, 
the public cloud has its share of security concerns. A recent 
user survey [16], indeed rated security as the top challenge 
of the cloud model. Private clouds can, to a certain extent, 
guarantee security, but the cost associated with this 
approach is quite high [50]. In this section, we present 
problems that are very important for cloud architectures. 
The security challenges associated with cloud computing 
are exacerbated at the network, host and application levels 
[30].  The main issues relate to defining which parties are 
responsible for which aspects of security. Such division of 
responsibility is hampered by the lack of standardization of 
the cloud Application Program Interface (API). The risk of 
data loss, the unauthorized collection and usage of data and 
the CSP not adequately protecting data [52], are some of the 
security concerns facing customers. The security risks fit 
into a broader model of cloud-related risks. According to 
CSA [17], the top threats to cloud computing are abuse and 
nefarious use of cloud computing, insecure interfaces and 
APIs, malicious insiders, shared technology issues, data loss 
or leakage, account or service hijacking and unknown risk 
profile. There is no consensus on ranking the degree of 
severity of these risks. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

It may be noted that there is scope for outsourcing 
security to security experts. Therefore, security need not 
necessarily suffer in moving to the cloud model.  In fact, in 
many cases, greater protection than those available 
previously, can be obtained. Some security concerns 
regarding the public cloud are described below:  
 Access  
Access to confidential information by a governments’ 
surveillance over data stored in that country in the cloud can 
increase the risks. Governments in the countries where the 
data is processed or stored may even have legal rights to 
view the data under some circumstances [18][53], and this 
may not be known by the consumers. Furthermore, as with 
other computing models, unauthorized access by entities 
involved in the provider chain with inadequate security 
mechanisms in place, can exacerbate the risk. There can be 
the risk of data theft by rogue employees of CSPs or by data 
thieves breaking into service providers’ machines, or even 
by other customers of the same service if there is inadequate 
separation of customers’ data in a machine that they share in 
the cloud [52]. 
The risk to data stored in the cloud for long periods of 
time is more from malicious behavior than processing in the 
cloud, because of higher exposure time. However, the 
problem can be potentially solved using encryption in the 
cloud storage [30]. 
 Control Over Data Lifecycle  
Another important issue for the cloud is to ensure the 
customer that they have control over their data. In particular, 
the cloud should ensure that data be deleted and 
unrecoverable by a cloud service provider. Presently, there 
is no way to prove this as it relies on trust. The problem is 
exacerbated in the cloud because there can be many copies 
of the data, potentially held by different entities [30]. 
This risk depends more specifically on the cloud service 
model being used. When using IaaS or PaaS, one or more 
virtual machines are created in order to run a program. 
When the task is finished, the virtual machines and the disk 
spaces are released. However, it may be possible for the 
next user to recover the previous user’s data as the media 
may not be wiped completely. Users generally do not know 
what happens to the physical volume supporting their virtual 
storage. When using the SaaS approach, the customer is one 
of the users of a multi-tenant application developed by the 
CSP. The customers’ data is stored in the cloud and made 
accessible to him on his subsequent log in. The data is 
deleted only at the end of the lifecycle of the data, if the 
customer wishes to change service provider. 
 Multi-Tenancy  
It is a feature of SaaS that one program can run to 
multiple machines. CSP uses a multi-tenant application of 
the cloud to reduce cost by using a virtual machine, but it 
increases vulnerability [19]. 
 Audit  
Internal control can be achieved through an external 
audit mechanism which permits CSP to monitor data [30]. 
The cloud computing environment presents new challenges 
from an audit and compliance perspective, but the existing 
solutions for outsourcing and audit can be leveraged. For 
ensuring data integrity and winning the trust of the data 
owner in the cloud environment, data transaction needs to 
be appropriate so as to prevent the occurrence of any 
untraceable action. This provision is still lacking, especially 
in public models. Additionally, there remains the issue of 
unclear ownership regarding the transactional data and this 
makes it hard to anticipate which data need protection [20]. 
C. Cloud Trust Issues 
One of the major concerns, particularly with regard to 
financial and health data is the higher risk to data privacy 
and security attached to the vendor offerings which actually 
aim to assist business and encourage the use of cloud 
computing [30]. Both the financial and health sectors deal 
with confidential and sensitive information. Therefore, the 
associated vulnerability of the cloud computing system is 
the key business inhibitor in such sectors. These domains 
need control against unauthorized or secondary access or 
any kind of misuse, and cloud computing systems do not 
allow such customer control.  Sectors, like finance and 
health, have to rely on mechanisms, such as insurance, court 
action, or penalties, which provide compensation in case of 
breach of SLAs. 
There is no universally accepted scholarly definition of 
‘trust’, as it is a complex concept; however, according to a 
number 
of 
contemporary 
cross-disciplinary 
scholarly 
writings, the following definition is widely held [21]: “Trust 
is a psychological state comprising the intention to accept 
vulnerability based upon positive expectations of the 
intentions or behavior of another”. Yet this definition does 
not fully capture the dynamic and varied subtleties involved: 
trust is a complex notion and a multi-level analysis is 
important in order to try to understand it. There are many 
different ways in which online trust can be established: 
security may be one of these, although security, on its own, 
does not necessarily imply trust [22]. Some would argue 
that security is not even a component of trust: [23] argues 
that the level of security does not affect trust. Although 
some would argue that security is not even a component of 
trust, it has been found that sometimes increasing security 
enhances the level of trust among customers. One example 
of this might be that the assurance of cryptogenic protection 
of credit cards and personal data may encourage people to 
participate in e-commerce [24]. 
Some may consider reputation, another component of 
online trust, as the most valuable asset of any organization 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[23], although the reputation of a CSP may not be justified. 
In the event of any breach of trust, the brand image suffers 
the most. 
In a relationship, trust goes through different phases. In 
the beginning, trust is built up until it finally becomes a 
stable trust relationship. However, another phase may 
follow after achieving a stable relationship, a phase of 
declining trust, and trust can easily be lost as Nielsen states 
[25], “It is hard to build and easy to lose: a single violation 
of trust can destroy years of slowly accumulated 
credibility”. 
Now, while assessing trust with regard to cloud 
computing systems, it is important to differentiate between 
social and technological aspects of providing diligent and 
dynamic trust as both aspects are necessary [26]. 
Persistent Trust: Characterized by properties or 
infrastructure emerging out of a relatively static socio-
technological mechanism, persistent trust is established over 
the long term. 
Dynamic Trust: In a context-based socio-technological 
mechanism, dynamic trust is associated with a specific state 
or context and specific, short term or variable information. 
In a hardware or software component/system, persistent 
social-based trust is interlinked with technological-based 
trust, because the former can only be established if 
confidence in the operation and implementation of the 
system is gained [30]. A vouching mechanism underlies this 
connection - it is equally important to know who is 
vouching and what are they vouching for. Similarly, in a 
cloud computing system, persistent trust is established when 
dynamic-technological-based trust is grown in combination 
with both social and technological mechanisms. In a cloud 
resource, information can only be trusted if there is trusted 
vouch for the method that provides and assesses the 
information. Depending on the context, vouching on a 
method should come from different entities such as 
consumer groups, auditors, security experts, regulators, 
companies with a proven reputation, and established CSPs. 
 Lack of Customer Trust 
Lack of transparency is one of the major reasons for 
distrust in any system [30]. The same is true for a cloud 
system where individuals have no clue why, how and by 
whom their personal information is managed and this result 
in skepticism which finally leads to mistrust [27]. 
Customers may not show confidence in using cloud 
services, 
especially 
when 
personally 
identifiable 
information is involved, due to security related concerns as 
to whether the cloud can adequately protect data [7], and 
this is particularly related to sectors like finance and health 
which involve confidential and sensitive information.  
Before taking any decision regarding a cloud system, 
customers should also take into account the obligation and 
compliance assurance from the prospective suppliers 
promising to address such risks. Therefore, trust is the key 
element in the adoption of SaaS by the customer. A 
mechanism that brings transparency into different service 
provisions might encourage customers to adopt such a 
system, because when adopting the cloud, there is always 
trade-offs 
between 
factors 
like 
security, 
privacy, 
compliance, costs, and benefits [27]. 
 Weak Trust Relationships 
Trust relationships may be weak at any point in the 
cloud service delivery chain, but they exist in order that a 
service can be provided quickly. When a cloud transaction 
is initiated there is always a risk of loss of control in the 
transaction of sensitive data to other organizations because 
of the globalized nature of cloud infrastructure [30]. This 
may cause significant loss in business due to the lack of data 
control on the part of the customer who is using the cloud. 
For example, the parent organization may not know whether 
the contractors are sub-contracting the key business 
processes to others. The contract requirements regarding 
data protection measures may not be propagated down the 
contracting chain and this further increases the risk. 
Ensuring trust at all level of the chain to customer may 
not be transitive for cloud providers, and particularly, the 
customer may not trust some of the subcontractors (XaaS 
providers). Lack of transparency may not even allow the 
customer to know about the cloud providers in the chain. 
Particularly, models, like ‘on-demand’ and ‘pay as you go’, 
based on weak trust relationships, allow third parties in data 
security practices to, expose data and even delete data which 
are hard to find. Moreover, addition of new cloud service 
providers at short notice or in real time does not provide any 
chance to scrutinize their background. 
Trust issues in cloud computing environments can be 
divided into four sub-categories [28][29][30][31], which 
include:  
 How to define and evaluate trust according to the 
unique attribute of cloud computing environments?  
 How to handle malicious recommend information, 
which is very important in cloud computing 
environments, as the trust relationship in the cloud is 
temporary and dynamic?  
 How to consider and provide different security levels 
of service according to the trust degree? 
 How to adjust and really reflect trust relationship 
dynamic change over time and space? 
 
D. Cloud Interoperability Issues 
Currently, each cloud offering has its own way that 
cloud clients/applications/users interact with the cloud, 
leading to the ‘hazy cloud’ phenomenon [32][57], the 
development of the cloud ecosystem is severely hindered 
because of enforced vendor lock in which prevents users 
from choosing alternative service providers for optimizing 
their resources at different levels within an organization.  
More importantly, proprietary cloud APIs makes it very 
difficult to integrate cloud services with an organization's 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

own existing systems (e.g., an on-premise data center for 
highly 
interactive 
modelling 
applications 
in 
a 
pharmaceutical 
company) 
[49][57]. 
The 
scope 
of 
interoperability here refers both to the links among different 
clouds and the connection between a cloud and an 
organization's local systems. The primary goal of 
interoperability 
is 
to 
realize 
seamless 
fluid 
data 
communication across clouds and between the cloud and 
local applications [54][57]. 
There are a number of levels at which interoperability is 
essential for cloud computing. First, to optimize the IT asset 
and computing resources, an organization often needs to 
keep in-house IT assets and capabilities associated with 
their core competencies while outsourcing marginal 
functions and activities (e.g., the human resource system) on 
to the cloud. In this case, frequent communication between 
cloud services (Human Resources (HR) system) and on 
premise systems (e.g., an Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP) system) becomes crucial and indispensable for 
running a business. Poor interoperability such as proprietary 
APIs and overly complex or ambiguous data structures used 
by an HR cloud SaaS will dramatically increase the 
integration difficulties, putting the IT department into a 
difficult situation. Second, more often than not, for the 
purpose of optimization, an organization may need to 
outsource a number of marginal functions to cloud services 
offered by different vendors. For example, it is highly likely 
that a Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) may use Gmail 
for the email services and SalesForce.com for the HR 
service. This means that the many features (e.g., address 
book, calendar) in the email system must connect to the HR 
employee directory residing in the HR system [57]. 
 Intermediary Layer 
The interoperability issues have been addressed in a 
number of recent works by providing an intermediary layer 
between cloud consumers and resources (e.g., VM). For 
example,[33][57] 
proposed 
the 
notion 
of 
virtual 
infrastructure (open nebula) management to replace native 
VM API interactions in order to accommodate multiple 
clouds, private or hybrid for an organization. Open nebula 
works at the virtualization level, thus providing cloud 
consumers with a unified view and operation interfaces 
towards the underlying virtualization implementations of 
various types. Unlike open nebula, [34][57]  developed an 
abstraction layer at a higher level. This provides a single 
resource usage model, user authentication model and an API 
to shield the cloud providers' heterogeneity which can 
hinder the development of cloud-provider independent 
applications. 
 Standard 
Standardization appears to be a good solution to address 
the interoperability issue [57]. However, as cloud computing 
has only now started to take off, the interoperability 
problem has not appeared on the agenda of major industry 
cloud vendors. For example, neither Microsoft nor Amazon 
supports the Unified Cloud Interface (UCI) project proposed 
by the Cloud Computing Interoperability Forum (CCIF) 
[35][57]. The standardization process will be very difficult 
to progress when these big players do not come forward to 
reach consensus. A widely used cloud API within academia 
is the Eucalyptus project [36][57], which mirrors the well-
known proprietary Amazon EC2 API for cloud operation. 
Although an Eucalyptus IaaS cloud consumer can easily 
connect 
to 
the 
EC2 
cloud 
without 
substantial 
redevelopment, it cannot solve the general interoperability 
issue that requires an open API to be complied with by 
different types of cloud providers. 
IV. 
MITIGATION STEPS 
One observer has correctly admonished IT executives, 
noting that when it comes to shifting to cloud computing, 
“Standing pat means being left behind” [55]. Linda Cureton, 
NASA’s CIO, stated the matter thus: 
“I’d like to say it a little more bluntly. If CIOs don’t get 
ready, manage fears and manage their risk, they will get run 
over by this disruptive technology. Your organization is 
doing it anyway – without you! So do something! You don’t 
have to move your entire enterprise into the cloud, just take 
the first step and look at some appropriate data sets.This 
does not have to be an all / none decision” [56]. 
Some mitigation steps and some solutions to overcome 
the issues discussed in the previous section are discussed 
here. In addition, this section also outlines a few 
recommendations for cloud service providers to develop 
good strategies which may help in reducing security, trust 
and privacy issues in a cloud environment. Adopting these 
issues again raises several issues related to performance as 
well as the security of the system, issues such as the user’s 
privilege 
to 
control 
data 
causing 
low 
transaction 
performance and internet speed affecting performance [37].  
Some actions as listed below must take place to mitigate 
the above problems: 
 In order to relocate a cloud environment from its 
traditional environment, a new policy must be put 
forward. 
 Finding a new solution to avoid or fix a problem is 
not enough. One has to check the effect of the 
solution on the system. 
 Any new changes made should be scrutinised by 
providers along with making the customers’ access 
privileges limited. 
 Finding the linked service providers to a particular 
cloud service provider is necessary for knowing 
about their right to use data. 
 Monitoring system should be excluded. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 Within the duration of services, a customer should be 
informed by its service provider about managing 
security policies apart from the provider’s own 
policy. 
 Data transfer should be protected and secured by 
standard security techniques and it must be ensured 
that data are managed by skilled professionals. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
High security is one of the most important problems for 
opening up the new era of the long dreamed vision of cloud 
computing as utility services. As the sensitive applications 
and data are moved into the cloud data centres, run on 
virtual computing resources in the form of a virtual 
machine. This unique attribute however, poses many new 
security challenges, such as: access, control over data 
lifecycle, availability and back-up, multi-tenancy and audit. 
With the rapid improvement of cloud computing and the 
increasing number of cloud users, security, privacy and trust 
issues will continue to increase. To protect private and 
sensitive data that are processed in data centres, the cloud 
user needs to verify the following:  
 The real existence of the cloud computing 
environment in the world. 
 The security of information in the cloud. 
 The trustworthiness of the systems in the cloud 
computing environment. 
In this paper, researchers primarily aim to highlight the 
major issues and challenges (security, privacy and trust) on 
the 
way 
towards 
adopting 
cloud 
computing. 
The 
interoperability issue was highlighted as well. 
REFERENCES 
[1]   
 D. Hilley, “Cloud computing: Taxonomy of platform and 
infrastructure-level offerings”, CERCS Technical Report, 
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2009, accessed on September. 
2013, 
available 
at: 
http://www.csrc.nist.gov/groups/SNS/cloudcomputing/index.ht
ml. 
[2]   
P. Mell and T. Grance, “Draft NIST working definition of cloud 
computing”, vol. 15, 2009, pp. 1-7. 
[3]   
D. Catteddu and G. Hogben, “Cloud computing: Benefits, risks 
and recommendations for information security”, European 
Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA), 2009, pp. 
17-25. 
[4]   
R. K. Chellappa, “Intermediaries in Cloud-Computing: A New 
Computing Paradigm”, INFORMS Annual Meeting, Dallas, TX, 
October 26-29, 1997, accessed on December. 2013, available at:  
http://www.bus.emory.edu/ram/. 
[5]   
R. Buyyaa, C. S. Yeoa, S. Venugopala, J. Broberg, and I. Ivona 
Brandic, “Cloud computing and emerging IT platforms: Vision, 
hype, and reality for delivering computing as the 5th utility”, 
Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 25, 2009, pp. 599-
616. 
[6]   
L. M. Vaquero, L. Rodero-Merino, J. Caceres, and M. Lindner, 
“A Break in the Clouds: Towards a Cloud Definition”, ACM 
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 39, no. 1, 
2009, pp. 1-6. 
[7]   
CSA, “Security Guidance for Critical Areas of Focus in Cloud 
Computing”, 2009, Cloud Security Alliance. 
[8]   
P. A. Dustin Amrhein, A. De Andrade, E. A. B. Armstrong, J. 
Bartlett, R. Bruklis, and K. Cameron, “Cloud computing use 
cases”, White Paper. Version 3.0 ed., 2010, pp. 1-7. 
[9]   
T. Grance, “The NIST Cloud Definition Framework” 2010, 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 
[10]   M. Armbrust et al. “Above the clouds: A Berkeley view of cloud 
computing”, EECS Department, University of California, 
Berkeley, Tech. Rep. UCB/EECS, 2009. 
[11]   S. Pearson, “Taking account of privacy when designing cloud 
computing services”, ICSE Workshop on Software Engineering 
Challenges of Cloud Computing, 2009, p. 44. 
[12]   Z. Gansen, R. Chunming, L. Jin, Z. Feng, and T. Yong, “Trusted 
data sharing over untrusted cloud storage providers”, Second 
International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and 
Science, 2010, p. 97. 
[13]   P. Kresimir and H. Zeljko, “Cloud computing security issues and 
challenges”, MIPRO, 2010, Opatija, Croatia. 
[14]   K. Popovic and Z. Hocenski, “Cloud computing security issues 
and challenge”, Proceedings of the 33rd International 
Convention, 2010, p. 344.  
[15]   R. Gellman, “Privacy in the Clouds: Risks to Privacy and 
Confidentiality from Cloud Computing”, World Privacy Forum, 
2009, 
accessed 
on 
June. 
2013, 
available 
at: 
http://www.worldprivacyforum.org/pdf/WPF_Cloud_Privacy_R
eport.pdf. 
[16]   IDC, “Enterprise panel”, 2009, accessed on July. 2013, available 
at: 
http://www.slideshare.net/JorFigOr/cloud-computing-2010-
an-idcupdate. 
[17]   CSA, “Top threats to cloud computing”, 2010, Cloud Security 
Alliance (CSA). 
[18]   Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act (RIPA), Part II, 2000, 
UK. 
[19]   M. Jensen, J. Schwenk, N. Gruschka and L. L. Iacono, 
“Technical security issues in cloud computing”, IEEE 
International Conference on Cloud Computing, 2010, p. 109. 
[20]   J. A. Hall and S. L. Liedtka, “The sarbanes-oxley act: 
Implications for large-scale IT outsourcing”, Communications of 
the ACM, vol. 50, no. 3, 2007, pp. 95-100. 
[21]   D. Rousseau, S. Sitkin, R. Burt, and C. Camerer, C. “Not so 
different after all: A cross-discipline view of trust”, Academy of 
Management Review, vol. 23, no. 3, 1998, pp. 393-404. 
[22]   D. Osterwalder, “Trust through evaluation and certification?”, 
Social Science Computer Review, vol. 19, no. 1, 2001, pp. 32-46. 
[23]   H. Nissenbaum, “Can trust be secured online? A theoretical 
perspective”, Etica e-Political, no. 2, 1999. 
[24]   S. Giff, “The Influence of Metaphor, Smart Cards and Interface 
Dialogue on Trust in e-Commerce”, 2000, University College 
London. 
[25]   J. Nielsen, “Trust or bust: Communicating trustworthiness in 
web design”, Jacob Nielsen’s Alert Box, 1999, accessed on July. 
2013, available at: http://www.useit.com/alertbox/990307.html. 
[26]   S. Pearson, M. Casassa Mont, and S. Crane, “Persistent and 
dynamic trust: Analysis and the related impact of trusted 
platforms”, Trust Management, LNCS 3477, ed: P. Herrmann, 
V. Issarny, and S. Shiu, 2005, pp. 355-363. 
[27]   A. Tweney and S. Crane, “Trust guide 2: An exploration of 
privacy preferences in an online world”, Expanding the 
Knowledge Economy, 2007, IOS Press. 
[28]   S. Paquette, P. T. Jaeger, and S. C. Wilson, “Identifying the 
security risks associated with governmental use of cloud 
computing”, Government Information Quarterly, vol. 27, no 3, 
2010, pp. 245-253. 
[29]   S. Subashini and V. Kavitha, “A survey on security issues in 
service delivery models of cloud computing”, Journal of 
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 34, no. 1, 2010, pp. 1-
11. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[30]   S. Pearson and A. Benameur, “Privacy, security and trust issues 
arising from cloud computing”, Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE 
International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and 
Science, IEEE Press, Nov. 2010, pp. 693-702. 
[31]   A. Sangroya, S. Kumar, J. Dhok, and V. Varma, “Towards 
analyzing data security risks in cloud computing environments”, 
Communications in Computer and Information Science, vol. 54, 
2010, pp. 255-265. 
[32]   M. Nelson, “Building an open cloud”, Science, vol. 324, 2009, p. 
1656. 
[33]   B. Sotomayor, R. Montero, I. Lorente, and I. Foster, “Virtual 
infrastructure management in private and hybrid clouds”, IEEE 
Internet Computing, vol. 13, 2009, pp. 14-22. 
[34]   T. Harmer, P. Wright, C. Cunningham, and R. Perrott, 
“Provider-independent use of the cloud”, The 15th International 
European Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing, 
2009, p. 465. 
[35]   Unified Cloud Interface (UCI) 2010, accessed on August. 2013, 
available at: http://code.google.com/p/unifiedcloud/. 
[36]   D. Nurmi, R. Wolski, C. Grzegorczyk, G. Obertelli, S. Soman, 
L. Youseff, and D. Zagorodnov, “The eucalyptus open-source 
cloud computing system”, Proceedings of Cloud Computing and 
Its Applications, 2008. 
[37]   P. Mathur and N. Nishchal, “Cloud computing: New challenge 
to the entire computer industry”, The1st International 
Conference on Parallel, Distributed and Grid Computing 
(PDGC), 2010, p. 223. 
[38]   L. Wang, J. Tao, and M. Kunze, “Scientific cloud computing: 
Early definition and experience”, Proceedings of the 10th IEEE 
International Conference on High Performance Computing and 
Communications, 2008, Dalian, China. 
[39]   L. Wang, G. Von Laszewski, A. Younge, X. He, M. Kunze, J. 
Tao, and C. Fu, “Cloud computing: A perspective study”, New 
generation Computing, vol. 28, 2010, pp. 137-146. 
[40]   E. Clemons and Y. Chen, “Making the decision to contract for 
cloud services: Managing the risk of an extreme form of it 
outsourcing”, Proceedings of 44th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, Hawaii, 2011, pp. 1-10. 
[41]   A. Velte, T. Velte, and R. Elsenpeter, R. “Cloud Computing a 
Practical Approach’, McGraw-Hill, USA, 2010. 
[42]   I. Foster, Y. Zhao, I. Raicu, and S. Lu, “Cloud computing and 
Grid computing 360-degree compared”, Proceedings of Grid 
Computing Environments Workshop, Austin, TX, 2008. 
[43]   T. Dillion, C. Wu, and E. Chang, “Cloud computing: Issues and 
challenges”, Proceedings of 24th International Conference on 
Information Networking and Applications, 2010, Perth, WA. 
[44]   Y. Sohan and H. Zeng, “Cloud: A computing infrastructure on 
demand”, Proceedings of 2nd International Conference on 
Computer Engineering and Technology, 2010, Chengdu, China. 
[45]   S. Bhardwaj, L. Jain, and S. Jain, “Cloud computing: A study of 
infrastructure as a service (IaaS)”, International Journal of 
Engineering and Information Technology, vol. 2, no. 1, 2010, 
pp. 60-63. 
[46]   J. Hurwitz, R. Bloor, M. Kaufman, and F. Halper, “Cloud 
computing for dummies”, Wiley Publishing, 2010, Indianapolis, 
Indiana.  
[47]   S. Alshomrani and S. Qamar, “Cloud based e-government: 
benefits 
and 
challenges”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Multidisciplinary Sciences and Engineering, vol. 4, no. 6, 2013, 
pp. 1-7. 
[48]   F. A. Alvi, B. S. Choudary, N. Jaffery, and E. A. Pathan, 
“Review on cloud computing security issues and challenges”, 
Department of Electronic Engineering, QUEST Nawabshah, 
Sindh, Pakistan, 2011. 
[49]   N. Yadav and V. B. Singh, “E-governance: past, present and 
future 
in 
India”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Computer 
Applications, vol. 53, no. 7, 2012, pp.36-48. 
[50]   D. Karunanithi and B. Kiruthika, “Efficient framework for 
ensuring the effectiveness of information security in cloud 
computing, 
International 
Conference 
on 
Signal, 
Image 
Processing and Applications, workshop of ICEEA, 2011. 
[51]   D. Catteddu and G. Hogben, “Cloud computing: Benefits, risks 
and recommendations for information security’, European 
Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA), 2009. 
[52]   B. Zwattendorfer, K. Stranacher, A. Tauber, and P. Reichstädter, 
“Electronic 
government 
and 
the 
information 
system 
perspective”, International Conference on Network and System 
Security, 2011, pp.1-6. 
[53]   T. Hariguna, “Prototype cloud computing for e-government in 
Indonesia”, International Journal of Engineering & Technology, 
vol. 11, no. 6, 2011. 
[54]   
K. Irion, “Government cloud computing and the policies of data 
Sovereignty”, 22nd European Regional Conference of the 
International Telecommunications Society, Budapest, Economic 
and Policy Issues, 2011. 
[55]   
H. M. Nezhad, B. Stephenson, and S. Singhal, “Outsourcing 
business to cloud computing services: Opportunities and 
challenges”, IEEE Internet Computing, Special Issues on Cloud 
Computing, 2009, pp. 1-10. 
[56]   
M. O’Gara, “Washington itching to take the lead on cloud 
computing”, 2009, SOA, accessed on December. 2013, 
available at: 
http://govit.sys-con.com/node/1055764. 
[57]   
T. Dillon, C. Wu, and E. Chang (2010). Cloud Computing: 
Issues and Challenges’, 24th IEEE International Conference on 
Advanced Information Networking and Applications, 2010, pp. 
1-7. 
 
 
 
 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

