Governance in Decentralized Ecosystems: 
A Survey of Blockchain and Distributed Ledger White Papers 
 
Petri Honkanen 
Department of Business Management and Analytics  
Arcada University of Applied Sciences 
Helsinki, Finland 
petri.honkanen@arcada.fi 
 
Magnus Westerlund 
Department of Business Management and Analytics 
Arcada University of Applied Sciences 
Helsinki, Finland 
magnus.westerlund@arcada.fi 
 
Mats Nylund 
Department of Business Management and Analytics 
Arcada University of Applied Sciences 
Helsinki, Finland 
mats.nylund@arcada.fi 
 
Abstract—For organizations of today, Information Technology 
(IT) governance is an important part of managing IT 
investments. To understand how governance is handled in 
blockchain projects, we surveyed a large body of project white 
papers to understand the level of organizational maturity in the 
field. The results show that governance has yet to receive a 
similar stance in blockchain projects as compared to IT 
governance in general. We introduce a discussion around 
implicit versus explicit governance, as to highlight the 
challenges in simplifying the debate around a level of 
distributedness, in terms of premissionless (public) and 
permissioned (private) blockchains. 
Keywords-governance; 
blockchain; 
distributed 
ledger 
technology; decentralized platforms; decentralized ecosystems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Over the last two decades, companies have begun 
understanding the importance of accountability in IT decision 
making. Today IT governance is part of any mature 
organization’s toolset to determine that IT decisions truly 
provide a return on investment and that managers of IT-
systems are accountable for the organizations decision making 
on investing in new and in maintaining legacy systems. An 
organization without a formalized approach to IT governance 
will have to rely on the individual system operator or manager 
to resolve issues as they arise and perhaps most importantly 
that this isolated decision making is also beneficial long-term 
to the company [1] [2]. 
Traditional IT systems are usually under the direct 
influence of the system owner, meaning that this system can 
receive updates and that the service can potentially be 
terminated in case a catastrophic error is detected. IT system 
decision making is also conceptually centralized around a 
system owner that may to a certain degree take input from 
users and customers, but the final decision is always in the 
hands of the owner. As IT architectures have moved over to a 
cloud provisioned model that may utilize a loosely coupled 
and fine-grained microservice architecture the control has 
become more difficult and may thus require an even deeper 
focus on IT governance. 
The new type of distributed architectures based on 
technologies, such as public (permissionless) distributed 
ledgers and blockchains introduces a new set of problems that 
require an increased understanding of governance. The 
distributed nature of execution means that a system owner no 
longer has the full control over who uses the system or even 
for what usage purpose. For decentralized ecosystems, based 
on Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT), it may even 
become difficult to determine who the system owner is. Here, 
the 
decentralized 
ecosystem 
becomes 
the 
inherent 
infrastructure to build new systems and services upon, and the 
original ecosystem creator may no longer be a relevant party 
to the continued development and maintenance of said 
ecosystem and services. Still, this does not mean that 
governance of the ecosystem is no longer required, rather this 
suggests that in accordance with open source software 
development this becomes a group effort. 
A core tenant of these decentralized ecosystems is that 
they offer users a certain amount of pseudonymity and this is 
something that often contrasts them from open source 
development. Architectures for decentralized ecosystems are 
based on the principal of achieving consensus based on 
trustless transactions. This can best be understood as that 
Alice and Bob can perform a transaction securely without the 
need for them to first establish trust towards each other. This 
is ensured by a consensus from the network peers that validate 
the transaction on behalf of Alice and Bob. Therefore, to 
enable 
anonymity 
in 
governance 
for 
decentralized 
ecosystems, 
the 
governance 
mechanisms 
should 
be 
distributed and arguably be based on the same trustless 
procedures as for other transactions. 
In this paper, we survey white papers from DLT and 
blockchain projects, and related proposals to understand how 
they intend to deal with governance. The initial survey aims 
to select those white paper proposals that raise the subject of 
governance and then to further expand on the maturity of these 
approaches. We limit the scope of the survey to a focus on the 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

long-term benefits for users of these ecosystem. We 
acknowledge that there is an argument for a developer and 
investor viewpoint as well, but due to length constraints we 
have chosen this focus for our present study. 
The structure of the paper is the following, first data 
gathering is described and from this material, we provide 
general observations and then describe models and challenges 
discovered.  We then introduce the abstractions of implicit and 
explicit governance, to deliver an analysis of the implications 
of a lack of governance. Finally, we present conclusions and 
future work. 
II. 
DATA GATHERING AND RESEARCH AIM 
For the survey, we have examined 241 white papers, 
which all cover and describe blockchain- or distributed ledger 
technology-based projects. These white papers include 
different types of projects, for example protocols, platforms or 
applications, which we refer to in a common term as 
“ecosystems”. The range of scanned white papers is wide and 
aims to select those papers that make a direct mention of 
governance for further study. The corpus was selected through 
non-probabilistic and discretionary sampling from various 
sources, that were found through search engines and various 
websites that report on relevant matters. Due to the inexistence 
of an all-inclusive global registry of DLT ecosystems, 
discretionary sampling remained our only alternative.  
The role of releasing white papers has become the de-facto 
norm when projects and ecosystems are conceptualized, and 
design views, abilities and features are explained, and staff 
introduced. In this survey, we present the first results of our 
study. We start from the general findings and follow the path 
to explain what these results could mean in the larger context 
of institutions, actors, structures and organizations. Further 
research concentrates on the relevance of decentralization by 
analyzing potential institutional and organizational changes, 
in order to capture and understand current and future 
developments occurring in the society at large. 
III. 
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 
The survey had a wide scope as to amass a large enough 
research body to examine. We start by discussing the common 
position and role of governance that is found in the 
whitepapers and then in consequent sections drill down into 
specific projects and their solutions.  
Governance, decision-making structures, and the inner 
processes (human activity) of the decentralized ecosystem as 
an explicit standpoint are missing in a large part of the 
examined whitepapers. This does not mean though, that there 
would be no governance, decision-making structures, or 
processes in these ecosystems. Structures and processes of 
governance can also exist implicitly and can be assessed 
through 
various 
scales, 
e.g., 
centralization 
vs. 
decentralization, explicated vs. hidden, dynamic vs fixed, and 
technocentric vs. human oriented. There are commonly no 
explicit explanations for the absence of governance structures 
and processes in white papers nor is there a standardized 
format the white paper should adhere to, therefore in this 
study, the reason for absence can only be conjectured.  
Potential reasons can be traced by considering the setting 
of white paper producers. Most of the white papers have been 
written by/for a company or other legal entity (e.g., 
foundation), whose main interest lays in initiating, developing 
and launching an ecosystem, but also to collect financing for 
the ecosystem through an Initial Coin Offering (ICO) or 
Security Token Offering (STO). Due to this latter target, some 
entities might want to hold quorum among the immediate 
beneficiaries of the project and are not prepared to discuss 
about the notion of distributing governance.  
Other reasons for absence of governance structures can 
signal 
various 
features 
of 
organizational 
structure, 
incompleteness 
of 
the 
planned 
ecosystem, 
planned 
unimportance of decentralization, forgetfulness of writers, or 
intended mischievous behavior. Another possibility is a 
misconception concerning an audience. Those who have 
produced the white papers may have had beliefs, that by 
describing an implicit technical solution of governance, they 
would not need to give any further explanation of how it 
works. This type of minimalism can be found for example in 
the Bitcoin white paper [3]. As such, today it can be 
considered delusional in a sense, that as the white paper paves 
the way for the first blockchain and the first successful 
cryptocurrency ever, the ecosystem should be able to function 
without any other governance structure than incentives for 
mining. Since the launch of Bitcoin, we have observed how 
this minimalistic model has led to deep contradictions and 
hard forks, because of a lack of consensus around decision-
making 
and 
governance 
concerning 
the 
continued 
development of the bitcoin protocol. Concerning the Bitcoin 
white paper, which was written 2008, it is understandable that 
governance was not understood and consequently described in 
more detail. In the more recent white papers we examined, 
which were published during 2017-18, the absence of a 
governance structure is more peculiar.  
Altogether, for an ecosystem to seem genuinely 
decentralized, the absence of a governance standpoint in a 
white paper may indicate some long-term issues the 
ecosystem will have to face. However, there are also white 
papers in which governance is described in detail and in these 
white papers conditions of governance have been scrutinized 
profoundly and it is sometimes clear that problems of a 
technical or human design are attempted to be solved by using 
certain models of governance. Due to these differences in 
attitudes, one may ask if there is something to conceal in the 
ecosystem projects, which do not openly describe and justify 
their governance model or even worse do not mention a 
governance standpoint at all. Due to this lack of clarity, we 
find that continued research into the role of governance for 
building sustainable decentralized ecosystems is well merited. 
IV. 
GOVERNANCE MODELS AND CHALLENGES 
In the following sub-section, we start with a brief 
examination of what primary and secondary sources discuss 
on the topic of blockchain governance. The following sub-
section then highlights findings from some of the blockchain 
projects surveyed. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

A. Literature survey 
Governance studies in academic literature is still sparse, 
particularly surveys of how blockchain projects view and 
implement governance. Some literature sources examine the 
philosophical aspects of decentralized governance and others 
consider how trust emerges towards a decentralized project. 
Others examine a specific case, such as the DAO project [4], 
but to the authors best knowledge none examined a multitude 
of projects as we do in this survey.  
Secondary sources such as open blog posts have so far 
been the foremost place for fostering a discussion about how 
governance should be implemented and approached. The 
discussion and openings originating from influential 
blockchain researchers such as Nick Szabo and Vlad Zamfir 
focus on definition [5]. The former, Szabo has provocatively 
classified blockchain governance into three categories [6] 1. 
“Lord of Flies” [edit. disastrous attempt of self-governance], 
2. Lawyers, 3. Ruthlessly minimized. His categorization gives 
an impression of frustration for governance choices and 
discussion about governance. However, all governance 
analysis does not remain as superficial as that. Zamfir has 
underlined the political aspect of governance and presented a 
“Blockchain governance outcome” model with five visions 
for the future [7]. These five visions are: Autonomous 
Blockchains, Blockchain Governance Capture, Internet 
Censorship as Blockchain Governance, Governance via 
Public International Law or Diplomacy, and Governance via 
International Private Cooperation.  However, despite 
profound argumentation, Zamfir’s view is validating the 
setting in which the general blockchain governance model is 
still very incomplete and even the definition is controversial.   
CleanApp foundation has brought a more analytical grasp 
to the discussion about governance. In their continuation of 
Zamfir’s five views, they introduced a “vocabulary for 
blockchain governance”, which can be interpreted to be based 
on at least six layers or operational contexts [8]. The six layers 
are: 
Intra-blockchain 
governance, 
Inter-blockchain 
governance, Pan-blockchain governance, Supra-blockchain 
governance, Private-off-chain governance and Global 
governance. As a result of their analysis CleanApp concluded 
that “today’s blockchain governance mechanisms are broken 
because it’s almost impossible to access today’s blockchain 
governance 
mechanisms” 
and 
“today’s 
blockchain 
governance feedback mechanisms are either non-existent or 
grossly under-developed”. To make governance easier to 
approach and understandable the concepts in-chain and off-
chain governance is used. This categorization elucidates the 
differences between traditional and automated (voting and 
execution) features of governance [9].  
By following commentaries about on-chain and off-chain 
governance, it can at times be an inflammatory theme of 
discussion. It seems that many writers do advocate the role of 
off-chain governance as a primary source of order and power 
in ecosystems. A good example of this genre is the title of 
Vlad Zamfir’s blog article. “Against on-chain governance” 
[10]. Also, Haseeb Qureshi has promoted the ideology that 
“Blockchains should not be democracies” [11]. He has argued 
that governance process should be built around the expertise 
of capable technologists, who can “get shit done”. However, 
his thesis is anchored to the phase of (radical) development of 
blockchain technology as he has stated himself: “Perhaps 
someday blockchains will be robust and stable enough to no 
longer need the guiding hand of capable technologists.”  
B. White paper survey 
In Table I, we present a classification of the white papers 
surveyed. General refers to broad DLT projects such as the 
Bitcoin blockchain. Others mean projects that could not be 
categorized under our classification. In the leftmost column, 
we list the types of projects included. In the following four 
columns, we have categorized the papers on a scale of 0-3 
defining the level of governance found. Here, 0 means that an 
explicit mentioning of governance is missing, while 3 means 
that governance is thoroughly described. We intentionally 
included a larger sample of media and content type projects as 
there was a higher ratio of white papers that described 
governance. 
In the white papers, an explicit on-chain or off-chain 
conceptualization is not common. Still, the NEO [12] white 
paper [13] provides an exception and governance for on-
chain/off-chain governance is briefly defined as following: 
“Chain governance: NEO token holders are the network 
owners and managers, managing the network through voting 
in the network, using the GAS generated from NEO to utilize 
the functions in the network. NEO tokens can be transferred.  
Off-chain governance: NEO Council consists of the 
founding members of the NEO project, under which the 
management committee, technical committee and the 
secretariat, respectively, are responsible for strategic 
decision-making, technical decision-making and specific 
implementation. The NEO Council is responsible to the NEO 
community for the promotion and development of NEO 
ecosystem as its primary objective.” 
As we see, there are obvious reasons to ask if NEO is a 
centralized and not a decentralized ecosystem. Even though 
on-chain processes are enabled in NEO, crucial decision 
making is located in a predefined off-chain governance 
structure.  
TABLE I - A SUMMARY AND CLASSIFICATION OF 
SURVEYED WHITE PAPERS  
 
 
Types
Explicit 
governance 
missing
Vague 
reference
Brief 
description
Governance 
described
Total
General
31
3
5
15
54
Data
13
3
2
2
20
Energy
7
0
0
0
7
Finance
8
0
2
1
11
Media&content
42
7
5
11
65
Professional
6
0
1
3
10
Sharing&reputation
14
3
2
2
21
Tools
9
0
2
2
13
Health
5
1
1
2
9
Commerce
5
1
1
1
8
Others
18
2
1
2
23
Total
158
20
22
41
241
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Essentially, 
the 
off-chain 
committees 
should 
be 
responsible for proposals and decision making and very little 
information exists on NEO’s website on who belongs to these 
committees, the nomination and expulsion process of these 
individuals/institutions. The financial decision making is also 
centralized as this comes from reserved NEO tokens during 
the launch and according to the white paper from the GAS 
generated from the NEO transaction processing.  
Recently, the NEO Council acknowledged the issue as 
well and have proposed a plan to instigate a decentralization 
of consensus nodes. Part of this process will be to rethink 
financing of the development work once the reserved tokens 
are consumed. 
“NEO Council had been spending the reserved NEO 
tokens to accelerate development, reward community, and 
foster ecosystem. Decreasing amount of NEO held by NEO 
Council means decreasing voting power, and eventually all 
NEO tokens aka governance power will be distributed to the 
community.” [14] 
For a project to explicate their own governance model in a 
white paper format, seems to be a challenging task for the 
organization responsible for blockchain- or other DLT-based 
ecosystems. Although the study found dozens of white papers 
with some sort of explicit approach to the governance issue, 
pervasive and integrated (in-chain) models of governance 
were rare. One explanation for the difficulties may lie in the 
incompleteness of ecosystems. As the ecosystem has not been 
launched or exists in a very early phase, real life tests are not 
possible to experience how the ecosystem functions in a real-
life context. However, in some white papers, the ecosystem 
defines a clearly articulated process, including roles and 
positions of governance and there are clear signs of an 
endeavor to decentralize the ecosystem in these projects.  
Furthermore, the few whitepapers in which governance 
models are profoundly detailed, tend to be advancing 
decentralization at least on a discursive level as desirable and 
as the intended final state of the ecosystem.  
As mentioned in the beginning, without exception, all the 
white papers have some sort of – although sometimes hidden 
- agenda for governance. However, the governance model 
does not have to be decentralized, it can be centralized or very 
minimalistic, but it exists. Dan Larimer [15] has described this 
as: 
 “Every blockchain that has a “process for upgrading” 
has a governance structure that is capable of changing the 
rules, rolling back stolen funds, etc. It is the good-old-boy 
network of Github admins, exchange connections, and mining 
pool operators. The problem is that these processes are 
informal and less predictable and even less accountable than 
the governmental structures we hope the blockchains would 
replace.”  
Even projects with a target of very thin governance can 
openly admit that some sort of governance is needed. In the 
white paper of Mixin [16] Network is stated: 
“We try our best to make Mixin Network just work 
without any governance, but there are still situations the 
program can’t handle” (p.27). 
In order to find solutions for the in-chain/off-chain 
challenge, some ecosystems have been created with a written 
constitution. For example, EOS [17]and media platform Civil 
[18] attempt to base their operations on this type of model. In 
the constitution there are established rules and principles that 
should govern the continued operation of these ecosystems. 
Qureshi has used Blockchain 3.0. to define on-chain based 
ecosystems, “On-chain governance is central to many 
“blockchain 3.0” projects, such as Tezos [19], DFINITY [20], 
and Cosmos [21]. Others, such as 0x [22]and Maker [23], are 
planning to eventually implement on-chain governance 
through a more gradual transition.” 
V. 
GOVERNANCE ABSTRACTIONS 
The traditional classification of blockchain types has been 
based on a technical distinction whether they are private or 
public. This usually refers to access control, determining, e.g., 
who may perform transaction validations and what incentive 
is offered to the nodes to stay honest. Below we consider the 
two main abstractions that we have found in the white-paper 
review. 
A. Implicit governance 
The most common governance abstraction found is 
implicit governance. Implicit governance refers to the lack of 
an explicated well-formed process that deal with decision-
making and the governance of those humans that still make 
decisions in relation to the ecosystems. Implicit governance is 
used both by Bitcoin and Ethereum and refer to a model that 
is based on human expertise to make decisions when they 
arise. Often these decisions are of a technical nature, e.g., 
when advancing the protocol. Such measures may require a 
deep level of technical knowledge that few people behold, and 
the obvious choice is to delegate the decision-making to this 
group. However, the dilemma arises when the changes are not 
only of a technical nature but may also change the dynamics 
of the ecosystem.  
An example of such a situation occurred when the 
Ethereum developer group decided to switch away from a 
pure Proof of Work (PoW) consensus model towards a Proof 
of Stake (PoS) model. The technical decision-making of such 
a change may require that a small group of physically 
identified and trusted people make the necessary design 
decisions, but the lack of an explicit governance model means 
that the users of Ethereum have as much input in the decision-
making process as they would have with a private chain. In 
this case, the change means that the mining process is altered 
so that miners are no longer compensated and that mining 
hardware is not needed as before. Please, note that we are not 
taking the position that either PoW or PoS is either good or 
bad, this is merely an example of the conundrum.  
Another example of implicit governance and lack of any 
institutionalized governance occurred in 2017 when there was 
a dispute over the ‘segwit2x’ hard fork and doubling of the 
block size among Bitcoin stakeholders. Due to the 
disagreement over doubling the block size, it led to that 
Bitcoin Cash was created and forked from the original Bitcoin. 
This could also have occurred, had a formally defined 
governance protocol existed, but for a characteristically 
decentralized ecosystem the latter system seems to be more 
effective, transparent, and foreseeable for all of the potential 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

stakeholders. Implicitness – trust without reservations and 
doubts – may entice conflicts when significantly upgrading 
the ecosystems, even when they are needed for the ecosystem 
to stay relevant in the market. 
In time of change, implicit governance leaves the 
stakeholders with three options, accept the modifications, exit 
the ecosystem, or in some cases do a hard-fork. Some would 
argue that these options provide a technocratic society with 
minimalistic regulation, while still functioning. However, a 
critical view is to ask how mature such thinking is and if this 
is inclusive enough for mainstream users to place their trust in 
such technology. 
B. Explicit governance 
Explicit governance arises from a well-formed process for 
decision-making, oversight, and stakeholder participation. 
Explicit governance is therefore not a purely technological 
solution, but rather something that resembles real life. An 
explicit governance ecosystem must strive to embrace the 
occurrence of conflict through resolution, rather than to state 
a take-it/leave-it implication. A technocratic society may view 
this as a ‘disastrous attempt of self-governance’ and they may 
be correct in such an assumption, still for a more human-
centric society, the aim is often not an autonomous ecosystem, 
but rather an automated ecosystem that increases peer 
participation in the decision-making process. 
In addition to the operative and strategic decision-making 
process, explicit governance also seeks to define the 
development process. In IT governance we often see that the 
development process is defined through a maturity model, 
meaning that the initial stage (level 1) would likely be 
developer based, as we also often find in the case for implicit 
governance. The Capability Maturity Model Integration 
(CMMI) model [24] define five maturity levels, described in 
Table II. Considering our review of the white papers, we can 
characterize most governance models to be on a maturity level 
of one or two. To achieve explicit governance, we consider 
that it requires that the CMMI level is also raised to three or 
higher. As most blockchain development projects are still in 
an early stage, we should perhaps not be too surprised with 
these findings.  
However, there may also be influences present from the 
traditional open source community that have often refuted 
commercial interests as a driving force for development. The 
question then becomes, moving beyond open source products 
towards online services and platforms based on various value 
instruments, such as coins and tokens, should this not be 
reflected in the maturity level of processes? 
 
TABLE II - CMMI MATURITY LEVELS 
 
The level of decentralization cannot only be measured in a 
technical context (e.g., node distribution), but also needs to 
reflect the participation rate of human peers. Thus, a 
blockchain project may consider themselves decentralized, 
but without a communicated explicit governance structure this 
should not be understood as anything different to a centralized 
model around a private chain. As shown, the differentiation 
between private and public chains only serves to communicate 
whom its intended target group is. 
VI. 
IMPLICATIONS FOR DECENTRALIZED ECOSYSTEMS 
In consequence of the absence of clearly defined 
governance in the project white papers and especially the lack 
of explanations for this omission, it may lead to a dubious 
effect on the decentralization discussion and over time slowly 
reduce the trust for the ecosystems, incl. connected companies 
and foundations responsible for the development of these 
ecosystems. An ecosystem without open access for all 
stakeholders to participate in a transparent way on agenda 
setting and decision making may from a decentralized point 
of view be considered distrustful. In addition, given a highly 
speculative project (high Return on Investment (ROI) 
potential), if a party can become a project stakeholder 
(decision maker) by acquiring coins/tokens of the ecosystem, 
it suggests that a centralization of power will eventually occur 
as the financial incentives would likely outcompete other 
incentives in the long-term. Then at least from an ideology 
perspective, but likely also from a perspective of influence, 
the project will become more centralized than equally 
distributed among participants. 
We cannot comprehensively know how the qualities of a 
governance model affect decisions of potential users when 
they choose between different alternative ecosystems. 
Nevertheless, these kinds of questions may arise in the near 
future if adaption of decentralized ecosystems takes place en 
masse. The relevance of governance as criteria for potential 
adopters should be elucidated through independent research.  
A peculiar feature concerning claims for decentralized 
ecosystems, is that a decentralized ecosystem by default also 
embodies a conceptually decentralized governance structure. 
However, in our view, ecosystems without decentralized 
governance are not properly decentralized ecosystems and 
based on some project white papers it can be difficult to 
understand if or even how people are poised to operate in that 
kind of an ecosystem. 
In this research, we have primarily considered white 
papers as research data when searching for the existence and 
features of governance models for DLT ecosystems. 
However, this does not denote that all aims of ecosystems and 
their governance have been documented in the white papers.  
There may also be reservations concerning the 
transparency of ecosystems. Because of local regulations of 
raising funds for DLT ecosystems, governance may restrict, 
e.g., the potential rights of the token holders. Ultimately, this 
could mean that in some cases the genuine goal of the 
ecosystem and its governance structure has been hidden to 
enable the development and launch of ecosystem. However, 
without further research into these types of potential 
distortions, we can only convey an expression of uncertainty. 
Level
Description
5
Optimizing the process continously
4
Process is quantitatively managed
3
Process is defined and proactive
2
Development is managed, but process is often reactive
1
Unpredictable and poorly controlled
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
As we have remarked, considering the size of the amassed 
research data we are yet to be aware of what governance 
features an ecosystem must have. Part of the problem is due 
to that there are more white papers without any explicit 
reference to governance than those that mentions the concept 
explicitly. The idea of a company, foundation or other 
organization as “owner” or “ultimate decision maker” of the 
ecosystem (through, e.g., initial token allocations), as the case 
is in quite many white papers, creates this enigma. Ultimately, 
if there is no mention of future aims of an ecosystem, i.e., to 
advance and deploy decentralization in governance, this kind 
of ecosystem refers to centralized governance without real 
commitment for decentralization. Hence, the traditional 
division of ecosystems as permissioned or permissionless, 
needs to be extended into a more complex framework that 
evaluates the current and future potential level of 
decentralized governance in the ecosystem. 
Our future work will focus on elaborating on the project 
white papers that mention governance and to examine some 
of these in-depth to understand if they have implemented the 
said governance structure and to examine if they have gone 
beyond what they promised in their white papers. 
Additionally, we aim to extend the scope from the user 
perspective to the developer perspective. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank the Lindstedt foundation for the 
financial grant that made this work possible. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Weill, and J. Ross, "A matrixed approach to designing IT 
governance, ". MIT Sloan Management Review, 46(2), 26, 
2005. 
[2] S. De Haes, and W. Van Grembergen, "IT governance and its 
mechanisms, " Information Systems Control Journal, 1, 27-33, 
2004. 
[3] S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash 
System. Available from: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf  2008. 
Accessed 14th of April 2019 
[4] C. Jentzsch, Decentralized Autonomous Organization To 
Automate 
Governance. 
Available 
from: 
https://download.slock.it/public/DAO/WhitePaper.pdf 
2016 
Accessed 14th of April 2019 
[5] A. Breitman (Tezos), J. Benet (Filecoin) and T. McConaghy 
(Ocean Protoco), In: A. Hamacher, Blockchain’s “founding 
fathers” talk governance. Available from:  
https://decryptmedia.com/3853/blockchains-founding-fathers-
talk-governance 2018.10.29 Accessed 14th of April 2019 
[6] N. Szabo, "Blockchain governance". Available from:  
https://twitter.com/nickszabo4/status/1009996445280169985 
2018.06.22  Accessed 14th of April 2019 
[7] V. Zamfir, Blockchain Governance 101. Available from: 
https://blog.goodaudience.com/blockchain-governance-101-
eea5201d7992 2018.09.30 Accessed 14th of April 2019 
[8] CleanApp, Blockchain Governance 102- Response to Vlad 
Zamfir’s Blockchain Governance 101. Available from: 
https://medium.com/cryptolawreview/blockchain-governance-
102-9912a88da91d 2018.10.02 Accessed 14th of April 2019 
[9] B. Curran, What is Blockchain Governance? Complete 
Beginner’s Guide. Available from: 
https://blockonomi.com/blockchain-governance/ 2018.09.21  
Accessed 14th of April 2019 
[10] V.Zamfir, Against on-chain governance. Available from:  
https://medium.com/@Vlad_Zamfir/against-on-chain-
governance-a4ceacd040ca 2017.12.01 Accessed 14th of April 
2019 
[11] H.Qureshi, Blockchains should not be democracies. Available 
from: 
 
https://haseebq.com/blockchains-should-not-be-
democracies/ 2018.04.16 Accessed 14th of April 2019 
[12] Currently the NEO coin is the 14th largest measured in 
market cap ($464,296,905). According to 
https://coinmarketcap.com/coins/. Accessed 5th of February 
2019. 
[13] NEO, NEO White paper. Available from:  
https://docs.neo.org/en-us/whitepaper.html Accessed 14th of 
April 2019 
[14] See the following for more information. NEO, A Statement 
from 
NEO 
Council. 
Available 
from:  
https://neo.org/blog/details/3067  2018.06.03.  See sub-section 
on “Facts about NEO's plan to decentralize Consensus Nodes”, 
point 3. Accessed 5th of February 2019. 
[15] D. Larimer, Decentralized Blockchain Governance. Available 
from: 
 
https://medium.com/@bytemaster/decentralized-
blockchain-governance-743f0273bf5a  2018.06.20 Accessed 
14th of April 2019 
[16] Mixin Network, Mixin Network White paper. Available from:  
https://mixin.one/assets/Mixin-Draft-2018-07-01.pdf 
2018.07.01 Accessed 14th of April 2019 
[17] D. 
Larimer, 
EOS.io 
White 
paper. 
Available 
from:  
https://github.com/EOSIO/Documentation/blob/master/Techn
icalWhitePaper.md 2017 Accessed 14th of April 2019 
[18] Civil, 
The 
Civil 
Constitution. 
Available 
from:  
https://civil.co/constitution/#constitution Accessed 14th of 
April 2019 
[19] LM. Goodman, Tezos — a self-amending crypto-ledger White 
paper. Available from: https://tezos.com/static/white_paper-
2dc8c02267a8fb86bd67a108199441bf.pdf  2014 Accessed 
14th of April 2019 
[20] T. Hanke; Movahedi M. & Williams D. DFINITY Technology 
Overview Series Consensus System. Accessed 14th of April 
2019 
[21] J. Kwon & Buchman E. Cosmos A Network of Distributed 
Ledgers. Available from: 
https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos/blob/master/WHITEPAPE
R.md Accessed 14th of April 2019 
[22] W.Warren, 
White 
Paper 
- 
0x. 
Available 
from:  
https://0x.org/pdfs/0x_white_paper.pdf 2017 Accessed 14th of 
April 2019 
[23] Maker, White Paper - Maker DAO. Available from: 
https://makerdao.com/whitepaper/ Accessed 14th of April 
2019 
[24] CMMI Product Team, "CMMI for Development, Version 1.3," 
Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Technical Report CMU/SEI-2010-
TR-033, 
2010. 
http://resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset-
view.cfm?AssetID=9661 
 
 
 
 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

