Deployment of Secure Collaborative Softwares as a Service in a Private Cloud to a 
Software Factory
Guilherme F. Vergara, Edna D. Canedo, Sérgio A. A. de Freitas 
Faculdade UnB Gama - FGA 
University of Brasilia 
Gama, DF – Brazil 
gfv.unb@gmail.com,ednacanedo@unb.br, sergiofreitas@unb.br 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a proposal of deploying secure 
communication services in the cloud for software factory 
university UNB (University of Brasília - Brazil). The 
deployment of these services will be conducted in a private 
cloud, allocated in the CESPE (Centro de Seleção e de 
Promoção de Eventos) servers. The main service that will be 
available is the EXPRESSO, which is a system maintained by 
SERPRO (Serviço Federal de Processamento de Dados). These 
services increase the productivity of the factory members and 
increase their collaboration in projects developed internally. 
Keywords-software factory; deployment of services; SaaS. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The technology of cloud computing aims to provide 
services on demand, being billed or not by usage, as well as 
other basic services. Prior trends to cloud computing were 
limited to a certain class of users or focused on making 
available a specific demand for IT resources [1]. This 
technology tends to comply with wide goals, being used not 
only by big companies that would outsource all its IT 
services to another company, but also for user who wants to 
host their personal documents on the Internet. This type of 
technology allows not only the use of storage resources and 
processing, but all computer services. 
In cloud computing, resources are provided as a service, 
allowing users to access without knowing the technology 
used. Thus, the users and companies began to access services 
on demand, independent of location, which increased the 
amount of services available [2]. With this, users are moving 
their data and applications to the cloud and can access them 
easily from any location. 
Cloud computing emerges from the need to build less 
complex IT infrastructures compared to traditional, where 
users have to perform installation, configuration and upgrade 
of software systems, also infrastructure assets are inclined to 
become 
obsolete 
quickly. 
Therefore, 
the 
use 
of 
computational platforms of others is a smart solution for 
users dealing with IT infrastructure. 
Cloud computing is a distributed computing model that 
derives characteristics of grid computing, with regard to the 
provision of information on demand to multiple concurrent 
users [2]. A cloud service provider offers cloud applications 
without the user having to worry about where the services 
are hosted or how they are offered. Slices of the 
computational power of the nodes of the network are offered, 
reducing costs to purvey own infrastructure to provide 
services. Resources are assigned only during the period of 
use, reducing power consumption when utilization is no 
longer needed. 
Virtualization technology [6] provides the foundation for 
many cloud solutions. Moreover, in many solutions 
environments, where users are able to choose their 
virtualized resources, such as programming languages, 
operating system and other custom services are offered. The 
main benefits are reduction of the costs of infrastructure 
investment, operating costs and scalability for the provision 
of services on demand. 
Cloud computing is an area that is increasingly growing 
and attracting diverse audiences. Ever more organizations 
has adopted cloud computing based solutions.  
The objectives of this paper can be summarized by 
making a study of existing technologies in cloud computing 
with application to a software factory and contribute for a 
collaborative environment for software factory. 
For a better understanding of this paper is explained now 
your organization. Section 2 provides a review of the 
concepts of cloud computing. Section 3 presents a set of 
possible implementations of solutions for factory software. 
Section 4 presents an implementation proposal for the 
software factory. Finally, Section 5 shows some results of 
this deployment. 
II. 
CLOUD COMPUTING 
Cloud computing refers to the use, through the Internet, 
of diverse applications as if they were installed in the user’s 
computer, independently of platform and location. Several 
formal definitions for cloud computing have been proposed 
by industry and academy. We adopt the following definition: 
“Cloud computing is a model for enabling convenient, on-
demand network access to a shared pool of configurable 
computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, 
applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned 
and released with minimal management effort or service 
provider interaction” [3]. 
Cloud computing is being progressively adopted in 
different business scenarios in order to obtain flexible and 
reliable computing environments, with several supporting 
solutions available in the market. Being based on diverse 
technologies (e.g., virtualization, utility computing, grid 
computing, 
and 
service-oriented 
architectures) 
and 
constituting a completely new computational paradigm, 
cloud computing requires high-level management routines. 
Such management activities include: (a) service provider 
selection, (b) virtualization technology selection, (c) virtual 
resources allocation, and (d) monitoring and auditing in 
order to guarantee Service Level Agreements (SLA) 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

A solution of cloud computing is composed of several 
elements, as shown in Figure 1. These elements form the 
three parts of a solution cloud [6]. Each element has a 
purpose and has a specific role in delivering a working 
application based on cloud. 
 
Figure 1.  Three Elements of Cloud Computing Solution [6]. 
 
Customers are in a cloud computing architecture, 
exactly what they are in a simple network. Are the 
devices with which end users interact to manage 
your information in the cloud. 
 
DataCenter is a set of servers where the application 
(Customer 
Relationship 
Management 
(CRM), 
financial, etc.) is stored. A growing trend in the IT is 
virtualization of servers, for example, the software 
can be installed allowing multiple virtual servers are 
used. 
 
Distributed servers: the servers do not have to be 
allocated in one location. Typically, servers are in 
different geographic locations, allowing the service 
provider more flexibility in options and security, for 
example, Amazon has a cloud solution worldwide. If 
something happens in one place, causing a failure, 
the service can be accessed through another site.[3] 
A. Cloud Computing Architecture 
Cloud computing architecture is based on layers. Each 
layer deals with a particular aspect of making application 
resources available. Basically, there are two main layers, 
namely, a lower and a higher resource layer. The lower layer 
comprises the physical infrastructure and is responsible for 
the virtualization of storage and computational resources. 
The higher layer provides specific services, such as: software 
as service, platform as service and infrastructure as service. 
These layers may have their own management and 
monitoring system, independent of each other, thus 
improving flexibility, reuse and scalability. Figure 2 presents 
the cloud computing architectural layers [4][5]. 
1) Software as a Service (SaaS): Provides all the 
functions of a traditional application, but provides access to 
specific applications through Internet. The SaaS model 
reduces concerns with application servers, operating systems, 
storage, application development, etc. Hence, developers 
may focus on innovation, and not on infrastructure, leading 
to faster software systems development. SaaS systems 
reduce costs since no software licenses are required to access 
the applications. Instead, users access services on demand. 
Since the software is mostly Web based, SaaS allows better 
integration among the business units of a given organization 
or even among different software services. Examples of SaaS 
include [7] Google Docs and CRM. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Cloud Computing Architecture [4] 
2) Plataform as a Service (PaaS): Is the middle 
component of the service layer in the cloud. It offers users 
software and services that do not require downloads or 
installations. PaaS provides an infrastructure with a high 
level of integration in order to implement and test cloud 
applications. The user does not manage the infrastructure 
(including network, servers, operating systems and storage), 
but he controls deployed applications and, possibly, their 
configurations [4]. PaaS provides an operating system, 
programming languages and application programming 
environments. Therefore, it enables more efficient software 
systems implementation, as it includes tools for development 
and collaboration among developers. From a business 
standpoint, PaaS allows users to take advantage of third party 
services, increasing the use of a support model in which 
users subscribe to IT services or receive problem resolution 
instructions through the Web. In such scenarios, the work 
and the responsibilities of company IT teams can be better 
managed. Examples of SaaS [7] include: Azure Services 
Platform (Azure), Force.com, EngineYard and Google App 
Engine. 
3) Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): Is the portion of 
the architecture responsible for providing the infrastructure 
necessary for PaaS and SaaS. Its main objective is to make 
resources such as servers, network and storage more readily 
accessible by including applications and operating systems. 
Thus, it offers basic infrastructure on-demand services. IaaS 
has a unique interface for infrastructure management, an 
Application Programming Interface (API) for interactions 
with hosts, switches, and routers, and the capability of 
adding new equipment in a simple and transparent manner. 
In general, the user does not manage the underlying 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

hardware in the cloud infrastructure, but he controls the 
operating systems, storage and deployed applications. 
Eventually, he can also select network components such as 
firewalls. The term IaaS refers to a computing infrastructure, 
based 
on 
virtualization 
techniques 
that 
can 
scale 
dynamically, increasing or reducing resources according to 
the needs of applications. The main benefit provided by IaaS 
is the pay-per-use business model [4]. Examples of IaaS [7] 
include: Amazon Elastic Cloud Computing (EC2) and 
Elastic Utility Computing Architecture Linking Your 
Programs To Useful Systems (Eucalyptus). 
B.  Roles in Cloud Computing 
Roles define the responsibilities, access and profile of 
different users that are part of a cloud computing solution 
[8]. The provider is responsible for managing, monitoring 
and guaranteeing the availability of the entire structure of the 
cloud computing solution. It frees the developer and the final 
user from such responsibilities, while providing services in 
the three layers of the architecture. Developers use the 
resources provided by IaaS and PaaS to provide software 
services for final users. This multi-role organization helps to 
define the actors (people who play the roles) in cloud 
computing environments. Such actors may play several roles 
at the same time according to need or interest. Only the 
provider supports all the service layers. 
C. Cloud Computing Deployment 
According to the intended access methods and 
availability of cloud computing environments, there are 
different models of deployment [9]. Access restriction or 
permission depends on business processes, the type of 
information and characteristics of the organization. In some 
organizations, a more restrict environment may be necessary 
in order to ensure that only properly authorized users can 
access and use certain resources of the deployed cloud 
services. A few deployment models for cloud computing are 
discussed in this section. They include private cloud, public 
cloud, community cloud, and hybrid cloud. 
Private: The cloud infrastructure is exclusively used by a 
specific organization. The cloud may be local or remote, and 
managed by the company itself or by a third party. There are 
policies for accessing cloud services. The techniques 
employed to enforce such private model may be 
implemented by means of network management, service 
provider configuration, authorization and authentication 
technologies or a combination of these. 
Public: The infrastructure is made available to the public 
at large and can be accessed by any user that knows the 
service location. In this model, no access restrictions can be 
applied and no authorization and authentication techniques 
can be used. 
Community: Several organizations may share the cloud 
services. These services are supported by a specific 
community with similar interests such as mission, security 
requirements and policies, or considerations about flexibility. 
A cloud environment operating according to this model may 
exist locally or remotely and is normally managed by a 
commission that represents the community or by a third 
party. 
Hybrid: It involves the composition of two or more 
clouds. These can be private, community or public clouds 
which are linked by a proprietary or standard technology that 
provides portability of data and applications among the 
composing clouds. 
III. 
POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS FOR DEPLOYMENT 
This section aims to investigate what are the possible 
options available in cloud computing to the university 
software factory. This chapter is divided by type of 
architecture, IaaS, PaaS and SaaS for a better understanding. 
A. IAAS 
IAAS solutions primarily aim to provide virtual machines 
with all the features of cloud for software factory. 
1) Microsoft Windows AZURE: Windows Azure, which 
was released on February 1, 2010. Is a cloud computing 
platform and infrastructure, created by Microsoft, for 
building, deploying and managing applications and services 
through a global network of Microsoft-managed datacenters. 
It provides both PaaS and IaaS services and supports many 
different programming languages, tools and frameworks, 
including both Microsoft-specific and third party software 
and systems [11]. 
OpenStack: OpenStack is an open source software able to 
manage components of multiple virtualized infrastructures, 
like the operatinal system manages the components of a 
computers, OpenStack is called Cloud Operating System, to 
fulfill the same role in larger scale. 
OpenStack is a collection of open source software 
projects that companies and service providers can use to 
configure and operate their infrastructure computing and 
cloud storage. Rackspace and NASA (the U.S. space agency) 
were the main contributors to the initial project. Rackspace 
provided a platform "Cloud Files" to implement the storage 
object OpenStack, while NASA entered the "Nebula" for 
implementing the computational side. 
Eucalyptus: The Eucalyptus project [10] is an open 
source infrastructure that provides a compatible interface 
with Amazon EC2, S3, Elastic Block Store (EBS) and allows 
users to create an infrastructure and experience the cloud 
computing interface. The Eucalyptus architecture is simple, 
flexible, modular and contains a hierarchical design which 
reflects the common features of the environment. 
Eucalyptus aims to assist research and development of 
technologies for cloud computing and has the following 
features: compatible with EC2, simple installation and 
deployment management using clusters tools, presents a set 
of allocation policies interface extensible cloud overlapping 
functionality that requires no modification on Linux 
environment, tools for managing and assisting the 
management of the system and users and the ability to 
configure multiple clusters, each with private internal 
network addresses in a single cloud. 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

B. PAAS 
The PaaS solutions offer a platform for users to simply 
and quickly put their programs into production, thus 
providing an environment for quickly testing. 
Tsuru: Tsuru is a open source and polyglot platform for 
cloud computing developed by globo.com since 2012 and it 
has began to be offered in a preliminary version in 2013 [12]. 
Like other platforms, the tsuru helps the development of web 
applications without the any charge of a server environment. 
Tsuru uses Juju orchestration of services and takes 
advantage of the attractive features of its architecture. 
Supported programming development languages include Go, 
Java, Python and Ruby. 
1) Heroku: Heroku [13] is a platform as a cloud service 
with support for several programming languages. Heroku 
was acquired by Salesforce.com in 2010. Heroku is one of 
the first cloud platformsa and it has been in development 
since June 2007, when it supported only the Ruby 
programming language, but since then added support for 
Java, Node.js, Scala, Python and Perl. The base operating 
system is Debian or in the latest Ubuntu based on Debian. 
C. SAAS 
1) Owncloud: The ownCloud is a free and open source 
web application for data synchronization, file sharing and 
remote storage of documents written in scripting languages 
PHP and Java Script. The Owncloud is very similar to the 
widely used Dropbox, with the primary difference being that 
ownCloud is free and open-source, thereby giving to anyone 
the option to install on your own private server, with no 
limits on storage space (except for hard disk capacity). 
2) Expresso: 
Expresso 
[14] 
is 
a 
complete 
communication solution that brings together email, calendar, 
address book, instant messaging and workflow in a single 
environment. Because it is a custom version of the E-
GroupWare, its development is also based entirely on free 
software.  
IV. 
PROPOSED DEPLOYMENT 
From the studies of cloud computing solutions, a 
proposal was created based on ease of deployment X 
relevance X time to deployment. For this paper, two software 
(SaaS) were chosen to contribute in collaborative software 
factory. Such software should help to ensure that members of 
the factory could share project documents, tasks, shared 
calendars and other tools for project management. An 
important factor to be considered during the time of adoption 
of a cloud service is the security. This security issue has 
attracted several discussions with the Brazilian Federal 
Government to the extent of having been issued a 
presidential decree (Decree No. 8.135, of November 4, 
2013). The first article of this decree is as follows: 
"Article 
1 
- 
Data 
communications 
direct, 
independent federal government and foundations 
shall 
be 
conducted 
by 
telecommunications 
networks and services of information technology 
provided by agencies or entities of the federal 
public administration, including public enterprises 
and joint stock companies of the Union and its 
subsidiaries.” 
This article clearly shows the concern of the 
Government, which began to be widely commented after 
being publicize cases of espionage on the emails of the 
President of Brazil. 
A. IAAS Proposal 
The first option selected for the software factory was in 
IaaS solutions, i.e., to provide a software factory the entire 
necessary infrastructure in a transparent and scalable way. 
The software factory does not provide today's servers and 
storage required to keep, such hardware resources are still 
going through the bidding process. By aiming to solve this 
problem, the main solution is that use virtual machines until 
the factory have their own means of keeping it going. For the 
provisioning of virtual machines, the XEN Hypervisor [15] 
was chosen as a solution, because it has a large use in the 
market besides being open source and have already been 
studied previously. 
Figure 3 shows the installation of two Linux virtual 
machines on the Windows client. One of the machines is a 
Linux server and the other one with an Ubuntu GUI. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Xen Client. 
The interesting aspect that can be seen in the Figure 3 is 
that we can control independently and completely the 
memory, the disk and the network; this way, we can have an 
idea if the VM was well provisioned.  
But, in the course of the project, we came across a 
pleasant surprise; CESPE (Center of Selection and 
Promotion Events), which is one of the partners of the 
factory, provides virtual machines using the Windows 
solution, Microsoft Azure and then making XEN relevant 
only for research. These machines will be used for the 
allocation of software offered as a service (SaaS) to the 
factory. 
B. PaaS Proposal 
As a software factory, it is very interesting that the 
factory is able to produce prototypes as quickly as possible, 
because, as soon as the customer has a prototype, reduces the 
risks of software that does not add useful features to the 
client and sooner he will have a preview of the software that 
will be delivered. It can be very interesting to the factory 
because it will have a platform where you can quickly put 
the software into production and can show their customers.  
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

For this type of service, both OpenShift and Tsuru tools 
were analyzed, but neither locally, although OpenShift 
proved to be a powerful tool for such functions. OpenShift 
supports major language currently used and is a leading 
solution Open Source. 
C. SAAS Proposal 
Lastly, we evaluated SaaS solutions and at the first view, 
these solutions did not prove to be relevant compared to IaaS 
and PaaS, because the Internet is full of them, such as 
Dropbox and Google Docs; but, one of the main reasons that 
lead to not use such software is the security that they do not 
provide. Because it is a software factory, is extremely 
important that their projects are not opened at all to other 
users. It is directly related to the decree mentioned before, 
SERPRO (Federal Data Processing Service) as the primary 
IT Company of the federal government, which was designed 
to provide such services and especially covering the second 
paragraph. 
"The agencies and entities of the Union referred to 
header of this article should adopt the email 
services and its additional features offered by 
agencies and entities of the federal public 
administration." 
With this scope, Expresso [14] comes in as an email 
platform and other features that SERPRO is the main 
developer and it has an internal allocation of its resources, 
thereby increasing the security of the application.  
As previously mentioned, the factory needs solutions that 
add value to collaborative work. As a solution to this 
problem, two solutions for SaaS are mentioned: 
1) Expresso: 
 
Figure 4.  Expresso Log in. 
Expresso, as mentioned in the previous section, is one 
complete communication solution, which includes email, 
calendar, address book, instant messaging and workflow in a 
single environment; in Figure 4, the log in of Expresso is 
shown. This solution greatly facilitates the work of the 
members of the software factory because they can set up 
meetings and schedule them on a shared agenda, facilitating 
the allocation of free time between them. Another very 
interesting service to be used by the factory is the video call, 
where project members can have meetings without leaving 
home, facilitating meetings and expediting meetings, which 
no longer need to be physically occurred. We can not forget 
of course the principal Expresso service, which is email, 
which will be much more secure than allocated in the 
internet environments, such as Gmail, Hotmail, etc. In Figure 
5, the main screen of Expresso is shown. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Main Screen of Expresso 
Looking at the top of Figure 5, we can see all five tabs 
that represent the key features of Expresso. First, the selected 
tab shows the functionality of email with multiple filter 
options, favorites, etc. Beside the email tab, we have the 
address book, where all the user's contacts are saved. The 
next tab shows a very interesting feature that is the task 
manager where for example a team manager can delegate 
tasks to any of his members in a simple and fast way. 
Perhaps, after the email feature, the second most used feature 
used by the teams is the calendar functionality, because the 
managers can easily manage the agenda of each of the 
participants, and facilitate the allocation of meetings, 
deadlines, etc. 
Lastly, we have the functionality of web conferencing, 
where members of a meeting for example, may join a video 
conference by simply accepting a request via email, 
facilitating the occurrence of meetings distributed teams or 
with difficulty time to face meetings. 
 
2) Owncloud: 
 
Figure 6.  Owncloud Log-in 
Besides the implementation of the email service, is 
intended to provide to members of the factory an archive, 
where it will be possible to share important documents in a 
safer environment then other solutions, because the files are 
storage in the factory servers. 
The software chosen was the ownCloud, which is a 
similar solution as the Dropbox; ownCloud is a free open 
source software and has great community support; in Figure 
6, the log in of ownCloud is shown. OwnCloud has as main 
feature the ability for the users to store their files, so that it 
can access on any computer with the client, both desktop and 
smartphones. 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
Figure 7.  Main Screen of Owncloud 
Looking at Figure 7, it is possible to notice the options 
allocation of ownCloud; the first file is an example of code 
written in C ++. This type of file can be viewed on its own 
web interface, already accepted by application and a similar 
visualization to the IDE for this extension and can it be 
edited directly from the browser, thus making it easier for 
programmers in the factory. The same applies for all other 
languages shown in Figure 7 and also to txt files, printing, 
and others. By clicking on the images, a pop-up appears with 
the selected image, facilitating the visualization of it. Lastly 
we have the songs that can be played directly from the 
internet. 
All these files can be downloaded in two ways: First, 
when passed the mouse over the file you click on download, 
and the download is done. On the other hand, the second 
way, that is by downloading the client ownCloud, so you 
keep all your files updated. 
A. Deployment 
1) Roles 
The implementation of Expresso and ownCloud in the 
software factory is a partnership between three institutions 
SERPRO, UNB and CESPE. The CESPE assumes the role 
of infrastructure provider, providing virtual machines and the 
entire necessary hardware infrastructure for deploying SaaS 
subsequently this work will be assuming the role of supplier 
of service provider, providing Expresso to the factory and its 
customers. This interaction can be best represented by Figure 
8. 
 
Figure 8.  Roles in cloud computing in this context 
2) Process 
The deployment of services is a process that will take all 
the time devoted to a future work. Figure 9 proposes an 
initial process that can be appropriately adjusted within the 
first stage of this process. 
 
Figure 9.  Process of deployment 
a) Implementation Plan 
This will be the beginning of the process for the services 
implementation; this phase is intended to study more “low 
level” of that material (storage, servers) and will be needed 
for deployment. In this case, we need a better study of the 
Expresso and the ownCloud to clarify what are the elements 
that need to be installed and configured. 
b) Prepare Environment 
At this stage, we already have a good overview of the 
elements necessary for the installation of the Expresso and 
the ownCloud. CESPE will help during this phase preparing 
and configuring all virtual machines. 
c) Install services 
This phase is intended to install/configure two services 
presented; this phase is perhaps one of the most time- 
consuming. Since there is not yet a broad understanding of 
the process of the installation of services, always unexpected 
can occur and end up taking a long time. In the case of 
Expresso, we have a greater ease, since they can have 
SEPRO aid. 
d) Test Plan 
After the services are already installed, it is planned to 
test the software; one can create a document specifying at 
this stage all the tests that will be performed, as well as 
expected results and comparing them with the results in the 
next stage. 
e) Test services 
After services are fully installed, you must run the tests 
planned in the previous step for problems that may have 
occurred in the installation, as a wrong connection with 
database, causing when people try to login or save your files. 
In this case you should review if the database has been 
properly installed and configured, and test again until all 
tests of test plan are completed  
f) Putting services into production 
This phase along with the installation is perhaps the most 
difficult and time consuming. This is because one must 
ensure that the services are running correctly, and ensure that 
clients are using them. It should always be close to 
customers looking to receive feedback on potential 
improvements and problems. 
g) Users training 
Right after the services have been put into production, 
users need a little coaching on how to use the tools. Since 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

users are mostly students of software engineering, this phase 
will be very short and easy. However, as the services needed 
for future maintenance is also included in this phase the 
transfer of knowledge for any member of the factory, so it 
can continue the operation of the service. At this stage, we 
will have the help of SERPRO also, which may give 
workshops on the operation of the Expresso, thus arousing 
the interest of members of the factory proposing future 
functionalities for the tool. 
h) Maintenance Services 
As most software evolves and presents problems, there is 
always the need for continued maintenance and upgrades 
thereof. The members walked in the previous training will 
first take the maintenance services. 
V. 
DEPLOYMENT RESULTS 
After having defined the Express and the ownCloud as 
software as services to be deployed, it moved to the 
implementation step. Firstly CESPE released 3 virtual 
machines with Debian 7 operating system and Intel Xeon 
x5660 2.8 GHZ 4 cores and 4GB memory, two machines 
with 100GB HD and the third one with 1TB . In the first 
virtual machine was installed the Express, in the second one 
the OwnCloud in the third one the Postgres database, this 
organization can be seen in Figure 10. Today, 2 months after 
the installation, Expresso proved to be a powerful 
communication suite and the OwnCloud surprises by its 
functionality and interface very similar to the already known 
Dropbox. We opted for a centralized database for both 
applications, thereby centralizing all information; thus, it is 
safer to keep the data because you can restrict the access to 
this virtual machine, for example by closing all ports in the 
firewall, 
leaving 
only 
port 
5432 
open, 
hindering 
unauthorized access. 
 
Figure 10.  Physical architecture 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
With each passing day cloud computing has been present 
in our lives, not only for personal use, but also increasingly 
in professional use. As much as cloud computing brings 
many benefits, it also brings many challenges. One of the 
major challenges is in relation to data security, especially 
after the scandals in Brazil and in the world in relation to 
privacy. 
This paper provided an overview of tools that implement 
the three main types of cloud architecture; additioanlly, a 
proposal for the implementation of two of the tools analyzed, 
one ownCloud, which deploys a system of file sharing, and 
Expresso as email service. 
Using these services is expected that the collaborative 
development of the factory becomes more facilitated and 
reliable with the exchange of files and emails, which will be 
more secure than allocated in the internet environments, such 
as Gmail and Dropbox. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Special thanks to FAPDF (Fundação De Apoio À 
Pesquisa Do Distrito Federal) for helping regarding the 
financial issue on this Conference in Venice. We also want 
to thank SERPRO and CESPE for helping us throughout this 
project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Miller. (2008). Cloud Computing Web-Based Applications, That 
Change the Way You Work and Collaborate online, Que Publishing, 
Pearson Education, Canada. 
[2] M. Zhou, R. Zhang, D. Zeng, and W. Qian, “Services in the cloud 
computing era: a survey,” Software Engineering Institute. Universal 
Communication. Symposium (IUCS), 4th International. IEEE 
Shanghai, 2010, pp. 40-46. China. 
[3] S. Uppoor, M. Flouris, and A. Bilas, “Cloud-based synchronization of 
distributed file system hierarchies,” Cluster Computing Workshops  
and Posters (CLUSTER WORKSHOPS), IEEE International  
Conference, 2010, pp. 1-4. 
[4] X. Jing and Z. Jian-jun,” A Brief Survey on the Security Model of 
Cloud Computing,” Ninth International Symposium on Distributed 
Computing and Applications to Business, Engineering and Science 
(DCABES), Hong Kong IEEE, Aug. 2010, pp. 475-478.  
[5] M. Zhou, R. Zhang, D. Zeng, and W. Qian, “Services in the cloud 
computing era: a survey,” Software Engineering Institute. Universal 
Communication. Symposium (IUCS), 4th International.  IEEE 
Shanghai, 2010. pp. 40-46. China.  
[6] A. T. Velve and T. J. Elsenpeter, “Cloud Computing – Computação 
em Nuvem - Uma Abordagem Prática. Translator: Mei, Gabriela 
Edel. Publishr: Alta Books. Edio: 1ł, (2011), pp. 352-359. 
[7] Z. Jian-jun and X. Jing, “A Brief Survey on the Security odel of 
Cloud Computing”, Ninth International Symposium on  Distributed 
Computing and Applications to Business, Engineering and Science. 
2010, pp. 475 – 478 
[8] A. Marinos and G. Briscoe, “Community cloud computing, in First 
International Conference Cloud Computing”, CloudCom, volume 
5931 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2009, pp. 472-484.  
[9] P. Mell and T. Grance, The NIST definition of cloud computing. 
Technical report, National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
Aug 2009. 
[10] S. Liu, Y. Liang, and M. Brooks “Eucalyptus: a web service-enabled 
einfrastructure”, Conference of the Centre for Advanced Studies on 
Collaborative Research, (CASCON 2007), October 2007, pp. 1-11 
[11] Windows Azure - The Official Microsoft. [Online]. Available from: 
http://azure.microsoft.com/en-us 
[12] Tsuru-A Open Source PAAS from Globo.com. [Online]. Available 
from:  http://www.tsuru.io/ 
[13] Heroku. [Online]. Available from: https://devcenter.heroku.com/ 
[14] Expresso. [Online]. Available from: http://www.expressolivre.org/ 
[15] Xen 
Hypervisor. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.xenproject.org/  
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

