Development of a Secure Cloud Based
Learning Environment for Inclusive Practice
in Mainstream Education
Nigel Beacham
Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
Email: n.beacham@abdn.ac.uk
Bob Duncan
Business School
University of Aberdeen
Email: bobduncan@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract—The use of IT based systems in mainstream education
brings a particular focus to bear on security. When these systems
involve the use of cloud, the challenge increases exponentially.
There are a great many beneﬁts to be gained from cloud use,
and therefore, we argue that developing a suitable approach to
provide a secure cloud based learning environment, which would
be used to facilitate use for inclusive practice in mainstream
education would be a worthwhile goal. We demonstrate how to
develop such an approach, which we believe could provide a more
effective approach than traditional technology based approaches.
Keywords–Inclusive education; security; privacy;cloud system.
I. INTRODUCTION
Educational systems are complex socio-technical systems
and we need to consider what makes this so. Introducing
educational services through the cloud can open pupils and
staff to further exploitation, which we need to investigate
[1][2]. We must bear in mind that the use of technical solutions
alone can never succeed. Any solution must be addressed
from a social engineering perspective, which considers the
political, personal and social aspects. This paper addresses
this important issue from this different perspective in order
to address both the special needs of all involved, the special
security and privacy issues raised by using a cloud based
solution, and the other security and privacy factors, which must
be taken into account.
Proper security and privacy for any web based system is
challenging. When cloud systems are used, these challenges
become considerably more difﬁcult to address successfully.
Thus, in Section II, we discuss the motivation for this work. In
Section III, we discuss the educational needs and requirements,
which must be satisﬁed in order to deliver the aims and
goals of the work. In Section IV, we outline the security
requirements needed to deliver the goals and aims of this work,
and in Section V, we explain how achieving these security
requirements will meet the security goals of the project. We
discuss our conclusions and future work in Section VI.
II. MOTIVATION
Virtual Learning Environments (VLE)s tend to be perceived
as providing tools for speciﬁc individuals and not as tools for
everybody [3]. They tend to be used for what is suggested as
inclusion; to facilitate a pupil’s ability to participate in learning
[4]. We argue that such tools allow the pupils to access learning
materials and/or curriculum, and in doing so, can allow pupils
to sometimes integrate within the classroom [5]. To be seen as
fully inclusive, they should be made available for everybody,
including teachers, parents, support staff and other agencies,
if appropriate. Instead of the emphasis being on the use of
VLEs to allow individuals to participate, there needs to be a
greater emphasis on the way all those in the class use VLEs
to allow all to participate. Consequently, at present, little is
understood about the way VLEs can be made available and
used for everybody. Looking at current practices using VLEs,
they tend to be used by pupils in schools under the control of
teachers, despite teachers tending not to use VLEs themselves
as part of their teaching practice. With a huge variety of
VLEs available, teachers often lack conﬁdence, awareness and
knowledge of VLEs, particularly in how best to use them in
the classroom [6]. Naturally, it can take teachers extra time
and effort to consider how to use VLEs within the classroom
for those pupils who are deemed as requiring such support.
VLEs tend to be made available only to those children within
their school who require them, and only to those areas the
educational system deems require their use [7].
Even when VLEs are made available to a pupil outwith the
school, they are often reported as failing to work appropriately
and many VLEs are only available for use within a particular
class. There are also numerous reports of many materials in
VLEs residing on the shelf, often unused. Where VLEs have
been used effectively in schools, it is unclear how useful they
were, the impact they had on the children’s learning, whether
it is used in terms of integration or inclusion, and whether
the tools were available from home and outside the school.
Whether VLEs are made available or not, it can leave pupils
excluded in class and also at home. New ways of observing
and analysing the way VLEs are used need to be explored and
better understood [8]. Whilst many children see technology
as just part of life, some pupils see the computer and the
use of VLEs as essential in all aspects of their learning.
This is particularly evident from those pupils with disabilities,
who have access to VLEs through assistive technologies and
computers at home that support their needs, as opposed to
those available in school. For other pupils, some may not wish
to use VLEs as part of a differentiated task but as part of
‘normal’ class work. Furthermore, savvy teachers and pupils
consider the limitations of some VLEs as being restrictive,
especially when similar open source tools are free.
The impact of technology on learning is much more
difﬁcult to determine than ﬁrst thought. Factors inside and
outside school can impact on the use of VLEs for learning. For
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

example, barriers within schools can prevent the use of open
source tools, while outside school, they are widely and freely
available to all [9]. We believe that a cloud based approach
can fulﬁl many of the practical requirements that must be
addressed. Principal among these is the adaptable approach,
with rapid scalability, and the ability to tailor resource usage
to the demands of teaching in order to optimise operating
costs. The use of cloud facilities also removes the barriers
associated with rolling out large scale computing projects using
traditional distributed hardware and software. This means the
system could quickly and easily be scaled out to service not
just a single school, but many schools within a region, or
indeed across a country. We cover many of these technical
points in later sections. Thus, our discussions throughout this
paper are based on the premise that we will use a cloud based
approach. We are acutely aware that pupils can be open to
exploitation and grooming within VLEs, not just at school, but
also in home and community environments. We are aware that
pupils, teachers and administrative and support staff must be
made ready for the step change in approach needed to ensure
a high level of cloud-based security as the main mechanism
by which we can ensure security and privacy inside the VLE.
The lessons learned from this robust approach to security and
privacy in this VLE can provide pupils with the foundation
for a key skill in protecting the secure development of their
personal on-line future. In the next section, we address the
educational needs and requirements, which must be delivered
in order to develop a successful system.
III.THE EDUCATIONAL NEEDS AND REQUIREMENTS
It is likely that teachers may lack preparedness in under-
standing the proper use of tools and techniques to monitor
and retain a secure and safe VLE, a vital part of ensuring
the successful running of a safe and secure environment, so
this must form part of the preparation for the use of such a
system [9]. We must also consider current VLE limitations in
the context of Transformability theory.
Transformability theory is a framework for transforming
learning capacity [10]. It provides a way of conceptualising
learning capacity and how to improve it through the teaching
practices used by teachers and schools [11][12][13]. Underpin-
ning the theory are the three principles: co-agency; everybody;
and trust. Co-agency relates to teachers, pupils, parents and
support services being a joint enterprise. Everybody relates to
teachers, pupils, parents and support services being respon-
sible and committed to all pupils in a learning community.
Trust relates to building close trusting relationships between
teachers, pupils, parents and support services. This theory not
only provides a lens within which to research, reﬂect and
inform the ways Assistive Technology (AT) and Information
and Communications Technology (ICT) are generally used
to enable meaningful participation in learning, but can guide
teachers on what to do, and not to do, in their practice with
cloud-based VLEs to improve security.
In educational terms, AT focuses on providing access to
materials and the curriculum [4]. Research on the development
and use of AT tends to centre on investigating how tools
improve access. This is only one of a number of aspects, which
need to be addressed to improve the capacity to learn. Other
aspects include the role AT plays in enhancing collaboration,
achievement, acceptance and recognition of learner diversity,
and furthermore how effective using a particular AT is to facili-
tate collaboration, achievement and acceptance and recognition
of diversity. It is these aspects, which tend to be ignored, and as
many teachers will know, make an important difference in im-
proving learning capacity. An inclusive pedagogical approach
draws attention to these additional aspects. Theories such as
transformability help inform teachers not only to use AT to
improve access to the materials and the curriculum but also to
address the other crucial aspects of learning capacity [14][15].
Thus, we need a theoretical framework to extend inclusive
education practices to security – in effect using a transforma-
bility theory approach. By this means, we can ensure that not
just technical staff are aware of preparedness in cloud-based
security, but everybody in the learning ecosystem does too.
This co-agency approach between pupils, parents, teachers,
administrators and technical staff is vitally important and is
required to keep pupils and staff safe, not just for the duration
of their learning, but as a solid foundation to ensure their
lifelong online protection. This will also help us to satisfy the
need to develop closer trust within learning communities as a
whole, and to ensure everybody perceives and beneﬁts from
being recognised, accepted and included [16].
IV.SECURITY REQUIREMENTS TO BE ADDRESSED
The well recognised security requirements of any enterprise
are conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability (CIA). Duncan
and Whittington [17], suggest that we should also add the
goals of sustainability, resilience and ethics. The traditional
approach to satisfy the CIA requirements, are access control,
plus encryption, for conﬁdentiality; transaction monitoring,
possibly with encryption, for integrity; and redundancy for
availability. Long term sustainability comes from providing a
system that works, achieving the goals set for it, providing
value for money, and does so in a reliable fashion. Resilience
comes from providing a system that is resilient to unexpected
shock; and a business continuity mechanism or policy, can
assist with this task. Ethical behaviour on the part of all the
actors in a cloud ecosystem can be delivered where all parties
are properly accountable, and through their individual ethical
behaviour, demonstrate they will not try to gain personal
advantage at the expense of others within the ecosystem.
These goals are generally well understood by enterprises,
and are often approached using technical solutions. However,
in any business environment, the business architecture com-
prises a combination of people, process and technology [18],
not by technology alone. The people of any business are gen-
erally recognised as being the weakest link, and whether it is
a FTSE100 world class enterprise, a government organisation,
a small ﬁrm, or an educational body, the fact remains that
the people in the organisation present the largest threat. When
we talk about people in the context of this paper, we refer
to the description for everybody in Section II, above. To this,
we must add all the agents involved in the cloud ecosystem,
and of course, the attack community. The bad guys have long
recognised that the weakest part of any IT system is actually
the users of that system, which is why they have long been
developing and polishing the very successful practice of social
engineering. Thus, proper user training must be undertaken.
Since cloud computing is enabled by use of the internet,
then web based applications present some of the most success-
ful attack vectors for the bad guys. While web vulnerabilities
are well understood, we can see from data collected by the
Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) [19], who
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

publish a top ten list of web security vulnerabilities every three
years, that these attacks continue to be perpetrated successfully
year on year. OWASP provide the most comprehensive list of
the most dangerous vulnerabilities and a number of very good
mitigation suggestions. The last three OWASP lists for 2007,
2010 and 2013 are provided in TABLE I, below.
TABLE I. OWASP TOP TEN WEB VULNERABILITIES — 2013 - 2007 [19]
2013
2010
2007
Threat
A1
A1
A2
Injection Attacks
A2
A3
A7
Broken Authentication and
Session Management
A3
A2
A1
Cross Site Scripting (XSS)
A4
A4
A4
Insecure Direct Object
References
A5
A6
-
Security Misconﬁguration
A6
-
-
Sensitive Data Exposure
A7
-
-
Missing Function Level
Access Control
A8
A5
A5
Cross Site Request
Forgery (CSRF)
A9
-
-
Using Components with
Known Vulnerabilities
A10
-
-
Unvalidated Redirects
and Forwards
These lists are based on the result of analysis of successful
security breaches across the globe, and highlight the most
easily breached areas in web based systems. It illustrates the
worst ten web vulnerabilities in computing systems globally.
While these vulnerabilities are relatively easy to address, it is
concerning that they continue to recur year after year. Thus,
these should all be addressed. There are likely to be additional
potential vulnerabilities, which also must be considered, not
necessarily only technical issues such as we have illustrated
above. Duncan and Whittington [17], identiﬁed ten key man-
agement issues, which also must be addressed. Often these are
not properly thought through by management.
The ten key management security issues identiﬁed are: The
deﬁnition of security goals; Compliance with standards; Audit
issues; Management approach; Technical complexity of cloud;
Lack of responsibility and accountability; Measurement and
monitoring; Management attitude to security; Security culture
in the company; and the threat environment. Further details on
each of these key areas of potential weakness are provided
in [17]. As quickly as security researchers come up with
solutions to new vulnerabilities, the bad guys, in turn, come
up with successful attacks against these ﬁxes. This continual
“arms race”, means that it is also essential to ensure a proper
monitoring system forms part of the design framework. Also,
since cloud provides easy scalability of resources to track the
demand curve, it will also be necessary to have a system
that can track the addition of new instances, the shutting
down of instances no longer required, and the extraction
of suitable audit trail and system logging data for forensic
examination purposes in the event of a breach. These security
requirements we propose go much further than conventional
technical approaches in use until now. It is clear from recent
annual security breach reports such as [20][21][22], which
clearly demonstrate the security and privacy problems still
faced today. The same attacks continue to be successful year
on year. Looking at this ﬁve year summary of Verizon reports
shown in TABLE II below, we can see the result of failing to
use a complete solution to the security problem:
It is clear that a more complete solution must be used, and
we have outlined the essential components of such a system. A
TABLE II. VERIZON TOP 5 SECURITY BREACHES — 2010-2014
(1=HIGHEST)
[23][24][25][26][20]
Threat
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Hacking
2
1
1
1
1
Malware
3
2
2
2
2
Misuse by company employees
1
4
5
5
5
Physical theft or unauth. access
5
3
4
3
4
Social Engineering
4
5
3
4
3
cloud service provider might well have a secure and effective
technical cloud solution, but it will be useless if cloud users
are compromised by a successful social engineering attack.
V. HOW THIS MEETS SECURITY GOALS
There are many challenges, which must be met by cloud
based systems, meaning a far more rigorous approach is
needed. A fundamental requirement is the use of a proper
monitoring system [27]. Without one, it will be almost impos-
sible to tell that a system has been breached. With no proper
audit trail and sufﬁcient forensic evidence, it will be extremely
difﬁcult to understand precisely which data has been accessed,
modiﬁed, ex-ﬁltrated or deleted. The popular approach to cloud
cyber security generally centres around technical solutions.
For the reasons stated in Section IV, this will always prove
inadequate in the face of adversaries with ever improving skill
levels and attack tool sets. Thus, our proposed framework must
incorporate some addition components. Cloud can necessarily
create and destroy instances at will, in order to scale up,
or down, as demand dictates, so it will be necessary to
have some level of control and monitoring system to log
each new instance as it is created, or deleted, and should
constantly monitor the instance throughout its life-cycle, to
ensure it continues to function as expected, and has not been
compromised by an attack.
The controller function should be created in a separate
server from the running instances. The data logs and any audit
trail should be stored in another separate secure server running
immutable database software to guard against attack. Neither
of these systems should run any other software, and should not
be exposed to public access on the internet. Each should run
behind a strong ﬁrewall, and should be protected by intrusion
detection software. In addition, the main system should also
run behind a secure cloud ﬁrewall, and should also run intru-
sion detection software. Access should be delivered via multi-
step authentication, to protect against common password attack
strategies. There are three ways to do multi-step authentication:
1) Something the user knows (e.g., a password, partial
password, pass phrase, or personal identiﬁcation number
(PIN), challenge response (the user must answer a ques-
tion, or pattern), or security question);
2) Something the user has (e.g., wrist band, ID card, security
token, mobile phone with built-in hardware token, soft-
ware token, or mobile phone holding a software token);
3) Something the user is or does (e.g., ﬁngerprint, retinal
pattern, signature, face, or voice identiﬁer).
The minimum use of two of the categories with three or
more questions to be successfully answered before access is
granted, provides an extremely secure level of access control,
without the use of passwords. We have outlined how there
are many more threats than just those that can be solved
by technical means alone. These additional threats are very
effective, yet relatively simple to guard against. The approach
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

we have outlined here is not technically difﬁcult to achieve,
nor expensive to implement, yet these steps, taken in concert
with conventional technical solutions, can prove invaluable
in the ﬁght against attack. This section considers the above
security threats from the perspective of transformability theory
and its three underlying principles. Transformability theory
has as its underlying philosophy ‘Learning without Limits’.
Based on this premise, we suggest that security threats should
be faced in a similar fashion — ‘Security without Barriers’.
From a social perspective the more barriers are erected, the less
secure communities will be. Thus, it is important to develop
a culture of ethical hacking between agencies. A culture that
ensures everybody is involved and included so they acquire the
knowledge and skills to keep them safe from, and prepared for,
cyber security threats. Core to this is the need to develop trust
within the community so focus can be targeted outside, in the
knowledge that inside, the community is soundly built.
Threats caused by e.g., pupils targeting their peers by
sending SMSs, emails and tweets, etc., need to be confronted
and addressed immediately and openly within the learning
environment. The perpetrator, their parents and other necessary
agencies need all to be aware. This may not reduce the stress
on the targeted pupil but does identify and expose the perpetra-
tor and their behaviour. Such an approach requires everybody’s
participation, trust and involvement. Action needs to focus
on improving respect and acceptance with the outcome of
changing behaviour. Physical threat or unauthorised access can
be reduced when working with and through others. Working
on activities requiring the synchronisation of two or more
agents can reduce the likelihood a third party will obtain
unauthorised access. We encourage more use of computer-
supported collaborative learning (CSCL)[28][29], approaches
and tools. Social engineering threats ultimately tend to target
entire communities rather than individuals within.
VI.CONCLUSION
We have outlined the problems faced when considering
the use of a cloud based technology solution in mainstream
education, and in particular where the learning environment
is used for inclusive practice. We argue for a more inclusive
approach to ethical hacking; providing an environment that
encourages security without barriers; all of which can be used
for communities as well as a society built on trust. Transforma-
bility theory provides a framework, which introduces a positive
mind-set that together, communities such as those within
education, can address security threats within both educational
systems and any socio-technical system. It provides a common
language from a social engineering perspective to discuss and
deal with threats; and provides a way to measure and monitor
environments for threats in the future. Such an approach will
be developed and piloted and provide useful knowledge in the
implementation of cloud-based security.
As we move towards virtual and augmented collaborative
learning environments such as Second Life, inclusive peda-
gogies must have more dynamic security. Many real-world
social skills are replicated in these virtual and augmented
worlds [30]. It is therefore important that inclusive pedagogies
are adaptable for physical and virtual learning environments,
including considering the role AT can play in enabling mean-
ingful participation in learning within such multi-dimensional
environments. To date, few ATs can be integrated effectively
within groupware systems in mainstream education.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. K. Beach, “Usable cybersecurity: Human factors in cybersecurity
education curricula, ” Natl. Cybersecurity Inst. J., 2014, p. 5.
[2]
N. Sultan, “Cloud computing for education: A new dawn?” Int. J. Inf.
Manage., vol. 30, no. 2, 2010, pp. 109–116.
[3]
G. Attwell et al., “Personal learning environments-the future of eLearn-
ing?” Elearning Pap., vol. 2, no. 1, 2007, pp. 1–8.
[4]
L. Florian and J. Hegarty, ICT and special educational needs: a tool for
inclusion. McGraw-Hill Education (UK), 2004.
[5]
N. Beacham and K. McIntosh, “Student teachers’ attitudes and beliefs
towards using ICT within inclusive education and practice,” J. Res. Spec.
Educ. Needs, vol. 14, no. 3, 2014, pp. 180–191.
[6]
N. Sclater, “eLearning in the cloud,” Int. J. Virtual Pers. Learn. Environ.,
vol. 1, no. 1, 2012, pp. 10–19.
[7]
S. Hubackova, “Pedagogical foundation of eLearning,” Procedia-Social
Behav. Sci., vol. 131, 2014, pp. 24–28.
[8]
E. Wiebe and D. Sharek, “eLearning,” in Why Engagem. Matters.
Springer, 2016, pp. 53–79.
[9]
N. Beacham, “Developing NQTs e-pedagogies for inclusion,” Institution
University of Aberdeen, May 2011.
[10]
S. Hart, A. Dixon, M. Drummond, and D. McIntyre, “Learning without
limits,” in Sage Handb. Spec. Educ., 1st ed. Open University Press, 2008,
ch. 38, pp. 499–514.
[11]
L. Florian and J. Spratt, “Enacting inclusion: A framework for inter-
rogating inclusive practice,” Eur. J. Spec. Needs Educ., vol. 28, no. 2,
2013, pp. 119–135.
[12]
L. Florian, K. Young, and M. Rouse, “Preparing teachers for inclusive
and diverse educational environments: Studying curricular reform in an
initial teacher education course,” Int. J. Incl. Educ., vol. 14, no. 7, 2010,
pp. 709–722.
[13]
C. Forlin and D. Chambers, “Teacher preparation for inclusive educa-
tion: Increasing knowledge but raising concerns,” Asia-Paciﬁc J. Teach.
Educ., vol. 39, no. 1, 2011, pp. 17–32.
[14]
S. Riddell, “Social justice, equality and inclusion in Scottish education,”
Discourse Stud. Cult. Polit. Educ., vol. 30, no. 3, 2009, pp. 283–296.
[15]
T. Mortimore, “Dyslexia in higher education: Creating a fully inclusive
institution,” J. Res. Spec. Educ. Needs, vol. 13, no. 1, 2013, pp. 38–47.
[16]
M. Ainscow and A. Sandill, “Developing inclusive education systems:
The role of organisational cultures and leadership,” Int. J. Incl. Educ.,
vol. 14, no. 4, 2010, pp. 401–416.
[17]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing cloud security and privacy:
The power and the weakness of the audit trail,” in Cloud Comput. 2016
7th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. GRIDs, Virtualization. Rome: IEEE, 2016,
pp. 125–130.
[18]
PWC, “UK information security breaches survey - Technical Re-
port 2012,” London, Tech. Rep. April, 2012. [Online]. Available:
www.pwc.com Last accessed: Jan 2017
[19]
OWASP, “OWASP top ten vulnerabilities 2013,” 2013. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.owasp.org/ Last accessed: Jan 2017
[20]
Verizon,
“2014
Data
breach
investigations
re-
port,”
Tech.
Rep.
1,
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.verizonenterprise.com/resources/reports/rp Verizon-DBIR-
2014 en xg.pdf Last accessed: Jan 2017
[21]
PWC, “2014 Information security breaches survey: Technical report,”
Tech. Rep., 2014.
[22]
Trustwave, “Trustwave global security report,” Tech. Rep., 2013. [On-
line]. Available: https://www2.trustwave.com/2013GSR.html Last ac-
cessed: Jan 2017
[23]
W. Baker et al., “Data breach investigations report,” Tech. Rep., 2010.
[24]
Verizon, “2011 Data breach investigation report: A study conducted by
the Verizon RISK team in cooperation with others,” Verizon/USSS, Tech.
Rep., 2011.
[25]
Verizon, N. High, T. Crime, I. Reporting, and I. S. Service, “2012 Data
breach investigations report,” Verizon, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[26]
Verizon, “Verizon2013,” Tech. Rep., 2013.
[27]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “The importance of proper measure-
ment for a cloud security assurance model,” in 2015 IEEE 7th Int. Conf.
Cloud Comput. Technol. Sci., Vancouver, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[28]
Wikipedia,
“Computer
supported
collaborative
learning,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer-
supported collaborative learning Last accessed: Jan 2017
[29]
S. J¨arvel¨a and A. F. Hadwin, “New frontiers: Regulating learning in
CSCL,” Educ. Psychol., vol. 48, no. 1, 2013, pp. 25–39.
[30]
A. Dix, J. Finlay, G. Abowd, and R. Beale, “Evaluation techniques,”
Hum. Comput. Interact., 2004.
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

