Invisible Ubiquity - Cloud Security in UK Corporate
Annual Reporting
Bob Duncan∗, Mark Whittington†
Business School
University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen, UK
Emails: ∗robert.duncan@abdn.ac.uk, †mark.whittington@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract—The cloud is embedded in the operations of large
businesses, who will understand the incentives in terms of cost
reduction but also need to recognise, accept and mitigate the
risks that come with adoption of an approach that brings in
more actors and more opportunities for rogue interventions.
We address the extent to which the ﬁve quoted UK banks, as
an interesting sample of UK quoted corporates, inform their
shareholders of the beneﬁts and risks of cloud use through the
traditional ofﬁcial medium of the annual report. There has been
a rise in pressure, whether legal, quasi-legal or perceived best
practice, to report signiﬁcant risks to the business and it would
be reasonable to assume that using the cloud might be such
a risk. A study of the banks’ lengthy reports, with over 1,600
pages across the ﬁve reports for 2017, shows minimal mention of
cloud as a risk, but the use of “cyber” as the term for, it seems,
internet and computer risks of all kinds. The reports focus on
directors overseeing and making themselves aware of risks with
much of the language vague with key terms not deﬁned. Standard
Chartered, however, seems to take a different and, it is suggested,
a more constructive approach than their peers.
Keywords–FTSE100
companies;
GDPR
compliance;
cloud
forensic problem.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Large corporates have always been interested in embracing
outsourcing technologies [1], and in particular IT. With many
decades of experience, they have become very good at it, and
understand the risks well. They also understand the value of
using the best of technology for their business and were quick
to realise the added value that outsourcing gave them, allowing
them to access better and faster technology, without having
to invest inordinately high sums of money to achieve their
objectives.
With cloud now into its second decade of evolution, it
is no longer the novelty architectural solution to corporate
IT problems, but has rather become an accepted part [2] of
the process of doing business. The rapid scalability of cloud
resources allows expanding resource requirements for even the
largest of corporates to now be considered an everyday event.
Indeed, it is so ubiquitous that you will be hard pressed to
ﬁnd any large corporate who does not enjoy its beneﬁts in a
multiplicity of ways today.
That does not mean the inherent security issues of cloud
are now a thing of the past. Indeed, many of these risks remain
to this day [3]. However, it is clear that with many decades
of experience in outsourcing IT behind them, large corporates
have developed a much deeper understanding of many of the
risks involved, with more of a “can do” approach than many
smaller companies seem to be able to manage.
Achieving information security with conventional dis-
tributed network computer systems continues to present a
signiﬁcant challenge, and cloud still continues to present
difﬁculties towards achieving this end. The principal reason
for the difﬁculty of this challenge remains the not yet fully
resolved “Cloud Forensic Problem” [4]. This arises once an
attacker gains a foothold in a cloud system and becomes
an intruder. Once this happens, there is little to prevent the
intruder from helping themselves to any amount of data, either
by viewing, modifying, deleting or ex-ﬁltrating it from the
victim system. Worse still, there is nothing to prevent the
intruder from gaining sufﬁcient privileges to completely delete
all trace of their attack. While there is still no bulletproof
solution, where appropriate mitigatory steps are taken, the risk
can be signiﬁcantly reduced. It is clear that serious monitoring
must take place continuously.
Large corporates also understand well the need to achieve
legislative and regulatory compliance, as well as the potential
penalties for failure to deliver such compliance. They do have
the advantage of having adequate resources at their disposal,
meaning they have no difﬁculty in accessing the best expertise
to deal with any situation. They certainly are aware of both the
ﬁnancial and reputational consequences of compliance failure.
Thus they have a clear view of the incentives, both for
compliance and the beneﬁts to their business by ensuring
that all the people they deal with are also in a position to
achieve compliance. Knowing who you are dealing with and
understanding that they too are compliant, ensures a far higher
level of trust, which in turn ensures there are less likely to be
issues surrounding compliance failures.
We start in Section II, by considering the cloud speciﬁc
issues that present a barrier to good security and privacy
with cloud use. In Section III, we consider IT and cloud risk
reporting to shareholders in large corporates and in Section IV,
we consider how this is approached by the 5 largest UK
banks listed on the FTSE100 Index. In Section V, we look
at the requirement UK banks have to report to shareholders.
In Section VI, we discuss our ﬁndings, and in Section VII, we
discuss our conclusion and make our recommendations.
II.
CLOUD RISK AND SECURITY ISSUES
IT risk has become a more prominent feature of risk
reporting in many jurisdictions, including the UK [5]. Over
and above the other risk and security issues with IT, cloud adds
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

a further level of issues and of questions that need answers.
There are a great many additional risk vectors which come into
play once cloud computing is deployed. It is not just a case
of getting past the corporate ﬁrewall and through the internal
defence network of the organisation, but in addition, attackers
do not even have to get inside corporate systems. They can
attack network trafﬁc to and from the cloud instances. They
can attack the Cloud Service Provider (CSP) direct, or through
side channel attacks from their own, or other compromised
systems. They can attack third party service providers, they can
attack through compromised Internet of Things (IoT) networks,
which are notoriously insecure.
Cloud systems are generally multi tenanted, with a range of
other users. Proper partitioning between different clients can
present non trivial challenges within the cloud environment.
Achieving and maintaining proper access controls is another
challenging area. Cloud systems can be vulnerable to Denial of
Service (DoS) or Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks.
Achieving and maintaining proper conﬁguration of client based
systems to use the cloud from within the corporate network
systems can also present a huge challenge.
Why would large corporates want to use outsourced re-
sources for their IT? What is the incentive for large corporates
to use cloud? All major cloud service providers make much
of the beneﬁts of using cloud for businesses. We believe the
following would be the most appropriate incentives for large
corporates to use cloud:
• Access Anywhere, Anytime;
• Cost-Effectiveness;
• High Scalability;
• Improved Disaster Recovery;
• Improved Uptime;
• Multiple Migration Options;
• Sophisticated Security.
What kind of cloud deployments would they be interested
in? Here are some examples of the most appropriate cloud
deployments for use in large corporates:
• Accounting systems;
• Business to Business (B2B) systems;
• Corporate eMail systems;
• Corporate forecasting tools;
• Customer Relationship Management (CRM) systems;
• Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems;
• Human Resources (HR) systems;
• Online web systems for both information and trading;
• Supply Chain Management (SCM) systems.
What kind of issues would they be likely to face in using
cloud for these cloud deployments? Here are some examples
of the kind of challenging issues they might face:
• Abuse of Cloud Systems;
• Account or Service Trafﬁc Hijacking;
• Data Breaches;
• Data Loss;
• Denial of Service;
• Insecure APIs;
• Insufﬁcient Due Diligence;
• Malicious Insider;
• Malware Injection;
• Shared Vulnerabilities.
Why would these present a particular challenge? The
primary security goal of all companies is to achieve Conﬁ-
dentiality, Integrity and Availability (CIA) of their data. For
cloud use, the CIA objective must still be met. We will brieﬂy
look at each of these issues in turn:
A. Abuse of Cloud Systems
Attacking encrypted systems, for example, is a difﬁcult task
to complete computationally. Some attackers will abuse cloud
systems by gathering signiﬁcant cloud resources to carry out
malicious attacks on others. This is not easy to detect, unless
particular attention is paid to high volume activity through log
analysis.
B. Account or Service Trafﬁc Hijacking
If account details are stolen, often through phishing, vish-
ing, social engineering, and other non-technical attacks, as well
as through technical means, including cross site scripting and
trafﬁc attacks, this can give an attacker a solid base from which
to attack the overall system. It also allows the attacker a base
from which to gain access to other systems more easily, as
well as an opportunity to insert malware into the system.
C. Data Breaches
A data breach is the result of an intrusion which is most
likely to be both malicious and intrusive. Because of the
communication speed of cloud resources, any breach can result
in mass data becoming exposed. This means data breaches
are a particularly worrying attack, which can have devastating
legislative and regulatory compliance consequences.
D. Data Loss
Data loss can arise for a number of different reasons. The
data owner could lose the encryption key rendering the data
useless. An authorised user might delete data accidentally.
An intruder might maliciously delete data. There could be a
physical failure of storage media, which if not properly backed
up could result in data loss. Where proper backups are not in
place, all these examples have the same result — the data is
irretrievably lost.
E. Denial of Service
This is an old attack which attempts to disrupt business
by ﬂooding the system with hundreds, thousands or millions
of automated requests for service. If not detected and dealt
with, this brings the system to a halt, effectively closing down
the availability of the system. It is like being caught in a
rush hour trafﬁc jam — you can neither go forward to your
destination, not backwards to try to ﬁnd an alternative route
through, meaning you have to sit there doing nothing until the
trafﬁc clears.
F. Insecure APIs
Cloud computing brings with it the dichotomy of trying to
make services available to millions yet keep systems secure
at the same time — two incompatible goals. That solution
has been the public facing Application Programming Interface
(API). OAuth, and open authorisation service for web services
which control third party access has been developed to help
with this task.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

G. Insufﬁcient Due Diligence
Many companies fail to perform adequate due diligence
to understand the full implications of using cloud before they
embark on using cloud. Often companies expect well protected
internal systems to work really well when they push them
to cloud and fail to grasp the subtle differences between the
two environments, leading to introducing weaknesses to their
system.
H. Malicious Insider
Where a company depends solely on the cloud service
provider for their security — they are at increased risk of ex-
posure to malicious user attacks. This is especially problematic
where the encryption keys are kept in the cloud, rather than
securely in the company’s own internal systems. Consider the
damage caused by the Edward Snowden leaks.
I.
Malware Injection
Malware injections are scripts or code embedded into
cloud services, which then purport to provide valid SaaS
instance services to cloud servers. This allows the code to
perform malicious actions to eavesdrop on company trafﬁc,
compromise the integrity of sensitive areas, exﬁltrate sensitive
data, or perform any number of malicious actions on behalf of
the attacker to the detriment of the company.
J. Shared Vulnerabilities
Cloud security is a function that must necessarily be shared
between provider and client. Each party has the responsibility
to take appropriate action to safeguard and protect the data.
This means the provider must provide a secure environment in
which to operate, but equally, the user must take responsibility
for ensuring that they take proper precautions to secure user
passwords and access restrictions to both data and devices,
preferably by the use of multi-factor authentication.
III.
IT AND CLOUD RISK REPORTING TO SHAREHOLDERS
IN THE UK
Quoted UK companies have a signiﬁcant responsibility
to report on their performance and, increasingly, their risks
to their shareholders as well as other stakeholders. This
responsibility is partly legally deﬁned and necessary and
partly voluntary. Some content falls between these two neat
categories as the law might dictate a heading to be covered
and then the approach and the level of detail to adequately
address this is determined by the company with the oversight
of their auditor. Risk is an area in this mezzanine category
with paragraph 414c of The Companies Act 2006 (Strategic
report and Directors’ Report) Regulations 2013, No 1970 [6]
stating that the strategic report for the company, which is the
main descriptive part of the annual report, must contain “(a) a
fair review of the company’s business and (b) a description of
the principal risks and uncertainties facing the company”. This
legislation reﬂects a growing trend towards the encouragement
of more non-ﬁnancial reporting such as the EU non-ﬁnancial
disclosure directive (2014) [7].
Companies, of course, face many risks of which cloud is
only one. As we have seen, however, it is becoming a risk
concerning not just known, narrowly deﬁned problems but a
more pervasive background to the entirety of “doing business”.
In this context, it is interesting to address the question of
how much companies feel they need to tell their shareholders
concerning their reliance on the cloud and the risks their
business consequentially has embedded in it.
IV.
INTRODUCTION TO BANKS
In order to focus our investigations into this question, we
will consider the ﬁve banks quoted in the FTSE100 index as
at October, 2018. These were Barclays, HSBC, Lloyds, RBS
and Standard Chartered. Banks, perhaps more than any other
industry, have layer upon layer of required reporting — some
nationally determined, some internationally — some general,
some very bank speciﬁc. Banks are a particularly interesting
sector as, it is often argued, the rest of the economic system is
dependent on the survival of the systemic or “too big to fail”
members of the sector. It could be argued that in seeking to
address the problems highlighted by the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis,
banks have been more regulated than they have been reduced
to sizes that might solve the too big to fail issue. Hence, now
banks report to, and are monitored by, their “host” government
and by global banking supervisory bodies, for example the
Financial Stability Board, as well as their traditional owners
and masters — their shareholders. On top of this other stake-
holders (customers, creditors, employees, etc.) are increasingly
recognised by corporate governance codes, as the Financial
Times [8] puts it “When only shareholders matter, there is
only one constituency to disappoint. As capitalism tilts slowly
to recognise other shareholders, General Motors is showing the
way in how to let multiple interested parties down.” So, for this
sector in particular, there are many concerned overseers and
it will be interesting to see what general or narrow cloud risk
gets through the ﬁlter to reach the owners (aka shareholders).
Banks have often been in the eye of the news websites for
disappointing IT related performance and, in a business model
that relies more on web-enabled software than traditional
branches or face-to-face contact, they are a key focus of the
dependability and trustworthiness of IT systems remembering
that disappointed customers may well take actions that will
lead to disappointed shareholders. Whilst the engagement with
cloud is often implicit and assumed rather than stated, there is
no doubt that cloud is critical and will be become more so as
the banks seek to increase efﬁciency by becoming more virtual
and less physically accessible. This shift inevitably changes the
risk proﬁle of the banks and, while potentially reducing some
risks (physical stealing of actual notes, for example), it will
mean a raised level for online risks that any organization might
struggle to keep up with.
V.
BANKS’ REQUIREMENT TO REPORT TO
SHAREHOLDERS
There is a logic to risk reporting being less clearly deﬁned
than, say, the reporting of ﬁnancial statements. Whilst all
companies have sales and costs, the types and level of threat
posed by differing risks will vary considerably by industry, as
would the importance of various environmental issues between
a bank and an oil company. There is a developing literature
focused on risk reporting (see [9] for a literature review) and a
concern that the idea of risk itself is not clearly conceptualised
[9](pp 54). Whilst directors have a requirement to report issues
of material and strategic importance or threat to the company,
it is clear that they would also wish to give the impression
that they are indeed “managing” the company and that risks
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

are under control and mitigated. Banking, in particular, has
developed a multi-dimensional set of risk frameworks for
bank-speciﬁc risks (credit risk, liquidity risk, market risk —
see the annual reports of our case companies for more details)
and, perhaps this leaves little room for the more mundane
“normal risks” that face other businesses from their operations
and systems. Nevertheless, it would seem that a cursory glance
at the popular press and IT industry news feeds would suggest
there might be much to make sure shareholders are aware of.
The methodology used here is that of content analysis
an approach that seeks to examine qualitative information by
turning it into quantitative data. This approach can address
many questions the tone and style of reports, the relative im-
portance through comparing quantities of mentions on differing
topics, highlighting which topics merit graphs or pictures as
opposed to just words, would be just three of many angles
one might take. Such studies have looked at environmental,
social, governance, risk and other areas of corporate reporting.
The issue of confusing the measurable “quantity” with the
less deﬁnable “quality” presents many issues and problems.
Repeated mentions of the same information may show some
recognition of importance, but does not impart more knowl-
edge. One truth is that whilst “quantity does not mean quality”,
“no quantity means no quality”. We ﬁnd, perhaps surprisingly
few (and oft repeated) direct mentions of “cloud” or even
the broader “cyber” within the long ﬁve reports we examine.
Hence our approach is adapted to become more discursive and
less numerically focused as we seek to modify our methods to
ﬁt the data that presents itself. This highlights a further issue
in studies such as this; that statistical sophistication, whilst
desirable, is only possible when there is plenty of data, yet
there are many topics that might be even more important but
without the data quantities to satisfy the number-crunching
desires of top academics.
VI.
CLOUD IN THE BANKS’ ANNUAL REPORT
Banks do not only report using their “Annual Report”.
Like any other large, listed company there will be interim
or quarterly reports along with a regularly updated website.
Producing a “Corporate Citizenship” report, however titled, is
usual and, if there is a share quote on a USA exchange, then
a US reporting format referred to as a 20-F. Speciﬁc banking
rules also require a Pillar 3 report covering their approach to
having adequate capital. Focusing on the Annual report, banks
have much to include, yet there is no word or page limit.
Table I below shows the pages in each of the latest (October,
2018) annual reports for the 5 banks and the number of pages
speciﬁcally in the risk section — of course, risk will probably
also appear elsewhere in the report.
TABLE I: BANK PAGE STATS 2017 c⃝2019 Duncan and
Whittington
Bank
AR Date
Length
(pages)
AR pp
Risk pp
% Risk
Barclays Bank
31/12/2017
328
87
27%
HSBC Holdings
31/12/2017
274
57
21%
Lloyds Banking Group
31/12/2017
278
50
18%
Royal Bank of Scotland Group
31/12/2017
419
80
19%
Standard Chartered
31/12/2017
344
74
22%
In a review of risk reporting in another UK industry
(food producers), Abraham and Shrives [10] found a majority
of general rather than speciﬁc disclosures and that content
was repetitive over time They took this to imply that the
companies were showing a concern to disclosure (symbolic)
rather than offering substantive content. Such an approach may
be more difﬁcult for companies to achieve in 2017/2018 as
audit coverage is somewhat broader than in the years 2002-
2007 used in their survey and now includes the auditor having
a check of much of the discursive section of the report. As
stated above, there are many categories of risk that banks
are required to take account of before they might turn to
consider areas where reporting might be more voluntary and
would have similarities with non-ﬁnancial businesses. These
are usually referred to as “operational risk” disclosures. Only
one paper has considered banking operational risk disclosures
in Europe [11] and this makes no speciﬁc reference to cloud,
IT or internet risk issues. A critical ﬂaw in the use of content
analysis is that there needs to be some relevant content that is
available for analysis and, hence, perhaps, the approach taken
did not focus on such details.
Reviewing the ﬁve lengthy reports reveals some differing
approaches. Whilst all ﬁve are “banks”, they are not the same
and do not face the same risks. Lloyds is a UK-focused
retail bank whilst the other four include the wide breadth
of investment banking too. RBS is still recovering from the
ﬁnancial crisis and continuing government ownership of a
majority stake. Different activities will lead to different risks
and therefore direct comparison may not be meaningful. Also,
there is signiﬁcant repetition in some of the reports which,
a common issue with content analysis, can lead to statistics
which show a great deal of disclosure when there is actually
one disclosure ten times. Hence, a more discursive rather than
numerical approach has been adopted.
“Cloud” rarely appears in any of the reports and not in a
risk context. HSBC and Standard Chartered do not mention
cloud once in their reports. Barclays launched a customer
product called “Cloudit” and, more usefully, Lloyds states:
“To support our transformation and deliver further efﬁciency
savings, we will simplify and modernise our IT architecture
while deploying new technologies such as cloud computing
to enhance our capabilities and increase resilience.” (Page
16, Lloyds — Digitising the group — Leveraging new tech-
nologies) This is conﬁrmation of our expectation of “cloud
behind the scenes”. RBS, in a similar vein, states: “Faster
repositioning of the bank’s existing distribution network and
technology platforms towards mobile, cloud based platforms
and virtualisation.” (Page 13, RBS)
“Cyber”, on the other hand, either by itself or as the initial
part of a word or phrase (cybersecurity, cyber-attack, cyber-
crime, etc.) is used to cover most information systems, internet
and distributed computing concerns and solutions. The RBS
quote below shows such an example: “Delivering appropriate
digital infrastructure is important to ensure a ‘technically-able’
bank that supports its long-term future. Cyber security is also a
vital part of providing a safe and secure banking service. Banks
need to proactively identify and manage risks and efciencies
in their operations and facilities” (Page 39, RBS)
The tables below (Tables II, III, IV, V and VI) show some
of the key content in each of the reports — there seems a
focus on showing that the directors have cyber covered in their
board and risk committee structures. Interestingly, some banks
have cyber risk mostly within operating risk, whereas Lloyds
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

and, more prominently, Standard Chartered now have it as a
primary risk category on its own. Two banks had directors who
might be seen to be experts in this ﬁeld, a third had developed a
system of named specialist external advisors to make sure there
was such expertise. Three banks mentioned cyber within bonus
objectives for one or more of the directors. Heavy investment
in resilience and technology was mentioned frequently but
without ﬁnancial numbers. The audit row of the table shows
the variety of length of the audit reports and also that there
appears to be a bespoke approach with different cyber risks
being highlighted by the audit ﬁrm, or, indeed, with HSBC,
none at all. Despite the number of data breaches suffered by
banks in previous years, the GDPR (General Data Protection
Regulations) makes few explicit appearances in these reports,
even though implementation was only a few months away
when the reports were written. Only Lloyds has more than
two mentions within their lengthy reports, with Barclays the
only one to highlight the size of potential ﬁnes.
TABLE II: BARCLAYS BANK 2017 [12]
Item
Description
Key Point
New Centre of excellence for cyber security as
part of restructuring
Comments in introductory
Investing in digital and mobile capabilities with
pages
an awareness of the cyber risk management
Risks highlighted
Cyber crime as a risk to the bank’s business
model. Model is stress tested with cyber attacks)
Increased compliance costs as regulators focus
on cyber risk
Directors
CEO has a target of strengthening cyber readiness
Committees
Risk committee sees the cyber theme as part
of operational risk
Cyber has reputational risk
Audit KPMG 6pp
User access management. Some concerns about
developers, but found no reason to investigate further
TABLE III: HSBC HOLDINGS 2017 [13]
Item
Description
Key Point
“dominant threat”
Comments in introductory
rising cyber threat risk
Risks highlighted
Cyber threat
Unauthorised systems access
Directors
Non-exec director is a security expert
CEO has a cyber personal objective
Committees
Also a Financial Systems Vulnerability Committee
Audit PWC 5pp
No comments
TABLE IV: LLOYDS BANKING GROUP 2017 [14]
Item
Description
Key Point
“ near term challenges new threats from
data and cyber security” (P2)
Comments in introductory
“UK’s largest digital bank” (P9)
pages
Information and cyber security policy are also included
as part of the Human Rights commitment
Risks highlighted
IT infrastructre, cyber risk, 3rd party reliance
Operational risk has cyber as a secondary section.
List of potential cyber damage on page 135
Directors
Chief Operating Ofﬁcer is assessed on mitigating
evolving risks, including cyber
Committees
Board risk committee report separates out “IT
and cyber risk” from operational risks
Audit PWC 8pp
Highlights access concerns, but additional testing
found this to be secure
Uniquely, at least in this small data set, RBS provide
a section of “additional information” from page 357 which
extends for 50 pages which includes further risk factors. Whilst
TABLE
V:
ROYAL
BANK
OF
SCOTLAND
GROUP
2017 [15]
Item
Description
Key Point
“a key operational competence”
Comments in introductory
Refers to a multi-layered defence to cyber
security , systems enhancements and training
Risks highlighted
Financial malware
Directors
No comment
Committees
Risk Committee receives bi-annual Resilience and
Security report where cyber is highlighted
Simulated cyber attack scenarios undertaken
Audit EY 14pp
Review of IT systems and controls mentioned,
but no concerns found
TABLE VI: STANDARD CHARTERED 2017 [16]
Item
Description
Key Point
Not complacent. Further enhancing cyber
security (P6)
Comments in introductory
We have made signiﬁcant progress in our work
to combat ﬁnancial crime and have increased focus
on our cyber risk management capabilities (p33)
Mentions cyber security industry working bodies
that it sits on
Risks highlighted
Information and cyber security raised to
principal risk level
Directors
Directors joined by specialist external advisor on
risk committee and subcommittee
Committees
Board Financial Crime Risk Committee
Committees on Cyber Security and Cyber
Threat Management mentioned
Audit KPMG 8pp
IT risk highlighted with discussion of
controls and access - in relation to ﬁnancial
reporting found acceptable
one cannot be entirely sure, this approach may well put this
section beyond the reviewing eye of the external audit team.
We will focus on the aspects of Standard Chartered’s reporting
that would appear to differentiate it from the other banks.
The additional information includes more detail on dependency
on IT systems, reputational damage of loss of customer data,
potential for ﬁnes, cost-saving focus undermining resourcing
improved security amongst others. On page 389, a cyber act as
part of a geopolitical event is mentioned as a further potential
problem.
Apart from this RBS appendix, Standard Chartered would
seem to have the most thorough and structured discussion of
cyber risk. It stands out by giving a deﬁnition of information
and cyber security risk as: “the potential for loss from a
breach of conﬁdentiality, integrity or availability of the Group’s
information systems and assets through cyber attack, insider
activity, error or control failure” (page 162, Standard Char-
tered). It would seem the other banks take for granted the
assumption that the reader’s understanding of cyber security
risk as matching their own.
Standard Chartered also uniquely further describes its man-
agement approach to the risk: “The Group seeks to avoid risk
and uncertainty for our critical information assets and systems
and has a low appetite for material incidents affecting these
or the wider operations and reputation of the bank” (page 34,
Standard Chartered)
And ﬁnally gives an overview of its “risk appetite” for
cyber security: “The Group seeks to avoid risk and uncertainty
for our critical information assets and systems and has a low
appetite for material incidents affecting these or the wider
operations and reputation of the Group” (page 177, Standard
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Chartered)
Page 177 explains Standard Chartered’s approach to cyber
risk including roles, committee structure and monitoring in a
more accessible way, as well as deﬁning terms when other
banks just use words and spread any content throughout the
report.
There is, of course, much that of necessity needs to be
left out of an annual report. However, it is easy enough for a
vigilant analyst or shareholder to ﬁnd the evidence presented
earlier in the paper from a variety of sources and form their
own view of the banks’ ability to get to grips with “cyber”. The
task of the annual report perhaps, would seem to be to present a
calm assurance that all is under control or at least controllable.
As the audit reports do not directly address the broader cyber
risks, it is for the shareholder to decide whether presentation
truly matches the reality they gather from elsewhere.
VII.
CONCLUSION
We can see from Section II, that there are a great many
possible additional threats to achieving proper security once
cloud is introduced to the provisioning of IT resources for large
corporates. Many of these are not trivial to resolve. Increased
vigilance becomes one of the most important elements of any
defensive plan, without which the business will be exposed to
further risk.
In an industry with so many risks and where other risks are
heavily regulated and require extensive coverage and reporting,
it might seem unreasonable to expect depth and detail on cyber
security. However, it is rising in prominence as a risk category
and is mentioned as a threat to the integrity of the business
model on at least two occasions. However superﬁcial coverage
of ill-deﬁned terms appears the norm.
The comments and statements in these annual reports do
not give great insight or detail, some of the banks appear to be
emphasising a big picture that they are doing whatever they can
to not only recognise but also match the cyber challenges that
they face. There is only the briefest glimpse into what this
means below the surface, apart from page 177 in Standard
Chartered’s report. Standard Chartered might be held up as
a role model in the clarity of their reporting
such response
to peer pressure is a recognized feature of the analysis of
corporate reporting. The recognition that terms need to be
explained, especially when the term “cyber” seems so frequent
and vague, and the attempt to bring together the information
on the topic rather than spreading it through the report gives
the impression of seeking to inform the reader rather than just
ticking boxes in a structure designed to report on committees
rather than subjects. Whilst impression management is another
key theme within discursive reporting research, this awareness
in itself is to be credited.
The annual report is the authorised vehicle for informing
shareholders speciﬁcally about the success and risks of the
business they own. The banks tend to focus on banking risk
categories, and this might squeeze the word count available
for more usual business risks. Banks, due to their size and
importance, as well as their reliance on IT, including cloud,
could do more to inform their owners about more than the
committee structures and broad themes. Perhaps this traditional
report structure is not the best way of doing this, yet Standard
Chartered seem to have provided a higher degree of clarity
and sharpness by deﬁning terms and focusing a little more on
topic than corporate structure.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Babin, S. Briggs, and B. Nicholson, “Corporate Social Responsibility
and Global IT Outsourcing,” Commun. ACM, vol. 54, 2011, p. 28.
[2]
J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, and S. Marusic, “1207.0203,” Futur. Gener. Comput.
Syst., vol. 29, no. 1, 2013, pp. 1–19.
[3]
B. Duncan and Y. Zhao, “Risk Management for Cloud Compliance with
the EU General Data Protection Regulation,” in 7th Int. Work. Secur. Priv.
Perform. Cloud Comput. (SPCLOUD 2018), Orleans, France, 2018, p. 8.
[4]
B. Duncan, M. Whittington, and V. Chang, “Enterprise security and
privacy: Why adding IoT and big data makes it so much more difﬁcult,”
in Proc. 2017 Int. Conf. Eng. Technol. ICET 2017, vol. 2018-Janua,
2018.
[5]
B. Duncan, Y. Zhao, and M. Whittington, “Corporate Governance, Risk
Appetite and Cloud Security Risk: A Little Known Paradox. How Do
We Square the Circle?” in Cloud Comput. 2017 Eighth Int. Conf. Cloud
Comput. GRIDs, Virtualization, Athens, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[6]
U.
Gov,
“The
Companies
Act
2006
(Strategic
report
and
Directors’
Report)
Regulations
2013,”
2013.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukdsi/2013/9780111540169/part/2
Accessed: 28/03/2019
[7]
EU, “(2) EU (2014) Directive 2014/95/EU of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 22 October 2014 amending Directive 2013/34/EU
as regards disclosure of non-ﬁnancial and diversity information by certain
large undertakings and groups.” 2014.
[8]
FT, “General Motors: Cruzing for a bruising,” 2019.
[9]
T. Elshandidy, P. J. Shrives, M. Bamber, and S. Abraham, “Risk report-
ing: A review of the literature and implications for future research,” J.
Account. Lit., vol. 40, 2018, pp. 54–82.
[10]
S. Abraham and P. J. Shrives, “Improving the relevance of risk factor
disclosure in corporate annual reports,” Br. Account. Rev., vol. 46, no. 1,
2014, pp. 91–107.
[11]
A. Barakat and K. Hussainey, “Bank governance, regulation, supervi-
sion, and risk reporting: Evidence from operational risk disclosures in
European banks,” Int. Rev. Financ. Anal., vol. 30, 2013, pp. 254–273.
[12]
B.
Bank,
“Barclays
Bank
2017
Annual
Reort,”
Tech.
Rep.,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://home.barclays/investor-relations/
reports-and-events/annual-reports/2017/{\%}0A Accessed: 28/03/2019
[13]
HSBC,
“HSBC
Holdings
2017
Annual
Report,”
Tech.
Rep.,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.hsbc.com/-/
ﬁles/hsbc/investors/hsbc-results/2017/annual/hsbc-holdings-plc/
180220-annual-report-and-accounts-2017.pdf Accessed: 28/03/2019
[14]
Lloyds, “Lloyds Bank 2017 Annual Report,” Tech. Rep., 2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.lloyds.com/investor-relations/
ﬁnancial-performance/ﬁnancial-results/annual-report-2017
Accessed:
28/03/2019
[15]
RBS,
“Royal
Bank
of
Scotland
Group
2017
Annual
Report,”
Tech.
Rep.,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//investors.rbs.com/{∼}/media/Files/R/RBS-IR/annual-report-2017/
royal-bankof-scotland-annual-report-and-accounts2017.pdf
Accessed:
28/03/2019
[16]
S. Chartered, “Standard Chartered 2017 Annual Report,” Tech. Rep.,
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.sc.com/annual-report/2017/ Ac-
cessed: 28/03/2019
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

