Can Forensic Audit Help Address the Cloud
Forensic Problem in Light of the Requirements of
the Forthcoming European Union
General Data Protection Regulation?
Bob Duncan∗, Mark Whittington†
Business School
University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen, UK
Emails: ∗robert.duncan@abdn.ac.uk, †mark.whittington@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract—There is no doubt that the forthcoming European
Union (EU) General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which
comes into effect on 25th May 2018, will certainly concentrate
many corporate minds. As for those who rely on cloud computing,
there is likely to be even more consternation in the ranks, due to
the issues surrounding dealing with the Cloud Forensic Problem.
While it is the case that all computing systems are constantly
under serious attack, this particular problem arises due to the
fact that once an attacker gains a foothold in a cloud system and
becomes an intruder, there is very little to prevent the intruder
from gaining sufﬁcient privileges to then completely delete all
trace of their incursion, possibly deleting far more records than
they need to in the process. Additionally, there is nothing to
prevent them from then helping themselves to any amount of
data covered by the GDPR, either by viewing it, modifying it,
deleting it or ex-ﬁltrating it from the victim system. This, then,
will present a compliance nightmare to a great many cloud users,
many of whom are poorly prepared to cope with this serious
practical and ﬁnancial challenge. In this paper, we consider how
the use of robust forensic audit techniques from the accounting
world might be applied to mitigate this serious challenge for such
companies.
Keywords–Forensic audit; GDPR compliance; cloud forensic
problem.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Achieving information security with conventional dis-
tributed network computer systems presents a signiﬁcant chal-
lenge, but this challenge increases exponentially when we
introduce cloud computing to the mix, due to the multiplicity
and complexity of hardware and software layers and the
number of actors with differing agendas, involved in any
cloud ecosystem. The principal reason for the difﬁculty of this
challenge is the so called “Cloud Forensic Problem”.
This arises once an attacker gains a foothold in a cloud
system and becomes an intruder. Once this happens, there is
little to prevent the intruder from helping themselves to any
amount of data, either by viewing, modifying, deleting or ex-
ﬁltrating it from the victim system. Worse still, there is nothing
to prevent the intruder from gaining sufﬁcient privileges to
completely delete all trace of their attack.
The forthcoming EU General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) [1] comes into effect on 25th May 2018, and a
principal requirement is the protection of personally identi-
ﬁable information held by any organisation, anywhere in the
world, on pain of severe ﬁnancial penalties. Given that the
cloud forensic problem presents a potentially insurmountable
compliance problem, a great many organisations are likely to
be exposed to incalculable potential penalties for the inevitable
string of cyber breaches that are likely to ensue.
We start in Section II, by considering the cloud forensic
problem and the challenges it poses. We turn to the accounting
world to see which techniques we could implement to help ad-
dress these serious challenges in Section III, where we look at
accounting, audit and forensic accounting to see how it works
for the accounting world, and in Section IV, we consider how
we might develop some of these well established techniques
to help us address this signiﬁcant cloud security problem. In
Section VI, we look at how we might use the immutable
database as the core of this approach. In Section VIII, we
discuss our conclusion and future work.
II.
THE CLOUD FORENSIC PROBLEM
Cloud systems are extremely popular with companies due
to the ﬂexibility offered by cloud. Speed of start-up, ease
of scalability to match the demand curve and the revenue
nature of the costs involved all provide a strong incentive for
companies to use cloud services. Cloud computing has been
with us now for over 10 years, and while much of the early
research concentrated on usability [2] [3] and performance [4]–
[6], it was not long before thoughts of security [7]–[9] and
privacy [10] [11] started to surface.
While the US National Institute for Standards and Tech-
nology (NIST) were one of the ﬁrst organisations to propose
standard deﬁnitions [12] [13], interest in security [14]–[17] and
privacy [18]–[20] started to grow.
Thoughts also started turning to accountability [8] [21]–
[23], given the evolving complexities of cloud ecosystems.
While there have been some really positive advances in
both security and privacy during this time, there remains one
fundamental weakness that has not been resolved, namely the
“cloud forensic problem”. All computer systems are subject
to continuous and serious attack, and cloud systems are no
exception. It would be realistic to state that no system is
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

immune to attack, and this is particularly true for cloud
systems.
The main focus of an attacker is to breach a system, which
can involve a considerable amount of work on their part. The
more diligent will ﬁrst perform surveillance, compile many
analyses of how the various company systems are structured
and how they interact with each other. Often, they will also
carry out huge amounts of work to understand the people of the
organization, since they are usually the weak link in the chain
[24]. This extensive intelligence gathering will usually cover
every conceivable aspect of all company systems to ensure
they discover everything they need to know about the company.
This why it is so important to analyse system logs, in order to
gain a better understanding of who is actually attacking their
systems.
Other attackers, will be much less organised, simply trying
to hack in to company systems, without a thought of the
overview of the company concerned. They will merely look
for known vulnerabilities and try to attack them. There are
other attackers who will speciﬁcally attack the people of
the company through social engineering and other similar
approaches. The ﬁrst objective of all attackers is the same —
to penetrate the system in order to become an intruder.
The aim is not just to get in, and out, as quickly as possible,
but to develop a long term foothold, secrete themselves into
corporate servers and other systems which will allow them
to return to help themselves whenever they want. The longer
they remain in the system, the more they are likely to try
to escalate privileges to give them access to more and more
possible information. All too often, they are helped along the
way by the companies themselves, often through an element
of laziness on the part of system administrators [25].
If we look back ﬁve years ago, at previous cyber breach
reports [26], there was a global average time of 6 months
between breach and discovery. With more rigorous attention
paid to reading and analysing their server logs, it is obvious
they could have discovered intruders much more quickly. By
2016, the time between breach and discovery had dropped to
a matter of weeks rather than months [27], however, this is
still not good enough to keep on top of what is going on in
corporate systems.
Companies often contribute to their own downfall by
failing to update security patches to both operating systems
and software systems, complexities from legacy applications
applications and risks of outages being reasons or excuses for
slow implementation [28]. All of these issues conspire to lead
inexorably to the, as yet unresolved, cloud forensic problem
— namely, that once an intruder is in the system, and has
escalated sufﬁcient privileges, there is nothing to prevent them
from deleting the forensic trail, all system logs and audit trails,
thus hiding all evidence of their successful penetration and of
the size and nature of their crime.
Under the forthcoming GDPR [1], any breached organi-
sation must report the breach within 72 hours of discovery
of the breach. They must also report how many relevant
records have been compromised, whether by having been read,
amended, deleted or ex-ﬁltrated from the system. Given that
many system logs are also not turned on by default [41],
this means identifying which records have been compromised,
whether by having been read, amended, deleted or ex-ﬁltrated,
will present a serious enough challenge in the ﬁrst place, but
since the intruder will likely have deleted all forensic trails
in the system, the likelihood of an organisation being able to
properly identify which records have been compromised may
be impossible to determine.
This means not only non-compliance with the GDPR,
triggering ﬁnes, but failure to tackle some elementary steps will
then cause these ﬁnes to escalate following repeated events to
the greater of e20million or 4% of global turnover. The size
of the potential ﬁnes, along with the bad publicity will surely
get the attention of organizations.
III.
USEFUL TECHNIQUES FROM THE ACCOUNTING
WORLD
The process of accounting has been around for millen-
nia, with the underlying standard approach of double entry
bookkeeping in use for over 500 years, with the generally
accepted story placing its creation in Italy. Accounting is
primarily seen as a technique for collecting, measuring, pro-
cessing and communicating ﬁnancial information about the
economic performance of entities, in order to provide decision
useful information for interested parties, such as management,
investors, creditors and regulators [30]. The International Ac-
counting Standards Board (IASB) issued a similar, but more
user-constrained deﬁnition in 2015, namely “The objective
of general purpose ﬁnancial reporting is to provide ﬁnancial
information about the reporting entity that is useful to existing
and potential investors, lenders and other creditors in mak-
ing decisions about providing resources to the entity. Those
decisions involve buying, selling or holding equity and debt
instruments, and providing or settling loans and other forms
of credit.” [31]
Auditing, too, has been around for millennia, as there
has always been a need to provide assurance that accounts
and ﬁnancial statements present a “true and fair view” of
the business under review. Naturally, many accounting and
auditing techniques can also be applied to anything else that
is measurable, and in this case, of particular interest to us
is data. Hence, seeking to apply the more evolved and time
tested techniques from accounting and auditing techniques to
the management and governance of data in the cloud would
seem logical.
A further extension of the processes of accounting and
audit is forensic (OED [32] “pertaining to, connected with,
or used in courts of law; suitable or analogous to pleadings
in court”) accounting, which as the deﬁnition suggests is the
process of preparing evidence suitable for use in a court of
law.
We can use these techniques, which have long been de-
veloped in the accounting world to good effect in helping us
secure our cloud data. We can then liken the database system
to an accounting system, whereby we collect, measure, process
and communicate non-accounting information concerning a
business to the people for whom it is intended or relevant.
In principal, we can then use cloud audit to provide
assurance of the data provenance of all the data held in the
database system, and in the event of a security breach, we
can easily apply cloud forensic techniques, learning from the
accounting world, in order to help us bring about a successful
prosecution in the courts and be aware of the steps needed to
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

improve security for the future. In practice, this will, of course,
be far harder to achieve.
Of course, it is worth pointing out that for centuries,
accountants have enjoyed the beneﬁts of working with hard
copy books, written with quill pen and ink. This medium
presents the beneﬁt of providing a hard ink trail to follow,
something which we shall later see is no longer available with
modern cloud systems.
IV.
FORENSIC CLOUD AUDIT
An interesting distinction in deﬁnition between “forensic
accounting” and “cloud computing forensic science” is the
presence of that last word science. Hopwood et al., [33] give
the following deﬁnition for forensic accounting:
Forensic accounting is the application of investigative and
analytic skills for the purpose of resolving ﬁnancial issues in a
manner that meets standards required by courts of law. Notice
that forensic accounting is not limited to the use of ﬁnancial
investigations that result in legal prosecution; however, if this
is the purpose, the investigation and analysis must meet the
standards required in the court of law that has jurisdiction.
(page 3)
Whilst NIST [34] provides the following discussion and
deﬁnition:
Many experts consider forensic science to be the applica-
tion of a broad spectrum of sciences and technologies to the
investigation and establishment of facts of interest in relation to
criminal, civil law, or regulatory issues. However, the resulting
techniques may also be used for purposes outside the scope of
law to reconstruct an event that has occurred. Cloud computing
forensic science is the application of scientiﬁc principles,
technological practices and derived and proven methods to
reconstruct past cloud computing events through identiﬁcation,
collection, preservation, examination, interpretation and report-
ing of digital evidence.
Note that the forensic accounting deﬁnition does not in-
clude the word science, despite the area (see for example two
textbooks Taylor [35] and Hopwood et al., [33]) including
scientiﬁc methods. Taylor [35], as a more introductory text,
focuses initially and at some length on the need to understand
background and environmental issues, using this as a backdrop
before moving on to, again, a largely discursive review of the
wide range of relevant criminal activities that might require
the attention of the forensic accountant. He also addresses risk
management issues in relation to IT systems, brieﬂy including
the cloud, and the process of investigation. Hopwood et al.,
[33] have a similar structure but give a little greater weight to
forensic science and computer forensics.
From the computer science camp, Choo and Dehghantanha
[36], a more scholarly work, reﬂects a greater weight placed on
technical issues, the tools and techniques needed, for forensic
cloud investigations. Almulla et al., [37] review the cloud
forensic literature and ﬁnd some discursive, though many
technical papers.
Issues requiring computer forensic audit are likely to in-
volve the stealing of money, the stealing of monetizable data or
the misrepresentation of data to personal or group advantage.
These are areas which accountants have strived to address over
decades in less technical and complex settings. It would seem
logical that their group learning over time would have some
relevance and currency to the new cloud situation.
Like most professions, accountants have well organised
professional exams. The Association of Chartered Certiﬁed
Accountants (ACCA), an international professional body with
over 200,000 members [38], has an exam at its professional
stage, Advanced Auditing and Assurance [39], that includes
a section on forensic audit though it should be noted that it
is only a small part. It would seem that qualiﬁed accountants
are ill-prepared for the complexities of the cloud environment,
both in terms of understanding the environmental issues,
though there is accessible material for them to pick up some
of this (see Taylor [35] and Hopwood et al., [33]), as well
as comprehending the technical ones, which would be a far
more complex and difﬁcult step. Whilst there are a few small
organisations focusing on forensic accounting and audit, these
appear peripheral (for example..), it does not seem that many
qualiﬁed accountants have moved into this more rareﬁed space
by adding years of further learning to their accounting badge.
From the other direction, computer specialists clearly have
an understanding of the technology and some understanding
of the softer environmental, legal and behavioural issues (see
Choo and Dehghantanha [36]) though little if any accounting
awareness.
So, it would seem, that apart from a few exceptional, mo-
tivated, highly skilled individuals there is not yet a signiﬁcant
body that balances the three areas in the venn diagram below.
The diagram is, of course, highly simplistic intending to just
give a broad view of the difﬁculties in bringing the wide
range of knowledge and experience required for forensic cloud
investigation.
Whilst there are many audit tools, the computing lit-
erature already uses the “audit trail” [37] when discussing
evidence integrity, however in previous work [40]–[43], we
have questioned the level of development of these audit trails
and whether all the lessons from the rich accounting history
in this area have been taken on board. One stark difference
between the accounting approach and the computing one is
that of redundancy. To the accountant, there is an expectation
of keeping more rather than less, with computer scientists
having a focus on efﬁciency and minimising costs. Another
is some level of agreement on what should be in an audit trail.
For example, Bernstein [44] sees the trail including: events,
logs, and the analysis of these, whilst Chaula [45] gives a
longer, more detailed list: raw data, analysis notes, preliminary
development and analysis information, processes notes, and so
on. Pearson et al. [9], as far back as 2010, accept that attaining
consistent, meaningful cloud audit trails is a goal rather than
reality. More worryingly, Ko et al. [21] point out that it is
possible to delete the audit trail along with a cloud instance,
meaning there is no record then remaining. Ko [46] details the
requirements for accountability.
V.
THE SPECIAL SKILLS MIX NEEDED FOR CLOUD
FORENSIC AUDIT
As we mentioned earlier, with modern cloud systems, we
no longer are able to enjoy the beneﬁts of the permanent
ink trail. While reasonable alternatives can be available with
conventional distributed network systems, this is not the case
for cloud systems. We discussed the Cloud Forensic Problem
earlier, and it is this security weakness inherent in cloud
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

systems that makes this job signiﬁcantly harder to accomplish
effectively.
When considering cloud forensic issues, it is now clear
that we can no longer afford to rely on conventional discipline
boundaries when trying to address these issues, as it is now
likely that all the disciplines affected are likely to suffer from a
potentially signiﬁcant knowledge gap. Clearly, the cloud envi-
ronment is considerably different from conventional distributed
network models under the sole control of a company. There are
also a great many actors involved in such an environment, each
potentially with its own agenda. Legal and regulatory issues
are a lot less clearly deﬁned for cloud environments, with the
increased likelihood of multiple companies and jurisdictions.
We also have to contend with a number of uninvited actors
— namely, the attackers and the intruders, with the latter
presenting the greater challenge.
Figure 1. The Area of Desired Expertise
This means we can no longer consider addressing cloud
forensic audit from an insular perspective, since accountants,
computer scientists and legal, regulatory and other actors
within the cloud environment will all suffer from incomplete
knowledge, which rather suggests there are likely to be weak-
nesses in their various individual approaches. Equally, in the
absence of the solid ‘ink trail’, this increases the complexity
of the task exponentially. In Figure ﬁg:venn, we show the
overlapping Area of Desired Expertise that is needed for all
three disciplines to fully understand where this knowledge gap
needs to be addressed.
Currently, when it comes to Cloud, intruders have it all
their own way. Once they are in the system, it is merely a
matter of time until they have sufﬁcient privileges to delete
the forensic trail, thus allowing them to bed down for the
long run. Since they are likely to be deleting all audit and
forensic trails as they go, this also means an increase in
difﬁculty, verging on the impossible, for data controllers to
safely keep the organisation fully compliant with all regulatory
and legislative requirements they must adhere to in order to
achieve compliance, security and privacy.
There are, therefore, two major goals that must be dealt
with. First, we need to restore the permanent ‘ink trail’ so that
we have something to follow, and this is where the immutable
audit trail process comes in. Second, we have to ﬁll the various
knowledge gaps to ensure that all parties involved in Cloud
Forensic Audit are fully up to speed. This will come down to
a combination of collaboration and proper training. This latter
is outside the scope of this paper, but the ﬁrst is very much a
part of it, and we discuss this further in the next section.
VI.
THE IMMUTABLE DATABASE
We can see that compliance with the GDPR is not a readily
achievable goal that can be easily met by any organisation
using Cloud services, due to the difﬁculties associated with
the Cloud Forensic Problem. Thus, we must ensure we create
and maintain both a secure forensic and audit trail in order to
have any chance of making this happen.
We need to consider very carefully exactly what we need to
log to ensure we can achieve compliance with the GDPR. This
means we need to monitor our Cloud instances, we need to
monitor who is accessing our systems and we need to monitor
what is happening with our database systems.
We start by considering our Cloud instances. As Duncan
and Whittington have shown in [41] [47] [42], a working
solution can be found using an immutable database at its
core to record all the relevant information we would require.
This means we must ﬁrst consider carefully exactly what that
information should be.
We would want to log all signiﬁcant events as they transpire
during the life cycle of each Cloud instance, with the ﬁrst
signiﬁcant event being the creation of the Cloud instance, and
the last being the shutting down of that instance. Under normal
circumstances, these, and all other lifetime events, would be
logged on the instance itself. This, as we know from Ko et al.
[21], is a dangerous thing to do; thus our ﬁrst step will be to
ensure this data is logged additionally onto an external secure
immutable database to ensure it achieves full persistence.
This external database must run on a dedicated secure
server, protected by an Intrusion Detection System (IDS), and
the database must be immutable, i.e., append only. This secure
server will also use dedicated software agents to police the
activities being logged, so that the occurrence of any signif-
icant event (such as the shutting down of a Cloud instance)
will be instantly identiﬁed and reported for approval/further
investigation.
Turning to the question of who is using our systems, we
want to understand who is logging in to our systems, where
they come from and what they do once they have successfully
logged in. Thus we must capture the relevant detail from
the access logs. The detail of how this may be carried out
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

will depend on the systems architecture deployed, the type of
access control credentials used and means of controlling access
to the various systems available to speciﬁc users. A multi-
factor authentication approach is always better than access by
password. Proper logging of each step in the process is also
always preferable.
Once a user gains access to any system, we still want
to know where the user came from, and we certainly want
to know what the user is doing with the system after they
gain access. Thus we should be logging all the steps that
the user takes, regardless of whether access is via physical
presence or via remote login. In other words, we need to log
every single query made or instruction given to the system.
We might wish to consider whether we want to record what
the result of that query would be, since this might generate
inordinate amounts of data in the case of a database query.
Whatever we decide is required, we must ensure a separate
copy of the queries recorded are stored into our dedicated
secure immutable database. It is clear that redundancy can be
a good thing.
VII.
DISCUSSION
Having devloped a workable solution to this problem, we
may well have some questions, such as:
•
How easy is it to implement?
•
How quickly and how well will interested parties
adhere to such a solution?
•
In the event of a breach, who will be responsible and
what might the consequences be?
The answer to the ﬁrst question is that we take the view
that this approach needs to be simple to implement and simple
to maintain. It is as simple as switching on the necessary
forensic and audit trail logging, then writing a chron job to
forward the resulting logs to the immutable database. Wherever
possible, such programmes should be set to immutable to make
it difﬁcult for attackers and intruders to delete them. A regular
check on the conﬁguration ﬁles would also be a useful thing
to do.
For the second question, it is likely that the easier some-
thing is to implement, the more likelihood that it will be imple-
mented. It is not challenging to implement, nor to maintain,
and the cnsequences of failing to do so could have a huge
adverse impact, so there is a considerable incentive to both
implement and maintain this approach.
As to the third question, it is not a question of ‘in the
event of a breach’, but rather a case of accepting there will
be breaches, and these are likely to be a continuous feature.
As soon as a breach occurs, a forensic trail will be generated
and stored both within the Cloud instance , as well as in the
off-site immutable database. Under normal circumstances, the
attacker will now attempt to dig deep, escalate privileges and
delete the forensic trail. The longer the intruder remains inside
the system, the more likelihood that a successful deletion of
the audit trail will take place. However, with a covert copy of
the forensic and audit trail data available, this will allow some
potentially fruitful investigative work to take place.
In the event that an attack against the Cloud instance is
successful, where will liability sit? The GDPR regulation is
quite clear. In the event of a breach, the Data Controller has a
legal obligation to notify the Supervisory Authority within 72
hours of becoming aware of a breach. Individuals must also
be notiﬁed in the event that encryption is not used. Clearly the
use of encryption would be a prudent approach to minimise
the impact of the breach, as well as the amount of any possible
ﬁne.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have seen that compliance with the EU GDPR for all
Cloud users is likely to present a signiﬁcant challenge. Without
special measures being taken, it is likely that compliance will
prove impossible to achieve. This is likely to expose such
Cloud users to the full force of the penalties of this regulation,
which are signiﬁcant.
It is clear that a minimal requirement will be to generate
both a secure forensic trail and an audit trail, in order to
have the basic requirements to be able to consider fulﬁlling
the regulatory requirements in the event of a breach. Without
this in place, it is likely to be impossible to comply with
the legislation, thus rendering the organisation liable to some
serious penalties.
In this paper, we have identiﬁed the particular issues that
companies who are Cloud users and are liable to be GDPR
compliant must be able to deal with. There is no point in
relying on Cloud service providers to take care of this matter.
The company data controller is accountable to the regulator
for ensuring the company is compliant, and without both a
forensic trail and a full audit trail for the PII held on behalf of
EU residents, then compliance will not be possible. This will
lead to potentially massive ﬁnes being applied — a situation
that is potentially avoidable.
We are in the process of building a miniature real life Cloud
system on which to test our ideas. The server will run a full
Cloud management system, which will be used to run a number
of independent Cloud instances, all of which will run web
servers with database back ends to replicate the approach of
many Cloud users. This will be subject to rigorous attack, with
the view to discover whether the immutable database approach
can allow Cloud users to be GDPR compliant.
We have a range of permutations to test, and we seek to
ﬁnd the optimum solution providing the right balance between
usability, performance, cost and ease of dealing with breaches.
We shall be reporting our results later this year, and we will be
working towards delivering a workable solution to keep Cloud
users compliant.
REFERENCES
[1]
EU, “EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),” 2017. [Online].
Available: http://www.eugdpr.org/ [Retrieved: December 2017]
[2]
T. Takahashi, Y. Kadobayashi, and H. Fujiwara, “Ontological Approach
toward Cybersecurity in Cloud Computing Categories and Subject De-
scriptors,” in Science And Technology, 2010, pp. 100–109.
[3]
L. M. Vaquero, L. Rodero-Merino, J. Caceres, and M. Lindner, “A Break
in the Clouds: Towards a Cloud Deﬁnition,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer
Communication Review, vol. 39, no. 1, 2008, p. 50.
[4]
M. Alhamad, T. Dillon, C. Wu, and E. Chang, “Response Time for Cloud
Computing Providers,” Response, 2010, pp. 8–10.
[5]
D. Durkee, “Why Cloud Computing Will Never Be Free,” Communica-
tions of the ACM, vol. 53, no. 5, may 2010, p. 62.
[6]
S. Fraser et al., “Cloud Computing Beyond Objects: Seeding the Cloud,”
Communications, 2009, pp. 847–850.
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[7]
A. Haeberlen, “A Case for the Accountable Cloud,” ACM SIGOPS
Operating Systems Review, vol. 44, no. 2, 2010, p. 52.
[8]
S. Pearson, “Towards Accountability in the Cloud,” IEEE Internet
Computing, vol. 15, no. 4, jul 2011, pp. 64–69.
[9]
S. Pearson and A. Benameur, “Privacy, Security and Trust Issues Arising
from Cloud Computing,” in 2010 IEEE Second International Conference
on Cloud Computing Technology and Science, no. December. Ieee, nov
2010, pp. 693–702.
[10]
R. Buyya, C. S. Yeo, S. Venugopal, J. Broberg, and I. Brandic, “Cloud
computing and emerging IT platforms: Vision, hype, and reality for
delivering computing as the 5th utility,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, vol. 25, no. 6, 2009, p. 17.
[11]
L. M. Kaufman, “Data security in the world of cloud computing,” IEEE
Security and Privacy, vol. 7, no. 4, jul 2009, pp. 61–64.
[12]
P. Mell and T. Grance, “Effectively and Securely Using the Cloud
Computing Paradigm,” NIST, Information Technology Laboratory, vol
2, no 8, pp 304-311.
[13]
P. Mell and T. Grance, “ The NIST deﬁnition of cloud comput-
ing.,”Tech. Rep., 2011. [Online]. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-
145 [Retrieved: December 2017]
[14]
S. Bradshaw, C. Millard, and I. Walden, “Contracts for Clouds: Com-
parison and Analysis of the Terms and Conditions of Cloud Computing
Services,” International Journal of Law and Information Technology,
vol. 19, no. 3, 2011, pp. 187–223.
[15]
K. Hon, C. Millard, and I. Walden, “The Problem of ‘Personal Data’
in Cloud Computing - What Information is Regulated ?” 2011. [Online].
Available: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1562461 [Retrieved: December 2017]
[16]
M. Iansiti and G. L. Richards, “Economic Impact of Cloud Computing,”
Economics of Innovation and New Technology, vol. 7, no. 2000, 2010,
pp. 1–42.
[17]
N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, M. C. Mont, and R. K. L. Ko, “Towards
Greater Accountability in Cloud Computing through Natural-Language
Analysis and Automated Policy Enforcement,” Engineering, 2011, pp.
1–4.
[18]
Data
Protection
Working
Party,
“Opinion
05/2012
on
Cloud
Computing,”
2012.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/article-
29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/ﬁles/2012/wp196 en.pdf
[Retrieved: December 2017]
[19]
W. Jansen and T. Grance, “Guidelines on Security and Privacy
in Public Cloud Computing,” NIST, Tech. Rep. 7, 2011. [Online].
Available:
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-144/SP800-
144.pdf [Retrieved: December 2017]
[20]
N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, and M. C. Mont, “Towards Natural-
Language Understanding and Automated Enforcement of Privacy Rules
and Regulations in the Cloud: Survey and Bibliography,” Analysis, 2011,
pp. 1–9.
[21]
R. K. L. Ko et al, “TrustCloud: A framework for accountability and
trust in cloud computing,” Proceedings - 2011 IEEE World Congress on
Services, SERVICES 2011, 2011, pp. 584–588.
[22]
R. K. L. Ko, B. S. Lee, and S. Pearson, “Towards achieving account-
ability, auditability and trust in cloud computing,” Communications in
Computer and Information Science, vol. 193 CCIS, no. PART 4, 2011,
pp. 432–444.
[23]
S. Pearson and A. Charlesworth, “Accountability as a way forward for
privacy protection in the cloud,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics), vol. 5931 LNCS, no. December, 2009, pp.
131–144.
[24]
M.
Hammock,
“A
Review
of
the
Economics
of
Information
Security
Literature,”
pp.
1–38,
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1625853 [Retrieved: December 2017]
[25]
A. M. Froomkin, “Government Data Breaches,” Berkeley Technology
Law Journal, 2009, pp. 1–42.
[26]
Verizon, “2012 Data Breach Investigations Report,” Verizon, Tech. Rep.,
2012.
[27]
Verizon, “2016 Verizon Data Breach Report,” Tech. Rep., 2016.
[28]
D. Kossmann, T. Kraska, and S. Loesing, “An evaluation of alternative
architectures for transaction processing in the cloud,” in Proceedings of
the 2010 International Conference on Management of Data. Indianapolis,
Indiana: ACM Press, 2010, pp. 579–590.
[29]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing Cloud Security and Pri-
vacy: The Cloud Audit Problem,” in Submitted to Cloud Computing
2016, Rome, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[30]
A. A. A. C. to Prepare a Statement of Basic Accounting Theory, A
statement of basic accounting theory. American Accounting Association,
1966.
[31]
IASB, “IASB ED/2015/3 - Exposure Draft Conceptual Framework for
Financial Reporting Comments,” IASB, Tech. Rep., 2015.
[32]
”forensic, adj. and n.” OED Online. Oxford University Press, December
2017. [Retrieved: December 2017.]
[33]
W. S. Hopwood, J. J. Leiner, and D. G. R. Young, Forensic accounting
and fraud examination. McGraw-Hill, 2012.
[34]
NIST, “NIST Cloud Computing Forensic Science Challenges,” 2014,
p. 51.
[35]
J. Taylor, Forensic accounting. Financial Times Prentice Hall, 2011.
[36]
K.-K. Choo and A. Dehghantanha, “Contemporary Digital Forensics
Investigations of Cloud and Mobile Applications,” in Contemporary Dig-
ital Forensic Investigations of Cloud and Mobile Applications. Elsevier,
2017, pp. 1–6.
[37]
S. A. Almulla, Y. Iraqi, and A. Jones, “A State-of-the-Art Review of
Cloud Forensics,” Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, vol. 9,
no. 4, 2014, pp. 7–28.
[38]
ACCA, “ACCA celebrates hitting 200,000 members worldwide with a
global tour to honour each and every one,” London, 2018.
[39]
ACCA, “Advanced Audit and Assurance: Syllabus and Study Guide
September 2018 to September 2019,” 2017.
[40]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Compliance with standards, assurance
and audit: does this equal security?” in Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Security of Information and Networks - SIN ’14.
Glasgow: ACM, 2014, pp. 77–84.
[41]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing Cloud Security and Pri-
vacy: The Power and the Weakness of the Audit Trail,” in Cloud Com-
puting 2016: The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing,
GRIDs, and Virtualization, no. April. Rome: IEEE, 2016, pp. 125–130.
[42]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Creating an Immutable Database for
Secure Cloud Audit Trail and System Logging,” in Cloud Computing
2017: The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs,
and Virtualization. Athens, Greece: IARIA, ISBN: 978-1-61208-529-6,
2017, pp. 54–59.
[43]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Creating and Conﬁguring an Im-
mutable Database for Secure Cloud Audit Trail and System Log-
ging,” International Journal On Advances in Security, vol. 10, no.
3 & 4, 2017, pp. 155–166. [Online]. Available: ISSN: 1942-2636,
http://www.iariajournals.org/security/index.html [Retrieved: December
2017]
[44]
D. Bernstein, E. Ludvigson, K. Sankar, S. Diamond, and M. Morrow,
“Blueprint for the intercloud - Protocols and formats for cloud computing
interoperability,” in Proceedings of the 2009 4th International Conference
on Internet and Web Applications and Services, ICIW 2009, 2009, pp.
328–336.
[45]
J.
A.
Chaula,
“A
Socio-Technical
Analysis
of
Information
Systems
Security
Assurance:
A
Case
Study
for
Effective
Assurance,”
Ph.D.
dissertation,
2006.
[Online].
Available:
http://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&btnG=Search&q=intitle:A+
Socio-Technical+Analysis+of+Information+Systems+Security+Assurance
+A+Case+Study+for+Effective+Assurance#1
[Retrieved:
December
2017]
[46]
R. K. L. Ko, “Data Accountability in Cloud Systems,” in Security,
Privacy and Trust in Cloud Systems. Springer, 2014, pp. 211–238.
[47]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Cloud cyber-security: Empow-
ering the audit trail,” International Journal on Advances in Secu-
rity, vol. 9, no. 3 & 4, 2016, pp. 169–183. [Online]. Available:
https://www.iariajournals.org/security/tocv9n34.html [Retrieved: Decem-
ber 2017]
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

