Understanding Cloud Requirements - A Supply
Chain Lifecycle Approach
Maik A. Lindner
SAP Research
SAP Labs, LLC
Palo Alto, CA
m.lindner@sap.com
Fiona McDonald
SAP Research
SAP (UK) Ltd.
Belfast, Northern Ireland
ﬁona.mcdonald@sap.com
Gerard Conway
Innovation Value Institute
National University of Ireland,
Maynooth, Ireland
gerard.conway@nuim.ie
Edward Curry
Digital Enterprise Research Institute
National University of Ireland,
Galway, Ireland
ed.curry@deri.org
Abstract—Cloud Computing is offering competitive advantages
to companies through ﬂexible and, scalable access to computing
resources. More and more companies are moving to cloud
environments; therefore understanding the requirements for this
process is both important and beneﬁcial. The requirements for
migrating from a traditional computing environment to a cloud
hosting environment are discussed in this paper, considering this
migration from a supply chain lifecycle perspective. The cloud
supply chain is examined from a lifecycle perspective for the
management of the migration project. This paper illustrates the
requirements that need to be considered when adopting a cloud
migration strategy and the steps to take in order to manage this
process.
Index Terms—cloud computing; supply chain; cloud sourcing;
cloud lifecycle.
The cloud provides scalable, on-demand network access to
virtualised computing resources [1]. This is a very attractive
concept for enterprise Information Technology (IT) landscapes
to adapt. However as with any new concept or emerging tech-
nology, IT departments face challenges with the opportunities
being offered by the cloud. Some of the challenges include
security, privacy and lack of control. The physical location of
hardware in addition to who can access the data is not always
known which, can lead to security and privacy issues. As the
cloud is run by a cloud service provider, users have limited
control of factors such as maintenance or resource usage as
these are the responsibility of the cloud service provider.
Although cloud computing reduces capital expenditure by
using a pay-per-use model, there can be hidden costs in order
to ensure adequate backups and disaster recovery processes are
in place. Despite these drawbacks many companies still strive
for cloud adoption as the advantages more than compensate for
these drawbacks, e.g., the cost beneﬁts including, scalability
and ﬂexibility. Cloud computing resources can be ”right-sized”
to meet real-time requirements. When high capacity is needed
at peak times the cloud can provide additional resources on-
demand, these can be instantly adjusted when less capacity is
needed. The functional beneﬁts of cloud computing consist of
increased response times as well as instant software updates
that are automatically provided. Other beneﬁts of the cloud
include resource beneﬁts, as employees can access information
anywhere and can focus on high priority tasks rather than the
routine maintenance tasks. These are a selection of the reasons
enterprises want to move to the cloud.
Businesses in the cloud computing area are interconnected
by what is known as the cloud supply chain [2]. This can
be deﬁned as two or more parties linked by the provision
of cloud services, related information and funds [2]. These
businesses are involved in the end-to-end provision of products
and services from the cloud service provider for end cloud
customers. Within the cloud supply chain, there are several
components and actors. There always exists a product/service
at the beginning of the supply chain and a consumer at the
end who is requesting the product/service. E.g., on-demand
software could be the product/service that is provided by the
cloud service provider to the customer (cloud consumer) who
wants to use the software.
A well-deﬁned cloud supply chain is needed to encourage
the adoption of cloud computing. Not only are products and
services passed through the supply chain but also information
and funds. It is important to be aware of what and who is
involved in the cloud supply chain to understand the potential
of this new technology chain and how it is used to identify
the requirements of moving to the cloud. The cloud supply
chain clariﬁes the process involved with both providing and
consuming cloud services. Supply chains generally serve two
functions, a physical function which, is the production of
the product and transportation of all components to the right
place and a market mediation function which, ensures the
product meets market needs. A supply chain must be classiﬁed
according to its components and the end-product it supplies.
For a business to successfully utilise the cloud, it needs to
migrate some or all of its IT services to the cloud, and then
manage the new environment. The research undertaken has
shown that by using a cloud lifecycle [3] both the migration
and the on-going management of the cloud can be planned
and controlled to ensure success. The lifecycle provides a
mechanism of breaking down all of the activities required for
a move to the cloud, into discreet manageable steps which,
allows an organisation to seamlessly migrate its services,
whilst minimising the risk to the business.
The following sections of the paper are structured as fol-
lows: In Section 1, cloud computing is discussed on a company
level from a supply chain approach, and the different cloud
types and service models are considered as well as an analysis
of the cloud supply chain by identifying the actors within the
20
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

chain. In Section 2, the structural setup of the supply chain
is also considered based on the identiﬁed needs. Section 3
looks at the requirements from a lifecycle approach for cloud
migration and on-going management. Section 4 includes the
conclusions and future work.
I. INTRODUCING CLOUD COMPUTING ON A COMPANY
LEVEL - A SUPPLY CHAIN APPROACH
There are various models and ways in which, cloud com-
puting can beneﬁt a company. It is important to understand,
that there are multiple cloud types and service models that can
be adopted and these need to be considered as requirements.
Each company’s individual setup will determine the model and
the beneﬁts of these services. Based on the identiﬁed type of
cloud to use and the services needed, a supply chain setup
needs to be established and relevant partners and distribution
channels need to be chosen.
A. Service Models and Cloud Types
In order to understand the concept of the cloud supply chain,
it is important to be aware of what it is composed of. There
are different service models that need to be considered in the
cloud such as:
• Infrastructure as a Service- this focuses on providing the
resources for the service such as, network, memory and
storage capacity which, is essentially the primary stage
of the process.
• Platform as a Service - this is the second stage that
presents the user with an additional abstraction level for
software to run on or for the user to build on [4].
• Software as a Service - this provides complete turnkey
software applications that may be of interest to the users
and allows these to be fully-utilised using the cloud.
Each of these service models can be used more than once
in the cloud supply chain. As these not only provide single
services, they can also be combined to provide value-adding
services that act as single objects in the cloud supply chain.
These aggregated services can be made up of two or more
services, e.g., Infrastructure and Platform can be combined as
a service for software developers.
The different types of clouds that can be used to consume
cloud services are public, private, hybrid and community
clouds, and the decision to use a particular cloud can depend
on the individual business needs and requirements. However,
the current position of the company also needs to be consid-
ered. Firstly, the choice of the appropriate cloud to use depends
on the prerequisites within a company; if they have an existing
data center, they may be more likely to choose a private cloud
structure as their current data center can be reconstructed.
On the other hand, a company with no data center what so
ever may go for public cloud with zero upfront spending.
In practice, consumers use different cloud instances to fulﬁll
different requirements, e.g., they may use a private cloud for
data storage and a public cloud for everyday processes such as
e-mail. This leads to using a hybrid model which, allows the
Figure 1.
Composite Service Cloud
consumer to source from multiple clouds, therefore resulting
in better value and a customised service.
Hybrid landscapes can be deﬁned as an IT environment that
uses both public and private clouds. This type of cloud allows
users to take advantage of the scalability and reduction in
Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) yet still have the security of
a private cloud. Effective and efﬁcient management of hybrid
landscapes will allow for users to receive better beneﬁts and
an optimal service from the hybrid cloud. It is important to
consider the cloud types when determining the requirements
for migrating to the cloud.
Figure 1 illustrates the transfer of the service, information
and funds through the supply chain of each cloud and shows
how a hybrid cloud is made up of a combination of two or
more of these clouds. Looking at the area of cloud computing
from different perspectives raises the issue of conﬂicting aims
between the provider and consumer of the cloud services. We
will look at who is involved in each of these models and the
relationship between these.
B. The Cloud Supply Chain
Once a decision on a speciﬁc cloud type and service
setup has been made, the comprehensive supply chain can be
determined and built up. For this, relevant partners have to be
identiﬁed and a clear product structure has to be established.
The cloud supply chain is illustrated in Figure 2 showing
the components and actors within the chain. The product is
passed along the supply chain to the end-customer. The service
provider can provide the end-customer with just one service
(software, platform or infrastructure) or they can act as a
service aggregator and combine these services to provide a
composite service for the customer.
Accounting, billing and monitoring should also be consid-
ered throughout the cloud supply chain when understanding
requirements, as information and funds are passed through the
chain. As a continuous example of a public cloud provider, we
will use Amazon who provide an IT company with storage
using Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3). Various
21
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

Figure 2.
Cloud Supply Chain
actors and goods have to be considered to determine and
deﬁne a supply chain. The cloud service provider is an actor
who provides the service to the end-customer and they can
take various roles depending on whether they provide infras-
tructure, platform or software as a service. In this case the
service provider is Amazon who is providing the IT company
with storage for their data. Amazon can have direct contact
with the customer or they can act as a broker who uses the
service and combines it with other services in order to enrich
it. This depends on the needs of the IT company, so if they
know speciﬁcally the service they require, they can directly
communicate with Amazon for that service. If they are unsure
and only have an idea of what they need, they could use
a cloud broker, who will ﬁnd the best suited package from
a selection of service providers for the consumer. However,
sometimes if a broker is involved, the service provider is in
contact with the broker who then deals with the end-customer.
A broker combines and enriches the services provided by
Amazon with and by others to provide a composite service
for consumers (the IT company). Therefore, the product for
the end-customer is an enhanced service provided in a ﬂexible
manner. The broker communicates with the service provider
and the end-customer, therefore the IT company receives the
cloud service through the broker. It is important to maintain
visibility and transparency of all processes and data within
a supply network to ensure the end-product remains clear
and deﬁned. The end-customers usually consume a product
that is a single or composite service which, is provided by a
service provider over the cloud supply chain [2]. It is important
to examine the cloud supply chain and to be aware of the
requirements in order to decide whether a broker is preferred
to receive a cloud service. With many actors involved, it is
important to maintain clarity and visibility within the supply
chain especially when it can become quite complex.
As well as the actors in the supply chain, the components
and structural setup needs to be considered when determining
the requirements of a cloud project.
II. STRUCTURAL SETUP OF THE SUPPLY CHAIN BASED ON
IDENTIFIED NEEDS
The setup of the supply chain depends on the needs and
requirements of the organisation. This section discusses the
components of the supply chain and considers the possible
complexities involved.
A. Components Within the Supply Chain
Components within the supply chain that lead to costs
include the management and restructuring of services, infor-
mation and funds. The typical payment model for cloud is pay-
per-use, however providers such as Salesforce and Microsoft
use a subscription based model for payment of their services.
The pay-per-use model is one of the key beneﬁts that outweigh
the traditional method of ﬁxed-rate exploitation. These funds
ﬂow from the service provider to the cloud infrastructure
provider who provides the IT infrastructure. However it can
be considered that this can ﬂow the opposite way in some
circumstances if there has been a violation in the Service Level
Agreement (SLA), which, would result in a compensation
penalty from the supplier.
B. Implications of a Complex Supply Chain
In order for users to receive the best possible service to
fulﬁll their requirements, it is important to consider that more
than one type of cloud can be used in the supply chain. Using
a number of various components such as services or types of
clouds can cause the supply chain to be complex and this needs
to be considered. Depending on user requirements or company
requirements, one cloud may not be able to offer the complete
service they have requested. For example, a user/company
could request a service in a public cloud but require some
of the data to be in a local cloud, i.e., within a certain region.
Therefore the cloud could outsource this portion of the service
temporarily to a cloud within their desired region in order to
22
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

be able to offer the consumer the full package. In-sourcing
of previously outsourced solutions to the cloud can also be
considered, so the data in the local cloud could be moved back
to the original when required. The different types of clouds can
work as a synergy to provide the best service for the consumer.
From a consumer perspective, the consumers are receiving
the optimal service to meet their needs as a result of the hybrid
model as well as a more efﬁcient supply chain. By choosing
to outsource non-core service capabilities to the public cloud,
it will allow them to develop a dynamic service supply chain
[5]. Most consumers would not choose to outsource their core
service capabilities as they are more secure within their private
cloud.
On the other hand, from a provider perspective running e.g.,
a private cloud within a business, at seasonal or event-based
peak of trafﬁc, they can move their data or applications to an
external cloud to cope with the surge of work. When the work
calms down to the normal pace, they can in-source their data or
applications back into their private cloud. This eliminates the
need to purchase additional hardware and software for those
peak times only, saving costs in the short-term and long-term.
This process of leasing compute capacity from an external
cloud in peak times is called cloud bursting. It is useful if
additional compute capacity is required in a short period of
time, as this can be leased from a cloud service provider
for the required time. The resources acquired from the cloud
service provider are, secured, provisioned, and made available
to load balancers so they then have the ability to manage
the additional requests. This can happen on an approved,
scheduled, or as-needed basis [6]. From an internal IT provider
perspective, with a setup of an internal cloud, cloud sourcing
and cloud bursting offer numerous cost and value beneﬁts to
their business. From an end-consumer perspective, all of the
advantages of using cloud are relevant, as well as the additional
beneﬁt of receiving the best possible solution to meet their
needs through the use of the hybrid model as long as all of
the initial requirements are fulﬁlled.
By analysing the cloud supply chain, the technical re-
quirements for migrating to the cloud can be identiﬁed. As
discussed, the type of clouds need to be considered and
whether more than one cloud will be used, as well as the
number of services required, what pricing model suits best
and whether to use a broker or directly contact a cloud service
provider.
III. THE CLOUD LIFECYCLE
Management of this process can be carried out by using the
cloud lifecycle. This represents the process of moving from
a traditional to a cloud infrastructure. This section describes
each of the steps in the lifecycle and how the supply chain
plays an active role in this process.
The lifecycle has four phases and eight steps that have been
proposed to follow in order to manage the process of migrating
to the cloud. It is an improvement cycle, therefore allowing
the process to be evaluated and improved continually. Each
step is explained in the following section.
Figure 3.
Cloud Lifecycle
A. Steps of the Lifecycle
Phase 1: Architecture
1) Investigate
This step provides an insight and understanding of what
the organisation wants to achieve by moving to the
cloud and what goals and expectations are to be met.
This will be based on an analysis of the appropriate
industrial segment, with insights from experts and
experiences from peer organisations, together with
knowledge of potential suppliers.
Outputs:
• IT strategy for cloud computing
• Strategic intent of moving to the cloud and how it
progresses the business objectives
• Intelligence document on service offerings and
providers
• A document describing what will be achieved
by comparing the strategic requirements with the
available services and providers
2) Identify
The purpose of this step is to objectively assess what
areas of the business are appropriate to outsource to
the cloud and what impact this will have on the current
delivery model. This will require an understanding of
the current state, so that it can be compared to the
desired future state. At least, the impact on the service,
people, cost, infrastructure, stakeholders and how it will
23
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

be managed should be considered.
Outputs:
• List of services to be outsourced to the cloud
• Outsourcing delivery model
• The current and future states of the IT structure
3) Implementation Strategy
The aim of this step is to deﬁne at a strategic level
how the services that are to be outsourced will be
rolled out. This will document how key decisions will
be made later on, by deﬁning strategies on stafﬁng,
communication, program roll-out and risk assessment.
Outputs:
• Program Roll-out strategy
• Communication strategy
• Strategy to manage staff impacted by the migration
to cloud
4) Business Design
This step involves designing what is to be outsourced
to the cloud and what the future state will look like.
It will detail the new service, how it will be managed,
how it interfaces to the existing/remaining systems,
and how it will be monitored and reported. It exists to
provide requirements with sufﬁcient detail to have a
meaningful conversation with suppliers so that they can
be objectively compared, based on cost and quality of
service.
Outputs:
External
• Contact template
• Service Level Agreement (SLA)
• Pricing model
Internal
• The future Enterprise Architecture with support and
technical interfaces
• How the contract negotiations will be managed
• How the supplier will be managed
Phase 2: Engagement
5) Selection
Based on the requirements and the other criteria deﬁned
by the Architect phase, this step will select the best
supplier based on value, sustainability and quality.
Outputs:
• Tender process
• Evaluation criteria
• Short-list of suitable suppliers with caveats
• Due diligence report
6) Negotiation and Sign-off
The purpose of this step is to pick the preferred
supplier(s), complete the ﬁnal negotiation, get internal
approval and then sign the contract.
Outputs:
• Negotiation strategy
• Results of the negotiation
• Signed ﬁnal documents: Contract, SLA and Pricing
document
Phase 3: Operate
7) Operational Roll-out
This step involves putting together a transition project
team that will manage the transition of the agreed
services to the new cloud environment. This will require
the transition of the service itself, the management
of staff impacted, communication to all stakeholders,
knowledge retention / transition and acceptance sign-off.
Outputs:
• Roll-out plan
• Progress updates
• Signed acceptance document
8) Management of the Supply Chain
The aim of this step is to manage the new environment as
efﬁciently and effectively as possible. The organisation
will need to adapt to the new setup particularly at
management
level,
rather
than
directly
managing
internal resources. The requirement will be to manage
the supplier and in particular the supplier relationship.
This will require effective monitoring and control so
that issues, variations and disputes can be resolved to
both parties satisfaction.
Outputs:
• Day to day performance metrics
• Status on issues, problems, variations and disputes
• Supplier meeting minutes
• Change management report
• Audit reports
Phase 4: Regenerate
9) Review
This step is important to review the service based on
requirements of the service itself, other changes within
the business, changes within the supplier organisation
or the need to change supplier.
24
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

Outputs:
• Intelligence report for next generation options
• Supplier audit results
• Business case for any proposed changes
B. Inﬂuence of the Supply Chain
The lifecycle is intended to provide an organisation with a
management structure to assess the following:
1) The readiness/maturity of an organisation to move to the
cloud.
2) Once they are migrated, assess how the organisation is
managing the new environment on a day-to-day basis.
3) Assess what new services can be moved to a cloud
environment.
The lifecycle interfaces with the supply chain in a number
of ways as follows:
• In the Architect phase when deciding what services to
move to the cloud and what suppliers can provide, this
will set the scene on what is technically viable to move
to the cloud.
• The Engage phase will determine what supplier will be
used and if they can deliver the requested services to the
required levels of reliability and quality.
• The Operate phase is the most critical as the chosen
service(s) will be migrated and then become the respon-
sibility of the chosen supplier. If the lifecycle is used
correctly this phase should run smoothly, otherwise either
the migration will fail or once migrated the service will
not be at the required levels to support the business.
• The ﬁnal Regenerate phase will assess the current sup-
plier and cater for the migration of new services.
In summary the lifecycle and the supply chain are
intrinsically linked and for the lifecycle to be successful there
is a dependency on a fully functioning, ﬂexible and robust
supply chain.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In conclusion, the paper analyzed the requirements that
need to be considered for migrating from a traditional IT
environment to the cloud from a supply chain approach. The
paper looked at the area of cloud computing in relation to
organisations and the various beneﬁts and problems associated
with this. The supply chain was explained as well as the
different types of cloud and different service models within
cloud computing. The cloud supply chain was illustrated
through the diagram as well as an explanation of the various
actors and components within it and how these interact. The
paper focused on the structural setup of the supply chain and
how it is composed and considered the possible complexity
of the supply chain taking into consideration the number of
clouds and services used at once within it. This introduced
the area of cloud bursting and showed the beneﬁts from both
a consumer and provider perspective of this process. The
management of the migration process is described through
the use of a cloud lifecycle. Each of the steps within the
lifecycle were identiﬁed and the steps that were inﬂuenced
by the cloud supply chain were discussed. Overall, by using
the cloud supply chain, the technical requirements for a move
to cloud can be identiﬁed and the cloud lifecycle can be used
to manage the migration and the ongoing improvement of the
cloud environment.
Future work includes the assessment of the cloud lifecycle
process to measure how effective it is in helping organisations
move to the cloud. This would allow for further improvements
to the cycle and possibly lead to a more efﬁcient migration
process. In relation to the supply chain, cloud supply chain
management and controlling would be a future topic of in-
terest. This would consist of the management from the cloud
service provider to the end-cloud consumer including all of the
components across the supply chain such as, cloud services,
information and funds.
V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The work presented in this paper has been funded in part by
Enterprise Ireland under Grant CC/2009/0801 and by Science
Foundation Ireland under Grant No. SFI/08/CE/I1380 (Lion-
2).
REFERENCES
[1] G. Conway ”Introduction to Cloud Computing”, White Paper, Innova-
tion Value Institute, Jan 2011 http://ivi.nuim.ie/publications/IVI-Exec-
Brieﬁng-Intro-to-Cloud-Computing.pdf, 28.06.2011
[2] M. A. Lindner et al., ”Cloud supply chain: A framework for information,
monitoring, accounting and billing,” CloudComp 2010, Springer Verlag,
2010
[3] S. Cullen, P. Seddon, and L. Willcocks, ”Managing outsourcing: The life
cycle imperative,” MIS Quarterly Executive Vol. 4, No.1, Mar 2005
[4] L. M. Vaquero, L. Rodero-Merino, J. Caceres, and M. Lindner, ”A break
in the clouds: Towards a cloud deﬁnition, ACM SIGCOMM, Vol 39 No.1
Jan 2009
[5] Ca technologies, ”Can you harness clouds without creating storms,” Nov
2010,
http://www.ithound.com/abstract/harness-clouds-creating-storms-
5720, 28.06.2011
[6] S. Somashekar, ”Opportunities for the cloud in the enterprise,”’
Jan 2010, http://www.ca.com/es/whitepapers/collateral.aspx?cid=230175,
28.06.2011
25
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

