Trust Managemement Parameters in Cloud Computing Environments 
 
 
Zafeiroula Georgiopoulou 
Department of Digital Systems,  
University of Piraeus  
Piraeus, Athens 
e-mail: roulageorgio@ssl-unipi.gr 
Costas Lambrinoudakis 
Department of Digital Systems,  
University of Piraeus  
Piraeus, Athens 
e-mail: clam@unipi.gr
 
Abstract— In cloud computing environments, successful trust 
management can compensate the countermeasures that have 
been adopted for mitigating the security and privacy risks that 
the cloud comes across. This paper identifies the parameters 
that a trust model should include. These parameters are 
presented together with a detailed analysis of how, each of 
them, could be applied/utilized by the trust model for 
quantifying the trust of the cloud providers to their users. 
Keywords- Cloud Computing; Trust; Trust Managemen;’ 
Trust Models; Privacy; Trust metric 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cloud computing is a technology that has emerged in all 
aspects of modern Information Technology infrastructure 
providing 
comparative 
advantages 
to 
organizations. 
However, this deployment and cloud tenancy create major 
security concerns and loss of trust that mainly comes with 
the loss of physical perimeter control. During the previous 
years, several scientists have addressed the issue of proper 
trust management [1].   
A fine-tuned trust management would be a very good 
countermeasure for many security and privacy risks in cloud 
environments. The main reason for such a conclusion is that 
having in place proper trust management mechanisms, users 
can select providers based on their requirements and 
trustworthiness and, at the same time, providers can reject or 
accept users based on how trustful they are.  
The novelty of the trust management model proposed in 
this paper is that it allows cloud providers to monitor in real-
time the users of their services. Based on our previous 
literature review research [1], we propose a list of trust 
parameters, together with an in depth description of how 
trust 
management 
can 
be 
applied 
per 
parameter. 
Furthermore, the proposed model includes a trust metric that 
will be capitalized for quantifying trust [3]. 
The structure of the paper is as follows: The next section 
defines the trust modeling parameters that should be 
considered for facilitating proper trust management of the 
users by the cloud providers. Section III explains how the 
aforementioned trust parameters could be combined in order 
to produce the “trust metric” that will quantify the trust of 
cloud providers to their users. The last section concludes the 
paper and provides pointers for future work. 
II. 
TRUST PARAMETERS 
Defining the correct trust parameters is a key point for 
successful trust management. They should take into account 
all the aspects and factors of a cloud architecture that could 
affect trust. The proposed list of trust parameters follows 
next. 
A. Trusted Access Points 
A user typically connects to the cloud from a pre-defined 
range of devices. By device we mean any electronic device 
that a cloud user could employ for accessing cloud services 
(Laptops, desktops, mobile phones, tablets, etc.). The range 
of devices that have been already used for connecting to the 
cloud, and thus fulfill the security policy criteria of the 
provider, will be referred as “Trusted Access Points”.  
A trust security policy should take into account the 
access point and extra attention should be paid in the case of 
new devices. In favor of “Trusted Access Points”, a table 
with the principal characteristics per device, as listed next, 
should be maintained in a central repository within the 
perimeter of the cloud provider. 
a) User ID: Uniquely identifies every user in the cloud. 
b) Unique Device ID: Uniquely identifies each device 
that a client is utilizing to access the cloud. This unique 
identifier is the result of a salted encrypted combination of 
the Device Type and its MAC address.  
c) Type: Categorization of device (Mobile, Laptop, 
Desktop, Tablet etc.) 
d) Operating System: The device’s operating system 
will be stored since it affects the security parameters.  For 
instance, an Android device is considered less safe from a 
Windows Server device. 
e) Date of Last Connection: Information on the date 
and time that a specific device accessed the cloud. 
All the above will be maintained from a “Trusted Access 
Point Agent”, which will monitor the devices employed by 
each user. 
Every time that a user requires to access the cloud an 
identification / authorization process will be invoked 
specifically for the purposes of the “Trusted Access Point”. 
The identification part aims to verify if the user’s device has 
been already whitelisted, by checking a central repository 
named “Trusted Access Points”. If the user attempts to 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

access the cloud with an unknown device, a security flag will 
be raised, initiating a process  that will check whether the 
specific device can be included in the Trusted Access Points 
repository or not. 
The unknown devices must be identified and should 
fulfill the security policy’s minimum requirements. For 
instance, mobile devices can be prohibited from the security 
policy [4]. 
B. Location 
Determining the geo-location of a device is the process of 
defining, in a precise manner, the latitude/longitude 
coordinates of the device together with some other 
characteristics like country, city, address, zip code and time 
zone. Based on Isaca’s definitions [5], Geolocation data are 
generated and collected either in an active mode, referred as 
user-device-based geolocation, or in a passive mode, referred 
as table look-up or data correlation server-based geolocation. 
Table 1 [5] summarizes these modes and the technologies 
that each mode employs. 
TABLE I.  
MODES OF GEOLOCATION DATA GENERATION AND 
COLLECTION 
 
Mode 
Collection Method 
Technologies Involved 
Active: 
User—
Device-
based 
• 
Uses 
firmware 
and 
software 
on 
user’s 
computer 
or 
wireless 
device 
• Location determined via 
GPS 
chip 
and/or 
triangulation using cellular 
tower information 
• Request-response model 
• GPS 
• Assisted GPS (A-GPS) 
•Wi-Fi—Wireless 
positioning 
• 3G/4G 
•Mobile 
applications—
iPhone, Android devices, 
BlackBerry® 
Passive: 
Data-
lookup—
Sever-
based 
Involves use of third-party 
geolocation 
service 
providers, e.g., Quova®, 
NetGeo,Bering Media 
• Based on nonlocation-
specific 
IP 
address 
acquired from user device 
or service set identifiers 
(SSIDs) 
for 
wireless 
networks 
• Correlation with stored IP 
or 
SSID 
databases 
obtained from 
purchase 
records, 
user-provided 
information, 
network 
analysis of trace routes and 
domain 
name 
system 
(DNS) host names 
• 
IP 
location—Whois 
lookup, 
DNS 
LOC, 
geographic 
names 
in 
domain name user or 
application information, 
timing data using ping 
inference 
based 
on 
routing 
data, 
e.g., 
traceroute monitoring of 
Internet service provider 
(ISP) networks 
• 3G/4G 
•Wi-Fi—Wireless 
positioning 
 
A far as privacy issues are concerned, the proposed 
model will need the IP Geolocation. Assuming that an 
accurate method for retrieving the location of a cloud client 
exists, we will consider how this affects the trustfulness of 
the client, justifying the fact that a trust security policy 
should take into account geolocation information [5]-[8].  
A user usually accesses the cloud from specific locations. 
This range of locations will be referred as “Trusted 
Geolocation Coordinates”. To maintain this information, the 
main characteristics of each user location, as listed next, will 
be recorded in a central repository within the perimeter of the 
cloud provider.  
a) User ID: Uniquely identifies every user in the 
cloud 
b) Location: Latitude and longitude coordinates of 
each user location 
c) IP address: The IP address that the user is utilizing 
to access the cloud 
d) City: The City from which the user is accessing the 
cloud 
e) Zip: The Zip code of the user’s access location  
f) 
Time Zone: The Time Zone of the user’s location 
g) Last Access: Information about the date and the 
time that a user accessed the cloud for the last time 
form a specific location.  
All the above will be maintained from the “Location 
Agent”. Then, an allowed zone of latitude/longitude 
coordinates will be defined that a user could be pinpointed. 
This zone comes from the combination of coordinates and an 
acceptable distance that has been specified at the initial 
configuration of the model. Every time a user accesses the 
cloud an identification and authorization method regarding 
geolocation characteristics is initiated. The identification 
process checks a central repository named “Trusted 
Geolocation Coordinates”, in order to verify if the user has 
been allowed before to access the cloud from the same 
location and its allowed perimeter. If the user is trying to 
access the cloud from an unknown location a security flag is 
raised until a decision of whether that location should, or 
should not, be included in the list of trusted locations is 
reached. Clearly, the Location Agent should invoke 
mechanisms against IP spoofing. 
C. Behavior 
In all types of systems (cloud and conventional), a user 
follows a similar pattern of actions (behavior). In other 
words, the behavior of a user is expected to be similar within 
different sessions [1] [10]. 
A trust security policy should take into account the 
behavior characteristics of its users. More specifically it is 
necessary to monitor the data that a user is typically 
accessing and to consider cases of abnormal behavior. The 
typical user behavior, in terms of the data that he is accessing 
and the actions that he is performing, will be referred as 
“Trusted Behavior”.  In order to monitor the behavior of a 
user the cloud provider should monitor the following 
information. 
a) User ID: Uniquely identifies every user in the 
cloud. 
b) Application Unit: During the initialization of the 
proposed model, the cloud resources are logically 
separated in isolated application units.  
c) Authorization granted: Boolean value of whether 
the user has the appropriate rights to access the 
specific application unit. 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

d) Type of action: Monitors the user actions; i.e. the 
user tried to view, write, update or delete 
information. 
e) Last Action: Information about the date and the 
time that a user performed a specific action. 
The audit trail for data access, maintained in the “Trust 
Behavior Table”, will be aggregated by the Trust Behavior 
Agent. Indicative overall aggregated values follow: 
a) The average number of accesses to each data 
category. 
b) The average user throughput (bandwidth for 
upload and download). 
c) Volume of data transfers from CSP to the user. 
d) Volume of data transfers from the user to CSP. 
e) Average duration of user access. 
f) 
Unauthorized 
modification 
or 
view 
access 
endeavors. 
The thresholds related to data access should be clearly 
defined. As a minimum, one threshold for every aggregated 
value is needed.  The Trust Behavior Agent will monitor all 
users’ data accesses and if any of the aforementioned 
thresholds has been violated a security warning will be raised 
from the agent. A relevant algorithm will process the 
information and will decide if the specific user should be 
excluded from the trusted data access behavior or not. 
D. Resources 
A cloud user typically consumes specific resources while 
using the cloud. By Resources we refer to network and 
hardware components that the user consumes while 
connected to cloud. The various resources utilized by a user 
during a specific session will be monitored and will be 
referred as “Trusted Resources”. 
The trust security policy of the proposed model will take 
into account the resources consumed by a user and in case of 
excessive use a security warning will be issued.  In order to 
maintain a “Trusted Resources” table, the following 
information will be traced: 
a) User ID: Uniquely identifies every user in the 
cloud. 
b) Unique Device ID: Uniquely identifies each device 
that a client is utilizing. Maintained in the Trusted 
Access Point table. 
c) Session Length: The total session time. 
d) Bandwidth: Bandwidth of cloud network used. 
e) Device Memory: Device memory used; depicted as 
percentage of the total device memory. 
f) 
Cloud Memory: Cloud memory used; depicted as 
percentage of the total cloud memory. 
g) CPU Threads: CPU usage on user’s device. 
h) Network Ports: List of ports that the user it 
utilizing on the cloud. 
i) 
Volume of data sent: Number of bytes sent by the 
user during the current session. 
j) 
Volume of data received: Number of bytes received 
by the user during the current session. 
The above information will be maintained by a Trust 
Resource Agent. Thresholds, regarding the resource limits, 
are necessary. During each session the Trust Resource Agent 
will monitor the consumption of cloud resources and in case 
that the thresholds are violated a security warning will be 
issued.  
E. Authentication 
Another major parameter of the proposed trust model is 
the authentication behavior of the cloud user. To this end, the 
following information will be monitored: 
a) User ID : Uniquely identifies every user in the 
cloud. 
b) Unsuccessful Logins: Number of times that the user 
tried to access the cloud services without success.  
c) Token Used: Metric regarding the security of the 
tokens used 
d) Wrong 
authentication 
method: 
In 
cloud 
environments that support multiple authentication 
methods the endeavor to use the wrong method 
should be monitored. 
The above information will be processed by a “Trust 
Authentication Agent”. A trust authentication value per user 
will be calculated/updated, based on pre-defined values, 
during every authentication process. When the value for a 
user falls below a specific threshold, he will not be 
considered a trusted user any more. Log in will be banned 
and further procedures will be required in order to reestablish 
trust. 
F. Feedbacks 
In cases of outsourcing, feedback on consumers who had 
transactions with other service providers is required. 
Specifying a common feedback trust metric, regarding 
trustfulness, 
between 
providers, 
will 
facilitate 
the 
consideration of this information.  To this end a “Feedback 
Trust Table”, should be maintained in a central repository 
within the perimeter of the cloud provider: 
a) User ID : Uniquely identifies every user in the 
cloud. 
b) Unsuccessful Logins: Number of times that the user 
tried to access the cloud services without success.  
c) Token Used: Metric regarding the security of the 
tokens used 
d) Wrong 
authentication 
method: 
In 
cloud 
environments that support multiple authentication 
method the endeavor to use wrong method should 
be monitored. 
The above information will be processed by a 
“Provider’s Feedback Agent”. Every time a user endeavors 
to access the cloud, the agent will search the relevant table 
for feedbacks. If the overall feedback value is below a 
threshold, the user will not be considered trusted and relevant 
actions should be taken. 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

G. Access Point Security 
Since trust management is part of the security policy, it is 
evident that the security of the access point – user’s 
computer, phone tablet, etc. – should be taken into account 
as an important parameter in the trust metric. To this respect, 
a Security Evidence collector should be available on the 
provider’s side and assuming that the user gives his consent, 
the agent will collect information regarding the user’s device 
security. The most important items that should be checked 
are the following: 
a) Use of antivirus  
b) Use of firewall  
c) Operating System’s Updates and Patches are 
installed 
d) List of Software installed 
Based on the collected data, an access point security 
value will be assigned to every user’s device.  If the security 
value for a user device is below some threshold, it will not be 
allowed to enter the cloud. 
III. 
TRUST METRIC 
The definition of a Trust Metric facilitates the 
quantification of the degree to which a cloud user can be 
trusted by a cloud provider and it is necessary to establish 
trust between the two entities. A simple way to implement 
this trust metric could be the use of a binary discrete model 
where the trust values are set ‘high’, for a highly trusted 
entity, or ‘low’ for an untrusted entity.  
In order to measure trust with the proposed model, a 
metric that will quantify, in a general manner, the 
trustfulness of each user is necessary. The range of trust 
values (TV) is set to be between 0 to 10; 0 being the 
minimum trust value and 10 the maximum. Furthermore, the 
proposed trust metric will employ a weighting factor for 
every of the aforementioned trust parameters. The weighting 
factors will represent the importance of each trust parameter 
and are: 
 
WAP : Weighting of Trusted Access Point 
 
WL : Weighting of Geo-location characteristics 
 
WDA : Weighting of Data Access 
 
WR : Weighting of Resources  
 
WA : Weighting of Authentication 
 
WF : Weighting of Feedback 
 
WAS: Weighting of Access Point Security 
 
WFP1…N : Weighting of future parameters 
Weights will take values between 0 to 1. The proposed  
Trust Metric will be: 
TAP*WAP + TL*WL + TDA*WDA + TR*WR + TA*WA + TF*WF 
+ TAS*WAS + TFP1*WFP1 + TFP2*WFP2 +……. + TFPn*WFPn 
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK 
Cloud Computing is a widely accepted technology but it 
raises a lot of security issues. The goal of our work is to 
improve the current status by applying proper trust 
management methods and surpass security risks. In this 
paper the trust parameters that a cloud trust model should 
take into account are presented together with an analysis of 
how these parameters can be monitored. Furthermore, the 
need for a trust metric, that will quantify the trust of the 
cloud provider to the user, has been highlighted. 
For the future, we aim to provide an overall simulation of 
the proposed trust model, presenting experimental results 
from measurements of the trust parameters and the way they 
are used to calculate the trust metric.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially supported by the Research 
Center of the University of Piraeus. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Wenjuan, P. Lingdi, and P. Xuezeng, "Use trust 
management 
module 
to 
achieve 
effective 
security 
mechanisms 
in 
cloud 
environment," 
in 
International 
Conference on Electronics and Information Engineering 
(ICEIE), vol. 1, Kyoto, Japan, 2010, pp. 14-19. 
[2] Z. Georgiopoulou, C. Lambrinoudakis,“Literature Review of 
Trust 
Models 
for 
Cloud 
Computing”, 
International 
Conference On Cloud Computing And Big Data (CloudCom-
Asia), Hong Kong, 2016. 
[3] P. D. Manuel, T. Selve, and M. I. Abd-EI Barr, "Trust 
management system for grid and cloud resources" in First 
International Conference on Advanced Computing (ICAC 
2009), Chennai, India, 2009, pp. 176-181. 
[4] Y. Zhimin, Q. Lixiang, L. Chang, Y. Chi, and W. 
Guangming, "A Collaborative Trust Model of Firewall-
through based on Computing" in 14th International 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in 
Design (CSCWD), Shanghai, China, 2010, pp. 329 - 334. 
[5] Geolocation: 
Risk, 
Issues 
and 
Strategies, 
ISACA, 
Geolocation: Risk, Issues and Strategies 
[6] B. Tang , R. Sandhu, “Cross-Tenant Trust Models in Cloud 
Computing”, Information Reuse and Integration (IRI), 2013 
IEEE 14th International Conference on  14-16 Aug. 2013. 
[7] B. Eriksson, P. Barford, J. Sommersy, and Robert Nowak, “A 
Learning-based 
Approach 
for 
IP 
Geolocation 
NIST 
Interagency Report 7904, December 2012  
[8] E. K. Banks, M. Bartock, K. Fiftal, D. Lemon, K, Scarfone, 
U. Shetty et al., “Trusted Geolocation in the Cloud: Proof of 
Concept Implementation”, International Journal of Computer 
Science and Information Technologies, Vol. 3 (2) , 2012, 
3328 – 3333. 
[9] B. K. Dewangan1, P. Shende2, “The Sliding Window 
Method: An Environment To Evaluate User Behavior Trust In 
Cloud Technology”, International Journal of Advanced 
Research in Computer and Communication Engineering, Vol. 
2, Issue 2, February 2013. 
[10] T. Li-qin, L. Chuang "Evaluation of User Behavior Trust in 
Cloud Computing" 2010 International Conference on 
Computer Application and System Modeling (ICCASM 
2010)  
 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-529-6
CLOUD COMPUTING 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

