Security of Cloud Services with Low-Performance Devices in Critical Infrastructures
Michael Molle1, Ulrich Raithel1, Dirk Kraemer2, Norbert Graß3, Matthias S¨ollner4 and Andreas Aßmuth4
1SIPOS Aktorik GmbH, Altdorf, Germany, Email: {michael.molle | ulrich.raithel}@sipos.de
2AUMA Riester GmbH & Co. KG, M¨ullheim, Germany, Email: dirk.kraemer@auma.com
3Grass Power Electronics GmbH, Nuremberg, Germany, Email: norbert.grass@grass-pe.com
4Technical University of Applied Sciences OTH Amberg-Weiden, Amberg, Germany,
Email: {m.soellner | a.assmuth}@oth-aw.de
Abstract—As part of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Industry 4.0
Cloud services are increasingly interacting with low-performance
devices that are used in automation. This results in security issues
that will be presented in this paper. Particular attention is paid
to so-called critical infrastructures. The authors intend to work
on the addressed security challenges as part of a funded research
project, using electrical actuators and battery storages as speciﬁc
applications. The core ideas of this research project are also
presented in this paper.
Keywords–Low-performance devices; Cloud; automation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The increasing integration of the Internet of Things into
industrial production has lead to the next industrial revolution
called “Industry 4.0”. [1] Increasing digitisation and automa-
tion leads to a greater number of systems being connected to
the Cloud. This also means that in addition to traditional IT
systems a growing number of Operational Technology (OT)
systems is also connected to Cloud services. Nowadays, even
Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems
without a suitable built-in Industry 4.0 implementation will
be hard to ﬁnd. All of this leads to the so-called “Industrial
Internet of Things” (IIoT) as a part of the IoT.
However, besides the big SCADA systems there is a great
variety of embedded systems on devices like sensors, storage
systems and actors running in physical processes. A power
plant, for example, has only one process control system, but a
couple of thousands of actuators to control the actual processes
of energy generation. In recent years, many of these devices
have been connected to Cloud services for advanced analytics
that cannot be computed on the devices themselves because
of their limited resources concerning computing power or
memory. These embedded devices very often consist of a low-
cost micro controller with low clock rate (usually in double-
digit MHz range), using proprietary protocols on proprietary
operating systems, while maintaining the real-time capability
as topmost objective. This quite signiﬁcant number of em-
bedded devices incorporates a steadily growing part of the
processes and infrastructure of whole branches of industrial
production. It also means that industry and economy of whole
countries more and more rely on such components.
The government of each individual country deﬁnes for
itself which processes and infrastructures are especially impor-
tant and which sectors of infrastructure have to be considered
critical. In Germany, for instance, these critical infrastructures
are devided into nine sectors, namely energy supply, informa-
tion technology and communication, transportation and trafﬁc,
health, water supply and wastewater disposal, food provisions,
ﬁnance and insurance industry, government and administration,
and, ﬁnally, media and culture. [3] In the United States of
America, a similar deﬁnition comprises even sixteen critical
sectors. [4] Because of the high security requirements for
Manufacturing
Commissioning &
Installation
Operation
Update
End of life
Cloud-based
SCADA
Manufacturer
Cloud
Other
Cloud services
Figure 1. Lifecycle of a low-performance device and its connection
to Cloud services. [2]
critical infrastructures, not only the operation of such a low-
performance device must be taken into account, but all cross-
relationships to Cloud services that occur during the life cycle
of the device must be considered, too (cf. Figure 1). The
manufacturer of the low-performance device stores speciﬁca-
tions or maybe even initial versions of the device’s ﬁrmware
in their Cloud. When the device is installed in an industrial
plant, it needs to be commissioned in order to communicate
with the manufacturer’s Cloud service. During operation, the
device communicates with the Cloud service. It sends, for
example, sensor data that is analysed maybe not only by the
manufacturer, but also by one of the already mentioned Cloud-
based SCADA systems. Therefore, an interface or gateway is
needed to interconnect the manufacturer’s Cloud service and
the Cloud-based SCADA system. It can not be ruled out that
the data is shared with other Cloud services, too. Because of
known security issues or in case of new additional features,
there might be updates for the software of the device. At the
end of the lifecycle, e.g., when the device is broken or it
no longer meets the requirements and therefore needs to be
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

replaced, the manufacturer may wish to swipe all data and
zeroise the device.
The paper is structured as follows: in Section II, we dis-
cuss threats and security challenges for Cloud-based SCADA
systems as well as connected operational technology devices.
In Section III, we review related work and present our own
approach in Section IV. This approach is the subject of a
current grant proposal by the authors, the different project
partners are named in Section V. We conclude in Section VI
with an outlook on future work.
II.
THREATS AND SECURITY CHALLENGES
Most countries consider energy and water supply as critical
sectors deserving special protection – and the increasing num-
ber of cyberattacks [5] conﬁrm this assessment to be correct.
In recent years, there have been numerous attacks, like the
Ukrainian blackout in 2015, when 225,000 people were suffer-
ing for a number of hours from a power outage. [6] During this
attack, not only Industrial Control System (ICS) but also the
ﬁrmware of serial-to-Ethernet adapters was damaged in order
to disconnect servers from their Uninterruptible Power Supply
(UPS) to maximise the length of the blackout. In December
2016, there was another attack on the Ukrainian energy supply
which again resulted in a blackout for 100,000 to 200,000
people over a period of several hours. [7] Such targeted attacks
are no longer carried out by single attackers but by full groups
with considerably different motivations. It is likely that groups
of organised crime or intelligence services might be involved.
The lifecycle of such an embedded device used in critical
infrastructures, as described above and depicted in Figure 1,
can be used to identify many attack vectors. If the adversary
has access to the manufacturer’s Cloud service, he could
attempt to install backdoors in the initial ﬁrmware while
the device is being manufactured. In addition to that, the
speciﬁcations stored in the Cloud would surely be interesting
for competitors and also be helpful to the attacker to detect
vulnerabilities that can be exploited later. During the on-
site installation, an attacker could, in principle, redirect the
connection to the manufacturer’s cloud service via a computer
controlled by him as a starting point for a man in the middle
attack. Security issues during operation are discussed explicitly
in the following sections. Based on the last two phases,
“update” and “end of life”, requirements for the protection
of the manufacturer’s intellectual property can be exempliﬁed.
For instance, suppose another manufacturer reproduces the
embedded devices in order to sell them at a lower price. This
competitor would certainly like to beneﬁt from new features
or security updates that the original device manufacturer rolls
out. It must therefore be ensured that a manufacturer can
distinguish their original devices from clones in order not to
supply those with new ﬁrmware. Likewise, it must be ensured
that at the end of an original device’s lifecycle its identity
cannot be copied or reused so that a cloned device can pretend
to be an original one.
Due to these threats some operating companies start to pre-
vent their devices from any kind of communication to outside
their own network. But most of the manufacturers, however,
do not want or cannot afford to dismiss the advantages of
interconnectedness, e.g., for systems like energy storages in a
Smart Grid. Because this development was discernible through
recent years, developments ranging from classic SCADA up to
Cloud-based SCADA solutions incorporate a growing number
of security-critical functions. Additionally, the corresponding
norms as well as legislation were pushed along, resulting,
for example, in standards like IEC 62443. Legislation in
Germany also has acknowledged the problem and demands –
in accordance with requirements for Cloud operators stated by
the Federal Ofﬁce of Information Security [8] and along with
a “CE-conformity label for IT security” for manufacturers of
products for critical infrastructure applying similar rules. [9]
A. Security challenges for Cloud-based SCADA systems
In recent years, numerous Cloud-based ICS or SCADA
systems have been developed and are now readily available.
These systems interconnect on-site low-performance opera-
tional technology devices with Cloud services that run data
acquisition and data analytics algorithms. The aggregation
and analysis of these huge amounts of data is then used to
optimise operation of the on-premise low-performance OT de-
vices. This means that such Cloud-based SCADA systems are
vulnerable against attacks targeting their Internet connection. A
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack that prevents the
above mentioned data acquisition and data analytics algorithms
from being available for the on-premises devices certainly
affects production in a non-beneﬁcial way. In addition, data
provided to these Cloud services might cause difﬁculties as
well because of the loop back. If a sensor is hijacked and
thus its data acquisition compromised, a control system today
hardly has any chance at all to determine whether the data has
been manipulated or not. At best, important data is provided
redundantly which usually is true in plants only if the data
emitting sensors are rated as safety critical. Manipulating a
seemingly unimportant measurement often bears the potential
of considerably interfering with a production plant’s processes.
Even worse are attacks on actors controlling these processes.
If, for example, one of the couple of thousands actuators in
a power plant can be compromised in a way that physically
perturbs the process, the shutdown of the power plant – and
so disconnecting it from the grid in order to reach a safe
condition – is one of the more harmless scenarios imaginable.
Since OT networks beneﬁt from having all data commu-
nication at precisely deterministic and thus predictable time
slots, anomaly detection can be a means of locating inter-
ference caused by an attacker. However, direct manipulation
of measurement within a sensor would not alter the sensor
transmitting valid data using the proper protocol to its superior
control system and anomaly detection would in most cases not
recognise the data being counterfeit.
B. Security challenges for OT devices
For the development of low-performance devices which are
deployed in critical infrastructures, security-related topics are
usually the last on the list of requirements – if present at all.
In most cases their importance is overruled by economic con-
cerns, since they are neither really relevant for manufacturing
issues nor (at least up till now) for the customers’ purchasing
decisions. In addition, the following fact is also in many cases
unattended: a security level for low-performance systems that
is comparable to traditional IT systems can only be achieved
with great effort – if at all possible. For economic reasons
these systems’ soft- and hardware is usually designed to have
exactly the performance to fulﬁl their main purpose – and
nothing beyond. The deployment of higher performance or
more complex security procedures, with respect to small proﬁt
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

margins and multiply optimized supply chains, quickly leads
to unproﬁtable and uneconomic products.
Apart from such economic reasons several other factors
may cause even partially secured systems to fail:
•
insufﬁcient communication security,
•
lacking authentication of communication end points,
•
faulty implementation of algorithms,
•
faults at the protocol level,
•
compatibility problems with applied protocols or
•
problems with the initial key deployment.
All this increases the probability of security breaches which
are either patched only infrequently or lead to a complete
replacement of these devices. [9] While IT systems usually
provide options to implement and install patches easily, big
installations, like power plants, allow only precisely deﬁned
time slots for revisions during which systems may be patched
without ﬁnancial losses or penalties.
III.
RELATED WORK
On a global scale, numerous institutions and companies
are developing Cloud-based services for all kinds of devices,
where they all have to consider security requirements.
As an example, the GE Predix service platform connects
industrial assets (such as turbines, sensors, etc.) with a Cloud
in order to collect and analyse operational and historical
data to allow and improve predictive maintenance. [10] An
additional application security service comprises two main fea-
tures: a user account and authentication service using industry
standards for identity management via whitelisting (amongst
others), and an access control service using policy-driven
authorisation for access restriction to resources programmed
in a special policy language.
The AUMA Cloud is a free and secure Cloud-based solu-
tion for cost-effective asset management and predictive main-
tenance of AUMA actuators, promoting high plant availability.
[11] It provides an easy-to-use interactive platform to collect
and assess detailed device information on all the AUMA
actuators in a plant. It allows plant operators to detect excessive
loads or potential maintenance requirements at an early stage
and take remedial action in time to prevent unexpected failures.
MindSphere is an open cloud platform developed by
Siemens for applications in the context of the Internet of
Things. [12] It stores operational data from all kinds of devices
and makes it accessible through digital applications in order to
allow industrial customers to make decisions based on factual
information. Assets can be securely connected to MindSphere
with auxiliary products (e.g., MindConnect IoT2040 or Mind-
Connect Nano) that collect and transfer relevant machine and
plant data.
IV.
THE ISEC APPROACH
The authors have submitted a funding proposal entitled
“Intelligent Security for Electric Actuators and Converters in
Critical Infrastructures (iSEC)” in order to solve some of the
security challenges mentioned above.
The technology, which is in the scope of the authors of
this paper, like actuators from SIPOS and battery storage
combined with electric vehicle chargers from GPE, belongs to
such critical infrastructure due to the widely distributed type
of the installation and remote operation of such systems. The
idea behind the funding proposal is to develop an integrated
data communication which facilitates both, a high internal
computing performance for the processing of real-time control
algorithms and secured communication.
Primarily, the untampered local operation of the equipment
needs to be ensured at any time and therefore the local
ﬁrmware needs to be secured from any unauthorised ac-
cess. Additionally, the local equipment’s data communication
containing real-time signals to system wide controllers or
Cloud services is essential for proper and stable plant or grid
operation. For service purposes, local equipment needs to be
accessible by service staff to integrate new features into the
system. The conﬁdentiality of data and signals needs to be
considered and ensured.
As stated before, microcontroller-based systems usually
provide only very limited computing power and memory. Be-
cause of that, the computation of state of the art cryptographic
algorithms or key negotiation algorithms may take several
minutes. Almost all of these systems are run in environments
where real-time requirements demand response times in the
range of milliseconds or even microseconds, e.g., frequency
converters in energy smart grids. Thus, system performance
represents a signiﬁcant limitation to the effectiveness of cryp-
tographic operations. A further limitation is restricted amount
of system memory – cryptographic algorithms have to be
tailored to ﬁt into the available RAM and ROM. As an
approach to solve this problem the research of “lightweight
cryptography” for low-performance embedded systems is just
at its beginnings. [14]
Energy storage systems in larger quantities are essential
to integrate higher contents of renewable energy sources into
public distribution grids. Fluctuating power generation of pho-
tovoltaic or wind power systems requires short term storage
to match the exact value of power consumption at any time
of the day. Stationary energy storage systems and electric
vehicle chargers become more common and are currently
being installed into industrial buildings which are connected
to public distribution grids. With increasing numbers, storage
devices contribute to grid stability and therefore, they become
critical infrastructure for grid operation and grid reliability.
Data security becomes an important issue, as these systems
are equipped with fully digital control systems, which are
connected to remote systems for control and service access
functionality. Furthermore, ﬁrmware updates can be installed
via remote access, which is a very useful and system-critical
feature likewise. Therefore, such critical systems need to be
able to verify the data they receive and to authenticate the
sender of the data before starting any actions based on the
data received. Additionally, the data requires conﬁdentiality to
protect the systems from competitors and invaders.
Figure 2 depicts the data communication architecture.
The power converters, controlled by digital signal processors
(Level 1) are connected via a local CAN network to a Linux-
based system and communication controller (Level 2). The
system controller has a TCP/IP interface which facilitates data
communication to local or via Internet connected Level 3
devices for operation and service functionalities. While CAN
communication is restricted to the local system, TCP/IP is
critical as it can be accessed from outside the local system.
It is planned to perform a detailed investigation of how in-
ternal and external interfaces can be constructed in a veriﬁable
secure design, and how in-situ tests can prove their efﬁcacy in
terms of security and usability.
Cloud services shall be used for mechanisms of identiﬁ-
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Level 3:
TCP/IP
Level 2:
Universal Communication Server (UCS)
Application
Modbus
TCP/IP
Web-
Server
Obj.Prot
Conﬁg.XML
Signal
Matrix
Timer
Event
Data Objects
Data
Log
Level 1:
CAN
CAN
Mod-
bus
RTU
Mod-
bus
TCP
PWM
SYNC
FO
Level 3
Interface
Level 1
Interface
CAN
DSP
Controller
Power
Inverter
DSP
Controller
Power
Inverter
DSP
Controller
Power
Inverter
Figure 2. Data communication architecture. [13]
cation and authentication, for easing the task of performing
necessary software patches and thus improving facilities’ out-
age times and service intervals.
In addition, it is planned to investigate how Physical
Unclonable Functions (PUF) can be used to secure com-
munication between a Cloud server and (low-performance)
sensor clients and to clearly identify a sensor client with a
digital ﬁngerprint. Hardware intrinsic deviations caused by
the manufacturing process of semiconductors can be used to
identify chips [15] and generate random encryption keys. The
drawbacks of using non-volatile storage-mechanisms for stor-
ing encryption keys, can be overcome by using this relatively
new approach. PUFs are a current subject of research, different
approaches have yet been investigated. [16] [17] For example,
with arbiter PUFs a race condition can be generated between
two different digital paths on the same semiconductor. An
arbiter circuit is used to measure which of the paths won
the race. With different challenges the path can be conﬁgured
and for every challenge, the winner is determined. Because of
the manufacturing deviations every chip will give a different
response, despite having the same hardware conﬁguration
and therefore, a digital ﬁngerprint can be read out. As the
response cannot be read out or predicted by an attacker it is
called unclonable. Also, PUFs based on digital bistable storage
elements, like SRAM cells, latches or ﬂip ﬂops, have been
demonstrated. They are based on the principle of bringing
them in, in an unstable state, and letting them settle in one
of their stable states. Due to statistical variations during the
manufacturing process, different chips cause different results
despite the same hardware conﬁguration. Many other solutions
using deviations of the manufacturing process for identifying a
chip are conceivable. [18] In this context, new protocols have
also been investigated to secure lightweight communication
based on PUFs. [19] [20] [21] Which lightweight PUF based
protocols can be used for encryption of sensor data connected
to a cloud-server is another topic of our studies. Just recently,
ﬁrst semiconductor devices with PUF-functionality are now
readily available in order to identify hardware and implement
a digital ﬁngerprint, for example. [22] [23] [24] It has to
be investigated whether these semiconductor devices can be
used in order to help solving some of the security challenges
mentioned before.
V.
THE CONSORTIUM
SIPOS Aktorik GmbH emanated in 1999 from the former
actuator division of Siemens AG in Nuremberg, since 2008
situated at Altdorf. Main proprietor of SIPOS Aktorik GmbH
is the AUMA Riester GmbH & Co KG, Muellheim, which
as a holding also provides commercial services. Today, SIPOS
Aktorik GmbH employs a staff of 85 people in the departments
assembly, R&D, customer service and administration. During
the last 20 years SIPOS Aktorik GmbH succeeded in position-
ing itself on the global market for electric actuators with an
export quota of 80 %. Main customers are international plant
engineering and construction companies, valve manufacturers,
and operating companies of conventional and nuclear power
plants in Europe and Asia.
Grass Power Electronics GmbH, Nuremberg, is working on
grid conected stationary battery storage systems in the range
of some hundreds of kilowatts. Core technology components
are digital computer modules for real time power converter
control and for system control, including TCP based data
communication.
The security research group at the Technical University of
Applied Sciences OTH Amberg-Weiden has already worked
on funded research projects using lightweight cryptographic
algorithms. They have also experience in developing security
protocols using PUFs for authentication and device identiﬁca-
tion. [25]
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we showed that when it comes to combin-
ing low-performance embedded devices with Cloud services,
all components must be secured to harden these systems
against cyberattacks. Otherwise, compromised sensors can
falsify computations and analytics performed in the cloud.
And attacks against the Cloud services, e.g., a DDoS attack,
has a direct impact on an ICS when it relies on a permanent
connection to the cloud, too.
To master the challenges of IIoT and Industry 4.0, it
is imperative to consider possible vulnerabilities and attack
vectors when designing such systems (“security by design”).
The authors hope that their submitted grant proposal iSEC
will be approved to work on these security challenges.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Hermann, T. Pentek and B. Otto, “Design Principles for Industrie 4.0
Scenarios,” in Proceedings of the 49th Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences (HICSS), January 5–8, 2016, Koloa, USA. IEEE,
Jan. 2016, pp. 3928–3937, T. X. Bui and R. H. Sprague, Jr., Eds.,
ISBN: 978-0-7695-5670-3, ISSN: 1530-1605, URL: https://doi.org/10.
1109/HICSS.2016.488 [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[2]
G.-J. Schrijen, G. Selimis, J.-J. Treurniet, “Secure Device Management
for the Internet of Things” in Proceedings of the 2019 embeddedworld
Exhibition & Conference, February 26–28, 2019, Nuremberg, Germany.
To be published.
[3]
Federal Ministry of the Interior, Building and Community, Ed., “Na-
tionale Strategie zum Schutz Kritischer Infrastrukturen” (National Strat-
egy for the Protection of Critical Infrastructures), 2009.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[4]
Department of Homeland Security, Ed., “Critical Infrastructure Sec-
tors”, URL: https://www.dhs.gov/cisa/critical-infrastructure-sectors [ac-
cessed: 2019.04.12]
[5]
Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security, Ed., “Die Lage der IT-
Sicherheit in Deutschland 2017” (The State of IT Security in Germany
in 2017), No. BSI-LB17/506, August 2017.
[6]
E-ISAC, Ed., “Analysis of the Cyber Attack on the Ukrainian Power
Grid”, Technical Report, March 18th, 2016, URL: https://ics.sans.org/
media/E-ISAC SANS Ukraine DUC 5.pdf [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[7]
M. Strathmann, “Malware f¨uhrte zum Blackout” (Malware led to
Blackout), Zeit-Online, January 5th, 2016, URL: https://www.zeit.de/
digital/internet/2016-01/stromausfall-hacker-ukraine-blackenergy
[ac-
cessed: 2019.04.12]
[8]
Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security, Ed., “Anforderungskatalog
Cloud Computing (C5)” (Cloud Computing Compliance Controls Cat-
alogue), September 2017.
[9]
UP KRITIS, Ed., “Empfehlungen zu Entwicklung und Einsatz von in
Kritischen Infrastrukturen eingesetzten Produkten” (Recommendations
for the Development and Deployment of Products used in Critical
Infrastructures), Version 1.00, November 29th, 2018.
[10]
General
Electric
Company,
Ed.,
“Predix
Architecture
and
Services”,
Technical
Whitepaper,
November
28th,
2016,
URL:
https://d154rjc49kgakj.cloudfront.net/GE Predix Architecture and
Services.pdf [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[11]
AUMA Riester GmbH & Co. KG, Ed., “The AUMA Cloud”,
2019, URL: https://www.auma.com/en/service-support/digital-services/
the-auma-cloud/ [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[12]
S. Naujoks, “MindSphere – Siemens cloud for industry: What
is it all about?”, May 9th, 2016, URL: https://www.pac-online.
com/mindsphere-siemens-cloud-industry-what-it-all-about
[accessed:
2019.04.12]
[13]
N. Grass, F. Ferner and F. Nickl, “Modular and Intelligent Battery
Control System for Electric Vehicles and Stationary Storage Systems”
in Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Telecommunications
Energy Conference (INTELEC), October 23–27, 2016, Austin, USA.
IEEE, Nov. 2016, pp. 1–7, ISBN: 978-1-5090-1877-2.
[14]
“NIST
Issues
First
Call
for
’Lightweight
Cryp-
tography’
to
Protect
Small
Electronics”,
2018,
URL:
https://www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2018/04/
nist-issues-ﬁrst-call-lightweight-cryptography-protect-small-electronics
[accessed: 2019.04.12]
[15]
S. Choi, D. Zage, Y. R. Choe and B. Wasilow, “Physically Unclonable
Digital ID”, in Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International Conference
on Mobile Services, June 2015, pp. 105–111.
[16]
R. Maes and I. Verbauwhede, Physically Unclonable Functions: A Study
on the State of the Art and Future Research Directions. Springer, Berlin;
Heidelberg, 2010, chapter 1, pp. 3–37, in A.-R. Sadeghi, D. Naccache,
Eds., Towards Hardware-Intrinsic Security, ISBN: 978-3-642-26578-5.
[17]
H. Handschuh, G. J. Schrijen and P. Tuyls, Hardware Intrinsic Security
from Physically Unclonable Functions. Springer, Berlin; Heidelberg,
2010, chapter 2, pp. 39–53, in A.-R. Sadeghi, D. Naccache, Eds.,
Towards Hardware-Intrinsic Security, ISBN: 978-3-642-26578-5.
[18]
S. Katzenbeisser, ¨U. Kocabas¸, A.-R. Sadeghi, I. Verbauwhede and
C. Wachsmann, PUFs: Myth, Fact or Busted? A Security Evaluation
of Physically Unclonable Functions (PUFs) Cast in Silicon. Springer,
Berlin; Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 283–301, in E. Prouff and P. Schaumont,
Eds., Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems – CHES 2012,
ISBN: 978-3-642-33027-8.
[19]
M. Majzoobi, M. Rostami, F. Koushanfar, D. S. Wallach and S. De-
vadas, “Slender PUF Protocol: A Lightweight, Robust, and Secure
Authentication by Substring Matching” in Proceedings of the 2012
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops, May 24–25,
2012, San Francisco, USA. IEEE, Jul. 2012, pp. 33–44, ISBN: 978-1-
4673-2157-0.
[20]
T. Idriss and M. Bayoumi, “Lightweight highly secure PUF protocol
for mutual authentication and secret message exchange” in Proceedings
of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on RFID Technology Ap-
plication (RFID-TA), September 20–22, 2017, Warsaw, Poland. IEEE,
Nov. 2017, pp. 214–219, ISBN: 978-1-5386-1833-2.
[21]
M. Delavar, S. Mirzakuchaki, M. H. Ameri and J. Mohajeri, “Puf-Based
Solutions For Secure Communications In Advanced Metering Infras-
tructure (AMI)”, IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2016/009,
https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/009, [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[22]
Maxim
Integrated,
“ChipDNA”,
https://www.maximintegrated.
com/en/design/partners-and-technology/design-technology/
chipdna-puf-technology.html [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[23]
INTRINSIC ID, “QuiddiKey”, https://www.intrinsic-id.com/products/
quiddikey/ [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[24]
NXP, “Secure microcontroller family SmartMX2”, https://www.nxp.
com/docs/en/brochure/75017516.pdf [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[25]
A. Aßmuth et al., “Improving Resilience by Deploying Permuted Code
onto Physically Unclonable Unique Processors”, in Proceedings of the
2016 Cybersecurity and Cyberforensics Conference (CCC), August 2–4,
2016, Amman, Jordan. IEEE, Oct. 2016, pp. 144–150, ISBN: 978-1-
5090-2657-9.
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

