Cloud Computing and its Application to Blended Learning in Engineering 
 
Sanda Porumb, Bogdan Orza, Aurel Vlaicu 
Communication Department 
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca 
Cluj-Napoca, Romania 
{sporumb, orza, aurel.vlaicu}@com.utcluj.ro 
Cosmin Porumb, Ioan Hoza 
R&D Department 
HyperMedia Ltd 
Cluj-Napoca, Romania 
{cosmin, ionut}@hpm.ro
 
 
Abstract—The education process in engineering means theory 
and practice, individual study, group-based projects or 
experimental 
work 
that 
involves 
equipment, 
simulation/emulation 
software 
packages 
and 
laboratory 
applications. In order to develop e-learning platforms for 
higher and postgraduate education in engineering, new 
methodologies should be taken into consideration: project- and 
problem based learning, virtual laboratory (remote access to 
laboratory infrastructure and task evaluation) or remote 
assistance for diploma projects and mobility grants. This paper 
presents new blended learning methodologies and the manner 
they can be customized for higher and postgraduate education 
in engineering by using the cloud computing paradigms.  
Keywords - cloud computing; blended learning; virtual 
laboratory; hybrid classware; project-based learning; problem-
based learning 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, with the advances of the Internet and e-
learning technologies, a blended mode of learning, which 
effectively combines the traditional face-to-face learning and 
e-learning, has evolved. Yet, this blended learning mode is 
not widely adopted in higher and postgraduate education in 
engineering. One major reason is that teachers are not 
familiar with the practice of designing courses under 
the blended learning environment. Another important aspect 
is that many teachers do not consider the e-learning 
methodologies as stable and functional enough for 
engineering, especially for laboratory and project task 
completion. The third reason is that academic staff considers 
the act of teaching/learning engineering as more than 
individual study and online assessment. 
Engineering consists of lecture attendance, project 
development, hands-on laboratory-based activities and 
computer simulation work. In this way, the educational act 
can be considered as learner-centered. Manseur [5] 
presented the synchronous distance learning concept (SDL) 
and its application to Electric and Computer Engineering 
and Mathematics. Students follow lectures live via 
videoconferencing but they attend laboratory sessions taught 
by on-site faculty.  The advanced technology has been used 
for linking the local and the remote classrooms: the lecturer 
teaching in one location is videotaped and can be seen live 
on a TV screen in the other classroom. The hands-on 
experimentation is difficult to conduct without access to 
often expensive equipment and components and without 
competent on-site laboratory tutors. In order to complete the 
lab, the SDL environment consists of two sets of fully 
equipped and staffed laboratories, one on each end of the 
SDL-connected campuses. 
Qiu [7] proposed a blended learning environment that 
implements the face-to-face teaching and e-learning 
capabilities in Advanced Software Engineering. A set of 
integrated projects was selected as stimulus to learning. 
Both inter- and intra-group collaborative learning are 
encouraged. A survey conducted at the end of the course 
revealed that students accept the problem-based learning 
quite well, and their academic achievements were also better 
than expected. The methodology consists of grouping 
student in teams, dividing the semester in project phases and 
developing the project using iterations. 
This paper is organized as follows: the related works and 
proposals are presented in Section II. Section III is dedicated 
to the blended learning models for higher and postgraduate 
education. Several important aspects are taken into 
consideration: how to improve the retention factor in the 
individual study, how to provide remote access to laboratory 
infrastructure and applications and how to support 
fundamental 
and 
applied 
research 
activities 
within 
individual, 
group-based 
projects 
or 
international 
partnerships. Section IV starts with the technological aspects 
and continues with the deployment diagram of the blended 
learning platform for technical education and continues with 
the elastic cloud environment presentation. The experimental 
results, especially the platform deployment for “Economic 
and 
Exact 
Sciences” 
and 
“Applied 
Electronics, 
Telecommunications and Information Technology” domains, 
including the blended learning support, practice and 
assessment processes, are highlighted in Section V of this 
paper. In conclusion, the authors underline the importance of 
SaaS (Software as a Service), PaaS (Platform as a Service) 
and IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service) concepts in higher and 
postgraduate education by presenting a complex scenario for 
extending legacy e-learning systems in order to support 
blended learning capabilities. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Mendez [3] illustrates that in traditional web-based 
learning mode, system construction and maintenance are 
located inside the educational institutions or enterprises, 
which led to a lot of problems, such as significant 
investment needed but without capital gains for them, which 
173
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

leads to a lack of development potential. In contrast, cloud-
based 
e-learning 
model 
introduces 
scale 
efficiency 
mechanism, i.e. construction of e-learning system is 
entrusted to cloud computing suppliers, which can make 
providers and users to achieve a win-win situation. The 
cloud-based environment supports the creation of new 
generation of e-learning systems, able to run on a wide 
range of hardware devices, while storing data inside the 
cloud.  
Laisheng [9] highlighted a new business paradigm in 
educational area by introducing the cloud computing in 
order to increase the scalability, flexibility and availability 
of e-learning systems. The authors have evaluated the 
traditional e-learning networking model, with its advances 
and issues, and the possibility to move the e-learning system 
out of schools or enterprises, inside a cloud computing 
infrastructure. The separation of entity roles and cost 
effectiveness can be considered important advantages: 
 
The schools and enterprises will be responsible for 
the education process, as well as for content 
management and delivery, and the vendor takes 
care 
of 
system 
construction, 
maintenance, 
development and management; 
 
The e-learning system can be scaled, both 
horizontally and vertically, and the educational 
organization is charged according to the number of 
used servers that depend on the number of students.  
Ouf [10] has presented an innovative e-learning 
ecosystem based on cloud computing and Web 2.0 
technologies. The article analyzes the most important cloud-
based services provided by public cloud computing 
environments such as Google App Engine, Amazon Elastic 
Compute Cloud (EC2) or Windows Azure, and highlights 
the advantages of deploying E-Learning 2.0 applications for 
such an infrastructure. The authors also identified the 
benefits of cloud-based E-Learning 2.0 applications 
(scalability, feasibility, or availability) and underlined the 
enhancements regarding the cost and risk management.  
Chandral [11] focused on current e-learning architecture 
model and on issues in current e-learning applications. The 
article presents the Hybrid Instructional Model as the blend 
of the traditional classroom and online education and its 
customization for e-learning applications running on the 
cloud computing infrastructure. The authors underline the e-
learning issues, especially the openness, scalability, and 
development/customization costs. The existing e-learning 
systems are not dynamically scalable and hard to extend – 
integration with other e-learning systems is very expensive.  
The article proposed the hybrid cloud delivery model that 
can help in fixing the mentioned problems.  
The e-learning platforms for higher and postgraduate 
education in engineering should provide remote access to 
both educational materials and laboratory infrastructure. 
They also need to implement synchronous/asynchronous 
collaborative learning features, as well as blended 
assessment functionality. Such a platform is expensive and 
its development can take much time. The cheapest solution 
is to opt for public cloud computing services, even if the 
component integration and customization will need 
important investments.   
The learning cloud prototype presented here is a fully 
functional, application-oriented, and in the same time, low-
cost solution that provides SaaS (Software as a Service), 
PaaS (Platform as a Service) and IaaS (Infrastructure as a 
Service) capabilities. Software as a Service is used to 
deliver the educational applications to the browser of the 
user/ customer from the learning cloud. It helps the faculties 
and departments with limited IT resources to deploy and 
maintain needed software in a timely manner while, at the 
same time, reducing energy consumption and expenses. 
Platform as a Service facilitates the development and 
deployment of applications, such as laboratory simulation 
software packages, without the cost and complexity of 
buying and 
managing the underlying infrastructure 
(hardware and associated software).  Infrastructure as a 
Service gets on-demand computer infrastructure (virtual 
desktop or data center, e.g.). 
III. 
BLENDED LEARNING MODELS 
From the teaching point of view, six essentials are 
identified: teaching subjects, teaching content, teaching 
environment, teaching models, teaching organizers and 
teaching administration. In order to improve their knowledge 
and skills, the students (subjects) actively participate to both 
real and virtual educational acts. So, the learning service 
providers should pay attention to both teaching modes: face-
to-face and Internet-based. The advances point out the 
manner of getting them together, in order to expand the real 
educational environment and make the virtual platforms an 
important part of the educational system. 
A. Blended Learning Model for Higher Education 
The traditional e-learning platforms consist of the 
learning management system, learning content management 
system, assessment and communication modules (especially 
forum and messaging). The third generation of e-learning 
platforms provides with advanced services such as online 
courses, tutorials and webinars. The education process in 
engineering means theory and practice, individual study, 
team projects or experimental work and involves laboratory 
equipment, simulation/emulation software packages and 
applications.  
 
Figure 1.  Blended Lerning Model for Higher Education in Engineering. 
The e-learning platforms for higher education in 
engineering implement new methodologies such as: project- 
and problem based learning, virtual laboratory (remote 
access to laboratory equipment and applications and task 
174
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

evaluation) or remote assistance for diploma projects and 
mobility grants. The blended learning model illustrated in 
Figure 1 proposes the following educational phases: 
asynchronous/synchronous 
collaborative 
learning, 
individual study support, virtual laboratory and blended 
assessment. Two main blocks should be taken into 
consideration in the e-learning system architecture: hybrid 
classware and asynchronous collaborative learning modules. 
The hybrid classware is a complex blended learning 
approach that provides with classroom-based education, 
synchronous 
collaborative 
learning 
(online 
course/tutoring/mentoring), 
virtual 
laboratory 
(remote 
access to laboratory equipment and applications) and 
blended assessment (practice and theory) capabilities. The 
problem-/project-based learning and individual study 
(interactive courses/tutorials) features are implemented in 
the asynchronous collaborative learning section. 
B. Blended Learning Model for MSc Programmes 
In MSc programmes the students are focused on research 
and career development activities. The educational schema 
consists 
of live lectures, 
hands-on experimentation, 
individual 
and 
group-based 
projects, 
virtual 
team 
cooperation and mobility grants. It is defined around the 
following skills: information synthesis in theory and hands-
on experimentation or online simulation, requirement 
analysis, 
project 
design, 
implementation, 
or 
result 
presentation. 
 
Figure 2.  Blended Lerning Model for MSc Programmes in Engineering. 
The blended learning model illustrated in Figure 2 
proposes the two main phases in the educational act: regular 
teaching 
and 
Internet-based 
learning. 
Information 
technology is important in education, even when regular 
teaching 
involves 
advanced 
technologies 
such 
as 
multimedia presentations, video projectors, or smartboards. 
Self-learning 
means 
individual 
study 
starting 
from 
educational materials created and posted onto the e-learning 
platform by the teachers, then browsing the Internet to find 
and select correct information about subjects related to the 
educational materials.  
Online tutoring approach consists of interactive tutorials 
and face-to-face Internet-based learning. Interactive tutorials 
can be also used as the introduction part of hands-on 
experimentation activities. The face-to-face Internet-based 
learning includes the online classroom/webinar sessions and 
remote assistance during the international research projects 
or mobility grants. 
C. Blended Learning Model for PhD Programmes 
Blended learning is not new - what is new is the 
recognition of its potential to help in fundamentally 
redesigning the learning experience in ways that could 
enhance the traditional values of higher education and 
postgraduate scholarship (MSc and PhD programmes). 
Preparing PhD students according to a blended strategy can 
be challenging, since it requires gaining different teaching 
skills and technologies. Redesigning the educational process 
takes into account new teaching and learning opportunities, 
managing the educational content both online and in-class, 
and preparing PhD students to work in a hybrid format.  
In Romania, the PhD scholarship based on European 
Social Funds (ESF) constrains the students to complete their 
PhD in three years, so, the activities should be well defined 
and supported by clear results. This aspect completely 
changed the PhD methodology (illustrated in Figure 3). For 
the moment, the PhD students must be integrated within 
research projects and work close to real and efficient 
research teams. Most of the research projects are developed 
according to the Scrum methodology [2]. This way, the 
authors took into consideration the blended learning and 
Scrum methodology for improving the education and 
research activities in PhD scholarship based on ESF Funds. 
 
Figure 3.  Blended Lerning Model for PhD Programmes in Engineering. 
The PhD programme means theory, practice and research 
activities with results published in scientific journals and 
conference proceedings. This way, the problem- and project-
based learning should be considered as necessary. The 
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca provides with PhD 
programmes in the following domains of interests: 
Automation, Computer Science, Electric Engineering, 
Applied 
Electronics 
and 
Telecommunications, 
Civil 
Engineering, Mechanics, etc. With the big number of 
domains and the increasing number of MSc and PhD 
students, the blended learning environment that supports 
MSc and PhD activities should be both horizontally and 
175
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

vertically scalable. In conclusion, an elastic learning cloud 
infrastructure should be implemented. 
IV. 
E-LEARNING CLOUD INFRASTUCTURE 
From the beginning, the role of blended learning was to 
improve the educational process by increasing the degree of 
students’ satisfaction, retention factor and students’ 
enrollment and developing students’ skills. In higher 
education, especially in engineering, the blended learning is 
a need because of the diversity of teaching/learning 
activities. The quality of the learning act can be considered 
another important aspect, so increasing number of students 
enrolled should not affect the educational process. The 
learning cloud means reliability and scalability, as well as 
cost effectiveness.  
Laisheng [9] proposed a generic e-learning cloud and 
identified several challenges such as: charge, bandwidth, 
security, user’s awareness and acceptance, educational 
forms and methods and resource development, and proposed 
solutions for each challenge. By setting up a market-
oriented charging mechanism and by combining two types 
of fees, school fees and individual fees (with school 
charging for general resources and individual charging for 
special resources) can be considered a solution. The 
bandwidth problem is almost fixed in Romania because 
between RoEduNet and each important Internet service 
provider there are peering services. In order to keep the 
integrity and confidentiality of data an encryption 
mechanism should be implemented for both storage and 
transmission.  
The e-learning cannot completely replace teachers; it is 
only an updating for technology, concepts and tools, giving 
new content, concepts and methods for education, so the 
roles of teachers cannot be replaced. The teachers will still 
play leading roles and participate in developing and making 
use of e-learning cloud. The blended learning strategy 
should improve the educational act. Moreover, the 
interactive content and virtual collaboration guarantee a 
high retention factor (up to 80%) [4].  
A. E-Learning Cloud Architecture 
 
Figure 4.  Learning Cloud Architecture. 
The proposed learning cloud architecture illustrated in 
Figure 4 can be divided into the following layers: hardware 
resource layer as a dynamic and scalable physical host pool, 
software resource layer that offers a unified interface for e-
learning developers, resource management layer that 
achieves loose coupling of software and hardware resources, 
service layer, containing three levels of services (software as 
a service, platform as a service and infrastructure as a 
service), application layer that provides with content 
production, 
content 
delivery, 
virtual 
laboratory, 
collaborative 
learning, 
assessment 
and 
management 
features. 
B. E-Learning Cloud Setup 
In the classic blended learning model, teachers assign 
teaching tasks, conduct regular lectures, or train students’ 
skills. The students attend the online autonomous learning 
act and cooperative learning sessions, or accomplish 
teachers’ assignments. The teachers make assessments over 
students’ learning effect and solve their problems. So, 
teachers set objectives and tasks of different levels, they put 
forward requirements and suggestions according to the 
teaching contents and make assessments to students’ 
learning effects through task-based activities. Teachers also 
answer students’ questions and offer essential teaching to 
major and difficult points. In addition, teachers can also use 
multimedia to enhance teaching content. Of course, teachers 
create flexible and diversified theoretical and practical 
scenarios and teaching contents, using authentic materials to 
let students come upon more technical information related 
to real problems/projects. Students work out their own 
learning 
plans, 
determining 
learning 
methods 
autonomously. They conduct on-line autonomous learning 
when they study each unit, finish its test via Internet and do 
some statistics to the test results. Teachers also encourage 
students to cooperate with each other to finish simple 
learning tasks or complex group-based projects. Through 
cooperative 
learning, 
students 
cannot 
only 
acquire 
knowledge, their team spirit and coordination will also be 
fostered, skills in dealing with people will be improved and 
abilities to express themselves will be enhanced. In applied 
electronics, 
telecommunications 
and 
information 
technology, the learning environment also provides with 
hands-on experimentation 
work, simulation software 
packages and semester/diploma projects. 
We proposed a learning cloud environment built around 
Citrix XenServer. XenServer is an enterprise-ready, cloud-
proven virtualization platform that contains all the 
capabilities required to create and manage a virtual 
infrastructure and provides an efficient management of 
Windows and Linux virtual servers and delivers cost-
effective server consolidation [1]. The initial setup, 
illustrated in Figure 5, must support the teaching/learning 
activities and practice. It should be a dynamic environment, 
able to create university/programme instances. Each 
instance consists of six virtual machines: two allocated for 
web hosting, two for the data warehouse and two for the 
virtual library. The initial setup also includes the 
collaborative 
work 
environment 
that 
hosts 
the 
176
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

asynchronous/synchronous collaborative learning tools: 
course authoring tool, interactive tutorial, messaging, forum, 
web conferencing, online focus group, or virtual classroom. 
 
Figure 5.  E-learning cloud setup. 
The learning management system allows the students to 
schedule online laboratory activities. The e-learning cloud 
infrastructure implements an advanced resource pooling 
mechanism (see Figure 6) that dynamically allocates twenty 
virtual machines for each university instance when the first 
student scheduled a virtual laboratory session. When fifteen 
of the initial virtual machines are allocated, the resource 
pooling mechanism allocates other twenty. The virtual 
machine will not be a powerful one. Its role is to provide 
students with remote access to lab equipment and simulation 
software packages needed for completing the tasks. The 
activity starts with an interactive tutorial, where the tutor 
describes the tasks and gives some suggestive examples 
related to the current work. The students remotely access the 
lab equipment and/or applications and complete the tasks.  
 
Figure 6.  Virtual Lab Approach. 
At the end of the lab session, each student saves its own 
work, in order for the tutor to verify it. If the tasks are not 
properly done, the tutor notifies the student to repeat the 
work or to attend a collaborative session in order to fix the 
problems together. 
The online access to the laboratory infrastructure 
complies with a well-defined schedule. It is almost 
impossible to allocate one virtual machine for each student 
enrolled in the educational program. This way, the students 
will access the virtual laboratory in groups of ten students. 
At the same time, we can have groups of ten virtual 
machines to be allocated for each field/line of study. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
Each educational organization should have its own staff 
that manages both educational act and content. When 
registering, the account manager should specify the number 
of students, form of study, education domain, then an 
intelligent block processes the information and provides 
with the most appropriate configuration needed for such a 
programme. 
The “Aurel Vlaicu” University of Arad opted for an e-
learning cloud-based service, in order to support blended 
learning in the Faculties of Economic and Exact Sciences. 
The manager of the Distance Learning Department 
completed the registration forms and defined a clear 
structure of BSc programme for 2 faculties, 5 domains, 3 
years of study, 72 teachers and more than 3000 students. 
The educational process in the Faculty of Economic 
Sciences consists of flexible individual study, individual and 
group-based projects, online and face-to-face teaching, 
online and classroom-based assessment, webinars and web 
meetings between students and/or students and tutors.  In 
the Faculty of Exact Sciences, it also includes virtual 
laboratory activities, especially remote access to lab 
applications (software development environment), and 
semester/diploma project support.  
The configuration block automatically creates the virtual 
machines (VM) and allocates the hardware and software 
resources: two VM allocated for web hosting, two for the 
warehouse and two for the virtual library. In the Faculty of 
Exact Sciences, the virtual laboratory involves one virtual 
machine allocated for each student, the virtual desktop that 
allows the student to complete his own work, and a reduced 
storage space necessary for saving the work at the end of the 
laboratory session. The virtual machine has minimal 
hardware and software requirements: it should support the 
software packages needed for completing the current tasks.  
The e-learning cloud prototype is also implemented in 
the Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Faculty of 
Electronics, 
Telecommunications 
and 
Information 
Technology, for MSc and PhD programmes. One of the 
pilot courses, “E-Business Technologies”, involves 25 
students, some of them involved in Erasmus mobility grants. 
By using the hybrid classware component, the Erasmus 
students have been able to actively participate to courses 
and lab activities. The teachers were also assisting the 
students during semester or diploma projects.  
177
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

The virtual educational environment will provide with 
classroom-based 
lectures, 
online 
courses, 
interactive 
tutorials, virtual laboratories (especially access to simulation 
software packages), problem- and project-based learning, 
and remote assistance for semester and diploma projects. 
The e-learning cloud automatically deploys an instance for 
each educational progamme that consists of six virtual 
machines. The management component processes the 
learning schedule related to each programme, controls and 
re-allocates the hardware and/or software resources, invokes 
the interactive/collaborative tools and provides online 
access 
to 
educational 
resources 
and 
laboratory 
infrastructure. 
The hybrid classware, illustrated in Figure 7, supports 
both synchronous collaborative leaning and face-to-face 
teaching. It enables the teachers to present the educational 
material in the classroom and simultaneously project it in 
the virtual space. The students can opt for assisting the 
presentation in the classroom or using the virtual classroom 
component. 
 
Figure 7.  Hybrid classware implementation. 
A complementary tool that allows the lecturer to 
dynamically handle the educational content is integrated 
into the learning cloud. Two types of educational content 
are stored into the virtual library: public and private content. 
If the lecturer considers one of his/her materials as really 
important for the public interest, that material will be 
uploaded on the server, converted to an internal format 
(SCORM compliant) and stored into the virtual library as a 
public material. If the material is private, or if the lecturer 
has no rights to make it public, it will be converted to the 
slideshow format and then stored into the library as private. 
The tutor is able to browse the media library, load it on the 
shared space and share it among the virtual classroom 
session. Asynchronous collaborative learning is also 
allowed. The lecturer is able to create interactive learning 
content by using the course authoring tool and store it into 
the virtual library. The student accesses the virtual library, 
browses the content and manages his own schedule.  
When setting up the hardware and software resources for 
the MSc Programme “Multimedia Technologies”, the staff 
should evaluate the laboratory equipment and applications 
to be integrated. For example, the lab activities for 
“Distributed Databases” and “Multimedia Databases” 
courses involve SQL Server and Oracle support, the ones 
for “Speech Synthesis and Recognition”, “Multimedia Data 
Compression and Encoding” and “Speech Compression” 
courses need Matlab. The lab activities for “Advanced 
Software Methods in Telecommunications” course need 
Rational, Visual Studio and JBuilder.  
Each laboratory activity should be performed according 
to the tutor’s specifications. The specifications consist of 
theory, objectives, interactive tutorials, demonstrations and 
external resources. If the laboratory objectives are related to 
software development, customization or analysis, the virtual 
machine allocated to each student just creates an instance of 
the development environment or software package used for 
completing the tasks. 
There are courses, such as “Mobile communications – 
3G and 4G”, that also involve simulation packages and 
hardware equipment. The simulation packages such as 
QualNet network simulator, can be exposed in the same 
manner as the software packages or the development 
environments, even if they are connected to real hardware 
devices or not.  
LabView can be also used for handling hardware 
devices. If exposing the hardware equipment via LabView, 
within the virtual machine, only one student or team can 
control it, at a moment. In order to avoid conflicts and 
protect the equipment and student work, the remote access 
to hardware devices must be optimized. 
In the Technical University of Cluj-Napoca there are 
3019 MSc students and 1432 PhD students registered in 9 
faculties and following different educational programmes. 
Not just the diversity of themes and interdisciplinary 
character of MSc and PhD recommend the implementation 
of a learning cloud environment. Another important aspect 
refers to research management during the PhD mobility 
grants, where important priorities are knowledge transfer 
and approaching of new technologies. 
 
Figure 8.  Scrum implementation in research projects. 
178
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

Most of the diploma, dissertation and research projects 
comply with the Scrum methodology. So, the authors 
propose the blended learning approach and Agile Scrum 
methodology to be implemented in the project-based 
learning module. The semester and diploma projects will be 
developed according to Agile Scrum methodology. It allows 
iterative development and full control of the project phases. 
The students are grouped in virtual teams (2-3 members). 
Forum, messaging and online focus group, document 
management and sharing capabilities (see Figure 8) are 
added to the project module in order to allow team members 
to collaborate during the project. 
In 
traditional 
engineering 
education, 
knowledge 
assessment consists of complex procedures such as 
periodical evaluation, project evaluation and the final 
knowledge assessment and it involves the teachers and 
students. The assessment model in the third generation of e-
learning is learner-centered and it consists of questions with 
one or more correct answers, as well as open answers. So, 
the students should complete the online assessment tests and 
the teacher will receive notifications about students’ tests 
and centralizes the results before closing the educational act. 
The presented prototype proposes a blending assessment 
method that preserves the traditional assessment methods 
and the flexibility the online assessment tools grant. 
The learning environment allows the management staff to 
setup the own educational platform or invoke needed 
interactive/collaborative 
tools. 
The 
cloud 
computing 
paradigms (SaaS, PaaS and IaaS) enable transparent access 
to services, software packages or hardware infrastructure. 
This way, the head of a department/programme manager that 
already implemented an educational platform and prefers to 
use it instead of re-implementing a new approach can opt for 
transferring the platform onto the new e-learning cloud setup 
(based on the Infrastructure as a Service paradigm) or extend 
the existing functionality in order to support more features. It 
assumes the integration of the legacy system by using the 
Software as a Service paradigm.  
The cloud computing environment, it is open for 
organizations and enterprises. The registration procedure is 
very simple: the responsible of an educational/training 
programme (MSc, PhD, even BSc) must complete the 
registration forms by specifying the requirements, then the 
intelligent configuration block automatically allocates the 
needed resources and creates the hardware and software 
components that support such a programme.  
The learning management features include the statistics 
and reporting capabilities. The reporting and statistics 
components provide with the information related to 
education and research activities the actors performed within 
the platform:  
 The number of educational resources and interactive 
materials created and uploaded into the platform; 
 The number of assessment sessions the tutors 
created and scheduled per month/week/day; 
 The number of synchronous collaborative learning 
sessions scheduled per month/week/day; 
 How many students accessed the interactive 
materials per month/week/day and completed the 
periodical assessment sessions; 
 How many students collaborated within the 
research/team projects and the contribution of each 
team member; 
 How many topics have been created within the 
course forum and how many students participated to 
a topic; 
 How many students used the multimedia messaging 
in order to communicate to the colleagues; 
 The number of collaborative sessions the students 
scheduled within the research/team projects; 
 The number of interactive tutorials the students met 
tutors in order to clarify important aspects regarding 
the educational content and activities; 
 The number of students that completed the 
laboratory tasks according to the pre-defined 
schedule; 
 The number of students that needed help during the 
laboratory tasks and how fast and clear was the 
tutor’s support; 
 How many team/research projects have been 
completed according to the pre-defined scheduled; 
 How many students studying abroad have been 
assisted remotely; 
 The number of MSc and PhD students are involved 
in virtual research teams; 
 The number of interactive training sessions has 
been scheduled and delivered via hybrid classware; 
 The number of virtual machines has been allocated 
for laboratory activities; 
 The bandwidth usage per month/week/day (Figure 
9); 
 
The CPU usage per virtual machine; 
 
The memory usage per virtual machine; 
 
The overloading per virtual setup. 
 
Figure 9.  “Aurel Vlaicu” Univeristy. Bandwidth usage (February, 2011). 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The article presents the blended learning concept based 
on cloud computing paradigms and the manner it can be 
customized for higher and postgraduate education in 
179
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

engineering. It starts from a functional analysis between 
traditional e-learning platforms and blended learning 
environments dedicated to higher and postgraduate 
education then it continues with the technological aspects 
and the deployment diagram of an e-learning cloud 
environment for engineering education.  
If analyzing the e-learning cloud setup with the 
platforms presented in the introduction and related works, 
the advantages are conclusive: individual study support, 
Internet-based collaborative learning features, online access 
to lab infrastructure, collaborative research capabilities, 
project-based 
learning 
and 
problem-based 
learning 
functionality delivered using a complex but low cost 
infrastructure. Due to cloud computing (SaaS, IaaS and 
PaaS paradigms) implementation, the e-learning service 
providers can easily setup new learning environments or 
extend their existing systems in order to support blended 
learning capabilities. 
The most important advantage of the cloud computing is 
the cost effectiveness. Instead of investing funds in the own 
e-learning infrastructure and educational software packages, 
the educational institutions should pay more attention to the 
content, staff, marketing and student enrollment, which can 
grant the service improvement. If opting for cloud-based 
services there are no IT costs, neither IT specialists to 
employ. The educational institutions register in the e-
learning cloud and pay just what they consumed. The online 
access to collaborative learning tools and flexible individual 
study are implementing using SaaS paradigm. The 
development and deployment of laboratory applications use 
the PaaS concept. In order to implement laboratory 
equipment/infrastructure 
sharing 
or 
virtual 
desktop 
functionality, the faculties and departments can opt for IaaS 
services.  
Such systems allow students to enroll in educational 
programmes even if the job is very restrictive because most 
of the learning activities can be remotely done. Several 
enhancements in the educational act have been identified. 
The implementation of the interactive learning approach in 
individual study grants a high retention factor (up to 80%) 
and the collaborative learning develops the soft skills and 
teamwork capabilities. The hybrid classware approach 
implements 
the 
synchronous 
collaborative 
learning 
methodologies and allow the students to actively participate 
to the educational act. Its main role is to keep the 
responsibility of learning on the teacher’s end but also make 
students more responsible, communicate to each other and 
work and study as a team. Fundamental and applied 
research support, task management features and remote 
access to lab equipment and applications are also supported. 
The e-learning cloud setup should be considered as the most 
reliable solution for virtual laboratory and student assistance 
during the semester, diploma, dissertation or research 
projects.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The paper was supported by the project "Development 
and support of multidisciplinary postdoctoral programmes in 
major technical areas of national strategy of Research - 
Development - Innovation" 4D-POSTDOC, contract no. 
POSDRU/89/1.5/S/52603, 
project 
co-funded 
by 
the 
European Social Fund through Sectorial Operational 
Programme Human Resources Development 2007-2013. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. 
E. 
Williams, 
“Virtualization 
with 
Xen(tm): 
Including 
XenEnterprise, XenServer, and XenExpress”, Syngress Publishing 
House, ISBN: 1597491675 2010, 2007. 
[2] M. Hicks and J.S. Foster, “Adapting Scrum to Managing a Research 
Group”, Technical Report CS-TR-4966, University of Maryland, 
Department of Computer Science, 2010. 
[3] J. A. Méndez and E. J. González, “Implementing Motivational 
Features in Reactive Blended Learning: Application to an 
Introductory Control Engineering Course“, IEEE Transactions on 
Education, Volume: PP, Issue: 99, 2011. 
[4] A. Vlaicu, S. Porumb, C. Porumb, and B. Orza, “Advanced Concepts 
for Interactive Learning”, WSEAS Engineering Education, ISSN 
1790-1979, Issue 6, Vol.3, 2006. 
[5] R. Manseur and Z. Manseur, “A Synchronous Distance Learning 
Program Implementation in Engineering and Mathematics“, Proc. 39th 
ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference, San Antonio, Texas, 
USA, Pages 1-6, 2009. 
[6] Y. Huixin, “Development of Blended Learning Modes and Its 
Practice in Computer Aided Language Learning Danikas“, Proc. 2nd 
International Conference on Information Science and Engineering 
(ICISE), pages 2021-2024, 2010. 
[7] M. Qiu and L. Chen, “A Problem-based Learning Approach to 
Teaching an Advanced Software Engineering Course“, Proc. 2nd 
International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer 
Science, pages 252-255, 2011. 
[8] Z. Hu and S. Zhang, “Blended/Hybrid Course Design in Active 
Learning Cloud at South Dakota State University“, Proc. 2nd 
International Conforence on Education Technology and Computer 
(ICETC), pages V1-63-V1-67, 2010. 
[9] X. Laisheng and W. Zhengxia, „Cloud Computing: a New Business 
Paradigm for E-learning”, Proc. 3rd International Conference on 
Measuring Technology and Mechatronics Automation, pages 716-
719, 2011. 
[10] S. Ouf, M. Nasr, and Y. Helmy, „An Enhanced E-Learning 
Ecosystem Based on an Integration between Cloud Computing and 
Web2.0”, Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Signal Processing 
and Information Technology (ISSPIT), pages 48-55, 2011. 
[11] D. Chandran and S. Kempegowda, „Hybrid E-learning Platform 
based on Cloud Architecture Model: A Proposal”, Proc. International 
Conference on Signal and Image Processing (ICSIP), pages 534-537, 
2010.  
 
180
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

