A Study into Smart Grid Consumer-User Profiling for Security Applications 
Mutinta Mwansa, William Hurst, Carl Chalmers, Yuanyuan Shen, Aaron Boddy 
Department of Computer Science 
Liverpool John Moores University 
Byrom Street 
Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK 
Email: M.Mwansa@2017.ljmu.ac.uk, {W.Hurst, C.Chalmers, Y.Shen}@ljmu.ac.uk, A.Boddy@2011.ljmu.ac.uk 
 
Abstract— A smart meter measures energy consumption with 
more granular detail than conventional analogue meters. The 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) facilitates real-time 
two-way communication between the consumer and the rest of 
the 
energy 
grid. 
Information 
concerning 
electricity 
consumption, demand and response and home energy 
generation is communicated back to the local utility for 
monitoring and billing purposes. However, the detailed 
electricity usage patterns and trends can also be used to 
understand daily consumer habits and their routines. The 
collection and analysis of such data raises significant security 
and ethical concerns which must be adequately addressed. This 
paper focuses on the data collected from the residential smart 
grid using its default reading frequency of 30 minutes. The 
research demonstrates how the information can be exploited to 
remotely profile users and detect abnormal user behaviours 
using cloud-based analytics. Security implications are outlined 
and a case study is put forward as a demonstration of 
information that can be obtained through consumer profiling. 
Keywords- Smart meters; Profiling; Advanced Metering 
Infrastructure, Data Classification, Data Analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Smart meters are a core component of the smart grid, 
which is a complex dynamic network of interconnected 
devices. This infrastructure provides mechanisms for 
information exchange, decision making and actuation. Smart 
grid systems include producers, consumers and actors to 
ensure a resource saving and economically efficient 
electrical network. Typically, they reduce financial losses, 
operational costs and enable the suppliers to forecast their 
customers’ demands [1]. As a result, smart meters are being 
implemented on a global scale. Many countries such as the 
UK, USA, Australia and Italy are already advanced in their 
smart meter implementation. The UK alone is aiming to 
install over 50 million gas and electricity smart meters by 
2020 [2].     
    The smart grid represents a technological era of resilience, 
performance and efficiency across the entire power industry; 
from generation all the way to consumption. While the 
benefits of the smart grid are clear, it also introduces a 
number of different risks and challenges. The complexity 
and interoperability of the smart grid mean that it is exposed 
to a series of digital threats from invasion of privacy to a 
sabotage of a critical national infrastructure [3]. As the smart 
grid is highly interconnected, security attacks can originate 
from various points. As a result, electric industries invest 
heavily in cyber-threat mitigation [4]. In particular, the 
acquired data from the smart metering infrastructure poses a 
significant risk to both the grid and its stakeholders if a 
security breach occurs. The research composure in this paper 
demonstrates the type of sensitive information which can be 
constructed from smart meter data using its default reading 
frequency of 30 minutes. Here detailed routines of the 
occupant can be exposed using different profiling techniques 
and data analytics.    
 The data used in this paper is collated from a smart 
meter trial deployed in 75,000 homes. The remainder of the 
paper is as follows. A background research on smart grid 
systems and associated technologies is put forward in 
Section 2. Subsequently, typically section 3 presents a 
sample of the data collected from our smart meter case study. 
Both data visualisations and statistical analysis of the data is 
undertaken. Section 4 discusses the methodology and 
techniques used for profiling users and highlighting the 
benefits of cloud computing for data processing within the 
wider smart grid. The paper is concluded in Section 5 where 
a discussion of the results is presented. In particular, this 
paper focuses on the smart meter and investigates the novel 
approaches for consumer profiling and for the consumers to 
monitoring energy usage in real time. 
II. 
BACKGROUND RESEARCH 
A smart meter is an electronic device that records 
consumption of utility services (such as electricity and gas) 
at fixed intervals. It replaces existing analogue meters where 
energy usage readings are collected manually usually over a 
longer period.  The system automatically communicates 
consumption information using a predefined schedule, to the 
Meter Data Management System (MDMS).  
A. Smart Meters 
Typically, the main aim of the smart meter is to facilitate 
real time energy usage readings at granular intervals, to both 
the consumer and smart grid stakeholders [5]. In order to 
achieve this aim, load information is obtained from 
consumer electrical devices while measuring the total 
aggregated energy consumption for the given property. 
Additional information, such as home generated electricity 
is provided to the utility company and/or system operator 
for enhanced monitoring and accurate billing. Some of these 
roles and benefits include: 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
Accurate recording, transmitting and storing of 
information for defined time periods (to a minimum of 
10 seconds). All UK smart meters must store energy 
usage readings for a maximum of 13 months providing 
a unique insight into energy consumption. 
 
Offer two way communications to and from the meter 
so that, for example, suppliers can read meters remotely 
[6], facilitate demand and response and upgrade tariff 
information. 
 
Support future management of energy supply to help 
distribution companies manage supply and demand 
across 
their 
networks 
[7]. 
This 
is 
achieved 
automatically through previously agreed Demand 
Response (DR) actions. 
A significant amount of research exists on how the data 
collected from the smart meters can be used to detect energy 
usage patterns in residential homes via user profiling [8] 
However, investigations into the security behind the security 
of smart meter analytics, is still a challenging and prevalent 
area of research [9].  
 The collector of the device retrieves the data and may 
process it or simply pass it on for processing upstream. Data 
is transmitted via a Wide Area Network (WAN) to the 
utilities central collection point for processing and use by 
business applications. Since the communications path is two 
way, signals or commands can be sent directly to the meters, 
customer premise or distribution device. The combination of 
the electronic meters with two-way communications 
technology for information, monitor and control is 
commonly referred to as the AMI. 
B. The AMI 
The AMI facilitates the bidirectional communication 
between the consumer and the rest of the smart grid stake 
holders. It reduces the traditional need for energy usage 
readings to be collected manually [10]. The smart meter is 
able to communicate with a gateway through a Home Area 
Network (HAN), Wide Area Network (WAN) or a 
Neighbourhood Area Network (NAN), which is outlined as 
follows in Figure 1: 
Communication 
Networks
Network Management Systems
In Home Display
Smart 
Appliances
Smart Plugs
HAN
WAN
Data 
Management 
systems
Response Laod 
Control
Metering 
Management 
Systems
Markets
Suppliers
3rd parties
UTILITY COMPANIES
Smart 
Meter
 
Figure 1. Advanced Metering Infrastructure 
The HAN is housed inside the consumer premises and is 
made up of different devices e.g., Meters, Thermostats, 
Electric storage devices, ZigBee transmitters. The HAN 
contains both the electrical and gas smart meter, which 
generates detailed consumption data. The data generated is 
transmitted in NANs and WANs and eventually to the 
control station for power corrective measure [11]. The HAN 
is responsible for providing communication between 
electrical devices and the access points. The WAN handles 
the communication between the utility companies and the 
HAN. The WAN is responsible for sending all meter data to 
the utility, using a robust backhaul network, such as carrier 
Ethernet, GSM, CDMA or 3G [12]. 
All of the acquired data is sent to the Meter Data 
Management System (MDMS), which is responsible for 
storing, managing and analysing the data [13]. The MDMS 
sits within the data and communications layer of the AMI. 
This component is an advanced software platform, which 
deploys data analytics while facilitating the various AMI 
applications and objectives. These applications include: 
managing metered consumption data, outage management, 
demand and response, remote connect / disconnect, and 
smart meter events and billing [14]. This information can be 
shared with consumers, partners, market operators and 
regulators. 
C. Smart Grid Challenges concerning User Profiling 
The major concern for profiling users is the privacy of 
the consumer. As demonstrated in Section 4, smart meters 
enable detailed profiling of consumers, their energy usage 
and the household activities. This information can be used 
by others, either maliciously or inadvertently to ascertain an 
insight into an individual’s home life. For example, 
activities or occupancies of a home for specific periods of 
time can be determined. In a general sense, analysis of 
granular smart meter energy data could result in 1) invasion 
of privacy;  2) unwanted publicity and embarrassment (e.g., 
public disclosure of private facts or the publication of facts 
which place a person in a false light); 3) endangering of the 
physical security of life. The security policies governing the 
reliability of the smart grid depend on appropriate 
connectivity protocols and the national institute of standards 
and technology being the reference model proposed. [15]. 
Behaviour profiling and confidentiality of security for the 
consumers as it is inextricably linked to their privacy. This 
research is devoted to presenting ways of ensuring 
confidentiality and privacy within the smart home/smart 
grid communication interoperability. 
D. Cloud Computing and the Smart Grid 
Cloud computing is currently used to mitigate the data 
processing challenges that are associated with the smart gird 
implementation. The data generated from the smart grid 
means that cloud processing platforms are now required to 
process and extract meaning from the acquired data while 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

ensuring a robust energy delivery network. There are 
numerous advantages that are associated with cloud 
computing platforms, which can be applied to the smart 
metering infrastructure to support its various objectives 
[16]. Cloud computing is an ever developing computational 
platform, which combines hardware, storage and high 
bandwidth networking to provide scalable solutions to third 
party organisations. The smart grid requires a fault tolerant, 
efficient data processing and communications infrastructure 
in order to deliver a reliable and affordable power 
distribution network [17]. The emergence of smart grids 
brings many benefits but also various challenges in terms of 
data management and integration. The smart grid by its very 
nature is a complex platform 
with vast storage, 
communication 
and 
computational 
requirements. 
To 
facilitate these requirements smart grids can leverage the 
following cloud computing benefits:  
 
Cloud computing is flexible and scalable. This ensures 
adequate resource allocation and provisioning [18]. As 
smart grid components are deployed on a large scale, 
cloud computing can be used to overcome scalability 
problems by provisioning additional resources as 
required. 
 
Cloud services maintain the underlying computational 
hardware and software. Smart grids are regarded as a 
critical infrastructure, which supplies essential utilities 
to the consumer. Any down time in services can have a 
detrimental impact on service users. As most cloud 
components are virtualised, guests can be migrated 
from one host to another while maintenance is 
undertaken. This removes the need for downtime and 
minimises service disruption [19].  
 
Many cloud providers are geographically distributed, 
which not only ensures low latency but also provides 
service replication. Essentially, services are mirrored in 
one or more additional data centres to prevent service 
disruption in the event of an outage. 
III. 
CASE STUDY 
The project outlined in this paper theorises that the 
detailed electricity usage patterns generated by smart meters 
describes the vast amount of data collected within the smart 
grid. In order to process and analyse large volumes of data, 
we propose the use of cloud computing because of its high 
performance computing resources and the high capacity 
storage devices [20].   
The amount of data required to process transactions of 
two million customers reaches upwards of 22 gigabytes per 
day [21]. It is a significant challenge to manage this data; 
which may include the selection, deployment, monitoring, 
and analysis processes. A real-time information processing 
is usually required in the smart grid to meet the needs of 
smart grid condition monitoring based on the smart grid 
condition monitoring with cloud computing [22]. Any delay 
may cause a serious consequence in the whole system, 
which has to be avoided as much as possible. As such, the 
methodology put forward in this paper makes use of a cloud 
platform for data processing 
By the end of 2020, the UK government plans to have 
smart meters installed in every household and commercial 
business. Providers are able to use this resource by 
integrating their own software frameworks through an 
agreed communication standard. Smart meters utilise the 
ZigBee Smart Energy profile, which can be used to pair 
Consumer Access Devices CAD’s using the ZigBee 
protocol. ZigBee has an operating range up to 70 meters 
with a data transmission speed of 250kbs. In addition, the 
UK DECC have declared SMETS2, which cites the use of 
ZigBee Smart Energy 1.x. This facilities access to smart 
meter data for both consumers and other 3rd parties.   
A. Data Study 
In this sub-section, a demonstration of the data that is 
collected from smart meters and how it can be analysed to 
model user behaviour is demonstrated. Table 1 below 
demonstrates a sample of smart meter data collected over a 
period of one month (January) for a single home occupant. 
The general supply of energy used on a daily basis (the 
energy delivered) is measured in KWH and can be described 
as what is used to bill the customer.  Figure II shows an 
example of energy reading of an individual household 
meter. Data is being collected over a 30 min time interval 
period and the “energy delivered” in KWH. The customer 
key is the primary key used to identify the consumer while 
the End Date Time highlights the time and date of the 
acquired reading. Both the general supply and off peak 
supply are recorded based on the specified tariff. 
TABLE 1. INDIVIDUAL READING SHOWING A MONTH 
USAGE PERIOD. 
 
 
In order to visualise and analyse the energy usage 
patterns the smart meter data was extracted, transformed and 
loaded into a data model. The software used for this task was 
Microsoft Power BI. The platform facilitates the aggregation 
of data from multiple sources including both on premise and 
cloud infrastructure. Fig. 2 presents an example of 70K 
household meter readings showing the energy usage and the 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

behaviour trend over a period of 12 months. Here we can see 
the general distribution of energy readings highlighting the 
energy requirements for different households. This type of 
data visualisation could give suggestion to the number of 
occupants living in a given premise. Houses with increased 
energy usage are more liking to have an increased number of 
occupants.  
 
Figure 2. A Meter reading showing 12 months usage. 
Fig. 3 highlights numerous meter readings taken over a 7 
month period to demonstrate what effects a seasonal change 
has on energy usage.    
 
Figure 3. A Meter reading showing several months usage. 
 
     The data shows the trend of which period during the year 
consumers in residential homes use energy less. The high 
peaks indicate the energy is mostly used probably because 
of the winter when there is drastic drop in temperatures. As 
the data shows, it is very much possible to identify electrical 
device behaviour from smart meter data collection. 
B. Stastical Annalysis   
A Smart-frame cloud computing, is a ﬂexible, scalable, 
and secure information management framework for smart 
grids based on cloud computing technology. Our idea is to 
build the framework at three hierarchical levels: top, 
regional, and end user levels in which the ﬁrst two levels 
consist of cloud computing centres while the last level 
contains end-user smart devices. The top cloud computing 
centre takes responsibility of managing general devices and 
accumulation of data across the regional cloud computing 
centres which are placed in the lower level in the hierarchy. 
The regional cloud computing centres are in turn 
responsible for managing intelligent devices, which have 
lower hierarchical level than the regional cloud computing 
centres in speciﬁc regions (e.g., with in a city), and processing data 
of these devices. The figures below show and compare two 
users one with normal behaviour and one with abnormal 
behaviour energy usage patterns. Figure 4 presents a scatter 
graph for one smart meter in the trail. Here the results show 
that the consumer does not use electricity with any 
repeatability in behaviour.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. A Meter reading showing abnormal energy usage. 
Fig. 5 presents a scatter graph for the second smart 
meter. Here, the consumer shows clear repeatability in 
patterns of behaviour while aspects of abnormal behaviour 
can be observed in the outliners.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. A Meter reading showing normal energy usage.  
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
In the following section, we propose a novel system to 
facilitate the handling and analysis of smart meter data. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Feature 2
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Feature 1
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
The solution proposed below will help network operators 
to identify, control and manage security risks in smart grid 
infrastructures and also to establish a detailed correlation 
between energy usage, weather conditions and other events 
as well as data management solutions. 
 
Clear deviations can be seen from the above two energy 
users from their behaviour; the patterns reflect an 
individual’s unique behavioural characteristics. Figure VI 
shows how much a meter can process a vast amount of data 
in a short period and if we have a number of such users then 
data storage is extreme and hence proposal of the cloud 
computing framework below. 
A. System Design 
A cloud computing based framework for big data 
information management in smart grids provides not only 
ﬂexibility and scalability but also security. As displayed in 
Figure 6, the chosen topology to be implemented in this 
project is discussed as follows: 
Smart Grid Monitoring Applications (SCADA)
Scheduling 
Algorithm
Management, 
Dispatch
Parallel Processing System
Cloud Computing Platfrom
Data Management Systems(Database)
Server Cluster
Distributed Storage Systems
Open Source Operating Systems
Real-Time Grid 
Data
Offline Data
 
Figure 6. Cloud Computing framework for Smart Grid Monitoring 
Application 
Smart grid monitoring application (SCADA): It is an 
application layer to monitor the status of the main power 
feeders, branch circuits, electrical equipment’s, distributed 
generation units, energy storage units and the different parts 
of the smart grid to determine the real time online. 
Parallel processing system: The amount of data collected 
on the smart grid is massive, distributed and complex. The 
parallel processing system enables the system to use a 
parallel computing to utilise the in demand computational 
and storage resource of cloud computing. 
Cloud computing platform: In this architecture, cloud 
computing offers web based resizable computing capacity in 
the cloud, massive data management systems and 
distributed storage systems. Cloud platforms can play an 
important role in software architectures that allow more 
effective use of smart grid applications.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, the security implications of the smart meter 
installation are outlined.  The electronic meters for electricity 
(smart meters) are undergoing an increasing deployment in 
private homes all over the world. As a consequence, an ever 
growing physical communication network, made up of 
millions of local meters, has been established. Likewise a 
complex data processing infrastructure has emerged which 
exploits numerous technologies and services to deliver an 
automated smart metering system. 
 
 The benefits of the smart meter implementation are vast. 
However, many of the considerable advantages are so far in 
favour primarily, if not solely, of the energy distributors. 
They provide a simpliﬁed, more efﬁcient, and less costly 
transaction with customers, e.g., for meter reading, billing, 
and energy supply administration. The detail and granularity 
of the data collected can be used in many ways by utility 
companies. Some examples include forecasting energy 
usage, demand and response and consumer profiling. 
However there are future challenges facing the smart gird 
implementation.  
 
Smart grids require an enormous pool of computing and 
massive data storage requirements are discussed. Cloud 
computing is proposed to overcome these demands by 
providing highly scalable computing resources to host smart 
grid applications. The details and granularity can be used to 
address many current and future challenges, which are faced 
by the grid. One of the main challenges is to meet the 
processing and storage of the vast data collected by the smart 
meter. The smart grid infrastructure will need information 
technology support to integrate data flow from numerous 
applications, to predict power usage and respond to events. 
Cloud computing services are ideally suited to support such 
data intensive always repeatedly. A significant issue 
surrounding security and data protection remain an ongoing 
challenge for smart grid operators. The data posed in this 
paper highlights how energy usage information can be used 
to profile both large numbers of households and individual 
consumers,  
 
Our future work will be to implement coordinated fault 
protection mechanism with the help of cloud-based 
infrastructure in smart grid. In this infrastructure, different 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

pieces of equipment are able to perform together efficiently 
to implement privacy preserving data collection techniques 
such as billing, and real time monitoring. The use of machine 
learning (specifically anomaly detection) will be integrated 
into our approach to facilitate the real time detection of 
abnormal behaviour within the smart metering infrastructure. 
                                                 REFERENCES 
[1] S.Florian, “Smart grid security, Innovative solutions for a modernized 
smart grid,”  2015. 
[2] J.Zheng, D.W. Gao, and L.Lin, “ Smart meters in smart grid: An 
overview. In Green Technologies,” Conference IEEE, pp. 57-64, 
April, 2013. 
[3] E.D. Knapp, J.T. Longil, “ Industrial Network Security: Securing 
Critical Infrastructure Networks and Smart Grid, SCADA and other 
Industrial Control Systems,”  Chapter, 12, 2015. 
[4] B.Obama,  “Taking the cyberattack threat seriously,” Wall Street 
Journal, 19, 2012. 
[5] W. Lingfeng, V. Devabhaktuni, N. Gudi, “Smart Meters for Power 
Grid – Challenges, Issues, Advantages and Status,” IEEE/PES Power 
Systems Conference and Exposition, PSCE, pp. 1-7, March , 2011. 
[6] C. Bennett, D. Highfill, “Networking AMI Smart Meters,” November 
2008, IEEE Energy2030. 
[7] M. Anas, N. Javaid, A. Mahmood, S. M. Raza, U. Qasim and Z. A. 
Khan, “Minimizing Theft using Smart Meters in AMI,” Seventh 
International Conference on P2P, Parallel, Grid, Cloud and Internet 
Computing, 2012. 
 
[8] C. Chalmers, W. Hurst, W, M.Mackay, & P. Fergus,  “Smart Meter 
Profiling For Health Applications. In the Proceedings of the 
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks,”  July, 2015 
[9] K.K.R.Choo,  “The cyber threat landscape: Challenges and future 
research directions: Computers & Security,” vol. 30 no. 8, pp. 719-
731, 2011. 
[10] M.Popa, “Data Collecting  from Smart Meters in an Advanced 
Metering Infrastructure, Proceedings of 15th International Conference 
on Intelligent Engineering Systems,” 2011. 
[11] R. Robinson, J. McDonald, B. Singletary, D. Highfill, N. Greenfield, 
M. Gilmore Advanced metering Security Threat Model .  
[12] D. Niyato, P.Wang, “Cooperative transmission for meter data 
collection in smart grid,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 40, 
2012. 
[13] Y.T. Hoi,  F.T. Kim , T.C. Kwok, C.T. Hoi, R.C. Hao, P.Gerhard, 
Hancke, F.M. Kim, “The Generic Design of a High-Traffic Advanced 
Metering Infrastructure Using ZigBee,” vol. 10, pp. 836-844, 2014. 
[14] B.Coalton, and H. Darren, “Networking AMI Smart Meters,” IEEE 
Energy, vol. 2030, November, 2008. 
[15] S.Bera, S.Misra, and J.J. Rodrigues, “Cloud computing applications 
for smart grid: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and 
Distributed Systems,” vol .26, no. 5, pp.1477-1494, 2015. 
[16] D.S.Markovic, D.Zivkovic, I. Branovic, R. Popovic, and D. 
Cvetkovic, “Smart power grid and cloud computing:Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews,” vol. 24, pp.566-577, 2013 
[17] A. Gupta, L.V. Kale, F. Gioachin, V. March, C.H. Suen, B.S. Lee, P. 
Faraboschi, R. Kaufmann, and D. Milojicic, “The who, what, why 
and how of high performance computing applications in the cloud. In 
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Cloud 
Computing Technology and Science,”, no.5,July,2013. 
[18] M.Armbrust, A. Fox, A. Griffith, R. Joseph, A.D. Katz, R. 
Konwinski, A.Lee, G. Patterson, D. Rabkin, A. Stoica, and 
M.Zaharia, “A view of cloud computing. Communications of the 
ACM”, vol.53, no.4, pp.50-58,2010. 
[19] J.Baliga, R.W.Ayre, K. Hinton, and R.S.Tucker, “Green cloud 
computing: Balancing energy in processing, storage, and transport,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 99. No. 1, pp. 149-167,2011. 
[20] B.Neenan,  and R.C. Hemphill, “Societal benefits of smart metering 
investments. The electricity journal,” vol. 21. No. 8. pp. 32-45,2008. 
[21] J. Zheng, D.W. Gao,  and L. Lin, “Smart meters in smart grid: An 
overview. In Green Technologies Conference,” IEEE, pp. 57-64, 
April, 2013 
[22] B.David “is a contributing editor at Scientific American, Is the U.S. 
grid better prepared to prevent a repeat of the 2003 blackout,” 
Available from: [www.scientificamerican.com/article/us-electrical-
grid-better-prepared-than-2003-blackout-ask-the-experts/],  August,  
2013. 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

