PLASMA – Platform for Service Management in
Digital Remote Maintenance Applications
Natascha Stumpp1, Doris Aschenbrenner2, Manuel Stahl3 and Andreas Aßmuth4
1ESSERT GmbH, Ubstadt-Weiher, Germany, Email: n.stumpp@essert.com
2Technische Universiteit Delft, Delft, Netherlands, Email: d.aschenbrenner@tudelft.nl
3Awesome Technologies Innovationslabor GmbH, W¨urzburg, Germany,
Email: manuel.stahl@awesome-technologies.de
4Technical University of Applied Sciences OTH Amberg-Weiden, Amberg, Germany, Email: a.assmuth@oth-aw.de
Abstract—To support maintenance and servicing of industrial
machines, service processes are even today often performed
manually and analogously, although supportive technologies such
as augmented reality, virtual reality and digital platforms already
exist. In many cases, neither technicians on-site nor remote
experts have all the essential information and options for suitable
actions available. Existing service products and platforms do not
cover all the required functions in practice in order to map end-
to-end processes. PLASMA is a concept for a Cloud-based remote
maintenance platform designed to meet these demands. But for
a real-life implementation of PLASMA, security measures are
essential as we show in this paper.
Keywords–Remote Maintenance; Cloud Solution; IoT; Security.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A major competitive factor for manufacturing companies
is a high and reliable availability of their production facilities.
Despite already existing technology like Augmented Reality
(AR) or Virtual Reality (VR), which has the potential to
improve the service processes, a lot maintenance even today
happens manually involving expert personnel. The common
Malfunction of system
On-premise troubleshooting
Contact support hotline
Classic remote maintenance
Expert has to travel
to damaged system
Loss of time and costs
Figure 1. Course of actions without an intelligent maintenance platform.
course of actions is depicted in Figure 1. Imagine that pro-
duction in a company suddenly succumbs because one of
their machines stops working. At ﬁrst, the workers try to
ﬁnd the reason for the malfunction themselves. Maybe, the
company employs their own technicians for the maintenance
of their systems. In this case, the workers call for one of these
technicians. In most cases, these technicians do not have the
same knowledge of the machine that specialists employed by
the manufacturer of the machines have. In many cases, neither
the technician nor the worker have all essential information
or know about possible actions to solve the problem the right
away. Therefore, if the technicians are not able to solve the
problem, e.g., they cannot ﬁnd a solution in the manual of the
machine, the company contacts the manufacturer using their
hotline or website. This is when classic remote maintenance
comes into play. If the machine is connected to the Internet,
one of the manufacturer’s specialists connects to the system,
e.g., via VPN, and tries to gather more information about the
malfunction. There are numerous cases in which one of the
specialists has to travel to a broken machine to repair it in
on-site. An essential part of the machine might be physically
broken and only the manufacturer is capable of installing a
spare part. Assuming the manufacturer is situated in Europe
and the company with the broken system is, e.g., in Australia,
the travel might take days causing high costs for the company
due to the outage.
A small or medium-sized company today faces the chal-
lenge to implement their whole digital service processes in
their existing environment, but only the currently available
solutions usually cover just a small number of isolated use
cases. Additionally, even though there is a large variety of
such very specialised services, encapsulated platforms or IoT
solutions readily available it is difﬁcult to choose the ones the
company really needs and that can be used in combination
with services for other partial tasks of their digital service
processes. For a complete mapping of application-driven end-
to-end processes, it is necessary to realise a combination of
these different platforms for small and middle-sized businesses
which could probably struggle with the implementation by
themselves. And these different platforms in practice do not
necessarily interact properly with each other.
A. Objective
The joint project PLASMA aims for a holistic solution,
which complements existing end-to-end business processes and
supports the development of new service concepts, e.g., pay-
per-x or x-as-a-service. Within the project an intelligent linkage
between systems and platforms will be developed to allow
integrated support and innovative business models all around
service for production processes and facilities.
The solution should seamlessly ﬁt into all process models
and should be integrable into existing system landscapes as
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

well as Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems. Addi-
tionally, PLASMA contains an information and knowledge
management component to store and document instructions,
tutorials, service reports, master data and offers a device- and
location-independent visualization of it. PLASMA enables the
user to handle complex machine data and real-time simulations
presented in an intuitive way. With AR- and VR-support it will
be possible to offer almost real guidance for maintenance and
service cases. The service management platform can connect
customers and suppliers and is intended to reshape the whole
transparent life cycle of a product without exposing sensible
data.
B. Related work
Currently, there is a vast change within automation industry
which is attributed to be the “fourth industrial revolution”;
although this name is mainly used in a European context, there
are similar movements in the USA and Asia. [1] The goal
of all these approaches is nearly the same: Whereas informa-
tion and communication technology has advanced rapidly in
recent years, the discovered trends and possibilities shall be
transferred, so that the production industry can beneﬁt from it.
Although electronics and network infrastructure have of course
been used for a long time in an industrial production setting,
it is important to realise that plants and production machines
are high investment goods which go together with slower
innovation cycles. This means that while in the customer off-
the-shelf segment, this year’s “new” hardware or software will
be already considered “old” in half a year (and eventually even
out of stack in a very short time span), the production eco-
system has a relatively long usage period of hardware and
software.
But what is exactly changing due to “Industry 4.0”? Next
to individualised production, the core issues of Industry 4.0
can be formulated according to [2] as the integration of
Internet and networking systems, smart objects and human
machine interaction. This already emphasises the need for
higher security requirements. Internet and Cloud applications
[3] come with the need to integrate production systems in
larger network infrastructures or even in the common Internet.
The latter is strengthened by the trend to enable new kinds of
human-machine interaction: Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
and remote access on industrial infrastructure with the help of
mobile devices can without doubt offer new services or help
to decrease costs. But they are also prone to attack scenarios.
The general challenges of cybersecurity are already widely
known. According to the 2017 Global State of Information
Security Survey [4], at least 80 % of companies in Europe
have experienced at least one incident in 2016 and the number
increased by 38 % compared to the preceding year. At the same
time, approximately 69 % of European companies have either
no or only basic understanding of their exposure to cyber risks
and small and medium-sized companies tend to pay a higher
price for this than larger companies. [5]
This topic increasingly receives the necessary political
attention, for example, within the currently discussed European
legislation regarding cybersecurity and vulnerability reporting.
The above mentioned surveys mainly focus on “common”
ofﬁce and server infrastructure, although the current transition
of the production industry towards “Industry 4.0” opens a
large ﬁeld of additional vulnerabilities. At the latest, since the
Stuxnet [6] malware, the possibility of damage on industrial
infrastructure through the Internet has received worldwide
attention. In order to understand where additional concern
of security research should focus on in the upcoming years,
we provide an overview over the current changes within the
production industry and the resulting possible vulnerabilities.
Due to the above explained transformation towards “In-
dustry 4.0” a multitude of devices become connected to the
common Internet; IBM estimates that the number will increase
to 40 billion by 2020. [7] To conclude from the above remarks,
it cannot be expected that those devices have a sufﬁcient
amount of security protection. Rather, a lot of devices might
consist of old, most probably unpatched equipment, but are
wired to critical infrastructures. Practical proof of this problem
can be, for example, obtained with tools, which automati-
cally detect and index Internet-facing industrial systems. The
Shodan computer search engine [8] has been successfully
tested to be able to index and identify Programmable Logic
Controllers (PLCs). As those devices are standard components
of industrial machines, several thousand devices can be found.
As they are automatically tested on the running ﬁrmware and
indexed accordingly, known vulnerabilities can be exploited
easily.
In a 2015 overview, Sadeghi et al. [9] lists a couple
of cyberattacks on IIoT (Industrial Internet of Things) and
emphasize the fundamental difference between CPPS (Cyber-
Physical Production System) compared to classical enterprise
IT systems. In the tradeoff between security and availibility,
the CPPS requirements are fundamentally different. They
mention numerous possible attacks on intellectual property,
product piracy. After providing an overview to different se-
curity architectures for CPS (Cyber-Physical System), the
article concludes with the following statement: “However,
existing security solutions are inappropriate since they do not
scale to large networks of heterogeneous devices and cyber-
physical systems with constrained resources and/or real-time
requirements.”
The book “Cybersecurity for Industry 4.0” [10] provides
the technological foundations of cybersecurity for the produc-
tion domain. It addresses existing threats caused by (A) hu-
mans, (B) technical insufﬁciencies, and (C) physical attacks of
the actual IoT hardware. [11][12]
Recently, NIST published a draft with considerations for
managing Internet of Things cybersecurity and privacy rights.
[13] The main challenges are seen to protect device security,
protect data security and protect individual’s privacy. The
publication focusses on “Internet of Things” in the sense
explained above and does not cover speciﬁc production topics.
Are companies already aware of this topic? In the 2018
Global State of Information Security Survey (GSISS), 81 % of
the companies judge IoT to be a critical part of at least some
of their businesses. But only 39 % of survey respondents are
conﬁdent that they have established “sufﬁcient digital trust –
security, privacy and data ethics– into their adoption of IoT”.
Furthermore, the replies from organisations using robotics or
automation show that 40 % fear a disruption of operations due
to a cyberattack on those systems.
II.
THE PLASMA APPROACH
To implement a holistic interactive support for service
processes in production environments with the goal to reduce
time- and resource-consuming error search and troubleshooting
it is necessary to evaluate the following features:
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

1)
Autonomous or automated event reporting in case
of malfunction with digital communication tools like
messengers or automated ticket systems,
2)
Automated delivery of context-sensitive data sheets,
videos, reports, statistics or other helpful stored in-
formation on a large variety of devices with different
presentation models (textual, 2D, 3D, virtual, aug-
mented, simulated, etc.)
3)
An interactive remote support assistance with a far-
off specialist,
4)
A gateway to existing online-shop systems to auto-
mate the procurement of spare parts, and ﬁnally,
5)
A complete connection to well-known ERP and Cus-
tomer Relationship Management (CRM) systems.
With these features we aim to solve common use cases like
a malfunctioning robot within an industrial plant. The goal
is to ﬁnd concrete solutions to elaborate a use case shown in
Figure 2. The malfunction triggers the troubleshooting progress
and tickets are created in an instant. A smart workﬂow manager
can classify the incident and is able to suggests a solution
depending on the severity of the error and archived data. The
on-site worker gets useful information like data sheets, log
ﬁles, instruction videos, virtual representations etc. to solve
the issue by himself or receives remote support from a far-off
specialist. All progress is documented and serves as new input
for the smart workﬂow manager to sharpen its classiﬁcation
and support skills (cf. Figure 2).
Smart Workﬂow Manager
Malfunction
Troubleshooting
is triggered
Problem solving
with matching app
System learns
from malfunction
Problem solved
Figure 2. PLASMA workﬂow integrated in business processes
III.
SECURITY CHALLENGES
The amount of information, as well as the aggregation
of information makes a remote maintenance platform like
PLASMA a high-value target for attackers. Because of the key
knowledge on technologies, machines and algorithms stored
in the system, economic espionage funded by competitors
certainly is an issue. In case the attacker is not capable
of extracting the desired information from the platform, for
example, he could also try to bring the system down using a
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack. This would lead
to high ﬁnancial losses for the providers of the platform and the
customers relying on the system alike. Organised crime should
also be taken into account because these attackers could also
try to bring the system down and demand ransom money to be
paid. Last but not least, secret services might become attackers,
too, if the information stored in the platform is essential for
companies or industrial branches in that country.
To put it in a nutshell: since the remote maintenance plat-
form is intended to be hosted in the Cloud, all of the already
known security issues of Cloud services, e.g., documented by
the Cloud Security Alliance in [14], apply to PLASMA as well.
The necessity to keep the platform available and accessible has
already been stated. Considering additional security services,
e.g., as recommended by CCITT X.800 [15], it can be stated
that their importance for the system security of PLASMA is
equally essential:
Authentication: It must be ensured that every entity com-
municating with the platform is properly authenticated. This
means, the capability to perfectly identify users as well as
attached machines is needed in order to prevent Spooﬁng or
masquerading attacks.
Access Control: In addition to authentication it must be
ensured that authenticated users and machines alike are only
able to access data they are allowed to. Due to the involvement
of many different companies and roles, Role-based Access
Control (RBAC) systems that have been adapted for use
in Cloud environments, as proposed by Tang et al. [16] or
Balamurugan et al. [17], seem to meet this demand.
Conﬁdentiality: For big remote maintenance platforms,
it seems likely that they will have competing companies as
customers. This means, all data must be kept conﬁdential such
that, for instance, one company cannot get access to data from
its competitor. As stated before, a remote maintenance platform
stores and aggregates different types of information, like algo-
rithms, procedures, etc., from manufacturers and customers or
machine data about outages and errors. The system potentially
gathers data that is relevant concerning the EU General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR), like working hours of operators
or maybe errors made by certain operators. If technicians or
experts use smartglasses during the error searching process, it
is possible that other personnel might get recorded as well.
This must be considered when it comes to GDPR-compliant
saving of the data.
Integrity: PLASMA is intended to learn from previous
errors and outages and if a malfunction occurs it is supposed to
automatically suggest the most suitable action to deal with this
scenario. An attacker might want to tamper with data in a way
that leads to wrong suggestions, either to derogate trust in the
remote maintenance platform or to harm an affected company.
Other targets might be stored sensor data that lead to wrong
simulation results when modiﬁed or falsiﬁed documentation on
machines or manuals which could mislead technicians in case
of a malfunction and cause even greater (physical) damage to
the machine. Weir, Aßmuth and J¨ager have proposed strategies
for intrusion monitoring in Cloud services and for managing
forensic recovery in the Cloud. [19] It is planned to realise and
evaluate these concepts for the remote maintenance platform.
Nonrepudiation: It must be ensured that no party is
capable of denying its involvement in any communication with
or in the system. One reason to keep track of all actions in the
system is to monitor the security of the system itself. But, of
course, the provider of a remote maintenance platform wants
to earn money with the system, too. Depending on the chosen
business model the amount of messages or communication in
general could be a metric to measure the usage of the system
by a certain company and this may be used for billing.
In order to emphasise the necessity for appropriate security
measures in a Cloud-based remote maintenance platform, we
revisit the use case described in Section II and depicted in
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Figure 2. Obviously, the Cloud-based remote maintenance
platform needs to be protected against DDoS attacks, otherwise
the system would not take notice of the malfunctioning robot in
one of the customer’s industrial plants. The triggering of the
troubleshooting process might be related to another security
issue. Imagine the situation that there is no malfunctioning
robot, but the troubleshooting is triggered by a manipulated
sensor. The attacker might want to stop production in the
industrial plant or learn how the maintenance platform deals
with such problems. The adversary might also try to tamper
with the smart workﬂow manager which could lead to inap-
propriate solutions for detected malfunctions and eventually
cause even greater damage. In addition to that, if informa-
tion about malfunctions and errors, manuals or machine data
gets manipulated, the system will not be capable of learning
properly how to handle such issues. Less knowing technicians
working in the industrial plant but also specialists might be
tricked into wrong actions. Security is essential for a system
like PLASMA.
IV.
INVOLVED PARTNERS
The project core team consists of four parties: two indus-
trial partners and two partners from academia.
ESSERT GmbH provides its multi-user remote support
system and large user base as an important starting point
for the development. It already offers a detailed user and
permission administration, generates service reports for further
documentation and is available for iOS, Android devices and
smartglasses. [18]
Awesome Technologies is involved in a couple of Industry
4.0 projects which use Augmented and Virtual Reality with
actual off-the shelf head-mounted displays, which also involves
localization issues.
The cooperative setting of remote support is a very interest-
ing topic within the framework of human supervisory control
of smart cyber-physical production systems (smart factory) at
TU Delft.
The research group of Prof. Dr. Aßmuth at OTH Amberg-
Weiden has been working on concepts and solutions to ward
off cyber-attacks aimed speciﬁcally at production facilities or
vehicles for many years. In cooperation with international
colleagues, concepts for increasing the security of Cloud
services and securing forensic data in the Cloud have been
published as well. [19]
The mentioned partners are currently looking for additional
partners and funding programs for a PLASMA funding pro-
posal.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
To compete on Cloud service markets SMEs need to
focus on security challenges. Launching a great idea on the
market may fail due to insufﬁcient data security or privacy
issues. Meeting a customer’s high expectations for security is
essential and a great challenge for SMEs because there are
no negotiation opportunities. The authors are convinced that
a Cloud-based remote maintenance platform, like PLASMA,
will be needed in future. Therefore, they plan to realise such
a system in a funded research project as a collaboration of
industrial partners and partners from academia.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y. Liao, F. Deschamps, E. de Freitas Rocha Loures and L. F. Pierin
Ramos, “Past, present and future of industry 4.0 – A systematic
literature review and research agenda proposal.” International journal
of production research, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 3609–3629, 2017.
[2]
D. Zuehlke, “Smartfactory – towards a factory-of-things.” Annual
Reviews in Control, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 129–138, 2010.
[3]
P. Mell and T. Grance, “The NIST deﬁnition of Cloud Computing.”
SP 800-145, 2011, URL: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-145 [ac-
cessed: 2019.04.12]
[4]
PwC,
Ed.,
“Key
ﬁndings
from
The
Global
State
of
Information
Security
Survey
2017.”
Technical
Report,
2017,
URL:
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/assets/
2017-gsisss-bold-steps-to-manage-geopolitical-threats-ﬁnal.pdf
[accessed: 2019.04.12]
[5]
K.
Kertysova,
E.
Frinking,
K.
van
den
Dool,
A.
Mariˇci´c
and
K.
Bhattacharyya,
“Cybersecurity:
Ensuring
awareness
and
resilience
of
the
private
sector
across
europe
in
face
of
mounting
cyber
risks
–
Study.”
Technical
Report,
European
Economic and Social Committee, March 2018, URL: https://www.
eesc.europa.eu/en/our-work/publications-other-work/publications/
cybersecurity-ensuring-awareness-and-resilience-private-sector-across-
europe-face-mounting-cyber-risks-study [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[6]
R. Langner, “Stuxnet: Dissecting a cyberwarfare weapon.” IEEE Secu-
rity & Privacy, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 49–51, 2011.
[7]
R. Baxter, “Bluemix and the Internet of Things”, 2014, URL: https:
//developer.ibm.com/bluemix/2014/07/16/bluemix-internet-things
[ac-
cessed: 2019.04.12]
[8]
R. Bodenheim, J. Butts, S. Dunlap and B. Mullins, “Evaluation of the
ability of the Shodan search engine to identify Internet-facing industrial
control devices.” International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protec-
tion, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 114–123, 2014.
[9]
A.-R. Sadeghi, C. Wachsmann and M. Waidner, “Security and privacy
challenges in Industrial Internet of Things” in Proceedings of the 52nd
Annual Design Automation Conference (DAC), June 07–11, 2015, San
Francisco, USA. ACM, Article no. 54, ISBN: 978-1-4503-3520-1, 2015.
[10]
L. Thames and D. Schaefer, Eds., “Cybersecurity for Industry 4.0.
Analysis for Design and Manufacturing.” Springer, ISBN: 978-3-319-
50659-3, 2017.
[11]
J. Dia and S. Smith, “A Hardware Threat Modeling Concept for
Trustable Integrated Circuits” in Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE Region
5 Technical Conference, April 20–22, 2007, Fayetteville, USA. IEEE,
Nov. 2007, pp. 354–357, ISBN: 978-1-4244-1279-2, 2007.
[12]
A. B. Shahri and Z. Ismail, “A tree model for identiﬁcation of threats
as the ﬁrst stage of risk assessment in HIS.” Journal of Information
Security, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 169–176, 2012.
[13]
K. Boeckl et. al, “Considerations for Managing Internet of Things
(IoT) Cybersecurity and Privacy Risks.” Draft NISTIR 8228, Septem-
ber 2018, URL: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8228-draft [accessed:
2019.04.12]
[14]
Cloud Security Alliance, Ed., The Treacherous 12, Top Threats to Cloud
Computing + Industry Insights, 2017.
[15]
The International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee
(CCITT), Ed., Security Architecture for Open Systems Interconnection
for CCITT Applications, Recommendation X.800, March 1991.
[16]
B. Tang, Q. Li and R. Sandhu, “A multi-tenant RBAC model for
collaborative cloud services” in Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual
Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust, July 10–12, 2013, Tarragona,
Spain. IEEE, Sep. 2013, pp. 229–238, ISBN: 978-1-4673-5839-2.
[17]
B. Balamurugan, E. Durga Chowdary and S. Linkesh, “A Combined
Architecture for RBAC and DAC for Inter-cloud Communication”
in Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Eco-friendly
Computing and Communication Systems, December 18–21, 2014, Man-
galore, India. IEEE, Aug. 2015, pp. 167–171, ISBN: 978-1-4799-7002-
5.
[18]
ESSERT GmbH, Ed., “Augmented Support”, 2019, URL: https://www.
essert.com/en/digital-processes [accessed: 2019.04.12]
[19]
G. Weir, A. Aßmuth and N. J¨ager, “Managing Forensic Recovery in the
Cloud”, International Journal on Advances in Security, vol. 11, no. 3
& 4, pp. 264–273, 2018.
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-703-0
CLOUD COMPUTING 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

