IT Security of Cloud Services and IoT Devices in Healthcare
Michael Gleißner1,2, Johannes Dotzler1, Juliana Hartig1, Andreas Aßmuth2,
Clemens Bulitta1 and Steffen Hamm1
Technical University of Applied Sciences OTH Amberg-Weiden
1 Hetzenrichter Weg 15, 92637 Weiden, Germany
2 Kaiser-Wilhelm-Ring 23, 92224 Amberg, Germany
email: {m.gleissner | jo.dotzler | j.hartig | a.assmuth | c.bulitta | s.hamm}@oth-aw.de
Abstract—The continuous evolution of new technologies is
going to rapidly transform several sectors. A widespread hy-
pothesis claims that especially the healthcare sector will undergo
a drastic transformation with the integration of medical Internet
of Things (IoT) devices. The use of medical IoT devices results
in the implementation of necessary medically approved hard-
ware, software and attached cloud services. This leads to new
Information Technology (IT) security challenges and demands for
new IT security concepts. This paper aims to identify upcoming
security challenges by researching existing IT security guidelines
targeting network-connected medical IoT devices, their users and
the attached cloud services in homecare and integrated care.
Keywords—Internet of Things; healthcare; medical IoT; cloud
services.
I. INTRODUCTION
According to the Check Point Software Technologies Ltd.
Security Report from 2020, more than 90 percent of companies
use cloud services, with 67 percent of security departments
complaining about a lack of transparency in their cloud
infrastructure and compliance. The number of attacks on cloud
services has increased in 2019 and is expected to continue
rising in the following years. Above all, the incorrect conﬁgu-
ration of cloud systems is identiﬁed to be a major problem [1].
Additionally, the number of active connections to the Internet
of Things (IoT) will grow worldwide from 8.74 million in
2020 to 25.44 million in 2030 [2].
The beneﬁts of more devices and cloud services will ensure
a high potential for innovation especially in the healthcare
sector. However, this also increases the risk of attacks. The
healthcare sector is an area where particularly sensitive infor-
mation is stored and processed. In this ﬁeld, digitization is
seen as a key factor for growth and the opportunity for mod-
ernization. Although Germany only ranks second to last when
it comes to digitization in the healthcare system compared to
other European countries, there is a noticeable change in the
market [3]. Further digitization in the health sector will lead to
more extensive exchange of sensitive patient data. Since the
data requires special protection, the IT security has to be a
major focus point.
This paper will describe some of the speciﬁc security
considerations that need to be made in the healthcare branch
when using IoT devices and cloud services. There are some
speciﬁcs that need to be highlighted in this industry. In Section
II, an overview of the status quo concerning IT security
for medical applications is provided. Initial analysis of IoT
devices and cloud services are presented in Sections III and
IV, respectively. Both sections go into more detail speciﬁcally
for the use cases homecare and integrated care. It shows the
different special conditions of the environment from the IT
security perspective. This can be used as a blueprint for dealing
with cloud services and IoT devices in the healthcare sector.
II. RECENT WORK IN MEDICAL IT SECURITY
With the current Covid-19 pandemic, it is obvious that
the healthcare sector is forced to transform itself and adopt
new telecommunication technologies more quickly. Therefore,
medical IoT device manufacturers are eager to evolve their
current hardware and develop additional cloud services, which
can already be seen in the rapid digitization of the industrial
sector. This trend raises several IT security challenges. Firstly,
as mentioned with the development of medical IoT devices,
manufacturers are trying to enlarge their business offerings
by developing digital services. Secondly, it is obvious that
due to ﬁnancial restrictions medical healthcare facilities are
going to integrate their out-of-date medical inventory into their
existing IT infrastructure. It is obligatory to note that such
devices were never designed to operate in an IoT network,
therefore, lacking the required security design to operate
in this environment. Additionally, for most older medical
devices the original manufacturers either never intended to
provide updates from the beginning or stopped doing so. The
previously mentioned thoughts clearly illustrate upcoming vul-
nerabilities. As a consequence, several institutes and enclosed
working groups are aiming to guide and regulate medical
device manufacturers. An example for a guiding group is the
Medical Device Coordination Group (MDCG) established by
Article 103 of Regulation (EU) 2017/745. They published
the “Guidance on Cybersecurity for medical devices” [4].
This Medical Device Directive represents a ﬁrst basis of the
ongoing research when it comes to implementing IT security
in the ﬁeld of network-connected medical devices. Also, the
International Medical Device Regulators Forum (IMDRF) is
investigating cyber threats and is aiming to "promote a globally
harmonized approach to medical device cybersecurity that
at a fundamental level ensures the safety and performance
of medical devices and encouraging information" in their
current work item "Medical Device Cybersecurity Guide" [5].
From a national perspective, the German Federal Ofﬁce For
Information Security (BSI) recently published the reports of
1
Copyright (c) The Government of Germany, 2021. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-845-7
CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

their research projects “Manipulation in Medical Products”
(ManiMed) and “Digitization in Care” (eCare). These docu-
ments contain recommendations for good IT security practices
for medical manufacturers. The publication “Cyber Security
Requirements for Network-Connected Medical Devices” [6]
provides detailed assistance to manufacturers in how identiﬁed
security threats can be reduced. Even if those concepts are de-
veloped, approved and implemented it is still vital to consider
how they are embedded into their speciﬁc environment. In
detail, it is important to differentiate the surroundings (e.g.,
private home, clinic, elderly home) into which medical IoT
devices will be integrated, the technical capabilities of the
targeted user and the individual IT landscape into which the
devices are integrated.
III. MEDICAL IOT
The Internet of Things is widely known as a landscape
of interconnected devices that collect, send and store data
over a network. After an initial setup, mostly no human-
to-human or human-to-computer interaction is required. In
contrast to classic devices, most IoT devices have features
known as smart functions, which means that they can access
information on the internet, as well as be accessed from
outside their local network. In general, two types of IoT
devices can be distinguished. While there are IoT devices
that require another device (such as a smartphone) in order
to establish a connection with the network indirectly, others
are connected directly. In order to use IoT devices, connections
between the devices are required. These connections can be
wired, such as Ethernet, or wireless, e.g., USB, Bluetooth,
5G networks, WiFi and Zigbee, that should be considered in
an IT security strategy. Especially in the ﬁeld of healthcare,
speciﬁc requirements for certain devices are needed, e.g.,
connectors for an ECG have standard requirements regarding
safety (ANSI/AAMI EC53) [7]. A review of several guidelines
and standard literature reveals that the recommendations and
speciﬁcations are similar to each other and show almost no
contradiction. In this respect, different sources of information
are being used in this paper, which all have the same direction
in approaching the desired security level. The productive usage
of IoT devices has a variety of beneﬁts. In relation to the health
sector, IoT devices can proactively foresee health conditions
and patients can be diagnosed, treated and monitored auto-
matically. IoT devices increase the transparency in tracking of
medical objects. Central management enables better visibility
for a large number of devices at the same time. This offers
an opportunity to relieve medical staff and let them focus
on their actual work on patients. As a consequence, hospital
stays can be reduced and re-admissions avoided [8]. However,
these interconnections represent potential security weaknesses.
In the following section potential threats concerning medical
IoT devices are discussed. The focus is on general advice
inﬂuenced by the top-level use cases homecare and integrated
care, which are explained in detail in Section III-A and III-B,
respectively.
First, a holistic security strategy must be created. This
strategy needs to include the overarching infrastructure of the
surrounding environment. It is crucial to distinguish whether
the environment is safe and controllable (e.g., hospital net-
work) or an unprotected area (e.g., in a patient’s home). In any
case, ﬁne-grained access control mechanism and multi-level
user administration have to be part of the deployment strategy.
Otherwise, especially in unprotected surroundings, this could
be an easy gateway for data theft or data manipulation [6].
An investigation by the BSI of six medical products (e.g.,
senior tablet, emergency watch with fall detection, etc.) shows
that this has not been sufﬁciently taken into account so far.
These devices were examined for security vulnerabilities. The
bottom line remains: The IT security level of all devices is
critical, as moderate to severe weaknesses were identiﬁed,
which concludes that none of the devices were previously
subjected to an IT security test. None of the devices met the
requirements of ISO 27001 [9]. Since it is mostly sensitive
patient data, encrypted data transmission is essential. The
technical guideline TR-02102 of the BSI on cryptographic
procedures should be included in the strategy [6].
If the conﬁguration is adapted to the environment, it must
be ensured that the speciﬁcations for secure implementation
are adhered to before commissioning. In concrete terms, this
means a separation of software units and the use of already
certiﬁed and, therefore, approved implementations instead of
in-house development of services or protocols. Before medical
IoT devices are put into operation, it has to be ensured that
the assignment of permissions is restricted by default. Only
the privileges necessary for operation should be allowed at its
lowest level.
After the devices have been conﬁgured and implemented,
an automated, auditable and controllable update function must
be offered in order to be able to close known vulnerabilities
as quickly as possible. Patches and updates for medical IoT
devices in Germany have to come from known and trustworthy
sources [10].
A. Medical IoT in Homecare
The term homecare describes the treatment of patients with
medical aids, dressings and medical diets at home or in nursing
homes [11]. In the context of this research, the focus is solely
on the applications at home. Products that are being used in
nursing homes will be addressed in the Section “Integrated
Care" below. In the homecare sector, various applications (e.g.,
wearables) can support the health system, such as remote
monitoring of health progress, improving self-management
of chronic conditions, early detection of anomalies, quick
identiﬁcation of symptoms or compliance with medication
intake. However, the use of IoT equipment in a remote envi-
ronment requires a well thought out strategy to allow reaping
said beneﬁts whilst neither compromising conﬁdentiality nor
integrity.
First, the characteristics of the environment in which an IoT
device is to be deployed must be identiﬁed. This is necessary
in order to derive the precautions, which are needed for secure
2
Copyright (c) The Government of Germany, 2021. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-845-7
CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

operation. The home networks of patients differ vastly in size,
complexity and given security. Devices of a home network
are unknown and can change at any time. Additionally, it
cannot be guaranteed that all network components within the
network are state-of-the-art and that their software is being
updated regularly. Therefore, the assumption of the worst case
scenario has to be made and a generic home network has to
be classiﬁed as a hostile environment. This requires thorough
security hardening of the used IoT devices. A certain secu-
rity level can be ensured by requiring relevant certiﬁcations
from the manufacturer, but there are still no speciﬁc medical
technical certiﬁcations, which completely fulﬁll the conditions
of medical surroundings. Another option would be to request
a penetration testing report from a well-known cyber security
company, but for most applications this is not a suitable option.
In practice this could lead to additional time and money, which
needs to be spent by the customer if the IoT manufacturer
cannot provide such a report by default. This can be justiﬁed
if the product is used in critical applications. It is therefore
highly dependent on the circumstances and the amount of risk
that needs to be mitigated. The customers themselves can also
proactively increase the network security independently of the
manufacturer. A safeguard is network segmentation, where the
goal is to completely separate the communication channels of
the IoT device from the trafﬁc of the remaining home network.
The IoT device is then only able to communicate with its
intended communication partners and it cannot be accessed
from any other non-trusted network member.
Second, the consumer has to specify the expected beneﬁts
and features the product of the manufacturer is supposed to
provide. The patients’ IT skills have to be taken into considera-
tion. Because a homecare provider has to provide their services
to the entire demographic and all social classes, IT knowledge
cannot be expected (e.g., elders). Therefore, the set up and
maintenance needs to be done by an expert and it should not
be possible for a patient to change any security parameters.
The speciﬁcations also allow identiﬁcation of communication
interfaces which should be enabled or disabled. Reducing the
amount of possible communication paths minimizes the attack
surface. In the context of homecare this is even more important
because of the unsecured and unprotected environment.
B. Medical IoT in Integrated Care
Integrated care is not a well deﬁned term [12]. In this
paper integrated care will be referred to as the aspiration to
optimize workﬂows within medical facilities with the help
of digitization and IoT. Such facilities could be hospitals,
nursing homes, medical ofﬁces or any other institutions in the
healthcare sector.
Deployment of an IoT device in an integrated care facility
needs to be well thought out. The IT security of the IoT
device itself must be guaranteed and a secure infrastructure
must be available. As with the homecare use case, the ﬁrst
step is to determine how to integrate an IoT product into the
network. It is an advantage that the infrastructure, into which
a product is deployed, is completely under the customer’s
control. The customer might provide their patients with WiFi
access, for example, so these connections can be seen as
unknown members within the network. As a consequence, the
patients’ connection can be potential threats. But most of the
time network segmentation is in place to strongly separate
this kind of trafﬁc from the internal communications of the
facility. Thus, the focus will only be on integrating IoT devices
into the closed off environment of the customer. From the
perspective of the IoT device the network can be seen as
a trusted environment. However, IoT devices themselves can
only be trusted to a certain degree. According to Check Point
Software Technologies Ltd. the risk of a data breach through
IoT is substantial. It is advisable to the customer to deploy
network segmentation in a way that the IoT device only has
access to the endpoints, which are needed for it to operate
[13].
Again, the speciﬁcation of all needed features is the founda-
tion that allows for the derivation of the customer’s needed IT
know-how, as well as the product’s communication interfaces
required. The customer needs to determine if it is within the
capabilities of their staff to set up and maintain the IoT product
in question. This depends on the amount of work force and
knowledge available, as well as the complexity and number
of the products. Additionally, it needs to be ensured that only
system administrators are allowed to conﬁgure IT security
parameters. The staff which is responsible for handling the
device in operation then only requires the permission to
conﬁgure and start the product on a medical level. This is
particularly a problem in nursing homes, where there is often
neither the required IT knowledge nor enough staff.
IV. CLOUD SERVICES
In Section III, the focus was on the security of the IoT
device. In the following sections, the chain of communication
from an IoT device to its respective cloud services is going to
be analyzed. Hereby, a distinction between different types of
cloud services is going to be made. At last, the speciﬁcs of
integrated care as well as homecare are going to be discussed
as well.
When it comes to deploying IoT in any environment,
considering the device itself as part of the respective network
is necessary, but any relationships to the cloud services it is
connected to in order to provide either its intended functions
or additional features are also relevant. Similarities can be
drawn to the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). In the
IIoT, connections to different services are needed in order
provide ﬁrmware updates, receive sensor data, achieve remote
maintenance, perform analytics and other services [14]. Each
cloud service needs to fulﬁll speciﬁc tasks which can differ
vastly in complexity and the amount of data which is sent
or received over a certain period of time. Therefore, different
interfaces, protocols and connection types are needed in order
to ensure the desired functionality.
In the health sector an IoT device might be responsible
for monitoring vital data of a patient (e.g., heart rate and
blood pressure). The manufacturer might require a connection
3
Copyright (c) The Government of Germany, 2021. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-845-7
CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

to their company servers in order to provide security and
feature updates on the ﬂy. A second connection might go
to the infrastructure of the doctor or health personnel in
charge in order to receive the measurements of the sensor
for evaluation. Even more connections might be possible for
remote maintenance and other services. The work in [15] goes
into further detail on which applications might be possible
and how such a cloud platform might be implemented. It can
be seen that knowledge from industrial applications can be
used as a foundation to build on for healthcare use cases. The
main difference is that the handled information is far more
sensitive and the requirements for availability and stability are
far higher. In a worst case scenario a malfunction of the IoT
device might decide over life and death.
Three entry points can be identiﬁed where a malicious actor
might compromise security. The ﬁrst being the connection
itself from a client to the cloud service. In the following
paragraph it is assumed that the way a connection is es-
tablished and maintained from the client to the cloud is
secure. This is justiﬁed because using common state of the
art technology, such as Transport Layer Security (TLS) or a
Virtual Private Networks (VPN), already ensures a high level
of security. Furthermore, it is not the objective of this paper
to evaluate common protocols or standards (e.g., Bluetooth).
What is left is the possibility for an attacker to disrupt the
connection, for example, with a Denial of Service (DOS)
attack. An interruption of communication does not necessarily
mean that a malicious actor is present. Other reasons might
be technical difﬁculties of the provider or power outages. It
is important for the customer to develop a process in which
it is deﬁned how an unexpected interruption is supposed to
be handled. The maximum reaction time should be speciﬁed.
The reaction time is deﬁned as the time difference between
the incident happening and the execution of the reaction.
Both the steps necessary to handle a security incident and
the maximum reaction time are highly dependent on the
products and services used as well as the severity of a potential
malfunction.
A second entry point might be the device itself. The ability
to compromise an IoT device has security implications on the
cloud services. Taking control of a device, which is connected
to a cloud service, must not lead to a security breach of
the cloud service. This can be achieved by minimizing the
permissions an IoT device has within the corresponding cloud
infrastructure. The provider of the cloud service is responsible
for these security measures. Taking a look at the example
of monitoring vital data mentioned above the device should
only be able to receive updates and send sensor data. When
receiving updates the only thing being sent by the device
should be the credentials to gain access to said updates. When
sending sensor data, only valid data sets are supposed to be
accepted by the cloud service. Should the cloud service accept
any malformed data sets or instructions, then security might
be at risk. Malicious instructions might be sent which were
not intended to be executed by design. Then the doors are
potentially open for privilege escalation attacks and much
more.
The last entry point is the cloud service itself for the
IoT devices. This is the most crucial component. A breach
of security in the cloud service not only puts at risk the
availability or conﬁdentiality of a single device but of all
devices using that service. Additionally, other cloud services,
which are connected to the compromised instance, in order to
further process data, might be affected, too. Depending on the
use case the cloud service may require extensive hardening.
Guidelines and certiﬁcations help ensure the desired level of
security. Again, the number of measures that need to be taken
depends on the intended use cases and the requirements on
the different security goals.
A. Cloud Services in Homecare
As previously established in Section III-A a home network
is an inherently hostile environment, therefore, any connection
to it must be veriﬁed as thoroughly as possible. As a result,
each type of application that is supposed to be used in a
homecare scenario has to be set up with certain precautions
in order to provide a high level of security.
Three major homecare application types have been identi-
ﬁed. First, there are management applications for staff in the
ﬁeld. These services help nurses, doctors and other personnel
to manage and document every day tasks, patients’ health
records, schedule appointments and meetings as well as allow
them to use the available work force as efﬁciently as possible.
The second category is cloud applications that provide status
updates to the patients. Here patients get access to all infor-
mation related to their treatment. Additional features might be
the ability to request appointments or ask questions related
to the treatment directly online. The last and most important
category for this paper are cloud services, which are connected
to the medical IoT devices in the ﬁeld. These services are
responsible for receiving the data that is being collected as
well as managing the devices by providing updates or doing
remote management tasks.
Management platforms for the nursing staff are very potent
tools when it comes to improving the quality of service. Be-
cause a staff member has access to the data of various patients
the attack surface needs to be as small as possible. This can be
done by only allowing managed work devices. These are then
able to establish a secure connection to the respective cloud
service. A secure connection might be realized with a VPN
tunnel. VPNs require competent IT staff in order to operate
securely. This has to be kept in mind when considering VPNs
as an option because if the required work force and know-
how is not present, such a solution will not be implemented
properly, leaving the connections vulnerable again.
Patients can be given online access to updates of their treat-
ments or the possibility to request appointments. In most cases
these services will be provided over a web interface. Securing
it can be a complex task because in the end it is a website
with access to patient data. It is important that the provider
follows good practices in web development in order to prevent
vulnerabilities such as the Open Web Application Security
4
Copyright (c) The Government of Germany, 2021. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-845-7
CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Project’s (OWASP) “Top 10 Web Application Security Risks”
[16]. Additionally, the amount of information provided to the
patient should be restricted to only what is of relevance to
them to limit the amount of information leaked in case of a
security breach.
When it comes to monitoring IoT devices, which might send
vital parameters to the nursing staff over a cloud service, either
in intervals or continuously, it is essential that the connection
to their respective platform is sufﬁciently encrypted and that
only authorized devices are allowed to send (and receive)
data. VPN tunnels might be an option, which allows the
connection from the medical applications to be separated from
all potentially malicious network trafﬁc in a patient’s home.
However, even then the risk remains that an attack consumes
the complete bandwidth of the internet connection resulting in
a violation of availability.
Before integrating any of the three application types into
their productive IT infrastructure, the customer of the cloud
service needs to ﬁnd out how the provider aims to prevent
attacks on their products. This is essential because then the
customer can compare the measures which have already been
taken to their own requirements and evaluate if the level of
security is sufﬁcient for their needs.
B. Cloud Services in Integrated Care
In Integrated Care, the network that is supported by a cloud
service is completely owned and controlled by the customer.
Integrating a cloud service into one’s infrastructure can be
done in a way that both systems are more interlinked than
they would be otherwise. This allows for more possibilities
to optimize the workﬂows within the corresponding premises.
Due to the vast amount of possible applications in this context,
it is not feasible for this research to cover all possibilities in
a competent manner. Instead the focus is on the cloud as an
intermediary between IoT devices and the infrastructure of a
customer. Data is being sent by the IoT devices to the cloud,
where it is being stored to enable the staff of the customer to
retrieve the needed information.
In order to assess the necessary precautions that need to
be taken, two parameters are to be determined. First, ﬁnding
out how sensitive/valuable the data sets or assets are, which
need to be protected, is necessary. Second, it is important to
evaluate the amount of trust that can be given to a potential
cloud service provider. Both factors dictate to what extent
patient data needs to be protected. For example, if the collected
data contains location information of a patient and the service
provider is also known to offer commercial activity tracking
and other analytics services to customers it can be expected
that the service provider is interested in the data sets as well
for their own commercial proﬁt [17]. It is then necessary to
encrypt the information given to the cloud service provider in
order to prevent sensitive information to be leaked to unwanted
third parties. An approach where this has been put into practice
can be seen in [18] and [19].
Optimally, a zero trust policy is to be established, where
access to patient data is only granted to staff who need insight
into the data for operation. Due to resource limitations this can
not always be put into practice. It is vital for the customer to
build a legal framework, where the cloud service provider can
be held responsible for neglecting the security of patient data.
This should be done in two ways. First, it has to be ensured
that the cloud service provider is a trusted and certiﬁed entity,
where the required know-how exists to provide comprehensive
security and service. Certiﬁcations such as ISO 27001 are good
indicators as to whether the potential service provider takes
their information security seriously. Additionally, the customer
should not only deﬁne the measures that need to be taken by
the provider to protect the data from leaks to third parties in
a written agreement, but should also record what the cloud
service provider is allowed or restricted to do with the stored
data. This should be done to avoid any unwanted analytics
done by the cloud service provider, which could potentially
leak sensitive patient data unwillingly. Finally, security and
privacy audits should be carried out on a regular basis.
V. 5G4HEALTHCARE
The mentioned use cases homcare and integrated care are
also the main focus of the research project 5G4Healthcare
funded by the German Federal Ministry of Transport and Dig-
ital Infrastructure. Its goal is to explore the effectiveness and
efﬁciency of healthcare services to derive recommendations for
scalable solutions with the help of 5G technology. IT security
is a crucial workstream within the project. So far, medical
technologies (e.g., mobile ultrasound devices, televisit trolleys,
medical robots) have been purchased within the project and
are being examined with regard to IT security. The results
of the investigations are still pending. However, due to the
sensitive data, the relevance of IT security is high, since simply
changing medium of communication does not guarantee higher
security, which could be a misconception due to the novelty
of the 5G technology.
Concept
Implementation
Evaluation
Recommendation for Action
Initial Idea
Homecare
Integrated Care
First Milestone
Second Milestone
Scenario
Scenario
Figure 1. Workﬂow of a test scenario used by the 5G4Healthcare research
project.
5
Copyright (c) The Government of Germany, 2021. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-845-7
CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

As can be seen in Figure 1, application scenarios are
designed for the two use cases integrated care and homecare
(phase 1), implemented in model form (phase 2) and tested
and evaluated (phase 3). A platform based on 5G will be
established, that enables testing and evaluation of digital appli-
cations in living labs (real-world environments) and test beds.
So far it turned out that 5G applications in healthcare must
meet essential requirements such as reliability, availability and
conﬁdentiality for rapid and high-volume data transmission.
5G enables the continuously increasing capacities of digital
applications in terms of bandwidth, availability and latency,
which are prioritized differently depending on the application.
Most of the products used in the test scenarios are IoT
devices with their associated cloud services. These scenarios
demand for extensive security evaluation in parallel to the main
objective of the research project. Details of the research results
will be published in future.
VI. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
This paper points out the need for common IT security
guidelines and independent testing laboratories when design-
ing and using medical IoT devices in productive environments.
Institutes, regulators and others are currently focusing on
developing recommendations and guidelines for IoT manu-
facturers but no proper entity checks on a regular basis or
even worse, never, if manufactures comply with approved
guidelines. Moreover, current guidelines do not take into
account different environments, e.g., public hospitals or private
homes, where medical IoT devices are going to be used.
The authors conclude from the analysis made above, that
different environments require different set-ups and different
conﬁgurations. As a result different levels of certain IT-skills
are needed for secure operation when embedding medical IoT
devices in an existing IT infrastructure. Also, it is obvious that
manufacturers are aiming to enlarge their IoT product portfolio
by developing supporting cloud services and platforms. The
additional cloud service offerings underpin the fact that in
contrast to the fourth industrial revolution IoT devices, medical
IoT devices need to comply to stricter requirements and should
be required to pass recurring testing cycles by speciﬁc medical
independent regulators. Doing so beneﬁts the patient’s well-
being and trust. Otherwise, a wide adaptation of trustworthy
medical IoT devices in the sensitive healthcare sector is
doomed to fail. Mastering those upcoming challenges, which
are going to exponentially grow by adopting 5G, must be
unequivocally investigated from different perspectives such as
environment, users and certiﬁcations to guarantee a trustwor-
thy development and usage life cycle. First and foremost, it is
obvious that a ﬁne-grained segmentation of IoT devices based
on their levels of sensitivity in usage is vital to support the
administration and monitoring of sensitive IoT devices and
ﬁnally ensure a secure operating environment.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is funded as part of recently granted
5G4Healthcare project by the German Federal Ministry of
Transport and Digital Infrastructure within the 5x5G Initiative.
REFERENCES
[1] Check Point Software Technologies Ltd., “Cyber Security Report 2020,”
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.ntsc.org/assets/pdfs/cyber-
security-report-2020.pdf [retrieved: 2021.03.02]
[2] Transforma
Insights,
“IoT
Connected
Devices
World-
wide
2019-2030,”
Statista,
2020.
[Online].
Avail-
able: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1183457/iot-connected-devices-
worldwide/ [retrieved: 2021.03.02]
[3] T. Thranberend and T. Kostera, “Digitale Gesundheit: Deutschland hinkt
hinterher [Digital Health: Germany is lagging behind],” 2018. [Online].
Available:
https://www.bertelsmann-stiftung.de/de/themen/aktuelle-
meldungen/2018/november/digitale-gesundheit-deutschland-hinkt-
hinterher [retrieved: 2021.03.02]
[4] Medical Device Coordination Group, “MDCG 2019-16 Guidance
on
Cyber
Security
for
Medical
Devices,”
Dec.
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/41863/
attachments/1/translations/en/renditions/native [retrieved: 2021.03.02]
[5] International
Medical
Device
Regulators
Forum,
“Medi-
cal
Device
Cybersecurity
Guide,”
2021.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://www.imdrf.org/workitems/wi-mdc-guide.asp
[retrieved:
2021.03.02]
[6] Bundesamt
für
Sicherheit
in
der
Informationstech-
nik,
“Cyber
Security
Requirements
for
Network-
Connected
Medical
Devices,”
Nov.
2018.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/EN/BSI/ICS/
Medical_Devices_CS-E_132.pdf [retrieved: 2021.03.02]
[7] D.
Guttadauro,
“Electrical
Connectors:
Design
Considerations
for
Medical
Devices,”
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.medicaldesignbriefs.com/component/content/article/mdb
/features/articles/33986 [retrieved: 2021.03.02]
[8] GMO
GlobalSign
Ltd.,
“Das
Gesundheitswesen
der
Zukunft:
Das
IoT
prägt
die
Branche
schon
jetzt
[Healthcare
of
the
Future:
IoT
is
already
shaping
the
industry],”
Sep.
2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.globalsign.com/de-de/blog/iot-
gesundheitswesen-der-zukunft [retrieved: 2021.03.02]
[9] Bundesamt
für
Sicherheit
in
der
Informationstechnik,
“eCare
-
Digitalisierung in der Pﬂege - eine aktuelle Marktanalyse und IT-
Sicherheitsbetrachtung [eCare - Digitization in Nursing Care - A current
market analysis and IT security review],” Dec. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/
DigitaleGe-
sellschaft/eCare_Abschlussbericht.pdf [retrieved: 2021.03.02]
[10] Bundesamt
für
Sicherheit
in
der
Information-
stechnik,
“SYS.4.4
Allgemeines
IoT-Gerät
[SYS.4.4
General
IoT
Device],”
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/Grundschutz/
Kompendium_Einzel_PDFs/07_SYS_IT_Systeme/
SYS_4_4_Allgemeines_IoT_Geraet_Edition_2020.pdf
[retrieved:
2021.03.02]
[11] Bundesverband
Medizintechnologie,
“Homecare,”
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.bvmed.de/de/versorgung/homecare
[retrieved:
2021.03.02]
[12] D. L. Kodner and C. Spreeuwenberg, “Integrated Care: Meaning, Logic,
Applications, and Implications – a Discussion Paper,” International
Journal of Integrated Care, vol. 2, no. 4, Nov. 2002. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ijic.org/article/10.5334/ijic.67/ [retrieved: 2021.03.29]
[13] Check
Point
Software
Technologies
Ltd.,
“Healthcare
Breaches
Affected
Nearly
One
Million
US
Patients:
The
Se-
curity
Risks
of
Medical
IoT,”
May
2019.
[Online].
Available: https://blog.checkpoint.com/2019/05/29/ultrasound-iot-hack-
security-risks-healthcare-medical-device-michigan-ransomware/
[re-
trieved: 2021.03.02]
[14] M. Molle et al., “Security of Cloud Services with Low-Performance
Devices in Critical Infrastructures,” in The Tenth International Con-
ference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization, B. Duncan,
Y. W. Lee, M. Westerlund, and A. Aßmuth, Eds., International Academy,
Research, and Industry Association.
International Academy, Research,
and Industry Association, 2019, pp. 88–89.
[15] S. Bharati, P. Podder, M. R. H. Mondal, and P. K. Paul, Applications and
Challenges of Cloud Integrated IoMT.
Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2021, pp. 67–85.
6
Copyright (c) The Government of Germany, 2021. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-845-7
CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[16] Open
Web
Application
Security
Project,
“OWASP
top
ten
web
application
security
risks,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/ [retrieved: 2021.03.02]
[17] S. Sharma, K. Chen, and A. Sheth, “Toward Practical Privacy-Preserving
Analytics for IoT and Cloud-Based Healthcare Systems,” IEEE Internet
Computing, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 42–51, 2018.
[18] M. Anuradha et al., “IoT enabled cancer prediction system to enhance
the authentication and security using cloud computing,” Microprocessors
and Microsystems, vol. 80, p. 103301, 2021.
[19] R. Denis and P. Madhubala, “Hybrid data encryption model integrating
multi-objective adaptive genetic algorithm for secure medical data
communication over cloud-based healthcare systems,” Multimedia Tools
and Applications, mar 2021.
7
Copyright (c) The Government of Germany, 2021. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-845-7
CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

