Securing the Internet of Things from the Bottom Up
Using an Immutable Blockchain-Based Secure
Forensic Trail
Bob Duncan
Computing Science
University of Aberdeen, UK
Email: bobduncan@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract—It has traditionally been the case that the Internet of
Things represents the weak link in the corporate information
system chain. While research has tried to improve the status
quo, this has brought a new challenge to the table. Corporate
systems, while generally much stronger than Internet of Things
systems, are not, in themselves, totally secure. This is especially
true of cloud-based systems. This major ﬂaw arises because of the
difﬁculty in safeguarding the forensic trail of corporate systems.
The ﬁrst thing the attacker does as soon as they have penetrated
a corporate system, is to delete all the evidence of their entry
from the forensic records of the corporate system, and there is
usually very little to prevent this from happening. This is why it
is such a challenge for authorities to trace attackers and bring
them to account. The forensic trail is often the least protected
part of corporate systems, but is arguably the most important
from a compliance point of view. We show how it is possible to
secure the forensic trail for corporate systems users who adopt
these secure IoT approaches, by adopting the straightforward
approach we suggest here to protect the forensic trail through
the use of Blockchain. This will allow corporates to ensure the
overall system can be secured, but more importantly, will provide
a means to ﬁght back against the attackers.
Keywords–Corporate Systems; Internet of Things; Immutable
Forensic Trail; Blockchain; Distributed Ledger Technology.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Internet of Things (IoT), a term ﬁrst coined by Kevin
Ashton in 1999 [1] was one of those great inventions that
everyone thought would be the next big thing. Until they
were implemented, and suddenly, the realisation struck that
nobody had really considered how security might be an issue.
Since most ‘things’ were produced with minimal resources, so
that they would be cheap to buy, this also meant there was
little ability to process the information collected and carried
onwards, let alone be able to deal with security. Like all new
advances in computing over the decades, it never takes certain
people long to ﬁgure out a way to abuse the new technology
for their own malicious ends.
The applications could be limitless, offering huge potential
for operating efﬁciencies. For example, in some industries,
many Supervisory, Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)
systems have been implemented to allow the company to
control industrial process over a wide geographical area. Many
components are highly specialised, very expensive, and can
often only be upgraded once a year when the whole operational
facilities are shut down for their annual maintenance program.
Many of these SCADA components are decades old, because
they are ultra reliable, but very expensive to replace.
However, when some bright spark suggested adding IoT
devices all over the area to provide readings, or carry out
functions that require people to physically travel to each
location, this was seen as a great way to save huge sums on
payroll and travel costs. Until those other people ﬁgured out
there was little to zero security on these cheap IoT devices, and
suddenly, they had unprecedented and unlimited access to not
only the entire SCADA system, but could often leverage that
access into conﬁdential corporate systems because they were
entering those systems from a ‘trusted’ source system. All too
often, corporates were lax on the implementation, and review,
of anomalous exceptions, meaning intrusions were frequently
missed. Oman and Schweitzer [2] expressed concern about
how this trend could pose threats to both power substations and
SCADA controllers. Creery and Byers [3] were very concerned
about how this hybridization of systems could lead to unin-
tended security consequences. Kropp [4] warned of the double
increase to risk brought about through the move from regulated
industries coupled with the use of networked systems. Ralston,
Graham and Hieb [5] carried out a risk assessment for SCADA
and Distributed Control Systems (DCSs) networks, and were
very concered about the increase in security risks posed.
Thus, those attackers would not only have access to the
sensitive corporate system, but they could also cause mayhem
by interfering with the SCADA equipment. This allowed for
the possibility to shut down gas, water or sewage pipelines,
shut off electricity supply, or cause massive damage to the
SCADA systems as a whole.
The solution is surely the development of highly secure IoT
systems? Sadly, that can only go part of the way to solving
the problem. That is because the main corporate systems and
the SCADA systems remain weak. In the following decade,
Ericsson [6] is concerned about the development of the smart
grid, and is concerned that often there is insufﬁcient separation
between operational and administrative computer systems,
leading to security weaknesses. Wilhoit [7] of Trend Micro,
expresses concenns around the importance of these systems,
yet their continued lack of security persists. Adding a highly
secure IoT system simply means the attacker will go into the
main system, then coming from the main source, will have
authorisation to get into the new highly secure IoT system,
thus allowing them to render the security ineffective.
There can only be one proper solution. We simply need to
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

protect the one thing all attackers crave — the forensic trail!
Will that ensure we ﬁnally have a secure system then? Not
exactly. Attackers will still be able to get into the system. But
now, with the forensic trail preserved, we now have the proof
of what the attacker did once they got into the system. This
means recovery will be able to become far more focussed than
before. With no complete forensic trail to work with, a full
search and investigation into all systems becomes necessary
to try to work out what has been compromised or exﬁltrated.
However, with a full forensic record showing who did what,
we instantly know what to check.
In 2016, Duncan and Whittington [8] emphasized the vital
importance of the need to secure the audit trail. Duncan and
Whittington [9] proposed the use of an immutable database
to secure the audit trail and system logs. Duncan, Happe
and Bratterud [10] proposed a novel method of achieving
this using unikernels. Zhao and Duncan [11] considered the
possibility of using Blockchain to secure the forensic trail,
by considering how secure the Blockchain was in its original
use in cryptocurrencies. Zhao and Duncan [12] looked at
the possibility of using Blockchain without the cryptocurrecy
element as a way forward for securing the forensic trail.
In Section II, we take a look at why companies should
care about the implications of legislative and regulatory non-
compliance for any company. In Section III, we identify what
the Cloud Forensic Problem is, and address why it is such
a challenging problem to overcome. In Section IV, we ask
whether it is possible to attain compliance without addressing
the cloud forensic problem. In Section V, we consider how
we might secure corporate systems. In Section VI, we look at
the detail of how Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) might
help us achieve a solution. In Section VII, we consider and
discuss the limitations of this work, and in Section VIII, we
discuss our conclusions.
II.
WHY SHOULD COMPANIES CARE ABOUT
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY COMPLIANCE?
Why should companies be concerned about compliance
with Legislative and Regulatory compliance requirements? The
answer to that is quite simple. Criminals who wreak havoc by
attacking online systems are extremely difﬁcult to identify and
track down, due to a combination of thier skills in covering
their tracks, and also through challenging jurisdictional issues.
The primary goal of any attacker is to remove all record of their
presence in the system by identifying all elements recording
their presence from the system forensic records.
After ﬁnancial deregulation in the UK during the mid-
1980s by the Margaret Thatcher Government, the ‘free-for-
all’ that followed, along with the numerous losses that arose
due to unethical behaviour, the Government invited Sir Adrian
Cadbury [13] to carry out a review to see what could be done,
and this resulted in the introduction of Corporate Governance
for public listed companies, together with the introduction
of the Combined Corporate Code. This has subsequently
been revised and updated, usually every three years, and has
accustomed corporates to adhere to the notion of compliance,
in this case for corporate governance at the highest levels of
these corporates. Of course there has always been the notion
that compliance is required with legisalation, as well as many
industry regulations.
Large corporates traditionally had a lax attitude to looking
after customer data properly, so Legislators and Regulators
decided that, since these corporates had a responsibility to look
after customer records, which they were clearly failing to do,
they would go after these companies. The recent introduction
of the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [14],
took these penalties to new heights, with the power to ﬁne
companies who were non-compliant up to 4% of their annual
turnover, or up to e20 million, whichever was the greater.
In the US, the US authorities have a raft of legislation to
ensure companies do the right thing. Facebook were brought
to task last year for privacy breaches, and a settlement was
reached of some $3 billion. Of course, Facebook are not yet
out of the woods. At they same time as the US intervention,
they were also brought to task by the Canadian Authorities,
as well as the EU under GDPR. Due to the signiﬁcant size
of the non-compiance, the investigations are being carried
out sequentially, rather than concurrently. In the UK, the
GDPR, whose regulator is the Information Commissioner’s
Ofﬁce (ICO) proposed ﬁnes last year of £183.5 millon and
£99.5 million respectively to British Airways and the Marriott
Hotel Group for privacy breaches. This represents a signiﬁcant
change in approach from both countries.
The US is a particularly litigious country anyway, and when
it comes to company wrongdoing, there is no change there. The
UK regulator has recently become far more disposed to bring
non-compliant corporates to task for their shortcomings. There
is no doubt that other jurisdictions have taken notice of this and
are also stepping up their approach to mirror these approaches.
This means that wherever a large corporate operates in the
globe, the regulatory and legislative environment will continue
to become far more challenging as time passes. Thus it would
make sense to ensure that they achieve compliance with all
the relevant legislation and regulation to safeguard their own
position.
Since the various legislators and regulators throughout the
globe have yet to ﬁgure out how to catch cybercriminals
with enough consistency to make any meaningful impact, the
burden will continue to fall on corporate shoulders. While
these shoulders might have been broad in previous years, now
that they have had the adverse economic effects of a global
pandemic to contend with, even their shoulders will no longer
be so broad. This means that the economic shock of larger
ﬁnes will potentially prove catastrophic over time.
Since the ICO investigation into the British Airways attack
started, negotiations have been ongoing between British Air-
ways and the ICO, and due to the huge economic impact of
the global pandemic on the airline industry, a much reduced
settlement of £20 million has now been reached. While this is
signiﬁcantly less than the proposed fone of £183.5 million, it
will still hurt. No doubt the Marriott group will be hoping that
their constrained economic circumstances as a result of the
global pandemic might now also be taken into account when
settling their eventual ﬁne.
When it came into force, the EU GDPR was touted as
the world’s toughest privacy law, but not all of the 28 EU
countries were ready to implement it at that time. During the
last two and a half years since then, Countries like the UK,
France, Germany and Italy have been starting to ﬂex their
regulatory muscles, although many smaller countries are yet
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

to get serious. It is clear that smaller countries like Ireland
and Luxembourg, where many tech companies are registered,
have yet to bring any successful large action against any US
big tech ﬁrm. Also, a number of EU countries still do not
publish regulatory ﬁnes lists. Given the economic dependence
of many of the smaller countries, one has to ask whether they
are best placed to regulating big tech.
III.
THE CLOUD FORENSIC PROBLEM (AND WHY IT IS
SUCH A DIFFICULT PROBLEM)
All computing systems are constantly under serious attack,
and where cloud computing is in use, this can become an even
more serious issue. Once an attacker gains a foothold in a cloud
system and becomes an intruder, there is little to prevent the in-
truder from helping themselves to any amount of data covered
by legislation and regulation, either by viewing it, modifying
it, deleting it or ex-ﬁltrating it from the victim system [15],
[16], [17]. Worse, there is nothing to prevent the intruder from
gaining sufﬁcient privileges to then completely delete all trace
of their incursion, possibly deleting far more records than they
need to in the process, leading to further problems for business
continuity. Traditional non-cloud systems may also be equally
vulnerable, particularly where transaction log monitoriing is
not a priority.
This problem is often known as “The elephant in the room”
in cloud circles. Pretty much everyone knows about it, yet
nobody is prepared to discuss it, let alone try to resolve the
problem, due to the difﬁculty of the challenge it presents. Make
no mistake, this is a serious challenge to defend against, let
alone overcome. However, not only is it a serious challenge
for organisations using cloud, it also presents a major obstacle
to compliance with legislation and regulation, thus exposing
corporates to much further potential harm.
Once all trace of the intrusion has been deleted, there
will be limited forensic trail left for authorities to follow.
This means many companies may be totally unaware that the
intrusion has even taken place, let alone be able to understand
which records have been accessed, modiﬁed, deleted or stolen.
All too often, companies will believe they have retained a full
forensic trail in their systems, but often forget that without
special measures being taken to save these records off-site [18],
they will no longer be available.
Currently, in any computer system, there must be a com-
plete and intact audit trail in order for the breached organi-
sation to be able to tell which records have been accessed,
modiﬁed, deleted or stolen. Where the audit trail and all
forensic records have been deleted, there remains no physical
means for any organisation to be able to tell which records
have been accessed, modiﬁed, deleted or stolen, putting these
organisations immediately in multiple breaches of the legisla-
tive and regulatory authorities, leaving them exposed to large
potential ﬁnes.
IV.
IS IT POSSIBLE TO ACHIEVE COMPLIANCE WITH
LEGISLATION AND REGULATION WITHOUT ADDRESSING
THE CLOUD FORENSIC PROBLEM?
There can be no guarantee that compliance can be achieved
without addressing the cloud forensic problem [19]! It should
be noted that this problem also can pertain to conventional
systems as well as IoT systems. Looking to the previous
section, we can see that there is nothing to prevent an intruder
from destroying every scrap of forensic proof of their incursion
into any computer system. It is clear that any form of forensic
record or audit trail can not therefore be safely stored on any
conventional computer system, nor any running cloud instance,
nor any standard IoT system.
This means that the only safe method of storage of forensic
data will be somewhere off-site from any running computer
system. Clearly, separation of the storage from the running
computer system would be the preferred solution. the off-site
storage must be highly secure, preferably stored in an im-
mutable database, and should especially be held in encrypted
format, with all encryption keys held elsewhere.
There are those who say that as long as they are not
breached, they will not be in breach of legislation or regulation.
While it lasts, that would certainly be true, but consider, how
will they be able to tell whether they have been breached, or
not? What if they have been breached, and the breach has been
very well covered up. They will have no means of knowing
whether a breach has arisen, let alone who perpetrated it,
how they got in or what they viewed, modiﬁed, deleted or
ex-ﬁltrated from the victim system. Given the propensity for
modern hackers to boast about their attacking prowess, it is
not likely that the attack will be missed by regulators for long.
What if a complaint is made that a customer’s data has
been stolen? The organisation will have no means of proving
whether the data has been tampered with, or not. Equally, if,
as is most likely, the breach has been extremely well covered
up, they will neither have the means of complying with the
reporting requirements, nor be able to understand exactly what
has been compromised. This begs the obvious question: How
do we secure the corporate system properly?
V.
HOW TO ADDRESS SECURING CORPORATE SYSTEMS
Let us ﬁrst consider what we require. First, we need to
ensure the integrity of our systems. This means we need to
be able to retain a full forensic trail of all activities within
the system. We also need to make it difﬁcult for attackers to
access. This means it needs to be separated from the main
systems. It should also be difﬁcult for attackers to understand
where the records they seek to obliterate are. This would imply
that encryption would be a prudent measure to include, along
with some form of immutable database.
That does not seem to be a complicated requirements set.
Will it be enough? Providing it is kept securely away from
the main system, it provides exactly what we need to be
able to understand what has happened to our system in the
event of a breach. We can see from the complete forensic trail
how the attacker got in, what they did from there, and what
records they viewed, modiﬁed, deleted or ex-ﬁltrated from the
system. Investigative agencies can do a great deal with minimal
information. How far they could go with a full forensic trail?
To meet these speciﬁc requirements, we can turn to the
ﬁnancial system to ﬁnd a suitable solution, speciﬁcally to the
area of cryptocurrencies. Anything to do with money is highly
attractive to attackers. Cryptocurrencies have to be secure, have
to have a bullet-proof audit trail to ensure the provenance of
transactions, yet need a high level of privacy, which is possible
with the assistance of Blockchain.
Typically, cryptocurrencies use a public blockchain ap-
proach, using a great many public “miners” to carry out all
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

the provenance and privacy work using encryption algorithms
along with a consensus mechanism to agree the audit trail. This
does make the ledger fully public, but also introduces a high
element of latency where thousands or hundreds of thousands
of miners are involved. The cryptocurrency record becomes
effectively immutable after consensus through this DLT. A
private blockchain approach could deliver a vastly reduced
latency, with the administration being funded by the corporate,
whereby they either run their own blockchain system, or they
might contract this DLT work in, if such facilities were offered
by professional ﬁrms. These are the kind of services the big
four auditing ﬁrms could offer, which could provide high levels
of assurance to the corporate users. We shall consider the detail
in the next section.
VI.
HOW CAN DISTRIBUTED LEDGER TECHNOLOGY
HELP SOLVE THE PROBLEM?
Let us ﬁrst have a brief look at the detail of how cryptocur-
rencies work. We will take a brief overview of Bitcoin, since
this was the cryptocurrency that was able to get cryptocur-
rencies off the ground back in 2009. To use Bitcoin, a user
must ﬁrst install a Bitcoin Wallet, which is require in order
to pay or to receive money. We will return to this later. The
core of the strength of all cryptocurrencies is the Blockchain,
which is a Shared Public Ledger (SPL). This ledger is fullly
distributed, hence Distributed Ledger Technology. Once a new
transaction is made to or from the user’s wallet, this transaction
is deemed to be ‘pending’ until it has been veriﬁed by a number
of ‘miners’ until consensus is reached, at which point it will
become part of the blockchain. This provides the veriﬁcation
of the transaction’s integrity in the bitcoin wallet. This process
involves entering the transactions into the blockchain in a
speciﬁc order, enforced by a strict cryptographic process
(carried out by the ‘miners’) to ensure the integrity and
chronological order of the Blockchain, in essence, creating an
immutable record of all veriﬁed transactions. Once entered
into the Blockchain, it is not possible to modify or delete
these transactions. It is only possible to add a plus or minus
transaction at a later date or time, thus ensuring a robust audit
trail of all the ﬁnancial transactions that have been processed.
Thus, the blockchain provides the immutable audit trail, and
this veriﬁes the user bitcoin wallets.
For our purposes, we do not require a public Blockchain,
or SPL, and thus do not need an army of ‘miners’, all of
whom need to be rewarded. This usually happens by awarding
them a speciﬁc fraction of a bitcoin for their work. Instead,
the corporate will need to provide, secure, and pay for, their
own private distributed blockchain ledger. Since this is likely
to become a target for attack, each of the many versions of the
Blockchain the corporate sets up should be stored away from
the primary system it is trying to protect. These blockchain
systems should be set up with only the absolute minimum
software required, with all public facing access removed. All
software should be extensively hardened, with no option to
delete or amend the Blockchain software.
Then, it is a simple matter for the corporate to decide
on precisely what to defend. It is important to be absolutely
clear on exactly what needs to be protected, and what will
be involved. Clearly, adequate resources will need to be
provisioned to collect the considerable volume of data that will
be needed. There is no doubt that it will be more expensive to
collect, store, and protect this information than under normal
operations. However, it is important to realise that instead of
being clueless in the face of a successful breach, the corporate
will have a considerable amount of veriﬁed data to hand,
which will clearly help mitigate any potential breach penalties,
since very targeted information on the attackers can be passed
to both the regulatory authorities as well as to the relevant
government agencies, such as police and security services, and
so on.
The data collected will also be useful for performing data
analytics to discover the footprint used by attackers, which
can be used to adapt existing access control systems to become
more robust. It would also be ineteresting to have the capability
to turn the tables on the attackers.
VII.
LIMITATIONS AND DISCUSSION
Many people point to the signiﬁcant cryptocurrency
breaches we have seen during the past decade:
•
Bitcoinica 2012 [20], 46,703 bitcoins stolen followed
by another 18,757;
•
Mt Gox 2014 [21], $460 million hack, following a
previous hack in 2011 of $8.75 million;
•
Bitﬁnex 2016 [22], $72 million hack;
•
Decentralized Autonomous Organization (DAO) 2016
[23], $70 million hack;
•
Coincheck 2018 [24], $530 million hack.
All very damning evidence for the weakness of Blockchain.
Or was it? Zhao and Duncan [25] carried out an investigation
on whether these attackes had been able to exploit any weak-
ness in the Blockchain and discovered that:
•
Bitcoinica stored large amounts of bitcoin online,
rather than in off-line stecure storage;
•
Mt Gox attack succedded due to a combination of poor
management, neglect and inexperience;
•
Bitﬁnex thought they made their systems more secure,
but failed to spot they had created an exploitable
weakness, which was duly exploited;
•
DAO there was a ﬂaw in their system which could be
exploited by a recursion attack. It was duly exploited.
Nice return for a couple of hours work.;
•
Coincheck did not use secure networks.
Thus it is clear that in every one of these successful attacks,
the Blockchain could not be breached. The lesson here is that
it is impossible to simply rely on the blockchain alone for good
security. Every element of a system must be properly secured
in order to ensure the success of the whole.
It is also true that the original aim of Blockchain was to
provide a high level of privacy, but Meiklejohn et al., [26],
Ober, Katzenbeisser and Hamacher [27], Reid and Harrigan
[28], plus Ron and Shamir [29] all observed that Bitcoin
delvered much weaker privacy than was ﬁrst expected. How-
ever, since this was based on the use of the public Blockchain,
this is not likely to be an issue where a private Blockchain is
in use.
Another area of concern arose in observing how some
‘miners’ exhibited selﬁsh behaviour to try to increase their
gains by ‘pool hopping’. To try to prevent this, Rosenfeld
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[30] drew attention to the mechanism design problem of trying
to keep rewards constant over time. Babioff et al., [31], and
later Eyal and Sirer[32] expressed their concerns that the
mining protocol rules can not be considered to provide true
equilibrium strategies if users have the option to withhold
information both on a selective and a temporary basis over
time. The use of a private Blockchain can remove this issue.
The 2013 introduction of another cryptocurrency, Ethereum
[33], opened up the possibility to use smart contracts to extend
the capabilities of the Blockchain. It is likely that for forensic
trail preservation, this is likely to be something of an overkill.
In 2016, McConaghy et al., [34] presented BigchainDB,
a scalable Blockchain database, suitable for big data applica-
tions. In this paper, the authors presented a comprehensive
description of their proposal, including a full analysis of
performance, latency and preliminary experimentation results.
They also introduced a new concept of Blockcahin pipelining
which provides the mechanism to deliver scalability gains.
In looking at how IoT security could be revolutionised,
Liu et al., [35] demonstrated how their proposed solution for
a Blockchain based data integrity service framework for IoT
data could outperform the use of Third Party Audit (TPA)
offerings. Westerlund and Kratzke [36] suggested how the use
of Blockchain could help address some of the inherent security
issues of using IoT. Qu et al., [37] proposed a Blockchain
based credibility veriﬁcation method for IoT entities. Angin
et al., [38] addressed the shortcomings of IoT devices and
proposed a solution to improve their security. Dukkipati et al.,
[39] suggested that a Blockchain backed access control system
could offer signiﬁcant improvements to the security of IoT
devices. Li et al., [40] suggested that by uding Blockchain
in manufacturing, it could help provide more integrated and
secure manufacturing ecosystems. Zhang et al., [41] proposed
the use of Blockchain smart contracts for access control to IoT
devices.
As we can see, there is a lot of work going on around
the possible use of Blockchain as a serious means to improve
IoT security. This is most certainly something that is very
necessary, but ultimately, if we add a much more secure IoT
system to existing corporate systems, then the security of the
IoT system could be much better than the existing corporate
system. This would result in the weakest link now becoming
the strongest link, which will not improve that status quo,
rather it will simply turn it on its head.
This is why the simple addition of a Blockchain based
forensic trail mechanism to all main corporate systems would
even the playing ﬁeld, security wise, and would offer a means
to understand whenever any breach arises. Policing for such an
event could be automated into the overall system in order that
rapid advance warning can take place, as well as any possible
preventive measures that could also be quickly activated. Best
of all, the attackers would then leave behind a complete
forensic trail of their incursion into the system.
It is important to stress that this is not a ‘silver bullet’ to
solve the security of corporate systems. However, it will clearly
provide a welcome solution to the problem of dealing with the
protection of the forensic trail that is so often obliterated from
corporate systems by attackers in the process of covering their
tracks. All too often, the less skilled attackers destroy more
data than they need to, resulting in far more difﬁcult challenges
for corporate data controllers. This will, however, mean that
the addition of a secure IoT system to any existing corporate
system can result in a much tighter system, with the bonus
of a means to understand exactly what is going on when any
attack takes place.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In summary, we can see that the ability for conrporate
sysems to have a new tool with which they can more fully
understand exactly what is going on as the result of an attack
will be a very good thing. This is particlarly the case when the
corporate falls under the jurisdiction of many legislative and
regulatory bodies, where failure to understand which records
have been viewed, modiﬁed, deleted or ex-ﬁltrated from the
system can lead to punitive levels of ﬁnes being levied, as well
as the expense and disruption of a lengthy investigation.
It will also be useful to be able to retain the full record
of the forensic trail for investigation by the appropriate au-
thorities. These records are not usually left behind, although
investigators can do a great deal with fractional forensic
snippets that sometimes get left behind in systems after a
successful attack. With the full forensic trail now available,
this will provide a transformative means for a ﬁghtback against
these secretive attackers, who have long considered themselves
immune to prosecution. While this will not solve the jurisdic-
tional problems, at least the perpetrators can be publicised and
added to public watchlists, as well as to various blacklists.
We have proposed how this challenging problem may
be approached to ensure that corporate users can be fully
compliant with the ever increasing leglative and regulatory
requirements that they now have to comply with. Clearly,
additional cost will require to be incurred, and there may be a
very small impact on latency, but these costs could signiﬁcantly
mitigate the possibility of a huge regulatory ﬁnes in the event
of a breach. It is also likely that this approach will ensure faster
discovery of the occurrence of a breach, thus minimising the
potential impact on business continuity.
For our next stage of this development, we propose to
set up two small test corporate systems. One system will
use existing security approaches, to which we will add a
Blockchain secured IoT system, which we will subject to a
systematic attack to demonstrate how even the addition of the
secured IoT system cannot solve this problem. The second
system will be a small test corporate system incorporating
the Blockchain secured forensic trail, with added Blockchain
secured IoT system to demonstrate how well the whole system
can handle an attack. We will then be able to compare both
systems and this will allow us to clearly demonstrate the
different levels of compliance that could be achieved.
The beauty of this proposal is that it will not involve a
major revision of existing corporate systems. Thus no massive
expenditure will be required to completely change the system,
with all the attendant workload to transfer all the data from
the old format to the new. It will simply involve the insertion
of a ‘software tool’ into existing corporate system, with which
corporates are already intimately familiar with. Best of all, it
is unlikely to involve massive expenditure, which in today’s
constrained working environment will always be welcome.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Ashton, “That ’Internet of Things’ Thing,” RFiD Journal, vol. 22,
no. 7, 2009, pp. 97–114.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[2]
P. Oman and E. O. Schweitzer, “Concerns About Intrusions Into Re-
motely Accessible Substation Controllers and Scada Systems,” in Power,
vol. 20, 2000, pp. 1–16.
[3]
A. Creery and E. Byers, “Industrial Cybersecurity for Power System and
Scada,” in Management.
IEEE, 2005, pp. 303–309. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=1524567
Accessed 15 October 2020.
[4]
T. Kropp, “System Threats and Vulnerabilities - SCADA EMS,” Power
and Energy Magazine, IEEE, vol. 4, no. april, 2006, pp. 46–50. [Online].
Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs all.jsp?arnumber=1597995
Accessed 15 October 2020.
[5]
P. A. S. Ralston, J. H. Graham, and J. L. Hieb, “Cyber secu-
rity risk assessment for SCADA and DCS networks,” ISA Transac-
tions, vol. 46, no. 4, oct 2007, pp. 583–594. [Online]. Available:
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0019057807000754 Accessed
15 October 2020.
[6]
G. N. Ericsson, “Cyber security and power system communicationessen-
tial parts of a smart grid infrastructure,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery, vol. 25, no. 3, 2010, pp. 1501–1507.
[7]
K. Wilhoit, “Who’s Really Attacking Your ICS Equipment?” Tech.
Rep., 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.trendmicro.com.hk/cloud-
content/apac/pdfs/security-
intelligence/white-papers/wp-whos-really-
attacking-your-ics-equipment.pdf Accessed 15 October 2020.
[8]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Cloud cyber-security: Empowering the
audit trail,” International Journal on Advances in Security, vol. 9, no. 3
& 4, 2016, pp. 169–183.
[9]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Creating an Immutable Database for
Secure Cloud Audit Trail and System Logging,” in Cloud Computing
2017: The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs,
and Virtualization.
Athens, Greece: IARIA, ISBN: 978-1-61208-529-6,
2017, pp. 54–59.
[10]
B. Duncan, A. Happe, and A. Bratterud, “Using Unikernels to Address
the Cloud Forensic Problem and help Achieve EU GDPR Compliance.”
Cloud Computing 2018: The Ninth International Conference on Cloud
Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization, February, 71–76.
[11]
Y. Zhao and B. Duncan, “Could Block Chain Technology Help Resolve
the Cloud Forensic Problem?” in Cloud Computing 2018: The Ninth In-
ternational Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization,
no. February.
Barcelona, Spain: IARIA, 2018, pp. 39–44.
[12]
Y. Zhao and B. Duncan, “Blockchain Challenges for Cloud Users,” in
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Cloud Computing,
GRIDs, and Virtualization, Venice, 2019, p. 6.
[13]
A. Cadbury, “The Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance,”
HMG,
London,
Tech.
Rep.,
1992.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.ecgi.org/codes/documents/cadbury.pdf Accessed 15 October
2020.
[14]
EU, “EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),” 2017. [Online].
Available: http://www.eugdpr.org/ Accessed 15 October 2020.
[15]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing Cloud Security and Pri-
vacy: The Power and the Weakness of the Audit Trail,” in Cloud Com-
puting 2016: The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing,
GRIDs, and Virtualization, no. April.
Rome: IEEE, 2016, pp. 125–130.
[16]
G. Weir, A. Aßmuth, M. Whittington, and B. Duncan, “Cloud Account-
ing Systems, the Audit Trail, Forensics and the EU GDPR: How Hard
Can It Be?” in The British Accounting and Finance Association: Scottish
Area Group Annual Conference.
Aberdeen: BAFA, 2017, p. 6.
[17]
P. Tobin, M. McKeever, J. Blackledge, M. Whittington, and B. Duncan,
“UK Financial Institutions Stand to Lose Billions in GDPR Fines: How
can They Mitigate This?” in The British Accounting and Finance Asso-
ciation: Scottish Area Group Annual Conference, BAFA, Ed., Aberdeen,
2017, p. 6.
[18]
R. K. L. Ko et al., “TrustCloud: A framework for accountability and
trust in cloud computing,” Proceedings - 2011 IEEE World Congress on
Services, SERVICES 2011, 2011, pp. 584–588.
[19]
B. Duncan, “Will Compliance with the New EU General Data Protection
Regulation Lead to Better Cloud Security?” International Journal on
Advances in Security, vol. 11, no. 3&4, 2018, pp. 254–263.
[20]
L.
Constantin,
“Hackers
break
into
bitcoin
exchange
site
Bitcoinica, steal $90,000 in bitcoins,” 2012. [Online]. Available:
https://www.networkworld.com/article/2188554/applications/hackers-
break-into-bitcoin-exchange-site-bitcoinica–steal–90-000-in-
bitcoins.html Accessed 15 October 2020.
[21]
R. McMillan, “Bitcoin’s $460 Mliion Disaster,” 2014. [Online].
Available: https://www.wired.com/2014/03/bitcoin-exchange/ Accessed
15 October 2020.
[22]
C.
Baldwin,
“Bitcoin
worth
$72
million
stolen
from
Bitﬁnex
exchange
in
Hong
Kong,”
2016.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-bitﬁnex-hacked-hongkong/bitcoin-
worth-72-million-stolen-from-bitﬁnex-exchange-in-hong-kong-
idUSKCN10E0KP Accessed 15 October 2020.
[23]
D. Siegel, “Understanding The DAO Attack,” 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://www.coindesk.com/understanding-dao-hack-journalists/ Accessed
15 October 2020.
[24]
BBC, “Coincheck: World’s biggest ever digital currency ’theft’,” 2018.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-42845505
Accessed 15 October 2020.
[25]
Y. Zhao and B. Duncan, “The Impact of Crypto-Currency Risks on
the Use of Blockchain for Cloud Security and Privacy,” in The 7th
International Workshop on Security, Privacy and Performance in Cloud
Computing (SPCLOUD 2018), 2018, p. 8.
[26]
S. Meiklejohn et al., “A ﬁstful of Bitcoins: Characterizing payments
among men with no names,” Proceedings of the Internet Measurement
Conference - IMC ’13, no. 6, 2013 (pp. 127-140).
[27]
M. Ober, S. Katzenbeisser, and K. Hamacher, “Structure and anonymity
of the bitcoin transaction graph,” Future internet, vol. 5, no. 2, 2013, pp.
237–250.
[28]
F. Reid and M. Harrigan, “An analysis of anonymity in the bitcoin
system,” in Security and privacy in social networks.
Springer, 2013,
pp. 197–223.
[29]
D. Ron and A. Shamir, “Quantitative analysis of the full Bitcoin
transaction graph,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics), vol. 7859 LNCS, 2013.
[30]
M. Rosenfeld, “Analysis of bitcoin pooled mining reward systems,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1112.4980, 2011.
[31]
M. Babaioff, S. Dobzinski, S. Oren, and A. Zohar, “On bitcoin and
red balloons,” in Proceedings of the 13th ACM conference on electronic
commerce.
ACM, 2012, pp. 56–73.
[32]
I. Eyal and E. G. Sirer, “Majority is not enough: Bitcoin mining is
vulnerable,” in International Conference on Financial Cryptography and
Data Security.
Springer, 2014, pp. 436–454.
[33]
V. Buterin and Others, “Ethereum white paper,” GitHub repository,
vol. 1, 2013, pp. 22–23.
[34]
T. Mcconaghy et al., “BigchainDB: A Scalable Blockchain Database
(DRAFT),” BigchainDB, 2016, pp. 1–65.
[35]
B. Liu, X. L. Yu, S. Chen, X. Xu, and L. Zhu, “Blockchain based data
integrity service framework for IoT data,” in 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Web Services (ICWS).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 468–475.
[36]
M. Westerlund and N. Kratzke, “Towards distributed clouds: A review
about the evolution of centralized cloud computing, distributed ledger
technologies, and a foresight on unifying opportunities and security
implications,” in 2018 International Conference on High Performance
Computing & Simulation (HPCS).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 655–663.
[37]
C. Qu, M. Tao, J. Zhang, X. Hong, and R. Yuan, “Blockchain based
credibility veriﬁcation method for IoT entities,” Security and Communi-
cation Networks, vol. 2018, n. pag. 2018.
[38]
P. Angin, M. B. Mert, O. Mete, A. Ramazanli, K. Sarica, and B. Gun-
goren, “A blockchain-based decentralized security architecture for IoT,”
in International Conference on Internet of Things.
Springer, 2018, pp.
3–18.
[39]
C. Dukkipati, Y. Zhang, and L. C. Cheng, “Decentralized, blockchain
based access control framework for the heterogeneous internet of things,”
in Proceedings of the Third ACM Workshop on Attribute-Based Access
Control, 2018, pp. 61–69.
[40]
Z. Li, W. M. Wang, G. Liu, L. Liu, J. He, and G. Q. Huang, “Toward
open manufacturing,” Industrial Management & Data Systems, 2018.
[41]
Y. Zhang, S. Kasahara, Y. Shen, X. Jiang, and J. Wan, “Smart contract-
based access control for the internet of things,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, 2018, pp. 1594–1605.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-778-8
CLOUD COMPUTING 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

