Cost-Effective Permanent Audit Trails for Securing
SME Systems when Adopting Mobile Technologies
Bob Duncan
Department of Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
King’s College, Aberdeen, UK
Email: robert.duncan@abdn.ac.uk and
Arcada University of Applied Sciences
Jan-Magnus Janssons plats 1, 00550 Helsinki, Finland
Email: robert.duncan@arcada.ﬁ
Magnus Westerlund
Department of Business Management and Analytics
Arcada University of Applied Sciences
Jan-Magnus Janssons plats 1, 00550 Helsinki, Finland
Email: magnus.westerlund@arcada.ﬁ
Abstract—Cyber security for SMEs is a challenging activity.
Since large corporations started to improve their cyber security
process and strategies, this has made life considerably more
challenging for attackers. This has resulted in a change of
approach by attackers to pursuing SMEs. They have found
such companies to be far less focussed on achieving really tight
systems that are difﬁcult to penetrate, to the extent that they
would rather attack SMEs than large corporations. This is an
important problem to deal with, because while large corporations
who get successfully breached ﬁnd the result expensive and time
consuming to rectify, they usually have adequate reserves and
resources to survive. This is seldom the case for SMEs, and
up to 50% of successful breaches on SMEs can result in their
bankruptcy. However, since SMEs have neither the reserves,
resources nor sufﬁcient skill levels of employees to help them
deal with this difﬁcult challenge, they are left at a considerable
disadvantage. We propose a simple, economic approach that can
improve security, ensure retention of a full forensic trail, all
within their ﬁnancial means.
Index Terms— SMEs, mobile devices, cloud security, audit trails
I. INTRODUCTION
There is little doubt that keeping corporate systems secure
presents a major challenge for businesses and in the UK,
the Government Cyber Security Breaches Survey in 2020 [1]
noted that almost half of all business suffered a breach during
the previous year. While many large corporations have the
necessary expertise and resources to deal with breaches, the
same cannot be said for Small and Medium Sized Enterprises
(SMEs). Why do we care about SMEs? Based on the World
Trade Report, the International Federation of Accountants
(IFAC) note that SMEs represent over 90% of the business
population, 60-70% of employment and 55% of Gross Do-
mestic Product (GDP) in all of the developed economies [2].
For SMEs, there are often serious constraints on resources,
and limited expertise in this area among employees.
We have also seen a rapid evolution in business architec-
ture, leading to new paradigms, such as cloud, distributed
systems and so on. The evolving widespread shift to mobile
communications and the ever increasing power of mobile
phones, means that many employees will no longer operate
just from a desk with a desktop computer, but instead might
use a range of devices. Often any individual might have, in
addition to the desktop, a laptop, a tablet, a mobile phone,
or two, perhaps a smart watch to name but a few. These
changes can offer improvements to the way business can
operate more efﬁciently, but they also bring more risk. The
traditional approach to security has been the “castle” approach
to protect the centralised systems. Now add to this the effects
of the pandemic and the move to working-from-home, often
using completely insecure domestic network connections to
add to the already precarious security approaches, and it is
clear that a great many SMEs could be heading for disaster.
With limited expertise and resources and often limited
understanding of the risks they face, this can put them at a
serious competitive disadvantage. Perhaps far more worrying,
will be the impact of their limited resources to spend on
proper cyber security, leading to a continually increasing risk
footprint. Another example might be that instead of using the
largest Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) operated by ‘big tech’
companies such as Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure
and Google Cloud, as well as traditional large corporations
such as IBM and HP, many might be tempted to use smaller
ﬁrms offering cheaper services, but who do not have the same
security procedures in place as can be provided by the big
CSPs.
Another important incentive concerns the ability to be
compliant with ever more legislation and Regulation specif-
ically targeting the proper control of Personally Identiﬁable
Information (PII), such as we have seen with the introduction
of the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). For a
GDPR breach involving the PII of any EU resident, and UK
residents, since it has been adopted by the UK since Brexit,
ﬁnes can be levied at up to the greater of C20 million or 4%
of annual turnover.
In Section II, we will consider the background on cyber
security risks. In Section III, we will consider Cyber Security
and SMEs and will introduce the framework for this interpre-
tative study, where we will address Cyber Security Threats,
SME behaviours, SME awareness and SME decision-making.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-948-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

In Section IV, we will consider some proposed corporate
solutions, looking at how these might be overly complex and
costly for SMEs to adopt. In Section V, we will consider how
we could adapt these for SMEs in a more cost-effective and
simple way to make them attractive to SMEs to implement.
Finally, in Section VI, we will discuss our conclusion.
II. BACKGROUND ON CYBER SECURITY RISKS
Proper risk management for SMEs has become an ever
more urgent and serious problem to address, often due to the
availability of minimal resources and limited understanding
of why this could be such a vital asset to the company [3].
All companies face a continuously increasing range of risk.
While traditional disaster type risks are reasonably easy to
understand, when it comes to data, the majority of these risks
are adversarial risks, which can be much more difﬁcult to
predict, and thus identify properly. The big problem for SMEs,
is that they stand a much higher chance of going bankrupt
after a large breach, due to their much lower level of available
resources [4].
Almost 40 years ago, Hollman and Mohammad-Zadeh
[5] recognised the importance of proper risk management
for SMEs, and 8 years later Miller [6] developed a very
straightforward framework suitable for SMEs to use for this
purpose. While the risks faced since that time have changed
signiﬁcantly, that is no excuse not to bother doing a good job
of risk management, as the ultimate risk if nothing is done
could lead to bankruptcy.
Falkner and Hiebl [7] suggested that SMEs generally faced
6 main categories of risk:
• Interest rate risk;
• Raw material price rise;
• E-business and technology risks;
• Supply chain risks;
• Growth risks;
• Management and employee risks.
The authors suggest that it is clear the area that SMEs need
to focus on will be E-business and technology risks, and in
particular, cyber security risk management. The vast majority
of such risks faced are adversarial in nature, making them
a much bigger challenge to deal with properly. Research in
this area has been a bit on the sparse side, but back in 2003,
Tranﬁeld et al., [8], put some useful base information together
in their paper that provides a good understanding to start from.
It is very clear that the more SMEs can start to understand the
true nature of the risks they face, the better they will be able
to prepare themselves to defend against them.
III. CYBER SECURITY AND SMES
Recently, Alahmari and Duncan [9] wrote about the chal-
lenges faced by SMEs and wrote about 5 areas of importance
that ought to be considered:
• Cyber Security Threats in SMEs;
• Cyber Security Behaviours in SMEs;
• Cybersecurity Practices in SMEs;
• Cybersecurity Awareness in SMEs;
• Cyber Security Decision-Making in SMEs.
Thus we will consider their observations in each of the
following 5 sub-sections:
A. Cyber Security Threats in SMEs
One of the key takeaways from this area is that a major
challenge is to be able to articulate properly the concept of
what exactly cyber security is and how it can impact on their
business. Some of the key risks arise from cyber attacks that
seek to breach data systems in order to steal, modify or delete
data, or to make it inaccessible to the users of the business
[10]. To this day, these risks continue to present the same level
of challenges, other than that the frequency of such attacks has
intensiﬁed during the past 7 years [11]. It is noticeable that
attacks against SMEs have also increased during the pandemic.
On the risk assessment front, Barlette et al., [12], suggest
it can be challenging for SMEs to be able to quantify exactly
what the impact of breaches can be. The authors also suggest
that while many SMEs believe they are not vulnerable because
of their size. That is precisely why they are being attacked,
since they present a much easier target than large corporations,
due to their limited resources and understanding of what they
face.
B. Cyber Security Behaviours in SMEs
Barlette et al., [12] also suggest that employee behaviour
can expose SMEs to greater threats due to such practices as
ignoring information policies, organizational guidelines, and
company rules can lead to exposing the SME to much greater
risk. Training and education are vital tools that can be used to
improve user awareness. Of course, in some cases, [13], this
might still not be enough, as they found in a previous study
that while training uptake was 85%, the actual behaviour was
much lower at 54%.
There is little doubt that user commitment and behaviour are
vital elements that can play a signiﬁcant role in the success
of the business’s ability to achieve a high level of security
[14]. Indeed, Gundu [13] avers that the real problem is not
employees knowledge and understanding, rather it is their
general negative cyber security behaviour as a whole that is
the cause.
C. Cyber Security Practices in SMEs
It has long been a concern in the literature that the SME
approach to cyber security has been the lack of seriousness.
SMEs have often failed to respond to the warnings coming
from the cyber security community about cyber threat [15],
and observations have often been made of how authorised
people participate, albeit unconsciously, in risky practices
which could have an adverse impact on the cyber security
success of the SME.
Osborn and Simpson [16], suggest that most cyber security
experts believe that current security practices used by SMEs
could be a barrier to efﬁciency due to the lack of their
engagement with the research community. The authors believe
that is such a pity, since large corporations are beneﬁtting
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-948-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

greatly from that relationship. While adopting outsourcing
facilities such as the cloud could make a big contribution to
the cyber security success of SMEs, their effectiveness would
be seriously degraded by bad practices. As Bada et al., [17],
suggest, failure to change those practices will perpetrate the
continuing success of attackers leading to ever more attacks.
D. Cyber Security Awareness in SMEs
SME awareness of cyber security risks has traditionally been
low, and Kaur and Mustafa, [14], suggest this has continually
led to considerable risks to SME assets. Osborn and Simpson
argue that the lack of knowledge of SME users signiﬁcantly
detracts from their awareness of cyber attacks, which leads
to an adverse impact on achieving an adequate level of cyber
security.
Osborn, [18], suggests that SMEs need additional infor-
mation about possible vulnerabilities, rather more than they
need the implementation of tools for evaluating self-assessed
risks, meaning they should develop the content of their speciﬁc
awareness programmes immediately. Gundu [13], suggests that
creating the best possible awareness program could be far more
productive for SMEs as a help to reduce the potential risks to
an acceptable level.
The threat to cyber security has been recognised as the
greatest threat to SMEs and that addressing this challenge by
deploying protective measures alone is not enough. Kabanda
et al., [15], suggest that increasing awareness is likely to have
a far more positive impact.
E. Cyber Security Decision-Making in SMEs
In considering decision-making in information risk man-
agement, SMEs have adopted out-sourcing as part of their
digital strategy. Successful out-sourcing has improved the
web presence of SMEs and increased efﬁciency. However,
outsourcing may have created a cyber security knowledge
gap in SMEs. If cyber security is recognised, it is seen as
a secondary issue to the presence. There is a lack of focus
on security by design methodology in SMEs. Owners and
managers generally play a major role [19] [12] [15], which
demonstrates the importance that is understood at a managerial
level. Such a pity that by the time it gets to implementation
in SMEs that such poor results are achieved.
IV. EXISTING CORPORATE SOLUTIONS
In this section, we will take a look at a number of corporate
solutions which have been developed to address a number
of key areas to give a ﬂavour of what large corporations
can achieve with their vast reserves, resources and in-house
expertise, in collaboration with the research community.
In 2016, Duncan and Whittington warned about forensic
issues which they described as the Cloud Audit Problem [20],
[21] and proposed a possible approach, although warning of
some of the potential barriers faced. They followed this in
2017 with a suggestion on how to create such an immutable
database and how to set it up to carry out such a task.
In 2018, Duncan and Zhao [22], considered the use of
blockchain as an alternative to some of the conventional
databases, which were limited in what they could do. At this
time Neovius et al., [23] looked at the use of distributed ledger
technology to provide much higher level security, and later
adapted this approach to address IoT security weaknesses [24].
In 2019, Westerlund and Jaatun [25], addressed the chal-
lenge of dealing with the cloud forensic problem, while
ensuring compliance can be achieved with the GDPR
In response to the serious weaknesses inherent in Internet of
Things (IoT) devices, Wikstr¨om et al., [26] developed a high
security approach using blockchain, but this time incorporating
Ethereum smart contracts to extend the power of the work.
This work would go on to be implemented to demonstrate the
viability of the concept.
It would be important to recognise that these concepts
were speciﬁcally targeted towards large corporations, meaning
that they would have both sufﬁcient resources available to
develop and implement the full system and also would have
sufﬁcient in-house expertise to ensure proper conﬁguration for
the implementation would be carried out.
We must be clear that the required level of resource avail-
ability and in-house calibre of staff would likely be far in
excess of anything that a great many SMEs would be able to
provide. Thus we considered how we might come up with an
effective, yet economical approach that could allow them to
greatly improve their security capabilities.
V. ADAPTING EXISTING CORPORATE SOLUTIONS
The key requirement was therefore to keep it simple and
ﬁnd an approach that would be relatively straightforward
to provide a much higher level of cyber security, without
pushing them beyond their often constrained budgets. We also
considered the fact that not all SMEs are equal. They might
vary from a one man operation up to a large company size with
many employees, much more resources than the smallest, and
possibly more technically competent staff as well.
We decided to attempt to propose a basic level approach,
then add incremental options depending on the resources and
in-house expertise of the SME.
Even the smallest SME would likely operate with a con-
siderable range of disparate devices, many of which would
use different operating systems, different software and apps,
which presents many SMEs with their ﬁrst challenge. With
insufﬁcient resources and limited skills in the workforce, how
could they do anything constructive from there?
Asking them to make changes to devices, or to update
specialised software, would likely be a challenge too much
for many. In many cases, there could also be a further issue,
namely the Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) approach in
many SMEs. Added to this would be the recent trend towards
Working From Home (WFH) brought on by the Covid-19
pandemic.
A. The Basic Proposal
We felt the sensible thing would be to re-think how we
might accomplish dealing with costly solutions for SMEs with
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-948-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

very limited resources. Since all devices used offsite, and with
the BYOD use in the ofﬁce, the sensible approach would be
to set up a Virtual Private Network (VPN), require all sign-
ins to corporate systems to be addressed through the VPN and
capture the forensic records in one place. In this way, no mater
whether company devices, BYOD devices on users working
on site could all login to the VPN, which would provide better
security and privacy and the relevant data collected from the
VPN without any company users noticing any change in what
they had to do, other than a new login method. In this way,
all direct logins to the company systems could be blocked to
enforce login via the VPN.
Many large providers can deliver a cloud-based VPN service
for a very reasonable monthly cost. They can also provide
systems geared for growing businesses. It is possible to rent a
company dedicated server to ensure increased availability and
having connecting up/down speeds of 1Gbps. These company
based solutions offer a dashboard to monitor and control what
is going on with the company network. An SME without any
other provisioned public endpoints than a VPN, would be
able to effectively block off external system access. Certain
providers can also offer VPN access based on multi-factor
authentication (MFA) that further strengthen the authentication
by utilizing a secondary key. Hence, if user id and password
combination leak, a secondary physical key will still hinder
unauthorized VPN access.
We would need to add an immutable database, and a new
open source offering came to market just over a year ago,
called immudb, which offers the fastest of database capabilities
without it being possible to tamper with the data contained
within the database. This addresses all of the traditional issues
with slow or unusable systems. The combination of the use of
the VPN in conjunction with the immutabe database, not only
addresses improving the security of access systems, it also
offers to ensure complete forensic trails are maintained, all
without the need for SMEs to to spend huge sums the simply
do not have.
The immutable database can be be kept remote from the
VPN server and could even be based on a cloud system. As
long as security is tight for this server, then it will provide
exactly what any SME would wish to have. A full forensic
trail of every device attempting to access company systems.
In this way, the company will be assured that only staff ac-
cessing company systems would be able to be granted access.
All external users of company systems would effectively be
blocked off completely, leading to much tighter security for
the SME.
This setup could include ALL devices, including mobile
phones, but some companies might prefer to have a more
structured approach. We therefore look at how we might meet
this need.
B. Adding Mobile Devices to the proposal
In the business world, the most popular mobile phone
systems use either Android operating systems, as developed
by Google, or Apple systems for a more up-market approach.
Google, for example, offer a mobile desktop package that
provides a management dashboard, known as Android En-
terprise. This can be developed in conjunction with Google.
The mobile is connected through the VPN, using a business
proﬁle conﬁguration, thus allowing the corporation to monitor
for threats and hinder access.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
SMEs must realise that they can no longer afford to ignore
the need to pay serious attention to detail in matters of security.
They must also start to realise that in order to remain compliant
with the range of legislative and regulatory compliance, there
is a strong need to address cyber security risks head on.
Legislators and regulators will not accept any excuses when
it comes to cyber breaches, especially where personally iden-
tiﬁable information is involved. There are no excuses, and the
legislators and regulators are right to bring those companies
who fail to keep users’ data properly secured to account.
These proposals we have offered provide a minimum step
on the route to proper security. This needs to be done properly,
and we do recognise that many SMEs simply do not have the
resources to achieve a robust level of security. These proposals
offer a potential route to achieving a much improved level of
security for an extremely modest cost. With the bare minimum
of expense, an SME could begin the process of bringing their
systems to a much more robust level.
It is fair to say that these proposals are designed as a ﬁrst
robust step, and there will be considerable improvements that
can be made in future. This proposal allows for the easy add-on
of additional protections, thus building on what would already
be there.
We plan to test this approach in the near future to demon-
strate how well this basic approach can work for SMEs. Once
we conﬁrm the effectiveness of the approach, we would look
to develop the extra advances that would allow additional new
features to be added.
REFERENCES
[1] HMG,
“UK
Cyber
Security
Breaches
Report
2020,”
HMG,
London,
Tech.
Rep.,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/cyber-security-breaches-survey-
2020 [Last Access: 25th February 2022]
[2] IFAC, “The Foundation for Economies Worldwide is small busi-
ness.” [Online]. Available: https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/national-
cyber-security-strategies/sme cybersecurity [Last Access: 25th February
2022]
[3] J. Brustbauer, “Enterprise risk management in SMEs: Towards a structural
model,” International Small Business Journal, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 70–85,
2016.
[4] A. Fielder, E. Panaousis, P. Malacaria, C. Hankin, and F. Smeraldi,
“Decision support approaches for cyber security investment,” Decision
support systems, vol. 86, pp. 13–23, 2016.
[5] K. W. Hollman and S. Mohammad-Zadeh, “Risk management in small
business,” J. Small Bus. Manag., vol. 1, pp. 47–55, 1984.
[6] K. D. Miller, “A framework for integrated risk management in interna-
tional business,” Journal of international business studies, vol. 23, no. 2,
pp. 311–331, 1992.
[7] E. M. Falkner and M. R. W. Hiebl, “Risk management in SMEs: a
systematic review of available evidence,” The Journal of Risk Finance,
2015.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-948-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[8] D. Tranﬁeld, D. Denyer, and P. Smart, “Towards a methodology for devel-
oping evidence-informed management knowledge by means of systematic
review,” British journal of management, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 207–222, 2003.
[9] A. Alahmari and B. Duncan, “Cybersecurity Risk Management in Small
and Medium-Sized Enterprises: A Systematic Review of Recent Evi-
dence,” in 2020 International Conference on Cyber Situational Aware-
ness, Data Analytics and Assessment (CyberSA). IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.
[10] K. Renaud and G. R. S. Weir, “Cybersecurity and the Unbearability
of Uncertainty,” in 2016 Cybersecurity and Cyberforensics Conference
(CCC). IEEE, 2016, pp. 137–143.
[11] A. A. Alahmari and R. A. Duncan, “Investigating Potential Barriers
to Cybersecurity Risk Management Investment in SMEs,” in 2021 13th
International Conference on Electronics, Computers and Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence (ECAI). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[12] Y. Barlette, K. Gundolf, and A. Jaouen, “CEOs’ information security
behavior in SMEs: Does ownership matter?” Systemes d’information
management, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 7–45, 2017.
[13] T. Gundu, “Acknowledging and reducing the knowing and doing gap in
employee cybersecurity complaince,” in ICCWS 2019 14th International
Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security, 2019, pp. 94–102.
[14] J. Kaur and N. Mustafa, “Examining the effects of knowledge, attitude
and behaviour on information security awareness: A case on SME,” in
2013 International Conference on Research and Innovation in Informa-
tion Systems (ICRIIS). IEEE, 2013, pp. 286–290.
[15] S. Kabanda, M. Tanner, and C. Kent, “Exploring SME cybersecurity
practices in developing countries,” Journal of Organizational Computing
and Electronic Commerce, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 269–282, 2018.
[16] E. Osborn and A. Simpson, “Risk and the Small-Scale Cyber Security
Decision Making Dialogue—a UK Case Study,” The Computer Journal,
vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 472–495, 2018.
[17] M. Bada, A. M. Sasse, and J. R. C. Nurse, “Cyber security awareness
campaigns: Why do they fail to change behaviour?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.02672, 2019.
[18] E. Osborn, “Business versus technology: Sources of the perceived lack
of cyber security in SMEs,” 2015.
[19] A. Bayaga, S. Flowerday, and L. Cilliers, “IT Risk and Chaos Theory:
Effect on the performance of South African SMEs,” in WMSCI 2017
- 21st World Multi-Conference Syst. Cybern. Informatics, Proc., vol. 2,
no. 5, 2017, pp. 48–53.
[20] B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing Cloud Security and Privacy:
The Cloud Audit Problem,” in Cloud Computing 2016: The Seventh In-
ternational Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization.
Rome: IEEE, 2016, pp. 119–124.
[21] B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing Cloud Security and Privacy:
The Power and the Weakness of the Audit Trail,” in Cloud Comput-
ing 2016: The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing,
GRIDs, and Virtualization, no. April.
Rome: IEEE, 2016, pp. 125–130.
[22] Y. Zhao and B. Duncan, “Could Block Chain Technology Help Resolve
the Cloud Forensic Problem?” in Cloud Computing 2018: The Ninth In-
ternational Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization,
no. February. Barcelona, Spain: IARIA, 2018, pp. 39–44.
[23] M. Neovius, J. Karlsson, M. Westerlund, and G. Pulkkis, “Providing
tamper-resistant audit trails for cloud forensics with distributed ledger
based solutions,” in CLOUD COMPUTING 2018, 2018, p. 29.
[24] M. Westerlund, M. Neovius, and G. Pulkkis, “Providing Tamper-
Resistant Audit Trails with Distributed Ledger based Solutions for
Forensics of IoT Systems using Cloud Resources,” International Journal
on Advances in Security, vol. 11, no. Number 3 & 4, pp. 223–231, 2018.
[25] M. Westerlund and M. G. Jaatun, “Tackling the cloud forensic problem
while keeping your eye on the GDPR,” in 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 418–423.
[26] J. Wikstr¨om, M. Westerlund, and G. Pulkkis, “Smart Contract based Dis-
tributed IoT Security: A Protocol for Autonomous Device Management,”
in 21st ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid
Computing (CCGrid 2021) (forthcoming), Melbourne, Australia, 2021.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-948-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

