A Management View of Security and Cloud Computing
Ndubuisi Anomelechi∗, William Cooper†, Bob Duncan‡ John D. Lamb§
Business School, University of Aberdeen, UK
Emails: ∗n.anomelechi@abdn.ac.uk, †william.cooper@abdn.ac.uk, ‡robert.duncan@abdn.ac.uk, §j.d.lamb@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract—Cloud security is often seen as a technical problem.
We argue that its solution needs both technical and management
input. We ﬁnd that cloud computing offers reliability and ﬂexi-
bility and its low cost makes it attractive, particularly to small
and medium sized enterprises. We note that security technology
must be adopted universally and often promptly. It requires both
an organisational commitment and an individual commitment,
which is most readily obtained if the technology places a low
knowledge burden on users: that is, it is transparent or adds
only a few, often-repeated, tasks. We note that providers have
already achieved this in many cloud services. Organisations need
clarity of what security is provided and who is responsible for
breaches. They also need cloud providers to help them identify
and recover from breaches. We consider why breaches have now
become a hot topic, and provide a suggestion of how to mitigate
the impact of these whilst meeting our management objectives
and complying with the forthcoming EU General Data Protection
Regulation.
Keywords–Management goals; cloud security; EU GDPR.
I.
INTRODUCTION
It is generally considered good practice for business organ-
isations to embrace innovation, which may include disruptive
technologies where appropriate [1], thereby doing things in
what might be argued to be smarter ways. Such approaches
may be adopted by sole trader start-up businesses to large
scale multi-national corporations. While this all sounds entirely
laudable and appears to make good business sense, there are
some issues that may not be getting the level of attention
they merit. The pressures on businesses to be efﬁcient and
effective, aligned with the adoption of innovative technology,
raises issues that previously may not have been considered
problematic. The potential for conﬂicting interests and ﬂawed
reasoning [2], is clearly demonstrated when it comes to the
arena of cyber security and the way in which the importance
of such may be viewed by businesses. This may be argued
to be particularly relevant to the Small and Medium sized
Enterprises (SME) sector and to the adoption and use of cloud
computing.
The central element of concern is that too little attention
may be paid to ensuring an adequate level of security is in
place when businesses make use of cloud computing. Even
where security elements have been made available, these may
be compromised by the behaviour of individuals accessing the
systems concerned. It has long been recognised that elements
of interface design and ease of use are important when it
comes to people effectively using computing provision. Human
behaviour has been recognised as requiring ease of use more
generally, for example by Drucker [3], who advised that
removing difﬁculties would increase the likelihood of desired
behaviour. The central message here would be that, if we
wish cloud computing facilities to be accessed securely, we
also need to consider issues of human behaviour and ensure
we facilitate ease of use by removing potential difﬁculties
that might detract from successful implementation of security
elements.
In Section II, we consider how cloud is used and how it
will impact on SMEs, and in Section III, we consider cloud
security weaknesses. In Section IV, we address adoption and
diffusion of innovations, and in Section V, we discuss the
limitations of our management goals. In Section VI, we ask
whether that is it, and discover some major issues that must be
addressed. In Section VII, we consider how we might ﬁnd a
quick solution to this problem, and in Section VIII, we consider
whether our ideas can meet the management goals we have set
ourselves. Finally, in Section IX, we discuss our conclusions
and future work.
II.
CLOUD COMPUTING
Cloud services and environments are variously deﬁned.
We note here the distinctions between Software as a Service
(SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS) and Infrastructure as a
Service (IaaS) [4] [5]. SaaS includes cloud ﬁle systems, web
servers and database management. Any business user of cloud
services is likely to use at least some of these. And businesses
that use PaaS and IaaS may still use these separately for both
convenience and security. We focus on these, because they are
where cloud services must minimally provide security.
We note immediately that using a cloud system creates
security issues that cannot be fully resolved by the enterprises
served. When attackers breach a cloud system, there is nothing
to stop them deleting the forensic trail. This means the enter-
prises cannot tell a regulator which ﬁles have been accessed,
modiﬁed, deleted or exﬁltrated. Secure encryption can mitigate
this problem but still gives the enterprise no means to preserve
data integrity other than keeping private backups of data. But
this contradicts reasons for an SME choosing a Cloud Service
Provider (CSP): to improve reliability without excessive cost.
We note that there may be further security responsibilities
for both business users and CSPs. We focus on SMEs because
they are most likely to choose cloud services without having
the technical knowledge to deal with all the security issues
that either a large entreprise or a CSP can.
A. Cloud Use: Advantages for SMEs
The potential gains for SMEs who choose to adopt cloud
computing may be considered to include improvements in
capacity, reliability and ﬂexibility, reduced costs and faster
time to market [6] [7]. The central beneﬁts of the cloud
approach may be considered to include low-cost availability,
innovation power, expandability and environmental protection.
Cloud computing enables the use of computing resources
without the need to own them, which reduces the overhead
costs for the businesses involved. This offers SMEs the
potential for international capability, which would be likely
to be more expensive using alternative means [8]. Cloud
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

use would potentially allow SMEs to compete at levels that
previously would have been considered the domain of larger
businesses. Research indicates that adoption of cloud services
by SMEs relates to the potential advantage offered and that
cloud computing may be of particular beneﬁt to entrepreneurial
ventures within developing nations [9].
B. Cloud Use: Adoption by SMEs
The adoption of cloud computing by SMEs is an area
that has been highlighted as requiring further research. En-
trepreneurial factors have been identiﬁed as likely to inﬂuence
adoption of innovative technology, such as cloud computing.
On a commercial basis, such innovative technology may be
regarded as risky [10]. While cloud technologies may facilitate
the development of SMEs, it may also open them to increased
threats [11]. The cloud option may be considered to offer
personalised and inexpensive computing facility on-demand
[12] and to offer scalable capabilities [13], which is likely to
be attractive to many within the SME sector. The scalability
and mobility offered by the cloud option may offer greater
levels of control over costs.
It is hardly surprising that such an option would be
considered as a business asset and that those businesses for
whom the minimisation of overhead costs, whilst maintaining
cutting edge capability, is particularly valuable, would seek to
utilise this facility. This is likely to be of particular relevance
to SMEs, as their available budgets are likely to be lower
than those of larger businesses. Supplier support may also
be considered to be inﬂuential in the decision to adopt, with
small businesses being more likely to rely on such external
support [14]. Business concerns regarding the use of cloud
computing may be considered to include lock-in, privacy and
security, each of which may have a negative impact on the
adoption of cloud computing by SMEs. The ease of use aspect
of cloud computing is considered likely to impact the adoption
level in SMEs, as has competitive pressure and the importance
of relative advantage [11]. Cloud vendor lock-in may be
exacerbated by the likely effort involved in moving to alternate
providers. SMEs may be argued to be particularly vulnerable
in this regard as they are less likely to have bargaining power
[15]. The importance of the privacy element and the related
issues of security and trust have been highlighted as important
in the adoption process, with early adopters and prospectors
emerging as more inclined to trust service providers. Security
and privacy fears relate to the potential for public disclosure
of sensitive information [16].
C. Security Issues
A major potential risk with cloud computing is that of secu-
rity, with such elements as protocols, authentication processes
and speciﬁc security standards requiring to be addressed. Thus,
factors of concern for CSPs implementing security may be
more technical.
Factors of concern to business entities when (rather than
if) breaches occur include loss of productivity, (intellectual)
property and business share, besides impact on customer
experience/relationship and cost of recovery from an attack.
Of utmost concern however will be business continuity. SMEs
are more vulnerable to these as they are arguably less able to
absorb the impacts of them than larger organisations. Whilst
we argue that the CSP should assume responsibility for data
integrity and recovery from breaches, obligations relating to
the business continuity costs above remain the responsibility
of the enterprises.
Partly owing to vendors’ and developers’ marketing strate-
gies, new technology is often adopted on the assumption of
complete sufﬁciency and security. Very little consideration
tends to be given to what might happen in the event of a
failure or breach. This gives rise to numerous risks related to
the factors of concern. Such risks cannnot be mitigated without
the adoption by each user organisation, including SMEs, of a
robust system security and disaster recovery strategy.
The nature of cloud computing is such that the users data
is stored in a relational data base using ﬁxed schemata. This
raises the likelihood of stability and security issues for users.
These may relate to traditional security, availability and third
party data control. Risks may be due to the cloud providers,
law restrictions, hackers, or the equipment in use. Such issues
may be addressed in a range of ways, including information-
centric security, transparency regarding data transfer and dis-
posal, and the use of encryption [8]. The concept of cloud
security may be considered to encapsulate ways in which
the infrastructure and the applications and data within it are
protected. As with most situations interrelated elements are put
at risk by the weakest link in their chain. With the use of cloud
computing it may be argued that the cloud itself may be the
weakest link, given that once this is penetrated the assailant
may erase any traces of entry and proceed to access areas
within the cloud at will. One of the central issues in relation
to cloud security might be argued to be that of user behaviour.
Perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use [17] may be
considered important in relation to the use of technology and
this may impact approaches taken to security provision and
the effective use of such.
III.
CLOUD SECURITY WEAKNESSES
From a technical and legal perspective, there are several
aspects of security that businesses have to comply with. For
much data there is a legal requirement to ensure privacy
and conﬁdentiality. From a business perspective availability,
integrity and authenticity are important and corruption or
misuse may create legal or professional problems, for example,
with accounting systems. In addition there is an increasing
requirement for businesses to be able to (i) detect and (ii)
recover from breaches of security, in both cases as fast as
possible.
We may note three features that are likely to be true of
most ICT security technologies. First, to work, the technologies
often need to be adopted by everyone within an organisation.
Second, many of the people adopting the technology may see
little reward from using it. Third, both managers and users
may have limited understanding of the reasons for using it or
even of what the technology does. This can be particularly
problematic for SMEs who, in choosing to outsource security
to a CSP, may employ no one with this understanding.
When enterprises, especially SMEs, use cloud computing
we show that both enterprise and CSP will have to implement
some aspects of security. Since no one security model will
work in all cases, it is vital to pin down who is responsible
for which aspects of security in the service level agreements.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

A. Secure cloud computing
Arguably it is even more important to develop technologies
for security that are also as transparent as possible. For
example, where encryption or data integrity are required,
ideally the implementation should be at the level of the ﬁle
system (whether local, remote or cloud) and handled within
the operating systems so that users can be minimally aware.
For example, the ﬁle manager and applications should be able
to open, close, modify and copy ﬁles without the user being
aware, except perhaps if there is an opportunity to copy data
from a secure system to an insecure one.
The ﬁrst requirement, then, that we identify for secure
cloud computing for enterprises is that what it provides must
place as low a knowledge burden as possible on end users. In
practice this usually means that CSPs need to offer security as
part of the cloud service. Possibly a business could provide en-
cryption before storing data on an insecure cloud service. But
this is likely to be difﬁcult without increasing the knowledge
burden on users and so increasing risk. Better is if the CSP
provides encryption software as part of the service. Better still
is to provide both encryption software and encryption standard
so that the business requires only keys and knowldge to decrypt
its data, but is relieved of the knowledge burden by using
the CSP. Maintaining data integrity, detecting breaches and
recovering from them should be the responsibility of the CSP
managing the data.
The second requirement is that CSPs should provide clarity
on what security is being provided, why it is being provided
and who is responsible for what aspects of security. We have
found that enterprises, especially SMEs, often lack the techni-
cal knowledge to identify this for themselves. It is important,
however, to identify whether the security provided includes
each of encryption (and how secure), authentication and data
integrity. It is important also to identify who is responsible for
any security failure. It may be clear that a CSP is responsible
for implementing encryption standards, providing software and
maintaining data integrity. But it is important also to make
sure enterprises, who seek a low knowledge burden, are aware
of their responsibilities, for example in choosing passwords,
preventing unauthorised use of secure keys and preventing
release of information through, for example, email or usb
memory devices. It is also important to identify who is legally
and ﬁnancially responsible for security breaches that are the
fault of the CSP.
A third requirement is that enterprises need means of
rapid recovery from security breaches. That is, they need to
recognise that there is always a risk of security failure and
they need (i) means to detect failure rapidly, (ii) methods to
prevent further damage and (iii) means to recovery rapidly
from failures. Typically, this requirement places burdens on
both enterprise and CSP. The enterprise needs to have means
to deal rapidly with problems arising because it failed in its
responsibilities. CSPs need means such as those suggested in
[5] of detecting, reporting and recovering from breaches in
security or failures in data integrity in the CSP.
The human issue with cloud security, and the use of such
by those in SMEs, may be argued to parallel the issues raised
regarding the design of software and the design of the human-
computer interface. There may be some conﬂict of interest in
the design of software, which is attributable to the fact that
those who build it are also those who design it. When this is
related to customer expectations with regard to functionality,
ease of use and the like we may ﬁnd a noticeable mismatch.
The way in which people interact with software may be
argued to lie within the specialist domain of usability and if
we look slightly deeper into the human-computer interaction,
the domain of psychology Cooper ( [18], p. 94) reminds us,
“Successful interfaces are those that focus on the users goals
ldots.” If we consider the cloud security element from such a
perspective we may conclude that the end user may in many
instances be SMEs, for whom the primary motivation to use
the cloud is that it offers business advantage at low cost. The
likely expectation of such users might be considered to be that
all security issues are taken care of for them within the package
provided.
Essentially, the SME users may be considered in a similar
way to most of those who drive cars. They wish to beneﬁt from
the independence and enhanced capability offered, but they are
unlikely to wish to do all the required maintenance of the safety
elements within the machine. However, while variations in ca-
pability and performance range may be considered acceptable,
relative to the cost of purchase or lease, it is unlikely to be
considered acceptable that safety should be compromised. The
expectation is likely to be that those providing the artefact,
which offers the enhanced capability, should take whatever
steps are necessary to ensure safety is ensured on a fail-safe
basis. For SMEs accessing cloud facilities this might be applied
to security and the responsibility for dealing with any breaches
of such in a fail-safe manner. For CSPs, the challenge might
be to inform SME users that, like car drivers, they must take
some responsibility.
IV.
ADOPTION AND DIFFUSION OF INNOVATIONS
Getting users to adopt cloud services or to comply with
security needs usually means persuading them to adopt some
technology that implements these things. This is a management
problem. There is management research going back 40 years
or so on how technology gets adopted. None that we know
of is on security; a little is on cloud adoption; much may be
helpful.
Rogers [19] summarises much of the recent research on
how technology diffusion occurs. The research identiﬁes inno-
vation as a process over a period of time. Usually it divides
it into stages. For example, [20] identiﬁes knowledge, persua-
sion, decision, implementation and conﬁrmation stages while
[21] identiﬁes initiation, adoption, acceptance, routinisation
and infusion. What matters here is not the particular stage
model but that adoption takes place, usually individually, over
time and various factors inﬂuence the speed and likelihood of
transition between stages.
Davis et al [17] summarise two models that identify
inﬂuencing factors. The ﬁrst is a general theory of reasoned
action model, which helps us identify intended behaviours. The
second, the technology acceptance model adds the perceived
usefulness and perceived ease of use. They ﬁnd that perceived
usefulness is the primary, and ease of use secondary the
secondary, determinant in people’s intention to use technology.
Gallivan [21] looks at inﬂuencing factors when adoption is
not voluntary and ﬁnds that strong and clear communication,
high resource commitment and centralised planning and con-
trol contribute to better adoption, but, as usual, ﬁnds many
individual factors also inﬂuence.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Walley and Amin [22] study customers rather than users
and discuss their adoption of customer processing technology
such as ATMs, petrol pumps and vending machines. They
identify factors affecting customer choice to use the technology
or not. The ones of interest are these. Customers adopt better
if they repeat the use of the technology often. They prefer
technology that presents a low variety of tasks. They are more
likely to choose the technology if they value what it provides.
They also discuss the extent to which customers ﬁnd using
the technology rewarding. The study is of interest because it
identiﬁes the factors likely to make voluntary adoption work.
In a review of organisational adoption of technology, Fich-
man [23] classiﬁes types of technology by two dimensions.
The ﬁrst combines the extent of interdependency between
users and the burden of knowledge required for adoption.
The second looks at the locus: individual or organisational
adoption. The examples of [22] are adopted individually and
work best when knowledge burden is low. Most customer-
processing technologies do not have interdependency between
customers.
Security technology requires both the organisational locus
of adoption and an individual locus: one user not adopting is
enough for failure. So, we need at the same time high resource
commitment and clear communication from management, and
a choice of technology that users are very likely to adopt.
Often the adoption is needed quickly and so factors slowing
individual adoption are undesirable. It may be difﬁcult, how-
ever, to make the technology rewarding to the user and many
may fail to perceive its usefulness. That is, while the adoption
is essentially organisational, it makes sense to regard users
as like the customers of ATMs and petrol pumps. That is,
organisations should prefer technology that requires little new
knowledge and changes as little as possible, or even reduces,
the tasks that the users must perform.
The ideal, then, is for managers to choose technologies that
are transparent or nearly so. Applying this, we can see some of
the reasons for the success and growth of cloud services. Not
only do they meet organisational requirements for outsourced
computing at a reasonable cost, but user adoption is ensured by
making the services simple enough that users can be unaware
they are using them. For example, when a CSP provides ﬁle
storage, programs or database servers that are set up so that
users cannot easily distinguish them from software on their
computer, then adoption is easy and managing the process is
largely limited to managers committing the resources to ensure
staff computers are set up correctly.
V.
LIMITATIONS AND DISCUSSION
These requirements presents challenges for managers. They
must be able to identify competently what they need from
cloud providers. And they must be willing to provide the
resource for it.
The most challenging problems for enterprises will be those
where users have to increase their burden of knowledge or
where security is dependent on technology that has a high
degree of interdependency among users, especially when the
users are outside of the organisation.
Passwords are a good example of where there may be
little choice but to increase the knowledge of users. Passwords
should have high information entropy, but most users perceive
little value in learning this. It is possible to remove some of the
burden from the users by testing and reporting entropy at the
time a password is set and by rejecting weak passwords. But
it remains important to teach users good ways to remember
strong passwords. It may be impossible to prevent users using
a good password on a secure system and also using it on a
less secure one, such as when they use their work password
on their social-media account.
The most common applications where there is a high
interdependency between users are email and web browsers.
These technologies, like most computing applications, were
developed long before security standards. What makes them
difﬁcult to replace is that all parties must implement more or
less the same standards. Secure email requires the co-operation
of both sender and recipient and is usually impractical between
organisations. Secure email within an organisation is possible,
though may be expensive to make transparent. It is possible to
remove email attachments, but without incentive to co¨operate,
users can bypass this kind of transparent security measure, for
example by using web-based email. Possibly a secure email
standard, but it is likely to take decades to get enough users
to use it.
Web browsers can be easier to manage, because the security
threat is largely external. Here again, managers are best advised
to try to use a web browser with security features that require
little or no knowledge from the user. But, once again, they
leave open the possibility of having an intruder undetected in
the system. For SMEs in particular, this presents a challenge,
because they are likely not to have the expertise to deal with
this. PaaS, where the web browser is provided by the CSP can
improve matters. But if it is not easier to use the cloud-based
web browser users are likely to see little reward from it and
so ﬁnd it simpler to use a web browser on their own device,
which is much harder to secure.
VI.
IS THAT IT?
Well, under normal circumstances, having made re-
searchers aware of the management issues as we see them,
we could perhaps relax and wait for researchers to deliver,
were it not for two very pertinent dark clouds on the horizon.
The ﬁrst is the Cloud Forensic Problem and the second is the
forthcoming EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
which comes into effect on 25th May 2018.
The ﬁrst dark cloud—the Cloud Forensic Problem, can be
best described as the elephant in the room. Many are aware
that it exists, but few are willing to talk about it. It con-
cerns the fundamental weakness in cloud computing, namely,
that although cloud cyber security research has progressed
signiﬁcantly during the past decade on strengthening cloud
security, there is one major and important issue that has yet
to be resolved, namely that once an attacker ﬁnally breaches
cloud defences, and become embedded within the system, they
become an intruder for as long or as little time as they wish.
Their primary goal will be to escalate privileges until they
can seek out the forensic trail and obliterate all evidence of
their presence within the system and how they were able to
get there. Their desire is often to obtain a permanent foothold
within the system, so that they can return again and again in
order to harvest whatever they can get their hands on. Worst
of all, there is absolutely nothing that existing cloud systems
can do to prevent this from happening.
The second dark cloud we need to consider is the question
of why cloud cyber security is becoming such a hot topic?
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

While there are many other pieces of data protection around
that need to be complied with, the real reason this is becoming
such a hot topic is that once the forthcoming EU GDPR
[24], comes into effect, any company that is breached will be
required, on pain of potentially massive punitive ﬁnes, to report
exactly which records were accessed, modiﬁed, deleted or ex-
ﬁltrated from the company system. By potentially massive,
punitive ﬁnes, we consider the larger of e20 million or 4% of
Global Turnover, for every breach, to be a serious amount for
any company, whether large or small.
If the cloud forensic trails are purged, this will leave
the breached company with a potentially impossible task for
them to comply with the strict reporting requirements of the
legislation, namely that they must report every breach within
72 hours of discovery of the breach. Without the existence of
forensic log data, it is doubtful whether any such company
would be able to meet even this simpliﬁed deadline. If we
consider that ﬁve years ago, the global average time between
breach and discovery was 6 months [25], and that by last
year, this had only improved to three weeks [26], it is clear
that no matter how quickly a breach is discovered, if the
forensic trail has been completely wiped, then a company will
likely be unable to understand which records may have been
seen, modiﬁed, tampered with, deleted or ex-ﬁltrated from the
system.
Once a breach is spotted, if due to the deletion of some or
all of the forensic data by the intruder, the company will be
unlikely to understand which records must be reported under
the regulation. This will render them liable to a much higher
range of possible penalties under the regulation.
The answer then, is a resounding no. The EU GDPR will
kick in within the next few months time, and those companies
who are not ready will have no excuse. This means that
something must be done NOW, not months after the GDPR
kicks in.
VII.
HOW DO WE FIND A QUICK SOLUTION TO THIS
PROBLEM?
Given the fact that the Cloud Forensic Problem has not
been solved, it is clear that the solution cannot be run on
the existing cloud server, otherwise it will be exposed to the
same problem as everything else. A simple approach would
be to use the Duncan and Whittington approach [27]–[30],
whereby the audit trail, the forensic trail and a log of all
database commands made are safely stored in an immutable
database held on a system external to the main cloud system.
All existing logging would continue to be carried out on
the existing cloud servers to encourage those attackers who
succeed in becoming intruders might be lulled into a false
sense of security.
Obviously, these covert logging systems will themselves
become a target for attackers, but if they are conﬁgured as
ultra high security servers with no direct web access, no
other software running on them, and highly restricted access,
together with a serious Intrusion Detection and Monitoring
System, they will be a little more difﬁcult to breach. These,
it turn, can also be protected by another similar system, or
indeed a chain of them, to provide a continuous self protecting
loop, preferably with each system running on a different CSP
offering.
VIII.
WILL THIS MEET THE CRITERIA WE HAVE
IDENTIFIED AS BEING IMPORTANT FROM A MANAGEMENT
PERSPECTIVE?
We have prepared a list of the management goals we have
identiﬁed in the paper, which we consider essential to meet
in order to ensure a high level of take up of security systems
within an organisation.
TABLE I. HOW OUR PROPOSED SOLUTION WILL IMPACT ON
MANAGEMENT GOALS
Management Goals Identiﬁed
Impact of our proposal
1. Management need reliability at reasonable cost and
possibly scalability
No adverse impact
2. To avoid lock-in
No adverse impact
3. Very low knowledge burden to use secure computing
No adverse impact
4. Need to be able to protect data integrity, maintain
privacy and detect breaches
Helps achieve goal
5. Need clarity about who is responsible legally and
ﬁnancially for security and what is provided by CSPs
Ability to retain forensic trail
helps with legal recourse
6. Need to be able to recover rapidly from breaches of
security or damage to data
Helps achieve goal
7. Require security technology that is readily adopted
by the whole organisation
Helps achieve goal
8. Require a very low knowledge burden so that they
get adoption by everyone individually
Helps achieve goal
9. Need high resource commitment and clear commu-
nication from management
Not expensive to implement
As we can see, the proposed method of implementing this
security approach is likely to have a minimum adverse impact
on our management goals, and therefore is likely to stand a
much higher chance of successful implementation.
IX.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
From a management perspective, we consider it is very
important that any security system meet our management goals
in order to ensure a high level of uptake. We can see from
TABLE I that we can implement the proposed methods to
ensure a high level of security in cloud systems is achieved,
which we can do while fulﬁlling our identiﬁed management
goals. A useful bonus is that we can also comply with the
EU GDPR and will have a useful means of ensuring rapid
turnaround of our business continuity plans.
This means that there will be a higher likelihood that such
an approach will be successfully implemented, especially by
SMEs. This will also ensure that in the event of a systems
breach, it will be possible to fully comply with the GDPR
reporting requirements. Also, the ability to fully recover from
such an attack will enhance any business continuity plan,
ensuring a faster and more full recovery than would otherwise
be possible.
In future work, we propose the development of a use case
model to test how well a company might recover from an attack
whilst still remaining compliant with the GDPR. We believe
this can provide a useful means of ensuring many SMEs, who
would otherwise fall foul of the new regulation.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Tidd, J. Bessant, and K. Pavitt, Managing innovation. Hoboken. NJ:
Wiley, 2013.
[2]
Y. Chen, V. Paxson, and R. H. Katz, “Handbook of Cloud Computing,”
Handbook of Cloud Computing, vol. 20, no. 2010, 2010, pp. 493–516.
[3]
P. Drucker, Management Challenges for the 21st Century, ser. Manage-
ment Challenges for the 21st Century. HarperCollins, 1999, no. pt. 794.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[4]
P. Mell and T. Grance, “The NIST Deﬁnition of Cloud Comput-
ing,” NIST, Tech. Rep., 2011. [Online]. Available: http://nvlpubs.
nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-145.pdf [Last ac-
cessed: November 2017]
[5]
G. Weir and A. Aßmuth, “Strategies for Intrusion Monitoring in Cloud
Services,” Cloud Computing 2017: The Eighth International Conference
on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization, 2017, pp. 1–5.
[6]
M. Miller, Cloud Computing: Web-Based Applications That Change the
Way You Work and Collaborate Online. Que Publishing, 2008.
[7]
S. Marston, Z. Li, S. Bandyopadhyay, J. Zhang, and A. Ghalsasi, “Cloud
computing - The business perspective,” Decision Support Systems,
vol. 51, no. 1, 2011, pp. 176–189.
[8]
K. Gai and S. Li, “Towards Cloud Computing: A Literature Review on
Cloud Computing and Its Development Trends,” 2012 Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on Multimedia Information Networking and Security,
2012, pp. 142–146.
[9]
S. Greengard, “Cloud computing and developing nations,” Communica-
tions of the ACM, vol. 53, no. 5, 2010, pp. 18–20.
[10]
V. Ratten, “Entrepreneurial and ethical adoption behaviour of cloud
computing,” Journal of High Technology Management Research, vol. 23,
no. 2, 2012, pp. 155–164.
[11]
Y. Alshamaila, S. Papagiannidis, and F. Li, “Cloud computing adoption
by SMEs in the north east of England,” Journal of Enterprise Information
Management, vol. 26, no. 3, 2013, pp. 250–275.
[12]
L. Wang, G. Von Laszewski, A. Younge, X. He, M. Kunze, J. Tao,
and C. Fu, “Cloud computing: A perspective study,” New Generation
Computing, vol. 28, no. 2, 2010, pp. 137–146.
[13]
D. C. Plummer, T. J. Bittman, T. Austin, D. W. Cearley, and D. M.
Smith, “Cloud Computing : Deﬁning and Describing an Emerging
Phenomenon,” Gartner Research, vol. G00156220, no. June, 2008, pp.
1–9.
[14]
W. DeLone, “Determinants of Success for Computer Usage in Small
Business,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 12, no. 1, 1988, pp. 51–61.
[15]
P. K. Ross and M. Blumenstein, “Cloud computing as a facilitator of
SME entrepreneurship,” Technology Analysis \& Strategic Management,
vol. 27, no. 1, 2015, pp. 87–101.
[16]
M.
Stern-Peltz
and
J.
Armitage,
“IT
Firms
Lose
bil-
lions
after
NSA
Scandal
Exposed
by
Whistleblower
Edward
Snowden,”
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//www.independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-and-tech/news/
it-ﬁrms-lose-billions-after-nsa-scandal-exposed-by-whistleblower-\
\edward-snowden-9028599.html [Last accessed: November 2017]
[17]
F. D. Davis, R. P. Bagozzi, and P. R. Warshaw, “User Acceptance
of Computer Technology: A Comparison of Two Theoretical Models
Author,” Management Science, vol. 35, no. 8, 1989, pp. 982–1003.
[18]
A. Cooper, About Face: The Essentials of User Interface Design. IDG
Books Worldwide, Inc., 1995.
[19]
E. M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations, 5th ed. New York: Free Press,
2003.
[20]
E. M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations, 3rd ed.
London: The Free
Press, 1983.
[21]
M. J. Gallivan, “Organizational adoption and assimilation of complex
technological innovations,” ACM SIGMIS Database, vol. 32, no. 3, 2001,
p. 51.
[22]
P. Walley and V. Amin, “Automation in a Customer Contact Environ-
ment,” International Journal of Operations & Production Management,
vol. 14, no. 5, 1994, pp. 86–100.
[23]
R. G. Fichman, “Information Technology Diffusion: A Review of Em-
pirical Research,” Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference
on Information Systems ({ICIS} ’92), 1992, pp. 195–206.
[24]
EU, “EU General Data Protection Regulation,” 2017. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.eugdpr.org/ [Last accessed: November 2017]
[25]
Verizon, “2012 Data Breach Investigations Report,” Verizon, Tech. Rep.,
2012.
[26]
Verizon, “2016 Verizon Data Breach Report,” Tech. Rep., 2016.
[27]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing Cloud Security and Pri-
vacy: The Power and the Weakness of the Audit Trail,” in Cloud Com-
puting 2016: The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing,
GRIDs, and Virtualization, no. April. Rome: IEEE, 2016, pp. 125–130.
[28]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Cloud cyber-security: Empowering the
audit trail,” International Journal on Advances in Security, vol. 9, no. 3
& 4, 2016, pp. 169–183.
[29]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Creating an Immutable Database for
Secure Cloud Audit Trail and System Logging,” in Cloud Computing
2017: The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs,
and Virtualization. Athens, Greece: IARIA, ISBN: 978-1-61208-529-6,
2017, pp. 54–59.
[30]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Creating and Conﬁguring an Im-
mutable Database for Secure Cloud Audit Trail and System Logging,”
International Journal On Advances in Security, no. 3&4, 2017.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

