Incorporating Permanent Audit Trails for Corporates
Bob Duncan
Business School
University of Aberdeen
King’s College, Aberdeen, UK
and
Arcada University of Applied Sciences
Jan-Magnus Janssons plats 1, 00550 Helsinki, Finland
Email:robert.duncan@abdn.ac.uk
Magnus Westerlund
and John Wickstr¨om
Department of Business Management and Analytics
Arcada University of Applied Sciences
Jan-Magnus Janssons plats 1, 00550 Helsinki, Finland
Email:magnus.westerlund@arcada.ﬁ, wickstjo@arcada.ﬁ
Abstract—All corporate businesses are under constant attack.
There is no doubt that the adoption of a multitude of cheap
Internet of Things devices have proved to be a great enabler of
the vastly expanded potential for data collection to run systems,
processes, and machines more effectively. Unfortunately, their
very cheapness often means that security is not appropriately
considered during design, and that the incorporation of such
devices can introduce a new route in to corporate systems for
attackers. The audit trail is often the single most important
target for attackers to allow them to cover their tracks and
remain hidden in the system for a long duration. Therefore,
we must ensure we take extra precautions to properly secure
this important record in a cryptographically secured immutable
database, for without it, we have no means to forensically
discover who has perpetrated attacks, nor how they penetrated
our systems. In this paper, we explore a method of securely
collecting and storing this information in an immutable database.
We approach this using blockchain based smart contracts, which
has the added advantage of allowing us to take a distributed
approach, which also ﬁts well with modern corporate computing
infrastructures. We ﬁnd that this approach can allow us to retain
the relevant audit trails deemed necessary to meet corporate
security goals and compliance requirements.
Keywords—blockchain, IoT, smart contracts, security, audit trails
I. INTRODUCTION
The introduction of Internet of Things (IoT) devices presents
a serious challenge for keeping corporate systems secure.
In 2020 in the UK alone, the Government Cyber Security
Breaches Survey [1] noted that almost half of all businesses
suffered a breach during the previous year. In the case of
large corporates, the rate of breaches was 75%. As corporate
systems become ever larger and more complex, the challenge
of securing them can increase exponentially. Vulnerabilities
are numerous, although often well understood. However, the
one area where most corporate failures lie is in the widespread
inability of corporate system users to be able to retain the audit
trail of key transactions processed within these highly complex
information infrastructures. This is not a new problem and has
been with us for a very long time.
In traditional highly centralised corporate systems, which
generally used a tight ﬁrewall around all corporate IT assets
within the boundaries of the organisation, attackers were still
able to get in. With ever expanding corporate needs, systems
have also grown and transitioned away from a centralised IT
model to a more distributed approach, partly due to multiple
site locations within a country, followed by multiple site
locations across both other countries and indeed continents,
the challenge has only intensiﬁed.
Once an attacker had successfully penetrated the system,
the audit trail was often their ﬁrst target, to ensure they could
remove all trace of their incursion. By altering the audit trail,
attackers can remove their traces so that their activities are not
recognized, and their identity and localisation remains hidden,
and their continued presence is guaranteed [2]. With a highly
distributed network, the goal of the attacker will still be the
same. The only difference will be in the exponential increase
in opportunity to gain entry into a system that may struggle
to maintain either physical or logical integrity.
During the past couple of decades, corporate IT systems
have expanded in complexity and capability beyond all com-
prehension. The addition of powerful, yet cheap, IoT devices
has had an impact on corporate systems and as a result may
demand new forensic methods [3]. While this has allowed
corporates to achieve greater cost savings, IoT gateways
have opened up considerable avenues of potential access to
corporate systems. Meanwhile, the appetite of attackers has
merely continued to expand relentlessly year on year [4].
In this paper, we outline how we propose to tackle this
serious problem with a very robust approach to resolving
these difﬁcult challenges. In Section II, we provide some
background, discussing the motivation for this work, in Sec-
tion III, we discuss the practical requirements for an audit trail
storage solution. In Section IV, we discuss why we elected to
use blockchain smart contracts to provide robust security of
the audit trail records. In Section V, we outline how smart
contracts can be used to deliver a persistent audit trail for
corporate systems that addresses the particular weaknesses of
adding IoT systems to the corporate IT systems portfolio.
In Section VI, we consider how adoption of the Zero Trust
approach might ﬁt with our proposed system elements. In
Section VII, we discuss our conclusions and consider future
improvements and developments of this system.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-845-7
CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

II. BACKGROUND
Traditional monolithic information systems are challenging
to keep secure and to retain a complete audit trail of events.
When such complexities as cloud computing, IoT and dis-
tributed systems are added, the challenge grows exponentially.
Duncan and Whittington [5] have written about the challenges
of dealing with the proper audit of cloud systems, stressing
the need to maintain a proper audit trail in these systems,
and about weaknesses arising through poor conﬁguration of
database systems [6]. They proposed addressing this through
the use of an immutable database to record a secure audit trail
and system logging for cloud applications [7].
In this paper, we opted to avoid using traditional databases
due to their mutability and subsequent unworthiness of stor-
ing something as invaluable as audit trail data. Traditional
databases can be very simple to operate, store and analyse data,
yet are notoriously difﬁcult to prevent the data being modiﬁed
by either internal authorized users such as administrators or
by external attackers that have breached the network barrier.
It is certainly the case that many early relational database
management systems offered the provision of an immutable
database option. The downside was that they were unable
to offer the beneﬁts of rapid searching through the use of
indexed ﬁelds, thus rendering them too difﬁcult to handle
after a volume of transactions had built up. While it is
certainly true that advances have since been made in more
modern database systems, and the capabilities of No-SQL
databases have opened up unstructured searching, nevertheless,
weaknesses still remain once subject to attack.
Westerlund et al., [2] started development of a blockchain
based solution for companies who wished to ensure the
addition of a highly secure IoT network. Subsequent work has
led to the development of a robust mechanism for a complete
IoT system that can protect audit trails through the use of
smart contracts as an immutable storage platform (see Sub-
section II-C).
A. The Audit Trail
Duncan and Whittington [8] note the huge wealth of ex-
perience accountants bring to ﬁnancial systems, which have
traditionally been subject to constant attack from both external
and internal sources. While cash remains a highly attractive
target, attackers have long realised that data often provides
easier pickings. This arises because cash systems are often
exceptionally well protected compared to data which can also
have a signiﬁcant value to an attacker.
The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) deﬁnes audit as:
Audit — OED ( [9]: “To make an ofﬁcial systematic ex-
amination of (accounts), so as to ascertain their accuracy”).
This is a process (in accounting) that requires outsiders who
are deemed to be both objective and expert to form their
own opinion of what is being audited and to then publicly
state their conﬁdence (or otherwise) in the reliability of what
they have investigated. Auditing is not straightforward or easy
and a common view is that the main purpose of audit is the
statutory requirement to audit ﬁnancial statements. There are a
further two areas in which we could ﬁnd audit useful. First, IT
systems audit will often be carried out in addition to ﬁnancial
audit, with one common weakness being that the IT system
is often treated as a “black box” system, meaning too much
trust may be placed in the system. IT systems audit is not
mandatory, meaning many opportunities to spot weaknesses
can be ignored, leaving potentially gaping security holes in
systems. Second, audits are often used, as a means of assuring
legislators and regulators that the legislation and regulations
are being complied with. As these are often not mandatory,
they tend to be carried out infrequently due to their highly
sensitive nature, thus they may be contingent on a relationship
between the auditor and the audited, again potentially leaving
weaknesses unaddressed. However, there is a wealth of history
and experience available in the accounting world that we can
learn from, and in particular with our approach to improving
the security of systems.
Turning to the audit trail, the OED [9] has the following
two useful deﬁnitions of an audit trail: “(a) Accounting: a
means of verifying the detailed transactions underlying any
item in an accounting record; (b) Computing: a record of the
computing processes that have been applied to a particular
set of source data, showing each stage of processing and
allowing the original data to be reconstituted; a record of the
transactions to which a database or a ﬁle has been subjected”.
Thus, we can see that there is not a uniﬁed perception between
the two disciplines of exactly what an audit trail is. Thus, if
we accept that we can choose our own requirements to suit our
purposes, we can leverage the vast wealth of audit skills and
experience from the accounting world to create an accounting
record that helps us adapt, improve, and satisfy our computing
requirements.
In the accounting world, the audit trail provides additional
information to help ensure the veracity of transactions such
that in the event of a serious breach, it is possible to recon-
struct what took place following examination by a forensic
accountant. For our purposes, we can theoretically leverage
these skills to apply this technique to any kind of data, together
with veriﬁcation of whatever useful information we may be
seeking to retain.
Whenever a new technological area is developed, a big
challenge is that it is usually difﬁcult to ﬁnd people who
have the appropriate skillset — since there is a requirement
for people who have both competence in audit as well as
expertise in the new discipline [10]. Nevertheless, for forensic
accounting purposes, a tailored audit trail that can be captured
and kept fully intact, can provide copious ammunition to
a forensic scientist who is called upon to investigate the
aftermath of a security breach. Thus, by ensuring our audit
trail provides the key evidence we require, we can signiﬁcantly
improve our ability to ﬁght back against the attackers.
B. Motivation
There are a great many businesses who will only ever pay lip
service to proper security [4], taking the view ‘It will never
happen to us’ or ‘We are not big enough to be of interest
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-845-7
CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

to attackers’. Since all business systems are under constant
attack, regardless of size or annual revenue, a business should
always err on the side of caution and prepare for one or more
of their systems to be breached. Once that happens, there can
be signiﬁcant consequences. There will be the disruption of
ofﬁcial investigations, which can drag on for months, even
years, often resulting in punitive ﬁnes. The disruption of
a serious breach can have a signiﬁcant impact on day-to-
day business, often leading to huge loss of revenue, huge
reputational damage, loss of conﬁdence in the business from
customers and suppliers, as well as from stock markets, which
can have a serious adverse impact on share prices. The one
constant in most large breach situations is that it never ends
well.
A big motivator happens on the ﬁrst day of a serious breach
when an attacker has taken over the systems of the business.
Many companies are completely unprepared for an event such
as this. At the very least, there may be signiﬁcant disruption
to business activities, with the extent of this depending on
the nature and extent of the attack. This can turn out to be
such a serious outcome that many ﬁrms have been put out of
business, or caused major disruption, job losses or complete
meltdowns. In the case of the EU General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR), companies have only 72 hours in which
to report a breach to the regulator after detecting the event
[11]. In the midst of such a panic, that would likely be far
down the list of priorities, yet failure to do so would not be a
valid excuse, adding to the resultant ﬁne.
In addition, it is worth pointing out that legislators and
regulators are getting ever tougher with companies who suffer
major breaches, especially where they have been less than
competent with their security practices. There are signs that
throughout the globe, punishments are getting ever tougher,
year on year. Just late last year, the Hamburg Commissioner
for Data Protection and Freedom of Information ﬁned H&M
(Hennes & Mauritz) C35.3 million for data protection vio-
lations of employees’ personal data. These violations only
came to light when the data became accessible company
wide following a misconﬁguration error, following which the
regulator became involved [12].
C. The IoT Secure Solution
A common challenge with distributed architectures based
on cloud computing or IoT, lays in securing them. Tradition-
ally, networks are separated into physical or logical distinct
networks, but for distributed architectures we may also see
overlay networks that implement certain structures on the
network. These overlay networks may offer a more nuanced
control over the network nodes that can include customized
security protocols.
In a previous proposal, we have detailed such an approach
for distributed security, whereby all entities, both actors and
devices, authenticate themselves through smart contracts run-
ning on the Ethereum blockchain [13]. Further, smart contracts
provide function authorization so that all entities conform to
a push and pull agreement for all activities. Thus, a device
owner can operate the device by executing a smart contract
transaction, deﬁned as a task, that the device listens to and
then interprets into an action on the device.
This class of solutions can signiﬁcantly improve the security
of distributed systems as nodes can be made invisible to
the network. By hardening nodes and denying any externally
initiated connections to a node means that they become
extremely hard to attack remotely. Although the approach still
demands improvement, such as detailed event audit trails, we
can foresee signiﬁcant improvement for distributed systems
that remain publicly hidden but whose utilization remains
largely unchanged.
III. PRACTICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR AN AUDIT TRAIL
STORAGE SOLUTION
In this section, we discuss the requirements for an im-
mutable, distributed, database that can hold the audit trail
records in a trustworthy manner offering good redundancy.
Users cannot modify or delete records from an immutable
database [6] and even if the system is breached, the attacker
should not be able to escalate credentials to take down the
distributed database nodes [2]. Many of the early database
management systems did have an immutable database option.
However, there was no access to indexing, which made access-
ing records a slow task that would get incrementally slower the
more records that were in the database. With no easy means
to sort the records, analytical searches would not be an option.
Without any cryptographical backing of the records, assuring
the integrity of the records would also have been a difﬁcult
challenge to overcome.
The development of blockchain technology introduced novel
methods of storing data in a distributed, immutable, and
scalable database. Public blockchains, like Ethereum [15],
provide an extremely robust mechanism to ensure the veracity
of immutable transactions, albeit at a signiﬁcant monetary
cost, particularly for use cases such as ours. Due to this
impracticality, we chose to deploy our own private blockchain
by using the same toolkit that was used to create the Ethereum
network.
While the Ethereum network is secure to a point of redun-
dancy, its cryptocurrency is now so valuable that it actively
attracts malicious users to explore and abuse exploits for mon-
etary gain. The primary beneﬁt of using a private blockchain
is that it reduces the cost of operations to almost nothing,
because the corporate owns the blockchain’s cryptocurrency.
Additionally, since the cryptocurrency’s value is no-longer
determined via supply and demand, attackers have signiﬁcantly
less to gain compared to the effort it takes to ﬁnd and abuse
potential vulnerabilities [14].
Database companies have slowly started proposing im-
mutable storage systems like Amazon’s Quantum Ledger
Database (QLDB) [16]. This product was speciﬁcally designed
for cloud applications and uses a cryptographically veriﬁable
transaction log to ensure the integrity of transactional data,
without the blockchain/smart contract transaction replication.
However, since we are planning ahead to incorporate the Zero
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-845-7
CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Trust approach recommended by the NSA (see Section VI), we
will not use any system based on proprietary code that is fully
managed by the supplier. ImmuDB [17] has also developed a
fast and cryptographically secure immutable database which
can be used on conventional servers or deployed in cloud.
It has arguably many improvements over the Amazon QLDB
option by being open source, privately hosted, and signiﬁ-
cantly faster, but does, however, lack the built-in authorized
processing of blockchain smart contracts.
IV. WHY WE OPTED FOR BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY
It is fair to say that all companies, no matter how large
or small, will generally have similar incentives to ensure the
completeness and veracity of their data systems. Since all
companies are equally exposed to the potentially punitive
levels of ﬁnes for failures to comply with the demands for
increasingly tougher security and privacy requirements, all are
likely to beneﬁt from a robust approach.
In our view, the bar for corporate compliance is set to a high
level so we must ensure that an exceptionally robust approach
can be achieved. In addition to these stringent compliance
requirements, corporate systems architectures have become so
complex, that failure to secure even one small part of the
system can have catastrophic consequences.
Thus, we need to ensure that every possible means should
be deployed to provide an exceptionally robust method to
safeguard these corporate systems. By utilizing blockchain
smart contracts, we can deliver a high degree of security to
all the varied and necessary audit trails, and ensure proper
protection for all parts of today’s highly complex systems.
It is often the case that we are faced with the task of adding
huge new parts to existing complex systems, such as when
we add a large IoT system to an existing corporate mega-
system. There may already be some weaknesses present in
many corporate systems and adding something like a large
insecure IoT system brings far more risks to the equation.
It is obvious that SMEs will not have large resources at
their disposal to ensure the highest security standards for their
business data. Being small companies, they also have a lot to
lose when anything goes wrong. In today’s ever increasingly
punitive jurisdictional environment, compliance failures lead
to potentially massive ﬁnes, even for the minnows of the
corporate world.
This paper will focus on the same approach as our IoT
solution [13], which has proved to deliver the high security
we sought. We can be selective about which audit trail data
we seek to protect, since not every event in the main corporate
systems will be critical. Naturally, all login events to access
control systems will be critical to retain, as will events
surrounding all ﬁnancial transactions. There will be others,
and the corporate can make up its own mind what needs to
be secured.
While we accept that there will be a resource cost to this
high security audit trail retention process, in the event of
a breach, it is likely to provide more than ample reward.
Currently, it is hugely challenging to understand how the
attacker got in to the system and what they did once there,
particularly since deleting the audit trail of their activities once
in the system is their primary focus. This is why attackers are
so difﬁcult to catch.
V. HOW WE STRUCTURED OUR APPROACH
Having developed a working distributed security solution
for IoT systems, we realised that it would be insufﬁcient
without proper attention to the main corporate system. Our
current work addresses the core system into which a secure
IoT system is added. The vast majority of current corporate
systems are not ﬁt for purpose as far as security is concerned.
Simply bolting on a secure IoT solution still does nothing if
the underlying corporate system is insecure. Thus, we were
motivated to consider upcoming practices and methods to
determine their potential weaknesses and to propose improved
solutions.
Edge computing performs computing tasks physically close
to target devices rather than on the cloud or centralised
location. Edge computing offers huge potential to make it
possible to apply different machine learning algorithms at the
edge node. An edge computing architecture relies on pipelines
crossing several security boundaries in the corporate system,
but the collected data should remain on the edge node and thus
privacy can be improved. Given the often distributed nature of
today’s large corporates, the ability to include edge computing
would be a potential asset.
Machine Learning Operations (MLOps) has been proposed
as a systematic software engineering method to automate and
optimize AI for production [18]. MLOps looks to increase
automation and improve machine learning quality in produc-
tion while respecting business and regulatory requirements.
It allows businesses to onboard machine learning to their
operations by training, deploying, and maintaining machine
learning pipelines, such as those employed for edge comput-
ing. MLOps is being proposed as an industry standard for
handling operational machine learning tasks. Given that we
do not intend for the audit trail data to be merely collected
and safely stored, it is obvious to us that their provisions to
allow for the performance of a variety of analytics on this data
needs to be put in place [19], and we discuss this further in
Section VII.
While we have looked at these new technologies, and are
considering them for our future work, they are not speciﬁcally
included in the work we have addressed in this paper. Thus,
we set out to deliver an approach based on smart contracts
for corporate systems that aim to utilize complex set-ups
that are hard to secure with traditional physical or logical
networking approaches, utilising our already proven approach
to delivering robust security for IoT systems. Obviously, in
this case, we would need to deliver the means to capture a
variety of different audit trail data, to address whatever areas
might be deemed necessary by the corporate.
Our software collects an extra copy of the data direct from
every system log and audit trail source that we wish to secure
and this is processed to the relevant smart contract. The
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-845-7
CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

multiple nodes that process the smart contracts simultaneously
process this data to ensure robust security. With a multiplicity
of physical locations for the nodes, we can achieve robust-
ness, redundancy and security. The data in the blockchain
is immutable, ensuring permanent security. The blockchain
consensus algorithm will ensure the data is validated thus
allowing us to develop trust in the data.
In the event of an attack, authorised users can access the
data from the smart contract, and can compare this against the
data contained in the original system logs and audit trail ﬁles,
which will highlight where the attacker has attempted to cover
their tracks. The necessary forensic data can be passed to the
relevant authorities.
The beauty of our approach is that no major system re-
write is required to ensure that full security and privacy can
be achieved. Companies are usually reticent to abandon an
existing expensive system after they have added a large IoT
implementation to ensure security and privacy. Rather, our
approach allows us to select every part of existing and new
systems to be speciﬁcally secured, without the need for major
change. Since the audit trail runs concurrently with the existing
system, there will be minimal disruption to existing systems,
yet additional levels of security and privacy will be added.
In our initial testing, our software works exactly as planned.
Processing is carried out efﬁciently and we can select the data
we wish to inspect at will. This data extraction facility makes
investigation considerably less of a challenge. Our next stage
will be to set up a test server to run an example system, in
which we will generate a typical selection of data. We will
then carry out a range of attacks on the system to test how
well the system works. We will publish the results of this
investigation in due course.
VI. HOW THIS CAN ALIGN WITH THE NSA ZERO TRUST
APPROACH
The National Security Agency (NSA) of the US recently
recommended all government, military and contractors who
work for these agencies to adopt a Zero Trust strategy [20].
The essence of this approach is to assume that ALL hardware,
software and people in an organisation should be regarded as
having Zero Trust. On this basis, corporates will not make
any weak assumptions of trust with any part of the business
architecture. This paradigm shift is a very sensible and a
welcome recommendation to security, but most centralized
systems would need to be rebuilt from the ground up in order
to comply with the ruleset.
We believe there is strong merit in adopting this approach
for all corporate systems. All too often, assumptions are made
about the level of trust according to hardware, software and the
people in an organisation, leading to too many weaknesses in
security being allowed to arise. There is no doubt that adoption
of this approach will require new ways of thinking. However, if
a corporate starts by adopting our secure IoT system ﬁrst, this
will cause no disruption to the smooth running of the business,
since our IoT solution already complies with the Zero Trust
model. Adopting the securing of the audit trails in the manner
we suggest in this paper, will further improve security with
minimal disruption.
The next stage would be to introduce the Zero Trust strategy,
again in a phased way in order to minimise disruption.
Once this fundamental shift in approach has been successfully
carried out, we would then be ready to incorporate the next
phase. Earlier in this paper, we introduced the possibility of
conducting analytics on the collected data. We can foresee the
possibility of using such analytics on secure data to perform all
manner of useful tasks to measure the veracity of data being
produced and recorded, all of which could be tailored to every
single part of the business architecture of the corporate. Again,
these variations could be added as required, to minimise
disruption to ongoing systems.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
In conclusion, we have developed a high security audit trail
system that can theoretically be applied to protect any part
of a large corporate system, which works by protecting the
forensic information contained in activity logs. Since these are
a frequent target of attackers, the ability to retain these records
will be transformative for corporates in their ﬁght against cyber
attacks. Having the ability to identify an attack more quickly,
identify how the attack was perpetrated, how it was executed,
and what data was exposed will be a huge improvement when
reporting to regulators. By ensuring that this data is properly
encrypted in the ﬁrst place and that we can identify speciﬁcally
which data was compromised, and whether it was properly
encrypted, the impact on personally identiﬁable information
will be minimal, as will the resultant ﬁne.
Furthermore, there will be an evidential trail available
for authorities to follow and pursue legally, opening up the
possibility that for the ﬁrst time, attention will be able to have
a forensic focus directed onto the criminals who perpetrated
these attacks. Nation states are taking these criminal activities
ever more seriously, and it will be interesting to see how
criminals like having the tables turned on them for a change.
Equally, it will be useful for corporates to be able to mitigate
the usual massive ﬁnes that are levied against them every time
they suffer a data breach.
Looking ahead to future developments, we can see that the
adoption of the Zero Trust approach will remove slack per-
ceptions of the security of corporate systems and will ensure
stronger corporate systems are developed and maintained. At
the same time, the ability to ensure the addition of highly
secure IoT systems will provide a massive boost to security,
as will be the ability to retain complete audit trails for all
important corporate systems.
However, the possibility to leverage this important data that
we have been able to secure will open the possibility to de-
velop some really important capabilities. Automated analysis
of server logs could provide instant feedback of an attack in
process. However, it might also be possible, by developing
systems using machine learning, to provide assurance of the
veracity and integrity of every single element of corporate
systems on an ongoing basis. Every single device, software
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-845-7
CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

system, server, and even the weakest link in the corporate
business architecture, the people, could all be continuously
monitored to ensure nothing untoward is happening.
REFERENCES
[1] HMG, “UK Cyber Security Breaches Report 2020,” HMG, London,
Tech. Rep., 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.gov.uk/government/
statistics/cyber-security-breaches-survey-2020 [Last access: 21 March
2021]
[2] M. Westerlund, M. Neovius, and G. Pulkkis, “Providing Tamper-Resistant
Audit Trails with Distributed Ledger based Solutions for Forensics of IoT
Systems using Cloud Resources,” International Journal on Advances in
Security Volume 11, Number 3 & 4, 2018, pp 288 - 300, 2018.
[3] S. Zawoad and R. Hasan, “Faiot: Towards building a forensics aware eco
system for the internet of things” 2015 IEEE International Conference
on Services Computing, pp. 279-284, 2015.
[4] Verizon, “Verizon Security Breach Report 2020,” Tech. Rep., 2020. [On-
line].
Available:
https://enterprise.verizon.com/en-gb/resources/reports/
dbir/ [Last access: 21 March 2021]
[5] B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “The Complexities of Auditing and
Securing Systems in the Cloud — is there a Solution and will the GDPR
move it up the Corporate Agenda?” International Journal on Advances
in Security, vol. 11, no. 3&4, pp. 232–242, 2018.
[6] B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Creating an Immutable Database for
Secure Cloud Audit Trail and System Logging,” International Journal
on Advances in Security, vol. 10, no. 3&4, pp. 1–12, 2017.
[7] B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing Cloud Security and Privacy:
The Power and the Weakness of the Audit Trail,” in Cloud Comput-
ing 2016: The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing,
GRIDs, and Virtualization, no. April.
Rome: IEEE, 2016, pp. 125–130.
[8] B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing Cloud Security and Privacy:
The Cloud Audit Problem,” in Cloud Computing 2016: The Seventh In-
ternational Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization.
Rome: IEEE, 2016, pp. 119–124.
[19] K. Grahn, M. Westerlund, and G. Pulkkis, “Analytics for network
security: A survey and taxonomy”, Information fusion for cyber-security
analytics, pp. 175–193, 2017, Springer.
[9] OED, “Oxford English Dictionary,” 2021. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.oed.com [Last access: 21 March 2021]
[10] B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Can Forensic Audit Help Address the
Cloud Forensic Problem in Light of the Requirements of the Forthcoming
European Union General Data Protection Regulation?” in Cloud Com-
puting 2018: The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing,
GRIDs, and Virtualization, no. February. Barcelona, Spain: IARIA, 2018,
pp. 84–89.
[11] EU, “EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),” 2017. [Online].
Available: http://www.eugdpr.org/ [Last access: 21 March 2021]
[12] H. Commissioner, D. P. of Information, and Freedom, “35.3 Mil-
lion Euro Fine for Data Protection Violations in H&M’s Service
Center,” p. 1, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://datenschutz-hamburg.
de/assets/pdf/2020-10-01-press-release-h+m-ﬁne.pdf [Last access: 21
March 2021]
[13] J. Wikstr¨om, M. Westerlund, and G. Pulkkis, “Smart Contract based Dis-
tributed IoT Security: A Protocol for Autonomous Device Management,”
in proceedings of 21st ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Cluster,
Cloud and Grid Computing (CCGrid 2021) (forthcoming), Melbourne,
Australia, 2021 pp 1 - 6.
[14] Y. Zhao and B. Duncan, “Could Block Chain Technology Help Resolve
the Cloud Forensic Problem?” in Cloud Computing 2018: The Ninth In-
ternational Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization,
no. February.
Barcelona, Spain: IARIA, 2018, pp. 39–44.
[15] V. Buterin and Others, “Ethereum white paper,” GitHub repository,
vol. 1, pp. 22–23, 2013.
[16] Amazon, “Quantum Ledger Database,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//aws.amazon.com/qldb/ [Last access: 21 March 2021]
[17] Immudb, “immudb,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.codenotary.
com/technologies/immudb/ [Last access: 21 March 2021]
[18] E. Raj, M. Westerlund, and L. Espinosa-Leal, “Reliable Fleet Analytics
for Edge IoT Solutions”, in Cloud Computing 2020: The International
Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization, pp 65 - 62
2020.
[20] N. S. Agency, “Embracing a zero trust security model,” Tech. Rep.,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://media.defense.gov/2021/Feb/25/
2002588479/-1/-1/0/CSI EMBRACING ZT SECURITY MODEL
UOO115131-21.PDF [Last access: 21 March 2021]
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-845-7
CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

