Adaptive Multimedia Learning Delivered in Mobile Cloud Computing Environment 
Aleksandar Karadimce, Danco Davcev 
Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering, University Ss Cyril and Methodius 
Skopje, R. Macedonia 
akaradimce@ieee.org, danco.davcev@finki.ukim.mk 
 
 
Abstract— The process of integrating multimedia files, such as 
different types of learning objects (video, images, audio, 
animation, etc.) to m-learning systems requires more 
computational resources than mobile devices can provide. 
Considering mobile device limitations, such as storage, 
computing power and bandwidth, we propose a mobile cloud 
computing in order to deliver adaptive multimedia learning 
courses to students. In this paper, we propose a PaaS cloud-
based framework, which offloads the process of dynamically 
adapting the multimedia content to the context-aware mobile 
learning environment. Hence, the student is provided with 
multimedia that is tailored to his or her cognitive style and the 
content is adapted according to context – aware network 
conditions. 
Keywords- mobile computing; cloud computing; adaptive 
multimedia learning; user profile; context-aware. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Incorporation of mobile devices during m-learning is 
done in order to improve and increase the scalability, 
collaboration and availability of learners. Multimedia 
learning systems typically include different kinds of 
multimedia resources such as audio, video, images, text etc., 
since they provide an efficient learning environment. There 
are always newer multimedia functionalities available on 
mobile devices that need to be exploited during the process 
of m-learning. 
Mobile language learning with multimedia using the 
image and audio-based training has opened the opportunity 
to develop mobile augmented and virtual reality spheres [1]. 
However, on the other hand, we can see the opportunities 
that mobile cloud computing architecture has provided for 
mlearning, with different cloud service models in university 
education, using a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) cloud 
model, as in [2]. Similar related work has been done in [3], 
with the promotion of potential of m-learning using cloud 
computing for talent training in universities. In [4], X. Bai 
presented an application for interactive learning through 
mobile devices combined with the new technology of cloud 
computing where live lectures from the instructor’s webcam 
are streamed to the cloud. Hence, the students interact with 
the lecturer and this increases the collaboration between 
them. 
In [12], D. Kovachev et al. introduce the future prospects 
of web and mobile multimedia development for creating the 
next generation of mobile web applications and the new 
standards and protocols like HTML5 and XAML [16]. 
Similar to the research done in [8], we have also used the 
web browser that is an integral part of mobile devices to be 
used for accessing the adaptive multimedia learning system. 
The main contribution of this paper is exploiting the 
processing power of mobile cloud computing to adapt the 
multimedia content to the cognitive style and context – 
aware network conditions of the mobile user. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II presents 
our proposed architecture of the adaptive multimedia 
learning framework. Section III describes the data workflow 
for provisioning multimedia learning requests. Section IV 
presents the results from our experimental mobile 
multimedia learning system. Finally, Section V concludes 
the paper. 
II. 
ARCHITECTURE OF ADAPTIVE MULTIMEDIA LEARNING 
SYSTEM 
Existing m-learning systems typically include different 
kinds of multimedia resources because they help learners to 
be more interactive and interested for collaboration. Using 
the existing services on mobile devices, students are able to 
send their requests to be processed within the mobile cloud 
computing environment, in order to receive diverse 
multimedia learning resources. One of the first generic 
frameworks for mobile learning through cloud computing 
designed for education practitioners was presented by X. Bai 
[4]. They have adapted the course material for a mobile 
device in the form of learning content and developed a 
prototype of mobile-based assessment as a proof-of-concept 
for mobile learning. A similar framework could be found in 
[5]. That research has introduced an interactive mobile live 
video learning system in a cloud environment. Using a 
camera, the instructor’s video presentation was captured and 
then was uploaded on a private cloud. Later, students using 
GPRS/WiFi connectivity on mobile devices are able to 
progressively download or replay the video [5]. 
The proposed adaptive multimedia learning framework 
(see Figure 1) in this research adopts the multimedia content 
to the cognitive style and context – aware network conditions 
of the mobile user. All of the requests from student’s mobile 
device are sent to the mobile cloud and the response is 
appropriate 
multimedia 
content. 
The 
mobile 
cloud 
computing role is to offload and to reduce the workload of 
mobile devices by exploiting the remote multimedia 
processing resources in the cloud. That way, all the SQL 
queries that are sent from students and professors and the 
heavy-duty processing tasks will be executed in the mobile 
cloud. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Architecture of adaptive multimedia learning framework 
Processing of the requests in the mobile cloud starts with 
gathering the context-aware information from the mobile 
user. Firstly, the mobile request is processed by the Request 
broker and scheduled for execution in the cloud. Next, 
Content adaptation component is analyzing the request and 
checks that the multimedia content is adapted to the context-
aware conditions and user cognitive style. The proposed m-
learning development environment is based on the Platform 
as Service (PaaS) cloud model that comes with integrated 
developer tools, a database management system and a web 
server. The web browser platform can work on different 
operating systems for mobile devices, and, in that manner, 
students and professors simultaneously can access the multi-
tenant cloud-based platform from any location, at any time. 
The students can work on their application independently 
and efficiently without additional problems with software 
installation and compatibility issues. 
Depending on the context-aware network conditions and 
the cognitive style estimation, the multimedia files are 
adapted and the request is sent to the Content delivery 
component to broadcast the appropriate information. The 
main advantage of the proposed architecture is that it offers a 
direct and flexible connection between the student and the 
mobile cloud environment. Different kinds of mobile devices 
(iPhone, HTC, Nokia etc.) using the diversity of access 
networks can connect to the Internet or telecommunication 
networks (using WiFi, WiMAX, UMTS, GPRS, HSDPA, 
4G or LTE) and provide access to the needed service. The 
intention is to provide a set of mobile services that will allow 
mobile devices to communicate with the mobile cloud. 
III. 
DATA WORKFLOW FOR PROVISIONING MULTIMEDIA 
LEARNING REQUESTS 
The main focus of the proposed adaptive multimedia 
learning framework are the multimedia files. Initially, their 
delivery depends on context-aware network conditions and 
the type of mobile device that the students are using. 
Therefore, multimedia files need to be adapted according to 
the available bandwidth of the network connection and they 
should be encoded with the corresponding format and coding 
of the user’s mobile device. Because of existing mobile 
device limitations, such as storage, computing power and 
bandwidth, we propose to use mobile cloud computing in 
order to deliver adaptive multimedia learning content. The 
results from our research have provided the data workflow 
diagram for provisioning multimedia learning requests in the 
adaptive multimedia learning framework. 
The advantage of the proposed architecture is that all of 
the encoding and adaptation of the multimedia learning 
content is done in the mobile cloud and the ready multimedia 
data (MM data) is streamed back to the user. The top layer of 
the data workflow is dedicated to the mobile device. From 
there, the request is sent to the cloud. The collection station 
gathers all necessary context-aware information: type of 
mobile device, OS of mobile device and bandwidth settings 
of the network connection (see Figure 3).  
Before users start using an application for the first time, 
cognitive style estimation will be conducted. We have used 
the 
Verbal-Visual 
Learning 
Style 
Rating 
(VVLSR) 
questionnaire, intended to tap the cognitive perception style 
[15]. The VVLSR questionnaire is an original one-item 
rating task used to estimate visualizer-verbalizer style 
dimension using a single question [15]. The question is: “In a 
learning situation sometimes information is presented 
verbally and sometimes information is presented visually. 
Please check mark indicating your learning preference” [15]. 
The answers rate the preference for visual versus verbal 
learning on a 7-point scale, as shown in Figure 2. The 
process of collecting of all VVLSR answers from the 
application users will fill the user profiles database that is 
stored in the mobile cloud. Verbalizers are users that have 
provided answers counted -3,-2,-1; visualizers are users with 
answers counted +3,+2,+1; and bimodal users provide count 
0, which are saved in the  user profiles database. 
Hereafter, the user of mobile device can easily send his 
or her requests to be processed within the mobile cloud 
computing environment. After processing the received 
requests in the Analysis/Estimation engine we will have 
adapted multimedia content ready to be delivered to the user. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Verbal-Visual Learning Style Rating 7-point scale [15] 
 
 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
Figure 3.  Data workflow for provisioning multimedia learning requests 
Using the proposed cloud-based framework the CSE 
(computer science engineering) students have taken the role 
of main developers. They have created database objects, 
have written SQL request queries and have developed the 
web-based application. The proposed multi-tenant mobile 
cloud computing environment provides delivery of the 
distance learning environment where all of the participants 
are grouped by different roles. The professor has a 
supervisory role that allows him to be able to access the 
development environment. He can provide scaffolding and 
propose more efficient solutions or can interactively support 
error debugging in the application development progress. In 
the proposed data workflow, students and professors have 
independent access to the same development environment, 
while the end users have access only to the application level. 
The main benefit of this proposed architecture is that no 
software download is required for CSE students to start 
development on any mobile device with its own web browser 
that is integral part of the device. The Web service reference 
is based on a Web Services Description Language (WSDL) 
document that describes the target Web service. When you 
create a Web service reference using a wizard, first it 
analyses the WSDL and collects all the necessary 
information to create a valid SOAP (the Simple Object 
Access Protocol) message. Using web-based mobile 
services, users of mobile devices easily send their requests to 
be 
processed 
within 
the 
mobile 
cloud 
computing 
environment. The received HTTP requests can then be 
managed and scheduled for processing in the mobile cloud.  
Using the context – aware network conditions, presented 
by QoS and the user profile database, which takes into 
consideration the user cognitive perception style measured 
by QoE, we have the mapping settings given in Table 1.   
 
TABLE I.  
MAPPING BETWEEN QOS AND QOE METRICS 
QoS 
Bandwidth 
QoE- cognitive perception style 
Visual perception 
Verbal perception 
High 
HQ images, audio 
and video 
3D graphics, 
text and audio 
Low 
Icons and images 
Text and audio 
 
The mobile cloud is the development platform that 
contains the user profile database and the bandwidth network 
QoS estimator. The mobile devices provide information for 
current bandwidth. If that bandwidth is above the QoS 
threshold (1000 KB/s) than the user is in high bandwidth 
region; otherwise, below the QoS threshold, the user is 
considered to be in low QoS bandwidth region. 
Depending on the available QoS factors, the framework 
can adapt to low or high bandwidth scenarios. The proposed 
mapping, given in Table 1, considers at the same time the 
user cognitive perception style. For better network 
conditions, in high bandwidth, the system can deliver more 
dynamic and high quality information. However, in low 
bandwidth conditions we have estimated that more static 
media is delivered (icons, images, text and audio). Therefore, 
according to the context –aware preferences, the system is 
providing adaptive change of the multimedia type [6]. In the 
last step, the requested multimedia learning content is 
streamed back to the mobile device. The mobile user 
receives dynamically adapted multimedia content to the 
given context compatible with its mobile device. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL MOBILE MULTIMEDIA LEARNING 
SYSTEM 
Cloud computing is a real benefit for young and 
developing universities that do not have diverse computer 
laboratory facilities. With the integration of cloud computing 
technology for the courses, such as Distributed Database 
systems, requirements for dedicated development platform 
and intensive computational resources are inevitable. There 
already have been different related studies for cloud service 
models in the university, using a Software-as-a-Service 
(SaaS) cloud model, as in [2]. Similar related work has been 
done in [3], with the promotion of the potential for m-
learning using the cloud computing, and the stress is put on 
virtualization, using the Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) 
cloud model.  
We have proposed an experimental mobile multimedia 
learning system that is based on the Platform as Service 
(PaaS) cloud model, and it will extend the potential for 
developing 
web 
applications 
that 
require 
database 
background. The Oracle APEX [13] platform is a 
comprehensive web-based SQL and application development 
environment that delivers platform for fast, reliable 
development and running on web applications [7].  
The Oracle APEX web-based platform in a mobile cloud 
environment allows us to write our custom SQL query and 
generate reports according our needs directly from the 
mobile device, see Figure 4.  
 
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
 
Figure 4.  Running SQL query on Oracle APEX using HTC. 
After we have compiled the configuration of the 
application, we have run experiments with three most used 
mobile devices: iPhone, HTC, Sony Ericsson and Nokia, 
which can access the Oracle APEX framework. Using the 
APEX platform, university students have used a simple use 
case web-based application for online shopping. The 
database system consisted of 3 tables: Customers, Products 
and Orders. 
Figure 5 provides a comparison overview of the Products 
table which contains multimedia content, presented on 
iPhone, HTC and Nokia mobile devices. Using this 
overview, we cannot distinguish any significant difference 
when presenting the multimedia content between the three 
types of mobile devices. 
We have done similar comparisons for the Customers 
and Orders database tables. There was also no difference in 
the display of information between the three mobile devices. 
Significant dissimilarity between the mobile devices was 
noticed in the Reports in Figure 6, where a web-based OLAP 
report is executed. Here, Nokia and iPhone mobile devices 
did not provide the expected multimedia graphs for the 
Report of Sales by Category/Month. The Sony Ericsson 
mobile device that uses Android mobile OS, on the other 
hand created a colorful histogram for the Report of Sales by 
Category/Month, as seen in Figure 6. 
We noticed from our research that there was also a 
different adaptation of the multimedia content for different 
interfaces, depending on the web browser used by the mobile 
device because they displayed the same code page 
differently. 
Adapted 
multimedia 
content 
is 
usually 
compressed using compression algorithms or codecs in order 
to achieve smaller file size for faster transmission or more 
efficient storage [12]. The results from the experiments have 
shown that using different mobile devices to access a single 
cloud computing platform, in this case Oracle APEX, 
produces different user experiences. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Comparison of database tables for Oracle APEX with HTC 
(top), Nokia (middle) and iPhone (bottom). 
We have used OPNET for our simulations. It provides a 
comprehensive development environment with a full set of 
tools including model design, simulation, data collection, 
data analysis and support on the modeling of communication 
networks [14]. This simulator provides a way to model the 
network behaviors by calculating the interactions between 
modeling devices. We have used the Discrete Event 
Simulation (DES) because it enables modeling in a more 
accurate and realistic approach. It creates an extremely 
detailed, packet-by-packet model for predicting the activities 
of the network. The simulation models of individual mobile 
device were developed using the OPNET network simulation 
software that provides a virtual network communication 
environment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
Figure 6.  Comparison of reports for Oracle APEX with Sony Ericsson 
(top) and iPhone (bottom). 
The network simulator was configured to run one hour of 
multimedia learning content, and the comparison of the 
results is presented in Figure 7. The dark blue line measures 
the performance from laptop using a classical web-based 
application without any mobile cloud environment, which 
takes most of the performance load. The red line measures 
the HTC mobile device, the green line measures the Nokia 
mobile device and light blue line measures the iPhone 
mobile device. For all mobile devices we have used the 
mobile 
cloud 
environment 
to 
show 
the 
decreased 
performance load. The simulation results from the 
multimedia performance load analysis clearly show that 
mobile devices using applications in a mobile cloud 
environment have a decreased performance load compared to 
the classical web-based application.  
A. Manjunatha et al.[16] are exploring the data intensive 
calculations for mobile and cloud computing landscape. 
Similarly, S. Wang et al.[17] are addressing the adaptive 
mobile cloud computing techniques for graphic rendering. 
The integration of mobile and cloud is used for adaptive 
display virtualization [18]. Similarly, R. S. Khune et al.[19] 
proposed a cloud-based intrusion detection system for 
Android mobile devices that provides continuous in-depth 
forensic analysis to detect any misbehavior in network. In 
our case study mobile devices with Android mobile OS have 
presented the complete report with multimedia information. 
On the other hand, mobile devices that have Symbian and 
Apple mobile OS have not displayed completely the needed 
multimedia content. The multimedia content is usually 
compressed using compression algorithms or codecs, in 
order to achieve smaller file sizes for faster transmission or 
more efficient storage [12].  
 
 
Figure 7.  Comparison of performance load in OPNET simulator. 
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT MOBILE DEVICE MEDIA 
PLATFORMS 
Type 
of 
media format 
and 
codecs 
support 
Android 
3.0 
[9] 
 
Symbian 
S60 
[10] 
 
Apple 
mobile 
OS [11] 
 
Audio 
AAC, 
MP3, 
MIDI, 
OGG 
(vorbis), WAV 
MP3, 
OGG 
(vorbis), AAC, 
WMA 
AAC, 
HE-
AAC, 
MP3, 
MP3 
VBR, 
AIFF, WAV 
Image 
JPEG, 
GIF, 
PNG, BMP 
JPEG, 
GIF, 
PNG, 
BMP, 
MBM 
JPG, TIFF, GIF 
Video 
H.263, H.264 
AVC, MPEG-
4, VP8 
WMV, 
FLV, 
MP4, 
OGG, 
3GP 
H.264, MPEG-
4, Motion JPEG  
 
 
In Table 2, a comparison of the different mobile device 
media platforms is based on different formats and coding 
protocols for Apple, Android and Symbian mobile OS [9-
11]. This represents another major challenge that m-learning 
faces, to adapt multimedia contents in order to be 
compatible with different mobile devices. Future mobile 
cloud computing applications should be able to provide 
conversion of media types to a compatible media format and 
codecs support for present mobile devices. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Mobile multimedia learning systems provide an intuitive 
and collaborative environment where users can experience 
the advantages of flexibility, portability and scalability.  
Mobile cloud computing can reduce the workload of mobile 
devices by exploiting the remote multimedia processing 
resources in the cloud. Therefore, all the services need to be 
designed in order to put less workload on the mobile device 
and allow heavy-duty processing tasks to be done in the 
cloud.  
We have developed a framework for mobile adaptive 
multimedia learning systems that is delivered using a mobile 
cloud computing environment. This kind of environment 
provides users with the appropriate mapping settings 
between the type of context – aware network conditions 
presented by QoS and user profile estimation, which takes 
into consideration the user’s cognitive perception style stated 
 
 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

by QoE. The experiments done using three different types of 
mobile devices have heightened the importance of choosing 
the appropriate device to be used in mobile multimedia 
learning systems. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Joseph, and M. Uther, “Mobile language learning with 
multimedia and multi-modal interfaces,” Proceedings of the 
IEEE International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile 
Technologies in Education. (ICHIT’06), 16-17 Nov. 2006, pp. 
124-128, DOI:10.1109/WMTE.2006.30. 
[2] S. Xiaojuan, R. Guang-wen, and W. Zhe, “The application of 
cloud computing SaaS delivery model in university talents 
training,” Proceedings of the IEEE Digital Manufacturing and 
Automation (ICDMA), 5-7 August 2011, pp. 1203–1205. 
DOI:10.1109/ICDMA.2011.296. 
[3] Q. Shuai, and Z. Ming-quan, “Cloud computing promotes the 
progress of M-learning,” Proceedings of the IEEE conference 
of Uncertainty Reasoning and Knowledge Engineering 
(URKE), 
 
4-7 
August 
2011, 
pp. 
162–164, 
DOI: 
10.1109/URKE.2011.6007934. 
[4] X. Bai, “Affordance of Ubiquitous Learning through Cloud 
Computing,” Proceedings of 2010 Fifth International 
Conference on Frontier of Computer Science and Technology, 
978-0-7695-4139-6/10, 
2010 
IEEE, 
pp. 
78-82, 
DOI: 
10.1109/FCST.2010.109.  
[5] S.Mohana Saranya, and M.Vijayalakshmi, “Interactive mobile 
live 
video 
learning 
system 
in 
cloud 
environment,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Recent 
Trends in Information Technology, ICRTIT 2011. 3-5 Jun. 
2011. 
Chennai, 
pp. 
673-677, 
DOI: 
10.1109/ICRTIT.2011.5972458.  
[6] A. Karadimce, and D. Davcev, “Personalized Multimedia 
Content Generation Using the QoE Metrics in Distance 
Learning Systems,” Proceedings of Fourth International 
Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and 
Applications. ADAPTIVE 2012. 22-27 Jul. 2012. Nice, 
France, pp. 1-6, ISBN: 978-1-61208-219-6.  
[7] J. Wang, and J. L. Kourik, “Delivering database knowledge 
with web-based labs,” Proceedings of American Society of 
Business and Behavioral Sciences. ASBBS in Las Vegas. 
Volume 19 Number 1. February 2012, pp. 923-931. 
[8] L.J. Zhang, “EIC Editorial: Introduction to the Body of 
Knowledge Areas of Services Computing,” Proceedings of 
IEEE Transactions on services computing, Vol. 1, No. 2. 
April-June 
2008. 
pp. 
62-74. 
http://tab.computer.org/tcsc/tsc2008020062.pdf 
[retrived: 
February, 2013]  
[9] Android 
Supported 
Media 
Formats. 
http://developer.android.com/guide/appendix/media-
formats.html [retrived: February, 2013] 
[10] Symbian OS - News, Tutorial and Development Updates. 
http://symbian-os-development.blogspot.com/ 
[retrived: 
February, 2013] 
[11] Apple 
iPhone 
specification. 
http://www.apple.com/iphone/specs.html [retrived: February, 
2013] 
[12] D. Kovachev, Y. Cao, and R. Klamma, “Mobile Multimedia 
Cloud Computing and the Web,” Proceedings of the 2011 
Workshop on Multimedia on the Web. MMWEB '11. Graz, 
Austria, 
September 
8, 
2011, 
pp. 
21-26, 
DOI:10.1109/MMWeb.2011.16. 
[13] D. Baker, and T. Jennings, Oracle Database 2 Day + 
Application Express Developer's Guide, Release 4.0. E15516-
04.Oracle, 
2010.  
http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E17556_01/doc/appdev.40/e15516.
pdf  [retrived: February, 2013] 
[14] Z. Lu, and H. Yang. Unlocking the Power of OPNET 
Modeler. Cambridge University Press, January 2012. 
[15] R. E. Mayer, and L. J. Massa, “Three facets of visual and 
verbal learners: Cognitive ability, cognitive style and learning 
preference,” Published in Journal of Educational Psychology. 
833-846. DOI: 10.1037/0022-0663.95.4.833. 
[16] A. Manjunatha, A. Ranabahu, A. Sheth, and K. Thirunarayan, 
"Power of Clouds In Your Pocket: An Efficient Approach for 
Cloud Mobile Hybrid Application Development," Published 
in 2nd IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing 
Technology 
and 
Science. 
496-503.DOI 
10.1109/CloudCom.2010.78. 
[17] S. Wang, and S. Dey, “Adaptive Mobile Cloud Computing to 
Enable Rich Mobile Multimedia Applications,” Published in 
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia. January 2013. 1-14. 
ISSN:1520-9210. 
[18] S. Sridhar, G. Satish, G. Raja, and Sumalatha Ramachandran, 
"Adaptive display virtualization and dataflow model selection 
(ADVADAMS) for reducing interaction latency in thin 
clients," in 2012 International Conference on Recent Trends 
In Information Technology (ICRTIT). April 2012. 233-238. 
ISBN: 978-1-4673-1599-9. 
[19] R. S. Khune, and J. Thangakumar, "A Cloud-Based Intrusion 
Detection System for Android Smartphones," in 2012 
International Conference on Radar, Communication and 
Computing (ICRCC). December 2012. 180-184. ISBN:978-1-
4673-2756-5.
 
 
 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

