Efﬁcient Management of Hybrid Clouds
Soﬁe Van Hoecke, Tom Waterbley, Jan Devos
Electronics and Information Technology Lab (ELIT)
University College West-Flanders (Howest)
Ghent University Association - Courtrai, Belgium
{soﬁe.van.hoecke, tom.waterbley, jan.devos}@howest.be
Tijl Deneut, Johan De Gelas
Sizing Servers Lab
University College West-Flanders (Howest)
Ghent University Association - Courtrai, Belgium
{tijl.deneut, johan.de.gelas}@howest.be
Abstract—Cloud computing has become a signiﬁcant tech-
nology trend driven by big players that is transforming our
current IT industry. Public cloud computing comes with advan-
tages such as cost savings, high availability, and easy scalability.
However, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises are driven by
different reasons for not outsourcing their IT infrastructure
entirely. By combining the beneﬁts of the private and public
cloud, hybrid cloud computing allows Small and Medium-
sized Enterprises to optimize their infrastructure and run
their virtual machines where they will be most effective and
efﬁcient. We present in this paper a virtual infrastructure
management tool that allows to set-up and manage hybrid
clouds efﬁciently in a user-friendly way. Our tool provides
automatic load balancing between the private and public clouds
at the virtual machine level, and dynamically upscales on-
premise virtual machines to public cloud servers based on cost
and performance information.
Keywords-hybrid cloud, virtual infrastructure management,
SME, load balancing.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing has become a signiﬁcant technology
trend, driven by big players like Amazon, Microsoft, Google
and VMware, and transforming our current IT industry.
Cloud computing delivers large-scale utility computing ser-
vices to a wide range of consumers. Within cloud computing,
users on various types of devices access programs, stor-
age, processing and applications over the Internet, offered
by cloud computing providers, resulting in a previously
unprecedented elasticity of resources. Through economies
of scale, cloud computing comes with advantages such as
cost savings, high availability, easy scalability [1], and the
transformation of capital IT expenditures into operational
IT expenditures. Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform
as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS)
relieves cloud users from maintaining their infrastructure,
development areas, and respectively software.
The increasing adoption rate of cloud computing is cur-
rently driving developers, integrators and hosting compa-
nies to take cloud computing into account. The last few
years, especially the number of providers delivering IaaS
has increased quickly [2]. Consequently, companies need to
revise their current assets as cloud computing is becoming a
strategic weapon. The expansion of IaaS providers increases
the options available to companies when acquiring resources
in a cost effective manner. Berkeley even predicts that the
economy of scale and statistical multiplexing may ultimately
lead to a handful of cloud computing providers and “data
center-less” companies [3].
However, we do not believe that most Small and Medium-
sized Enterprises (SMEs) will become “data center-less” in
the near future [4][5]: SMEs cover a wide spectrum of
industries [6] and the number of SMEs far exceeds the
number of large and very large organizations in almost every
country all over the world. Besides the large number of
SMEs worldwide, it is also recognized that SMEs constitutes
a growing importance as providers of employment oppor-
tunities and key players for the well-being of local and re-
gional communities. SMEs are driven by different reasons to
maintain their own data center, such as legislation of storing
data in-house, investments in the current infrastructure, or
the extra latency and performance requirements. This drive
is supported by the fact that SMEs have already invested
heavily in their own private server equipment and software.
Consequently, we feel that a hybrid approach makes more
sense for SMEs. Through the creation of hybrid clouds [7],
one can use the internal infrastructure combined with public
cloud resources (see Figure 1). This way, on one hand,
critical applications can run on the hardware in the private
data center or collocated at an SME hosting provider, and,
on the other hand, the public cloud can be used as a solution
to manage peak demands (cloudbursting) or for disaster
recovery. These hybrid clouds capitalize on investments
made on the private IT infrastructure, and upscale to the
public cloud for speciﬁc application requirements.
The architectural concept of a hybrid cloud is overpow-
ering: being able to dynamically move virtualized servers
between your data center and a public cloud provider.
However, there are still many research challenges to be
tackled before hybrid cloud computing can become a reality.
One key question is how to enable virtual infrastructure
management, meaning the dynamic orchestration of virtual
machines (VMs). The scaling efﬁciency and elasticity of
hybrid cloud computing all depend on the efﬁciency of
the virtual infrastructure management [8]. As many cloud
providers are incompatible and use proprietary cloud soft-
167
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

Figure 1.
Hybrid cloud computing model
ware and APIs, it is hard to set-up hybrid clouds integrating
different cloud solutions, resulting in vendor lock-ins. This
is even more the case when it comes to SMEs as they depend
strongly on external IT expertise [9][10]. There is little
general support with respect to how to set up hybrid clouds
and how to manage resources in hybrid environments where
management has to act across different resource infrastruc-
tures [8]. Existing solutions for hybrid cloud computing and
virtual infrastructure management require multiple tools to
cooperate and a lot of manual conﬁguration. To the author’s
knowledge, user-friendly tools that allow SMEs to manage
the virtual infrastructure themselves are non-existing.
Therefore, the aim of this research is to design and
implement an integrated virtual infrastructure management
tool that allows SMEs to set-up and manage hybrid clouds
efﬁciently in a user-friendly way. Our virtual infrastructure
management tool provides automatic load balancing between
the private and public clouds at the VM level, and dynam-
ically upscales on-premise VMs to the public cloud servers
based on cost and performance information. This way, SMEs
can optimize their infrastructure and run their VMs where
they will be most effective and efﬁcient.
The remainder of this paper is as follows. The next
section outlines the beneﬁts and challenges of hybrid cloud
computing for SMEs. Subsequently, related work in the
ﬁeld is presented in Section III, after which we deﬁne
the objectives, design and implementation of our virtual
infrastructure management tool in Section IV. Section V
covers our experimental evaluation and results, after which
we summarize the most important conclusions of our work
in Section VI.
II. BENEFITS AND CHALLENGES OF HYBRID CLOUD
COMPUTING FOR SMES
The hybrid cloud model extends the private cloud model
by using both local and remote resources. These remote
cloud resources are seamlessly integrated in the private
infrastructure. Hybrid clouds are usually used to scale out
when the local resources are exhausted, called cloudbursting.
This way, companies can create highly elastic environments.
The beneﬁts of hybrid clouds are amongst others [3][11]:
• Optimal utilization
As peak loads can be up to ten times higher than the
average load, traditional data centers need to be over-
dimensioned, resulting in idle servers during average
load and unnecessary costs. Hybrid clouds scale out
to the public cloud to handle peak loads, so the private
infrastructure can be dimensioned to handle the average
case.
• Risk transfer
The risk of downtime is reduced. Whenever there are
problems with the private IT infrastructure, the load
can be transferred to the public cloud who ensures high
uptimes.
• Availability
Hybrid clouds can upscale to the public cloud or even
let the public cloud completely take over operations,
this way providing high availability without requiring
redundancy and geographic dissemination in the private
infrastructure.
However, there are also many challenges and issues for
hybrid cloud computing [3][11][12], especially when target-
ting SMEs:
• Interoperability and vendor lock-in
Vendor lock-ins were already identiﬁed as a major risk
factor in IT outsourcing [13]. Additionally, failures can
also hit public cloud providers, even the big players.
According to [3], the only solution is using multiple
cloud providers, but, again here, this is only possible
when vendor lock-ins are avoided.
• Hybrid cost
Hybrid cloud infrastructures have on one hand a setup
and operating cost for the private IT infrastructure (such
as hardware, power, cooling, maintenance) and, on the
other hand, a pay-per-use cost for the public part at the
cloud provider. This hybrid cost model makes it hard
to reveal and predict the total costs and beneﬁts of an
IT investment project.
• Security
Hybrid cloud computing requires solid service level
agreements with and trust in the public cloud providers.
As the servers are no longer shielded by the company’s
ﬁrewall, other security measures have to be applied.
III. STATE OF THE ART
Today, large technology vendors as well as open-source
software projects both address the hybrid cloud market
and are developing virtual infrastructure management tools
to set-up and manage hybrid clouds. VMware’s vCloud
offers live migration of virtual appliances and machines
between data centers and allows service providers to offer
IaaS while maintaining compatibility with internal VMware
deployments. HP provides three offerings for hybrid cloud
computing: HP Operations Orchestration for provisioning,
HP Cloud Assure for cost control, and HP Communications
168
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

as a Service for service providers to offer small businesses
on-demand solutions. Also Amazon reaches towards hybrid
cloud models with its Virtual Private Cloud service.
In addition to the large technology vendors, also open-
source software projects are providing on-premise and public
cloud integration. Eucalyptus Enterprise provides a software
infrastructure for on-premise cloud computing and enables to
work within VMware environments and provision resources
to Amazon Web Services. Ubuntu Enterprise Cloud (UEC)
is shifting from Eucalyptus towards OpenStack and is also
compatible with Amazons EC2. OpenNebula [7] is another
open-source project that supports the dynamic execution of
multi-tier services on a distributed infrastructure consisting
of both data center resources and remote cloud resources.
Nimbus also provides a virtualization framework to help
manage cloud deployments for IaaS. Finally, openQRM
extended its focus and now also supports public clouds,
currently however limited to Amazon EC2.
Although many options are on the table, and many
advertise they support hybrid cloud computing, the cur-
rent initiatives of the large vendors either result in (i) a
hypervisor and/or vendor lock-in, (ii) require a separate
interface to manage the private and public cloud, or (iii)
require additional tools to implement the load balancing.
vCloud only supports ESX as hypervisor, UEC Xen and
KVM, and openQRM ESX, Xen and KVM as hypervisor.
The virtual infrastructure management capabilities of the
open-source solutions provide more choice but require a
lot of scripting and are difﬁcult to conﬁgure and use. If a
ﬂexible hybrid cloud is the goal, the choice of the underlying
virtualization platform is crucial, putting the open-source
solutions afront. As Nimbus only supports a limited number
of hypervisors, and Eucalyptus is more appropriate for
private clouds [7][11], OpenNebula and openQRM are the
best options today [14].
However, although OpenNebula and openQRM are the
best options today, important features are missing like mon-
itoring VM instances or retrieving the VM’s IP addresses in
order to implement advanced load balancing mechanisms.
Also, a graphical interface is either missing or not user-
friendly. As general speaking, SMEs are lacking behind in
adoption of IT compared to larger companies [15], a good,
user-friendly, vendor-independent virtual infrastructure man-
agement tool is needed to help SMEs efﬁciently set-up and
manage hybrid clouds. To our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst
to provide such a tool that allows automatic load balancing
between the private and public clouds at the VM level, and
dynamically upscales on-premise VMs to the public cloud
servers based on cost and performance information.
IV. DESIGN OF THE VIRTUAL INFRASTRUCTURE
MANAGEMENT TOOL
Below the objectives, general concept and implementation
of the virtual infrastructure management tool are described.
A. Objectives
Three requirements for hybrid clouds will be fulﬁlled:
ﬁrstly, the hybrid cloud should be able to autonomously
handle different load patterns, including peak demands,
balance the load and upscale when needed to the public
cloud. Secondly, the hybrid cloud should be transparent for
the VMs in the infrastructure. This makes sure that the
hybrid cloud logic needs only to be implemented in our
tool, and standard virtualization software can be used on
the VMs. And thirdly, the hybrid cloud architecture should
be easy and user-friendly to set-up and conﬁgure. Human-
platform interaction for conﬁguring the hybrid cloud should
be straightforward by using user-friendly user interfaces so
that training and dependency on external IT expertise can
be minimized. Current hybrid cloud initiatives do not fulﬁll
these requirements and therefore a new tool is designed and
presented in this paper.
B. General concept
Consider the use case of the SME Nieuws.be to illustrate
the general concept and show how current SME data centers
can be optimized in order to gain competitive assets to
the public cloud. Nieuws.be is an internet company that
aggregates and distributes national and international news on
the web, collected by the redaction or contributed by one of
their readers. By providing ﬁltering and news-on-demand,
they fulﬁll new market requirements and gain market share
within the widely spread news business. As a result, they
need an infrastructure to support their heavily visited news
site.
In the traditional way, Nieuws.be buys and maintains an
infrastructure of six load balanced web servers and one
database. Using virtualization and by setting up a hybrid
cloud, they can optimize their infrastructure by consolidating
lightly used servers. Using virtualization, three web servers
can be ran on a single machine. The database is heavily
used, so is virtualized on a dedicated machine. As a result,
the same performance can be achieved by only three (heav-
ily used) physical servers. In case of peak demands, the
heavily used servers cannot handle the load, and therefore
cloudbursting is used to automatically allocate additional
resources in the public cloud. Additionally, as Nieuws.be is
a local news site, the request pattern also depends strongly
on the time of the day. As can be seen in Figure 2, during
night hours, requests to Nieuws.be fall back to a minimum.
Therefore, during down times, the hybrid cloud can further
optimize by migrating lightly used VMs to a single host,
allowing to shutdown one of the servers.
One can immediatly see that this hybrid cloud architecture
results in a two-fold cost reduction: on one hand, only three
instead of six servers need to be bought; on the other hand,
the infrastructure has a huge energy saving. Besides the
cost beneﬁt of consuming less energy, it additionally has
the social beneﬁt of reducing their energy footprint.
169
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

Figure 2.
Request pattern of Nieuws.be
Other use cases that illustrate the beneﬁt of hybrid cloud
computing to handle peak loads are the Hallmark infrastruc-
ture around Valentine’s day, or the Colruyt infrastructure in
December due to holiday purchases and gifts (see Figure 3).
Figure 3.
Request pattern of Colruyt
C. Implementation
The main functionality of the virtual infrastructure man-
agement tool provides efﬁcient management of hybrid
clouds through automatic scaling and load balancing. Figure
4 illustrates the architecture for the virtual infrastructure
management tool.
Figure 4.
Architecture of the virtual infrastructure management tool
As can be seen in this ﬁgure, two parts make up the virtual
infrastructure management tool: on one hand, a proxy that
implements different load balancing algorithms and provides
conﬁgurable thresholds for upscaling to the public cloud;
on the other hand, a management interface that visualizes
and manages the hybrid cloud, clusters VMs and remotely
conﬁgures the proxy.
The major task of the proxy is forwarding the incom-
ing requestst to the appropriate VMs. The proxy supports
different load balancing algorithms in order to do so. At
the moment round robin and weighted round robin are
supported, but more algorithms will follow in the future.
Round robin is especially suited for load balancing when the
different VMs have (almost) the same performance. If the
VMs have different speciﬁcations, weighted round robin can
be used to compensate for these differences. There, servers
are presented requests in proportion to their weighting
resulting in fairly distributing the requests amongst VMs,
instead of equally distributing the requests. To support the
weighted load balancing, the performance of all VMs needs
to be monitored and the thresholds for up- and downscaling
need to be conﬁgured. As each public cloud instance type
differentiates itself from the others in terms of price, number
of virtual cores, available memory and I/O bandwidth, these
pricing and performance models are used to derive the
weights for the weighted round robin load balancing and
can also be used to implement more advanced load balancing
and upscaling algorithms in the proxy.
The management interface, presented in Figure 5, pro-
vides a tab for visualizing the current VMs in the infrastruc-
ture, both private and public ones, as well as the functionality
to start and stop these VMs. New VMs can also be added,
and clusters can be generated. A cluster is a group of VMs
providing the same service. Each cluster can use its own load
balancing and scaling settings. The management interface
also provides a tab to conﬁgure the proxy’s load balancing
algorithms and scaling thresholds.
Both the proxy and management tool are implemented
using C# in combination with the .NET Framework. In order
to fulﬁll the deﬁned requirements above, it is important that
the VMs in the private cloud can be addressed the same way
as the VMs in the public cloud in order to simplify the hybrid
cloud management. Therefore, the proxy is implemented on
a dedicated VM in the cloud without an interface, and uses
a plug-in system to communicate with different private and
public cloud providers. In order to support the automatic
upscaling, the VMs also need to be monitored. In order
to do so, the APIs of the different cloud providers are
used. All requests sent to the proxy are load balanced and
forwarded to the according VM (private or public); the
response however is directly sent to the client, skipping the
proxy. The communication between the management tool
and the proxy is implemented using Web service technology
and WCF. In order to adjust the proxy settings, the user
can use the graphical management interface which sends
Web service requests to the proxy in order to conﬁgure the
thresholds and load balancing algorithms. At the backend, a
database is used to store the properties of the hosts, clusters,
VMs, scaling thresholds and load balancing constraints. This
database is updated by periodically monitoring the VMs in
the background. The database is implemented using SQL
Server and the Entity Framework. This way, the relational
structure of the database is abstracted and one can directly
170
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

Figure 5.
Screenshot of the management tool presenting the infrastructure overview
work with the created object classes.
Currently, VMware is supported for the private part of the
hybrid cloud, and Amazon for the public part of the hybrid
cloud. More cloud providers will be added in the future.
For the public cloud part, the Amazon EC2 service is used
to manage the public VMs, and the Amazon CloudWatch
service is used to monitor the status of the VMs. The
Amazon AWS API can be used starting from Microsoft
.NET Framework v2.0. The VMware vSphere API is similar
to the Amazon AWS API for .NET, but then applied to a
VMware cloud. In order to set up the hybrid cloud, the
VMware vSphere PowerCLI API is used. This PowerCLI
offers in the ﬁrst place an interface to Windows PowerShell
(which is a new and advanced command-line shell for
Windows), but the dlls can also be imported in .NET projects
resulting in the same functionality being available using
programming code.
V. EVALUATION AND RESULTS
The components of the virtual infrastructure management
tool have been implemented and are currently being evalu-
ated.
Figure 5 presents a screenshot of the management inter-
face where the current infrastructure is visualized, presenting
all private and public VMs and their properties. Each of
these VMs can be started, stopped, rebooted or suspended.
The management tool also provides tabs to add additional
VMs to the infrastructure or to create service clusters. The
proxy conﬁguration can also be done in the graphical tool:
thresholds for up- and downscaling can be conﬁgured (see
Figure 6) and a load balancing algorithm can be selected
and tuned.
The operation of our virtual infrastructure management
tool was veriﬁed through an experimental performance
study. During the evaluation, we started with two web
Figure 6.
Screenshot of the management tool presenting the scaling
tresholds conﬁguration
Figure 7.
Average response time and amount of VMs in function of the
requests per second
servers in the private cloud and upscaled to maximum six
web servers in the public cloud, resulting in an infrastructure
consisting of eight VMs. The number of requests per second
171
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

was increased over time. The test results are presented
in Figure 7. As can be seen in this ﬁgure, the response
time initially increases as the requests per second increases.
When the upscaling thresholds are reached, VMs are added,
stopping the response time from further increasing as the
load is now balanced over an expanded infrastructure.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This paper highlights the opportunities of hybrid cloud
computing for SMEs and presents a virtual infrastructure
management tool that can be used by SMEs to set-up and
manage their hybrid cloud. Different reasons can drive SMEs
to maintain their own data center instead of becoming “data
center-less”.
Providing a tool to easily set-up and manage these hybrid
clouds takes into account the technical possibilities, the
SMEs perspective, and the economic tradeoff between the
different business models such as classic data centers, private
cloud computing and public cloud computing. We are aware
of the fact that these hybrid clouds are not the best solution
for every SME. If the restrictions of the public cloud not
apply and the SMEs only have a limited IT infrastructure
and expertise, then outsourcing to public clouds can be very
interesting due to economy of scale.
Results clearly illustrate that current SME data centers
can be optimized to compete with the public cloud. As
the number of SMEs far exceeds the number of large and
very large organizations in almost every country all over the
world, this approach results in interesting business beneﬁts.
By using hybrid clouds, SMEs critical or latency sensitive
applications are kept on the infrastructure (collocated or not)
in which they have already invested, and applications are
moved toward cloud computing enabled data centers in order
to handle occasional peak requests. This methodology allows
SMEs to freeze capital investments and move applications
toward cloud computing enabled data centers. Hybrid cloud
computing may therefore become a very important compet-
itive feature of SME data centers to leverage the economies
of scale that the “public clouds” offer.
We will continue the design of more advanced load
balancing algorithms by taking into account the different
pricing and performance models. Future work also includes
the development of additional plug-ins for our proxy so
on one hand more private and public cloud providers are
supported, and on the other hand also security can be
managed. Especially the latter is challenging as classical
security models may be insufﬁcient as data is replicated and
distributed in potentially worldwide infrastructures [8].
REFERENCES
[1] N. Leavitt, Is Cloud Computing Really Ready for Prime Time?,
Computer, 42(1), pp. 15-20, 2009.
[2] D. Hilley, Cloud computing: A taxonomy of platform and
infrastructure-level offerings, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Technical Report GIT-CERCS-09-13, April 2009.
[3] M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A.D. Joseph, R. Katz, et
al., Above the Clouds: A Berkeley View of Cloud Computing,
Technical Report, February 10, 2009.
[4] J.A. Welsh and J.F. White, A Small Business Is Not a Little Big
Business, Harvard Business Review, 59(4), pp. 18-32, 1981.
[5] N.A. Sultan, Reaching for the cloud: How SMEs can manage,
International Journal of Information Management, 31, pp. 272-
278, 2011.
[6] J. Bolton, Small Firms: Report of the Committee of Inquiry
on Small Firms, Cmnd 4811, HMSO, London, 1971.
[7] B. Sotomayor, R.S. Montero, I.M. Llorente, and I. Foster, Vir-
tual Infrastructure Management in Private and Hybrid Clouds,
IEEE Internet Computing, 13(5), pp. 14-22, 2009.
[8] K. Jeffery and B. Neidecker-Lutz, The Future of Cloud Com-
puting: Opportunities for European Cloud Computing Beyond
2010, Expert Group Report, European Commission, 2010.
[9] J. Thong, C.S. Yap, and K.S. Raman, Top management support,
external expertise and information systems implementation in
small businesses, Information Systems Research, 7(2), pp. 248-
267, 1996.
[10] C.S. Yap, C. Soh, and K.S. Raman, Information systems
succes factors in small business, Omega - The International
Journal of Management Science, 5(6), pp. 597-609, 1992.
[11] P.C. Heckel, Hybrid Clouds: Comparing Cloud Toolkits,
Seminar Paper Business Informatics, University of Mannheim,
2010.
[12] S. Fraser, R. Biddle, S. Jordan, K. Keahey, B. Marcus,
et al., Cloud computing beyond objects: seeding the cloud,
Proceeding of the 24th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object
oriented programming systems languages and applications, pp.
847-850, 2009.
[13] B.A. Aubert, M. Patry, and S. Rivard, A Framework for Infor-
mation Technology Outsourcing Risk Management, Database
for Advances In Information Systems, 36(4), pp. 9-28, 2005.
[14] P. Sempolinski and D. Thain, A Comparison and Critique of
Eucalyptus, OpenNebula and Nimbus, Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and
Science, pp. 417-426, 2010.
[15] J.G. Devos, H. Van Landeghem, and D. Deschoolmeester,
IT/IS and Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises: Literature
Overview, paper submitted for publication in the Journal of
Small Business Management.
172
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

