Instruments for Cloud Suppliers to Accelerate their Businesses  
The Need for Unleashing Business Potential and Boosting Cloud Economics 
Fred Kessler 
InnovationLeaders Academy 
fk@innovationleaders.ceo 
 
Stella Gatziu Grivas, Claudio Giovanoli  
Institute for Information Systems 
University of Applied Science Northwestern Switzerland 
{stella.gatziugrivas, claudio.giovanoli}@fhnw.ch 
 
 
Abstract—Major IT suppliers like HP, IBM, Microsoft and 
Oracle are pushing their cloud services and technologies to the 
global markets. Their success varies considerably, especially in 
Europe. From a Microsoft perspective, the Scandinavian 
countries are far ahead in adopting cloud services, and the 
German speaking countries are far behind. Distribution 
channel partners (also IT-suppliers) and customers refuse to 
buy in. In addition, IT suppliers´ communication is mainly 
technical and as a result, customers do not understand how 
cloud service adoption would bring any profitable strategic 
advantage.  This also inhibits the use of Electronic 
Marketplaces for Cloud Services (EMPCS), Cloud Service 
Brokerage (CSB) or Electronic Market Places (EMP). 
Suppliers need instruments and support for anticipating, 
communicating and measuring the business potential of and 
with their customers. Cloud transformation for suppliers 
means changing their approach to cloud services, in order to 
increase their competitiveness and cash flow, as well as that of 
their customers`. 
Keywords - business potential reference model; cloud 
services; 
customer 
value 
orientation; 
open 
innovation; 
transformation process. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In Austria, Germany and Switzerland, Cloud business got 
stuck before it even really started. Besides other obstacles, 
like legal and security issues, customers do not buy cloud 
services, mainly because IT-suppliers fail to communicate 
the business value to business decision-makers.  
One major reason for their dysfunctional attempts is their 
inability to identify and analyze customers´ business 
potential. In this context our empirical research and 
conversations with more than 300 executives of Microsoft 
partner companies in Austria, Germany and Switzerland 
reveal that they do not even try to measure the business 
impact of their IT-solutions, which means that they are not 
even interested in monetary customer business value [8]. 
Instead, suppliers talk (in their marketing) about technologies 
like azure, hyper-v, high availability, fault tolerance, big 
data, predictive analytics and so forth instead of projecting 
the achievable customer results of their service bundles in 
terms of cash flow and competitiveness. Customers are 
confused and do not sign cloud services contracts. Cloud 
business in these countries is far behind other European and 
global countries. There are also other reasons for not buying 
cloud solutions, which are linked to the customers 
themselves. The banking and insurance industries for 
instance, who would derive major and profitable strategic 
advantages from adopting cloud services, refuse to bring 
their sensitive information to the cloud. 
With this positioning paper, we structure the problem and 
introduce an approach to resolve the situation. Starting with 
assessing the IT-suppliers with regard to their customer-
value-orientation [8], we then introduce a business potential 
reference model as a common denominator for customers 
and IT-suppliers. With such a model in place, we then 
develop a sound innovation process as the central instrument 
for IT-suppliers to create, sell, implement, and measure 
monetarily valuable cloud solutions, with, for and to 
customers.  
Various attempts have been made to define the term 
“Cloud Economics” in the literature [27][28][29]. The one 
that we perceive as closest to our understanding is: “Cloud 
economics is a branch of knowledge concerned with the 
principles, costs and benefits of cloud computing” [30]. In 
our research, we develop instruments that help leverage 
financial transactions between providers and consumers of 
cloud services. 
 The main objective of our research is to answer the 
question of how the business transformation of cloud 
suppliers can be performed successfully. Finally, we 
introduce a 9-stage end-to-end transformation process [8] 
with all relevant instruments to help IT-suppliers master the 
inevitable change, associated with the process. 
In Section II, we focus on the definition of customer 
value orientation, regarding the expected advantages of cloud 
services usage, by defining a catalog of indicators to measure 
the advantages. In Section III, we discuss our model for 
defining the business potential on the customer side, which 
can be achieved by the enabling technologies on the IT-
Supplier side. In Section IV, we introduce some initial 
elements of the transformation process that must be 
undertaken by IT-Suppliers, so that their services can help 
customers unleash business potential. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

II. 
ASSESSING IT-SUPPLIERS´ CUSTOMER VALUE 
ORIENTATION  
Initially, we need to define customer value orientation. 
The main components are customer value and orientation. 
The next step would be to revisit the conceptualization and 
operationalization of the customer value orientation to make 
it fit the modern needs of cloud economics. With this in 
mind, we can assess IT-suppliers´ current customer value 
orientation status, in order to help them focus on the right 
target (see Figure 1. Misaligned customer value orientation).  
 
        
 
 
Figure 1. Misaligned customer value orientation 
A. Customer value  
We asked executives from the customer side for their 
criteria when judging capital expenditures (CapEx) or major 
operational expenditures (OpEx), which would both also 
apply to cloud services. Their answers were all about Return 
on Investment (ROI), Break Even, Net Present Value (NPV), 
etc., being very clearly determined and at the same time 
predictable. We conclude that the customer value they are 
looking for is something that helps them either generate a 
better interest rate on their invested capital or helps them 
increase competitiveness. 
B. Orientation 
In the literature, there are various definitions of the term 
“orientation” and, depending on the discipline, there are 
different perspectives. At least three relevant aspects refer to 
the main characteristics of orientation. First, there is the 
environmental positioning and information collection, 
second, there are values, guidelines and principles and third, 
there are intended behavior and targeted activities [8].  
When it comes to organizational orientation with IT-
suppliers, we have, without exception, encountered implicit 
technological orientations but no explicitly described models 
with other objectives.  
There are various forms of orientation described in the 
literature and there are also very diverse definitions of value, 
but only one orientation form focusses on monetarily 
measurable customer value [8]. It seems reasonable to orient 
or realign an entire IT-suppliers´ organization around 
providing exactly the value that executive business decision- 
makers on the customer side are looking for. 
C. Conceptualization and operationalization of customer 
value orientation  
Organizational orientation is often conceptualized with 
the same pattern.  There are success factors on a corporate 
level, on an interaction level and on a service level (see 
Figure 2. Levels and success factors of customer value 
orientation). 
Each factor is subsequently described by formative 
and/or reflective indicators with underlying values, usually 
measured on a scale from 0-100. 
       
 
Figure 2. Levels and success factors of customer value orientation [8] 
 
Implementing customer value orientation in an IT-
supplier organization means synchronizing each individual 
success factor with the main objective. For instance, with 
Goals, the organization would express and document the 
customer value it wants to create and provide, Strategies 
would express how the organization will create the customer 
value, HR would define how members of the organization 
are hired, measured and fired in the process of creating 
customer value, Marketing/PR would communicate customer 
value, Individual skills would be developed with members of 
the organization to create and deliver customer value and, 
last but not least, Customer value measurement would ensure 
having leading indicators in place to control, prove and 
finally document the customer value. 
The success factors´ individual level of sync with the 
customer value orientation is measured and depicted in a 
diagram (see Figure 3. Customer value orientation status). 
 
        
 
 
Figure 3. Customer value orientation status 
 
D. Current customer value orientation status  
We have created an initial catalogue of indicators to 
measure the current customer value orientation of IT-
suppliers (see Figure 3. Customer value orientation status). 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

The results reveal the enormous potential for IT-suppliers to 
grow their businesses because typically, we encounter values 
below 50 for all success factors. Whenever we had the 
opportunity to conduct such measurement with members of 
different hierarchical levels within an organization, we could 
also observe that higher-ranking people would rate the 
orientation status more positively than the lower levels. 
Finally, we found, with all IT-suppliers that they do not 
measure the customer value potentially obtained from using 
their solutions. 
III. 
BUSINESS POTENTIAL REFERENCE MODEL 
A “business potential” is a chance to generate a higher 
operating cash flow, either by reducing outgoing cash flows 
or increasing incoming ones. Investing and financing cash 
flows are designed to leverage the operating cash flow. 
Therefore, they are not important to the genuine business 
potential. Basically there are inhibitors (I) from I1 to In, 
preventing this currently happening. To unleash the business 
potential, these inhibitors need to be addressed individually 
and appropriately with enablers (E) from E1 to En. The total 
monetary value of both inhibitors and enablers can be 
calculated with the following formula: resources x time x 
value (in any freely convertible currency). This way, the total 
value of a business potential is the sum of the values that 
each Inhibitor (I1 to In) generates on the one side. On the 
other side, the total value of the offering is the sum of the 
values that each enabler (E1 to En) generates. Altogether, 
this constitutes a solution (see Figure 4. Business potential 
reference model).   
The real value of this solution is the total value of the 
inhibitors minus the total value of the enablers. If this value 
is positive, it indicates that the solution generates a positive 
impact on the operating cash flow of the owner of the 
business potential. Ideally, this is the customer, but the IT-
supplier should also be able to generate a higher operating 
cash flow for himself, if he is able to determine the customer 
value. 
 
   
 
 
Figure 4. Business potential reference model 
 
Looking at elements of a business potential, reveals the 
lever for making cloud services more effective and efficient. 
The customer business potential, with its current inhibitors, 
needs to be revealed and examined, making this the common 
denominator between IT-suppliers and customers. By 
contrast, our observation from over 12 years of working with 
over 11.000 people from over 450 IT-suppliers, is that 
suppliers and customers use technologies as a common 
denominator, although none of them has properly analyzed 
the inhibitors or even a defined business potential as a target. 
Looking at the web sites and marketing collateral of IT-
suppliers and requests for proposals (RFP) or requests for 
information (RFI) from customers, it is evident that this has 
not changed at all over time. We will not try to figure out 
which side is responsible for such dysfunctional behavior. 
Instead, we will establish the business potential, with its 
inhibitors and enablers, as the most effective common 
denominator. Understanding, analyzing and quantifying the 
individual inhibitors of a business potential is crucial to 
defining appropriate individual enablers and to specifically 
addressing the inhibitors. Only this way can both sides of a 
solution be measured and controlled. Finally, a solution is 
intended to help the customer generate more operating cash 
flow and hence increase his competitiveness. The advantage 
for the supplier would be a value-added pricing approach. 
We conclude that the current state of play requires both 
parties to fundamentally change the way they approach and 
create cloud services as intended solutions. A challenge is 
that leaders on both sides are not prepared. Neither 
transformational 
leadership, 
nor 
transformation 
methodology, nor innovation methodology, nor innovation 
processes, were taught at university or other training to the 
majority of people who are currently in leading positions on 
either side. There is a massive skill gap to close.  
 
IV. 
TRANSFORMATION PROCESS 
IT-suppliers are able to manage the complexity of IT, but 
are still unable to map it to customers´ business potentials, 
because they do not have insight into their target customers´ 
business processes. Fundamentally changing their approach 
to innovation management (creating, communicating/selling, 
implementing and controlling) of Cloud-Services is what we 
perceive as the core of the so-called cloud transformation, in 
order to boost cloud economics in our target countries.  
 
A. The need for innovation processes 
Cloud technology itself is not a solution and does not 
provide value. Identifying business challenges or desired 
results is essential before modifying technologies. IT-
suppliers in our focus countries are still technology oriented. 
Innovative is, ex post, what has successfully penetrated a 
market. We recommend integrating the customers into the 
innovation process (Open Innovation) of cloud services. 
According to our conversations with the executives of IT-
suppliers, this needs to be the focus of our research. From 
over 300 CEO conversations, we have observed that IT-
suppliers do not have an innovation process in place. It may 
seem incredible, but while process management and process 
modeling techniques [10] have impacted on a lot of 
processes even in the academic world (see Figure 5. The 
Nobel price process), for example, by making them visible, 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

repeatable, measurable and controllable, the innovation 
process still evidently remains a black box.  
 
 
Figure 5. The Nobel price process [9] 
 
In the literature, innovation processes [11][12] are only 
described as a series of specified sub-processes [13] and 
rarely end-to end [14][15], which ultimately contributes to 
failure in innovation [16][17]. There is a demand for new 
management priorities [18], management responsibilities 
[14], management models [19], core processes [20][21][22], 
process activities, process roles and process resources 
[16][23]. 
Designing a simple innovation process that IT-suppliers 
can use to create cloud-based hybrid service bundles is a 
research gap and thus the subject of our future research and 
publications.   
 
B. Conducting successful transformation 
The term change is used so variously in the literature that 
some misunderstanding is inevitable. There is no copyright 
on 
expressions 
like 
“Organizational 
Development”, 
“Evolution”, “Change Management” or “Transformation 
Management” [1][7]. An early version of a change 
management model introduced in 1947 proposed that change 
in an organization requires unfreezing, changing/moving and 
(re)freezing [4]. Although the theory was criticized for being 
too simplistic and for not being operationalizable, Lewin´s 
model still is relevant and can be found at the cores of many 
major approaches to change.  
We will therefore introduce the major concepts 
(Transformation management, Enterprise Transformation 
and Transformation of Management) before introducing our 
own transformation model. In addition, the success of a 
transformation is fundamentally determined by its extent. 
Too big could make it too long and costly, whereas too small 
could mean failing to achieve the objectives. In general, 
there are three types of transformation (see Figure 6. Types 
of transformation) 
 
 
Type 1: Transforming the organization as an entity 
 
Type 2: Having a small team pilot and role model the   
              transformation within the organization 
 
Type 3: Establishing a new entity outside the  
              organization and starting from scratch [5]. 
 
   
 
 
Figure 6. Types of transformation 
 
We will have to analyze and develop recommendations, 
and 
determine 
with 
IT-suppliers 
which 
type 
of 
transformation will be most effective/efficient and under 
which circumstances. Also, we would need to define the 
three dimensions of transformation, Ends: Describing 
objectives that need to be achieved through initiatives, 
Means: Describing resources needed to achieve objectives, 
Scope: Describing the extent and direction of the 
transformation (see Figure 7. Dimensions of transformation) 
  
              
 
 
Figure 7. Dimensions of transformation [6] 
 
The transformation approaches in both the literature and 
in practice have matured over the past decades. Nevertheless, 
leading or managing transformation is still not common in 
the curricula of graduate and post-graduate studies. When 
conducting transformations in the past, the author has 
identified this issue and already introduced a new stage in 
Kotter´s transformation process [3] “Stage 3: Empowering 
the guiding coalition” (Figure 8). Educating the key people 
in transformation methodology and about the original core of 
their transformation, has already helped hundreds of people 
to drive their transformations successfully. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. The 9-Stage process [8] 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

V. 
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Customers of cloud solutions want to achieve positive, 
monetarily measurable results. Making them aware of their 
business potentials would leverage the sale and use of cloud 
solutions. IT-suppliers do yet not speak the language of 
business. They are talking bits and bytes, which currently 
leads to poor business in the focal area. Business potential is 
the most effective common denominator for customers and 
suppliers of cloud solutions. The major objective of our 
research is therfore to create a methodology and tools, 
enabling IT-suppliers to conduct their transformation 
successfully, which will in turn contribute to driving cloud 
economics. 
 
VI. 
FUTURE RESEARCH 
On the one hand, we strongly recommend conducting 
future research on innovation processes in order to enable 
customers and suppliers to measurably and repetitively 
create innovations. An alignment of these processes would 
together lead to better and faster results. On the other hand, it 
is questionable whether the majority of suppliers and 
customers are really able to transform with a reasonable 
scope of objectives, within a reasonable period of time and at 
an acceptable level of costs. The critical element is time to 
market. Therefore, we recommend future research in 
methodology and cloud-based technology to help both 
parties exploit business potential as the most effective 
common denominator. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Janes et al., “Transformation-Management – Changing 
Organisations Inside Out,“ Vienna: Springer, 2001. 
[2] W. B. Rouse, “Enterprise Transformation - Understanding 
and Enabling Fundamental Change,” Wiley, 2006. 
[3] J. P. Kotter, “Leading Change,” Boston: Harvard Business 
Review Press, 1996. 
[4] K. Lewin, “Change Management Model,” New York: 
McGraw Hill. 
[5] J. P. Kotter, “Accelerate: Building Strategic Agility for a 
Faster Moving World (XLR8),” Boston: Harvard Business 
Review Press, 2013. 
[6] W. B. Rouse, “Enterprise Transformation - Understanding 
and Enabling Fundamental Change,” Wiley, 2006, p. 39. 
[7] R. Lessem et al., “Transformation Management - Towards the 
Integral Enterprise,” Farnham: Gower, 2009. 
[8] F. Keßler, “Enterprise Transformation Management – 
Development of a Concept of Customer Value Orientation for 
IT_Companies, B2B, as a Path to Longterm Profitable 
Growth ”, 2011.  
[9] Author 
not 
named, 
in 
http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/20100601/10-06-02.pdf, p. 
26, retr.: Feb. 2016 
[10] G. Schewe et al., „Innovation for Medium Size Companies – 
A Process Oriented Guideline for SME,“ Wiesbaden:  Gabler, 
2009, pp. 124. 
[11] Fraunhofer Institut für Arbeitswissenschaft und Organisation 
“Cross-Industry 
Innovation,“ 
in 
http://wiki.iao.fraunhofer.de/index.php/Cross_Industry-
Innovation, 2012, retrieved: Oct. 2012. 
[12] Author not named, Gabler Wirtschaftslexikon, “Open 
Innovation,“ 
in 
http://wirtschaftslexikon.gabler.de/Archiv/81584/open-
innovation-v3.html, 2012, retrieved: Oct. 2012. 
[13] B. Wirtz, “Business Model Management – Design – 
Instrumente – Success Factors of Business Models,“ 
Wiesbaden: Gabler, 2011, pp. 214. 
[14] J. Hauschildt et al., “Innovation Management,“ 5. überarb., 
erg. und akt. Aufl., Munich: Vahlen, 2011. 
[15] T. Stern et al., “Successful Innovation Management – Success 
Factors, 
Basic 
Patterns, 
Cases,“ 
4., 
überarb. 
Aufl., 
Wiesbaden: Gabler, 2010, p. 18. 
[16] M. Disselkamp, “Innovation Management - Instruments and 
Methods for Implementation in Companies,“ 2., überarb. 
Aufl., Munich: Springer Gabler, 2012, pp. 56. 
[17] M. Zollenkop, “Business Model Innovation,“ Wiesbaden: 
Deutscher Universitäts-Verlag, 2006, p. 49. 
[18] T. Bieger et al., “Innovative Business Models - Fundamental 
Concepts, Creative Areas and Entrepreneurial Practice,“ 
Heidelberg: Springer, 2011, pp. 81. 
[19] N. Tomaschek et al.,  “Management & Consulting in 
Transformation- und Innovation-Processes - Research in 
Progress,“ Munich: Rainer Hampp, 2010. 
[20] C. Hentschel, et al.,  “TRIZ – Systematic Innovation,“ 
Munich: Hanser, 2010. 
[21] B. Maurer et al., “World Champions in Innovation – How our 
Companies become Unbeatable,“ Weinheim: Wiley, 2011. 
[22] J. O. Meissner, “Introduction to systemic Innovation-
Management,“ Heidelberg: Carl-Auer-Systeme, 2011. 
[23] O. Gassmann et al., “Practical Knowledge Innovation 
Management – From Idea to Market Success,“ 2. erw. und 
überarb. Aufl., München: Hanser, 2011. 
[24] H. Österle et al., “Memorandum for Creation Oriented 
Wirtschaftsinformatik, in Österle et al.: Creation Oriented  
Wirtschaftsinformatik: 
A 
Pleadoyer 
for 
Rigor 
und 
Relevance,“ infowerk Verlag, 2010, pp. 1 – 6. 
[25] A. R. Hevner et al., “Design Science in Information Systems 
Research,” in MIS Quarterly, Vol. 28, No. 1, (2004)3 
[26] A. R. Hevner, “A Three Cycle View of Design Science 
Research,” Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 
19(2007)2, pp. 87 – 92. 
[27] M. Yamartino, “The Economics Of The Cloud,” in 
http://news.microsoft.com/download/archived/presskits/cloud/
docs/the-economics-of-the-cloud.pdf, 2010, (retr. Feb. 2016) 
[28] H. Okin, “Cloud Economics,” in https://www.kpmg-
institutes.com/institutes/advisory-institute/events/2014/09- 
/podcast-cloud-economics.html, 2014,  retr.: Feb. 2016 
[29] D. Reeves et al., “The Truth About Cloud Economics,” in 
https://hbr.org/2012/04/the-truth-about-cloud-economic/, 
2012, retr.: Feb. 2016 
[30] o. V. TechTarget, in http://searchcio.techtarget.com/ 
definition/ cloud-economics, 2013, retr.: Feb. 2016 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-460-2
CLOUD COMPUTING 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

