C2TP: A Service Model for Cloud 
 
Chris Peiris 
Faculty of Information Sciences and 
Engineering 
University of Canberra 
ACT, 2601, Australia 
Chris.Peiris@canberra.edu.au 
Dharmendra Sharma  
Faculty of Information Sciences and 
Engineering 
University of Canberra 
ACT 2601, Australia 
Dharmendra.Sharma@canberra.edu.au
 
 
Bala Balachandran 
 Faculty of Information Sciences and 
Engineering 
University of Canberra 
ACT 2601, Australia 
Bala.Balachandran@canberra.edu.au
 
 
Abstract - The notion of cloud computing capability is 
gathering momentum rapidly. However, the governance and 
enterprise architecture to obtain repeatable, scalable and 
secure business outcomes from cloud computing is still greatly 
undefined. There is very little research explored to define a 
framework that not only considers financial motivations, but 
also business initiatives, IT governance structures, IT 
operational control structures and technical architecture 
requirements to evaluate the benefits regarding cloud 
investment.  We are proposing a novel model to address this. 
This model can be leveraged by an organization to evaluate the 
“tipping point” where the organization can make an 
informative decision to embrace cloud computing at the 
expense of on-premise hosting options. The authors refer to 
this model as Cloud Computing Tipping Point (C2TP) model. 
The model is a service centric framework created by mapping 
cloud computing attributes with industry best practices such as 
ValIT, Control Objectives for Information and related 
Technology 
(COBIT) 
and 
Information 
Technology 
Infrastructure Library (ITIL). This paper discusses the C2TP 
model in detail with its findings. 
 
Keywords - Cloud computing Tipping Point; C2TP; Cloud 
readiness model; CTPXML; Cloud artifact; Cloud taxonomy 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Merrill Lynch research estimated cloud computing as a 
“$160 billion addressable market opportunity, including $95 
billion in business productivity applications, and another $65 
billion in online advertising” [11]. There are several industry 
vendors (e.g., Amazon, Google, Microsoft, Sun, Salesforce, 
HP, etc.) attempting to capitalize on this market opportunity. 
Academic research community has also taken a keen interest 
in creating frameworks such as Virtual Workspaces [18], 
OpenNebula [22], Eucalyptus [10],[39] and Aneka [5] to 
address this opportunity. According to Buyya & Yeo [5], the 
hype about cloud computing is getting realized in the form of 
real world solutions. They continue to elaborate by focusing 
on computation power as the 5th utility on top of water, 
electricity, gas and telephony [6]. This computing utility will 
provide basic computation requirements for essential every 
day needs similar to the other four utilities stated above. 
They identify cloud computing is one of the paradigms that 
could realize this vision [6].  
 
An ICT organization will reach a “cross road” or an 
“equilibrium” where the organization is required to make a 
conscious decision to either enhance the existing on premise 
investment or procure IT capability via cloud computing 
providers [26]. The popularity of cloud offerings are 
primarily driven by the financial benefits gained by 
organizations in comparison to on premise investments. 
Buyya, Pandey & Vecchiola [4] proposed a market oriented 
cloud computing architecture leveraging “Cloudbus” toolkit. 
The Cloudbus architecture addresses simulations, policies 
and algorithms to facilitate the cloud marketplace. Lenk et al. 
[20] created a general framework that targets transitioning 
from existing systems to cloud offerings. This framework 
primarily focuses on the financial advantages of the cloud 
platforms. Both of these capabilities do not address a model 
that an organization can leverage to evaluate organization‟s 
business initiatives, existing IT investment and existing IT 
control structures to determine the equilibrium (or a “tipping 
point”) for cloud computing investment. This information is 
vital to evaluate the decision to either migrate to the cloud or 
expand on existing investment for an organization.  
This paper attempts to address this research gap. The 
focus of this paper is to demonstrate Cloud Computing 
Tipping Point (C2TP) model that an ICT organization can 
leverage to evaluate the future benefits or limitations. The 
authors developed the following approach to create the C2TP 
model as detailed in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  C2TP model inputs, processing and outputs 
135
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

The authors have leveraged multiple case studies 
representing both enterprises and small to medium 
enterprises to investigate the relevant attributes for the 
perceived model. The model primarily focuses on 
organization‟s business architecture information, financial 
viability information and technical architecture information 
[27]. They are described as “inputs” of the model in Figure 
1. The model captures many attributes that represent the 
above focus areas. This is illustrated as “processing” in 
Figure 1. These subject areas are discussed in detail in the 
next section. They are analyzed and evaluated to generate 
multiple measurements and services. Figure 1 illustrates 
these measurements and services as “outputs”. These 
measurements and services are described in sections II and 
IV. These services can be leveraged to provide guidance 
regarding the “readiness” of the organization to embrace or 
decline on cloud offerings. Section III of this paper describes 
the details of an artifact designed to evaluate and capture 
findings of C2TP model. Section V will detail the findings, 
conclusions, future work and related work. 
II. 
C2TP MODEL 
The C2TP model will enable organizations with the 
knowledge to invest in future strategic decisions regarding 
cloud computing investment. The model will evaluate 
financial, business and technical data to derive a conclusion 
whether the organization will benefit from investing in cloud 
computing or extend their investment in on premise 
capability. This is an important toolset that can be leveraged 
by the industry and will actively contribute to cloud 
computing enterprise architecture. The following Figure 2 
illustrates components of C2TP model. 
 
 
Figure 2.  C2TP : Cloud computing Tipping Point Model 
The authors explored whether they could use industry 
best practices of Control Objectives for Information and 
related 
Technology 
(COBIT) 
[7] 
and 
Information 
Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) [14] as a base 
framework to define the attributes for the Cloud Computing 
Tipping Point model. Lainhart [19] described COBIT as a 
“methodology for managing and controlling Information. It 
also 
controls 
Information 
Technology 
risks 
and 
vulnerabilities”. IT Infrastructure Library (ITIL) is a set of 
industry best practices published by British Office of 
Government Commerce (OGC) [14]. It comprises of 
operational framework details that includes industry best 
practices, standard operating procedures and technical 
operating procedures. The authors concluded that the high 
usage of these frameworks in the industry and their proven 
control structures provide a solid foundation for the C2TP 
model. The primary attributes planned for the model are, 
a) Better risk management and information security 
b) Better 
software 
development 
life 
cycle 
management 
c) Better business continuity 
d) Excellent capacity and availability management 
e) Low cost operations 
f) 
Shorter implementation life cycles of IT systems 
and applications 
g) Enhanced service levels 
h) Higher uptime 
The authors also concluded that some of the long term 
strategic objectives (e.g., value management, optimizing 
internal rate of return etc.) of a Cloud solution are not 
addressed by COBIT and ITIL control structures [29]. 
Therefore, they have leveraged ValIT [36] model to address 
these gaps. ValIT addresses assumptions, costs, risks and 
outcomes related to a balanced portfolio of IT-enabled 
business investments. It also provides benchmarking 
capability and allows enterprises to exchange experiences on 
best practices for value management [36]. Therefore, the 
authors have decided to leverage COBIT, ITIL and ValIT to 
provide the governance framework for Cloud Computing 
Tipping Point model. The authors have created key metrics 
to measure the outcome of the model [28]. They are,  
 
C2TP Financial Model metric. 
 
C2TP Business Initiatives Index. 
 
C2TP Operational Governance Index. 
 
C2TP Readiness Index. 
A. C2TP Financial Model 
The C2TP financial model analyses the fixed and 
variables costs of migrating and sustaining cloud platform 
architecture. The financial model currently accommodates 
the following costs. These are staff costs, help desk costs, 
server maintenance costs, server replacement costs, data 
center environment costs, software licensing costs, software 
maintenance 
costs, 
networking 
costs, storage 
costs, 
migration costs, centralization costs, journaling costs, 
training costs, archiving infrastructure costs, archiving 
content  costs, backup and recovery costs, disaster recovery 
costs, support consultancy costs and cost of Investment 
(interest on borrowed funds to facilitate the investment). 
Future work on this base framework can expand these 
criteria further. 
136
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

The model analyses the above costs for on premise IT 
investment and will compare it against the cloud alternative 
capability. The model evaluates the financial position of the 
on premise investment and cloud offerings by referring the 
following equation. Note that “n” is a positive integer and 
“N” is the total number of financial costs. 
∑ 
 
   
                 ∑ 
 
   
                    
An organization is financially in a better position if the 
cloud offerings investment is less than the on premise 
investment. 
B. C2TP Business Initiatives Index 
C2TP 
business 
initiatives 
index 
evaluates 
the 
organization‟s eagerness and ability to embrace cloud 
computing as a mechanism to gain completive advantage 
over their peers. The business initiative attributes of the 
model are, 
 
Efficiency gains 
 
Agility 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
IT Security issues 
 
Risk Management 
 
Simplicity 
of 
capability 
development 
and 
management 
 
Business process optimization 
 
Social impact to the employees 
 
Regulatory compliance  
 
Interoperability with partner organizations. 
The C2TP model gathers the organization‟s perceptions 
and priorities regarding the above subject areas. This 
information is gathered by answering series of questions to 
evaluate the organization‟s perspective of these business 
initiatives under the on premise model and alternative cloud 
computing capability. These business questions leverage 
ValIT, COBIT and ITIL key subject areas. The total of on 
premise business initiatives are collected together as “On 
Premise Business Initiatives index”. The total of cloud 
business initiatives are collected together as “Cloud Business 
Initiatives Index”. In order to move to the cloud, the Cloud 
Business Initiatives Index requires to be greater than the On 
premise Business Initiatives index as described below. Note 
that “n” is a positive integer and “N” is the total number of 
business initiative measures. (Note – Business Initiatives 
Index is abbreviated as “BII”) 
                ∑                        
 
   

                    ∑                             
 
   

                                       
C. C2TP Operational governance Index. 
This index attempts to compare the organization IT 
governance and control objectives under the on premise and 
cloud computing models. This measure is vital to ensure the 
organizations future IT platform (regardless of on premise or 
cloud computing) is operating as efficiently as possible. 
COBIT and ITIL provides extensive capability in industry 
implementations for similar requirements. The authors have 
evaluated 
these 
industry 
best practices 
extensively. 
Therefore, the C2TP model is influenced by COBIT and 
ITIL control structures to address some of the key 
capabilities as described below. 
1) Acquire and Maintain Application Software 
The key focus areas under this model are, 
 
Which model is more efficient in procuring 
software? 
 
Which model attracts the best licensing costs 
arrangement for the organization? 
 
Which model manages the licensing costs better? 
(e.g., better tools are available for management and 
transparency) 
 
Which model provides more efficient application 
maintenance? 
 
Under which model is application maintenance 
financially attractive? 
2) Procure IT Resources 
The key focus areas under this model are, 
 
Which model provides the procurement efficiencies? 
(i.e., less time to procure software) 
 
Under which model is it easier to secure IT resources 
that are skilled to develop IT capability? 
 
Which model offers cheaper to find IT resources? 
 
Which model offers efficient project management? 
3) Acquire and Maintain Technology Infrastructure. 
The key focus areas under this model are, 
 
Which model offers simpler procurement process to 
acquire hardware resources? 
 
Which model offers lower infrastructure costs for the 
organization?  
 
Which model offers better hardware infrastructure 
optimization?  
 
Which model offers better tools to address disaster 
recovery functions?  
 
Which offers better toolset to manage the 
organization‟s infrastructure? 
4) Manage Performance and Capacity 
The key focus areas under this model are, 
 
Which model offers better performance tools set to 
monitor hosted applications? 
 
Which model offers better performance tools set to 
manage hosted applications?  
 
Which model provides easier access to increase or 
decrease capacity? 
5) Define and Manage Service Level 
The key focus areas under this model are, 
 
Which 
model 
offers 
better 
Service 
Level 
Agreements (SLA) for organization needs?  
 
Which model offers liability measures (from 
providers) in case of lack or interruption of service 
or data?  
 
Which model offers clear 'pay per view' cost 
structure for services consumed? 
137
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

6) Ensure Continuous Service 
The key focus areas under this model are, 
 
Which model offers better availability of data?  
 
Which model offers better availability of critical 
services?  
 
Which model ensures integrity of data?  
 
Which model ensures integrity of critical services? 
 
Which model ensures confidentiality of corporate 
data?  
 
Which model secures organization from Denial of 
Service attacks? 
C2TP model evaluates these subject areas by engaging 
with the target organization with a series of workshops, 
questions and answers sessions and presentations. The 
interactions with the organizations and the organization‟s 
responses are recorded in the C2TP artifact tool. This tool 
and its functionality will be described in section III. The 
organization evaluates its on premise business case against 
the cloud computing alternative under the C2TP model. The 
C2TP model proceeds to accumulate this information and 
derives Operational Governance Index for on premise and 
cloud computing alternatives. Then the model compares the 
two indexes to analyze the suitability of each model. The 
Operational Governance Index of cloud computing should be 
greater than the Operation Governance Index of on premise 
model in order for an organization to benefit from cloud 
computing offerings. The equations to obtain this decision 
are demonstrated below. Note that “n” is a positive integer 
and “N” is the total number of operational governance 
measures. (Note - Operational Governance Index is 
abbreviated as “OGI”.) 
          ∑                                 
 
   
    
               ∑                                     
 
   
 
                                   
D. C2TP Readiness Index. 
C2TP model readiness index is the end result of the 
evaluation. The readiness index will elaborate the 
organization‟s “readiness” to embrace cloud computing or 
whether it has reached the “tipping point” to invest in cloud 
computing offerings. The Readiness Index is derived by 
aggregating the previous discussed indexes. The authors 
believes the C2TP readiness index and all the other indexes 
needs to be positive to conclusively decide that the 
organizations have reached the “tipping point” to invest in 
cloud computing offerings. The following illustrates this 
equation.  
C2TP Readiness Index    = 
Financial Model + Business Initiatives Index + Operational 
Governance Index 
The authors developed an artifact to demonstrate this 
model and to evaluate its capability extensively. This 
conclusion of C2TP Readiness Index was confirmed by the 
findings of the artifact. 
III. 
C2TP ARTIFACT 
This section discusses the Cloud Computing Tipping 
Point artifact that was designed and developed to evaluate 
and captures the information in relation to C2TP model. 
A. Research method – Artifact building  
Artifact design is an iterative process. March and Smith 
believes that the search for the best, or optimal, design is 
often intractable for realistic information systems problems 
[23]. Simon [32] describes the nature of the design process 
as a Generate and Test Cycle. According to Simon, we 
would generate research material and will evolve to new 
material when we apply testing scenarios. The authors have 
followed this process numerous times to create the artifact 
for C2TP model. March and Smith [23] proposed 4 general 
outputs for design research. They are constructs, models, 
methods, and instantiations. The C2TP model addresses all 4 
of these outputs.  
 
Constructs are defined by March and Smith [23] as 
conceptual vocabulary of problems and solution 
domains. This is addressed by defining extensive 
conceptual architecture of the C2TP artifact. It 
breaks down the conceptual architecture to multiple 
layers (i.e., presentation, business logic and 
database) 
and 
clearly 
defines 
each 
layer‟s 
responsibility.  
 
A model is a set of propositions or statements 
expressing relationship among constructs [23]. The 
artifact addresses this requirement by extensive set 
of Unified Mark-up Language (UML) constructs. 
They are outputs such as entity relationship diagrams 
and class diagrams.  
 
The method is a set of steps used to perform a task 
[23]. The artifact leverages UML 
modeling 
techniques such as use cases and sequence diagrams 
to address this.  
 
March and Smith [23] defines instantiations as 
“operationalize constructs, models and methods. The 
eventual instantiation of the research is a web site 
that accumulates all the information regarding the 
C2TP model. 
B. Solution Architecture for the model 
The C2TP conceptual architecture is based on three tier 
architecture model. The three tiers are Presentation, Business 
Logic and Database. There are also several “cross cutting” 
components of the architecture including security, common 
integration methods and a library of components that 
addresses instrumentation, auditing, logging, tracing, caching 
and validation.  The authors have created a specific 
taxonomy to share C2TP model information. This taxonomy 
is referred to as Cloud Tipping Point Markup Language 
(CTPXML) [29]. CTPXML is a well formed communication 
structure specifically designed for C2TP model. The primary 
objective of CTPXML is to exchange information between 
C2TP model and its consumers in a scalable and secure 
environment. The consumers can be number of entities. They 
138
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

are web browsers, mobile phones, desktop applications or 
intelligent agents [30].  
Presentation layer essentially consists of user experience 
layer and self-service channel to expose the C2TP model 
capability. The self-service channel will provide the ability 
to expose a “service view” of C2TP selected applications to 
be consumed by external service providers and 3rd parties. 
The Self Service Channel will host scalable and reliable 
services that will allow other organizations to build their own 
applications that leverage C2TP data. However, the 
application creation and maintenance will be the sole 
responsibility of the 3rd party organization. The following 
services will be exposed via these mechanisms that are built 
on top of the “service agents” that technology platform 
provides [30]. 
 
C2TP Financial Model Service 
 
C2TP Business Initiatives Index service 
 
C2TP Operational Governance Index service 
 
C2TP Readiness Index service 
C2TP Business Logic layer accommodates both in-host 
and cross-host capabilities. The in-process model supports 
the web user, mobile user and potential desktop forms 
application functionality. The in-process model enables 
memory caching and will provide speedy access to data. The 
services interface provides a scalable standard interfaces for 
the Self Service Channel. This layer will provide the proxies 
or agents that facilitate the plumbing code for the service 
layer. It also leverages standard service contracts, message 
contracts, data contracts and fault contracts to communicate 
to presentation layer. The orchestration layer of the business 
logic layer is a key capability. The orchestration layer will 
route client requests to the relevant business components. 
The orchestration layer coordinates (and in some cases 
aggregates) 
data 
communications 
between 
business 
components and necessary integration components. This 
layer will also provide framework level support for the 
following, 
 
Validation capability – these components provide 
business level validations (e.g., valid post code) and 
developer support (e.g., regular expressions to 
validate email address) 
 
Business rules and business objects – The business 
logic and the associated business rules are hosted in 
these objects. 
 
The necessary workflow rules and components. 
 
Client message inspector – This component 
evaluates the user‟s authorization credentials to 
execute the business functionality. 
 
Parameter inspector – This component will inspect 
the parameters being provided to the business layer 
by the presentation layer. 
The database solution architecture supports necessary 
table structures and integration connectors. The database 
design will follow the 3rd normal form and there are small 
data marts created for user and administrator reports. 
C. Service enablement of C2TP model 
SOA is a software architecture that is designed around 
loosely coupled software components called services, which 
can be orchestrated to improve business agility [8]. Vouk 
[37] defines SOA as delivery of an integrated and 
orchestrated suite of functions to an end-user through 
composition of both loosely and tightly coupled functions, or  
often networkbased services. As defined by W3C, services 
provide functionality at the application and business levels of 
granularity using widely applied standards [13] . A 
conceptual SOA metamodel to enable business capability 
was demostared by Emig et al [9] and Henkal & Zdravkovic 
[12]. This SOA metamodel is leveraged  to build the C2TP 
artifact that can seemlessly intercat with 3rd party 
compoments or intelligent agents to share information 
generated by the C2TP model.  
IV. 
RESULTS AND FINDINGS 
The proposed model has been validated with results from 
several organizations with a cross-section of business 
models. Due to the recent global financial crisis and 
volatility of the global markets, the organizations were quite 
keen to investigate technology options that give them a 
competitor advantage over their competitors. Therefore, 
C2TP model was viewed as a timely development to assist 
with their evaluation for cloud computing options.  
„One on one‟ interviews and workshops were the primary 
mechanisms of collecting data and evaluating C2TP model 
with target organizations. The collected information was 
entered into the C2TP artifact to process the results. The 
C2TP artifact produced the financial model and the relevant 
indexes to evaluate the cloud computing suitability.   The 
results were member checked [21] with the participants. 
Member checking was performed both during the interview 
(or workshop) process and at the conclusion phase. 
Interviewer corroboration [21] was also leveraged as a 
validation technique to ensure the quality of results. Negative 
case analysis [34] provided a valuable toolset to refine the 
model further in some cases. The paper categorized these 
findings under two categories to address necessary cross 
sections of the IT industry. They are as enterprise clients and 
small or medium enterprise clients. 
A. Validation of Enterprise clients 
Experiment 1 - C2TP model was evaluated by 
representatives of a global consulting company that has in 
excess of 80,000 employees. The organization is a mature 
CMMI level 5 accredited IT services provider. The 
representatives‟ motivations were to analyze the cloud email 
hosting benefits of transferring their on premise capability to 
cloud platform. They were interesting in leveraging both 
Infrastructure as a service and software as a service cloud 
offerings. 
They 
leveraged 
the 
C2TP 
model 
to 
comprehensively analyze their requirements. Here are the 
results. 
 
The model clearly identified the financial benefits 
leveraging the formulae discussed earlier. The C2TP 
Financial readiness Index was positive.  
139
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

 
The C2TP business Initiatives index was also 
positive. This supported the conclusion of the 
organization business initiatives are in synergy with 
the cloud platform offerings.  
 
C2TP Operational Governance Index was positive. 
The organization‟s accreditation of CMMI level 5 
had ensured structured processes to address 
management and governance issues. Therefore, the 
organization could effectively transition their on 
premise email hosting environment to cloud 
computing offering with minimum number of 
business interruptions. 
 
The C2TP model concluded that the C2TP 
Readiness Index was positive in light of all the other 
indexes were positive. Therefore, the C2TP model 
endorsed the organizations strategy to migrate their 
email hosting system to cloud platform and start 
leveraging the benefits of the cloud architecture. 
The participants provided valuable feedback as part of 
member checking to enhance the C2TP model. They have 
indicated the value of benchmarking their findings with 
similar organizations to further understand the competitor 
advantages and limitations. They have highlighted that a rich 
set of historical data that focuses on their industry does add 
substantial value to the existing C2TP model. This important 
discovery 
was 
corroborated 
by 
other 
interviewers 
subsequently. 
Experiment 2 - The 2nd enterprise company is a global 
supplier of security hardware to financial industry and 
government agencies. They have close to 20,000 global 
employees. The company representatives‟ interest was to 
leverage the C2TP model to evaluate their “Next generation 
desktop” project. This is a platform rationalization project 
viewed as an opportunity to provide a solution for their 
existing aging desktop platform. This platform as a service 
project also attempts to provide a single environment for the 
company‟s newly acquired subsidiaries to work together and 
to be integrated into their global headquarters. Here are the 
findings 
 
The C2TP Financial Readiness Index was positive 
indicating the financial benefits of rationalizing their 
platform with cloud platform offerings. 
 
The C2TP Business Initiatives Index was negative. 
The company subsidiaries operated as independent 
entities in all its geographies. Therefore, their 
business initiatives were influenced heavily by 
demographic circumstances and were not centrally 
managed. This was the outcome of several 
acquisitions 
and 
mergers 
over 
the 
years. 
Unfortunately, the IT environment integration 
wasn‟t a priority in these acquisitions and mergers.  
The objective of the “Next generation desktop” was 
to provide a unified desktop solution globally. 
However, the representatives could not agree on the 
unified set of business initiatives that was driving the 
project. 
 
C2TP Operational Governance Index was negative. 
Due to mergers and acquisitions, there were 
substantial differences between the IT maturities for 
IT teams representing different geographies. This led 
to the conclusion that they need to create a unified IT 
platform and a governance framework at the global 
headquarters level before they investigate migrating 
capability to the cloud. It was noted that this global 
platform could be viewed as a Cloud offering. 
However, the representative did conclude there are 
sensitive data (as a result of their security operations) 
that they were not planning to host on the cloud 
offering. They concluded to consolidate all the IT 
teams and create governance framework. This 
governance framework will address the issue of 
sensitive data and investigate leveraging cloud 
computing for their non-core activities. 
 
Due to the C2TP Business Initiatives index and 
C2TP Operational governance index being negative, 
it was concluded that the C2TP Readiness Index was 
negative. Therefore, it was concluded that the 
organization haven‟t reached the “tipping point” to 
invest in cloud offerings. 
 
The conclusion was to enhance their existing invest 
in on premise offering and enhance the maturity of 
the organization till it reaches a point where they can 
revisit the cloud computing value proposition. 
The paper leveraged negative case analysis validation 
technique to refine the model with this particular experiment. 
The initial data from the C2TP model did not corroborate 
with the interview findings. Further analysis led to the 
revision of the model attributes and introducing a 
“weightings” system for the calculations to reflect these 
special circumstances. 
B. Validation of SME clients 
Experiment 3 - The model was evaluated by an 
Australian 
consulting 
company 
that 
specializes 
in 
collaboration and portal development capability. This 
company has close to 20 employees. They specialize in 
collaboration toolset for financial and manufacturing sector. 
The company was having difficulty to scale their current on 
premise infrastructure platform to facilitate its growing 
demand. They also noticed high seasonal demand for 
Collaboration capability towards the start of the financial 
year by their financial industry clients. The company was 
having difficulty to justify the additional costs to cater small 
window during seasonal spikes and leave the resource idle 
for rest of the year. They were keen to leverage the C2TP 
model to explore their options and evaluate their readiness to 
acquire cloud computing capability. Here are the results,  
 
Positive C2TP Financial Model for the company 
elaborating the advantages of moving to a cloud 
provider to facilitate the seasonal spikes in lieu of 
acquiring new on premise infrastructure.  
 
Due to the small nature of the company and mature 
ITIL process in place, the C2TP Operational 
Governance Index was positive. 
 
Their business Initiatives index was also positive 
indicating their suitability to migrate to the cloud 
platform.  
140
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

 
The C2TP readiness index was positive due to the 
feedback from C2TP Financial Model, Business 
Initiatives Index and Operational Governance Index 
Member checking and interviewer corroboration were 
leveraged as validation techniques for this experiment. The 
organization was keen to leverage C2TP model to investigate 
sharing 
CTPXML 
information 
with 
their 
partner 
organizations and clients. 
Experiment 4 - The 2nd SME participant organization 
specializes in residential and commercial imagery for 
product catalogues. This is a small organization with 5 
employees. The major challenge was to manage their digital 
library and keep up to date with technology advancements 
and security considerations. They were interested in 
evaluating both platform as a service and software as a 
service offering to meet their growing demand. They have 
been leveraging their on premise platform for number of 
years. However, due to increased storage needs, image 
processing and bandwidth needs, they were finding it 
difficult to extend their existing infrastructure and justify the 
extra costs. Therefore, they were keen to evaluate the C2TP 
model to obtain guidance to make decisions on investing on 
cloud offerings 
 
The C2TP Financial Model was positive indicating 
they were financially in a better position due to their 
move to the cloud offerings. 
 
The C2TP business Initiatives Index was also 
positive indicating that the business models of the 
company or the business initiatives are not adversely 
affected by transferring their capabilities to the 
cloud. They also noticed that cloud offering will 
significantly reduce their capital expenditure and 
transfer costs to the “operating budget”.  
 
C2TP Operational Governance Index was positive. 
The company benefitted from its small size and was 
able to be agile and improve its process. Therefore, 
they had sufficient control structures and governance 
model to successfully migrate to the cloud platform 
with little process alterations. 
 
Due to positive feedback from C2TP Financial 
Model, C2TP Business Initiatives Index and C2TP 
Operational Governance index, the C2TP Readiness 
Index was positive.  The conclusion was that the 
organization has the capability and the motivations 
to successfully migrate to could platform under the 
C2TP evaluation.  
These 4 experiments have addressed both enterprise and 
small to enterprise organizations to obtain a good cross 
section of the IT industry. The experiments also addressed 
variations of size, number of employees, industry focus and 
multiple geographical locations.  C2TP model was leveraged 
by all 4 experiments successfully with proven validation 
techniques 
such 
as 
member 
checking, 
interview 
corroboration and negative case analysis. Therefore, the 
C2TP model has assisted in our research goal to create a 
model that provides strategic guidance to organizations to 
evaluate future cloud investments in comparison with on 
premise investment. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A. Summary of Contributions 
The primary contribution of the research is the Cloud 
Computing Tipping Point (C2TP) model and the artifact to 
demonstrate 
its 
capability. 
This 
model 
will 
assist 
organizations to evaluate the “tipping point” whether the 
organization can either embrace the cloud offerings or 
enhance their investment in on premise IT capability. This 
model provides a comprehensive structure by leveraging 
proven financial indicators and industry best practices (i.e., 
COBIT, ITIL and ValIT). This model addresses a timely 
need in the industry to create a framework to provide 
guidance to organizations to evaluate the benefits and 
limitations of embracing the cloud platform. The current 
literature and the industry momentum are driven purely by 
the financial comparisons of on premise cost versus cloud 
computing costs. There is no model available that analyses 
not only the financials, but also the organization core 
business initiatives, its existing IT capability control 
structures and the suitability of the organizations existing IT 
governance processes in relation to cloud computing. These 
selection criteria have the same weight as the financial 
information for organizations 
These organizations are aware of the complexities of IT 
projects. The complexity of these IT projects will further 
enhance if they include new cloud capability that the 
organization cannot manage or govern in a scalable and 
predictable fashion. These organizations also need to 
mitigate the risk of an external cloud provider having access 
to their business information. Does the cloud platform offer 
better “value for money” under these circumstances? Or does 
the organization conclude the organization‟s intellectual 
property information is too sensitive to share on the cloud?  
Unfortunately, there is no model available to address these 
concerns currently. The authors believe in a set of minimum 
criteria or checklist items for organizations to evaluate to 
determine their cloud readiness. Therefore, the authors 
believe the C2TP model provides a comprehensive 
evaluation criterion to address this growing need in the 
industry. The model provides feedback to an organization on 
its cloud readiness by factoring in the financials and other 
key business factors. Therefore, this model enhances the 
academic body of knowledge in relation to cloud enterprise 
architecture. 
The cloud infrastructure is primarily built using 
virtualization technologies comprising of hypervisors 
running on a large number of parallel servers operating in 
distributed networking environment. The major hosting 
providers have also launched application programming 
interfaces for development of cloud friendly programs that 
can be run in Software as a Service mode. The current 
hosting providers have kept the backend architectures 
proprietary and hence there is a risk of the applications 
getting tied to specific cloud computing environments. The 
current researchers feel a need for standard cloud 
infrastructure and an enterprise model that all hosting 
providers should follow in order to ensure openness of the 
system from customer perspective. The authors share these 
141
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

sentiments and shall contribute to such an open architecture 
model supporting the empirical generalizations being 
attempted by the current researchers. The C2TP model will 
contribute and enhance enterprise architecture of cloud 
computing as a result of this research. 
This paper also analyses the synergy between the 
industry best practices (i.e., COBIT, ITIL and ValIT) and 
how they can be coupled together to create an academic 
model. This academic model then is tested and proven to be 
effective by referring to the previous section. Selected 
components of these industry best practices are indirectly 
peer reviewed and analyzed in academic context. This 
enhances the „body of knowledge‟ of academic empirical 
studies based on these industry best practices. This will 
enhance credibility and wider acceptance in academia for 
these industry best practices for academics to be leveraged in 
the future. 
The CTPXML taxonomy is another contributor as a 
result of this research. The CTPXML taxonomy is primarily 
designed as the communication mechanism to share data 
between C2TP model and its consumers. The taxonomy is 
based on well-formed XML standards and will follow Web 
Service Basic Profile standards to ensure interoperability 
between heterogeneous platforms. The current taxonomy 
addresses the C2TP model information, security credentials, 
infrastructure information and transport information. The 
security, transport and infrastructure information is kept to 
minimum due to the focus of the C2TP model information. 
The authors believe these areas will be a prime candidate for 
future work. The CTPXML taxonomy can be leveraged by 
multiple clients to render the C2TP information seamlessly 
to their preferred presentation medium.  
B. Future Work 
C2TP model has undergone several iterations already. 
The model is also evaluated with enterprise and SME 
organizations as we discussed earlier. The findings of these 
evaluations were very positive. The findings also shed some 
light regarding the further enhancements to the model that 
can be classified as future work. 
1) Expanding the initial design of the C2TP artifact 
Currently the weighting of the attributes in Business 
Initiatives Index and Organizational Governance Index are 
equal. Therefore, each attribute is weighted evenly. The 
SME case study on enterprise global manufacturing 
company and similar ones have indicated that this position 
can be enhanced with a specialized weighting system in the 
future. This is to reflect that some organizations work in 
specialized industries with specialized business motivations. 
Hence they are bias towards certain attributes. For an 
example, a firm that specializes in Defense IT security has 
greater dependency on security and risk management 
attributes. Therefore, enhanced focus should be allocated to 
some 
attributes 
to 
reflect 
these 
industry 
specific 
circumstances. Significant industry benchmarking needs to 
be conducted initially to revise the weighing structure. 
Bateman and Wood [2] argues that cloud computing 
promotes “Green IT” as long as location of hardware and 
storage premises leverage renewable energy. According to 
Bajgoric [1] and Vykiukal, Wolf & Beck [38], cloud 
computing indirectly reduces greenhouse gases and CO2 
emissions. Issa, Chang and Issa [16] have proposed a 
PESTEL (i.e., Political, Economic, Social, Technological, 
Environmental and Legal) evaluation regarding cloud 
computing sustainability. The authors believe future 
expansions of the C2TP model should evaluate these current 
research developments. 
2) A multi agent design & implementation architecture 
The CPXML Taxonomy and service design of C2TP 
model can be leveraged by intelligent multi agents to capture 
process and evaluate information. This can be achieved by 
multiple intelligent agents working in synergy by 
communicating with other intelligent agents adhering to 
specific rule set. The agents can control the flow of 
information and manage the constant communications 
between the nodes. The agents can also be mobilized to 
address different components of the model and use complex 
algorithms to analyze developing situation in light of 
variable user input. The intelligent agents will be able adapt 
to information provided by the user and propose different 
metrics to evaluate the cloud suitability under these 
circumstances. Here are some of the opportunities leveraging 
current research 
 
Son and Sim [33] are creating a multi-issue 
negotiation 
mechanism 
for 
cloud 
service 
reservations. These agents will be able to negotiate 
price and time slot among cloud partners. The C2TP 
agents will be able to communicate with these 
intelligent agents to conduct and report on these 
negotiations. 
 
Kang and Sim [17] are creating a cloud ontology and 
agent based cloud search engine referred to as 
“Cloudle”. It is specifically designed to find cloud 
services over the internet. C2TP agents will be able 
to provide valuable information to expand this 
ontology and benefit form Cloudle search engine to 
locate complimentary cloud services. 
3) Industry benchmarking for C2TP model 
As discussed earlier, industry benchmarking has been 
identified as a key focus area for future work. It is expected 
that the C2TP model will evolve and refine according to the 
industry benchmarking feedback. Benchmarking and wide 
acceptance of the model will assist to refine the weighting 
system for attributes of the model. The C2TP model will 
evolve to comprise core competencies and will accumulate 
industry specific competencies as the result of the 
benchmarking activities. The participant organization will 
obtain richer and more competitive data analysis in their 
C2TP evaluation. Lenk and Nimis et al [20] has introduced 
an open framework to migrate the pre-existing cluster and 
grid computing capability to cloud computing. C2TP can 
leverage this framework to provide a future roadmap with 
the benchmark information as an implementation guide. This 
will provide both strategic and tactical information to the 
C2TP model consumer. 
 
 
142
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

4) Enhancement of CTPXML taxonomy 
The CPXML Taxonomy and service design of C2TP 
model can be leveraged by intelligent multi agents to 
capture, process and evaluate information. This can be 
achieved by multiple intelligent agents working in synergy 
by communicating with other intelligent agents adhering to 
specific rule set. An open implementation model has been 
proposed based on standard SOAP, UDDI and WSDL 
protocols. These standard protocols can be leveraged by 
intelligent multi agents to manage the C2TP evaluation 
process. The agents can control the flow of information and 
manage the constant communications between the nodes. 
The agents can also be mobilized to addresses different 
components of the model and use complex algorithms to 
analyze developing situation in light of variable user input. 
The intelligent agents will be able adapt to information 
provided by the user and propose different metrics to 
evaluate the cloud suitability under these circumstances. 
The CTPXML taxonomy is expected to evolve with each 
new revision of the model. The benchmarking and refining 
of the model will introduce new taxonomy changes that need 
to be reflected in the communication with the model 
consumers through intelligent agents. It is also expected that 
the current model‟s security and transport capabilities will be 
enhanced. This will also result in some adaptation of the 
CTPXML taxonomy. 
C. Related Work 
Cloud computing popularity has prompted several 
academic and industry initiatives to explore the capabilities 
and enhancements in cloud computing. The value 
proposition of cloud computing in comparison with on 
premise investments is one of the key research areas. There 
are several initiatives to specifically address the economic 
viability of the cloud investment. They are primarily driven 
by industry vendors to promote their offerings. Cloud ROI 
Framework [15] and Azure ROI calculator [24] are two 
examples of this initiative.  
There are several academic initiatives investigating key 
business model aspects of cloud computing. Buyya, Pandey 
& Vecchiola [4] proposed a market oriented architecture for 
cloud computing. This is a continuation of Buyya and Yeo et 
al. [6] attempt to introduce cloud economic model. Lenk et al 
[20] created a general framework that targets transition of 
existing systems to cloud platforms. Sun et al [35] discussed 
a SLA based model to facilitate financial services 
infrastructure. Brebner and Liu [3] compared various vendor 
offerings such as Google App Engine, Amazon EC2, and 
Microsoft Azure to provide guidance on cost, application 
performance (and limitations) for different deployment 
scenarios.  
These academic initiatives are parallel related work to 
C2TP. However, all these initiatives are focused on financial 
benefits an organization can derive from cloud computing. 
Therefore, the C2TP model offers a unique research value by 
including organization‟s business initiatives, governance 
processes, 
existing 
control 
structures 
and 
technical 
architecture attributes on top of the financial imperatives. 
The paper believes the C2TP model contributes to the cloud 
computing enterprise architecture and will be leveraged by 
future academic research endeavors. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Bajgoric N. (2010), “Always-on Enterprise Information Systems for 
Business Continuance: Technologies for Reliable and Scalable 
Operations”, IGI Global, USA 
[2] 
Bateman 
A. 
and 
Wood 
M. 
(2009), 
“Cloud 
Computing”, 
Bioinformatics, vol. 25, no. 12, p. 1475. 
[3] 
Brebner P. and Liu, A. (2010), “Modeling Cloud Cost and 
Performance”, Proceedings of  1st  Annual International Conference 
on Cloud Computing and Virtualization, pp. 79-86, Singapore. 
[4] 
Buyya R., Pandey S., and Vecchiola, C. (2009), “Cloudbus Toolkit 
for Market-Oriented Cloud Computing”, Proceeding of the 1st 
International Conference on Cloud Computing (CloudCom 2009, 
Springer, Germany), Beijing, China. 
[5] 
Buyya R., et al. (2009), “Cloud computing and emerging IT 
platforms: Vision, hype, and reality for delivering computing as the 
5th utility”, Future Generation Computer Systems, Elsevier and 
Science Direct. Vol. 25: 599-616. 
[6] 
Buyya R, Yeo C.S., and Venugopal S. (2008), “Market-oriented 
cloud computing: Vision, hype, and reality for delivering IT services 
as computing utilities”, Proceeding of the 10th IEEE Int. Conference 
on High Performance Computing and Communications, HPCC 2008, 
Dalian, China, Sept. 2008. 
[7] 
COBIT 4.1, (2007),  – Executive Summary Framework. IT 
Governance Institute. ISACA.org. pp.  4-16. 
[8] 
Erl T. (2005), Service-Oriented Architecture: concepts, technology 
and design, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ 
[9] 
Emig C., Krutz K., Link S., Momm C., and Abeck S (2007),  “Model-
Driven Development of SOA Services”, Cooperation & Management, 
Universität Karlsruhe (TH), Germany, p. 2. 
[10] Eucalyptus Public Cloud (EPC). 
http://eucalyptus.cs.ucsb.edu/wiki/EucalyptusPublicCloud/, [Retrived 
on 5 May 2010] 
[11] Hamilton D. (2008), “Cloud computing seen as next wave for 
technology 
investors”. 
Financial 
Post, 
04 
June 
2008, 
http://www.financialpost.com/money/story.html?id=562877  
[12] Henkel M. and Zdravkovic J. (2005), "Approaches to Service 
Interface Design", Proceedings of the Web Service Interoperability 
Workshop, First International Conference on Interoperability of 
Enterprise 
Software 
and 
Applications 
(INTEROP-ESA'2005), 
Hermes Science Publisher, Geneva, Switzerland 
[13] Huhns M. and Singh M. (2005), “IEEE Internet Computing, 
Published by the IEEE Computer Society, January edition. 
[14] ITSMF (2001), “IT Service Management Version 2.1a”, The IT 
Infrastructure Library, Office of Government Commerce UK.  
[15] Infosys 
(2010), 
Cloud 
ROI 
Framework, 
http://www.infosysblogs.com/cloudcomputing/2009/06/the_cloud_roi
_framework.html, [Retrieved on 27 March 2010] 
[16] Issa T. and Chang V. (2010), “The Impact of Cloud Computing and 
Organizational Sustainability”,  Annual International Conference on 
Cloud Computing and Virtualization,  pp. 163 – 169, Singapore 
[17] Kang J. and Sim K. M. (2010), “An agent based  Cloud Search 
Engine tat Consults a Cloud Ontology”,  Annual International 
Conference on Cloud Computing and Virtualization,  pp. 312 – 318, 
Singapore 
[18] Keahey K., Foster I., Freeman T., and Zhang X. (2005),  “Virtual 
workspaces: Achieving quality of service and quality of life in the 
Grid”, Scientific Programming, 13(4):265-275, October 2005 
[19] Lainhart J.W. (2000), “COBIT: A Methodology for Managing and 
Controlling Information and Information Technology Risks and 
Vulnerabilities”, Journal of Information Systems, Vol 14 (s-1), p. 21,  
doi: 10.2308/jis.2000.14.s-1.21 
143
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

[20] Lenk A., Nimis J., Sandholm T., and Tai S. (2010), “A Multi -issues 
Negotiation Mechanism for Cloud Service Reservation”,  Annual 
International Conference on Cloud Computing and Virtualization,  
pp. 297 – 305, Singapore 
[21] Lincoln Y. and Guba E.G. (1985), Naturalist Inquiry, Sage 
Publications, Newbury Park, CA. 
[22] Llorente 
I. 
and 
Montero 
R., 
OpenNebula 
Project. 
http://www.opennebula.org/ [Retrieved on  02 July 2010] 
[23] March S. T. and Smith G. (December 1995), “Design and Natural 
Science Research on Information Technology”, Decision Support 
Systems (15:4), pp. 251-266. 
[24] Neudesic (2010), Azure ROI Calculator,  
http://azureroi.cloudapp.net/, [Retriewed on 21 May 2010] 
[25] Nunamaker J., Chen M., and Purdin, T.D.M. (Winter 1991),  
“Systems Development in Information Systems Research”, Journal of 
Management Information Systems (7:3), pp. 89-106 
[26] Peiris C., Balachandra, B., and Sharma D. (2010a), „Cloud 
Computing Value Proposition: An Interrogation‟, Proceedings of the 
Annual 
International Conference on Cloud Computing and 
Virtualisation (CCV 2010),  pp. 193 – 200, Singapore, May 17-18, 
2010. 
[27] Peiris C., Balachandran B., and Sharma D. (2010b), “Governance 
Framework for Cloud Computing”,  GSTF International Journal on 
Computing,  ISSN 2010-2283, GSTF 
[28] Peiris C, Balachandran B & Sharma D (2010c), “Cloud Computing 
Tipping Point Model”,  GSTF International Journal on Computing, 
ISSN 2010-2283, GSTF 
[29] Peiris C., Balachandran B., and Sharma D (2010d), “Service Centric 
Model for Cloud Computing Tipping Point of an ICT Organisation”,  
Proceedings of the Annual International Conference on Cloud 
Computing and Virtualisation (CCV 2010),  pp. 186 – 193,  
Singapore, May 17-18, 2010. 
[30] Peiris C, Balachandran B., and Sharma, D.  (2010e) 
, 
“Validating and designing a service centric view for C2TP: Cloud 
Computing Tipping Point model”; Advances in Intelligent Decision 
Technologies, Vol 4, pp. 423--433, ISBN 978-3-642-14615-2, 
Springer Heidelberg. 
[31] Peiris C., Balachandran B., and Sharma D. (2010f), “C2TP: Service 
Model for Cloud”, International Journal of Cloud Computing, ISSN 
2043-9989, Inderscience (in press, accepted on 12th August, 2010) 
[32] Simon H.A. (1996), The Sciences of the Artificial (3rd ed.), MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
[33] Son S. and Sim K.M. (2010), “A Multi -issues Negotiation 
Mechanism for Cloud Service Reservation”,  Annual International 
Conference on Cloud Computing and Virtualization,  pp. 123 – 130, 
Singapore 
[34] Spiggle S. (1994), “Analysis and Interpretation of Qualitative Data in 
Consumer Research”, Consumer Reserach, Vol 21, No. 3, p. 491. 
[35] Sun Y.L., Perrottb R., Harmerc T., Cunninghamd C., and Wrighte, P. 
(2010), “An SLA Focused Financial Services Infrastructure”, 
Proceedings of  1st  Annual International Conference on Cloud 
Computing and Virtualization, pp. 59-65, Singapore 
[36] ValIT (2010)  , ISACA.org , 
http://www.isaca.org/Template.cfm?Section=Val_IT3&Template=/Ta
ggedPage/TaggedPageDisplay.cfm&TPLID=80&ContentID=51867, 
[Retrieved on  13 June 2010] 
[37] Vouk M. (2008), “Cloud Computing – Issues, research and 
Implementations”, 
Journal 
of 
Computing 
and 
Information 
Technology - CIT 16, 2008, 4, pp. 235–246, doi:10.2498/cit.1001391 
[38] Vykoukal J., Wolf M., and Beck R. (2009), “Does Green IT Matter? 
Analysis of the Relationship between Green IT and Grid Technology 
from a Resource-Based View Perspective”, in Pacific Asia 
Conference on Information Systems (PACIS). 
[39] Youseff L., Seymour K.,You H., Dongarra J., and Wolski R. (2008) 
The impact of paravirtualized memory hierarchy on linear algebra 
computational kernels and software, pp.141–152.ACM, 2008 
 
144
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

