Analysis of Protection Options for Virtualized Infrastructures in Infrastructure as a 
Service Cloud 
Ramaswamy Chandramouli 
Computer Security Division, Information Technology Laboratory 
National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Gaithersburg, MD, USA 
e-mail: mouli@nist.gov 
 
Abstract-Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) is one of the three 
main cloud service types where the cloud consumer consumes a 
great variety of resources, such as computing (Virtual 
Machines or VMs), virtual network, storage and utility 
programs (DBMS). Any large-scale offering of this service is 
feasible only through a virtualized infrastructure at the service 
provider. At the minimum, this infrastructure is made up of 
resources such as Virtualized hosts together with associated 
virtual network and hardware/software for data storage An 
IaaS’s consumer’s total set of interactions with these resources 
constitutes the set of use cases for IaaS cloud service. These use 
cases have associated security requirements and these 
requirements are met by protection options enabled by 
available security solutions/technologies. The contribution of 
this paper is to analyze these protection options.  The outcome 
of this analysis is a realistic characterization of the features, 
security strengths & architectural foundations of these 
protection options that will enable an IaaS consumer to choose 
the appropriate set of security solutions depending upon its 
deployment context. 
Keywords- 
Virtualization; 
Cloud 
Infrastructure; 
Virtual 
Machine; Virtual Network; Infrastructure as a Service 
I. INTRODUCTION 
      Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) is one of the three main 
cloud service models that makes available to consumers 
resources, such as computing (Virtual Machines or VMs), 
virtual network, storage and utility programs (DBMS). This 
results in a large virtualized infrastructure at the IaaS cloud 
service provider’s data centers. At the minimum, this 
infrastructure has to consist of Virtualized hosts together 
with associated virtual network and hardware/software for 
data storage. The IaaS consumer’s different interactions 
with these resources constitute the typical set of use cases 
for the IaaS cloud service. In order that these interactions 
are secure, certain security requirements should go with 
each use case. 
     With increasing demand for IaaS cloud service and 
competitive nature of the market place, cloud providers and 
third parties are offering many security solutions. 
Depending upon the functionality and architecture of these 
security solutions, they can either be deployed by IaaS cloud 
consumer (e.g., VM-based Anti-Virus software) or only by 
IaaS cloud provider (e.g., Hypervisor-based firewall). Also, 
given the varied feature set and the deployment architecture 
of these security solutions (let us call them as “protection 
options” in the rest of this paper), we need an objective way 
of correlating their security functionality (features) with the 
security requirements of use cases and determine as to how 
effectively they (protection options or security solutions) 
address those security requirements In other words, we need 
a methodology for performing analysis of the available 
protection options in the context of the security 
requirements stemming from a typical set of IaaS cloud 
service use cases. This is the objective of this paper. 
     The first step of the methodology, therefore, is to identify 
the typical set of uses cases encountered by IaaS cloud 
consumer. Those that we consider in this paper are: (a) 
Checking out VM Images, (b) Configuring VM instance OS 
(Guest OS), (c) Configuring Virus/Malware protection for 
VM instance, (d) Configuring VM instance access 
protection, (e) Configuring VM instance lifecycle operation 
protection, (f) Configuring VM instance isolation, and (g) 
Comprehensive Data protection. The justification for 
choosing these as use cases comes from the fact that in any 
IaaS SLA (Service Level Agreement), the responsibility for 
VM protection & its associated data lies entirely with the 
consumer. For each use case, we consider the security 
requirements and then analyze the features/capabilities of 
the available protection options (provided either by IaaS 
cloud provider as an integral part of the service or 
Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) solutions deployable by 
IaaS cloud consumer) to meet those requirements.  The rest 
of the paper is organized as follows: Each of the Sections II 
through VIII provides a brief description of the use case, the 
security requirements for each use case and an analysis of 
protection options that are enabled by available security 
solutions/technologies. The Conclusions and Benefits 
section summarizes the protection options and findings 
37
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

resulting from analysis for each use case and also outlines 
the benefits of our approach. 
II. CHECKING OUT VM IMAGES 
     VM images launched on a virtualized host become 
running VM instances.  Each VM image is a self-contained 
package that contains all constituents needed for running a 
complete computing stack such as: (a) OS binaries together 
with other files in the OS distribution, as well as patches, 
and (b) files containing description of all virtual resources 
that make up a VM – starting from processor cores, memory 
size, virtual disks or data stores, etc. Thus, we see that VM 
images are a set of files which are stored as data and this 
data forms the foundation for the security profile of 
production VM instances launched from them.  Any VM 
instance with unsafe security profile can result in 
jeopardizing the integrity of applications hosted on that VM 
instance and in some cases may endanger the integrity of 
other VM instances on the virtualized host. Hence, at the 
minimum, VM images have the following security 
requirements: 
 
Integrity 
Protection 
(VM 
Images 
can 
be 
created/modified only by authorized administrators and 
its contents should carry this seal of integrity.) 
 
Authorized use (limiting the administrators who are 
allowed to check out images from the Image repository 
and launch VM instances.) This is to prevent a 
phenomenon known as “VM Sprawl” which may result 
in proliferation of unauthorized VM instances. 
The protection options that can cover the above 
requirements are [1]: 
 
The integrity of the VM images can be protected using 
checksums or digital signatures. 
 
Robust access control scheme & assignment of names 
with well-defined semantics to VM images (e.g., 
association with an enterprise project), are two ways to 
control VM sprawl. The second option helps to trace 
the presence of a particular VM instance to a specific 
corporate effort (Project, Cost Center etc). 
 
The enterprise should develop a “VM Gold Standard” 
in terms of OS Distribution Version/Patch #, Resource 
Profile etc. and any VM image should be checked for 
conformance to this standard before deployment.  
 
The file containing metadata information about VM 
images should be logically separate from VM Images 
themselves and access to both of them subject to access 
control. 
The above protection options can be realized through COTS 
crypto modules and Configuration Management Tools. The 
integrity protection option has to be implemented by the 
stakeholder who created the VM image repository (IaaS 
cloud provider or IaaS cloud consumer) while authorized 
use of VM images for launching has to be implemented by 
IaaS cloud consumer. 
III. CONFIGURING VM INSTANCE OS (GUEST OS) 
     Securing the OS installed in the leased VM instance 
(Guest OS) is the first security task of the IaaS cloud 
consumer. The minimal set of security requirements for this 
task is: 
 
The OS modules configured should result in a hardened 
installation – one that contains the minimal modules 
from the OS distribution [1] that will provide the 
functionality for the purpose for which the VM instance 
is going to be deployed. 
 
It should contain the latest version of the OS 
distribution as well as the latest patches. 
     The protection options available to IaaS cloud consumers 
for meeting the above requirements are straightforward:  (a) 
Verify whether any of the pre-defined VM images offered 
by the IaaS cloud provider meets the above security 
requirements or build their own VM image meeting the 
above requirements and  (b) deploy only those compliant 
VM images as their VM instances in the cloud provider 
infrastructure. Being an automated verification process, 
these options require no further analysis. 
IV. CONFIGURING VIRUS/MALWARE PROTECTION 
FOR VM INSTANCE 
      Before loading them with applications, VM instances 
need to be secured with an anti-malware/ anti-virus engine 
as application execution involves lots of file activity. The 
security functions expected of these engines are [2]:  
Monitor file events (e.g., downloads and modifications), 
periodically scan files resident on the VM, detect viruses 
and malware using the set of signature files and perform the 
necessary remediation and/or generate alerts. Remediation 
may take the form of either deleting or quarantining the 
malicious files. These requirements can be met using one of 
the following protection options [2]: 
 
Run an Anti-virus engine on each VM instance 
 
Run an Anti-virus engine as a Virtual Security 
Appliance (VSA) in a specially hardened security VM 
that uses the hypervisor introspection API to scan and 
monitor file-level events in all VM instances in that 
virtualized host 
38
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Obviously, the second option holds more advantages than 
the first because: 
 
It consumes less resources overall compared to a in-VM 
solution 
 
Easier maintenance due to a single copy of anti-virus 
engine and signature files running in a VSA on a 
hardened VM 
 
Uniform application of policies across a set of VM 
instances since policies are specified centrally at one 
location 
 
Ability to add  sophisticated logging (generating logs 
conforming to a standard syslog format) and auditing 
capabilities since the anti-virus engine is not running in 
a production VM instance and hence not likely to hog 
the resources and affect application performance. 
     However, running an anti-virus engine as a VSA can 
only be done by IaaS cloud provider as it uses the 
introspection API of the hypervisor to which individual IaaS 
cloud consumers cannot be provided access. At the same 
time, an IaaS cloud consumer cannot hand over the task of 
providing anti-virus, anti-malware protection through a 
VSA to the IaaS cloud provider as the latter will gain 
visibility into all files belonging to the former, thus 
potentially compromising the confidentiality of enterprise 
assets. 
 
V. CONFIGURING VM INSTANCE ACCESS 
PROTECTION 
     The first security requirement for any server after loading 
and configuring application is access protection and the VM 
instance (virtual server) is no exception to this. VM instance 
access protection requirements can be met through 
following protection options: 
 
Establishing a secure session using a secure access 
protocol such as SSHv2 or TLS/SSL. 
 
Access 
to 
VM 
instances 
using 
multi 
factor 
authentication with one of the authentication factors 
being “what you have” type consisting of a public key 
certificate [3] 
 
Enabling privileged access (e.g., using SSH) to VM 
instances only from IaaS cloud consumer’s corporate 
network (e.g., specifying the sub network from which 
SSH access (using port 22) is possible) 
     The criteria to look for in the above protection options 
are: (a) Strength of cryptographic keys supported in SSH & 
TLS solutions and (b) the entropy of authentication secrets.  
VI. 
CONFIGURING VM INSTANCE 
LIFECYCLE 
OPERATION PROTECTION 
     One of the core class of functions that administrative 
users of IasS cloud consumer perform is Lifecycle 
operations on their VM instances – Start (Launch), Suspend, 
and Stop (Terminate).  These operations are performed 
using API calls to the hypervisor management interface. The 
security requirements for these operations are: 
 
Ability to restrict the set of administrators who can 
make these API calls 
 
Sending the API calls with integrity and in some certain 
instances in a confidential way 
     The protection options for meeting these requirements 
and an analysis of implementation issues are given below: 
     Restricting the set of API calls a particular IaaS cloud 
consumer user can invoke can be enforced using 
conventional access control mechanisms. Very often the 
Identity & Access Management system provides the ability 
to create groups or roles to which a set of allowable API 
calls can be assigned. By assigning an individual IaaS cloud 
(administrative) consumer to one or more of these groups or 
roles, that individual’s access rights can be restricted only to 
the set of permissions assigned to those groups or roles. 
Further API calls are protected by channeling them through 
a dedicated management network that is isolated from the 
network that carries the traffic for applications running on 
VM instances. 
     To ensure that lifecycle operations on VM instances have 
originated from the authorized IaaS cloud (administrative) 
consumer user and have not been tampered with, while 
being submitted across the network, commercial IaaS cloud 
services require that API calls to perform those operations 
are digitally signed and the interfaces are on a dedicated 
management network [3]. To obtain this capability, an IaaS 
cloud (administrative) consumer user has to generate a 
private cryptographic key and have the corresponding public 
key vouched for through a Certificate issued by a trusted 
Certificate Authority (CA). In addition, if the IaaS cloud 
(administrative) consumer user wants to send the API calls 
with confidentiality protection, he/she has to establish a SSL 
session with management interface provided by the IaaS 
cloud provider. 
VII. CONFIGURING VM INSTANCE ISOLATION 
     The business value for IaaS consumers to lease VM 
instances from an IaaS cloud provider comes from the 
ability to architect a multi-tier enterprise application by 
leasing multiple VM instances. To protect these applications 
39
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

running on different VM instances, IaaS consumers need to 
have mechanisms for isolating VM instances based on the 
type of application/application-tier hosted on them. This 
isolation requirement can be met by the following protection 
options. A detailed analysis of these protection options 
follow: 
 
Isolation through Firewall Configurations 
 
Isolation using VLAN ID/Portgroup 
A. Isolation through Firewall Configurations 
     Firewalling functions perform monitoring and place 
restrictions on both inbound and outbound traffic to and 
from specific VM instances. The argument for placing 
restrictions on outbound traffic is that if a VM instance 
belonging to a consumer is compromised, it could be used 
as a launching pad to attack other VM instances belonging 
to the same IaaS cloud consumer because of pre-established 
connections of a multi-tier application. 
There are two firewalling architectural options: 
 
Firewall based at the Virtual Network layer 
 
Firewall housed on VM instance 
     Firewalls implemented at the Virtual Network layer 
restrict inbound and outbound traffic to and from targeted 
VM instances and have the following architecture & 
features: 
 
They generally consists of two components [4]: (a) A 
Hypervisor kernel module that forwards all or selected 
(based on a set of rules) packets coming into a virtual 
network card (vNIC) of every VM in a virtualized host 
to a firewall that is run as a VSA and (b) A firewall that 
is run as a VSA on a specially-hardened VM instance 
that receives packets from the hypervisor kernel module 
(referred to in (a) above) and enforces traffic 
restrictions (allow or restrict). These restrictions are 
enforced based upon traffic filtering rules centrally 
defined on a virtual infrastructure management server 
and pushed into this VSA running on each virtualized 
host.   
 
They make use of VMI (Virtual Machine Introspection) 
capability of the hypervisor [5] to gain visibility into the 
network traffic flowing in and out of VM instances and 
reside between the physical network interface of the 
virtualized host and the vNICs of VM instances 
 
Traffic restriction policies can be enforced at the following 
level of granularity: (a) Based on TCP 5-tuple (Source IP, 
Destination IP, Source Port, Destination Port, Protocol  type 
(e.g., TCP/UDP), (b) Application Ports & (c) Administrator-
defined Security Groups (Cluster (a group of virtualized 
hosts), Resource pool (group of VMs) and  Port 
Group/VLAN (that can be defined at the level of virtual 
switches within a virtualized host)) 
Since, in a given virtualized host, VM instances belonging 
to tenants (consumers) run in a typical IaaS cloud service, 
the virtual network configuration has to be under the control 
of IaaS cloud provider, and hence, a virtual network-based 
firewall can only be installed and run by the IaaS cloud 
provider. However, the cloud provider can provide the 
capability for selective administration of this firewall to 
cloud consumers to specify firewall traffic rules pertaining 
to their own VM instances in that cloud service.  
     A typical scenario for IaaS cloud consumer to use a 
virtual network-based firewall provided by the IaaS cloud 
provider is the following: 
 
IaaS consumer runs three VM instances one each for 
three application types – Web Server, Application 
Server and Database Server. Each of these types can be 
designated as a Security Group. 
 
Restrictions on external access to VM instances 
belonging to each of the security group can be specified 
[3]. For example, access to VM instances in the Web 
Server Security Group can be allowed only on ports 
80/443 either with no restrictions on the IP source 
address or restricting it to the corporate IP network of 
the IaaS cloud consumer. Similarly access to VM 
instances belonging to Application Server Security 
group or Database Security Group can be restricted to 
only designated administrators on the corporate IP 
network and that too only to ports needed for 
establishing secure sessions (e.g., SSH on Port 22). 
 
Restrictions on VM instances from other VM instances 
run by the same cloud consumer can be specified based 
on the architecture of the multi-tier application. For 
example access to VM instances in the Application 
Server Security Group can be restricted to VM 
instances from the Web Server Security Group [3]. 
Similarly access to VM instances in the Database 
Security Group can be restricted to VM instances in the 
Application Server Security Group. 
     In order to obtain enhanced security assurance for 
applications running on VM instances, the IaaS cloud 
consumer should also augment the capabilities provided by 
virtual network-based firewalls with host-based firewalls 
running on their VM instances, though it may take away 
some valuable CPU cycles that could otherwise be dedicated 
to production applications. 
40
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

B. Isolation using VLAN ID/Portgroup 
     Another set of network level isolation (protection) 
options that IaaS consumers can look for in an IaaS cloud 
provider infrastructure consists of the following: 
 
Virtual LAN ID (VLANID)-based Isolation 
 
Portgroup Isolation 
     It may be difficult in many large scale IaaS cloud 
provider environments to provide isolation for multi-tenant 
VMs based on VLANIDs due to the following: 
 
VLANIDs are complex to configure and the number of 
IDs are limited (e.g., 4000) 
 
The security profiles of IaaS cloud consumer VMs are 
bound to change continuously requiring frequent  re-
configuration of VLANs. 
 
In providing isolation using VLANs, the enforcement 
point is a physical firewall or the physical switch. This 
requires routing all traffic originating from or coming 
into a VM to the physical NIC of the virtualized host 
and on to the trunk port of a physical switch, thus 
increasing the latency of communication packets with 
consequent increase in application response times. 
     Because of the above difficulties in providing isolation 
through VLAN IDs, IaaS cloud providers could be 
providing isolation between multi-tenant VMs through a 
feature called Portgroup Isolation [4]. A portgroup is a 
software-defined port on the software defined virtual switch 
on a virtualized host. In the Portgroup isolation, the required 
isolation between multi-tenant VMs could be provided by 
assigning the VMs of each tenant to a different portgroup. 
Isolation between two VMs belonging to two different 
tenants is obtained by assigning their corresponding VM 
instances to different portgroups and by installing a gateway 
software that routes inter-VM traffic based on Portgroup 
IDs. 
VIII. COMPREHENSIVE DATA PROTECTION IN IAAS 
CLOUD SERVICE 
     The complete set of data in a typical IaaS cloud service 
consists of the following: (a) Data generated/used by 
applications running in the VM instances and (b) Data 
defining the entire running VM instance. Examples of 
former type of data are: (a) Data originating from cloud 
consumer’s client software (e.g., Data Input to an 
application running in a VM instance) and (b) Data 
originating from a VM instance (e.g., an application in a 
VM instance that generates data).  Let us now look at the 
security requirements and the available protection options 
that IaaS consumers have for these two types of data. 
 
A. Data Protection for Data Generated/Used by VM 
Instances 
        The storage artifact available to IaaS cloud consumer 
for associating storage with their VM instances is the 
concept of “Virtual Disks”. However the mapping of these 
logical storage units (i.e., virtual disks) to physical storage 
artifacts is entirely under the control of IaaS cloud provider. 
For example, the virtual disks may map to: (a) local physical 
disks of the virtualized host (b) remotely located NFS file 
volumes or (c) remote block storage devices accessed 
through Internet Small Computer System Interface (iSCSI) 
or Storage Area Network (SAN) protocols. Irrespective of 
the storage technology deployed by IaaS cloud provider, 
protection of data is entirely the responsibility of the IaaS 
cloud consumer and may span the following requirements: 
 
Data in Transit protection – This applies to: (a) data in 
transit between IaaS consumer’s client software and 
VM instance and (b) data travelling between two VM 
instances of  the same IaaS consumer. The protection 
options for both these classes of in-transit data can be 
provided through the capability to set up secure 
sessions (to or between VM instances) using protocols 
such as SSHv2 or TLS/SS (described under VM 
instance access protection) as these protocols enable 
data to be both encrypted and digitally signed.  
 
Data at Rest protection – This applies to: (a) 
unstructured data stored under a file system defined 
over a virtual disk volume and (b) structured data stored 
by DBMS engine running in VM instances. Regardless 
of the type of data,it can be protected from 
unauthorized 
access/modification 
through 
the 
following: (a) Access Control – Using access control 
mechanisms available in file systems or DBMS 
engines, IaaS consumer administrators can define 
permissions at the appropriate level of granularity for 
their cloud users, and  (b) Encryption. Generally most 
cloud offerings leave it to the IaaS cloud consumer to 
encrypt their data. The practical limitation that IaaS 
consumers encounter while deploying an encryption 
mechanism to encrypt data going into the virtual disks 
associated with their VM instances is that the 
encryption engine and the associated key management 
engine have to be run in the IaaS cloud provider’s 
infrastructure [6] – most likely in a dedicated VM 
instance for performance reasons. 
 
Data Durability/Recoverability protection – This 
applies to protecting data due to corruption and 
41
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

loss/theft of the media holding the data. The most 
common technique applied is a mechanism for robust 
backup and recovery capability for restore/recovery of 
data in case of data corruption incidences. This kind of 
protection again may apply to two types of data. They 
are: (a) Data generated/used by applications running on 
VM 
instances 
(for 
which 
transit/acess/storage 
protection have been discussed in the previous sections) 
and (b) Data defining the entire VM instance itself. For 
data of the first type, the IaaS cloud consumers should 
have to employ on their own, either a data 
backup/recovery solution or rely on a Cloud Storage 
service that may be offered by the same IaaS cloud 
provider or some other cloud provider. This is due to 
the fact that such a backup/recovery service is usually 
not offered as an integral part of IaaS cloud service. 
Regarding durability/recoverability protection for “data 
that defines the entire VM instance”, there are several 
options and hence we devote a separate section to 
discuss this. 
 
B. Data Protection for Files that define the VM instance 
     Since VM images are a set of data files (refer section II), 
VM instances that are launched from those images are made 
up of the same set of files augmented with files that capture 
the state of the VM instance such as virtual memory swap 
files and log files. The following backup & recovery 
solutions are available for backing up files that define the 
VM instance: 
 
Image-level backup with Snapshot capability [7]:  In 
this backup mode, the entire contents of the virtual disk 
defined in the VM instance is backed up as an Image. 
This backup is done without going through the guest 
OS of the VM instance. In this type of backup, in order 
to obtain a transaction-level consistency of data in the 
various disk blocks, the following procedure is adopted: 
First the VM instance is subject to quiescing using a 
special driver that runs inside the guest OS. This action 
momentarily pauses the running processes on the VM 
instance and forces the guest OS and applications to 
write any pending data to disk. Once that is complete, a 
virtualization-specific process called Snapshot is 
performed using a tool at the hypervisor layer. The 
effect of this snapshot process is that any subsequent 
writes by the running VM instance will be written to a 
temporary virtual disk file, thus freezing the contents of 
the original disk file. After the image-level backup of 
the original (virtual) disk file is completed, the contents 
of the temporary virtual disk file is merged block by 
block with the original disk file to bring the contents of 
the VM instance up to date and the snapshot is also 
deleted. The advantage of image-level backup is that it 
not only makes the backup a simple process but also the 
restore as well since the image-level backup can simply 
be copied to any other storage device attached to any 
other virtualized host and the VM restarted in the new 
virtualized host. 
 
File-level backup: This backup is done at the level of 
individual files that constitute a running VM instance 
and is done through VM instance OS (Guest OS). The 
downside of this type of backup is that it may take away 
some valuable CPU cycles allocated to a VM instance 
which might otherwise be used by applications running 
on them. 
 
IX. CONCLUSIONS AND BENEFITS 
     In this paper, we identified the typical set of uses cases 
for 
IaaS 
cloud 
consumer, 
the 
associated 
security 
requirements for its safe operation and analyzed the 
protection options available to meet those requirements 
based on security solutions/ technologies offered by IaaS 
cloud 
providers 
and 
third 
parties. 
 
The 
security 
requirements, protection options and the focus of analysis of 
those protection options in terms of feature set/deployment 
architecture are summarized in Table 1. The primary 
benefits of the analysis of the protection options are: (a) 
Provides a realistic picture of security protection options the 
IaaS cloud consumer can deploy, (b) Provides a realistic 
assessment of IaaS cloud provider’s security capabilities and 
those that can be demanded and (c) Enables IaaS cloud 
consumer to choose the most appropriate security 
configuration for their VM instances depending upon the 
profile of the applications running in them. It must be 
mentioned that in spite of the due diligence in analysis of 
protection options, there are two areas in which obtaining 
the necessary security assurance is difficult. They are: (a) 
Device Drivers employed in Hypervisors and (b) Remote 
Management software [8] deployed to facilitate remote 
execution of VM Lifecycle operations. 
 
 
 
 
 
42
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

TABLE 1.  SUMMARY OF PROTECTION OPTIONS ANALYSIS FOR IAAS USE CASES 
Section – Use Case 
Security Requirements 
Protection Options 
Features, Security Strengths & 
Architectural Foundation 
Checking out VM 
Images 
(a)Integrity of  VM Image files 
(b) Preventing Unauthorized 
VM launches 
(a) Digitally signed VM Images 
(b) Name Space Control, Gold Standard 
Configuration,  Separation  of  Data & 
Metadata & Access control 
(a) Strength of Cryptographic 
Signing Keys, Secure session with 
Image Repositories                         
(b) Robust Configuration Mgmt 
Utilities 
Configuring VM 
Instance OS (Guest OS) 
(a) 
Hardened OS Distribution 
(b) Latest Patches 
Verify that IaaS provider’s pre-defined 
images meet the IaaS consumer’s Gold 
Standard 
 N/A 
Configuring Virus / 
Malware Protection 
(a) 
Monitor File Events, Scan 
Files 
(b) File Remediation 
Run Anti-Virus Engine on each VM 
instance (or) Run one copy as a 
Security Virtual Appliance 
Security Virtual Appliance enables 
uniform application of policies & 
Consumes less resources  
Configuring VM 
instance Access 
Protection 
(a) 
Secure Session  
(b) Multifactor Authentication 
(a) 
SSHv2 or TLS/SSL 
(b) PKI-based Authentication or One-
time Password Token 
Strength of Encryption / Signing 
Keys & Entropy of  Authentication 
secrets 
Configuring VM 
instance lifecycle 
operation 
(a) 
Limit API calls to 
authorized admins 
(b) Sending API calls with 
integrity & Confidentiality 
(a) 
Identity & Access Management 
System 
(b) Digitally signed API calls & 
Dedicated Management network 
(a) 
Creation of Admin 
Groups/Roles 
(b) Public Cryptographic Keys on 
Virtualized Host 
Configuring VM 
Instance Isolation 
Restricting the type of inbound 
& outbound traffic between 
VMs 
(a) 
In-VM or Virtual Network based 
Firewall 
(b) Isolation using VLAN ID/ 
Portgroup 
(a) 
Virtual Network based 
Firewalls use Hypervisor’s 
Introspection API 
(b) Portgroup Isolation solutions 
function as Application 
Gateway 
Comprehensive Data 
Protection in IaaS cloud 
service 
Confidentiality & Integrity 
protection for in-transit & stored 
data (generated by & 
constituting VM instance) 
(a) 
Secure Session Protocols (in-
transit data) 
(b)  Access Control + Encryption 
(stored data) 
(a) 
Strength of cryptographic 
session keys 
(b) Strong Authentication + Strong 
Encryption Keys 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Brooks, C. Caicedo, and J. Park, “Security Challenges and 
Countermeasures for Trusted Virtualized Computing Environments,” 
World Congress on Internet Security, Jan  2012, pp. 117-122. 
[2] J. D. Sherry, “Continuous Monitoring in a Virtual Environment,“  Nov 
2013, http://www.trendmicro.com/cloud-
content/us/pdfs/business/reports/rpt_continuous-monitoring-virtual-
environment.pdf  [Retrieved: March, 2014] 
[3] “Amazon Web Services: Overview of Security Processes,” March 2013, 
http://aws.amazon.com/security/ [Retrieved: February, 2014] 
[4] “The Technology Foundations of VMware vShield,” Oct 2013, 
http://www.vmware.com/files/pdf/techpaper/vShield-Tech-Foundations-
WP.pdf [Retrieved: April, 2014] 
[5] Q. Chen, et al, “On State of the Art in Virtual Machine Security”  IEEE 
Southeastcon, 2012, pp.  1-6. 
[6] R. Chandramouli, M. Iorga, and S. Chokhani, “Cryptographic Key 
Management Issues and Challenges in Cloud Services,”  NIST IR  7956, 
Sept 2013, http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2013/NIST.IR.7956.pdf 
[Retrieved: April, 2014] 
[7] E. Siebert, “The Expert Guide to VMWare Data Protection and Disaster 
Recovery,”  July 2012, http://www.veeam.com/wp-vmware-data-
protection-disaster-recovery-expert-guide.html [Retrieved: March, 2014] 
 [8] D. P. Botero, J. Szefer, and R. B. Lee, “Characterizing Hypervisor 
Vulnerabilities in Cloud Computing Servers,” International Workshop on 
Security in Cloud Computing, May 2013, pp. 3-10.  
 
43
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-338-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

