OpenStack Cloud Security Vulnerabilities from Inside and Outside
Sasko Ristov, Marjan Gusev and Aleksandar Donevski
Ss. Cyril and Methodius University,
Faculty of Information Sciences and Computer Engineering,
Skopje, Macedonia
Email: sashko.ristov@ﬁnki.ukim.mk, marjan.gushev@ﬁnki.ukim.mk, aleksandar.donevski@outlook.com
Abstract—As usage of cloud computing increases, customers
are mainly concerned about choosing cloud infrastructure
with sufﬁcient security. Concerns are greater in the multi-
tenant environment on a public cloud. This paper addresses
the security assessment of OpenStack open source cloud so-
lution and virtual machine instances with different operating
systems hosted in the cloud. The methodology and realized
experiments target vulnerabilities from both inside and outside
the cloud. We tested four different platforms and analyzed
the security assessment. The main conclusions of the realized
experiments show that multi-tenant environment raises new
security challenges, there are more vulnerabilities from inside
than outside and that Linux based Ubuntu, CentOS and Fedora
are less vulnerable than Windows. We discuss details about
these vulnerabilities and show how they can be solved by
appropriate patches and other solutions.
Keywords-Cloud Computing; Security Assessment; Virtualiza-
tion.
I. INTRODUCTION
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) is the most offered
cloud service layer by public cloud service providers and
also the most used by customers. There are lots of open
source cloud solutions that offer building IaaS framework
over Internet. Selecting a proper IaaS framework is a difﬁcult
task since the customers have different requirements and
all IaaS frameworks offer various advantages [1]. System
administrators mostly care about easy deployment, scalabil-
ity, supporting different operating systems, hypervisors, and
licensing. However, the main concern of cloud computing
customers is the security. New challenges arise due to multi-
tenancy, virtualization, data and application transfer to third
party.
Building a private cloud is a good approach that might
solve most of the security challenges, since it mitigates the
security risks. However, private clouds lack scalability and
elasticity [2]. Therefore, most customers will make their de-
cisions in favor of public clouds, since they offer scalability,
elasticity and cost reduction. For example, public clouds
reduce the cost up to 85% for disaster recovery compared to
on-premise resources [3]. It could provide better Recovery
Point Objective (RPO) due to layered backup strategy and
also Recovery Time Objective (RTO) due to built-in geo-
graphic redundancy. Nevertheless, the cloud service provider
maybe has not deﬁned these objectives or they do not meet
with the customer’s one [4]. Most discussions and related
papers conclude that the main obstacle for public cloud
solutions is the security [2]. Conﬁdentiality, integrity and
availability are the biggest security concerns faced by the
customers in public cloud solutions [5].
Security evaluation of the cloud architecture and cloud
service provider should be realized before migrating the
customer virtual machines in public cloud. Traditional se-
curity incident handling procedures are applicable for cloud
computing with some modiﬁcation to function optimally [6].
Security assessment and comparison of commercial clouds
might be a difﬁcult task because of the limited access rights.
Therefore, many public cloud service providers use open
source clouds.
In this paper, we are interested in analyzing the security
vulnerabilities from private or public networks both on vir-
tual machine instances and OpenStack [7] cloud nodes. We
focus on OpenStack open source cloud since it is a scalable
solution and more than 60 leading companies participate in
its development. The goal of this research is to check the
validity of the following hypotheses:
H1
The cloud solution is more vulnerable from inside
than outside. Inside vulnerabilities subsume the
outside vulnerabilities;
H2
The multi-tenant environment raises new security
vulnerabilities risks from inside the cloud, both for
the tenants and the OpenStack cloud provider; and
H3
Windows based virtual machine instances are more
vulnerable than Linux based CentOS [8], Ubuntu
[9] and Fedora [10].
The hypotheses are set since the tenants in the cloud
are exposed not only from outside, but also from inside
the cloud. That is, there is a threat from other tenants, but
also from the cloud provider. The cloud provider has also
threats from inside, i.e., the tenants. The systems are more
vulnerable if the attacker is in the same LAN [11].
We installed the OpenStack cloud with default installation,
where the virtual machine instances are installed with default
operating systems. Our goal is to determine all possible risks
that arise from inside and outside the OpenStack cloud,
the OpenStack cloud architecture vulnerabilities, as well
as to propose measures to mitigate the security risks by
securing detected vulnerabilities. Our analysis is focused
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

toward operating system vulnerabilities of virtual machine
instance hosted in the cloud and the cloud controller where
the OpenStack cloud services are deployed. We assess the
OpenStack product weaknesses, possibilities of unauthorized
access, ensuring data conﬁdentiality, integrity and availabil-
ity, risk of DoS (Denial-of-Service) or even Distributed DoS
(DDoS) attacks, man-in-the-middle attack, etc.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Related
work is presented in Section II. Section III brieﬂy describes
the OpenStack cloud architecture and its components. The
methodology for security assessment is presented in Sec-
tion IV. In Section V, we present assessment results both for
inside and outside vulnerabilities. We discuss and conclude
our work, and present future work in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
There are a lot of open source cloud solutions to build
a private cloud with IaaS cloud service layer. Voras et
al. [12] devise a set of criteria to evaluate and compare
most common open source IaaS cloud solutions. Mahjoub
et al. [13] compare the open source technologies to help
customers to choose the best cloud offer of open source
technologies. Most common open source cloud computing
platforms are scalable, provide IaaS, support dynamic plat-
form, Xen virtualization technology, linux operating system
and Java [14]. However, they have different purposes. For
example, Eucalyptus [15] ﬁts well to build a public cloud
services (IaaS) with homogeneous pool of hypervisors, while
OpenNebula [16] ﬁts well for building private/hybrid cloud
with heterogeneous virtualization platforms [17].
Many authors have analyzed the cloud security challenges
and propose methodologies for security evaluation of the
cloud solutions. Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) announce
Cloud Control Matrix Version 1.3 [18] which can assist
the potential cloud customers to assess the overall security
risk of a cloud service providers classifying the security
controls according to cloud service layer and architecture. A
methodology for security evaluation of on-premise systems
and cloud computing based on ISO 27001:2005 [19] is pro-
posed in [20]. The authors in [4] evaluate ISO 27001:2005
control objective importance for on-premise and the three
cloud service layers IaaS, PaaS (Platform as a Service) and
SaaS (Software as a Service). International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) is developing new guidelines ISO/IEC
WD TS 27017 [21] that will recommend relevant secu-
rity controls for information security management system
(ISMS) implementation in cloud computing. Eucalyptus and
CloudStack [22] have integrated the maximum security level
in front of OpenNebula and OpenStack open source cloud
solutions [23].
III. THE OPENSTACK CLOUD ARCHITECTURE
Open source clouds have similar architecture [24]. Each
open source cloud has, at minimum:
Figure 1.
The three components of OpenStack cloud [7]
• cloud controller - several services are deployed on
this server that control the system, network, schedule
the virtual machine instances and act as administrator
interface; and
• cloud node - this server hosts the virtual machine
instances of virtual machines. It communicates with the
cloud controller.
This section brieﬂy describes the architecture of the
newest Folsom release of OpenStack cloud, its components,
networking and features.
A. OpenStack Components
Figure 1 depicts the three main components of OpenStack
cloud: Compute, Object Storage, and Image Service.
Compute Infrastructure (Nova) is the core part of the
OpenStack cloud that manages instances of virtual machines
and networking. Object Storage is the subsystem that stores
the objects in a massively scalable, large capacity system. It
back ups and archives data, stores secondary or tertiary static
data, stores data when predicting storage capacity is difﬁcult,
and creates the elasticity and ﬂexibility of cloud-based
storage for customer web applications. Image Service is
lookup and retrieval subsystem for virtual machine images.
B. OpenStack Deployment
OpenStack can be deployed and runs on Linux Ubuntu,
CentOS and RedHat operating systems. It supports KVM
[25], Xen [26], UML [27], and Hyper-V [28] hypervisors.
Nova services can be deployed either on the same physical
server or they can be installed on separate servers. The
OpenStack cloud can be deployed in three different modes:
• Single Node: All nova-services are deployed on only
one physical server which hosts also all the virtual
machine instances.
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Figure 2.
OpenStack networking example [7]
• Dual Node: This deployment consists of two physical
servers, i.e., the Cloud Controller Node (CCN) and the
Compute Node (CN). The former is used as cloud con-
troller which runs all the nova-services except for nova-
compute. The latter is deployed with nova-compute to
instantiate virtual machine instances.
• Multiple Node: Particular number of CNs can be in-
stalled resulting in a multiple node installation. Vol-
ume controller and a network controller can be added
as separate nodes in a more complex, multiple node
installation.
We deployed the OpenStack in the Single Node since
we are not interested in performance, but for security. The
choice for Single Node is based on the fact that the security
vulnerabilities of OpenStack services do not depend on the
number of physical nodes.
C. OpenStack Networking
OpenStack network consists of two networks, public and
private, as depicted in Figure 2. IP addresses from the public
network are associated with virtual machines instances to
be accessed from the public Internet. The private network is
used for internal cloud web service communication.
In this paper, we are interested in analyzing the security
vulnerabilities from private or public networks both on vir-
tual machine instances and OpenStack cloud node deployed
in Single Node.
IV. METHODOLOGY FOR SECURITY ASSESSMENT
This section presents the methodology for security assess-
ment on OpenStack cloud and virtual machine instances. It
is based on two assessments with two groups of test cases for
different targets. The goal of the assessments is to determine
the vulnerabilities of the OpenStack cloud nodes (Compute
and Controller deployed in one physical server) and virtual
machine instances with different operating systems, both
from inside and outside the OpenStack cloud.
A. The Targets
Two different target groups will be assessed. The ﬁrst
target group covers the assessment of physical OpenStack
server node which is installed with Ubuntu Server 12.04
64-bit operating system. The second target group covers the
assessment of virtual machine instances hosted in the cloud
with operating systems:
• Windows 2008 R2 Standard 64 bit;
• CentOS 6 64 bit;
• Ubuntu 10.04 Server Edition 64 bit; and
• Fedora 17 64 bit.
The virtual machine instances are installed with default
conﬁguration in order to detect all possible vulnerabilities.
We will address which vulnerabilities can be secured after
implementing additional patches or reconﬁgurations.
B. Security Assessment Plan
The security assessment basic goal is to determine the
security vulnerabilities of the targets from inside and outside
the OpenStack cloud. Therefore, we realize two different
assessments using Nessus 5 vulnerability and conﬁguration
assessment scanner [29] using External Network Scan pol-
icy. Nessus scans all TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)
and UDP (User Datagram Protocol) ports, as well as the
vulnerabilities of the services that work on certain opened
port.
Each vulnerability is rated as derived from the associated
Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) [30] score:
• Info if CVSS score is 0;
• Low for CVSS score ∈ {1, 2, 3};
• Medium for CVSS score ∈ {4, 5, 6};
• High for CVSS score ∈ {7, 8, 9}; and
• Critical if CVSS score is 10.
Figure 3 depicts the test cases of security assessment from
inside and outside the OpenStack cloud, i.e., on private and
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

CCN/CN
Public Network
Private Network
C
F
W
U
Figure 3.
Inside and outside security assessment
public network. U denotes the Ubuntu operating system,
while F, C and W denote the Fedora, CentOS and Windows
operating systems, correspondingly.
1) Inside Security Assessment: The Nessus client is de-
ployed on one virtual machine instance. It scans the four
virtual machine instances with different operating systems
and cloud physical server node (both CCN and CN are the
same physical server in our case). This assessment from
inside simulates the tenant and its goal is to assess the
vulnerabilities that arise from the cloud multi-tenancy. Open-
Stack private network is used to communicate among the
target inside virtual machine instances, the cloud physical
node and the virtual machine instance with Nessus client.
2) Outside Security Assessment: The Nessus client is
deployed on a workstation outside the OpenStack cloud,
i.e., on a public network. It also scans the same four
virtual machine instances with different operating systems
hosted in the OpenStack cloud and the cloud physical server
node. This assessment goal is to assess the vulnerabilities
that arise for virtual machine instances and the OpenStack
cloud services outside the cloud. OpenStack public network
and ﬂoating IP addresses are used for communication with
virtual machine instances and cloud physical server node.
V. THE RESULTS OF THE ASSESSMENT
This section presents the results of both assessments for
both target groups deﬁned in previous Section IV. We omit
the results of the assessments with CVSS score 0 since they
are informative, rather than real vulnerabilities. The values
Figure 4.
Summary results of OpenStack security assessment
for critical vulnerabilities are also omitted since we have not
found any critical vulnerability during the assessments.
A. OpenStack Node Vulnerabilities
Figure 4 depicts the summary results of the security
assessment of the cloud node.
The results conﬁrm the hypothesis H1 that there are more
inside vulnerabilities which subsume the outside vulnerabili-
ties. 13 medium and 3 low vulnerabilities are detected from
inside and only 1 low and 12 medium vulnerabilities are
detected from outside. High vulnerabilities are not detected
neither from outside, nor from inside.
Let us assess detected vulnerabilities in more detail. 6
Web Server Generic XSS (Cross-site scripting) and 6 Web
Server Generic Cookie Injection vulnerabilities (medium)
are detected by both assessments on several ports. We
conclude that the web server is prone to cross-site scripting
and cookie injection attacks. Therefore, new patches must
be developed in order to secure two assessed vulnerabili-
ties. Common low vulnerability is the usage of plain text
authentication forms which should be transmitted encrypted
over secured HTTPS.
Assessment of inside vulnerabilities detected 1 additional
medium vulnerability, i.e., the DNS (Domain Name System)
server is vulnerable to cache snooping attacks. DNS software
vendor should ﬁx it.
Two additional low vulnerabilities are detected, as well.
DHCP (Dynamic Host Conﬁguration Protocol) server may
expose information about the associated network and ap-
plying ﬁltering will keep the information off the network
and mitigate the risk of this vulnerability. The web server
leaks a private IP address that is usually hidden behind
a NAT (Network Address Translation) Firewall or proxy
server. However, this is not a real vulnerability since our
private IP address will be a public IP in real world scenario.
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Figure 5.
Summary results of outside security assessment on instances
B. Virtual Machine Instance Vulnerabilities
In this section we present and analyze the results of the
assessment of the four instances, each with different oper-
ating system, both from inside and outside the OpenStack
cloud.
1) Vulnerabilities from Outside: Figure 5 depicts the
summary results of the outside security assessment on virtual
machine instances. U denotes the Ubuntu operating system,
while F, C and W denote the Fedora, CentOS and Windows
operating systems, correspondingly.
The Nessus client has not detected any vulnerability
neither on Ubuntu, nor on Fedora, nor on CentOS operating
system. 1 high and 1 medium vulnerabilities are detected on
Windows operating system with the assessment from outside
the OpenStack. Windows could allow arbitrary code execu-
tion (high vulnerability) in the implementation of the Re-
mote Desktop Protocol (RDP). The problem with Windows
lies in the requirement to activate remote desktop to connect
to Windows, instead of secured SSH (Secure Shell) protocol
to connect on Linux based operating systems. However,
installing the existing patch will secure the vulnerability.
Network Level Authentication (NLA) on the remote RDP
server is not conﬁgured (Low vulnerability) by default and
should be enabled.
2) Vulnerabilities from Inside: Figure 6 depicts the sum-
mary results of the inside security assessment on virtual
machine instances hosted in OpenStack.
Linux based operating systems are not detected with any
security vulnerability from outside the OpenStack cloud,
as well. The same 1 high and 1 medium vulnerabilities
are detected from inside the virtual machine instance with
Windows operating system. However, 3 additional medium
vulnerabilities are detected. The ﬁrst, Windows is using
weak cryptography by default for RDP and changing RDP
encryption level to ”High” or ”FIPS Compliant” will mit-
igate this vulnerability. The second, the virtual machine
instance is vulnerable to a man-in-the-middle attack. Forcing
Figure 6.
Summary results of inside security assessment on instances
SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) or RDP with NLA will secure
the vulnerability. The last detected medium vulnerability is
”man-in-the-middle attack against the Server Message Block
(SMB) server” which can be secured by enforcing message
signing.
FIPS-140 incompliance for terminal services encryption
level is the additional low vulnerability which can be secured
changing RDP encryption level to ”FIPS Compliant”.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have realized security assessments of OpenStack cloud
services and four virtual machine instances with different
operating systems Fedora, Ubuntu, CentOS and Windows.
The experiments addressed the security vulnerabilities both
from inside and outside the OpenStack cloud.
The results of the assessments proved hypothesis H2 that
cloud multi-tenant environment raises new security vulner-
abilities risks from inside the cloud, both for the tenants
and the OpenStack cloud provider. Inside vulnerabilities
subsume the outside vulnerabilities for the cloud node and
each operating system, which proves the hypothesis H1.
Vulnerabilities on Linux operating systems are not de-
tected, neither from outside, nor inside. The assessment of
Windows operating system shows additional 1 low and 3
medium security vulnerabilities, which proves the hypothesis
H3. All these vulnerabilities are not detected from outside
since the OpenStack cloud denies all TCP and UDP ports
from outside by default. They still exist because of the
Windows default installation (conﬁguration) and the require-
ments of creating Windows image.
Although Windows based virtual machine instances with
default conﬁguration are less secure than Linux based
instances, all Windows vulnerabilities can be secured by
implementing existing patches or reconﬁguration. Only then
RDP port 3389 should be opened to outside.
OpenStack cloud is also more vulnerable from inside the
cloud with additional 1 medium and 2 low vulnerabilities
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

which can be secured with reconﬁguration. However, we
detect that OpenStack cloud has 2 medium vulnerabilities on
6 different ports that can not be secured with reconﬁguration,
but with new patches that should be developed. All detected
OpenStack security vulnerabilities do not depend on creating
different virtual machine images, but they exist with default
OpenStack deployment.
This paper realizes the security assessment of OpenStack
open source cloud and virtual machine instances hosted with
different operating systems. We will continue the security
assessment on the other open source clouds and bring
relevant conclusions about their security vulnerabilities. This
will help the customers to select the most appropriate cloud
solution regarding the security.
REFERENCES
[1] G. von Laszewski, J. Diaz, F. Wang, and G. Fox, “Com-
parison of multiple cloud frameworks,” in Cloud Computing
(CLOUD), 2012 IEEE 5th International Conference on, june
2012, pp. 734 –741.
[2] M. Shtern, B. Simmons, M. Smit, and M. Litoiu, “An archi-
tecture for overlaying private clouds on public providers,” in
8th Int. Conf. on Network and Service Management, CNSM
2012, Las Vegas, USA, 2012.
[3] T. Wood, E. Cecchet, K. K. Ramakrishnan, P. Shenoy,
J. van der Merwe, and A. Venkataramani, “Disaster recovery
as a cloud service: economic beneﬁts & deployment chal-
lenges,” in Proc. of the 2nd USENIX conf. on Hot topics in
cloud comp., ser. HotCloud’10, USA, 2010, pp. 8–8.
[4] S. Ristov, M. Gusev, and M. Kostoska, “Cloud computing
security in business information systems,” International Jour-
nal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), vol. 4,
no. 2, March 2012, pp. 75–93.
[5] S. Chaves, C. Westphall, C. Westphall, and G. Geronimo,
“Customer security concerns in cloud computing,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 10-th Int. Conf. on Networks, ser. ICN 2011.
IARIA, 2011, pp. 7–11.
[6] A. TaheriMonfared and M. G. Jaatun, “As strong as the weak-
est link: Handling compromised components in OpenStack,”
in Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE Third International Con-
ference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science, ser.
CLOUDCOM ’11.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer
Society, 2011, pp. 189–196.
[7] O. C. Software. Openstack cloud. [Retrieved: March, 2013].
[Online]. Available: http://openstack.org
[8] T.
C.
Enterprise,
“Centos,”
[Retrieved:
March,
2013].
[Online]. Available: http://www.centos.org/
[9] Canonical, “Ubuntu,” [Retrieved: March, 2013]. [Online].
Available: http://www.canonical.com/
[10] A. R. H.-S. C. Project, “Fedora,” [Retrieved: March, 2013].
[Online]. Available: http://fedoraproject.org/
[11] H.-C. Li, P.-H. Liang, J.-M. Yang, and S.-J. Chen, “Analy-
sis on cloud-based security vulnerability assessment,” in e-
Business Engineering (ICEBE), 2010 IEEE 7th International
Conference on, Nov. 2010, pp. 490–494.
[12] I. Voras, B. Mihaljevic, and M. Orlic, “Criteria for evaluation
of open source cloud computing solutions,” in Information
Technology Interfaces (ITI), Proceedings of the ITI 2011 33rd
International Conference on, june 2011, pp. 137 –142.
[13] M. Mahjoub, A. Mdhaffar, R. B. Halima, and M. Jmaiel, “A
comparative study of the current cloud computing technolo-
gies and offers,” in Proceedings of the 2011 First International
Symposium on Network Cloud Computing and Applications,
ser. NCCA ’11.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer
Society, 2011, pp. 131–134.
[14] J. Peng, X. Zhang, Z. Lei, B. Zhang, W. Zhang, and
Q. Li, “Comparison of several cloud computing platforms,”
in Proceedings of the 2009 Second International Symposium
on Information Science and Engineering, ser. ISISE ’09.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp.
23–27.
[15] Eucalyptus. Eucalyptus cloud. [Retrieved: March, 2013].
[Online]. Available: http://www.eucalyptus.com/
[16] OpenNebula. Opennebula cloud software. [Retrieved: March,
2013]. [Online]. Available: http://Opennebula.org
[17] T. D. Cordeiro, D. B. Damalio, N. C. V. N. Pereira, P. T.
Endo, A. V. de Almeida Palhares, G. E. Goncalves, D. F. H.
Sadok, J. Kelner, B. Melander, V. Souza, and J.-E. Mangs,
“Open source cloud computing platforms,” in Proceedings of
the 2010 Ninth International Conference on Grid and Cloud
Computing, ser. GCC ’10.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2010, pp. 366–371.
[18] CSA, “Cloud security alliance,” [Retrieved: March, 2013].
[Online]. Available: http://cloudsecurityalliance.org/
[19] ISO/IEC, “ISO/IEC 27001:2005, Information Security Man-
agement Systems - Requirements,” [Retrieved: March, 2013].
[Online].
Available:
http://www.iso.org/iso/iso catalogue/
catalogue tc/catalogue detail.htm?csnumber=42103
[20] S. Ristov, M. Gusev, and M. Kostoska, “A new methodology
for security evaluation in cloud computing,” in MIPRO,
2012 Proc. of the 35th Int. Convention, IEEE Conference
Publications, 2012, pp. 1808–1813.
[21] ISO/IEC,
“WD
TS
27017,
Guidelines
on
infor-
mation
security
controls
for
the
use
of
cloud
computing
services,”
[Retrieved:
March,
2013].
[On-
line]. Available: http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue
tc/catalogue detail.htm?csnumber=43757
[22] CloudStack.
Cloudstack
opens
source
cloud
comput-
ing.
[Retrieved:
March,
2013].
[Online].
Available:
http://cloudstack.org
[23] S. Ristov, M. Gusev, and M. Kostoska, “Security assessment
of openstack open source cloud solution,” in Proceedings of
the 7th South East European Doctoral Student Conference
(DSC2012), 2012, pp. 577–587.
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[24] C.-H. Ng, M. Ma, T.-Y. Wong, P. Lee, and J. Lui, “Live
deduplication storage of virtual machine images in an open-
source cloud,” in Proceedings of the 12th ACM/IFIP/USENIX
international conference on Middleware, ser. Middleware’11.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2011, pp. 81–100.
[25] KVM, “Kernel based virtual machine,” [Retrieved: March,
2013]. [Online]. Available: http://www.linux-kvm.org/page/
Main Page
[26] C. Systems, “Xen hypervisor,” [Retrieved: March, 2013].
[Online]. Available: http://www.xen.org/
[27] UML, “User-mode linux kernel,” [Retrieved: March, 2013].
[Online]. Available: http://user-mode-linux.sourceforge.net/
[28] Microsoft, “Microsoft hyper-v server 2012,” [Retrieved:
March,
2013].
[Online].
Available:
www.microsoft.com/
hyper-v-server/
[29] Tenable, “Nessus 5,” [Retrieved: March, 2013]. [Online].
Available: http://www.tenable.com/products/nessus
[30] N. V. Database, “Common vulnerability scoring system,”
[Retrieved: March, 2013]. [Online]. Available: http://nvd.nist.
gov/cvss.cfm
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

