Financial Business Cloud for High-Frequency Trading 
 
Arden Agopyan 
Software Group 
IBM Central & Eastern Europe 
Istanbul, TURKEY 
arden@tr.ibm.com 
 
Emrah Şener 
Center for Computational Finance 
Özyeğin University 
Istanbul, TURKEY 
emrah.sener@ozyegin.edu.tr 
Ali Beklen 
Software Group 
IBM Turkey 
Istanbul, TURKEY 
alibek@tr.ibm.com
 
 
Abstract — This paper defines a new business cloud model to 
create an efficient high-frequency trading platform. High-
frequency trading systems, built to analyze trends in tick-by-
tick financial data and thus to inform buying and selling 
decisions, imply speed and computing power. They also 
require high availability and scalability of back-end systems 
which require high cost investments. The defined model uses 
cloud computing architecture to fulfill these requirements, 
boosting availability and scalability while reducing costs and 
raising 
profitability. 
It 
incorporates 
data 
collection, 
analytics, trading, and risk management modules in the 
same cloud, all of which are the main components of a high-
frequency trading platform.  
Keywords — high-frequency trading; cloud computing; 
financial business cloud; 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Financial markets are broad and complex systems in 
which market players interact with each other to determine 
the prices of different assets. 
Advances and innovations in computer technologies 
have changed the nature of trading in financial markets. As 
a result of these innovations, transmission and execution of 
orders are now faster than ever, while the holding periods 
required for investments are compressed. For this reason a 
new investment discipline, high-frequency trading, was 
born [1].  
In very broad terms, high-frequency trading refers to 
analyzing trends in tick-by-tick data and basing buying and 
selling decisions on it. 
Exchanges 
supporting 
high-speed 
low-latency 
information exchange have facilitated the emergence of 
high-frequency trading in the markets. In 2009, in the 
United States, high-frequency equity trading was 61% of 
equity share volume and generated $8 billion per year [2]. 
Again in the United States, high-frequency trading also 
accounted for up to 40% of trading volume in futures, up 
to 20% in options, and 10% in foreign exchange [3]. It has 
already become popular in Europe and is also manifesting 
itself in some emerging markets, like Latin America and 
Brazil [3]. It is estimated that about 30% of Japanese 
equity trading is high-frequency [3]. This compares with 
up to 10% in all of Asia, up to 10% in Brazil, about 20% in 
Canada, and up to 40% in Europe [3]. 
High-frequency trading platforms incorporate trading, 
data collection, analytics, and run-time risk management 
modules to create systems which search for signals in 
markets, such as price changes and movements in rates. 
This helps to spot trends before other investors can blink. 
Then finally orders and strategies are executed or changed 
within milliseconds on the exchanges. The trading module 
hosts trading algorithms built on top of the statistical 
models and executes orders on electronic execution 
platforms like exchanges. The data collection module 
collects tick-by-tick data from data providers and feeds 
trading and analytics modules. This data can also be 
exported to external data analysis tools. The analytics 
module is used to analyze historical financial data, to 
generate automated reports and to help creating new 
trading algorithms. Finally, the run-time risk management 
module is responsible for maintaining the whole system 
within pre-specified behavioral and profit and loss 
boundaries. These modules can be accessed via web and 
rich mobile applications which enhance management 
capabilities and increase the speed of user interactivity and 
control. 
High-frequency trading systems imply speed, as high-
frequency trades are done in milliseconds, and also require 
high availability and readiness to trade at anytime. The 
speed of execution is secured by powerful hardware and 
co-location of the systems with the electronic execution 
platforms to minimize the network latency [1, 4]. High 
availability is achieved by adding more resources to the 
system and by clustering the datacenters. All of these 
necessitate high cost investments.  
Cloud computing refers to both the applications 
delivered as services with Software as a Service (SaaS) 
model over the Internet, and the hardware and systems 
software in the datacenters that provide those services [5]. 
A cloud is the ensemble of applications delivered as 
services 
and 
datacenter 
hardware, 
software 
and 
networking. 
From the cloud user and consumer perspective, in the 
cloud, computing resources are available on demand from 
anywhere via the Internet and are capable of scaling up or 
down with near instant availability. This eliminates the 
need for forward planning forecasts for new resources [6]. 
Users can pay for use of computing resources as needed 
(e.g., processors by the hour and storage by the day) and 
164
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

release them as needed, thereby rewarding conservation by 
letting machines and storage go when they are no longer 
useful [5]. The cost impact of over-provisioning and 
under-provisioning is eliminated [6] and consumers no 
longer need to invest heavily or encounter difficulties in 
building and maintaining complex IT infrastructures [7]. 
Cost elements like power, cooling, and datacenter 
hardware and software are eliminated, as well as labor and 
operations costs associated with these. Using computing as 
a utility [6] with infinite and near instant availability and 
low entry costs gives enterprises the opportunity to 
concentrate on business rather than IT in order to enter and 
exploit new markets. There is also no cost for 
unexpectedly scaling down (disposing of temporarily 
underutilized equipment), for example due to a business 
slowdown [5]. In our world, where estimates of server 
utilization in datacenters range from 5% to 20% [5], elastic 
provisioning to scale up and down to actual demand 
creates a new way for enterprises to scale their IT to 
enable business to expand [6].  
In cloud computing, business process as a service is a 
new model for sharing best practices and business 
processes among cloud clients and partners in the value 
chain [8]. A business cloud covers all scenarios of business 
process as a service in the cloud computing environment 
[8].  
This paper presents a financial business cloud model 
for high-frequency trading to create an efficient trading 
platform and IT infrastructure using cloud computing 
architecture for financial institutions. In this model, 
trading, data collection, analytics, and run-time risk 
management modules are deployed to the cloud. An 
Enterprise Service Bus, a standard-based integration 
platform [9], integrates these modules and handles routing, 
data transformations, mediations and messaging between 
them. Cloud Manager is responsible for essential tasks like 
policy management, account management, authorization & 
access, security, application management, scheduling, 
routing, monitoring, auditing, billing and metering [8]. It 
exposes modules as high availability financial cloud 
services accessible from anywhere in the world via the 
Internet. The whole cloud is co-located in datacenters 
close to the electronic execution platforms to avoid data 
movement costs and network latency, and to assure the 
speed of execution [4, 5]. 
Cloud computing is a unique opportunity for batch-
processing and analytics jobs which analyze terabytes of 
data and take hours to finish, as well as automated tasks 
responsible for responding as quickly as possible to real-
time information [5]. As these are essential jobs in high-
frequency trading operations, and require high computing 
power, high-frequency trading platforms are ideal 
candidates for cloud computing.  
Total cost of ownership can be reduced by using high-
frequency trading platforms as financial business clouds 
instead of deploying capital intensive on-premise 
infrastructure. Adopting this model reduces the IT 
dependence of high-frequency trading while increasing 
profitability. Existing systems can be designed to exist in a 
cloud, as portability can be achieved while moving to 
cloud environments [10].  
Cloud computing gives financial institutions the 
opportunity to outsource their IT infrastructure and 
operations, and to concentrate on business rather than IT. 
It also helps to reduce their operational risk and risk 
management costs because availability and service 
delivery are assured by cloud providers via Service Level 
Agreements (SLAs) [7]. Cloud computing has a big future 
for high-frequency trading clients, and can be used 
increasingly to allow firms to implement strategies that 
previously might have been considered too short-term to 
justify implementation [11].  
Section 2 of this paper, presents work related to this 
subject. Section 3 discusses why high-frequency trading 
requires the adoption of cloud computing as Information 
Technology (IT) infrastructure. This section also includes 
the reference component architecture of a contemporary 
on-premise high-frequency trading platform. Section 4 
reveals the proposed model with a case study which helped 
to determine the requirements of the model. Section 5 
presents the conclusion and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are many published studies to assist in 
understanding 
high-frequency 
trading 
and 
cloud 
computing individually. Irene Aldridge published a book 
exploring various aspects of high-frequency trading [1], 
and references [5, 6, 7, 8] are valuable studies on cloud 
computing. Regarding financial cloud applications, V. 
Chang, G. Wills and D. De Roure proposed the Financial 
Cloud Framework [10]. This study demonstrates how 
portability, speed, accuracy and reliability can be achieved 
while moving financial modeling from desktop to cloud 
environments.  
This study proposes a financial business cloud model 
and addresses high-frequency trading. It proposes cloud 
reference 
architecture 
for 
efficient 
high-frequency 
operations. 
III. 
HIGH-FREQUENCY TRADING AND CLOUD 
COMPUTING 
This section examines why high-frequency trading 
requires the adoption of cloud computing as IT 
infrastructure. The reference component architecture of a 
contemporary on-premise high-frequency trading platform 
is also presented. 
A. High-Frequency Trading 
In time, masters of physics and statistics, quants, gave 
birth to quantitative trading. This is a new trading style 
using innovative and advanced mathematical trading 
models which make portfolio allocation decisions based on 
scientific principles. The objective of high-frequency 
trading is to run the quant model (the model developed 
after quantitative analysis) faster, and to capture the gain 
from the market, as high-frequency generation of orders 
leaves very little time for traders to make subjective non-
quantitative decisions and input them into the system.  
165
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

 
Figure 1.  Reference component architecture of a contemporary on-
premise high-frequency trading platform. 
Many high-frequency traders collect tiny gains, often 
measured in pennies, on short-term market gyrations [12]. 
They look for temporary "inefficiencies" in the market and 
trade in ways that can make them money before the brief 
distortions go away [12].  
The need for speed, to make and execute trading 
decisions and strategies, requires investment in fast 
computers. These strategies are established by designing 
algorithms including generation of high-frequency trading 
signals and optimization of trading execution decisions. 
The need to be ready to trade at anytime requires high 
availability of the trading and execution systems. This high 
availability is assured by adding more resources to the 
system and by clustering the datacenters. With all of these 
aspects, 
high-frequency 
trading 
operations 
are 
IT 
dependent. 
This IT dependence of high-frequency trading 
generates two drawbacks from a cost perspective: 
• 
Profitability: Trading itself already entails a 
transaction cost, and high-frequency trading 
generates a large number of transactions, leading 
to exorbitant trading costs. As high-frequency 
traders look for tiny gains, the combination of 
trading and IT infrastructure costs reduces 
profitability.  
• 
Lead time to deploy trading algorithms and 
strategies: Implementing high-frequency trading 
platforms to deploy algorithms and strategies 
created by quants and traders requires experienced 
IT labor and this adds another layer to the 
operation, costing time and money. 
B. Contemporary High-Frequency Trading Platforms 
Contemporary 
high-frequency 
trading 
platforms 
incorporate trading, data collection, analytics, and run-time 
risk management modules. They may also be accessed via 
web and rich mobile applications to provide user control 
and enhanced management capabilities.  
Figure 1 shows the reference component architecture 
of a contemporary on-premise high-frequency trading 
platform. In this architecture: 
• 
The 
trading 
module 
incorporates 
optimal 
execution algorithms to achieve the best execution 
within a given time interval, and the sizing of 
orders into optimal lots while scanning multiple 
public and private marketplaces simultaneously. 
These 
algorithms 
are 
generally 
academic 
researches and proprietary extensions which are 
coded and embedded into the software. This 
module accepts and processes data from data 
providers via the data collection module and real-
time data coming from exchanges. It generates 
portfolio allocation and trade signals, and records 
profit 
and 
loss 
while 
automating 
trading 
operations. 
• 
The data collection module is responsible for 
collecting real-time and historical financial data 
coming from data providers. High-frequency 
financial data are observations on financial 
variables taken daily, or on a finer time scale, and 
this time stamped transaction-by-transaction data 
is called tick-by-tick data [11]. Data providers (or 
aggregators) are companies who generally provide 
24-hour financial news and information including 
this high-frequency real-time and historical price 
data, financial data, trading news and analyst 
coverage, as well as general news. Collected tick-
by-tick data and financial news in machine 
readable format are distributed to trading and 
analytics modules to feed trading algorithms, to 
support decision making processes, and to 
generate reports. This data can be exported to 
external data analysis software to be used in 
algorithmic research. 
• 
The analytics module is responsible for automated 
report generation from historical financial data as 
well as providing multi-dimensional analytics. 
• 
The run-time risk management module ensures 
that the system stays within pre-specified 
behavioral and profit and loss bounds using pre-
defined metrics. Such applications may also be 
known as system-monitoring and fault-tolerance 
software [1]. 
• 
The electronic execution platform is the exchange 
or market facilitating electronic trading (preferably 
in high-speed and low-latency) which is a must for 
high-frequency 
trading 
operations. 
Platform 
independent high-frequency systems can connect 
to 
multiple 
electronic 
execution 
platforms. 
Intermediary languages like Financial Information 
166
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

eXchange (FIX), a special sequence of codes 
optimized for the exchange of financial trading 
data, helps organizations to change the trading 
routing from one executing platform to another, or 
to several platforms simultaneously [13]. 
• 
Web and rich mobile applications are channels 
developed to enhance management capabilities, 
and increase the speed of user interactivity and 
control. They may also incorporate modules under 
the same interface to create a single point of 
control. 
Modules can be developed in-house, or alternatively 
proprietary software sold by major software vendors can 
be used. Modules are deployed on-premise following high 
investments in expensive datacenters including hardware, 
software and network connectivity [5]. Generally, each 
module is deployed on-premise to separate hardware with 
very low or no virtualization. They interact with each other 
independently with different communication protocols and 
data types. Development, deployment, operation and 
maintenance of these systems require experienced IT labor 
which is expensive and drives costs upwards. 
C. Cloud Computing as Infrastructure for High-
Frequency Trading 
The adoption of cloud computing as infrastructure for 
high-frequency trading addresses the IT dependency of 
high-frequency trading platforms as follows: 
• 
Investing in building and maintaining complex IT 
infrastructure is no longer necessary. Computing 
resources are billed on a usage basis. 
• 
Computing resources are infinitely available on 
demand from anywhere via the Internet. 
• 
The cloud provider is responsible for maintaining 
and operating the IT infrastructure. 
Most of the tasks in high-frequency trading operations 
are automated based on algorithms. The whole system is 
responsible for responding as quickly as possible to real-
time information coming from markets. Cloud computing 
provides the availability, speed and computing power 
required for these automated operations. 
High-frequency trading operations include batch-
processing and analytics jobs requiring high computing 
power. Cloud computing provides a unique opportunity in 
this regard [5]. 
Total cost of ownership can be reduced by adopting 
cloud computing as a high-frequency trading infrastructure 
instead of deploying capital intensive on-premise 
infrastructure. Buyers can move from a capital expenditure 
(CAPEX) model to an operational expenditure (OPEX) 
one by purchasing the use of the service, rather than 
having to own and manage the assets of that service [6].  
Adopting this model reduces the IT dependency of high-
frequency trading while increasing profitability.  
Nowadays, trading firms and hedge funds are already 
outsourcing their accounting and back-office operations. 
Cloud 
computing 
gives 
financial 
institutions 
the 
opportunity to outsource their IT infrastructure and 
operations, and concentrate on business rather than IT. It 
also helps to reduce their operational risk and risk 
management costs because availability and service 
delivery are assured by cloud providers via SLAs [7]. As 
high-frequency trading operations are already running in 
many countries, this model will facilitate the entry of other 
participants to the market at a low entry cost. Cloud 
computing has a big future for  high-frequency trading 
clients and can be used increasingly to allow firms to 
implement strategies that previously might have been 
considered too short-term to justify implementation [11].  
IV. 
FINANCIAL BUSINESS CLOUD FOR HIGH-
FREQUENCY TRADING (FBC-HFT) 
This section presents the Financial Business Cloud for 
High-Frequency Trading (FBC-HFT) to create an efficient 
trading platform and IT infrastructure for financial 
institutions using cloud computing architecture. A case 
study which helped determine the requirements of FBC-
HFT is also exposed in this section. 
A. A Case Study to Determine Requirements of FBC-
HFT 
Implementation of a high-frequency trading platform 
consists of many components such as identified statistical 
models, coded algorithms using these models to analyze 
and clean the tick data, installations of hardware and 
software, and connections with exchanges and data 
providers as well as whole risk management structure of 
the platform. The objective of this case study is to analyze 
historical high-frequency foreign exchange data extracted 
from Bloomberg [14] to determine the main requirements 
of FBC-HFT for the data analysis phase, which is the most 
critical part of the operation. Implementation of other 
components required to build a complete high-frequency 
trading platform is subject to future work. 
High-frequency TRY/USD currency data between 
September 12th 2009 and March 27th 2010 are used for 
this application. 
Extracted data are already ordered, filtered and cleaned 
by Bloomberg, so no further cleansing required (data 
cleansing may be required for different types of data from 
different providers). Business week restrictions are not 
applied to the data as the analysis is not region specific.  
Intervals of one minute, five minutes, ten minutes, 
thirty minutes, one hour, six hours, twelve hours and daily 
tick data for closing trade prices are extracted and the time 
series created from these data sets have following fields:  
• 
A timestamp (ex: 12.09.2009 09:00) 
• 
Last trade price (ex: 1.484) 
• 
A financial security identification code (ex: 
TRYUSD) 
Last trade prices are not meaningful in isolation, so 
calculation of return series (R) from these data sets is 
required. Returns are expressed as percentages and are 
calculated using the following formula: 
 
 
 






=
−1
ln
t
t
P
P
R
  
 
(1) 
167
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

All analysis and experiments are done using these 
calculated return series data sets. 
All experiments include the following analysis for one 
minute, five minutes, ten minutes, thirty minutes, one 
hour, six hours, twelve hours and daily tick data: 
• 
Basic descriptive statistics (including mean, 
standard deviation, sample variance, kurtosis and 
skewness) 
• 
Histogram for the frequency of return percentages 
(to graphically interpret skewness and kurtosis) 
A graph of changes in kurtosis of all time series is 
generated to show kurtosis’ behavior. In the case of one 
minute and daily tick data, Augmented Dickey-Fuller test 
for unit root testing (test for stationarity), and correlograms 
to check the auto-correlation function, are calculated. 
Generated basic descriptive statistics and histograms 
for one minute data are shown in Table 1 and in Figure 3 
respectively. 
This case study presents an essential part of high-
frequency trading operations which includes: 
• 
Extraction of the data from data providers, 
• 
Conversion and manipulation of the data for 
different analysis software and tools, 
• 
Routing the data to the tools. 
• 
Analyzing 
the 
data 
for 
high-frequency 
characteristics and decision-making based on this 
analysis. 
Regarding this case study, the following outputs are 
observed: 
• 
Development 
of 
data 
conversions 
and 
transformations is time consuming and hampers 
the implementation. 
• 
There is a need for integration between different 
tools and systems. 
• 
Analyzing high-frequency data is computing 
power intensive. 
These outputs show that the adoption of cloud 
computing can address the computing power need. An 
Enterprise Service Bus (ESB), is a standards-based 
integration platform combining messaging, web services, 
data transformation and intelligent routing in a highly 
distributed, event driven Service Oriented Architecture [9], 
that can facilitate the development of data transformation 
and the integration of different systems. 
B. The Model 
The 
proposed 
reference model in this 
paper 
incorporates high-frequency trading modules in short 
running; routing, data and protocol conversion based 
processes and reveals them as a business cloud. 
Figure 2 shows the reference component architecture 
of the proposed Financial Business Cloud for High-
Frequency Trading. 
In this architecture, trading, data collection, analytics, 
and run-time risk management modules are deployed to 
the cloud. Existing systems can be designed to exist in a 
cloud as portability can be secured while moving to cloud 
environments [10]. Their functionalities and roles in the 
operation are the same as in contemporary high-frequency 
trading platforms. However, the integration of these 
modules, routing and data, and protocol conversions 
between them, are now handled with an ESB. Modules 
provide standardized interfaces to be accessed and 
managed in the cloud. 
Cloud Manager (CM) is the common management 
system which also manages request and response flows in 
the cloud. CM is directly connected to electronic execution 
platforms and data providers. Modules which need 
interaction with electronic execution platforms and data 
providers use CM to access outside the cloud. All routing, 
data and protocol transformations, mediations and 
messaging between modules and CM are done via ESB. 
This provides flexibility and standardized integration of 
the system components. 
CM provides web and rich mobile application channels 
as single points of control for the cloud, boosting the speed 
of user interactivity and control. Data for external data 
analysis software can be exported via Cloud Manager. 
 CM is also responsible for cloud specific management 
tasks:  
• 
Account management for cloud users and 
consumers. 
• 
Authorization and access control of users for 
modules and resources. 
 
Figure 2.  Reference component architecture of Financial Business 
Cloud for High-Frequency Trading. 
168
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

• 
Scheduling of jobs and tasks as well as selecting 
and provisioning suitable resources in the cloud.  
• 
Routing of incoming requests from outside the 
cloud to the ESB to run associated processes, and 
vice versa. 
• 
Application 
management 
for 
deployed 
applications 
(modules) 
including 
application 
specific configurations. 
• 
Policy management for cloud resources and 
configuration of SLAs guaranteeing service 
availability and delivery. 
• 
Monitoring of the entire cloud including users, 
tasks, processes, modules and resources. 
• 
Security of the cloud. 
• 
Providing audit records of the cloud. 
• 
Metering, 
usage-based 
billing 
and 
billing 
management. 
The whole cloud is co-located in datacenters close to 
the electronic execution platforms to avoid data movement 
costs and network latency, and to assure speed of 
execution [4, 5]. 
The Financial Business Cloud for High-Frequency 
Trading is a model to adopt cloud computing as an IT 
infrastructure for financial institutions running high-
frequency operations. It brings the benefits of cloud 
computing to high-frequency trading and addresses 
business specific issues explained in the previous sections. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents a new business cloud model to 
create an efficient high-frequency trading platform. 
Current drawbacks and needs of high-frequency trading 
are addressed by the proposed reference model. 
 Future research and work on this study will implement 
a complete real life scenario of this reference model to test 
performance benefits and the efficiency of the system, 
from 
both 
cloud 
consumer 
and 
cloud 
provider 
perspectives. The implementation and development of 
each component of the proposed model, and the 
development of security and management approaches are 
also subject to future work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Aldridge, High-Frequency Trading. New Jersey: Wiley, 2010. 
[2] L. Tabb, R. Iati, and A. Sussman, “US Equity High Frequency 
Trading: Strategies, Sizing and Market Structure”, 2009, Report by 
TABB Group. 
[3] Internet: High-frequency trading surges across the globe. Available 
on WWW at URL: http://www.dnaindia.com/money/report_high-
frequency-trading-surges-across-the-globe_1319167 (Last access 
date: June 2010). 
[4] Internet: High-frequency trading. Available on WWW at 
URL:http://www.vimeo.com/6056298 (Last access date: June 
2010). 
[5] M. Armbrust et al., “Above the Clouds: A Berkeley View of Cloud 
Computing”, Technical Report, 2009. Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Sciences, University of California at Berkeley, February 
2009. 
[6] M. Skilton et al., “Building Return on Investment from Cloud 
Computing”, White Paper, The Open Group, April 2010. 
[7] R. Buyyaa, C. S. Yeoa, S. Venugopala, J. Broberg, and I. Brandic, 
“Cloud computing and emerging IT platforms: Vision, hype, and 
reality for delivering computing as the 5th utility”, Future 
Generation Computer Systems, December 2008. 
[8] L. Zhang and Q. Zhou, “CCOA: Cloud Computing Open 
Architecture”, IEEE International Conference on Web Services, 
2009 
[9] D. A. Chappell, Enterprise Service Bus, O'Reilly Media, June 
2004, p.1. 
[10] V. Chang, G. Wills, and D. De Roure, “Towards Financial Cloud 
Framework - Modelling and Benchmarking of Financial Assets in 
Public and Private Clouds”, University of Southampton. 
[11] Internet: New wave of high-frequency traders to target European 
markets. Available on WWW at 
URL:http://www.thetradenews.com/node/4395 (Last access date: 
June 2010). 
[12] Internet: What's Behind High-Frequency Trading. Available on 
WWW at URL: 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB124908601669298293.html (Last 
access date: June 2010). 
[13] Internet: What is FIX? Available on WWW at URL:  
http://www.fixprotocol.org/what-is-fix.shtml (Last access date: 
June 2010).  
[14] Internet: Bloomberg - Business & Financial News, Breaking News 
Headlines. Available on WWW at URL: 
http://www.bloomberg.com (Last access date: August 2010). 
Figure 3.  Histogram of returns for one minute data. 
TABLE I.  
BASIC DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR ONE MINUTE 
DATA 
Mean 
4.73023E-07 
Standard Error 
8.1594E-07 
Median 
0 
Standard Deviation 
0.000287753 
Sample Variance 
8.28017E-08 
Kurtosis 
265.2351796 
Skewness 
-2.318022932 
Range 
0.030399821 
Minimum 
-0.019277394 
Maximum 
0.011122428 
Sum 
0.058830806 
Count 
124372 
Largest(1) 
0.011122428 
Smallest(1) 
-0.019277394 
Confidence Level(95,0%) 
1.59923E-06 
 
Returns for One Minute Data
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
-0.3473%
-0.3214%
-0.2955%
-0.2696%
-0.2437%
-0.2177%
-0.1918%
-0.1659%
-0.1400%
-0.1141%
-0.0882%
-0.0623%
-0.0364%
-0.0105%
0.0154%
0.0413%
0.0672%
0.0932%
0.1191%
0.1450%
0.1709%
0.1968%
0.2227%
0.2486%
0.2745%
0.3004%
0.3263%
0.3522%
0.3782%
0.4041%
Bin
Frequency
169
CLOUD COMPUTING 2010 : The First International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-106-9

