Can EU General Data Protection Regulation
Compliance be Achieved When Using Cloud
Computing?
Bob Duncan
Business School
University of Aberdeen, UK
Email: bobduncan@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract—The forthcoming EU General Data Protection Regula-
tion (GDPR) will come into effect across the EU on 25th May
2018. It will certainly be the case that a great many companies
will be inadequately prepared for this signiﬁcant event. While a
great many companies who use traditional in-house distributed
systems are likely to have a hard enough job trying to comply
with this new regulation, but those businesses who use any form of
cloud computing face a particularly difﬁcult additional challenge,
namely the Cloud Forensic Problem. It is not enough that cloud
use presents a far more challenging environment, but that the
cloud forensic problem presents a far more difﬁcult barrier to
compliance. This problem arises due to the fact that all computing
systems are constantly under serious attack, but once an attacker
gains a foothold in a cloud system and becomes an intruder, there
is very little to prevent the intruder from helping themselves to
any manner of data covered by the GDPR, either by viewing
it, modifying it, deleting it or ex-ﬁltrating it from the victim
system. Worse, there is nothing to prevent the intruder from
gaining sufﬁcient privileges to then completely delete all trace
of their incursion, possibly deleting far more records than they
need to in the process. We address exactly what the requirements
of EU GDPR compliance are, consider whether this can be done
without resolving the Cloud Forensic Problem, and propose some
approaches to mitigate this problem, and possibly the massive
potential ﬁnes that could then be levied.
Keywords–EU GDPR; Compliance; Cloud computing; cloud
forensic problem.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The forthcoming EU General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) [1], is likely to present one of the greatest compli-
ance challenges faced by companies across the globe. Every
company that trades anywhere on earth, should they deal with
even a single EU resident, must ensure they are compliant
with the EU GDPR. If that company suffers a security breach
and the records of any EU citizen are compromised, then
the jurisdiction of the GDPR will extend globally, and that
company may be pursued and ﬁned signiﬁcant sums of money.
Achieving information security is a big enough challenge
for companies who use conventional distributed network sys-
tems, but once companies start using cloud systems, the
challenge increases exponentially. There are many reasons for
this, mostly arising from the complexity of the additional
relationships, and agendas, of different participant companies
involved in cloud systems. Much research has been carried out
to attempt to resolve these problems e.g., [2], [3], [4], [5], [6].
The most challenging, and as yet, unresolved issue is the
cloud forensic problem, otherwise known as “The elephant in
the room.” Pretty much everyone knows about it, yet nobody is
prepared to discuss it, let along try to resolve the problem, due
to the difﬁculty of the challenge it presents. The forthcoming
implementation of the EU GDPR means that heads can no
longer be left in the sand. This will not present an acceptable
defence.
If any company using cloud is unable to resolve the
cloud forensic problem, we suggest this will present such a
fundamental issue that it will be impossible for that company
to comply with this new regulation. As far back as 2011 and
in subsequent years [7], [8], [9], [10], a great deal of research
was focussed on trying to resolve this issue, yet it is clear from
looking at regulatory ﬁnes for breaches that the message is not
getting though.
In 2012, Verizon estimated that a total of 174 million data
records were compromised [11]. By 2017, this had increased
to an estimated 2 billion records lost or compromised in the
ﬁrst half of 2017 alone [12]. Yahoo disclosed a 1 billion
compromised account breach in the 2013 attacks, yet when
Verizon took over Yahoo last year, it turned out that ALL 3
billion accounts had been compromised [13].
In Section II, we take a look at the implications of non-
compliance for any company that falls under the jurisdiction of
the forthcoming EU GDPR. In Section III, we identify what
the Cloud Forensic Problem is, and address why it is such
a challenging problem to overcome. In Section IV, we ask
whether it is possible to attain compliance without addressing
the cloud forensic problem. In Section V, we address the
minimum requirements required necessary to achieve compli-
ance. In Section VI, we look at what achieving the minimum
requirements will allow us to do. In Section VII, we consider
the limitations of this work, and in Section VIII, we discuss
our conclusions.
II.
THE EU GENERAL DATA PROTECTION REGULATION
Why should companies be concerned about compliance
with the forthcoming EU GDPR [14]? Perhaps the maximum
ﬁne for being non-compliant, and suffering a serious cyber
breach of the greater of e20million or 4% of global turnover
might serve to grab their attention. We should therefore take
a closer look at the detail of the regulation.
The Article 29 Working Party [15]was set up by the
European Commission under the terms of Article 29 of the
Data Protection Directive in 1996, and its main stated missions
are to:
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

•
Provide expert advice to the States regarding data
protection;
•
Promote the consistent application of the Data Pro-
tection Directive in all EU state members, as well as
Norway, Liechtenstein and Iceland;
•
Give to the Commission an opinion on community
laws (ﬁrst pillar) affecting the right to protection of
personal data;
•
Make recommendations to the public on matters re-
lating to the protection of persons with regard to
the processing of personal data and privacy in the
European Community.
During the time it has been active, the Article 29 Working
Party has overseen the evolution of the GDPR, and has seen
thousands of amendments proposed. One of the best proposals
was the requirement to report all breaches “. . . within 72 hours
of the breach occurring”, which would have had the impact of
ensuring that all organisations would give security top priority
in order to achieve compliance. However, following much
lobbying, this was watered down to “. . . within 72 hours
of discovery of a breach.” This rather takes the urgency away
from organisations.
On the other hand, another key amendment involved
broadening the scope of the regulation, from all organisations
anywhere in the EU, to any organisation anywhere in the globe,
which stores privately identiﬁable information relating to any
individual resident anywhere in the EU. This will certainly get
the attention of far more organisations than would have been
the case had it been an EU only requirement.
In the next three subsections, we have a look at how the
GDPR seeks to streamline activities for both organisations and
data subjects; how the GDPR will use enforcement mecha-
nisms to ensure compliance; and what happens in the event of
a data breach.
A. The Streamlining Goals of the GDPR
1) For Organisations: The idea for organisations is to
streamline compliance by providing:
A single set of rules which would apply anywhere in
the EU and by using the One Stop Shop approach, covered
by Articles 46 to 55 of the GDPR, this would make for
a streamlined approach for all organisations, whether based
inside or outside the EU.
2) For Data Subjects: The idea for data subjects is to make
the whole process for them much simpler by providing:
•
Right of Access (under Article 15) - which gives data
subjects the right to access their personal data held by
any company subject to compliance with the GDPR;
•
Right to Erasure (under Article 17) - which gives
data subjects the right to have erasure carried out
on certain data held by organisations about the data
subject on any one of a number of grounds including
non-compliance with article 6.1 (lawfulness) that in-
cludes a case (f) where the legitimate interests of the
controller is overridden by the interests or fundamental
rights and freedoms of the data subject;
•
Data Portability (under Article 20) - data subjects
have certain rights to data portability (particularly in
the case of social media accounts), whereby a person
shall be able to transfer their personal data from
one electronic processing system to and into another,
without being prevented from doing so by the data
controller;
•
Data Protection by Design and by Default (under
Article 25) - seeks to ensure that all data subjects
can expect privacy by design and by default, that
has been designed into the development of business
processes for products and services. This requires that
privacy settings must be set at a high level by default
and that technical and procedural measures should be
taken care of by the controller in order to make sure
that the processing, throughout the whole processing
lifecycle, complies with the regulation. A report by the
European Union Agency for Network and Information
Security (ENISA) [16], elaborates on what needs to be
done to achieve privacy and data protection by design.
It speciﬁes that encryption and decryption operations
must be carried out locally, not by remote service,
because both keys and data must remain in the power
of the data owner if any privacy is to be achieved.
Furthermore, it speciﬁes that outsourced data storage
on remote clouds is practical and relatively safe, as
long as only the data owner, not the cloud service,
holds the decryption keys;
•
Consent by Data Subjects - data subjects must have
given their consent for data about them to be pro-
cessed, thus providing a lawful basis for processing.
3) A Lawful Basis for Processing: The data subject must
have given consent which must be explicit for data collected
and the purposes data is used for (Article 7; deﬁned in Article
4). Data controllers must be able to prove “consent” (opt-in)
and consent may be withdrawn. Consent for children must be
given by the child’s parent or custodian, and must be veriﬁable
(Article 8). Such consent to the processing of his, her or their
personal data for one or more speciﬁc processing purposes,
must be:
•
necessary for the performance of a contract to which
the data subject is party or in order to take steps at
the request of the data subject prior to entering into a
contract;
•
necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to
which the controller is subject;
•
necessary in order to protect the vital interests of the
data subject or of another natural person;
•
necessary for the performance of a task carried out
in the public interest or in the exercise of ofﬁcial
authority vested in the controller;
•
necessary for the purposes of the legitimate interests
pursued by the controller or by a third party, except
where such interests are overridden by the interests or
fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject
which require protection of personal data, in particular
where the data subject is a child.
B. Enforcement Mechanisms
•
Appointing a Data Protection Ofﬁcer - this person
would be required for all data processor organisations,
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

and a person with expert knowledge of data protec-
tion law and practices should assist the controller or
processor to monitor internal compliance with this
Regulation. The appointment of a DPO within a large
organization will be a challenge for the Board as well
as for the individual concerned, due to the myriad
governance and human factor issues that organisations
and companies will need to address given the scope
and nature of the appointment. In addition, the post
holder will need to create their own support team and
will also be responsible for their own continuing pro-
fessional development as they need to be independent
of the organization that employs them, effectively as
a “mini-regulator”;
•
Ensuring Compliance with the GDPR, by checking
that all the correct mechanisms are properly deﬁned
and in place, mainly through compliance demonstra-
tion, e.g, the data controller should implement mea-
sures which meet the principles of data protection by
design and data protection by default. Such measures
include the process of pseudonymising (Recital 78),
i.e., by means of encryption, which process should be
completed as soon as is practically possible.
•
The GDPR seeks to provide Responsibility and Ac-
countability by all parties involved in data processing,
with expanded notice requirements covering retention
time for personal data, and contact information for
data controller and data protection ofﬁcer. Automated
decision-making for individuals, including algorithmic
means of proﬁling (Article 22), which is regarded
as contestable, similar to the Data Protection Di-
rective (Article 15), receive particular attention. The
expectation is that all actors involved in the whole
process of data processing will behave responsibly
and will be fully accountable for their actions. Data
Protection Impact Assessments (Article 35) have to
be conducted when speciﬁc risks occur to the rights
and freedoms of data subjects. Risk assessment and
mitigation is required and prior approval of the Data
Protection Authorities (DPA) is required for high risks.
Data Protection Ofﬁcers (Articles 3739) are to ensure
compliance within organizations.
C. In the event of a Data Breach
In the event of a data breach, under the GDPR, the
Data Controller will be under a legal obligation to notify the
Supervisory Authority without undue delay. The reporting of
a data breach is not subject to any de minimis standard and
must be reported to the Supervisory Authority within 72 hours
after having become aware of the data breach (Article 33).
Individuals have to be notiﬁed if adverse impact is determined
(under Article 34), unless the data was encrypted. In addition,
the data processor will have to notify the controller without
undue delay after becoming aware of a personal data breach
(under Article 33).
1) Sanctions: The following sanctions can be imposed:
•
a warning in writing in cases of ﬁrst and non-
intentional non-compliance;
•
regular periodic data protection audits;
•
a ﬁne of up to e10million or up to 2% of the annual
worldwide turnover of the preceding ﬁnancial year in
case of an enterprise, whichever is greater, where there
has been an infringement of the following provisions
(Article 83, Paragraph 4[18]):
◦
the obligations of the controller and the pro-
cessor pursuant to Articles 8, 11, 25 to 39 and
42 and 43;
◦
the obligations of the certiﬁcation body pur-
suant to Articles 42 and 43;
◦
the obligations of the monitoring body pur-
suant to Article 41(4).
•
a ﬁne up to e20million or up to 4% of the annual
worldwide turnover of the preceding ﬁnancial year in
case of an enterprise, whichever is greater, where there
has been an infringement of the following provisions:
(Article 83, Paragraph 5 & 6[18]):
◦
the basic principles for processing, including
conditions for consent, pursuant to Articles 5,
6, 7 and 9;
◦
the data subjects’ rights pursuant to Articles
12 to 22;
◦
the transfers of personal data to a recipient in
a third country or an international organisation
pursuant to Articles 44 to 49;
◦
any obligations pursuant to Member State law
adopted under Chapter IX;
◦
non-compliance with an order or a temporary
or deﬁnitive limitation on processing or the
suspension of data ﬂows by the supervisory
authority pursuant to Article 58(2) or failure
to provide access in violation of Article 58(1).
The above details provide the essence of what we need
to know in order to understand what information will be
required to be delivered in the event of breach, in order for
the data processor to be compliant with the GDPR. In the next
section, we will take a look at the Cloud Forensic Problem, and
why it is such a difﬁcult problem, not only from the security
perspective, but also from the GDPR compliance problem.
III.
THE CLOUD FORENSIC PROBLEM (AND WHY IT IS
SUCH A DIFFICULT PROBLEM)
As we have already stated, all computing systems are
constantly under serious attack, but once an attacker gains a
foothold in a cloud system and becomes an intruder, there
is little to prevent the intruder from helping themselves to
any amount of data covered by the GDPR, either by viewing
it, modifying it, deleting it or ex-ﬁltrating it from the victim
system [17], [18], [19]. Worse, there is nothing to prevent the
intruder from gaining sufﬁcient privileges to then completely
delete all trace of their incursion, possibly deleting far more
records than they need to in the process, leading to further
problems for business continuity.
This is often known as “The elephant in the room” in cloud
circles. Pretty much everyone knows about it, yet nobody is
prepared to discuss it, let alone try to resolve the problem,
due to the difﬁculty of the challenge it presents. Make no
mistake, this is a serious challenge to defend against, let alone
overcome. However, not only is it a serious challenge for
organisations using cloud, it also presents a major obstacle
to compliance with the GDPR.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Once all trace of the intrusion has been deleted, there
will be very little forensic trail left to follow, meaning many
companies will be totally unaware that the intrusion has taken
place, let alone understand what records have been accessed,
modiﬁed, deleted or stolen. All too often, companies will
believe they have retained a full forensic trail in their running
instance, but often forget that without special measures being
taken to save these records off-site [2], they will vanish when
the instance is shut down.
Currently, in any cloud based system, there must be a
complete and intact audit trail in order for the breached organ-
isation to be able to tell which records have been accessed,
modiﬁed, deleted or stolen. Where the audit trail and all
forensic records have been deleted, there remains no physical
means for any organisation to be able to tell which records
have been accessed, modiﬁed, deleted or stolen, putting these
organisations immediately in multiple breaches of the GDPR.
IV.
IS IT POSSIBLE TO ACHIEVE COMPLIANCE WITH THE
EU GDPR WITHOUT ADDRESSING THE CLOUD FORENSIC
PROBLEM?
The short answer is, of course, it is not! For the reasons
outlined in the previous section, we can see that there is indeed
nothing to prevent an intruder from destroying every scrap of
forensic proof of their incursion into any current cloud system.
It is clear that any form of forensic record or audit trail can
not therefore be safely stored on any running cloud instance.
This means that the only safe method of storage of foren-
sic data will be somewhere off-site from the running cloud
instances. Clearly, the off-site storage must be highly secure,
preferably stored in an append-only database, and should
especially be held in encrypted format, with all encryption
keys held elsewhere.
Doubtless some will say that as long as they are not
breached, then they will not be in breach of the GDPR. While
that may very well be true, how will they be able to tell whether
they have not been breached, against the circumstance where
they have been breached, and the breach has been very well
covered up. They will have no means of knowing, let alone
proving the point.
Let us suppose that a complaint is made to the regulator,
the organisation will have no means of proving that the data
has not been tampered with. Equally, if the breach has been
extremely well covered up, they will neither have the means
of complying with the requirement to: a) report the breach
within 72 hours, nor b) have any means of determining which
records have been accessed, modiﬁed, deleted or stolen. Let us
now suppose that the conversion of private data has yet to be
encrypted, and worse, that the encryption and decryption keys
are held on the cloud instance “for convenience”. If we were
to receive a request from any users whose data had just been
compromised, we would be unable to comply with the request,
meaning we would now be looking at multiple breaches, thus
causing the ﬁne level to escalate to the higher level, as outlined
in Subsubsection II-C1.
V.
THE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS TO ACHIEVE
COMPLIANCE WITH THE GDPR
We have seen that to do nothing would not be a viable
option as far as GDPR compliance is concerned. Attacks will
continue unabated. We must therefore be prepared and armed
with whatever tools we can develop to ensure we achieve as
high a level of compliance as we possibly can.
We therefore need to consider what the absolute minimum
technical requirement might be to attain our objective of GDPR
compliance. We know that under the GDPR the organisation
must be able to:
•
provide a Right of Access (under Article 15) to
personal data by data subject, if requested;
•
provide the means to comply with a Right to Erasure
(under Article 17) by data subject, subject to the
appropriate grounds being met;
•
provide privacy by design;
•
in the event of a data breach, report the breach to the
Supervisory Authority within 72 hours after having
become aware of the data breach (Article 33). The
breach must also be reported to the controller without
undue delay after becoming aware of a personal data
breach;
•
in the event of a data breach, notify the data subject
if adverse impact is determined (under Article 34),
unless the data was encrypted;
In the case of the ﬁrst requirement, we would require to
ensure the provenance and veracity of the contents of the
database. In the case of the second requirement, if appropriate,
the same provision would apply.
In the case of the third requirement, the cloud system
must be designed in accordance with the recommendations
of the Article 29 Working Party [20], which suggests the
reports produced by ENISA should be followed. This report
[21] speciﬁes that encryption and decryption operations must
be carried out locally, not by remote service, because both
keys and data must remain in the power of the data owner
if any privacy is to be achieved. Furthermore, it speciﬁes
that outsourced data storage on remote clouds is practical and
relatively safe, as long as only the data owner, not the cloud
service, holds the decryption keys. ENISA have also produced
a stream of other relevant reports, including a Cloud Risk
report in 2009 [22], and recommendations for certiﬁcation in
2017 [23].
In the case of the fourth requirement, we would require
to ensure the provenance and veracity of the contents of the
database. In the case of the ﬁfth requirement, where the data
is not yet encrypted, the same provision would also apply.
However, it should be stressed that it will always be preferable
to ensure data is encrypted before it leaves the control of the
data owner.
It is clear that where no steps have been taken to ensure the
cloud forensic problem has been mitigated, the organisation
will fail on every count. Thus, as a minimum, we need to
ensure the following steps are taken:
•
all personal data should be encrypted, and this should
be performed locally;
•
the encryption and decryption keys should not be
maintained on the cloud instance;
•
a full audit trail of the entire database must be main-
tained off-site;
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

•
full forensic records of all users having accessed
the database and carried out any commands on the
database must be collected and stored off-site.
VI.
WHAT WILL THE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS ALLOW
US TO DO?
Let us now assume that we have completed the minimum
requirements. Can we now be sure that we can be compliant
with the provisions of the GDPR? We must therefore look
at each of the ﬁve reporting requirements in turn to establish
whether we will be able to meet these requirements.
1)
First, if a data subject serves us with a Right of
Access request, can we respond in the afﬁrmative?
We are now sure that we hold the subject’s data
securely, in encrypted format in our database. Further
we can prove that the data has only been accessed
by duly authorised persons, and that the data records
have neither been modiﬁed, stolen nor deleted. We
are therefore compliant on the ﬁrst requirement;
2)
Next, if a data subject serves us with a right to Erasure
notice, can we comply with that request. Assuming
the request can be legitimately carried out and is
not prohibited by statute, then since we can correctly
identify the private data held about the data subject,
then there is no reason why we would be unable to
delete the appropriate data as requested. Accordingly,
we would be compliant on the second requirement;
3)
Next, can we provide privacy by design? Since we
can comply with the ﬁrst two requirements, this is
a clear indication that we are potentially capable of
supplying privacy by design;
4)
In the event of a data breach, can we report the
breach to the Supervisory Authority within 72 hours
of discovery? In the case of a data breach, we will
not only be able to notify the breach within 72 hours
of discovery, we will actually be able to notify within
72 hours of the occurrence of the breach. In addition,
since we will retain full forensic data and audit trails
for the system, we will also be able to provide
very precise details of which records were accessed
and read, which might have been modiﬁed, with
full details of what modiﬁcations were made, which
records were deleted, and which records were ex-
ﬁltrated from the system. Not only that, but we will
be able to provide full details of how the perpetrators
got into the system and where they forwarded any
stolen records, which means we can identify precisely
which records were compromised, thus ensuring we
would be beyond fully compliant;
5)
In the event of a data breach, would we be able to
notify the data subject if adverse impact is determined
(under Article 34)? In the event of a data breach, we
would be able to identify every single record attacked,
and identify every single data subject affected. Since
the full records would already be encrypted, we
would not be required to notify the data subjects, but
would be fully capable of so doing. This would mean
we would again be beyond fully compliant.
Thus, we can reasonably claim that we would be in a
position to be fully compliant with all the requirements of the
GDPR, thus providing an exceptionally high level of privacy
on behalf of all data subjects. Thus, the level of exposure of
data subjects would be extremely minimised, thus ensuring
compliance with the regulation, and therefore the likelihood
that we would be able to fully mitigate any penalty that would
otherwise be applied by the regulator.
Contrast this position with the case where cloud users
do not take these mitigatory steps. In every requirement -
they would be non-compliant, thus exposing the enterprise
to the full extent of penalties allowed, namely the greater of
e20million or 4% of global turnover.
VII.
LIMITATIONS AND DISCUSSION
There are two very important tasks that must be performed
in order not to limit the effectiveness of this approach. Since
persistent storage in the cloud instance cannot retain data be-
yond its currently running lifetime [2], we must also make sure
that all necessary logs and data is stored securely elsewhere.
And as the default settings for virtually all database software
involves logging being turned off [17], we must ensure this
function is turned on in all running cloud instances, again,
with the data being stored securely elsewhere.
This prompts the question of what data we require to keep.
In order to meet our regulatory compliance requirement, we
need to understand the 5 W’s — namely: Who is accessing our
system? Where have they come from? What are they looking
for? When is this happening? From this data, we should be able
to infer the Why? Are they authorised to be in the system, to
enter the system the way they have, to look at the data they
are trying to access, and at the time they are trying to access
it? Deducing the Why can give an indicator of anomalous
behaviour.
Many database software offers additional full audit trail
capabilities. Each additional capability will require more and
more storage resources. A balance will need to be found
between the minimum requirement consistent with maintaining
performance and a cost effective level of storage. The risk in
not utilising all that is on offer, would be that this might com-
promise security, reducing the ability of achieve compliance.
However, it is clear that a sensible precaution to mitigate
this risk would be to encrypt all the data being held on all
databases maintained within the system, ensuring that encryp-
tion/decryption keys are not stored on the cloud instances.
While encryption is not mandatory, in the event of a breach
where encryption is not used, the ﬁne levied by the regulator
is likely to be much higher as a consequence.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
The forthcoming GDPR will certainly present a serious
wake up call to a great many companies operating around the
globe if they ﬁnd themselves falling under the jurisdiction of
this new regulation. In this paper, we have considered whether
it is possible to achieve regulatory compliance where any
organisation is using cloud computing. Again, we reiterate that
without suitable precautions being put in place, the answer is
a resounding “No!”.
We have outlined the key requirements from the regulation
to which all organisations falling under its jurisdiction must
comply. We have identiﬁed the currently unresolved “Cloud
Forensic Problem” as presenting the largest obstacle to achiev-
ing compliance.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

We have proposed how this challenging problem may be
approached to ensure that cloud users can be fully compliant
with this new regulation, with little more than being sensibly
organised. Clearly, additional cost will require to be incurred,
and there may be a small impact on latency, but these costs
could signiﬁcantly mitigate the possibility of a huge regulatory
ﬁne in the event of a breach. It is also likely that this approach
will ensure faster discovery of the occurrence of a breach, thus
minimising the potential impact on business continuity.
REFERENCES
[1]
EU, “EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),” 2017. [Online].
Available: http://www.eugdpr.org/ [Last accessed: 22 December 2017]
[2]
R. K. L. Ko, P. Jagadpramana, M. Mowbray, S. Pearson, M. Kirchberg,
B. S. Lee, and Q. Liang, “TrustCloud: A Framework for Accountability
and Trust in Cloud Computing,” Perspective, 2011, pp. 1–9.
[3]
R. K. L. Ko, B. S. Lee, and S. Pearson, “Towards achieving accountabil-
ity, auditability and trust in cloud computing,” Commun. Comput. Inf.
Sci., vol. 193 CCIS, 2011, pp. 432–444.
[4]
N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, and M. C. Mont, “Towards Natural-
Language Understanding and Automated Enforcement of Privacy Rules
and Regulations in the Cloud: Survey and Bibliography,” Analysis, 2011,
pp. 1–9.
[5]
S. Pearson, “Taking Account of Privacy when Designing Cloud Com-
puting Services,” Current, 2009, pp. 44–52.
[6]
S. Pearson, “Toward accountability in the cloud,” IEEE Internet
Comput., vol. 15, no. 4, jul 2011, pp. 64–69. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=5934852
[7]
N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, M. C. Mont, and R. Ko, “A Toolkit for
Automating Compliance in Cloud Computing Services,” Int. J. Cloud
Comput., vol. x, no. x, 2014, pp. 45–68.
[8]
J. Singh and J. M. Bacon, “On middleware for emerging health services,”
J. Internet Serv. Appl., vol. 5, no. 1, 2014, p. 6.
[9]
J. Singh, J. Bacon, and D. Eyers, “Policy Enforcement Within Emerging
Distributed, Event-based Systems,” Proc. 8th ACM Int. Conf. Distrib.
Event-Based Syst. - DEBS ’14, 2014, pp. 246–255.
[10]
J. Singh, J. Powles, T. Pasquier, and J. Bacon, “Seeing through the
clouds: Management, control and compliance for cloud computing,”
Cloud Comput., 2015, pp. 1–12.
[11]
Verizon, “2012 Data Breach Investigation Report: A study conducted
by the Verizon RISK Team in cooperation with the United States
Secret Service and Others,” Tech. Rep., 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://www.verizonenterprise.com/resources/reports/rp data-breach-
investigations-report-2012 en xg.pdf
[Last
accessed:
22
December
2017]
[12]
Verizon, “Verizon Security Breach Report 2017,” Tech. Rep., 2017.
[13]
S.
Khandelwal,
“Its
3
Billion!
Yes,
Every
Single
Yahoo
Ac-
count Was Hacked In 2013 Data Breach,” 2017. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://thehackernews.com/2017/10/yahoo-email-hacked.html [Last
accessed: 22 December 2017]
[14]
The European Parliament and The European Council, “General Data
Protection Regulation,” Off. J. Eur. Union, vol. 2014, no. October 1995,
2016, pp. 20–30.
[15]
EU, “Opinion 05/2012 on Cloud Computing (Data Protection),” 2012.
[16]
G. Danezis, J. Domingo-Ferrer, M. Hansen, J.-H. Hoepman, D. L.
Metayer, R. Tirtea, and S. Schiffner, Privacy and Data Protection by
Design - from policy to engineering, 2015, no. December.
[17]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing Cloud Security and Pri-
vacy: The Power and the Weakness of the Audit Trail,” in Cloud Comput.
2016 Seventh Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. GRIDs, Virtualization, no.
April.Rome: IEEE, 2016, pp. 125–130.
[18]
G. Weir, A. Aßmuth, M. Whittington, and B. Duncan, “Cloud Account-
ing Systems, the Audit Trail, Forensics and the EU GDPR: How Hard
Can It Be?” in Br. Account. Financ. Assoc. Scottish Area Gr. Annu.
Conf.Aberdeen: BAFA, 2017, p. 6.
[19]
P. Tobin, M. McKeever, J. Blackledge, M. Whittington, and B. Duncan,
“UK Financial Institutions Stand to Lose Billions in GDPR Fines: How
can They Mitigate This?” in Br. Account. Financ. Assoc. Scottish Area
Gr. Annu. Conf., BAFA, Ed., Aberdeen, 2017, p. 6.
[20]
EU,
“Unleashing
the
Potential
of
Cloud
Comput-
ing
in
Europe,”
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=SWD:2012:0271:FIN:EN:
PDF [Last accessed: 22 December 2017]
[21]
ENISA, “Article 4 Technical Report,” ENISA, Tech. Rep., 2011.
[22]
ENISA,
“Cloud
Risk,”
ENISA,
Tech.
Rep.,
2009.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/cloud-computing-
risk-assessment [Last accessed: 22 December 2017]
[23]
ENISA, “Recommendations on European Data Protection Certiﬁcation,”
Tech. Rep., 2017.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

