Cloud Computing Brokering Service: A Trust Framework 
Service Level Agreements: An Analytical Study in Progress 
 
Prashant Khanna 
 
Institute of Engineering and Technology  
JK Lakshmipat University 
Jaipur, India 
e-mail: perukhan@gmail.com 
Budida Varahala Babu 
Institute of Engineering and Technology 
JK Lakshmipat University 
Jaipur, India 
e-mail: profbvbabu@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract— The paper highlights existing research voids in 
defining and designing binding and enforceable service level 
agreements (SLA) between three actors in the cloud computing 
framework defined by NIST – the cloud brokers, the cloud 
consumers and the cloud providers. The paper presents a 
techno-managerial perspective to the issue of how cloud 
brokers would handle service provisioning and whether 
binding service level agreements would be useful tools for the 
NIST cloud framework to function.  A template constituent 
framework is also recommended as part of this ongoing study. 
Keywords-Cloud Brokers; Cloud Computing; SLA; Service 
Provisioning; Trust. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Cloud Computing is an emerging computing paradigm 
that promises to change the landscape of the present service 
models on offer in provisioning of Information Technology 
services. The “Cloud”, as a term has found prominence in an 
increasingly large number of publications, both in the 
academia as well as in industry literature. It is a buzz word 
and the buzz is getting louder by the day. The definitions of 
cloud computing are many, and varied. The industry has, 
only in late 2011, finally decided to accept one that was 
proposed by National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST), U.S. Department of Commerce [1].  As per the Draft 
Computing Technology Roadmap published by NIST, Cloud 
Computing is a model for enabling convenient, on-demand 
network access to a shared pool of configurable computing 
resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and 
services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with 
minimal management effort or service provider interaction. 
The definition has listed five essential characteristics that 
would be common to all cloud computing services, namely: 
on-demand self service, broad network access, resource 
pooling, 
rapid 
elasticity 
and 
measured 
service. 
It 
recommends three service models: Software as a Service 
(SaaS), Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), and Platform as a 
Service (PaaS), and four deployment models i.e. private, 
public, community and hybrid clouds.  
The reference architecture in the NIST document 
highlights interactions amongst these entities and provides a 
companion cloud computing taxonomy detailing the 
definitions and relationships of a control vocabulary. The 
document also identifies five major actors to enable the 
reference model to work, namely, cloud consumer, cloud 
provider, cloud carrier, cloud auditor, and cloud broker. Each 
actor is an entity (a person or an organization) that 
participates in a transaction or process or performs tasks in 
cloud computing.  A lot has been said and written about the 
model and the way the players interact in this model to 
derive services. Each of the players have been defined and 
redefined in literature and the use case(s) to make the model 
successful has also been commented upon extensively. 
Amongst the actors defined in the NIST model [1], the cloud 
broker was an add-on after much thought. Gartner, in a 
report in 2011 [2] indicated that cloud brokering services in 
the cloud service marketplace is emerging as a promising 
low-risk business model for offering new and value-added 
services through cross provider service delivery and 
partnership. This assertion has made a major impact on the 
industry as well as the academia. 
Any service brokering architecture, in general, must have 
the ability to support a service delivery infrastructure for 
integration, delivery and management of composite services 
in a multi-provider heterogeneous networks environment. It 
is no different in the cloud service provisioning environment. 
In the present stage of evolution of the cloud as a repository 
of services, this provisioning is far from being ideally 
achieved. The cloud paradigm is currently in a state of 
transition and multiple players are trying to dominate the 
service delivery scene. The cloud providers are competing 
with the cloud brokers to deliver the intended service to the 
cloud consumer, but this model of business to consumer 
interaction is not bearing the desired results due to multiple 
barriers of scale and other managerial issues. This research 
on the subject, supported by the industry reports indicate that 
the player who is likely to emerge as the principal stake 
holder in provisioning and arbitraging of services as a truly 
elastic and dynamic package for the consumer would be the 
cloud broker. Such service provisioning is already appealing 
to the small and medium business entrants who are not yet as 
big as Google or Amazon, but have the understanding of 
how the cloud works [2].  Forrester [3], in their annual report 
in 2011, also cite brokering services in the cloud to be the 
next game changer in the service provisioning space. 
However, the present state of cloud implementation is highly 
proprietary and private, akin to islands of highly autonomous 
island solutions which do not have any linking ferry services 
which can carry the inhabitants across. The cloud brokering 
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

service available today is thus confined to a miniscule subset 
of matching services that are seamlessly able to speak to 
each other. There is a serious void in interoperability 
between cloud solutions that are not been addressed by the 
present generation of brokering service providers, either due 
to technological incompatibilities or due to managerial 
issues. The present NIST framework for the cloud-based 
service model, as others similar frameworks, are based on 
adopting managerial practices in organizations which are 
implemented by using a preferred underlying technology. 
This is truer today with the inclusion of the cloud broker as 
an actor in the models under consideration.  
We appreciate that this is as much a managerial issue as 
it is a technical one. This paper and research is an attempt to 
highlight existing research voids and present a techno-
managerial perspective to the issue of how cloud brokers 
would handle service provisioning and whether binding 
service level agreements (SLA) would be useful tools for the 
NIST cloud framework to function. This is a work in 
progress and it is anticipated that the research would result in 
proposing a framework that would make service clouds talk 
to each other under a universally acceptable interoperability 
standard, where enforceable and automated SLA become 
corner stones for provisioning of dynamic and elastic 
services amongst the actors enumerated in the NIST model. 
The structure of the remaining paper will be as given 
below: Section II presents the Literature Survey on the topic 
of SLA in the cloud and its relevance to the cloud brokering 
services, Section III addresses the constituents of an SLA 
within a service oriented business model, Section IV 
provides the details of a framework in making for a 
enforceable SLAs amongst cloud brokers, cloud consumers 
and cloud providers for efficient service provisioning. 
Sections V and VI conclude current findings and highlights 
future work directions.  
II. 
LITERATURE SURVEY  
Though Cloud computing is a highly studied topic today 
and a large body of research has gone into studying specific 
standards of interoperability amongst clouds and how they 
are to be achieved, the aspects of brokering services to the 
end client from amongst those available is finding refereed 
status only recently [4]. A cloud broker has been described 
as an entity that manages the use, performance and delivery 
of cloud services and negotiates relationships between cloud 
providers and cloud consumers. 
Existing work in literature primarily stress on using 
SLAs to guarantee consumer of cloud services a level of 
performance, that is defined by abstract metrics, directly 
from the cloud service providers to the end client or cloud 
consumers [9], [10], [11]. There is an apparent void in 
research on SLA formulation strategies between the cloud 
service broker and the cloud consumer and between the 
cloud service broker and the cloud service provider. This 
research is an attempt to highlight the research void and 
recommend a framework which can be developed for 
creation of enforceable and implementable SLAs in the 
cloud paradigm. 
The architecture of the cloud, whether public, private, 
community or hybrid, would make it non trivial to propose 
and implement a framework for creating of such binding 
frameworks in the absence of accurate measuring and 
monitoring mechanisms for provision of services. This is 
especially true for a use case when the broker is aggregating 
and arbitraging services from multiple cloud service 
providers and packaging them as a service bundle for the end 
client. Previous work on the subject include [5], [6] and [7] 
that pertains to SLA formulation, but does not address the 
aspects of the cloud brokering actor’s role in the 
provisioning of services. Alhamad [9] [10] discusses the 
aspect of SLA and performance measurement in his recent 
findings but does not address the issue in the perspective of 
how a broker would become a party to the SLA agreement 
between the end user or the cloud consumer and the cloud 
service provider. In [25], Alhamad describes a conceptual 
framework for SLA in the cloud computing paradigm, but 
the same is silent on the aspect pertaining to Brokers in the 
service model. Other work on SLA management and creation 
includes [11], which describes an approach for negotiating 
and creating SLA between infrastructure providers and 
service providers. In [12], Parrilli provides a legal 
perspective on the aspect of SLA provisioning in the 
European Union and how the rules on jurisdiction provided 
by the Regulation 44/2001 where two general distinctions 
are drawn in order to determine which (European) courts are 
competent to adjudicate disputes arising out of a SLA. The 
former is between Business to Business and Business to 
Consumer transactions, while the latter is in regard to 
contracts which provide a jurisdiction clause and contracts 
which do not. 
A recent work by Wang et al. [13] addresses the aspects 
of multi-variable SLA based metrics that manages resource 
scheduling for application provisioning on the cloud. They 
also recommend a reputation based system for selecting a 
cloud provider. In [14], Salvatore et al. discuss a framework 
for broker assigned SLA management service with a novel 
high level abstraction model has been recommended. They 
recommend an architectural design for a system named 
Cloud Agency that aims to respond to the need for Resources 
management and offers added value to the existing Cloud 
services. The proposed system is in charge of brokering the 
collection of Cloud resources from different providers that 
fulfills requirements of user's applications as a best effort 
service. The user is able to delegate to the Agency the 
necessary checks of the agreement fulfillment, the 
monitoring of resource utilization and eventually necessary 
re-negotiations. In [15], Balakrishnan and Somasundaram 
propose a broker framework where SLA enabled broker 
evaluate the number of resources available in the 
environment and the number of policies per resource that 
need to be implemented. The results presented in the paper 
indicate that the inclusion of SLA affects the resource 
selection behavior of the broker. The paper is however silent 
on the methods to control the affect using an SLA. It does 
however indicate that the overall performance of the system 
improves in terms of job throughput with an extra overhead 
in request processing due to the presence of a broker. These 
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

results are shown on a grid sharing environment and major 
differences exist in the business model used for the grid 
service provisioning and cloud service provisioning model. 
A number of publications, post 2010 [8], [9], [13], [23], 
[24], [25] are either addressing the aspect of SLA 
management for brokering services at the level of a resource 
scheduler, or abstractions of the same when lifted from the 
grid computing era.  The industry is viewing SLA 
performance management and service provisioning as a 
combination of availability parameters and associated 
factors. The carry forward of concepts of web service based 
SLAs in literature is also evident while drafting cloud based 
SLAs in recent papers.  However, this research on the topic 
indicates that the business model of provisioning of these 
two frameworks is very different and mapping the two under 
the same head would be a mistake. The same has been 
asserted by NIST [1].  Quantifiable system level metrics like 
QoS, CPU utilization, assured storage space, scale up and 
scale down time in terms of elasticity of service, besides 
some metrics of security also find mention in industry white 
papers when they refer to enforceable SLAs.  Recent 
literature also highlight the abstract and non quantifiable 
aspects of performance management and binding of service 
issues by cloud service brokers while terming the 
environment of cloud computing turbulent [16].  
The purpose of this paper is to highlight the research gap 
existing in SLA formulation between the cloud broker-
consumers and broker-provider combine. It presents the 
research done thus far and the likely line of further research 
to address the void. The researchers believe that the solutions 
to finding or evolving a framework for enabling such 
enforceable SLAs would be a combination of adopting 
appropriate managerial practices by the consumers and 
incorporating the best available technological means for 
monitoring and measuring the services available in the cloud.  
This paper thus presents a techno-managerial perspective to 
the issue.   
The perspective adopted in this paper is that of a cloud 
broker. It is directed towards a cloud consumer and a cloud 
provider, when seen from a cloud broker’s angle. This paper 
does not discuss the implication of a binding SLA between 
the cloud broker and cloud auditors or the cloud carriers. The 
relationship impact on these actors from the perspective of 
the broker will be done as a separate study in future.  
III. 
SLA WITHIN A SERVICE ORIENTATION MODEL 
An agreement is always based on a measure of trust. 
Trust concepts have been defined differently when used in 
varying contexts. Economists, lawyers and information 
technologists tend to view trust in different light. Numerous 
models are proposed in literature that attempt to solve the 
problems that arise when two parties need to establish a 
business relationship between them. Hussain and Chang [17] 
highlight the confusion in literature around the concept of 
trust. The acceptable definition of trust in a common usage 
scenario is succinctly provided by Dasgupta in [18] where he 
defines trust as “the expectation of one person about the 
actions of others that affects the first person’s choice, when 
an action must be taken before the actions of others are 
known.”  This paper considers the interaction between the 
cloud actors in the same context. Gambetta [19], on the other 
hand, states that “trust (or, symmetrically, distrust) is a 
particular level of the subjective probability with which an 
agent assesses that another agent or group of agents will 
perform a particular action, both before he can monitor such 
action (or independently of his capacity ever to be able to 
monitor it) and in a context in which it affects his own 
action.” In the cloud paradigm this relationship maps to the 
level of trust that exists between the actors involved in the 
services provisioning. 
A. Trust as a Base for Enforcable SLAs 
SLAs are based in an inherent trust relationship. SLAs 
are legal and formal documents which presents the manner in 
which a relationship between two entities would evolve and 
be conducted during normal and extreme circumstances. 
Service providers use SLA as a foundation to optimize the 
use of resources available at their disposal, while ensuring 
that the necessary levels of service, as defined in the SLA is 
delivered to the consumer. The cloud consumer on the other 
hand uses a SLA to assure themselves of a minimum level of 
service, which gets enumerated in the SLA that defines the 
relationship.  For the service industry, SLAs must be 
modeled around a series of related metrics which govern 
performance in the specific industry. More specifically, an 
SLA must clearly define components that govern the 
relationship between the players. An SLA format should 
illustrate the following: 
 
Describe a service in unambiguous terms so all stake 
holders understand the implication and expectations 
from the service. 
 
Present the level of performance of service in terms 
of metrics. 
 
Define a monitoring mechanism that would monitor 
and report if the defined service levels are being 
provisioned and available to the consumers. 
 
A mechanism for measurement of the services being 
provisioned. It is essential that the process is 
acceptable to all the players involved in the process. 
 
Provide a framework for imposing penalty due to 
diversions from the stated terms in the SLA.  
 
Provide a mechanism that allows the parties engaged 
in the SLA to interact and meet on common ground 
in the event of a dispute.  
 
Duration of implementation and validity of the SLA. 
B. SLAs in the Service Industry Framework  
The researchers believe that that for the service industry, 
and especially for the cloud based business model, an SLA 
must define adherence to some other common metrics. These 
metrics need customization based on the kind of services 
needed by the broker (arbitraged or intermediated). Some of 
the metrics, which can be included in formulating an 
effective and enforceable SLA, are presented below :- 
 
Response levels in terms of time for service 
provisioning.  
 
Cost of provision of service to the end user. 
208
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
Service problem reporting and hierarchy of ticket 
resolution. 
 
Resolution mechanisms. 
 
Monitoring and service reporting accountability in 
terms of resources responsible for the monitoring 
and adherence within the time frame agreed upon. 
 
Liabilities of the service provider in case the desired 
services are not delivered. 
 
Terms and taxonomy that is agreed upon by the 
consumer of services and the other actors involved 
in the process. 
 
Conditions extraneous to the agreement which have 
a binding bearing on the SLA. 
C. Factors that Fail SLA based Relationships 
It is also pertinent to appreciate factors that have been 
found to be primary reasons for SLA based relationships to 
fail at times. Industry literature indicates non-optimal 
business deals that fall through, do so due to ill conceived or 
poorly researched SLAs [3]. This research deducted that 
issues common in such failed SLAs based relationships 
include: 
 
Ambiguity in differentiating between results and 
efforts by the service provider.  
 
Unclear and incomplete service specifications in the 
SLA lead to dissimilar level of understanding 
between the service provider and service consumers 
and other actors involved in the process.  
 
Incorrect people in the hierarchy creating and 
approving the SLA.  
 
Lack of agreement on common taxonomy and terms 
of reference. 
 
Lack of trust after a service related issue between the 
cloud consumer and cloud provider. 
Dinesh [20] cites the three different approaches or 
models used to create a binding SLA in the service industry. 
These are the Insurance Model, where the service provider 
makes its best attempt to satisfy the performance, availability 
and responsiveness objectives that are specified in the SLA 
according to its normal 
operating 
procedures, the 
Provisioning Approach where the service provider typically 
signs different types of service objectives with different 
customers and allocates the resources within the environment 
differently to each customer in order to be able to support the 
service level objectives for each of the individual customer, 
and finally the Adaptive approach where service provider 
would dynamically modify the configuration of the system 
used to support the customer when monitoring mechanisms 
indicates a change in requirements and a danger that the SLA 
might get violated.  Research in this paper through 
interaction with the industry and the academia indicates that 
for the cloud based service framework, all three models 
would be required and some customization on the model 
might be used at times, based on the kind of type of services 
desired by the broker and the consumer.   
D. Constituients of an SLA for the Service Industry 
In a service oriented architecture, especially on an IP 
based networks which the cloud paradigm is all about, the 
creation of an SLA would entail incorporating several 
system availability, system performance and security related 
metrics. A tentative list is provided in the GICTF [21], for 
ready reference. The final aim of providing a service level 
management framework is to enable the players to offer a 
business ready service oriented architecture that enables the 
service economy in a quantifiable and dependable way. This 
is true for cloud providers, consumers and brokers alike. 
Thus the intended SLA governing the relationship between 
these actors must ensure that the following metrics are met: 
 
The quality characteristics of service are predictable 
and enforced at run time. 
 
The SLA management is transparent and defines the 
exact conditions of service delivery and can be 
managed across the entire IT service stack as defined 
in the NIST model.   
 
The whole process is as automated as possible to 
ensure that the service delivery is elastic and 
scalable, besides being responsive. 
 
The process of creating an SLA must be repeatable. 
How this translates to a cloud broker-cloud consumer and 
cloud broker-cloud provider is the subject of the next section.  
IV. 
SLA WITHIN THE THE CLOUD BROKER PARADIGM 
As cloud computing is evolving, the provisioning and 
monitoring of cloud services is becoming more complex. It 
has been realized that the present set of services on offer are 
so complex that normal cloud consumers would not be able 
to manage and deploy them without significant assistance. In 
such a scenario, a cloud consumer would request cloud 
services from a cloud broker, instead of contacting a cloud 
provider directly [1]. As per NIST, a cloud broker is an 
entity that manages the use, performance and delivery of 
cloud services and negotiates relationships between cloud 
providers and cloud consumers.  
A. SLA Formulation Issues in the Cloud 
Ensuring SLA formulation in the present cloud service 
provisioning space is a non trivial task.  Compliance to 
multiple local laws in the location that house the data of the 
cloud consumer, opacity in terms of location of the resources 
that are provisioned and other similar non-quantifiable 
metrics make the drafting, measuring and monitoring 
difficult. The present framework of cloud provisioning is by 
no means stable and the interplay between players in the 
cloud model is presently not able to efficiently and 
adequately address the needs of consumers or the brokers. 
There is thus a growing need for adopting SLA frameworks 
that not only support the service models of IaaS, PaaS and 
SaaS, but also provide a measuring and quantification 
methodology for ensuring SLA adherence. This issue finds 
mention in the Draft NIST Roadmap for Cloud Computing, 
in Section 2.3, which highlights the need for an industry 
wide standard SLA for provisioning of services between the 
cloud provider and the cloud consumer. The draft is however 
209
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

silent on the need to formulate the SLAs between the broker 
and other players in the model.  
As per the NIST framework, the cloud broker would 
provide three distinct services: Service Intermediation, 
Service Aggregation, and Service Arbitrage. These have 
been explained in detail in the ibid document and the 
distinction lies in the mode of provisioning of the services 
and what kind of value addition the broker would provide to 
the cloud consumer and a business value to the cloud service 
provider. These require specific and binding agreements 
between the actors for the reference model to function as 
intended. Adding complexity to the cloud brokering 
framework are the varied deployment models that exist in 
reality, i.e. the public, private hybrid and community 
deployment models. The broker would require multiple 
SLAs with the associated stake holders based on the 
deployment model and the placement of actors in the model.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Framework for SLA management and Cascading Effect 
B. Cloud Broker and Cloud Consumer  SLA  
Cloud service oriented SLAs, with the cloud broker as an 
actor, represent a negotiated service contract between the 
associated parties that specifies, in measurable terms, what 
cloud service will be provided to the consumer through the 
cloud broker. This necessitates that key elements required for 
cloud services including warranties, guarantees and related 
performance metrics are not left out of the SLA. If left out, 
they often tend to make the SLA unenforceable. The broker 
would need to make the consumer understand and appreciate 
the nuance of such elements and make sure that the 
agreement between the broker and the service provider also 
reflects the terms in an unambiguous manner. The aim is to 
make sure all parties understand and anticipate the course of 
action in provisioning of the service.  
Research indicates that the usage of common terms and 
definitions within the SLAs are accepted to avoid 
misunderstandings between all three parties. The terms of 
reference need to be universally defined at the beginning of 
an SLA in a manner that it becomes unambiguous to the 
consumer, the provider and the broker as to what the service 
agreement entails.  
C. Cloud Broker and Cloud Provider SLA  
It is also necessary to create an environment which 
allows the broker to objectively compare competing services 
and offer them as bundles to the intended consumers. As the 
broker would be involved in service intermediation, 
aggregation, and arbitrage, it is necessary to have a 
comparative framework where the services provisioning and 
service usage are both compared in an objective manner. The 
authors are of the opinion that reputation based systems 
would be ideal to achieve such objectivity. Design of such 
systems would be a work in progress and evolve based on 
the stability of the cloud broker system.  
SLAs that would define the relationship between cloud 
brokers and cloud providers would need to be based on the 
same lines as those between the cloud broker and the cloud 
consumers. There is a need for enumerating the same level of 
service provisioning guidelines which get mentioned in the 
broker-consumer SLA.  
Fig. 1 illustrates the relationship between the actors 
involved in the service provisioning model and how 
enforceable SLAs would provide a systematic assessment of 
the services on offer based on the measuring, monitoring and 
penalty metrics. The figure also illustrates the effect of a 
failure of an SLA on the provisioning model. With the cloud 
broker as an entity in the NIST recommended cloud 
framework, it is imperative that metrics of service agreement 
agreed upon between the cloud broker and cloud service 
provider need to be more stringent than those between the 
broker and the cloud consumer. A failure in provisioning of 
the agreed upon services by the cloud service provider will 
have a ‘Cascading Effect’ on the service model. The 
‘cascade’ will be aggravated in the cloud paradigm as 
multiple associations exist between the cloud broker and the 
service consumers (one-to-many and, at times, many-to-
many). The aspect of service arbitrage by the cloud broker 
would thus need to be deliberated very minutely in the event 
of a failure of service. The researchers strongly believe that 
the affect of SLA failures will lead to a cascade effect in 
terms of service outage for multiple cloud service 
consumers. In April 2012, Amazon Inc., faced a major 
outage of host of its services [22]. Such outages reflect the 
effect of the cascade due to the failure of a bundle of services 
from one provider on multiple, sometimes more than a 
million consumers – which we feel is a cascade of service 
outages.   
The researchers are also convinced based on interaction 
with the industry and the academia that there is a need for a 
reputation based system, based on the assumption of a 
stronger metric enforcement between the cloud broker and 
cloud service provider vis-à-vis the cloud broker-consumer, 
for arriving at a comparative framework for selecting the 
service bundle and defining the system level and availability 
based metrics in the SLA between the cloud service provider 
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

and the broker. The reputation based system can be based on 
relevant service metrics as would be proposed for the 
consumer-broker SLA. Some of the metrics, which the 
researchers feel could be used in selecting the appropriate 
service bundles by the brokers could include response time 
in provisioning (SaaS), rate of successful delivery of 
promised services levels of a defined period of time (PaaS), 
risk preventing mechanisms in place by the provider and 
SLA success metrics of the provider. This also brings upon 
the aspect of measuring mechanisms which need to be in 
place while drafting the SLA. This is especially true while 
drafting the provider–broker SLAs as it is anticipated that 
aggregation of multiple, differing services is the way ahead 
and cloud brokers would need to have a mean to measure the 
service been hired. This is also illustrated in Figure 1 above.  
This research illustrates that the violation of service 
agreements between the broker and provider has a 
consequent affect on the agreements between the broker and 
the consumer and this can lead to a cascading degradation in 
service provisioning, if not checked in time through effective 
monitoring mechanisms. SLA drafting and management by 
incorporating 
effective 
monitoring 
and 
measuring 
mechanisms is thus an essential task in ensuring better cloud 
services provisioning.  The metrics recommended in this 
research for basing a SLA between different actors in the 
cloud framework would need further study and the 
researchers also believe based on the work thus far that these 
metrics would change based on the service bundle desired by 
the consumer and arbitraged by the broker.  
V. 
CONCLUSION  
Creating an effective trust relationship between the cloud 
brokers and cloud consumers is essential to maintain the 
desired level of service provisioning in the cloud. This trust 
is enforced using effective agreements between actors. This 
trust is often realized when agreements are based on clearly 
defined and effectively executed contract agreements, or 
SLAs, which are a corner stone for provision of well 
executed, responsive and elastic services in the cloud. The 
aspect of SLA management between cloud brokers and cloud 
providers as well as between cloud brokers and consumers is 
a research void at present and has been highlighted in this 
paper. The SLAs between the three actors have a bearing on 
each other. Industry reports coupled with the research done 
on the subject indicate that the cloud broker’s role in the 
framework for cloud service provisioning is increasing and 
thus the relationship between these individual SLA assume 
increased importance. It has also been realized through this 
research that a strong contractual SLA between the cloud 
broker and the cloud service provider is necessary for the 
cloud framework to maintain its stability. The research also 
highlights the affects of failure of the agreed upon services 
illustrated in a SLA between the broker and the provider and 
the consequent service outage which ensues. The researchers 
have termed this as ‘Cascading Effect’ in the cloud service 
model.  The utility of a well defined and enforceable SLA 
based on quantifiable metrics with the broker as a central 
actor is thus of paramount importance. The researchers also 
believe that there is a need for a reputation based, 
comparative system for arbitraging services from different 
service providers. Such a system can be used by brokers for 
selecting the bundle of service more efficiently and the 
design of such a reputation based system is a work in 
progress.    
VI. 
 FUTURE WORK  
This paper is a work in continuation as part of a doctoral 
thesis on cloud computing and affects on managerial aspects 
of an organization when working in a cloud paradigm. As a 
future work the authors are examining the NIST framework 
and exploring how measurable metrics can be defined to 
create a universally acceptable interoperability framework 
required for dissimilar clouds to talk to each other. The 
authors are also of the opinion that there is a need to further 
work on drafting comprehensive and binding SLA templates 
that address the lacunae existing in service provisioning 
between the three actors. There is also a need to further 
understand the cascading affect due to terms of service 
violation when seen from the perspective of a cloud broker. 
Monitoring and measuring frameworks also form an 
essential part of the SLA management process and are a 
topic for future research.  Another work in future could be 
the affect of these SLAs on the cloud auditors and cloud 
carriers when viewed from the perspective of a cloud broker.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] NIST, “Draft Cloud Computing Technology Roadmap” NIST 
Special Publication 500-293.  
[2] K. E. Cheng, Y. M. Gottlieb, G. M. Levin, and Fuchun Joe 
Lin, “Service brokering and mediation: Enabling next 
generation market and customer driven service delivery,” 
Proc. Tenth International Symposium on Autonomous 
Decentralized Systems (ISADS '11). IEEE Press, Mar. 2011, 
pp. 525-530, doi: 10.1109/ISADS.2011.100.  
[3] L. Herbert and J. Erickson, “The ROI of cloud apps” in A 
Total Economic Impact™ Analysis Uncovers Long-Term 
Value In Cloud Apps, Forrester, 2011. 
[4] C. A. Yfoulis and A. Gounaris, “Honoring SLAs on cloud 
computing services: a control perspective”, Proc. 2nd 
Workshop on Bio-inspired Algorithms For Distributed 
Systems, Jan. 2010, pp. 29-38. 
[5] D.D. Lamanna, J. Skene, and W. Emmerich, “Slang: A 
language for defining service level agreements,” Proc. Nnth 
IEEE workshop of Future Trends of Computing 2003, IEEE 
Press, 
May 
2003, 
pp. 
100-106, 
doi:10.1109/FTDCS.2003.1204317. 
[6] H. Ludwig, A. Keller, A. Dan, R. King, and R. Franck, “Web 
service level agreement (WSLA) language specification,” 
IBM System Journal, vol. 43, Jan. 2004, pp. 136-158, 
doi:10.1147/sj.431.0136. 
[7] A. Paschke, “Rbsla - A declarative rule-based service level 
agreement language based on rulem,” Proc. International 
Conference on Computational Intelligence for Modelling, 
Control and Automation and International Conference on 
Intelligent Agents, Web Technologies and Internet Commerce 
Vol-2 (CIMCA-IAWTIC'06), IEEE Computer Society Dec. 
2005, 
vol. 
2, 
pp. 
308-314, 
28-30, 
doi:10.1109/CIMCA.2005.1631486. 
[8] H. Boley, S. Tabet, and G. Wagner, “Design rationale of 
ruleml: A markup language for semantic web rules” 2001, pp. 
380-401 [retrieved: May, 2012]. 
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[9] M. Alhamad, T. Dillon, and E. Chang, “SLA-Based Trust 
Model for Cloud Computing,” Proc. 13th International 
Conference on Network-Based Information Systems (NBIS 
'10). IEEE Computer Society, Dec. 2010, pp. 321-324. 
doi:10.1109/NBiS.2010.67  
[10] M. Alhamad, T. Dillon, and E. Chang, “A survey on SLA and 
performance measurement in cloud computing,” Proc. 
Confederated International Conference on On the Move to 
Meaningful Internet Systems - Vol II(OTM'11), Springer-
Verlag, Dec. 2011, pp. 469-477. 
[11] A. Lawrence, K. Djemame, O. Wäldrich, W. Ziegler, C. 
Zsigri, “Using service level agreements for optimising cloud 
infrastructure services,” Proc. International Conference on 
Towards 
a 
Service-based 
Internet (ServiceWave'10), 
Springer-Verlag Berlin, 2011, pp. 38-49. 
[12] D. M. Parrilli, “The determination of jurisdiction in grid and 
cloud service level agreements,” Proc. 6th International 
Workshop on Grid Economics and Business Models (GECON 
'09), Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 128-139, doi:10.1007/978-3-
642-03864-8_10. 
[13] M Wang, X Wu, W. Zhang, F. Ding, J. Zhou, and G. Pei , "A 
Conceptual Platform of SLA in Cloud Computing," Proc. 
IEEE Ninth International Conference on Dependable, 
Autonomic and Secure Computing (DASC), 2011, Dec 2011, 
pp.1131-1135, 12-14, doi: 10.1109/DASC.2011.184. 
[14] S. Venticinque, R. Aversa, B. Martino, M. Rak, and Dana 
Petcu, “A 
cloud 
agency 
for 
SLA 
negotiation 
and 
management,” Proc. Conference on parallel processing (Euro-
Par 2010), Springer-Verlag, Aug. 2010, pp.587-594. 
[15] P. Balakrishnan and T. S. Somasundaram, “SLA enabled 
CARE resource broker,” Proc. Future Gener. Comput. Syst, 
vol. 
23, 
Mar 
2011, 
pp. 
265-279, 
doi:10.1016/j.future.2010.09.006. 
[16] V. C. Emeakaroha, I. Brandic, M. Maurer, I. Breskovic, 
“SLA-Aware 
Application 
Deployment 
and 
Resource 
Allocation in Clouds,” Proc. Computer Software and 
Applications Conference Workshops (COMPSACW 2011), 
IEEE 
Press, 
July 
2011, 
 
pp. 
298-303, 
doi:10.1109/COMPSACW.2011.97. 
[17] F. K. Hussain and E. Chang, "An overview of the 
interpretations of trust and reputation", Proc. The Third 
Advanced International on Telecommunications (AICT 
2007), May 2007, pp. 30-30. doi:10.1109/AICT.2007.11. 
[18] A. Dasgupta and A. Prat, "Reputation and asset prices: A 
theory of information cascades and systematic mispricing”, 
Manuscript, London School of Economics, Sep. 2005. 
[19] D. Gambetta, “Trust: Making and breaking cooperative 
relations,” Basil Blackwell, New York, 1990. 
[20] D. C. Verma, M. Beigi, R. Jennings, “Policy Based SLA 
Management in Enterprise Networks,” Proc. International 
Workshop on Policies for Distributed Systems and Networks, 
Jan. 2001, pp. 137-152. 
[21] GICTF, “Use case and funtional requirements for inter cloud 
computing,” 
Aug 
2010, 
url: 
http://events.oasis-
open.org/home/sites/events.oasis-
open.org.home/files/20111012-ICS-goto-GICTF.pdf 
, 
[retrieved : May 2012]. 
[22] Rick Vanover, “What the recent Amazon Web Service Mean 
in 
our 
own 
Cloud 
Journey,” 
url: 
http://www.techrepublic.com/blog/networking/what-the-
recent-amazon-web-services-outages-mean-in-our-own-
cloud-journey/3910?tag=content;siu-container 
[retrieved 
: 
May 2012]. 
[23] R. N. Calheiros, R. Ranjan, A. Beloglazov, D. Rose, A. F. 
César, and R. Buyya, “CloudSim: a toolkit for modeling and 
simulation of cloud computing environments and evaluation 
of resource provisioning algorithms,” Journal of Software 
Practice and Experience, vol 41, Aug 2010, pp. 23-50, 
DOI: 10.1002/spe.995.  
[24] M. Mac as, J. O. Fit , and J. Guitart, "Rule-based SLA 
management for revenue maximisation in Cloud Computing 
Markets," International Conference on Network and Service 
Management 
(CNSM), 
Oct. 
2010, 
pp. 
354-357, 
doi:10.1109/CNSM.2010.5691226. 
[25] M. Alhamad, T. Dillon, and E. Chang, "Conceptual SLA 
framework for cloud computing," 4th IEEE International 
Conference on Digital Ecosystems and Technologies (DEST, 
Apr. 2010, pp. 606-610, doi: 10.1109/DEST.2010.5610586. 
 
 
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-216-5
CLOUD COMPUTING 2012 : The Third International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

