Community Clouds 
A centralized approach 
Claudio Giovanoli, Stella Gatziu Grivas 
Institute for Information Systems 
University of Applied Science Northwestern Switzerland 
Olten, Switzerland 
{claudio.giovanoli, stella.gatziugrivas}@fhnw.ch 
 
Abstract— Community cloud is one of the rising ideas in the 
area of cloud computing. Many companies do not move into 
the cloud, as they need tailored solutions to ensure industry 
specific security and regulatory requirements. A community 
cloud can perfectly fulfill this requirement and costs can be 
spread among several organizations. Providing a community 
cloud involves aspects like security, privacy, identification and 
access management that includes lot of organization. This 
prevents providers and users to build a community cloud 
despite its advantages. However, until now it is not as widely 
spread as other deployment models like public or private 
clouds. One reason is that providing a community cloud needs 
a lot of organizational effort and communication. Additionally 
no standard concept for doing this is elaborated so far. Some 
providers 
are 
offering 
community 
clouds 
or 
certain 
organizations build one. Nevertheless, each community cloud 
underlies a different approach. This paper discusses the 
federated 
and 
brokered 
approaches. 
Additionally, 
a 
centralized approach on how a community cloud can be built 
will be introduced. 
Keywords-Cloud Computing; Community Clouds;  Service 
Market;  Brokering Service 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
Cloud computing has become a significant technology 
trend and provides new possibilities and advantages. It has 
open new opportunities to businesses on how to improve the 
usage, efficiency and reduce spending of their IT systems. 
According to NIST (National Institute of Standards and 
Technology of the US) several service and deployment 
models are proposed [1]. As a deployment model beyond 
private and public clouds, the concept of a community cloud 
is proposed. Community clouds are a union of private 
clouds, which are tailored to a specific vertical industry, such 
as government, healthcare or finance, offering a range of 
services including infrastructure, platform or software. 
Often, organizations that have shared concerns (e.g., mission, 
security 
requirements, 
policy, 
and 
compliance 
considerations) need to fulfill specific security and 
regulatory requirements [1]. 
The use of community clouds is not widespread yet, but 
there is definitely interest. Gartner shows with its Hype 
Cycle for Cloud Computing that Community Clouds are in 
its advent. Nevertheless, Gartner sees a high potential for the 
topic within the upcoming two to five years [2]. 
 
But what are the reasons community clouds are not 
widely used? Community cloud is a way of congregating 
users under an umbrella of services. Some businesses may 
hesitate to share common resources with competitors. A first 
obstacle on the way to a community cloud is to identify the 
appropriate community and to convince possible community 
mates to cooperate with. A second big drawback of this 
deployment model is to define the management, roles and 
responsibilities within all stakeholders. For interested 
customers, these additional efforts can be very discouraging 
to use such a shared cloud environment. 
Despite the fact that community clouds are not yet 
established, there are some examples in the market. In 
particular, the industries of health, finance and government 
are early adopters of community clouds rollouts. 
Most advantages of a community cloud are covered in 
the general benefits of cloud computing such as cost 
reduction and the shift from capital expenditures to 
operational expenditures. 
Nevertheless, a community cloud offers special advantages 
compared to other deployment models [3], [4]: 
 
• 
Secure, private multi-tenant cloud computing satisfies 
demanding requirements of the organizations 
• 
Flexible solutions to differing market needs 
• 
Matching market fluctuations in demand 
Figure 1. Gartner's Hype Cycle for Cloud Computing 2012 [2] 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Figure 2. Customers' concerns entering a Cloud [5] 
• 
Application or sensitive data can remain in the 
community network 
• 
Less management than a private cloud 
• 
Cost reduction by eliminating owned infrastructure and 
software licenses needs 
• 
More efficient and potentially lower cost than existing 
systems and less cost than building an own private 
cloud or data center. 
 
Several studies are showing that most of customers’ 
concerns regarding clouds are compliance related issues. 
For example, a study published in early 2011 by KPMG [5] 
explains that companies are currently facing most often 
legal challenges. So, there are issues like security, 
uncertainty about the future control of their own data and to 
meet legal compliance, which hint potential users. 
 Thus, an important benefit of a community cloud is to 
address compliance requirements for specific groups like 
similar industries and to offer appropriate solutions to its 
concerns. 
The aim of this paper is to discuss the different 
management models (federated, brokered and centralized) 
for such community clouds. After the introduction, 
challenges of community clouds will be discussed. The third 
section gives a short overview on current management 
models and introduces a centralized model. Thus, in the 
fourth section, a high level architecture of a centralized 
system will be suggested. The subsequent parts, sections V – 
IX, are explaining the different layers of the introduced 
models, from infoplace, to quality gate, over a brokering 
service, the cloud service management to finally the concept 
of a service market. The last section concludes the paper and 
gives a short overview on future work and next steps. 
II. 
 CHALLENGES OF COMMUNITY CLOUDS 
Besides the introduced drivers, we see some key 
challenges within the idea of community clouds, which need 
to be considered before building up such kind of cloud. 
 
1) Organizational Structures and management models 
for building community clouds 
By 
building 
up 
a 
community 
cloud, 
different 
stakeholders are involved. Thus, when considering a 
community cloud, at least as a special form of private cloud, 
two roles can be identified: the service providers and the 
service users. 
Going one step further, a community deployment model 
can consist of several users and several providers, offering 
different services with some times similar functionality. 
This is mandatory to be able to prevent the well-known 
vendor lock-in effect [6]. However, this requires appropriate 
organizational structures and management models to avoid 
the loss of advantages. Several models will be discussed in 
the upcoming section. 
 
2) Communications 
Already 
before 
planning 
a 
community 
cloud, 
communications between the different stakeholders are 
crucial. Customers need to understand the advantages and 
risks of cloud services within such a closed environment. 
But, also, provider(s) have to understand the specific 
requirements each community has.  
Even at an earlier stage, while thinking about the idea to 
build up a community cloud, an appropriate community has 
to be identified. Communications have to be initialized with 
first community members (clients and users). Thus, we 
suggest that the first step for building a community cloud is 
the establishment of an appropriate community. This 
community should create the business case, set the rules and 
organization form, and choose other members and 
providers.   
But, communications between customers and providers, 
like announcements of common SLA adjustments, are 
playing also a key role during the cloud operations. To 
ensure a good cooperation between the community network, 
rules and responsibilities have clearly to be defined and 
announced to all stakeholders. 
 
3) Ease of use 
While establishing the cloud environment, not only 
security, efficiency and compliance issues have to be 
considered. As cloud promises fast and on-demand 
provision of IT services, customers have to decide easily, 
which services they need and want to use. Also ordering and 
service termination processes have to be allocated in such a  
way that users care able to access and execute services as 
easy as possible. 
 
III. 
MANAGEMENT MODELS FOR COMMUNITY CLOUDS 
Management models for community clouds follow either 
a federated or a brokered approach [7]. In a federated 
approach all institutions (members of the community cloud) 
share their own resources, whereas in a brokered approach 
sharing of the resources takes place through a third party, the 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

so-called broker. This means, the broker procures the 
resources (services) to the community cloud members.   
Today the implementation of a federated management 
model most often faces challenges mainly due to two main 
reasons. First, it is difficult to tackle liability issues like the 
legal impact of a service outage or responsibilities. Secondly, 
it is hard to provide cost transparency. Questions about the 
responsibility 
of 
paying 
support, 
maintenance 
and 
operational costs are arising. However, such a federated 
model comes with its benefits. The vendor lock-in issue does 
not exist, risks are distributed and costs are reduced. 
Furthermore, it offers full control of the community 
members who can share best practice and their industry 
specific services.  
Today, the brokered model is the usually deployed one, 
when implementing a community cloud. In the brokered 
model, institutions share provider resources through a so- 
called broker. The broker acts as an intermediary and should 
provide expert advice to the community. It takes care of trust 
establishment and contract settlement. The institutions only 
have one party to trust and one contract to sign. The brokers 
can also handle disputes in the cloud [8]. This model is 
transparent in terms of operation and accountability, 
awareness raising, guidance on expectations regarding the 
use of the community cloud, levels of security, and meeting 
legal obligation (compliance). Operations can be spread 
across multiple cloud providers whereby continuity is given. 
The broker is fully responsible for security issues, it forces 
specific security and regulatory requirements. Participating 
institutions do not need to test whether a cloud provider is 
effectively mitigating risks. It is the role of the broker to 
assure such aspects for the community. At last, a broker can 
provide value-adding services like federated identity 
management or resource federation [7]. 
Contrariwise, a third model, the centralized one, has only 
one IaaS provider and one broker. The model foresees an 
IaaS provider as the leading party, which is responsible for 
(i) establishing the infrastructure platform of the cloud 
including services such as 
- 
Computational Power 
- 
Networking 
- 
Storage 
- 
Virtualization 
- 
etc. 
 
 
 
and (ii) for procuring PaaS and SaaS providers. The broker is 
responsible for expert advice and acts as an intermediary. In 
this model the broker has different duties, as described in the 
brokered model. Operations are spread across multiple 
service providers. 
With regards to performance aspects, it has to be 
considered that a centralized model is highly dependent of a 
sole IaaS provider. Thus, we are expecting that in a worst 
case scenario, the centralized approach can be less 
performing compared to the other models. While the 
federated and brokered models are offering the opportunity 
to change the provider in such a case, the centralized one 
does not.  
IV. 
ARCHITECTURE OF A CENTRALIZED APPROACH 
Following a centralized approach opens a wide range for 
the establishment of architecture of a community cloud. 
Besides choosing an IaaS provider for the leading provider 
role, we recommend five layers within the community cloud 
architecture. These layers support customers and service 
providers through different stages of the service lifecycle.  
The cooperation between each of the five components 
establishes a trustworthy usage of the different cloud services 
within the community. It offers flexibility to the community, 
with regards to organization and communication aspects. 
Figure 4. A centralized approach 
Figure 3. Two main models for Community Clouds [7] 
Figure 5. Proposed components of a centralized community model 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Figure 6. The CLiCk Infoplace [9] 
Additionally, it ensures that users can easily get the needed 
services with a low commitment to time, money and 
management resources. Each of these five layers from 
infoplace, Quality Gate, to Brokering Service, Cloud Service 
Management and Service Market will be introduced within 
the following sections. 
V. 
INFOPLACE 
A so-called infoplace builds the entry point for the 
community 
members 
and 
can 
clearly 
support 
the 
establishment of the communication between the members of 
a community cloud. 
Whereas potential cloud customers are facing several 
challenges and open questions like 
- 
Which services are appropriate to obtain from the 
cloud environment? 
- 
Do Cloud Services fit to the IT of my company?  
- 
What are the advantages and benefits, given through 
Cloud services? 
- 
Is my company prepared for the cloud?  
the infoplace offers assistance to the customer, e.g. readiness 
assessments to evaluate potential technical or organizational 
gaps within the company.  
An additional advantage of the infoplace is the use case 
repository. The use case repository enables to store the 
collected cloud use cases within the community. It follows a 
developed framework, which defines different areas of 
interest inside such a use case. Following this scheme also 
establishes that use cases can be compared on the different 
topics like the service model but also on technical and 
management issues.  
The use cases should be (i) a viable source for the user to 
see how other have compete their cloud projects and (ii) to 
support the user by identifying different workloads / process 
areas, which are predestined to run in a cloud. 
For realizing these infoplace requirements the University 
of Applied Science Northwestern Switzerland is building a 
platform for guiding users through the cloud life cycle. For 
this need, they introduce a project named CLiCk (Cloud Life 
Cycle). 
The vision of the CLiCk-Infoplace is the provision of self 
-services and supportive information, which can be accessed 
on an appropriate platform through the accordant enterprises 
[9].  
VI. 
QUALITY GATE 
All actors within the community cloud need to fulfill 
certain criteria. Not everyone is allowed to use the services, 
not every application will be offered in the cloud, and not all 
service providers fulfill the compliance requirements of the 
users. Therefore a quality gate service has to be provided. 
The Quality Gate describes an independent service within 
the community cloud. Its main purpose is to assess the 
general and industry specific criteria, which have to be 
followed by all stakeholders in a community cloud (users 
and providers). General criteria could be for example the 
ability of auditing. Industry specific criteria can dictate e.g. 
form, location and minimal duration of storage for digital 
records [10]. The quality gate includes:   
 
- 
Quality of Service Providers: The quality of service 
providers needs to be assured because the 
community has to follow certain legal restrictions. 
E.g. the service provider needs to prove, that their 
company obeys to according laws or that they 
handle sensitive data with needed concern. Another 
aspect is the sustainability of the service provider, it 
is important for the success that the company will 
exist further. To ensure the quality of service 
providers certain standards need to be fulfilled. 
These standards can be ISO standards or other 
certifications. 
- 
Quality of Services: The offered services need to 
have a certain quality. For example a finance 
application for financial administration has the 
restriction that it needs to be certified by the 
government. The quality assurance service should 
elaborate a list of criteria, which an application 
needs to fulfill. This list of criteria differs depending 
on the type of application. For example an 
application for wage payment has other criteria than 
an application for drawing mind maps. 
- 
Quality of Customers: The third category of the 
quality assurance process concerns the users. Goal 
is to assess candidates for community membership.  
While establishing the introduced community it is 
important to setup the conditions for entering the 
community and using the services out of the cloud.  
To ensure a high level of trust, the role of assessing the 
introduced quality criteria within the gate should be executed 
by an independent actor.  
Criteria should be defined and collected continuously 
through a consortium of community members and project 
independent advisories. 
VII. BROKERING SERVICE 
Cloud brokering is not yet finally defined. Several 
opinions about what, who and how cloud brokering services 
should be able to fulfill exist. One perspective of brokering 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

has been explained in Section III within the brokered 
community cloud model. A more generic view, applicable 
for most cloud deployment models is given by Buyya [11].  
It can be understood as a part of a global marketplace, where 
service providers and consumers join to find suitable match 
for each other. It provides various services to its customers 
such as resource discovery, meta-scheduler, reservation 
service, queuing service, accounting and pricing services 
[11]. Gartner explains cloud brokering as a “cloud services 
brokerage (CSB) is a service provider that plays an 
intermediary role in cloud computing” [12]. They see three 
different types of brokerage scenarios: aggregation, 
intermediation and arbitration [13]. 
Within the introduced community cloud approach, 
brokering services are understood as a provision and convey 
of the available services. The cloud broker has knowledge 
about the used services by each customer and the available 
services in the market. If a customer needs a new service, 
e.g. additional software, or an altered quantity of a service, 
the brokering service executes the new requirement 
immediately and orders it from the service market. Like in 
the brokered community model, the broker can also take a 
leading role for contracting. 
VIII. CLOUD SERVICE MANAGEMENT 
The fourth layer deals with service management aspects. 
The cloud service management denotes the implementation 
and management of additional services that meet the needs 
of the community members and includes facilities like: 
 
a) Installation 
and 
Configuration: 
executes 
administrative tasks that occur primarily in the 
introduction, the transition or the early use of cloud 
computing. It includes, for example, adjustments of 
organizational processes and structures, and descriptions 
of specific cloud projects or complex issues and how 
these can be overcome. 
b) Resource Management: This topic deals with the 
distribution of the (hardware) resources (e.g. based on 
best practices) - also with regard to high scalability and 
flexibility. It also includes interoperability aspects, so far 
by defining standards for higher compatibility between 
different services is provided. 
c) Service Monitoring and Reporting: offers automated 
services to control if agreed parameters like availability, 
speed and quality of provided services are accordantly to 
Service Level Agreements. This includes also a 
customer service for reporting current figures about 
usage, costs and delivered performance of services.  
A cloud service management can be provided through an 
appropriate mix of people, process and information 
technology. 
IX. 
SERVICE MARKET 
The final element of a community cloud is the 
provision of the individual cloud services independent from 
IaaS, PaaS or SaaS.  
On a so called service market, customers are able to 
compare, select, buy and review applications. Users choose 
out of a set of qualified cloud services. Any offered service 
is tested and approved in the quality gate through an 
independent consortium. Usage of the service market has to 
be as simple and easy as other well know application stores 
like, e.g., Apples iTunes or Google’s Play.  
While the infoplace supports customers to find the 
appropriate service, the service market leads the client to the 
final purchase of a service. A service market model is 
potentially valuable for any sort of IT product or service that 
is sufficiently industrializes and packaged in order to be 
consumed by a non-expert end-user. Such kind of 
application store can become the marketplace to access 
cloud, commercial software products, skills, as well as to 
finally succeed reusing and exchanging software across 
different companies. The goal of a service market is to make 
IT offerings transparent, unambiguous and comparable. 
Furthermore, reduced procurement times, increased user 
satisfaction, and reduced costs should be the outcomes of 
such a marketplace. 
The idea behind a marketplace is not explicitly bound to 
a community cloud. But according to Buyya et al. [14] it is 
predestinated to be applied for a specific industry 
respectively community similar to the logistics clouds. 
X. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
Cloud Computing is still in its advent, and the number of 
interested business and depending business models is 
increasing. But many institutions, whether potential 
customers or consultancies are hesitating to consume IT 
services in a cloud approach. As shown, many issues 
concern security and compliance areas. IT has not yet been 
successful in getting these issues out of the way to the 
cloud. 
To decrease such security and compliance issues, a 
community cloud is one approach to face these challenges 
and to use the advantages of the cloud approach like 
reducing costs, faster time to market at the same time. 
While a community cloud can improve the security and 
compliance issues, it also brings additional challenges. 
Compared to other deployment models, organizational and 
communication efforts within a community cloud are 
increasing as a whole. As other deployment models, like 
public and private, commonly are describing a business to 
business (customer to provider) dependency. A community 
approach opens relations to the entire community 
(customers and providers). To ensure the success and proper 
management of a community cloud the stated increased 
organizational and communication efforts is essential.  
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

In a good working cooperation the additional effort can 
be spread over all community members and will not cause 
more effort for the single instance then using other 
deployment models. 
For the process of establishing a community cloud we 
propose as a first step to identify and coin a proper 
community with specific similar concerns. This community 
shall define the requirements, goals, organizational and 
management approaches of the cloud. As concerns 
regarding compliance most often are related with the cloud 
data center location, the introduced centralized approach, 
including one leading IaaS provider, should enlighten the 
given regulatory requirements and ensure that Platform- and 
Software providers are in line with the community concerns 
too. 
The introduced layered approach of the centralized 
solution supports the community to establish a vendor 
independent (excluding the infrastructure provider), flexible 
and high quality shared IT environment, where advantages 
of cloud computing can be gained. Thus, community 
members are able to focus on core businesses instead of 
handling with IT issues. 
Whether a brokered, federated or centralized approach, 
community clouds in general are offering a considerable 
option for businesses with sensible IT issues. We see the 
community deployment model as a serious suggestion for 
future IT services in areas with special security and 
compliance needs. 
As the introduced centralized approach is only a first 
high level architecture, the authors are currently identifying 
different domains to initiate a first pilot. Goal is to find few 
partners for establishing a pilot of a centralized community 
cloud. First talks are held with partners from energy, health 
and public industries. Based on their feedback funding and 
further partners in the industries for a pilot project will now 
be identified. As a first step of such a pilot program, the 
domain specific requirements will be assessed to setup the 
base for the different layers. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Mell, P. and Grance, T.,  “The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing” 
Recommendations of the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology,  NIST Special Publication 2011. 
[2] Gartner Inc. , “Hype Cycle Cloud Computing 2012”, Gartner 
Incorporate, Stamford: 2012. 
[3] Nussbaum, C.,  “Dissecting the Cloud IV – Community Clouds”., 
2012, 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.atomrain.com/it/technology/dissecting-cloud-iv-
community-clouds 07.04.2013. 
[4] Butler, B. , “Will community cloud services be the next big thing?” 
Digital Publication, Computerworld.uk, 2012, Retrived from 
http://www.computerworlduk.com/in-depth/cloud-
computing/3341808/will-community-cloud-services-be-the-next-big-
thing/ 07.04.2013. 
[5] KPMG, “Clarity in the Cloud: A Global study of the Business 
adoption of Cloud”, KPMG International, Switzerland: 2012 
[6] Armbrust et al., “ A View of Cloud Computing: Clearing the clouds 
away from the true potential and obstacles posed by this computing 
capability” , ACM Communications, University of Berkeley: 2010 
[7] Teunissen, H. et al., “Community Clouds; Shared Infrastructre as a 
Service”, University of Utrecht, Cloud Seminar, 2011, Retrieved from 
http://de.slideshare.net/SNKN-CloudComputing/110616-community-
cloudsseminar-cloud-computing 03.04.2013. 
[8] Koelliker, C., “Community Clouds in Domains with Specific Needs: 
The Example of Swiss Government Cloud”, Master Thesis, 
University of Applied Arts and Sciences Northwestern Switzerland, 
Januray 2013, unpublished 
[9] Giovanoli, C. and Gatziu Grivas, S.” Building a Knowledge Base for 
Guiding Users through the Cloud Life Cycle”, CLOSER Conference 
Paper, 2013, to be published. 
[10] Duranti, L., Rogers, C., “Trust in digital records: An increasingly 
cloudy legal area”, Elsevier, University of British Columbia, Canada: 
2012. 
[11] R. Buyya et al., “Cloudbus Toolkit for Market-Oriented Cloud 
Computing”, Manjrasoft Pty Ltd, Melbourne, Australia, 2012. 
[12] Gartner Inc. , “Gartner Outlines Five Cloud Computing Trends That 
Will Affect Cloud Strategy Through 2015”, Gartner Incorporate, 
Stamford, 2012 
[13] Gartner Inc. , “Three types of Cloud Brokerage will enhance Cloud 
Services”, Gartner Incorporate, Stamford: 2009. 
[14] Buyya, R., Pandey, S. and Vecchiola, C., “Cloudbus toolkit for 
market-oriented cloud computing.” Cloud Computing, pp. 24–44, 
2009,  Retrieved from http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-
3-642-10665-1_4 
03.04.2013.
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

