Identification of IT Security and Legal Requirements Regarding Cloud Services 
 
Constantin Christmann, Jürgen Falkner, Andrea Horch, Holger Kett  
Fraunhofer Institute for Industrial Engineering IAO  
Stuttgart, Germany 
e-mail: {constantin.christmann, juergen.falkner, andrea.horch, holger.kett}@iao.fraunhofer.de 
 
 
Abstract—The adoption of cloud computing holds tremendous 
potential for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) as it 
enables them to reduce costs as well as improve flexibility and 
scalability. In order to choose an appropriate cloud service, it 
is necessary to carefully identify functional and non-functional 
requirements. In this regard, the aspects affecting IT security 
as well as legal requirements are important topics to the users 
of SMEs. However, the smaller the enterprise, the lower the 
probability that there is enough expertise to identify the 
requirements in these subject areas. Addressing this issue, the 
contribution of this paper is the description of a method for 
identifying IT security and legal requirements regarding a 
cloud service in a structured kind of way. The presented 
method was implemented as a part of a prototype for a cloud 
service search. Based on this search system, an evaluation with 
users of SMEs was conducted. The evaluation results attest the 
search system and its underlying method to successfully assist 
users regarding the identification of relevant legal and IT 
security requirements, hence reducing the amount of expertise 
required by users of SMEs, as well as the associated effort of 
searching for appropriate cloud services. 
Keywords- cloud computing; cloud services; IT security; 
legal; requirments; service search. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The adoption of cloud computing holds tremendous 
potential for organizations of all shapes and sizes. Especially 
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are highly 
interested in cloud computing as it enables them to reduce 
costs as well as improve flexibility and scalability [1]. In 
order to choose the right cloud service, a thorough 
identification of functional as well as non-functional 
requirements regarding such service is necessary. Due to the 
necessary outsourcing of data – which is often a crucial asset 
of an enterprise - aspects of cloud services affecting 
information technology (IT) security as well as legal 
requirements are important topics to users of SMEs [2][3]. 
However, the smaller the enterprise, the lower the probability 
that there is enough expertise to identify the requirements in 
these subject areas. Hence, the contribution of this paper is 
the description of a method for identifying IT security and 
legal requirements regarding a cloud service in a structured 
kind of way. We did implement this method as part of a 
prototype for a cloud service search (depicted in Fig. 1). In 
this search system, the search is based on functional and non-
functional requirements. In order to define the non-functional 
requirements – addressing the subject areas of IT security as 
well as legal aspects of cloud computing - the user is asked 
simple questions which are easy to answer without special 
expertise in both subject areas. These answers serve as an 
input to the method presented in this paper and the result is a 
selection of applicable requirements addressing IT security 
or legal constraints. These requirements then serve as input 
to a service search which accesses a repository to select 
appropriate cloud services matching the functional and non-
functional requirements. The results of this search are then 
displayed to the user, making sure that the user will consider 
only cloud services which satisfy her needs. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: 
Section II gives an overview over the different subject areas 
of cloud service requirements and justifies the focus of this 
paper. Section III covers the related work regarding the 
identification of IT security and legal requirements. Then, in 
Section IV, the underlying methodology for the development 
of the presented method is described, and in Section V, the 
method is explained in detail. Section VI presents the 
application of the presented method in a website helping 
users to identify appropriate cloud services. Section VII 
describes our evaluation efforts and Section VIII concludes 
with a discussion and an outlook on further research 
activities. 
 
II. 
CLOUD SERVICE REQUIREMENTS AND FOCUS 
In the field of software engineering, the requirements 
regarding a software application are typically categorized 
into functional and non-functional requirements [4]. This 
schema can also be used for the categorization of 
requirements regarding a cloud service: 
 Functional requirements: This category comprises 
the functions/modules needed by users of the cloud 
service. Examples are address administration, e-mail 
or invoice practice. The needed interfaces to other 
services or applications also fall into this category. 
 Non-functional 
requirements: 
Non-functional 
requirements typically cover various qualitative and 
quantitative aspects regarding the software (i.e., 
usability, 
performance, 
IT 
security 
or 
documentation). However, for an adequate selection 
of cloud services we need a broader understanding of 
non-functional requirements which – along with 
qualitative aspects – also considers the following: 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

o 
Legal requirements: Depending on the 
kind of data that is processed by the cloud 
service, it might be necessary to obey 
certain legal constraints – i.e., in Germany 
the 
Federal 
Data 
Protection 
Act 
(Bundesdatenschutz-gesetz) regulates the 
processing of personal data. Such legal 
requirements may influence (improve) also 
the IT security of a service; however, 
primarily they are of a regulatory nature - 
i.e., they may ensure that fiscal authorities 
can access service data easily.   
o 
Economic aspects: When selecting a 
cloud service, it might be necessary to also 
consider economic aspects – i.e., the price 
of the service should not exceed a given 
budget or migration cost to a service must 
be taken into account.   
Fig. 2 shows the taxonomy which forms the basis for our 
understanding of cloud service requirements.  
In order to select an appropriate cloud service, all aspects 
need to be taken into account. However, users from SMEs 
require varying support in the different subject areas. For 
example, for reviewing the user experience of certain cloud 
software not much technical expertise is required. Also, the 
evaluation of a cloud service from an economic perspective 
is something users of SMEs should be capable of. However, 
studies show that such users are especially concerned with IT 
security as well as being compliant to applicable law [2][3] 
and these are the topics the users of SMEs in general do not 
have much experience with.  As IT security and law are the 
areas the users of SMEs need the most support, the focus of 
this paper lies on the identification of requirements out of 
these two subject areas. 
 
 
Figure 2. Taxonomy of cloud service requirements. In the diagram the 
focus areas of this paper has been highlighted. 
III. RELATED WORK 
As IT security is a highly relevant topic in the context of 
cloud computing, there exists various literature supporting 
providers and users to obey important security aspects of 
cloud computing and cloud services. For example Mather et 
al. [5] and Krutz et al. [6] cover security aspects of cloud 
computing mostly with an emphasis on the enterprise 
perspective. 
Another 
example 
are 
the 
 
security 
recommendations for cloud providers [7] published by the 
German Federal Office for Information Security, which can 
also act as a source for requirements for users of cloud 
services. On an European Union level the European Union 
Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA) 
offers thread analysis for internet and cloud architectures [8] 
and, with members from all over the world, the Cloud 
Figure 1. Visualization of the cloud service search 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Security Alliance (CSA) promotes the use of best practices 
for providing security assurance on cloud computing for an 
even broader audience [9]. Furthermore, various certificates 
formulate requirements affecting the IT security and can be 
applied in the context of cloud services [10]. Examples are 
the certification regarding ISO 27001 [11], which addresses 
IT security management in general or the Euro Cloud Star 
Audit [12], which explicitly addresses cloud services.  
The legal aspects of cloud computing/cloud services do – 
especially in Germany and the EU as a whole – get great 
attention and various publications cover relevant aspects for 
providers as well as users of cloud services [13][14][15]. 
To sum up, in both areas - IT security as well as law - 
many resources are available, which can be used by users of 
cloud computing to formulate their requirements regarding a 
cloud service. However, to do so, a certain expertise is 
necessary and in both fields no approach exists, which helps 
users of cloud services to identify the appropriate 
requirements without requiring the user to deal with the 
sometimes rather complicated details. 
Recommender systems seek to predict a rating or 
preference of a user for a specific item. There exist different 
recommender systems which support the selection of 
appropriate cloud services [16][17]; however, existing 
systems mainly focus on quantitative aspects like execution 
time, response time or budget – hence, leaving out important 
qualitative aspects with respect to legal constraints or IT 
security. Furthermore, in these systems the user has to 
specify the (quantitative) requirements herself which may 
not be possible for many users of SMEs. 
IV. METHODOLOGY 
This section covers the individual steps which led to the 
development of the presented method and its prototypical 
application. Fig. 3 gives an overview of the different steps 
involved in this process.  
 
Development of the method
Development of the service search prototype
Evaluation by experts
Collection of non-functional requirements
Evaluation by users
 
Figure 3. Overview of the different steps which led to the presented method 
and its prototypical application. 
At first, literature reviews in the field of IT security and 
regarding legal aspects of cloud computing were conducted. 
Based on [7], [10], [14], [22], [23], and [24] a 
comprehensive list of non-functional requirements was 
collected – all of them being relevant regarding the selection 
of cloud services. The final list of requirements contains 104 
entities each being assigned to one of the following subject 
areas (for examples, see Section V): 
 Data center: Infrastructural aspects relevant to IT 
security, processes, organization of staff (35 
requirements) 
 Service provider: processes, organization of staff (17 
requirements) 
 Cloud service: Various aspects of the service relevant 
to IT security, training and support (35 requirements) 
 Legal: contract, legal requirements (17 requirements) 
In a next step, strategies regarding IT risk assessment 
were investigated. As the foundation for our method, we 
chose the concept of risk analysis [19], which combines the 
damage a security breach could do to the IT system of a 
user/organization with its associated probability for 
occurrence. Then, the list of non-functional requirements as 
well as the developed method were improved based on 
discussions with experts with expertise in IT security and 
regarding legal aspects of cloud computing. The final 
method is presented in Section V of this paper.  
This method was then implemented as part of a prototype 
for a web-based search system for SMEs which supports the 
selection of adequate cloud services (see Section VI). The 
last step comprised an evaluation of this web-based 
prototype by users from SMEs. The evaluation setting and 
the results of both evaluation stages (experts and users) are 
described in Section VII.  
 
V. DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD 
Fig. 4 visualizes the data flow giving an overview over 
the individual steps of the presented method. The initial input 
is the set of functional requirements of the user regarding a 
potential cloud service. The first step performs a 
preprocessing which results in data types and legal 
constraints due to the functional requirements. Based on the 
data types, the protection needs to become qualified. 
Afterwards, the individual non-functional requirements are 
derived taking into account these protection needs as well as 
the legal constraints. The final result is a set of individual 
non-functional requirements regarding a cloud service. In the 
following, the different steps of the method will be described 
in detail. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Functional 
requirements
Preproces-
sing
Qualifiying 
protection 
needs
Selecting 
require-
ments
Legal constraints
Individual 
protection needs
Non-functional 
requirements
 
Figure 4. Visualization of the data flow 
A. Preprocessing 
In the first step a preprocessing is performed, where, 
based on the functional requirements, the following 
information is derived: 
 The different data types which should be processed 
by a cloud service. As an example, if a functional 
requirement for the cloud service is address 
administration, then this implies the processing of 
address data. 
 The legal constraints regarding the cloud service due 
to the processing of the different data types. These 
constraints must be derived from national word of 
law and from regulations applicable to the user’s 
business. Example: In the case of address data being 
a data type, in Germany, the processing of personal 
data has a legal constraint – due to the fact that the 
regulations of the Federal Data Protection Act have to 
be obeyed.  
B. Qualifying Protection Needs 
Regarding IT security, the most prominent protection 
targets are availability, integrity and confidentiality of data 
[18]. In order to qualify the individual user needs regarding 
these protection targets, our method utilizes the concept of 
risk analysis [19], which combines the damage a security 
breach could have to the IT system of a user/organization 
with its associated probability for occurrence. The risk 
analysis used by our method comprises the following steps: 
1. Value of protection: For each data type and 
protection 
target 
(availability, 
integrity, 
confidentiality) the value of the protection is 
qualified using the categories low, normal, high, very 
high. Then, following the maximum principle [20] 
the value of protecting a target is chosen as the 
maximum value over all data types. 
2. Threat characteristic: Then a threat characteristic 
matching the industry sector must be chosen. Based 
on this threat characteristic, the probability of a 
security breach affecting one of the protection 
targets is qualified using the categories very rare, 
rare, occasionally, often, very often (see Table I). 
3. Individual protection needs: Based on the value of 
protection and the probability of a security breach, 
the individual needs regarding the protection targets 
are derived as being low, medium, high or very high 
(see Table II). 
TABLE I.  
THREAT CHARACTERISTIC 
Threat 
Characteristic 
Probability of security breach 
Availability 
Integrity 
Confident- 
iallity 
Politically explosive, 
high public interest 
very often 
occasionally 
occasionally 
High risk for 
(industry) espionage 
very often 
occasionally 
very often 
No specific 
characteristic 
very often 
occasionally 
rare 
TABLE II.  
PROTECTION NEEDS 
Probability 
Value of Protection 
Low 
Normal 
High 
Very High 
Very rare 
low 
low 
low 
normal 
Rare 
low 
normal 
normal 
high 
Occasionally 
low 
normal 
normal 
high 
Often 
low 
normal 
high 
high 
Very often 
low 
high 
high 
very high 
 
 
C. Selecting Requirements 
The foundation for this step is a comprehensive list of 
non-functional requirements relevant to IT security or 
regarding legal constraints. Examples of such requirements 
are: 
 In Germany, if the processed data is personal, then 
the contract with the cloud service provider must be 
compliant with the Federal Data Protection Act 
(Bundesdatenschutzgesetz).  
 The computing center of the cloud provider should 
have a redundancy of N+1 for critical components in 
order to be able to offer high or very high availability. 
 In order to ensure very high protection of integrity 
and confidentiality a strong authentication (i.e., two 
factor authentication) for users of the service is 
necessary.   
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
A schema for conveniently expressing that list of 
requirements is depicted in Fig. 5.  
 
Low
Medium
High
Very high
Low
Medium
High
Very high
Low
Medium
High
Very high
Individual-
related data
 
Figure 5. Schema for expressing the set of non-functional requirements 
The objective of this last step is the selection of a subset 
of requirements from this list. This can be achieved by 
selecting the requirements which do apply when considering 
the given legal constraints as well as the individual 
protection needs. 
VI. APPLICATION 
The method described in the previous section was 
implemented as part of a prototype for a web-based search 
system for SMEs supporting the selection of adequate cloud 
services. The central components of this search system are: 
 Fn: The first component of the system is responsible 
for the determination of functional requirements 
regarding a cloud services. In this step, the system 
supports the user by allowing a semantic extraction of 
functional terms from product websites specified by 
the user (i.e., the website of a product the user 
currently has in use and intends to replace by a cloud 
service). The technique for this semantic extraction of 
functional requirements is described in detail in [21]. 
The functional requirements are represented as a set, 
detailing for each identified function what kind of 
data (data types) this function processes and which 
legal constraints have to be obeyed in this context. 
 Non-Fn: The second component implements the 
method described in this paper. 
 Search: The last component performs a search in the 
service repository using the search profile defined by 
Figure 6. Screenshot of the input elements used to qualify the protection needs 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

the functional and non-functional requirements. For 
each service the fulfillment of the individual 
functional and non-functional requirements was 
stored in the repository. The search was performed by 
filtering out services which miss one or more of the 
identified requirements.  
In the following, some background information regarding the 
implementation of the Non-Fn component will be given. 
A. Preprocessing 
Data types and legal constraints are automatically 
determined based on the functional requirements which were 
identified by the Fn component. In order to achieve this, the 
system uses a data set which allows a mapping from 
functional 
requirements 
to 
associated 
data 
types. 
Furthermore, the data set specifies if a data type has one or 
more legal constraints. The following legal constraints are 
supported by the system: personal data, fiscal relevant data 
and security clearance. 
B. Qualifying Protection Needs 
In order to gather the value of protection for each tuple 
data type / protection target as well as for selecting an 
adequate threat characteristic, corresponding questions and 
input elements are presented to the user (see Fig. 6). Then, 
the individual needs regarding the three protection targets 
(availability, integrity, confidentiality) are derived based on 
these inputs. 
VII. EVALUATION 
The first evaluation comprised the review of the 
presented method, as well as the list of non-functional 
requirements by two experts – one with expertise in IT 
security, one with expertise in both IT security and legal.  
Both experts did attest the list to successfully cover the 
necessary aspects of IT security as well as relevant legal 
aspects regarding the selection of cloud services. Based on 
the reviewers’ feedback the method itself was further 
improved resulting in the form presented in Section V. 
The second evaluation stage involved the assessment of 
the implemented prototype of the search system by users 
from five independent SMEs from the craft domain.  The 
prototype was presented to each of these reviewers and 
afterwards an interview was conducted in order to get the 
reviewer’s opinion regarding the search system and the 
underlying method. During the interviews, the reviewers 
attested the search system (together with the underlying 
method) to successfully assist users with the identification of 
relevant non-functional requirements. Hence, the system 
would reduce the amount of expertise required by users of 
SMEs as well as the associated effort of searching for 
appropriate cloud services. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have presented a method for identifying 
IT security and legal requirements regarding a cloud service. 
Also, details regarding the implementation of the method as 
a component of a service search as well as evaluation results 
were given. As the feedback of users of SMEs was quite 
promising we think that the underlying method is well suited 
for 
supporting 
the 
identification 
of 
cloud 
service 
requirements. Hence, we think that by utilizing the method in 
search systems for cloud services the process of finding 
appropriate cloud services can be simplified and accelerated 
as users do not have to identify these requirements on their 
own. Instead, a search system can handle all these individual 
requirements under the hood and just present the appropriate 
services to the user. If users are convinced that such a search 
system has taken into account all relevant requirements (in 
particular covering IT security and law) this could further 
increase the adoption of cloud computing by SMEs as users 
would have more trust that the selected service is appropriate 
for them.  
Due to these promising results, we plan to further 
develop the service search system. In addition to 
improvements to the user experience, we intend to further fill 
the repository with various cloud services from different 
domains. This will help us to further asses the relevance of 
the presented method as well as the relevance of such search 
system as a whole.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was funded by means of the German Federal 
Ministry of Economy and Technology under the promotional 
reference “01MD11041”. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. Sahandi, A. Alkhalil, and J. Opara-Martins, “Cloud 
computing 
from 
SMEs 
perspective: 
a 
survey-based 
investigation,” 
Journal 
of 
Information 
Technology 
Management, vol. 24, No. 1, University of Baltimore, 2013, 
pp. 43-49. 
[2] 
H. Kasper, H. Kett, and A. Weisbecker, Potenziale von 
Cloud Computing im Handwerk. Stuttgart: Fraunhofer 
Verlag, 2012. 
[3] 
S. Lamberth and E. Hebisch, Sichere Cloud, Technical 
Report,  Stuttgart: Fraunhofer IAO, 2011. 
[4] 
H. Balzert, Lehrbuch der Softwaretechnik – Basiskonzepte 
und Requirements Engineering. 3rd ed., Heidelberg: 
Spektrum, 2009. 
[5] 
T. Mather, S. Kumaraswamy, and S. Latif, Cloud Security 
and Privacy: An Enterprise Perspective on Risks and 
Compliance. O’Relly, 2009.  
[6] 
R. L. Krutz and R. D. Vines, Cloud Security: A 
Comprehensive Guide to Secure Cloud Computing. 
Indianapolis: Wiley, 2010. 
[7] 
Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik (BSI): 
Sicherheitsempfehlungen für Cloud Computing Anbieter, 
Bonn, 2012.  
[8] 
C. Lévy-Bencheton, L. Marinos, R. Mattioli, T. King, C. 
Dietzel, and J. Stumpf,  Threat Landscape and Good Practice 
Guide for Internet Infrastructure, Report, European Union 
Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA), 
2015. 
[9] 
R. Ko and S. Lee, Cloud Computing Vulnerability Incidents, 
Report, Cloud Security Alliance (CSA), 2012. 
[10] Á. Geréd, A. Weiss, B. Becker, U. Huber, and C. Zeidler, 
Cloud Computing – Herausforderungen, Qualitätssicherung, 
Standards und Zertifizierung. Wien: EuroCloud.Austria, 
2013. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[11] International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization 
(ISO): 
ISO/IEC 27001:2013. 
[12] EuroCloud: ECSA - EuroCloud Star Audit. http://eurocloud-
staraudit.eu/ [accessed: 10.07.2013]. 
[13] M. Bedner, Cloud Computing: Technik, Sicherheit und 
rechtliche Gestaltung. Dissertation, Kassel: University Press, 
2013. 
[14] J. Eckhardt, M. Hilber, R. Giebichenstein, F. Niemann, T. 
Helbing, and A. Weiss, Leitfaden Cloud Computing – Recht, 
Datenschutz 
und 
Compliance. 
Köln: 
EuroCloud 
Deutschland_eco, 2010. 
[15] Bundesverband Informationswirtschaft, Telekommunikation 
und neue Medien (BITKOM): Cloud Computing - Evolution 
in der Technik, Revolution im Business, Berlin, 2009. 
[16] M. Zhang, R. Ranjan, S. Nepal,  M. Menzel, and A. Haller, 
“A 
Declarative 
Recommender 
System 
for 
Cloud 
Infrastructure Services Selection,” 9th Int. Conf. on 
Economics of Grids, Clouds, Systems, and Services 
(GECON'12), 2012, pp. 102-113. 
[17] S.-M. Han, M. M. Hassan, C.-W. Yoon, and E.-N. Huh, 
“Efficient Service Recommendation System for Cloud 
Computing Market,” 2nd Int. Conf. on Interaction Sciences: 
Information Technology, Culture and Human, 2009, pp. 839-
845. 
[18] C. Perrin, The CIA triad, techrepublic.com, 2008. 
http://www.techrepublic.com/blog/it-security/the-cia-triad/ 
[accessed: 25.12.2014]. 
[19] C. Eckert, IT-Sicherheit, Konzepte – Verfahren – Protokolle, 
8th ed., Munich: Oldenbourg, 2013. 
[20] Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik (BSI): 
BSI-Standard 100-2. 
[21] A. Horch, C. Christmann, and H. Kett, “Automated 
Elicitation of Functional User Requirements for Supporting 
Cloud Service Search,” Submitted to: 3rd Int. Conf. on 
Building and Exploring Web Based Environments (WEB 
2015).  
[22] V. Avelar, Guidelines for Specifying Data Center Criticality 
/ Tier Levels, White Paper, Schneider Electric, 2011. 
[23] Uptime Institute: Data Center Site Infrastructure Tier 
Standard: Topology, Santa Fe, 2010. 
[24] J. Wollersheim, P. Hoberg, and H. Krcmar, Merkmale einer 
Servicebeschreibung für Cloud Services - V 0.9, 2013. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-388-9
CLOUD COMPUTING 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

