A Novel Cloud Hybrid Access Mechanism for Highly Sensitive Data Exchange 
 
 
Elhadj Benkhelifa  
Faculty of Computing, Eng and Sciences 
University of Staffordshire 
Staffordshire, UK 
e-mail: e.benkhelifa@staffs.ac.uk 
Dayan Abishek Fernando 
Faculty of Computing, Eng and Sciences 
University of Staffordshire 
Staffordshire, UK 
e-mail: d.fernando@staffs.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a research contribution from a 
significant Business-University collaborative Project. The aim 
of the project is to develop a new disruptive approach for 
Digital Forensics service provision to enable the creation of 
new value chains via the Cloud technology.  The project is 
highly complex and multidimensional. The project is 
concerned with the manipulation and service provision for 
highly sensitive data via a secure Cloud Service Delivery 
Platform. This paper reports on one aspect of a long running 
research program, concerned with Security. The paper 
presents a relatively novel solution adopted in the project for 
enhanced security to be implemented as part of the intended 
Cloud Service Delivery Platform. This solution is a hybrid 
approach 
between 
a 
Single-Sign-On 
and 
Multi-Factor 
Authentication in Federated Settings. Consideration of 
implementing this solution in the presence of Multi-Tenancy is 
also discussed in this paper, An aspect which has not been 
attempted yet, to the best of the authors’ knowledge.  
Keywords- Cloud Computing, Single-Sign-on; Multi-Factor 
Authentication; Cloud Federation; Cloud Security, Multi-
Tenancy 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Cloud computing is fast becoming a mainstream 
technology replacing the current practices in IT resource 
provisioning. The Cloud technology is a disruptive model as 
it represents a major change to the IT services landscape. 
Cloud Computing describes a new way of delivering IT 
services based on Internet protocols, and it typically involves 
provisioning of dynamically scalable and often virtualized 
resources [1]. Cloud services offer great benefit to 
organizations 
by 
eliminating 
complexity 
of 
service 
designing, deploying and configuring. Cloud Computing 
enables the delivery of services through the on-demand 
service-provisioning model to end users on a pay as you go 
basis over a network such as the Internet [1, 2].   
 
Using the Cloud, companies can drive a more efficient, 
effective, and consumer led commercial that helps them 
continually reinvent and transform the way they do business, 
focusing on what makes sense from a business delivery, 
consumer satisfaction and growth model [1]. Enabling the 
underlying IT allows businesses to rapidly deliver services, 
integrate across technological divides, and increase 
efficiencies; where cost reduction and increased efficiency is 
a major feature; along with the ability to affect reach, 
reliability and availability no matter where you are or what 
time it is. In short, Cloud technology offers a wide spectrum 
of new digital value chains. However, security is often cited 
as one of the major concerns in adopting the technology.  
 
Cloud services are mainly delivered through three main 
delivery models Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a 
Service (PaaS) and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) [1, 2, 
3]. Table 1 summarises the main security concerns for each 
of the delivery models. 
TABLE I.  
MAIN SECURITY CONCERNS ON CLOUD DELIVERY MODELS 
Delivery 
Models 
Security Concerns 
Examples 
SaaS 
Data Security 
App Security 
Identity Authentication 
Google Apps, 
Oracle SaaS, 
NetSuite 
Salesforce 
PaaS 
Data & Computing 
Availability 
Data Security 
Disaster Recovery 
Google App 
Engine, RedHat, 
Microsoft Azure 
Heroku 
IaaS 
Data center construction 
Physical Security 
Network Security 
Transmission Security 
System Security 
Amazon EC2, 
Verizon, IBM, 
Rackspace,  
Nimbus 
 
As defined by the American National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST), Cloud can be deployed in 
four models: Public and Private Clouds together with less 
commonly used models, Community and Hybrid Clouds; 
private Cloud; community Cloud; and hybrid Cloud; [3, 4]. 
 
This paper presents a relatively novel solution adopted in a 
real business case project; funded by a UK research Council 
to develop a complex Cloud Service Delivery Platform for 
Digital Forensics [15]. This solution is a hybrid approach 
between a Single-Sign-On and Multi-Factor Authentication 
in Federated Settings. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

 
 
 
Figure 1.  Delivery models vs. Deployment models. 
Consideration of implementing this solution in the presence 
of Multi-Tenancy is also discussed in this paper; an aspect 
which has not been attempted yet, to the best of the Authors’ 
Knowledge (Section IV). The paper also was an opportunity 
to review the area of Cloud service provision and reflect on 
the current practices for Cloud access management (Section 
III) and classifies Security challenges (Section II). 
Conclusions 
and 
direction 
for 
future 
research 
are 
summarised in     Section V. 
II. 
CLOUD SECURITY AND PRIVACY CHALLENGES 
This section provides a concise summary of the current 
security and privacy challenges in a Cloud environment 
based on state of the art classification under five main 
categories, as illustrated in Figure 2.  
There are number of security and privacy concerns for 
today’s cloud computing landscape as it incorporates with 
various technologies including virtualization (i.e. virtual 
servers, virtual networks), on demand service provisioning, 
shared resource pools (i.e. data, memory), concurrent access, 
load balancing and distributed data are some examples [5]. 
Also big data in cloud has always been a security and 
privacy challenge due to the velocity, volume and variety of 
data.  As shown in Figure 2, cloud security and privacy 
challenges can classified in to five main categories. 
 
 
. 
 
Figure 2.  Cloud Security and Privacy Challenges. 
Authentication and Identity Management 
 
Interoperability challenges in between service 
providers  
 
Inherent limitations in passwords 
 
Lack of clarification of multi-tenancy 
 
Multi-jurisdiction issues   
 
Trust Management and Policy Integration 
 
Semantic heterogeneity 
 
Jurisdiction issues 
 
Trust and interaction/sharing requirements 
 
Composition of multiple services to enable 
bigger application services  
 
Secure Service Management 
 
Issues such as  price, QOS, and SLAs 
 
Automatic and systematic service provisioning; 
and a composition framework that considers 
security and privacy issues   
Privacy and Data Protection 
 
Storing data and applications on systems that 
reside outside of on-premise datacentres 
 
Shared 
infrastructure, 
risk 
of 
potential 
unauthorized access and exposure. 
 
Privacy-protection 
mechanisms 
must 
be 
embedded in all security solutions. 
 
Balancing between data provenance and privacy   
Organizational Security Management 
 
Shared governance  
 
Dependence on external entities  
 
Insider threat is significantly extended when 
outsourcing data and processes to Clouds. 
 
III. 
CLOUD ACCESS MANAGEMENT 
 
The Cloud Data Management Interface (CDMI) defines 
the functional interface: to implement strong access controls; 
provide data encryption; and storage media for secure multi-
tenant Cloud environments; [6] CDMI supports most of 
standard protocols like File Transfer Protocol (FTP), Storage 
Area Network (SAN), Network Attached Storage (NAS) and 
Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV) [7].  
Preventing un-lawful access to data resources in the 
Cloud is a key challenging deliberation. The most significant 
issue is that the digital identification and framework may not 
naturally extend into a Cloud environment, thus re-
engineering the existing framework to support Cloud 
services may prove to be difficult [8]. Employing two 
different authentication protocols, one for the internal 
systems and another for external Cloud-based systems, leads 
to technical difficulty that can become unusable over time. 
Identity federation, supported by the introduction of Service 
Oriented Architectures (SOA), is one solution. Identity 
federation allows both Cloud service provider and service 
organisation to trust and exchange digital identities and 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

attributes across both domains. As shown in Figure 3, for 
federation to succeed, identity and access management 
transactions 
must 
be 
interpreted 
carefully 
and 
unambiguously, and protected against attacks [8, 9]. 
Federation is enabled by an Authorisation Exchange 
Standard [10]. 
 
Authentication and Authorization Standards
Federated Identity Solutions
Cloud Federation
 
Figure 3.  Single Sign-on based Cloud federation framework. 
A. Authentication /Authorisation Standards 
 
The Authentication and Authorisation Standard for Cloud 
computing defines a set of principles for exchanging 
authentication and authorisation between security domains. 
There are a number of protocols like OpenID, UMA, Radius 
and SAML which provide support to build the authentication 
and Authentication frameworks [10]. The Security Assertion 
Markup Language (SAML) is the most widespread standard 
that integrates digital security tokens containing assertions 
which pass information about a user, protocols and profiles 
so as to implement authentication and authorisation scenarios 
which allow secure data exchange between domains [11]. 
B. Single Sign-On (SSO) 
 
As shown in Figure 4, Single Sign-On (SSO) is a 
process that enables a user to have single user credentials to 
gain access to multiple applications and resources which 
have been assigned for the user. SSO allows users to switch 
between different applications more effectively without any 
additional authentication requests [11]. 
 
Numerous researches have shown the prompt impact of 
SSO within Cloud industry.  Shibboleth IDP, oxAuh OP, 
UMA PDP and LDAP cache are some of the architectures 
that refer to frameworks to build SSO environments [10, 
11].  
 
    According to JANET, Shibboleth is the most widely 
adopted open source federated identity solution developed 
by the Internet2 middleware group [12]. The latest 
Shibboleth (V 2.0) builds on top of the SAML 2.0 
authentication and authorization standards. 
 
Siingle Login
User
 Access 
Gateway
Internal 
Applications
Corporate 
Database
Public 
Resources
Web 
Applications
 
Figure 4.  Single Login – Multiple Applications. 
C. Multi-Factor Authentication 
The multi-factor authentication is an authentication 
method, which requires two or more authentication factors to 
allow access to the IT resources [13]. As shown in Figure 5, 
there are three factors involved in establishing the multi-
factor authentication framework. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Multi-Factor Authentication. 
 
Research studies have shown that a traditional username 
and password based Single-factor authentication is no longer 
strong/scalable enough to support the present security 
demands of the cloud. This is because compromise of a 
single factor results in a breach; whereas multi-factor 
authentication decreases the chance of subversion by having 
an increase in likelihood of correct identification with every 
additional factor. The current and widely used trend is two-
factor authentication; it is widely spread amongst large 
financial 
institutions 
in 
Europe 
[8]. 
Two-factor 
authentication can also be found in a number of user-facing 
applications, such as social networks (Facebook) and Google 
Applications. 
Although 
the 
two-factor 
is 
currently 
considered the most efficient and very secure scheme, 
research continues to explore other more effective solutions 
as Two-factor authentication is already seen being breached. 
Therefore, an increased factor authentication (eg. three-
factor) or hybrid approaches  [9, 10], are currently being 
tested and researched.  
This paper is an attempt to implement a hybrid 
authentication approach, using Single-Sign-On together with 
two-factor authentication whilst considering the multi-
Tenancy Scenario (Section IV). This approach is proposed 
for direct application in a real business case. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

IV. 
SECURE CREDENTIAL FEDERATION FOR HIGHLY 
SENSITIVE DATA EXCHANGE 
 
Finding 
a 
balance 
between 
security 
and 
simplicity/accessibility is very important [13]. The proposed 
multi-level, hybrid authentication mechanism based on 
Single Sign-on (SSO) and two-factor authentication, enables 
not only Cloud federated access among multiple applications 
and organizations but also allowing sensitive data exchange 
between different domains (Figure 7). 
 
Authentication and Authorization Standards
Federated Identity Solutions
Cloud Federation
Two Factor Authentication
Highly Sensitive 
Resources
Federated Resources
 
Figure 6.  Proposed - Multi-Level Hybrid Authentication Mechanism 
Single-Sign-On provides a unified mechanism to manage 
and monitor user interactions and business rules, determining 
user access to Cloud applications and data resources through 
the internet.  Some industries require extra levels of security 
and identity protection over SSO settings in order to precede 
some specific secured tasks such as extremely sensitive 
application/data access, cross-border investigations, and 
remote data manipulation activities. Therefore, this paper is 
inspired to introduce a hybrid Cloud access framework by 
combining multifactor authentication with SSO in order to 
protect enterprise identities and thus enable a strong 
authentication method. Figure 6 and 7 illustrate the basic 
idea of the proposed solution. 
 
Single Sign On
User
Federated Resources
Highly Sensitive Data
Two Factor Authenticaion
Resources from multiple 
domains and multipal locations
 
Figure 7.  Resource Access through Multi-Level Hybrid Authentication. 
The proposed hybrid solution comprises of two levels of 
security access layers providing access to federated resources 
and further sensitive resources within the federation agenda. 
The proposed solution defines federated resources as 
combined    Cloud environments and applications for the 
purpose of resource sharing using single sign on to access 
multiple applications from multiple locations. Also, this 
solution allows access to highly sensitive resources within 
federation settings. Table 2 displays the access matrix vs. 
authentication of the proposed framework. 
TABLE II.  
DIFFERENT RESOURCE ACCESS THROUGH MULTI-LEVEL 
HYBRID AUTHENTICATION 
Data Access \ 
Authentication 
Federated 
Resources 
Highly Sensitive 
Resources 
Single Sign-on 
√ 
√ 
Two Factor 
Authentication 
X 
√ 
 
Figure 8 shows the high level access flow of the 
proposed hybrid access mechanism. The cloud access 
gateway acts as the doorman at the enterprise perimeter to 
cloud services and service users. The users can gain access to 
federated resources simply by providing SSO credentials. If 
the user need to access sensitive data within the federated 
settings, then they will be diverted to the two factor 
authentication for further credentials in order to gain access. 
Figure 
9 
illustrates 
the 
interaction 
between 
cloud 
components and users, showing how processes operate with 
one another and the direction in which federated resources 
are accessed. In a similar manner, Figure 10 displays the 
enhanced version of accessing sensitive data through two 
factor authentication.  
(1) (5) (9) (11) (15)
User
Cloud Access 
Gateway
WAYF
(2) (6)
(4) (8) (14)
(3) (7)
Identity 
Provider 
Single Sign on
Federated 
Resources
Highly Sensitive 
Data
Two Factor 
Authentication
(12) (16)
(13) (17)
(10)
(18)
 
Figure 8.  Hybrid SSO-Two-Factor Authentication Framework. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

A. Cloud Access Process flow 
1. 
Request to access federated resources 
2. 
Redirected to the SSO WAFS (Where are you 
from) 
3. 
IDP Request 
4. 
Request   User Credentials 
5. 
Provide Credentials 
6. 
Authentication 
7. 
If success – Generate SSO User Session and pass 
into the Access Gateway 
8. 
Prompt Authentication Status and redirect to 
federated resource pool 
9. 
Access to Federated Resources 
10. Federated Resources 
11. User Request to access Highly Sensitive Data 
12. Redirected to the Two Factor Authentication 
Service 
13. Generate Security Token and pass into the Access 
Gateway 
14. Send Security Token via SMS / Email 
15. Enter Security Token 
16. Pass token for verification 
17. Update SSO session 
18. Access to Highly Sensitive Data 
 
B. Considering Multi-Tenancy with the Proposed Solution 
Multi-tenancy is a method of sharing a single instance of 
data and applications among multiple customers (tenants) by 
allocating a unique profile for each tenant. Multi-tenancy 
presents a number of benefits such as: reduced operation 
cost by sharing resources (software/hardware); increased 
utilisation /optimisation rate in data centres and instant 
service provisioning for new clients [14]. However, despite 
the above-mentioned benefits, multi-tenancy is not widely 
deployed in the Cloud industry. The balance between 
resource sharing and security is very constrained and 
conflicting within a multi-tenancy framework. Also, the 
present multi-tenancy delivery models (Dedicated resource 
model, Metadata map model) are either less flexible or less 
secure (Table 3). The future developments of the proposed 
hybrid authentication solution will attempt to embed the 
multi-tenancy architecture where it is believed a mix of 
dedicated resources and metadata map architectures will 
deliver stronger security and greater flexibility. To the best 
of the authors’ knowledge, this work is unprecedented, due 
to its complexity and limitations in the current Cloud 
Technology. 
TABLE III.  
MULTI-TENANT DELIVERY MODELS 
Dedicated resource model 
Metadata map model 
Increased Security 
Increased Flexibility 
Lower Flexibility 
Lower Security 
 
User
Cloud Access Gateway
Federated Resources
Request - Federated Resources
Redirect - Shibboleth
SSO Manager
IDP Request
Request - User Credentials
Credentials
Authentication
SSO Session
Prompt - Resource Portal
Request - Federated Resource Portal
Federated Resource Portal
 
Figure 9.  Sequence Diagram – Access to Federated Resources. 
User
Access Gateway
Request - Sensitive Resources
Redirect - Shibboleth
SSO Manager
IDP Request
Request - User Credentials
Credentials
Authentication
SSO Session
Send Security Token
Redirect - Two Factor Auth
Security Token
Sensitive Resources
2 Factor Manager
Enter Security Token
Pass Token for verification
Update - SSO Session
Request - Sensitive Resources Portal
Sensitive Resources Portal
Prompt -  Resources Portal
 
Figure 10.  Sequence Diagram – Access to Sensitive Resources. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper proposes a novel hybrid solution for increased 
security to be implemented as part of a real business case 
project.  The project is concerned with highly sensitive data, 
hence a more complex security approach is needed. The 
proposed hybrid solution, Single-Sign-On and two-factor 
authentication, is accepted by the project consortium and 
end-users to be a state-of-the-art and highly secure 
authentication approach. The proposed framework is 
currently being tested as part of the project deliverables, and 
results will be shared in future publications.  Immediate 
future work will investigate the implementation of the 
proposed framework in the presence of Multi-tenancy, in 
federated Cloud settings. Another direction for future 
research is to evaluate the feasibility of implementing more 
than two factors for authentication. This evaluation will 
include the readiness of the current Cloud technologies for 
such enhancement in security and working out the balance 
under different constraints.  
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. M. DaSilva, P. Trkman, K. C. Desouza, J. Lindic,  
Disruptive Technologies: A Business Model Perspective on 
Cloud Computing, 2013. 
[2] C. Chapman, et al., Software architecture definition for 
ondemand cloud provisioning, Cluster Computing, 2011: pp. 
1-21. 
[3] P. Mell and T. Grance, The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing, 2011 
[4] M. Armbrust, et al., A View of Cloud Computing, 
Communication of ACM, 2010 
[5] A. Lenk., et al., What is Inside the Cloud? An Architectural 
Map of the Cloud Landscape, in Workshop on Software 
Engineering Challenges of Cloud Computing, Collocated with 
ICSE 2009,  IEEE Computer Society: Vancouver, Canada , 
2009. 
[6] SNIA Cloud Data Management Interface (online). Available 
at URL: http://cdmi.sniaCloud.com [Retrieved: Feb 2013] 
[7] JSON-RPC project (online). Available at URL: http://json-
rpc.org [Retrieved: Feb 2013]  
[8] P. A. Boampong, L. A. Wahsheh, Different facets of security, 
Proceedings of the 15th Communications and Networking 
Simulation Symposium, 2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
[9] L. Peterson et al., Slice-based federation architecture, v2.0. 
http://groups.geni.net/geni/attachment/wiki/SliceFedArch/SF
A2.0.pdf  [Retrieved  March 2013] 
[10] K. D. Lewis, J. E. Lewis, “Web Single Sign-On 
Authentication using SAML,”  IJCSI- International Journal of   
Computer Science Issues, 2009. 
[11] D. Raywood, Google adds two factor authenticationton Gmail 
via SMS one time passwords, 2010. 
[12] L. M. Vaquero, L. Rodero-Merino, J. Caceres, M. A. Lindner, 
Break in the Clouds: towards a Cloud definition, 2009. 
[13] M. Trojahn and F. Ortmeier, Biometric authentication through 
a virtual keyboard for smartphones, in International Journal of 
Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT),  
2012. 
[14] S.  Walraven, T. Monheim, E. Truyen, W.J. Sdsd, Towards 
performance isolation in multi-tenant SaaS applications, 
Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Middleware for Next 
Generation Internet Computing, 2012. 
[15] E. Benkhelifa and D. Fernando,  Developing a Complex 
Cloud Service Delivery Platform: Practical Lessons From 
Real Business Case. International Conference of Cloud 
Computing and Services Science (ICCCSS’13), Dubai. 29-31 
Jan 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-271-4
CLOUD COMPUTING 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

