Application of a Secure Cloud Based Learning
Environment for Inclusive Practice in Mainstream
Education: A Higher Education Case Study
Nigel Beacham
Computing Science
University of Aberdeen, UK
Email: n.beacham@abdn.ac.uk
Bob Duncan
Business School
University of Aberdeen, UK
Email: robert.duncan@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract—In previous literature, an inclusive practice approach
to counteract possible areas of concern regarding cloud-based
security for virtual learning environments has been proposed. In
this paper, the theoretical framework ‘transformability theory’
underpinning such a proposal is applied in the context of higher
education. Practicalities and limitations applying to such an
idealised approach in a real context are explored in the form
of a case study. The case study includes both the multiple and
mixed roles that learning analytics and usability play in cloud-
based security. Whilst such roles provided by technology still
rely on the need for a social and technical system approach
based on a pedagogical focus aligned with educational beliefs,
attitudes and practices, observations from the case study show
that risks and threats can be managed on a perception and
actual occurrence basis. Such encouraging ﬁndings from this pilot
study support the need for a larger more substantial investigation
into the theoretical approach. The proposal for this case study
is very timely, due to the concerns surrounding both the cloud
forensic problem and the potential impact of the provisions of the
forthcoming EU General Data Protection Regulation. The case
study will outline a workable approach to achieve high levels of
both security and privacy, such that compliance with the new
regulation can be achieved.
Keywords–Inclusive education; security; privacy; cloud based
systems; virtual learning environments; transformability theory.
I.
INTRODUCTION
From a practical perspective, cloud presents an ideal basis
for developing educational systems. It can be rapidly deployed,
is eminently scalable, requires no massive capital outlay, and
has no long lead time for delivery. Of course, no solution is
ever completely perfect. The educational system will be run-
ning on someone else’s hardware, and often software too. This
means there will be additional concerns that will be necessary
to contend with, such as security, privacy and accountability.
Of course, while it is sensible to deal with such issues,
there is also the added concern and impact from legislation
and regulation that will also have an impact. This means these
issues must be dealt with rigorously. Legislation, such as the
Data Protection Act [1], have substantial penalties that can be
levied in the event of non-compliance. However, such penalties
will pale into insigniﬁcance compared to the forthcoming EU
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [2], which comes
into effect on 25th May 2018.
In the case of the GDPR, the maximum penalty, in the
event of a signiﬁcant breach where non-compliance of the
responsible organisation is a contributory factor, can be the
greater of e20 million or 4% of global turnover based on
the previous year’s accounts. This represents a serious amount
of money, and in an area where budgets are already a big
enough challenge, this would have a signiﬁcant adverse impact
on learning.
Human and social factors are important to consider when
designing cloud-based security within education systems. As
a consequence, there is a real lack of literature that has
studied these factors and interventions from the perspective
of inclusive social/technical systems. The realisation by others
has led to an increased interest in researching systems to
improve cyber-security [3]. One dilemma is the lack of the-
oretical rigour underpinning what amounts to a technological
solution. Studies that have been conducted, whilst encouraging,
nevertheless focus on the human factors of security systems [4]
[5]. Such studies focus on the behavioural aspects using an
experimental and empirical approach based upon behavioural
psychology theories. Whilst these highlight strategies and pro-
vide insights into some of the key factors contributing towards
the challenges of security, it remains to be seen whether in
practice such strategies amount to real behavioural change
and ultimately reduce security threats and risks in educational
organisations.
In Section II, we discuss previous work in this area. In Sec-
tion III, we next consider the security and privacy weaknesses
in cloud systems, in order to understand the magnitude of the
problem. In Section IV, we outline how we might approach
we might take to attempt to ﬁnd a way to try to resolve this
problem. In Section V, we consider the technical strategies that
ought to be deployed. In Section VI, we outline the manner
in which the case study will be deployed. In Section VII,
we consider and discuss the limitations of the work, and in
Section VIII, we discuss our conclusions.
II.
PREVIOUS WORK
From an inclusive education perspective, much research
exists on strategic and technological approaches to enhancing
inclusion [7]–[9], but little if any account for the cybersecurity
threats and risks. Some of the most interesting work has
been undertaken by Young, which focuses on inclusive spaces.
Young [10] explores how organisational spaces impact on
the effectiveness of education strategies and practices. Whilst
having a safe place to retreat to is an important factor, the
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

research does not address security aspects and in particularly
cybersecurity.
The same can be said from the perspective of adopting
inclusive strategies and practices through ICT. There is a
growing body of research studying education inclusion using
Information and Commuications Technology (ICT), which
show encouraging results [11]–[14]. Whilst many of the studies
tend to focus on the beneﬁts, there is also evidence that ICT
can inhibit inclusive education; albeit not from the perspective
of using cybersecurity technologies [15]. This highlights the
issue that little if any research considers the cybersecurity
aspects in terms of whether inclusive strategies reduce the
risks and threats of cybersecurity or whether cybersecurity
technologies can enhance or inhibit inclusion?
Based upon Beacham and Duncan’s [3] theoretical frame-
work for considering inclusive cloudbased security for educa-
tion, and possible ways in which such a framework may mani-
fest its self in the context of an inclusive learning environment,
the following sections of this paper explores in more detail how
such theory and inclusive pedagogies can be used in practice
through pedagogical strategies to bring about real change and
improvement in reducing risks and threats of cybersecurity.
Such insights will form the basis of a case study undertaken
within Higher Education (HE). This case study will seek
to highlight the difﬁculties in developing an experiment to
measure the change in behaviour being encouraged. This case
study will pilot the framework and obtain experimental and
empirical evidence highlighting the beneﬁts and challenges
using such a framework in an authentic context. Lessons from
the case study will be used to inform further investigations
within real-world contexts.
III.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY WEAKNESSES IN CLOUD
SYSTEMS
All systems are the subject of serious penetration attempts
by attackers. While resisting such attacks presents a huge
challenge, where cloud is involved, the challenge is even
greater. The attackers make no distinction between what kind
of organisation, or individual they are attacking. They seek to
get into the system, then dig themselves in, hiding themselves
away to become a hidden intruder, with the goal of ﬁnding as
much useful information as they can to extract for their own
nefarious purposes.
This presents a serious challenge to defend an organisation
properly from attack [16]–[19], but in the case of cloud,
we also suffer from a fundamental, as yet unsolved, prob-
lem known as the cloud forensic problem. Once an attacker
breaches a cloud system and becomes an intruder, there is
nothing to then prevent them from escalating privileges until
they are in a position to delete the forensic trail recording their
ingress into the system, thus potentially turning them into an
invisible intruder.
Once the intruder reaches this stage, they present a serious
threat, since they are now in a position to help themselves to
anything they want from the cloud system, and can also use
this position as a springboard to attack other systems elsewhere
within the organisation. They would also be in a position to
completely shut down the running cloud instance, which would
delete all data that had not been made persistent elsewhere.
This could pose a serious challenge in trying to identify which
information has been compromised, or stolen.
As if that were not bad enough, the forthcoming EU
regulation, the GDPR [2], comes into effect on 25th May
2018. There is a requirement to report any breach within 72
hours of discovery. However, where forensic records have been
destroyed, it may prove impossible to comply fully with this
requirement. This would potentially expose the organisation
to a ﬁne, which in the worst case, could be the greater of
e20million or 4% of global turnover, based on the previous
year’s accounts.
Duncan and Whittington [20] recently proposed a possible
solution to this problem through the use of generating a full
forensic and audit trail to be stored off site in an immutable
database. We like this approach for its simplicity of applica-
tion, there being nothing overly technical involved. Sadly, this
will not be the only problem to contend with.
While there are a great many technical solutions, which
have been developed to address technical issues [21]–[25],
there are also other issues that need to be addressed. Many or-
ganisations forget that business architecture comprises a com-
bination of people, process and technology, and not technology
alone [26]. Thus, organisations who rely on technological
solutions alone will be likely to fail to achieve a satisfactory
level of security and privacy.
The weakest link of any organisation is usually the people
involved in the organisation. Attackers have long recognised
that people are very susceptible to attack via a wide range
of social engineering attacks, malicious links in emails, spoof
web sites, and a whole range of other attacks designed to target
the weaknesses of the people of the organisation, rather than
directly attacking the Information Technology (IT) systems of
the organisation.
IV.
THE APPROACH
Whilst some general ways of enhancing the social and
technical approaches to security and inclusion have been
independently reported [3], this section highlights inclusive
pedagogies and practices that can be used in computer science
education. We selected computer science education because
not only are students susceptible to the security threats and risk
as students in general, but that these cohorts of students need
to have knowledge and understanding about cyber-security if
they are to engineer secure application systems in future.
Creating an authentic testbed in which to pilot such an
investigation of this type is not without its difﬁculties. In the
framework outlined by Beacham and Duncan [3], such systems
would entail developing a socio technical system around an
inclusive learning community involving pupils, teachers, par-
ents, technicians, school management and administration, and
staff within the local authority, to name but a few. Developing
a socio-technical system for use within a real mainstream
educational organisation such as a school or local authority
would be fraught with educational and technical challenges;
not to mention ethical and political issues.
For this reason, a smaller and more manageable system
will be constructed, safe within the conﬁnes of a Higher
Education Institution (HIE). The pilot system seeks to build
a similar inclusive learning community but with a more
manageable number of stakeholders. The inclusive learning
community provides a framework in which to encourage
inclusive strategies such as co-agency, everybody and trust,
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

TABLE I. DARE’S STRATEGIES [7]
Strategy to:
Co-ag-
Ever-
Trust
ency
yone
Invite students to join different groups. Meeting
the minds of learners to lift the limits posed by a
security system.
X
X
Get to know each other. Find ways to connect
with each other building on their strengths as
opposed to differentiating tasks.
X
X
Avoid singling students out. Plan tasks to be open
to all in learning community.
X
X
Help students with studying and ﬁnding solutions.
Seek ways for tutors to learning from learners and
building valued partnerships.
X
X
Group sub-groups of students together or with
buddies. Develop a community culture, which “not
just facilitates access and engagement (to learning
tasks) but to reinforce young peoples’ active sense of
their powers and competence as thinkers and learners
that what they have to bring and contribute to their
own learning is important, valued and welcome.”
X
X
Use a problem based learning approach by dividing
community into small and meaningful groups.
X
X
Insist on learners taking shared responsibility for
learning activities and allow learners to make rules
and decisions.
X
X
Tutors focus is to “transform the context, the
curriculum, and the conditions that sustain learning.”
In partnership with learners.
X
X
Adopt security mechanisms that are accessible,
afford well-being and achievement for all based
on unity and solidarity learning.
X
X
but is formed and managed within the conﬁnes of a cohort
studying within an HEI. This provides a more appropriate
context and environment in which to undertake an initial pilot
to empirically study the effectiveness of such a system.
A. Inclusive strategies
Before undertaking the pilot, it was important to ascertain
what strategies increase inclusion within learning communities
[6]. These strategies were then applied in the context of the
case study with the intention of collecting evidence, which
showed an inclusive learning community can reduce security
threats and risks.
The strategies considered relate to the three principles of
transformability theory. They consist of:
•
Co-agency strategies that encourage tutors and stu-
dents to work together and view each other as equal
partners in the teaching and learning process;
•
Everybody strategies that promote collaboration with
stakeholders, such as parents, Local Authorities and
education agencies;
•
Trust strategies that seek to develop effective scaffold-
ing for tutors and learners.
As shown in TABLE I, such principles were implemented
by using the inclusive strategies listed in the table.
Such overlapping strategies underpin criteria, which will be
used to evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention covered
in the case study.
In the next section, we discuss the technical strategies that
should be deployed in the framework.
V.
TECHNICAL STRATEGIES
In order to construct a realistic learning environment, a
closed prototype has been developed containing the following
features:
•
Authentication, by using access control, passwords or
multi factor authentication;
•
Monitoring/logging/reporting can be carried out in
real-time, providing a transparent system;
•
Auditing will be carried out using an independent,
read-only closed system;
•
Privacy will be achieved through a combination of
actions/activity based focus and encryption.
In Figure 1, we outline how the various components of
the system will ﬁt together. We consider how each type of
strategy addresses threats and risks outlined in the theoretical
framework, mapping strategies to practice — this is the focus
of the pilot study.
Thus, we require to include a simple mechanism whereby
we collect ALL the forensic data and audit trail data that we
are likely to need, in addition to what the cloud system can
already collect, and store this into an “append-only” database.
This immutable database must be stored off-site from the cloud
instance in order to make it more difﬁcult for the attacker to
understand what is going on.
This immutable database must run on a server with no other
function, other than to solely concentrate on the retention of
the forensic data and the audit trail for the cloud instances
it is designed to protect. We must remember that it will be
necessary to actively provide a means of collecting both the
forensic data and the full range of audit trail data we require,
since as Duncan and Whittington note, many of these functions
are switched off by default from a great many database systems
[27] [20].
This data collection should include additional material to
identify the speciﬁc cloud instance identifying number (ID), a
timestamp to indicate generation time of the data collected, and
if we want to take a paranoid approach, we could also serialise
the data collected ID using a centrally generated number,
which would assist in post hack event analysis. Indeed, the
central ID generator could be monitored to seek out anomalous
numbering sequences from which alerts could be generated to
instantly warn of a developing situation.
This solution will provide us with the one fundamental
means of being able to answer the big GDPR question in
the event of a breach — namely we can identify which
information, if any, that was compromised in the breach. While
it is not a regulatory requirement, encryption of Personally
Identiﬁable Information (PII) [2] will go a long way to help
mitigate any liability in the event of a breach.
In the next section, we outline the rationale and methodol-
ogy for the pilot case study.
VI.
THE PILOT CASE STUDY
The socio component of the system involves the forming of
a learning community. The community consists of students and
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Figure 1. Socio-technical system approach to an inclusive cloud-based
security learning environment.
tutors co-working together on achieving learning outcomes of
a course studying Human Computer Interaction (HCI). Whilst
the course covers conventional topics, it also includes the
additional topic of usable security.
The students consist of two campus-based cohorts studying
for a Master of Science (MSc) in Information Technology
degree programme. One group of students form part of a
September intake and have studied cyber-security in the previ-
ous term. The second group of students form part of a January
intake beginning their programme.
Both cohorts of students are taught together on the HCI
course. The course involves two one-hour lectures and one
two-hour practical session. The lectures include materials that
help students enhance their knowledge about usability with the
aim of them understanding its relevance to usable security. In
the practical sessions, they work in teams to complete tasks tar-
geted at applying such knowledge and understanding. Students
are also provided with additional materials and encouraged
to undertake further reading and study around the usability
aspects of security.
Although some of the students will have studied aspects
of cyber-security, more broadly, students are not expected to
know or understand the technicalities of cyber-security. For
example, they do not need to know how to develop systems
which require users to have a username and password, only that
such process places usability constraints to use an application,
such as having to recall authentication details.
The students are expected to use their knowledge and
understanding to outline the types of data gathering approaches
they would use as part of an Interface Design, and the types of
evaluation approaches they would use to measure the usability
of the security aspects of the user interface.
Regarding the technical component of the system, to at-
tempt to make the case study authentic, students along with
tutors develop and manage their groups own cloud-based
learning environment. The cloud-based learning environment
includes a small commercial system of a retail organisation.
The students are tasked with reviewing this system and make
recommendations for its usability.
In addition to students and tutors working together, for
the socio-technical is to be effective, tutors are expected
to work with cloud-based security specialist, and through
student experts (who have studied a cybersecurity course) to
implement technical aspects of the cloud-based security VLE.
The mission for each student team involves the implementation
of a user interface in the form of a low-ﬁdelity prototype.
Students are required to consider different ways to prevent
social engineering and improve usability security. Students
who have previously studied cybersecurity are expected to
lead the practical sessions, helping the security specialist to
share knowledge and expertise throughout the entail learning
community.
A key aspect of the exercise involved tutors leaving stu-
dents to drive agenda and facilitate the addressing of issues.
Where possible consider the use of CSCW as opposed to
independent standalone and individual practices. This includes
each student team incorporating an ethical hacking approach
by recruiting testers to attack their small commercial system,
and conducting their own evaluation of the system. Students
will have been given access to key components of the technical
system such as the web server and database management
system, but not the dedicated server. This server will be
restricted to students but not tutors and the security specialist.
Students will be introduced to ethical hacking and encouraged
to test the usability and effectiveness of each teams solution.
They will not be aware of the dedicated system.
Throughout the course tutors will assess the progress of the
students and evaluate the performance of each teams security
system. Tutors seek to address the following key questions
based on students progress.
•
How usability forms part of security; how it is integral
to useable security.
•
How technical strategies are realised within pilot.
•
How social strategies are realised within pilot.
•
How inclusive strategies realised within pilot.
Throughout, students are not made aware of the inclusive
strategies taking centre stage. Tutors will be seeking evidence
to what extent such strategies are present and being applied.
Future work will seek to develop this aspect based upon
ﬁndings.
In the course of the Pilot Study, students are asked to
address the human weak link in security, and to explore ways
of managing risks and threats within the provided cloud-based
secure learning environment.
We outline below the main components of the Pilot Case
Study to be implemented:
•
Pilot Case Study to be implemented within HE;
•
Aims and objectives of pilot case study:
◦
To address the human weak link in security;
◦
To enhance an inclusive security learning com-
munity, culture and environment;
◦
To explore ways of managing risks and threats
within a cloud-based secure learning environ-
ment.
•
Targets MSc IT students studying the programme full
time on campus:
◦
September starts will have studied the ﬁrst
term of the programme;
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

◦
January starts will have just started the pro-
gramme.
•
Rationale for target sample:
◦
Students have various levels of knowledge and
understanding of Information Security (IS);
◦
Some students received course on IS;
◦
Some students will not have received a course
on IS.
•
Cloud-based learning environment:
◦
MyAberdeen / MyTimetable / MyCurriculum;
◦
Email / Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) /
Zend / PHPMYADMIN;
◦
Bring Your Own Devices (BYOD)s — mo-
biles, tablets, laptops, PCs;
◦
Personal storage space — University, external;
◦
Social media — linkedin, facebook, twitter,
youtube;
◦
Integrated Development Environment (IDE)s
— cloud9, Codio, Git/Github, SPM;
◦
Other — Dropbox, milkthecow.
•
How inclusive strategies are realised within pilot case
study;
•
How technical strategies are realised within pilot case
study;
•
Pilot case study forms part of a course on HCI; how
to develop usable security.
Tutors and students develop and manage their own cloud-
based learning environment as part of practical sessions. Prac-
tical sessions require students to apply content covered in
HCI lectures and then consider its relevance to cloud-based
security systems within HE. Additional two-hour voluntary
weekly sessions introduced to provide space in the schedule
for reﬂection and planning.
Tutors work with cloud-based experts, and through student
experts (who have studied on the IS course) to implement
technical aspects of the cloud-based security Virtual Learning
Environment (VLE). The mission for each student group is to
implement a course wiki in the form of a MySQL database
with independent logging. Students are required to consider
different ways to prevent social engineering and improve
usability of security.
A key aspect of the exercise involved tutors leaving stu-
dents to drive the agenda and facilitate the addressing of issues.
Where possible, we considered the use of Computer Supported
Co-operative Work (CSCW) as opposed to independent stan-
dalone and individual practices. This includes each student
team incorporating an ethical hacking approach by recruiting
testers to attack their small commercial system, and conducting
their own evaluation of the system. Students will have been
given access to key components of the technical system such
as the web server and database management system, but
not the dedicated server. This server will be restricted to
students but not tutors and the security specialist. Students
will be introduced to ethical hacking and encouraged to test
the usability and effectiveness of each teams solution. They
will not be aware of the dedicated system.
Throughout the course tutors will assess the progress of the
students and evaluate the performance of each teams security
system.
Tutors seek to address the following key questions based
on students’ progress:
•
How usability forms part of security; how it is integral
to use-able security;
•
How technical strategies are realised within pilot;
•
How social strategies are realised within pilot;
•
How inclusive strategies realised within pilot.
Throughout, students are not made aware of the inclusive
strategies taking centre stage. Tutors will be seeking evidence
as to what extent such strategies are present and being applied.
Future work will seek to develop this aspect based upon the
ﬁndings. In the next section, we address some limitations of
this work.
VII.
LIMITATIONS AND DISCUSSION
There are a number of limitations in this work, which
we will now discuss. Whilst the initial intentions are prov-
ing positive, this pilot case study involves small numbers
of students who have had time to develop relationships as
peers with fellow students and tutors. A key factor lacking is
the heterogeneous nature of teams in learning environments.
However, we plan to address this once the pilot case study
concludes. Once the ﬁndings are fully analysed, we will
incorporate the ﬁndings and implement the full case study
starting from September, which will give us access to the
impact of the full heterogeneous nature of teams in learning
environments.
We hope to get the message across to all students that
there needs to be serious consideration given to taking into
account the potential impact of new legislation and regulation
as it comes in to effect. Further education institutions need to
be at the cutting edge so that once students leave with their
qualiﬁcations, they will be ideally placed to ensure their future
employers will be better able to improve policies, procedures
and good working practices, to ensure they achieve adequate
compliance with legislative and regulatory bodies. We also
hope that students will achieve a better understanding of how
to approach achieving a high level of usable security in their
future employment.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
This pilot case study forms part of a proof of concept for
a longer term case study, which we hope to use to be able to
ensure all students gain a better understanding of all the issues
of security and privacy that must now be taken into account for
all organisations who handle any form of PII. We anticipate
being able to present the results of this pilot case study at the
conference.
We believe the concept will help ensure that all students
will be able to work in a secure and private environment,
while learning how to safeguard themselves, their peers and
their future employers. The proposed framework will be able
to ensure that organisations can achieve compliance with the
forthcoming EU GDPR, as well as achieving compliance with
existing legislation on security and privacy. By ensuring that
the framework can be resistant to the effects of the cloud
forensic problem, this will ensure a robust capability to provide
a high level of security and privacy.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Naturally, we accept that there will be a need for a more
thorough and substantial investigation, and we will endeavour
to achieve this with the next phase of the project, where we
will be applying the framework to a full cohort of students,
which will allow us to understand how those with different
levels of experience can work together to ensure the safety of
the whole educational environment.
REFERENCES
[1]
Crown,
“Data
Protection
Act
1998,”
1998.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/29/contents
[Retrieved:
De-
cember 2017]
[2]
EU, “EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),” 2017. [Online].
Available: http://www.eugdpr.org/ [Retrieved: December 2017]
[3]
N. Beacham and B. Duncan, “Development of a Secure Cloud Based
Learning Environment for Inclusive Practice in Mainstream Education,”
in Cloud Comput. 2017 Eighth Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. GRIDs,
Virtualization, Athens, 2017, pp. 1–4.
[4]
J. M. Blythe, L. Coventry, and L. Little, “Unpacking security policy
compliance : The motivators and barriers of employees ’ security
behaviors,” Proceedings of the Eleventh Symposium On Usable Privacy
and Security (SOUPS 2015), Ottawa, Canada, 2015, pp. 103–122.
[5]
S. L. Pﬂeeger and D. D. Caputo, “Leveraging behavioral science to
mitigate cyber security risk,” Computers and Security, vol. 31, no. 4,
2012, pp. 597–611.
[6]
D. Mitchell, “ What really works in special and inclusive education:
Using evidence-based teaching strategies.” (2nd ed.). [Online] Available:
http://ovidsp.ovid.com/ovidweb.cgi?T=JS&PAGE=reference&D=psyc11
&NEWS=N&AN=2014-03315-000 [Retrieved December 2017]
[7]
L. Dare and E. Nowicki, “Strategies for inclusion: Learning from
students’ perspectives on acceleration in inclusive education,” Teaching
and Teacher Education, vol. 69, 2018, pp. 243–252.
[8]
H. Dong, “Strategies for teaching inclusive design,” Journal of Engineer-
ing Design, vol. 21, no. 2-3, 2010, pp. 237–251.
[9]
V. E. Mumford and J. P. Chandler, “Strategies for Supporting Inclusive
Education for Students with Disabilities,” Strategies, vol. 22, no. 5, 2009,
pp. 10–15 Taylor & Francis Group.
[10]
K. S. Young, “Institutional separation in schools of education: Under-
standing the functions of space in general and special education teacher
preparation,” Teaching and Teacher Education, vol. 27, no. 2, 2011, pp.
483–493
[11]
L. Florian and J. Hegarty, ICT and Special Educational Needs: a tool
for inclusion. McGraw-Hill Education (UK), 2004.
[12]
A. Istenic Starcic and S. Bagon, “ICT-supported learning for inclusion
of people with special needs: Review of seven educational technology
journals, 1970-2011,” British Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 45,
no. 2, 2014, pp. 202–230.
[13]
A. K. Yadav, “Supporting Inclusive Education Through ICT Implemen-
tation: An Intermediary Role,” Educational Quest, vol. 5, no. 1, 2014,
pp. 51–55.
[14]
World Health Organisation, “Assistive Technology for Children with
Disabilities: Creating Opportunities for Education, Inclusion and Partic-
ipation A discussion paper,” World Health Organization, 2015, p. 34.
[15]
N. Beacham, “Developing NQTs e-pedagogies for inclusion,” Univer-
sity of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Tech. Rep. May, 2011. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/system/ﬁles/8065 0.pdf [Retrieved:
December 2017]
[16]
N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, M. C. Mont, and R. Ko, “A Toolkit for
Automating Compliance in Cloud Computing Services,” Int. J. Cloud
Comput., vol. x, no. x, 2014, pp. 45–68.
[17]
J. Singh and J. M. Bacon, “On middleware for emerging health
services,” J. Internet Serv. Appl., vol. 5, no. 1, 2014, p. 6.
[18]
J. Singh, J. Bacon, and D. Eyers, “Policy Enforcement Within Emerging
Distributed, Event-based Systems,” Proc. 8th ACM Int. Conf. Distrib.
Event-Based Syst. - DEBS ’14, 2014, pp. 246–255.
[19]
J. Singh, J. Powles, T. Pasquier, and J. Bacon, “Seeing through the
clouds: Management, control and compliance for cloud computing,”
Cloud Comput., 2015, pp. 1–12.
[20]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Creating and Conﬁguring an Im-
mutable Database for Secure Cloud Audit Trail and System Logging,”
Int. J. Adv. Secur., no. 3&4, 2017.
[21]
R. K. L. Ko et al., “TrustCloud: A Framework for Accountability and
Trust in Cloud Computing,” Perspective, 2011, pp. 1–9.
[22]
R. K. L. Ko, B. S. Lee, and S. Pearson, “Towards achieving account-
ability, auditability and trust in cloud computing,” Commun. Comput.
Inf. Sci., vol. 193 CCIS, 2011, pp. 432–444.
[23]
N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, and M. C. Mont, “Towards Natural-
Language Understanding and Automated Enforcement of Privacy Rules
and Regulations in the Cloud: Survey and Bibliography,” Analysis, 2011,
pp. 1–9.
[24]
S. Pearson, “Taking Account of Privacy when Designing Cloud Com-
puting Services,” Current, 2009, pp. 44–52.
[25]
S. Pearson, “Toward accountability in the cloud,” IEEE Internet Com-
put., vol. 15, no. 4, jul 2011, pp. 64–69.
[26]
PWC, “UK Information Security Breaches Survey - Technical Report
2012,” PWC2012, Tech. Rep. April, 2012.
[27]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Creating an Immutable Database for
Secure Cloud Audit Trail and System Logging,” in Cloud Comput. 2017
Eighth Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. GRIDs, Virtualization. Athens, Greece:
IARIA, ISBN: 978-1-61208-529-6, 2017, pp. 54–59.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

