Management of Virtual Desktops in Energy Efﬁcient Ofﬁce Environments
Using Thin Clients
Christina Sigl, Alexander Faschingbauer and Andreas Berl
Deggendorf Institute of Technology, Germany
Email: [christina.sigl, alexander.faschingbauer, andreas.berl]@th-deg.de
Abstract—There are different approaches to make ofﬁce computer
environments more energy efﬁcient: terminal server environments
and virtual desktop infrastructures. While in both environments
money saving thin clients are used to connect a server, this paper
presents an alternative approach, that uses several distributed
workstations instead of a server. Therefore, this topology allows
some savings concerning power consumption, as well as procure-
ment cost, because no centralized server is required. Theoretical
consideration for a typical use case showed a potential for energy
savings using this approach. Moreover, the model is especially
interesting for small ofﬁce environments. Existing workstation
computers can be used and replaced step by step through thin
clients without purchasing an expensive virtualization server.
Keywords–VDI; virtualization; distributed hypervisors; thin
client; virtual desktops; energy efﬁciency
I.
INTRODUCTION
In times of climate change, the energy demand of enter-
prises becomes a point of interest. Often the term Green IT
is used with the goal to reduce CO2 emissions. For modern
ofﬁce environments, this means reducing energy consump-
tion and hence energy costs. Therefore, the approaches of
terminal servers and virtualization are used to implement
energy efﬁcient infrastructures. Whereby, these environments
are mainly using energy efﬁcient and cost effective thin clients.
Using terminal servers, end users are connected to a central
server, where all the calculations are done. The other cost
effective tool in computer technology is virtualization. Using
this technique, user environments with operating system and
all required applications are virtualized using virtual machines
running on a centralized server with one hypervisor. Thus, the
utilization rate of a server can be enhanced [1]. Nowadays, it
is especially used in medium to large scale enterprises, in form
of a Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) [2].
This paper presents an extended and distributed approach
of the traditional VDI architecture. Here, virtual desktops are
provided by several ofﬁce workstation computers instead of a
central server. Additionally, a set of workstation computers is
also replaced by thin clients. Remaining workstations are used
as user workspaces and virtualization platform (distributed
hypervisors). The paper is focused on the concept of the Work-
station based Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (WVDI) model. It
covers the question, weather this approach may be used to
achieve energy savings. Furthermore, a theoretical evaluation
of this approach, using a typical use case in a small ofﬁce
environment, is presented. Thereby it is shown, that WVDI has
a theoretical potential to reduce energy consumption within an
ofﬁce infrastructure.
This paper is organized as follows. In section II, the
technical background and related work are given. Section III
presents the concept of WVDI. Possible limitations of this
approach are pointed out in section IV. A theoretical evaluation
of the presented model is done in section V. Finally, in
section VI we conclude the paper and indicate some further
work.
II.
RELATED WORK
A. Terminal Servers
Applications installed on very powerful servers and provid-
ing user sessions for connected terminals are referred to as ter-
minal servers. Usually, terminals are thin clients, which merely
create remote connections to terminal server sessions. Since
only a video stream, as well as mouse and keyboard input
are transmitted over network, a higher degree of data security
within an enterprise is reached. Attack surface via network is
thus reduced signiﬁcantly. Compared to environments using
workstations or personal computers, terminal servers have
many beneﬁcial aspects. Due to centralization, PC maintenance
costs decrease. All settings and software installations are
accessed and applied centrally. Thus, applications are available
to a large number of users. In large companies usage of
terminal servers may reduce costs. Compared to a normal
workplace, power consumption of a terminal server is only a
1/8th the amount. Further savings can be achieved by replacing
expensive workstations with low-cost thin clients. Due to
their structure, these environments are reliant on powerful
servers [3] [4].
The thin clients and the use of remote display connections
are important, but central servers are not used and not regarded
further in this paper.
B. Virtualization Technologies
Another approach for energy efﬁcient computer envi-
ronments is virtualization. Many virtualization technologies,
which differ with respect to the component to be virtualized
exist. Below, two virtualization technologies are described.
1) Server Virtualization: On a physical server hardware
a hypervisor, that distributes physical resources to Virtual
Machines (VMs), is installed. Each virtual desktop can use
physical hardware to a share determined by hypervisor, which
ensures that VMs are separated logically and can not interfere
or manipulate each other. Virtual desktops can be migrated
between physical host systems dynamically, depending on
hypervisor and any additional products, without being no-
ticed by the user or operating system running in a VM.
This virtualization technology offers greater ﬂexibility, load
distribution and reliability. It makes Data Centers (DCs) much
more efﬁcient and saves energy [5].
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

2) Desktop Virtualization: In general, desktop virtualiza-
tion is similar to server virtualization. The difference is that
VMs can be streamed across platforms such as personal
computers, laptops or thin clients. Using hosted VDI-Desktops,
users work with dedicated virtual desktops on a server. Each
user has its work environment in an own VM, that can only be
accessed via network. The user terminal serves only for input
and output operations and needs almost no computing power.
Depending on server performance and VM usage, a variable
number of virtual desktops can be deployed on a hypervisor
simultaneously [6].
In the approach presented in this paper, hypervisor based
server virtualization shall be used on workstations. Therefore,
it will be further developed in the course of this paper.
Since thin clients can not provide the required computing
performance, they are used in combination with hosted VDI-
Desktops or VDIs, where programs are executed on a server
centrally. Thus, usage of thin clients in VDI is possible, which
is relevant for this work.
C. Virtual Desktop Infrastructure
In VDI, user desktop environments are virtualized and con-
verted into VMs. Powerful central servers are equipped with
a hypervisor to host and run virtual desktops. Workstations or
desktops can be used as terminals on user side and are only
used to establish a connection to VMs via a remote display pro-
tocol over network. To create a connection to a server hosted
virtual machine little computing power is necessary. Hence,
inexpensive and energy efﬁcient thin clients are used instead of
workstations or personal computers [7]. A central Connection
Broker (CB) distributes requests for a remote connection from
thin clients and forwards them to correct VMs. Users can login
to any terminal device and work with their virtual desktop.
VDIs are used in medium to large enterprises and are focused
on virtualization of desktop PCs. Use of workstations and
desktop computers requires an effort regarding installation,
conﬁguration, as well as high procurement and operating costs.
Therefore, virtualization becomes interesting and its popularity
increases. Usually, for a user it does not matter whether he
is connected to a VM from a workstation, desktop or thin
client. In case of failure or replacement of an end-device, it
is easy to set up a replacement device, because no complex
installation and conﬁguration is necessary. The user can work
almost seamlessly [8] [9] [10].
D. Virtual Desktop Infrastructure without central servers
Based on VDIs there is an approach without central
servers [11] [12]. Here, hosting of VMs is done only on
workstations and a software is utilized for virtualization.
Employees may use a random workstation to connect to their
virtual desktop over network. Virtual machines are located
arbitrarily on workstations in an ofﬁce environment. Depend-
ing on workload of individual workstations, virtual machines
can be migrated dynamically between them. In this way, the
highest possible energy efﬁciency can be achieved, which is
the primary goal of this approach. This approach provides no
infrastructure with servers in a server room or DC, but an ofﬁce
environment consisting exclusively of workstations. These are
equipped with a hypervisor each, so that virtual desktops can
be distributed to workstations variably.
Since thin clients are not yet used, an extension of this
approach that allows their usage in such an environment,
is presented in this paper. Thin clients have no hypervisor
function, but use remote display protocols to connect to VMs
hosted on workstations. As thin clients have a much lower
power consumption than workstations, energy efﬁciency can be
increased signiﬁcantly. In addition, savings are possible with
regard to cost of ownership, because thin clients are far more
economically priced than workstations.
III.
WORKSTATION BASED VIRTUAL DESKTOP
INFRASTRUCTURE
An extension for a VDI environment is the WVDI model,
that uses the approach of replacing servers by workstations
to take care of virtualization. In addition, to an environment
composed of only workstations, a share of them is replaced
by thin clients to achieve further energy savings and reduce
procurement costs. Servers are not required, because already
existing workstations are hosting VMs [11] [12].
A. Architecture
Figure 1. VDI-environment based on workstations
Figure 1 shows an abstract representation of an ofﬁce
environment including two workstations and four thin clients.
Workstations provide users the same functionality as thin
clients do, namely enable remote access to VMs. Further, there
is a virtualization layer on each workstation, that provides
virtual desktops (round hard disk icons). On the left and
right, both VMs located on top illustrate a virtual desktop
accessed via workstation. The other four are accessed via
thin clients. Main task of a thin client is to create remote
desktop connections to virtual desktops. A CB is illustrated,
that takes care of management tasks. It is either implemented
on an independent computer or run in a separate virtual
machine on a workstation. This approach applies hypervisor
based virtualization exactly like VDI, so users can choose
their operating system individually. Maximum number of VMs
on a workstation is limited by hardware performance. Thus,
not as many as on a high performance server can be run.
The number of hosted virtual desktops depends on processor
performance, memory and hard disk space of a workstation.
To run VMs in an ofﬁce environment, it must consist of at
least one workstation with hypervisor.
B. Management concept
A CB is responsible for maintenance of connection requests
from the user side. For correct transfer to an appropriate
virtual desktop, each user is assigned to a personal VM. The
CB knows which hypervisor hosts a proper virtual desktop
and manages migrations between workstations centrally, to
allow a uniform, but also energy efﬁcient, load distribution.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

Goal is to adapt the CB, so that workstations are always
utilized to their capacity and also without performance losses,
to require less workstations with hypervisor. Remaining work-
stations can be shut down, but local working users should
be considered. Moreover, migration is done in off or on
state (Live-Migration). By monitoring utilization of all virtual
desktops and workstations, it is decided whether to migrate
VMs to another workstation for better performance. This is
done completely autonomous and remains unnoticed by users.
If a virtual machine has to be run, the respective workstation
is woken up via Wake-On-LAN.
C. Assignment of virtual machines
The approach works with static and dynamic assignment of
VMs, that can be moved manually, e.g. replace workstations or
perform maintenance work. Using static assignment a certain
virtual desktop always remains on a speciﬁc, previous deﬁned
host and is migrated independently of the load level of a
workstation. Worst case is if all workstations are switched
on and only one virtual desktop is run on each. This is not
particularly energy efﬁcient, but implementation is simpler and
the CB can be omitted, because organizing and monitoring
of dynamic migration is not needed. Alternatively, virtual
desktops can be migrated dynamically. Migration can take
place at any time, regardless whether a VM is running or
not. A CB initiates and monitors all migrations. It is always
aware, which workstation is hosting a certain virtual desktop
and brokers connection requests accordingly. Migration should
be performed in following cases:
1) Start and end of work: At start of work, in most cases,
VMs are scattered on switched off workstations. For each
additional user who begins to work, the corresponding virtual
desktop and hosting workstation are localized and started if
necessary. The more users start working, the more workstations
have to be run. Depending on the number of VMs run in
total and their load, a consolidation on a few or distribution
to several workstations, may be useful. If users shut down
their virtual desktops or place them in idle state, workstations
without running VMs are shut down, unless migrations or
backup tasks are pending. Not all users stop working at once.
Usually, this extends over a longer period of time. Migration is
useful to consolidate still running VMs to as few workstations
as possible at an early stage. Thus, energy efﬁciency increases.
2) Lack of hard disk space: One or more VMs must be
migrated to another workstation, if the amount of free disk
space of the workstation decreases. Particularly in case of thin-
provisioning, where hard disk space for virtual desktops is
assured but not physical available at all.
3) High and low utilization: For high workstation uti-
lization in form of processor and memory utilization, it is
advisable to migrate VMs to another workstation in order to
provide sufﬁcient performance for all users. If necessary, a
switched off workstation has to be started. If utilization of
workstations is low, it may be advisable to consolidate VMs
on less workstations. This increases energy efﬁciency, because
remaining workstations are utilized more efﬁciently and others
are released from their current work and can thus be switched
off.
D. Energy savings
In principle, two things establish energy savings using
WVDI in ofﬁce environments. First, many workstations are
replaced by energy saving thin clients. Secondly, an intelligent
management uses dynamic migration. Resources of worksta-
tions are exploited as efﬁcient as possible by running as
many VMs per host as feasible. Maximum of hosted VMs
are determined by utilization and performance of physical
available hardware. In case of high utilization rates of in-
dividual workstations, remaining ones, which are not used,
can be switched off automatically. Overall, energy savings
are achieved through non running workstations. In a scenario
where one workstation and three thin clients are used, possible
energy saving is theoretical 50% compared to an environment
with workstations alone, since mainly thin clients are used
for better utilization of workstations. In order to achieve high
energy efﬁciency, just as many workstations as required are
switch on. This is possible if running workstations are well
utilized, but limitation of performance is reasonable for users.
IV.
POSSIBLE LIMITATIONS OF WVDI
WVDI enables virtualized ofﬁce environments to be run
energy efﬁcient without a server infrastructure, by using energy
saving thin clients and existing workstations with hypervisors
to provide VMs. Therefore, energy savings are achieved by
replacing some workstations with energy saving thin clients.
Analyzing WVDI, possible problems can be identiﬁed for
practical implementation. Some of these are presented and
discussed below.
A. Wake up of Workstations
A CB decides if a workstation is woken up, to serve as
hypervisor. This can be done via Wake-On-LAN by sending
a magic packet, to give the boot command. A problem cloud
be that in an already existing ofﬁce environment workstations
may not be Wake-On-LAN capable or behave incorrectly, e.g.
do not follow the usual boot sequence.
B. Properties of virtual desktops
A virtual desktop is located in a VM. Size of a VM
can vary arbitrarily, but it must not exceed the local hard
disk size, even if thin-provisioning is used, that allows to
allocate more hard disk space, than physically available. If
allocated memory, that is not physically present, is used
entirely, it may lead to a destruction of the VM. Using dynamic
migration, maximum hard disk size should be equal to storage
capacity of the smallest hard disk integrated in all workstations.
Alternatively, VMs, that have not as much physical disk space
as allocated, can be prevented from being copied. Depending
on virtualization degree, several VMs located on a workstation
share space. The size of a virtual machine has a direct impact
on migration duration. Further, no special requirements are
imposed on the operating system of a virtual desktop, but it
has to be supported by hypervisor.
C. Exceeding maximum storage capacity of a workstation
In WVDI, hard disk space can not be added easily. De-
pletion of storage capacity depends on physical available hard
disk space and space already occupied by other VMs. Both
values are variable since each workstation can have a different
hard disk size and VMs with different virtual disks. Here,
an optimization by the CB is necessary, to migrate virtual
desktops to other workstations in time and thus an overﬂow of
hard disk is avoided. For static allocation of VMs, it should
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

be sufﬁcient to allocate as much virtual disk space as physical
available.
D. Simultaneous start and end of work at all workplaces
If many users start their VMs simultaneously (for exam-
ple at start of work), virtual desktops must be deployed or
upgraded. Because simultaneous switching on/off of multiple
VMs requires more hardware performance, this may lead to
initial performance limitations. In case of static distribution of
virtual machines, this performance limitation is restricted to its
boot time. Using (dynamic) migration can cause more limita-
tions. If many migrations take place simultaneously, network
load is high correspondingly and depending on network hard-
ware, performance bottlenecks can occur. In the worst case,
all VMs are on a single workstation initially and requested
concurrently. Then, a majority of VMs is migrated to other
workstations, to make the same amount of hardware available
for each virtual desktop. To prevent this scenario, the CB
has to be parameterized with a maximum number of storable
VMs, for each workstation. This number should be chosen
individually, depending on the available hardware resources.
Virtual desktops have to be distributed to workstations in
roughly equal proportions, so that no performance losses occur
due to a simultaneous start of all workstations. It is similar
if all employees go off duty simultaneously, but do not have
to wait for shut down or migration. Instead, this is done in
background autonomously, after ofﬁce hours.
E. Hardware failure of a workstation
If a workstation crashes e.g. due to a disk defect, all
stored data and VMs are lost. A backup strategy should
be designed, that regular backs up all virtual desktops to
a Network Attached Storage (NAS), to prevent data loss.
This could be performed every night, when network load is
low anyway. Alternatively, VMs could always be migrated to
at least two workstations to ensure redundancy. This could
be done automated, always after a virtual desktop is shut
down. However, this would require additional memory and
thus limit the total number of VMs. In addition, network trafﬁc
is increased each time a VM is shut down or copied to an
additional workstation.
F. Integration of a central management unit for WVDI
A centralized management is necessary to manage VMs
and to perform and monitor dynamic migration. This can
be implemented on a small computer with low computing
power, since high performance is not required for its tasks.
Alternatively, a management unit can also be installed on an
existing workstation. However, this workstation must be active
at all times or at least for the time when a workstation or a thin
client is to be used, because it handles incoming connection
requests and manages migration processes. Alternatively, an
allocation table of VMs could be stored in thin clients and
workstations permanently. This may result in a greater admin-
istrative management if a device needs to be replaced.
G. Data security and safety
Using WVDI, implementations for physical access protec-
tion like in conventional ofﬁces are far more difﬁcult, because
data is stored in users VMs, that are located on workstations
and are thus exposed to third party access. In order to en-
sure data security, encryption should be used. The best case
is to encrypt all VMs entirely if possible and appropriate
regarding performance. Further, communication between user
workplaces and VMs shall be encrypted.
H. Flexible selection of workplace and telework
The approach allows users to work from home via remote
desktop connections. Energy savings are achieved by not
running a dedicated workstation for each user separately. A
further advantage is, that it is not required to shut down a VM
when leaving, but calculations are still pending. Users simply
turn off thin clients while virtual desktops are running in
background. When working within a virtualized infrastructure,
opportunity to change the workspace and continue working
is given. Here, the VM continues to run on a respective
hypervisor without interruption and only the connection is
established from another end device, which may be a thin
client, workstation or a computer at home.
I.
Operating conditions of a virtual machine
If a VM is paused, the current system state is frozen
and written to hard disk. After this, a virtual desktop no
longer needs any resources. Power consumption in this state
corresponds to a proper turned off VM. A user only has to
turn off thin client and peripheral devices, such as a screen or
printer. Returning from break, a user starts his thin client and
the virtual desktop is woken up, that is again in exact the same
state, as left previously so work can be continued seamlessly.
This can be problematic if application programs are connected
to a central database server directly. It can lead to unwanted
results if the database server is disconnected due to timeout,
resulting in inconsistencies within database. Another option
is to continue to run VMs if a user disconnects and turns
off thin client. Time exposure is equal to the other option
here. Any further calculations can be continued or database
connections maintained. Energy savings are only possible if
thin client and its peripherals are turned off. On hypervisor
side, no savings can be achieved as the VM is continues
running. When returning to work, a user only needs to restart
his thin client and the corresponding remote connection.
V.
EVALUATION OF WVDI
To evaluate WVDI, its energy efﬁciency is compared with
conventional workstation or desktop PC solutions. For calcu-
lations, power consumption values of respective components
were taken into account. The purpose is to determine whether
the use of WVDI can save energy or not. The number of
necessary workstations and thin clients is determined by the
virtualization rate and total number of required workspaces.
Deﬁnition: The virtualization rate speciﬁes the maximum
number of VMs that can be run on a hypervisor.
According to this deﬁnition, a virtualization rate of three
means, on a hypervisor (up to) three VMs can be run. In WVDI
a hypervisor runs on a workstation and a user can work with
the virtual desktop on it directly. A virtualization rate of three
in WVDI means there are a workstation and two thin clients.
A virtualization rate of three is noted in this work as VR = 3.
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

A. General conditions
Certain reference hardware and their parameters (power
consumption) are used for a simpliﬁed and theoretical eval-
uation. A workstation serves as a hypervisor and is available
to a user as workplace. For remote connection to a VM, a
thin client is used as local end device. A desktop computer
and workstation (without hypervisor) are used for comparison
with conventional desktop PC or workstation based solutions.
Performance of all considered components is interpreted for
an average user type called ”medium user”. This user is
characterized by using two or three applications at the same
time, including e.g. word processing, spreadsheet, database or
client/server applications [13]. In order to obtain concrete and
realistic performance data, widely used and adapted hardware
components for this user type are considered.
1) Workstation: The Fujitsu’s CELSIUS W530 Premium
Selection workstation with a power consumption of 38 Watts
in IdleMode, 100 Watts in Maximum and 44 Watts in On-
Mode is used as a reference workstation. This workstation
is recommended for virtualization tasks by the manufacturer.
Values for power consumption (IdleMode and Maximum) were
given by the ECO Declaration Sheet [14]. Power consumption
of 44 W in OnMode was calculated and rounded using the
formula deﬁned in the Product Cases Report of the European
Commission [15]:
OnMode[W] = 0, 9 · IdleMode[W] + 0, 1 · Maximum[W]
A ﬁxed (38 Watts in IdleMode) and a variable power con-
sumption are included in the total power requirement for each
workstation. Variable power consumption is determined by the
number of VMs run. A virtual desktop causes an additional
power consumption on the host system of up to about ﬁve
watts [16]. Since they are not always run under full load,
an additional power consumption of four watts is assumed
for each additional VM. The fact that power consumption
is nonlinear according to processor utilization, is neglected,
because deviations are minimal to the ﬁnal result but would
increase calculation effort considerably.
2) Thin Client: The Igel UD5-LX thin client with following
data is used as a reference device. It has a typical power
consumption of 11 Watts. No distinction is made between
IdleMode, OnMode and Maximum, since no calculations are
performed by thin clients in the actual sense, only a remote
session is provided. Hence, utilization is almost always the
same.
3) Desktop PC: The Fujitsu’s ESPRIMO P720 E90+ desk-
top PC with following data is used for comparison with
WVDI. For each PC a power consumption of 24,2 Watts in
OnMode is assumed [17]. It is an all-round PC, dimensioned
for conventional ofﬁce work and has been selected for this
reason. For following calculations, a rounded value of 25 watts
(OnMode) is used for its power consumption.
In addition, the CB (to manage host assignments of VMs) is
not regarded. Since this is only a single small computer or even
a single virtual desktop, it is hardly important here. In addition,
higher network trafﬁc resulting from a dynamic migration of
VMs is not taken into account. Dynamic migration is shown in
the best case scenario. With dynamic migration it is possible
to cause and approximate the best case. Power consumption
of peripheral components are not included here, because these
are required in any case, regardless of whether a conventional
installation or WVDI is implemented.
B. Energy efﬁciency in an ofﬁce environment model
WVDI was designed to enable small enterprises usage of
VDI without a dedicated server. Small enterprises typically
consist of up to 50 employees. Since in most cases not all users
are present at the same time and there are part time employees,
this evaluation is based on a more realistic scenario with
30 workplaces. Power consumption is calculated at different
virtualization rates. Virtualisation rates of two, four, eight and
ten were chosen, since these appear reasonable and realistic.
The goal is to determine whether WVDI allows energy savings.
For the sake of a clear presentation, an evaluation of the
virtualization rates was relinquished. A speciﬁc number of
workstations and thin clients is required for each virtualization
rate. Table I shows how many workstations and thin clients are
required for several numbers of virtualization rates.
TABLE I. REQUIRED NUMBER OF WORKSTATIONS AND THIN CLIENTS PER
TOTAL NUMBER OF WORKPLACES AND VIRTUALIZATION RATE
30 Workplaces
Workstations
Thin Clients
VR=2
15
15
VR=4
8
22
VR=8
4
26
VR=10
3
27
1) Worst case scenario: Users work on thin clients only
and use VMs, which are hosted on different workstations. For
each user a thin client and a workstation has to be started.
Power consumption is thus higher compared to solutions using
only workstations or thin clients. When all workstations have
started, only power consumption of thin clients and VMs
are added for each additional user. This problem could be
solved by organizational measures in the company or by usage
of dynamic migration of VMs, but this is not taken into
account here. Figure 2 shows that at ﬁrst, power consumption
Figure 2. Worst case with 30 workplaces
for all virtualization rates is slightly above the conventional
workstation solution. This is due to the fact, that not only
a workstation but also a thin client and a VM have to be
run per user. Starting from VR=4, it can be seen that even
in the worst case, power consumption for ten workplaces is
below a workstation solution. Starting from 25 workplaces,
power consumption is even below that of a pure desktop
computer solution. This is analogous to other virtualization
rates. Using a virtualization rate of VR=2, more than 18
workplaces have to be used in order to achieve energy savings
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

compared to a pure workstation solution. Using 30 workplaces
power consumption in WVDI is about 400 Watts lesser than the
workstation solution. Even if 30 workplaces are used, power
consumption of a desktop computer solution is about 100 Watts
below the WVDI solution.
2) Best case scenario: The most favorable and thus most
energy efﬁcient situation when using WVDI is represented.
In this case, it is assumed that users are distributed at their
workplaces, so that as few workstations as possible have to be
run. This can be done in two ways: Firstly, users are organized
in such a way that certain groups of users work with their
VMs on the same workstation simultaneously. Thus, only as
few workstations as necessary are run. However, this could be
difﬁcult to implement, because of a signiﬁcant reduction in
ﬂexibility and higher administrative and organizational effort.
Secondly, dynamic migration is implemented. All required
VMs are moved dynamically to as few workstations as possible
during operation, so that as many workstations as possible can
be switched off. This option is much more complex regarding
implementation on technical side, but is hardly noticeable to
users. Here, the maximum number of VMs per workstation
is utilized fully and as few workstations as possible are run.
In Figure 3 curves for workstation and desktop computer
Figure 3. Best case with 30 workplaces
solutions are exactly the same as in the worst case scenario. A
further workstation is switched on for each signiﬁcant increase
of a WVDI curve. The Figure shows that using WVDI with
the lowest virtualization rate of VR=2, power consumption is
below a workstation solution. Using a virtualization rate of
VR=3, power consumption is below the desktop PC solution.
With a virtualization rate of VR=4, power consumption is half
as much compared to a workstation solution. If a best case
distribution is ensured by organizational measures or dynamic
migration, energy efﬁciency can be increased signiﬁcantly, as
well as energy savings. It is analogous to other virtualization
rates. The best case scenario shows that power consumption of
WVDI using a virtualization rate of VR=2 with 30 workplaces
is about 400 Watts below a pure workstation solution. Further,
the desktop computer solution is about 100 Watts below the
WVDI solution. This is the same as in the worst case scenario.
Starting with a virtualization rate of VR=4 in the best case,
power consumption in WVDI is below a desktop computer
solution whereas in the worst case power consumption is lesser
than a desktop computer solution if more than 25 workplaces
are used.
VI.
CONCLUSION
Using WVDI compared to conventional solutions, energy
savings, as well as lower procurement costs are possible. Com-
pared to a solution consisting of only workstations, procure-
ment cost savings are already achieved using a virtualization
rate of VR=2. Using a virtualization rate of VR=4, procure-
ment costs are already half as much. Even in the worst case
scenario, the power consumption of WVDI is below a pure
workstation solution, if a minimum virtualization rate of VR=4
with ten workplaces is used. Starting form 25 workplaces,
power consumption is also below a desktop computer solution.
In the best case, power consumption is already below a pure
workstation solution using a virtualization rate of VR=2. This
solution is suitable particularly for small ofﬁce environments,
where procurement and maintenance of a large and cost
intensive server infrastructure is not worthwhile. Using WVDI,
small ofﬁce infrastructures can still beneﬁt from the advantage
of virtualization and increase energy efﬁciency. Energy savings
in WVDI are theoretically determined and illustrated using
speciﬁc power consumption values for exemplary hardware
components (workstations, thin clients and desktop PCs). It
is assumed, that execution time is nearly the same in both
cases, therefore the decline in power consumption translates
to energy savings. Which solution is the one with highest
energy efﬁciency for a respective IT environment, depends on
the number of devices, but also on their power consumption.
The result of the research question shows, that WVDI can
save energy in theory. Further, the following points have to be
considered within the next steps. This paper provides only the-
oretical calculations, hence, the real number of possible VMs
on a host is not considered. Therefore, further steps will be
required to evaluate possible limitations of the WVDI model,
such as communication and load balancing. Since WVDI is
an distributed hypervisor system, network trafﬁc may rise due
to an increasing number of required migration processes for
consolidation. This may also lead to potential performance
cost if those migrations become more frequent. But it must
also been taken into account, that a high consolidation rate
may decrease performance, because workstations are not as
powerful as servers. Another important aspect to be worked on
regards data security and privacy assurance in WVDI. Finally,
potential drawbacks of WVDI have to be analyzed further, to
substantiate energy savings.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This paper is based on the master thesis ”Management
of Virtual Desktops in Energy Efﬁcient Ofﬁce Environ-
ments Using Thin Clients” of Julian Willerding (Email: ju-
lian@willerding.de) written at the University of Passau [18].
The authors would like to thank Julian Willerding for providing
his preliminary work for publishment in this paper.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Dutta and A. K. Gupta, “Green computing: A greener approach
towards IT,” in 2016 3rd International Conference on Computing for
Sustainable Global Development (INDIACom), Mar. 2016, pp. 50–53.
[2]
M. Plettenberg and R. Spruijt, “State of the VDI and SBC Survey 2017
Edition,” Login VSI und VDI Like A Pro, Tech. Rep., Jun. 2017.
[3]
C. Kehl and N. Frangos, “The Efﬁcient Installation and Operation of
Terminal Server Farms (original title: Die efﬁziente Installation und der
Betrieb von Terminalserverfarmen),” visionapp GmbH, White Paper,
April 2007, URL: https://slidedocument.com/die-efﬁziente-installation-
und-der-betrieb-von-terminalserverfarmen [accessed: 2017-12-19].
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

[4]
K. Usvub, A. M. Farooqi, and M. A. Alam, “Edge Up Green
Computing In Cloud Data Centers - ProQuest,” International Journal of
Advanced Research in Computer Science, Tech. Rep., Mar. 2017, URL:
https://search.proquest.com/openview/8ad22aad54ab6364be896bb80aa
f46d8/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=1606379 [accessed: 2017-12-12].
[5]
VMware, “Virtualization Overview,” VMware Inc., White Paper, 2006,
URL: http://www.vmware.com/pdf/virtualization.pdf [accessed: 2017-
12-20].
[6]
D. K. Sachsenmaier, “Energy-efﬁcient Computer Workstations in Ofﬁce
Environments: Technologies and Comparison (original title: Energieef-
fziente Computerarbeitsplaetze in Bueroumgebungen: Technologien und
Vergleich),” Bachelor thesis, University of Passau, September 2013.
[7]
L. Casanova, Marcel, and E. Kristianto, “Comparing RDP and PcoIP
protocols for desktop virtualization inVMware enviroment,” in 2017
5th International Conference on Cyber and IT Service Management
(CITSM), Aug. 2017, pp. 1–4.
[8]
K. Feldhusen, “Sizing of Virtual Desktop Infrastructures,” Whitepaper,
Fujitsu Technology Solutions GmbH, White Paper, 2011, URL:
http://www.fujitsu.com/downloads/HK/wp-vdi-sizing.pdf
[accessed:
2017-12-20].
[9]
A. Murphy, “Optimizing VMware View VDI Deployments with F5,”
F5 Networks Inc., White Paper, 2009, URL: https://www.pei.com/wp-
content/uploads/2013/01/Optimizing-VMware-VDI.pdf [accessed:2047-
12-19].
[10]
E. VMware, Cisco, “Enterprise Virtual Desktop Infrastructure: De-
sign for Performance and Reliability,” VMware, Cisco, EMC, White
Paper,
2009,
URL:
http://www.emc.com/collateral/hardware/white-
papers/white-paper-vdi.pdf [accessed: 2017-12-20].
[11]
A.
Berl
and
H.
de
Meer,
“An
Energy
Consumption
Model
for
Virtualized
Ofﬁce
Environments,”
Future
Generation
Computer
Systems,
vol.
27,
no.
8,
Oct.
2011,
pp.
1047–
1055,
URL:
http://www.net.ﬁm.uni-passau.de/pdf/Berl2011b.pdf
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0167739X11000616
[accessed: 2017-12-20].
[12]
A.
Berl,
N.
Race,
J.
Ishmael,
and
H.
de
Meer,
“Network
Virtualization
in
Energy-Efﬁcient
Ofﬁce
Environments,”
Computer
Networks,
vol.
54,
no.
16,
Nov.
2010,
pp.
2856–
2868,
URL:
http://www.net.ﬁm.uni-passau.de/pdf/Berl2010d.pdf
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1389128610002513
[accessed: 2017-12-20].
[13]
E. Weidner et al., “Ecological Comparison of PC and Thin Client
Workplace Devices (original title: Oekologischer Vergleich von PC und
Thin Client Arbeitsplatzgeraeten),” Fraunhofer-Institut fuer Umwelt-,
Sicherheits-, Energietechnik UMSICHT, Oberhausen, Tech. Rep., Dec.
2006.
[14]
D. Feuerer, “Product environmental attributes - THE ECO DECLARA-
TION - Workstation CELSIUS W530,” Fujitsu Technology Solutions
GmbH, ECO Declaration, Juli 2013.
[15]
R. Kemna, M. van Elburg, W. Li, and R. van Holsteijn, “Methodology
Study Eco-design of Energy-using Products (MEEUP): product cases
report,” Delft, Netherlands: VHK-Van Holsteijn en Kemna BV, 2005.
[16]
Q. Chen et al., “Proﬁling Energy Consumption of VMs for Green Cloud
Computing.”
[17]
Fujitsu Technology Solutions GmbH, “Energy Consumption ESPRIMO
P720 E90+,” White Paper, Fujitsu Technology Solutions GmbH, White
Paper, June 2013.
[18]
J. Willerding, “Management of Virtual Desktops in Energy Efﬁcient
Ofﬁce Environments Using Thin Clients (original title: Management
von virtuellen Desktops in energieefﬁzienten Broumgebungen unter
Verwendung von Thin Clients),” Master thesis, University of Passau,
December 2014.
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-607-1
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization

