Evaluating a Distributed Identity Provider Trusted Network with Delegated
Authentications for Cloud Federation
Antonio Celesti, Francesco Tusa, Massimo Villari and Antonio Puliaﬁto
Dept. of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, University of Messina
Contrada di Dio, S. Agata, 98166 Messina, Italy.
e-mail: {acelesti, ftusa, mvillari, apuliaﬁto}@unime.it
Abstract—Federation offers an affordable opportunity for
small and medium cloud providers to become as competitive
as the biggest counterparts. However, in order to establish
a federated cloud ecosystem, it is needed to rely on an
efﬁcient security infrastructure enabling authentication among
clouds. Assuming a scalable federated cloud environment, the
management of security can become very hard due to the
number of authentications and trusted relationships that have
to be established. Nowadays, the latest trend in authentication
is the Identity Provider/Service Provider model. This paper
aims to investigate a distributed IdP/SP infrastructure based on
the concept of delegated authentications, evaluating its possible
utilization in a federated cloud scenario.
Keywords-Cloud Computing, Federation, Distributed IdPs,
Trusted Network.
I. INTRODUCTION
By now, the cloud ecosystem has been characterized by
the steady rising of hundreds of independent and heteroge-
neous cloud providers, managed by private subjects which
yield various services to their clients. Using this computing
infrastructure it is possible to pursue new levels of efﬁciency
in delivering Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as
a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS) to clients
(e.g., companies, organizations, end-users, and so on).
Despite such an ecosystem includes hundreds of indepen-
dent, heterogeneous clouds, many business operators have
predicted that the process toward interoperable federated
Intracloud/Intercloud environments will begin in the near
future [1], even involving standardization boards (i.e., IEEE
[2]). Nowadays, small/medium cloud providers are becom-
ing popular even though their virtualization infrastructures
(i.e., deployed in their datacenters) cannot directly com-
pete with the bigger counterparts, including mega-providers
such as Amazon, Google, and Saleforce. The result is that
frequently small/medium cloud providers have to exploit
services of mega-providers in order to develop their business
logic and their cloud-based services. This means that the
role of market leader is intended to remain in the hands
of bigger players in the near future. To this regard, a
possible future alternative scenario is based on the concept
of cooperating clouds constituting the federation. Federation
has always had both political and historical implications: the
term refers, in fact, to a type of system characterized by
an aggregation of partially “self-governing” entities with a
“central government”. In a federation, each self-governing
status of the component entities is typically independent
and may not be altered by a unilateral decision of the
“central government” [3]. Federation is also a concept
which is adopted in many information systems. Considering
small/medium independent self-governing cloud providers,
federation means a cooperation enabling the sharing of
part of their computational and storage resources with the
purpose to provide new business opportunity. The advantage
of a federated cloud scenario is twofold. On one hand,
small/medium cloud providers, which rent resources to other
providers, can optimize the use of their infrastructure, which
often is under utilized, at the same time earning money for
the use of their resources. On the other hand, external smal-
l/medium cloud providers can elastically scale their logical
virtualization infrastructure, borrowing resources and paying
other providers for their use. Therefore, cloud federation
allows another form of pay-per-use economic model for ICT
companies, universities, research centers and organizations
that usually do not fully exploit the resources of their phys-
ical infrastructure. The beneﬁts of cloud federation include
provisioning of distributed cloud-based services, resource
sharing, resource optimization and power saving [4].
However, several issues have to be faced from the point of
view of security. Security is a wide topic in cloud computing
and in this work we speciﬁcally focus on the establishment
of trusted relationships between clouds, that can become
very hard to be managed in scalable scenarios. Usually a
trusted relationship among two or more systems is performed
by means of authentication mechanisms.
In this paper, we discuss two possible authentication
scenarios for the establishment of trust contexts between
federated clouds: 1) Single Sign-On (SSO) Authentica-
tion using the traditional Identity Provider/Service Provider
(IdP/SP) model; 2) Single Sign-On (SSO) authentication
using a system of distributed Identity Providers (IdPs) with
delegated authentications.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II describes
the state of the art in authentication for distributed system,
focusing on the IdP/SP model. In Section III, we analyze
in detail the two authentication scenarios. A comparison
between them is discussed in Section IV. Conclusions are
summarized in Section V.
79
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

II. RELATED WORKS
A. Authentication Systems
With the term “authentication” we refer to any process by
which it is possible to verify that someone is who claims
to be. Username/password is the most widely used form of
authentication. Another method is based on the private/pub-
lic key cryptography. A stronger form of authentication is
based on digital certiﬁcate [5], an electronic document which
uses a digital signature to bind a public key with an identity
described by information such as the name of a person or
an organization.
Considering the evolving Internet scenarios, where entities
need to access different services in a dynamic fashion, the
requirement of interoperability among authentication tech-
nologies, also reducing the number of needed credentials and
authentications is more and more compelling. To this regard,
the latest trend in term authentication is represented by
the Identity Provider/Service Provider (IdP/SP) model along
with the Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) [6],
an XML-based standard that allows to exchange authenti-
cation and authorization data. The IdP/SP model allows to
plan Single Sign-On (SSO) authentication scenarios when
software/human entities can login once an IdP gaining the
access to all SPs which rely on that target Idp.
Although SSO and SAML technologies are strictly related
to the web context, some recent works are trying to employ
the same approach on new scenarios where many entities
that belong to different domains need to perform authen-
tication [7], [8]. This is also the case of cloud federation
[1], [9], where clouds cooperate together establishing trust
contexts in order to provide new business opportunities.
Recently, trust has been identiﬁed as a beneﬁcial concept in
large scale networks [10]. Considering trust relations when
selecting service providers as partners leads to more efﬁcient
cooperation and composition of services [11].
SAML, offers the possibility of adding extensions in order
to achieve dynamic federation in a generic way, regardless
the speciﬁc scenario where it is applied. Considering fed-
erated cloud environments, in [12] it is discussed a new
SAML proﬁle named Cross-Cloud Authentication Agent
SSO (CCAA-SSO) deﬁning the steps needed for a secure
cloud SSO authentication. However, the bottleneck of the
IdP/SP model is represented by the presence of a central
IdP per trust context. In order to overcome such a limitation,
an approach [13] is proposed to minimize the dependence
on central IdPs with a priori conﬁguration, making entities
more autonomous and capable of taking trust decisions.
Another solution is exploiting the concept of delegation.
Unfortunately, SAML natively lacks of delegation capabil-
ities. Nevertheless, there are several works in Grid, Web
Service, and Ubiquitous Computing environments where
SAML is extended with the purpose to beneﬁt of delegation
capabilities [14], [15], [16].
B. Propagation of Trustiness
Scenario we are addressing can be deﬁned as simpliﬁed
context for trustiness in Cooperating Clouds, thus because
Clouds may strongly leverage IdPs entities. Many works
have been done in area of trustiness even in the propagation
of trustiness. Of course our concept of delegation relies on
some pre assumptions, those are: a) Each Cloud Provider
uses well-know IdP (either its own or in the shared conﬁg-
uration). b) Each Cloud is able to decide if use/not-use the
delegation against some speciﬁc IdPs (it may perform its
ﬁltering of IdPs existing in trustiness chains).
The complexity of evaluating the level of trust of a Subject
insisting in the Internet determines to carefully face the
topic, especially for large networks (i.e., Social Networks).
Huang [17] developed a framework of trust propagation
schemes evaluating them on a large trust network consisting
of 800K trust scores expressed among 130K people. An
interesting work has been conducted in [18] about the Ontol-
ogy of Trust reporting a formal semantics and deﬁning the
concept of Transitivity. The authors highlighted that Trust
Transitivity is not always an applicable concept at all. Chen
et al [19] tried to determine a formula for expressing the
trustiness. In particular they introduced the Mean operator
(Transitive mean degree), that is the trust degree of a path
(from source to destination considering the weights of edges
existing in the between). It is calculated with the geometric
or arithmetic mean of those weights of all edges along that
path.
The security and trustiness in distributed environments
are topics widely assessed. Our main aim is to investigate
Clouds and adopt existing security solutions for overcoming
issues related to the federation.
III. AUTHENTICATION BETWEEN CLOUDS
Due to the high dynamism of federated cloud environ-
ments, a ﬂexible method for building dynamic trust contexts
should be provided.
According to [1], in this work, we assume that, regard-
less the adopted cloud middleware, the federation process
is accomplished according to three different phases that
is: Discovery, Match-Making and Authentication. In our
solution a speciﬁc module named Cross-Cloud Federation
Manager (CCFM) including three agents is able to perform
such activities.
The Discovery Agent (DA) manages the discovery process
of the resources and services made available by all the clouds
belonging to the dynamic distributed environment. Once the
clouds’ service discovery has been performed, the Match-
Making Agent (MA) will accomplish the task of choosing
the more convenient cloud(s) wherewith to establish the fed-
eration according to requirements and policies. Finally, the
Authentication Agent (AA) will perform the authentication
with the selected clouds, creating a trust context, hence a
federation. Once the security context has been created, a
80
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

cloud will be able to exploit resources and services offered
by other federated cloud. In this Section, we focus on
the authentication phase debating two different scenarios
involving IdPs. In order to clarify the idea on using the
IdP/SP model, we consider the following as a basic example:
according to the IdP/SP terminology the AA of cloud A
borrowing resources plays the role of “client”, the AA of
cloud B lending resources plays the role of “SP” (Relying
Party), and IdP X plays the role of trust third party (Asserting
Party) assuring to cloud B that cloud A is which claims
to be. In order to allow cloud A to be authenticated by
cloud B, it is needed that cloud A is enrolled in IdP X
and that cloud B relies on IdP X. Once the authentication
has been accomplished, cloud A will be able to log-in all
clouds relying on IdP X without further authentications.
A. Traditional IdP/SP Scenario for Cloud Federation
Assuming an ecosystem with N clouds, the most obvious
approach consists of using M, M
< N different IdPs.
Basically, we can distinguish three main cases:
1) Case 1. M = 1. It is the simplest case. It consists
of using a unique IdP for all federated clouds, thus
enabling SSO authentications. In this way each cloud
has to manage only one credential. However, this
solution is out of place, because a unique central IdP
would be a bottleneck for the whole authentication
system.
2) Case 2. M < N, M ̸= 1. It is the case in which
a cloud, in order to perform authentications with the
other N − 1 clouds, has to perform an enrollment on
M IdPs, thus managing M different credentials. For
example, let us consider three different IdPs X, Y, Z,
and clouds 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Clouds 1, 2, 3, 4 rely
on IdP X, clouds 5, 6, 7 rely on IdP Y, and clouds
8, 9 rely on IdP Z. In order to allow cloud 10 to be
authenticated on all the other clouds, it has to perform
enrollments on IdP X, Y, and Z, thus managing three
credentials.
3) Case 3. M = N − 1. In this case each of the N − 1
clouds rely on a different IdP. A cloud, in order to
perform authentications with the other N − 1 clouds,
needs to perform enrollments on N − 1 IdPs, thus
managing N − 1 different credentials.
In cases 2 and 3, if an IdP is corrupted, it will not affect the
whole authentication system, however case 3 represents the
worst case from the point of view of needed trust relation-
ships, i.e, enrollments of clouds in IdPs. In this paper, we
analyze this latter case. Considering a federation including N
clouds, the number of trust relationships tr needed to obtain
the total overlay (i.e., each cloud is authenticated with each
other) can be computed as:
tr = N(N − 1)
(1)
Figure 1.
Authentication between clouds using the traditional IDP system
where each cloud relies on a different IdP (worst case from the point of
view of needed trust relationships).
In Figure 1, 5 clouds are depicted with their associated
IdPs. Using eq. (1), tr
=
5 ∗ 4
=
20. This means
that the full overlay of the network can be reached after
the establishment of 20 trust relationships (i.e., performed
enrollments of clouds in IdPs). In Figure 1, the existence
of a trust relationship is indicated by an arrow connecting
the AA of the CCFM of each cloud with the corresponding
IdP(s), where the cloud has an enrollment. For example, in
order to allow cloud 1 to be authenticated in clouds 2, 3,
4, and 5, it as to perform enrollments in IdPs B, C, D, E.
All the consideration we will assume in the following are
based on the possibility of extending the SAML protocol as
described in some recent works we have cited [13], [14],
[15] and [16].
B. Distributed IdP Trusted Network (DIdP-TN) Scenario for
Cloud Federation
As the authentication based on the traditional IdP system
can imply high management costs especially in case 3,
starting from the idea of delegation, we investigated an
alternative authentication scenario able to reduce the number
of required authentications in a federated cloud environment.
We named such a system Distributed IdP Trusted Network
(DIdP-TN). As depicted in Figure 2, the authentication
system is based on the concept of delegation between IdPs.
Cloud 1 has an enrollment on IdP A and therefore is able to
perform a SSO authentication on cloud 2 and 3. As trusted
relationships exist between IdP A, B, C, D, E, cloud 1 is
also able to perform a SSO authentication on all the clouds
of the federation. For example, as clouds 6, 7 rely on IdP
E, cloud 1 is able to perform an authentication on cloud
7, because IdP E trusts IdP B and IdP B trusts IdP A. In
this scenario, trust relationships have to be managed by the
DIdP-TN and not by clouds themselves as in the traditional
scenario. In this case the number of trust relationships tr
needed to obtain the full coverage of the network of clouds
81
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

Figure 2.
Authentication between clouds using the DIDP-TN system.
will be:
tr ≤ N(N − 1)
(2)
IV. EVALUATION OF THE DIDP-TN
In order to compare the DIDP-TN with a traditional
IDP/SP authentication system for cloud federation, we mod-
eled them using the graph theory and performed several
experiments.
A. Modeling the two Authentication Systems
Let V and E(V ) = {{a, b} (for simplicity ab) |a, b ∈
V, a ̸= b} two ﬁnite sets. We deﬁne a pair G = (V, E)
with E ⊆ E(V ) the cyclic digraph (or directed graph)
representing a cloud federation. The elements of V are
vertices of G, and those of E the edges of G. Vertices a
and b are adjacent if the edge ab ∈ G. The vertices set of
the digraph G is denoted by VG and its edge set by EG.
The number υG = |VG| of vertices is called the order of G,
and ϵG = |EG| is the size. The E are oriented, that is, the
edges are oriented: E ⊆ V ×V where ab ̸= ba. The digraph
does not allow loops, that is, it is not allowed an edge aa.
Let ei = vivi+1 ∈ G be edges of G for i ∈ [1, k]. The
sequence WG = e1e2 . . . ek is a walk of length k from v1 to
vk. Here ei and ei+1 are compatible in the sense that e1 is
adjacent to ei+1 for all i ∈ [1, k − 1]. We will write a → b
if it exists at least one walk between a and b. We denote
with ωG = |WG| the number of walks from a vertex a to a
vertex b. A digraph will be named complete if ∀a, b ∈ VG,
a is adjacent with b. In this case, if υG = N, it will be
ϵG = N(N − 1). Furthermore, a digraph will be named
connected, if ∀a, b ∈ VG it exists at least one walk a → b.
Let GIdP a subgraph of the graph G, denoted by GIdP ⊆
G, if VIdP
⊆ VG and EIdP
⊆ EG. GIdP represents
the traditional IdP/SP authentication system in a federated
cloud environment. GIdP is built according to K events.
An event represents the need of authentication of cloud
a in cloud b, and each oriented edge ab ∈ E represents
a trust relationship, i.e., the enrollment of cloud a in the
Figure 3.
Example of digraph representing the traditional IDP-based
authentication system for a federated cloud environment, where each cloud
relies on a different IdP (worst case from the point of view of authentication
management).
IDP on which cloud b relies, so that a will be read cloud
and b IdP. Given an event with two equiprobable random
vertices a, b, a ̸= b, if a walk of length k = 1 exists,
that is, if an edge ab exists, nothing is done; else an edge
ab is created. Considering the set F with all the clouds
belonging to the federation with υV
= N each cloud
a ∈ F, in order to be federated with the other N − 1
clouds, must have a walk of length l = 1 toward all the
other N − 1 clouds of the federation. This implies that the
digraph representing the federation has to be connected, so
that N(N − 1) trust relationships (i.e., enrollments of cloud
in IdPs) have to be performed. In this case, considering
GIdP , ω = ϵ = N(N − 1) is the number of needed
trust relationships tr in order that each clouds is able to
be authenticated in each other. Figure 3 depicts an example
of digraph representing the authentications in a federated
clouds environment with total overlay using the traditional
IDP-based system with υ = 10 and ω = ϵ = 90.
Let GDIdP −T N a subgraph of the graph G, denoted by
GDIdP −T N ⊆ G, if VDIdP −T N ⊆ VG and EDIdP −T N ⊆
EG. GDIdP −T N represents a DIdP-TN in a federated clouds
environment. GDIdP −T N is built according to K events. An
event represents the need to establish a trust relationship, i.e.,
an agreement between two IdPs, and each oriented edge ab ∈
E represents the a trust relationship between IdP a and IdP
b where delegated authentications take place. Given an event
with two equiprobable random vertices a, b, a ̸= b, if it exists
one and at least one walk from the vertex a to the vertex
b, nothing is done, else an edge ab is created. The meaning
of each element ab ∈ V of GDIdP −T N is the following: if
we read ab, it will be read the IdP b is trusts IdP a. It is
important to notice that as we are considering a digraph, if
IdP a trusts IdP b it does not mean that IdP b trusts IdP a.
This implies that the digraph representing the DIdP-TN has
to be only complete (and not connected as in the previous
scenario). In this case, a walk a → b of length 1 ≤ l ≤
N −1 from IdP a to the IdP b represents a trust relationship
between the two IdPs. Note that in this case considering
GDIdP −T N, ϵ ≤ ω ≤ N(N − 1), that is, the number of
needed trust relationships between IdPs is less or equal to
82
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

Figure 4.
Example of digraph representing a distributed system of IdPs
with delegated authentication in federated cloud environment.
tr. Figure 4 depicts an example of a digraph representing the
trusted relationships between IdPs, by means of each cloud
is able to perform a SSO authentication on each other.
B. Comparison Between the two Authentication Approaches
For each authentication scenario we built a digraph cre-
ating edges according to the simulation of K events. For
both graphs, we assumed an order υ = 25. In simple terms,
we considered a scenario including 25 Idps. For each event
i, i = 1, 2, . . . , K, we stored the number ϵi of edges created
and the percentage Xi of total overlay on the whole digraph
up to event i as:
Xi =
ϵi · 100
N(N − 1)
(3)
The total overlay is a parameter indicating how clouds cover
the network of federated clouds from the point of view
of authentications. The 100% of total overlay is obtained
when each cloud of the federation is able to perform the
authentication with all the other ones.
For simplicity, all the simulations have been performed
with equiprobable events, and without the possibility of
cancellation of a created edge, i.e., without the possibility
to break trusted relationships. For each of the two authen-
tication scenarios, we assumed 25 IdPs and 8000 events,
repeating the simulations 50 times, picking up the mean
values of both the created edges and the total overlay
percentage for each i − th event. For each simulation, we
also calculated variances and conﬁdence intervals at 95%.
The goodness of our experiment is motivated by the fact that
we have obtained conﬁdence intervals rather small.
Figures 5 and 6 depict a comparison between the two
authentication scenarios respectively considering the per-
centages of overlay on the whole cloud federation and the
number of established trust relationships. In Figure 5, on the
x-axis is reported the number of simulated events instead
on the y-axis is reported the percentage of overlay on the
whole cloud federation. Regarding the traditional IdP/SP
authentication scenario, we obtained the 100% of overlay
on the whole cloud federation after 6765 events (i.e, the
need of establish authentications between clouds), instead
in the case of the DIdP-TN we obtained the 100% of
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 0
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
 7000
 8000
Mean overlay percentages
Number of Events
Comparison between the mean overlay percentages
DIdP-TN system
Traditional IdP system
Figure 5. Comparison between the two authentication systems, considering
the overlay percentages.
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
 0
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
 7000
 8000
Mean created trust relationships
Number of Events
Comparison between the established authentications
DIdP-TN system
Traditional IdP system
Figure 6. Comparison between the two authentication systems, considering
the mean value of created authentications.
total overlay after 285 events (i.e., the need of establish
agreements between IdPs).
In Figure 6, on the x-axis is
reported the number of simulated events, instead on the
y-axis is the number established trusted relationships. We
remark that for the traditional IdP/SP authentication scenario
a trust relationship is an enrollment of a cloud in one IdP, and
that in the case of DIDP-TN authentication scenario a trust
relationship is an agreement between two IdPs. Regarding
the traditional IdP system scenario, we can observe that we
obtained a connected digraph after 6765 events. In fact,
after 6765 events, we obtain N(N − 1) = 25 · 24 = 600
enrollments of clouds on IdPs. Instead, regarding the DIdP-
TN system, we obtained a system in which each cloud is
able to perform authentication on each other after 285 events,
and 47,860 mean established agreements between IdPs. In
both cases the variance had a Gaussian trend. This meant
that the conﬁdence intervals had their maximum amplitude
around the midpoint of all the curves, before their saturation.
Saturation is reached when each cloud is able to perform
the authentication with each other, i.e., when the overlay
percentage is 100%.
83
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
Percentage of total overlay
Mean created trust relationships
Comparison between the two approaches
DIdP-TN system
Traditional IdP 
Figure 7.
Comparison between the two approaches considering both the
number of created authentications and the respective overlay percentages.
Figure 7 depicts a comparison between the two ap-
proaches considering both the number of created trust re-
lationships on the x-axis and the respective overlay percent-
ages on the y-axis. It is possible to notice how for the DIdP-
TN system the 100% of overlay is obtained faster than the
traditional IdP system.
C. Overcoming issues with Transitive Trust
The paper we are presenting is a preliminary work that
needs to be reﬁned. In the context of Transitive Trust, sys-
tems authentication performed along through the delegation
mechanism might raise problems. In particular in our case
a subset of IdPs that are nor recognized in the chain of
trustiness of whatever cloud provider. To address such a
problem we introduced the Access Control List (ACL) for
preventing the involvement of untrusted IdPs no directly
accesses but present in the list of delegation. Indeed there
could be the possibility that even though a trust relationship
exists from an IdP a to an IdP b through a cloud c, the
cloud a decide to create a direct trust relationship with
cloud b because it considers too much risky a delegated
authentication through a cloud c. For example cloud a could
consider cloud c not so reliable from the point of view of
security. We are looking at a much more complex trustiness
scenarios in which the links weight of trusting walks along
with the IdP reputation must be taken into account (i.e.,
[20]).
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we focused on two authentication scenarios
for federated cloud environments: the ﬁrst based on the
adoption of a traditional IdP system, and the second based
on a DIdP-TN. From the simulations, it is evident how the
DIdP-TN system allows to drastically reduce the needed op-
erations for clouds, simplifying the management of accounts
and enrollments. However, even if on one hand it is possible
to reduce the number of needed authentications, on the other
hand a few problems might rise. In this work, we assumed
equiprobable events, but if we consider also the possibility
of breaking the trust relationships, the scenario on one hand
might be fault tolerant as alternative trust relationships (i.e.,
walks considering the digraph) might exist, whereas on the
other hand the scenario might become more complicated.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Celesti, F. Tusa, M. Villari, and A. Puliaﬁto, “How to
enhance cloud architectures to enable cross-federation,” in
Proceedings of IEEE CLOUD ’10, pp. 337–345, IEEE, July
2010.
[2] April 2011.
IEEE works towards cloud interoperability
standards:
http://www.cloudcomputingzone.com/2011/04/ieee-works-
towards-cloud-interoperability-standards/.
[3] Forum of Federations: http://www.forumfed.org/en/index.php.
[4] B. Rochwerger, D. Breitgand, A. Epstein, D. Hadas, I. Loy,
K. Nagin, J. Tordsson, C. Ragusa, M. Villari, S. Clayman,
E. Levy, A. Maraschini, P. Massonet, H. Munoz, and G. Tof-
fetti, “Reservoir - when one cloud is not enough,” Computer,
vol. 44, pp. 44–51, 2011.
[5] “C. Adams and S. Farrell, Internet X.509 Public Key In-
frastructure: Certiﬁcate Management Protocols, RFC 2510:
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2510.”
[6] “Security assertion markup language, oasis, http://www.oasis-
open.org/committees/security.”
[7] K. Traw, S. Yang, and P. Comitz, “Federated identify manage-
ment in service oriented architectures,” in Integrated Commu-
nications, Navigation and Surveillance Conference (ICNS),
pp. 1–6, May 2008.
[8] R. McKenzie, M. C. M, and C. Wallis, “Use cases for identity
management in e-government,” in Security & Privacy, IEEE,
vol. 6, pp. 51–57, March-April 2008.
[9] Goiri, J. Guitart, and J. Torres, “Characterizing cloud feder-
ation for enhancing providers’ proﬁt,” Proceedings of IEEE
Cloud ’10, pp. 123–130, 2010.
[10] D. Artz and Y. Gil, “A survey of trust in computer science
and the semantic web,” Web Semantics: Science, Services and
Agents on the World Wide Web, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58 – 71,
2007.
[11] S. Florian, S. Daniel, and D. Schahram, “The cycle of trust
in mixed service-oriented systems,” in Proceedings of SEAA
’09, pp. 72–79, 2009.
[12] A. Celesti, F. Tusa, M. Villari, and A. Puliaﬁto, “Three-phase
cross-cloud federation model: The cloud sso authentication,”
Second International Conference on Advances in Future
Internet (AFIN), pp. 94–101, 2010.
[13] P. Arias Cabarcos, F. Almen´arez Mendoza, A. Mar´ın-L´opez,
and D. D´ıaz-S´anchez, “Enabling saml for dynamic identity
federation management,” in Wireless and Mobile Networking,
vol. 308, pp. 173–184, Springer Boston, 2009.
84
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

[14] T. Komura, Y. Nagai, S. Hashimoto, M. Aoyagi, and K. Taka-
hashi, “Proposal of delegation using electronic certiﬁcates
on single sign-on system with saml-protocol,” in SAINT,
pp. 235–238, 2009.
[15] S. Shen and S. Tang, “Cross-domain grid authentication
and authorization scheme based on trust management and
delegation,” in CIS, pp. 399–404, 2008.
[16] W. Jun, D. V. David, and H. Marty, “Extending the security
assertion markup language to support delegation for web
services and grid services,” in Proceedings of IEEE ICWS
’05, pp. 67–74, 2005.
[17] M. S. F. Jingwei Huang, “An ontology of trust: formal
semantics and transitivity,” in ICEC, pp. 259–270, 2006.
[18] J. Huang and M. S. Fox, “An ontology of trust: formal seman-
tics and transitivity,” in Proceedings of the 8th international
conference on Electronic commerce: The new e-commerce:
innovations for conquering current barriers, obstacles and
limitations to conducting successful business on the internet,
ICEC ’06, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 259–270, ACM, 2006.
[19] Y. Chen, T.-M. Bu, M. Zhang, and H. Zhu, “Max-
minimum algorithm for trust transitivity in trustworthy net-
works,” Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology,
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on, vol. 3, pp. 62–
64, 2009.
[20] Y. Chen, T.-M. Bu, M. Zhang, and H. Zhu, “Measurement
of trust transitivity in trustworthy networks,” Journal of
Emerging Technologies in Web Intelligence, vol. 2, no. 4,
2010.
85
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

