Security Management of  a Cloud-based U-City Management System 
 
Sung Min Kim, Jun Oh Kim, Chang Ho Yun,  
Jong Won Park, Yong Woo LEE (Corresponding Author) 
School of Electrical & Computer Engineering 
University of Seoul, Ubiquitous-City (Smart City) Consortium 
Seoul, Korea 
{smkim, kjo, touch011, comics77, ywlee}@uos.ac.kr 
Hae Sun Jung 
Ubiquitous-City (Smart City) Consortium 
Seoul, Korea 
holylife7@hotmail.com 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we introduce a user authentication 
methodology for a cloud-based U-City management system to 
manage the U-City which includes ubiquitous resources and 
cloud computing resources. Cloud computing enables the 
integrated urban operation center of the U-City to provide 
limitless computing power without having its own computing 
center. However, because huge number of services and users 
use the U-City service and the cloud computing power and they 
should be carefully screened, we need a specially designed 
security management to protect the U-City and its facilities. 
For it, we propose the cloud-based U-City management system, 
UTOPIA which uses SAML-based Single-Sign-On (SSO) 
authentication for the security management to do user 
authentication and privilege management for the cloud 
computing in the U-City. 
Keywords-U-City; Cloud Computing; SAML; U-City Security 
Management; Single-Sign On. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
With ubiquitous computing, we are seeking the way to 
satisfy human beings’ desire to enjoy IT services with any 
device, anytime and anywhere. In U-City, every possible 
information system such as residential, environmental, 
medical, business, governmental, social and the like is linked 
through ubiquitous computing technologies and the whole U-
City acts as virtually one system or a global system which 
works for human beings and takes care of them. 
U-City is usually centrally managed by the central 
operation center which processes the huge amount of the 
data and often needs huge computing power. The irregularity 
of need in computing power makes it very attractive that the 
U-City uses cloud computing since the cloud computing 
obviously save the cost of computing power [1]. 
Cloud computing is defined as “a style of computing 
where scalable and elastic IT-related capabilities are 
provided as a service to customers using Internet 
technologies.” [2]. To use cloud service requires generally 
better security than to use private system. In order to include 
cloud computing in U-City, we should keep it in mind. As 
well-publicized cases of cloud computing vulnerability, we 
can think Amazon S3 malfunction over seven-hour on July 
20, 2008 [3], Gmail outage over one-day in mid-October 
2008 [4] and Google Docs vulnerabilities [5].  
Security issues such as user authentication, information 
protection and access control should be carefully solved in 
order that we provide U-City services using the cloud 
computing to users. For it, we propose a U-City Management 
System named UTOPIA, which uses SSO authentication 
technology based SAML as a part of the security 
management [6]. Users who use the U-City Management 
System do not need to be bothered to login again and again 
whenever they use difference service of  UTOPIA but login 
just once. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly 
introduces related works and confirms that this work is the 
first and only work till now. Section 3 outlines our U-City 
management system, UTOPIA, which is composed of the 
three tiers. Sections 4 explains our SAML based SSO user 
authentication as a part of our security management. Section 
5 describes the implementation of the SAML based SSO user 
authentication into UTOPIA. Finally, Section 6 gives 
conclusions and explains future works. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. U-City Management 
U-City management system enables citizens to easily use 
U-City services. There are many U-Cities in Korea as shown 
in Table 1.  
Seoul Metropolitan Government Information Agency, 
Seoul in Korea has been building many U-Towns based on 
U-Seoul Master Plan which aims U-Care, U-Fun, U-Green, 
U-transport, U-Business and U-Government [7]. They have 
central operation centers, which use their own U-City 
management systems but they are different from UTOPIA 
which uses the three tier U-City Management System 
Paradigm based on U-City middleware and U-City portal. 
They have various kinds of user services, but they are not 
integrated together and do not provide SSO based user 
authentication.  
U-Dongtan U-City provides many kinds of public services 
such as surveillance of public areas, environment pollution 
information, water leakage management, media board, traffic 
information and so on. It uses user authentication with just 
identity and password and does not use SSO authentication 
[8]. The U-city has central operation center which use a 
platform but does not use U-City middleware. Like these, we 
are the only U-City management system which uses three 
tier U-City paradigm, U-City middleware and the U-City 
74
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

portal and uses SSO authentication. That is, currently, there 
is no U-City which is based on our concept. 
 
 
TABLE I.  
SOME MAJOR U-CITY PROJECTS IN KOREA  
U-city Project 
Name 
Period 
Goal 
Digital Media 
City 
2001~2010 
The world best IT town. Northeast 
Asian IT hub. 
U-Gangnam 
2004~2007 
Seamless 
Connectivity. 
Mobile 
Environment. 
Teleportation 
& 
Telework. 
U-
cheonggyeche
on 
2007 
3D-based GIS. A U-City testbed. 
U-
Myengdong/ 
U-ljiro 
2007~2010 
Digital media plaza. Digital media 
stree, Digital media gallery. 
Eunpyeong 
New Town 
2006~2011 
A ubiquitous new-town.  
U-Busan 
2004~2010 
The World first u-city. U-port, U-
Traffic, U-convention. 
U-Gwangju 
2004~2012 
Centered on U-home. 
U-Daejeon 
2004~2007 
U-cluster. U-wellbeing. 
U-Gyeongbuk 
2004~2010 
The largest U-City testbed. U-
culture. 
U-Pyong 
Chang 
2006~2010 
U-city for winter sports. 
U-Chungbuk 
2005~2009 
3D GIS. U-cluster. 
U-Jeju 
2004~2006 
Focused on telematics. 
U-Sejong 
2005~2030 
U-government 
Gwanggyo 
New-town 
2005~2011 
A ubiquitous well being town. 
Pangyo New-
town 
2006~2010 
A U-echo city. 
U-Dongtan 
2003~2007 
GIS. ITS. BcN. IBS. 
U-Jeonju 
2005~2008 
U-culture. U-tour. U-traffic. 
U-Paju 
2005~2009 
Total Life-Card. Smart transport. 
U-Bucheon 
2010~2014 
U-home network, U-traffic, U-tour. 
U-echo. U-safety. 
U-Changwon 
2004~2008 
Digital broadcasting. Media center. 
U-Ansan 
2007~2012 
U-Industry. U-tour. 
 
 
 
B. Security management using personal authentication 
technology 
Table 2 summarizes major personal authentication 
methods case by case. Currently SSO is popular and widely 
used [9]. We think SSO is one of the best solutions to the 
security management in U-City, since so many kinds of U-
City services are provided, so many kinds of organizations 
such as public agencies, financial institutions, large 
corporations, educational institutions are integrated in U-City 
and the separately developed U-Cities can be merged into a 
larger U-City later. Currently no U-City uses SSO for their 
security management, and this work is the first case and the 
only research at the moment.  
 
 
TABLE II.  
THE PERSONAL AUTHENTICATION  
Security Technology 
Description 
ID/Password 
It is a typical personal authentication method. It 
requires periodic renewal [10]. 
Public key certificate 
 
It uses a digital signature to bind a public key with 
an identity. The private keys are stored in 
certificate storage location. Encryption / decryption 
processing, cryptography transmission method are 
usually used to protect them. By implementing 
programs to protect private key and certificate into 
client computers, the security can be improved. 
However, it requires users’ agreement and actions 
and causes extra maintenance expenses. [11] 
SSO 
(Single Sign On) 
Users log in once and gain access to all systems 
without being prompted to log in again at each 
system [12]. 
MTM (Mobile  
Trusted Module) 
It is a hardware-based authentication which was 
proposed by TCG (Trusted Computing Group). It 
is usually used for the authentication of mobile 
devices and is recently used for cloud computing 
authentication with SIM (Subscriber Identity 
Module) [13]. 
Finger Print  
and Identifier 
It uses user’s bio profiles such as finger print and 
etc. which are usually kept in the file system and 
are used to identify the user. But, it is weak to 
Trojan horse attacks, memory hacking and key-
logging because users’ profiles are store in the file 
system [14]. 
IP-Geographic 
location 
Identification 
It uses user’s IP location and is helpful to prevent 
MITM attacks [14]. 
Knowledge-based  
authentication 
It asks the question about specific knowledge of 
user information. But, it is usually used with other 
methods because it is vulnerable to MITM attacks 
[14]. 
OTP(One-Time 
Password) 
It uses a password which is valid during only one 
login session to avoid a shortcoming of static 
passwords. In order to deliver the OTP, text 
messaging or proprietary tokens or web-based 
method is used. It is vulnerable to key logging and 
MITB because it relies on a key input [14]. 
Out-of-Band 
authentication 
Each time, it uses a different communication 
channel to verify a transaction request. It 
guarantees very high security but it requires initial 
registration. Thus it can be expensive [14] [15]. 
Internet 
Personal 
Identification 
Number (i-PIN) 
It uses the Resident Registration Number for login. 
It is used in South Korea [16] [17]. 
 
 
III. 
CLOUD-BASED U-CITY MANAGEMENT 
Our U-City management system, UTOPIA, supports the 
unified ubiquitous cloud environment by providing dynamic 
service deployment based on context-awareness, high 
performance and collaborative computing on Grid and cloud. 
It is based on three tiers paradigm as shown in Figure 1. The 
feeling tier is composed of U-City infrastructure such as 
buildings, bridges, loads, etc., and ubiquitous IT devices 
including sensors and video cameras and connected to the 
processing tier through Broadband Convergence Network 
(BcN) and Ubiquitous Sensor Network (USN). The 
processing tier plays a role of brain in human body, receives 
data from the feeling tier and processes them intelligently. 
Finally, the presentation tier receives the request of users and 
75
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

sends it to processing tier and show the result from the 
processing tier to them.  It acts as a window to the U-City 
system.   
Our middleware in the processing tier, which we call 
SOUL, supports cloud computing and security management 
facilities including user authentication. It also supports 
Computational Grid so that it can smoothly satisfy 
applications which require real-time high performance 
computing. It supports computer supported cooperative work 
(CSCW) through Access Grid that is the best choice 
currently and a next generation CSCW. 
It has the following additional characteristics. First, it 
provides common device interface which was designed to 
support variable sensor network data-sinks and protocols. 
Therefore, it can be used as the common gateway for various 
kinds of sensors and ubiquitous sensor networks which 
collect sensed data.  
Second, it uses ontology-based intelligent inference 
engine which provides context-aware, that is, intelligent 
information using the sensed data through the common 
device interface. Third, it provides a user-transparent 
infrastructure that generates and provides intelligent services, 
which are invisible to users, to various applications. Fourth, 
it enables user to control remote devices in real-time mode so 
that remote control devices such as fire doors and other 
emergency devices can be controlled remotely in real-time 
mode. Fifth, it has the advantages of layered architecture 
since it is designed to have layer architecture. Lastly and 
sixth, it can directly be connected to easy-to-use, yet 
convenient, user interfaces, the U-City portal.  
We believe that these advantages make SOUL possible to 
be used in various kind of U-city applications of our project 
and it can shorten the period and expense to develop the U-
city applications. [18] 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  UTOPIA: A U-City Management System. 
 
The U-City portal has the security management 
component and beyond it, it has two distinctive components 
as shown in figure 2. One is the application platform and the 
other is the system platform. The environment management 
application is one of the application services which belongs 
to the application platform and give services in the 
management of noise, air-pollution and water quality using 
GIS visualization technology. The cloud management 
belongs to the system platform [19][20]. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The architecture of  the U-City portal. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The architecture of  the U-City portal. 
 
IV. 
SSO AND SAML IN UTOPIA 
The advantage of the adopting SSO in the U-City 
management system can be explained in following two 
viewpoints.  
 
76
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

 
1) Users’ viewpoint: 
Without SSO, users are asked to log in each service or 
each organization when they want to use the U-City service 
and therefore users should remember their IDs and 
passwords in each login. With SSO, users just should log in 
one time. It is more convenient, easier and more efficient 
than without SSO. 
 
2) Administrators’ viewpoint: 
With SSO, administrators can trace users activities and 
manage users security at the level of overall or total 
management of U-City, not at the level of individual 
organization or services. That is, U-City can have total 
solution for security management with easy administration 
and more consistant manner with SSO. 
 
SSO in UTOPIA is operated as shown in Figure 3 and 
Figure 4. When a user accesses UTOPIA through the U-City 
portal to use the U-City services, the login facility starts. The 
SSO agent in the login facility for the security management 
in 
UTOPIA 
sends 
the 
user’s 
information 
to 
the 
authentication manager using the SAML request. SAML 
messages at each step are encrypted using the SSL protocol. 
Then, the authentication manager does the security screening 
by asking the credential database and makes a decision. 
Since UTOPIA uses SSO, the user does not have to be 
bothered by login many times if he/she wants to use several 
services in UTOPIA.  
.  
 
 
Figure 3.  SSO management in UTOPIA. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Single-Sign-On Service in UTOPIA. 
 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
Figure 5 shows how UTOPIA processes SAML-based 
SSO for U-City. SAML supports implementing SSO. We use 
OpenSAML2 Library and openssl. The RSA key pair is 
generated with openssl for authentication. The RSA key 
pairs 
are 
UTOPIA_sso_private.der 
and 
UTOPIA_sso_public.der. SSO is implemented  with original 
RSA public key. The user accesses the service provider, the 
U-City portal of UTOPIA, to use the U-City service. 
ServiceProviderForm in U-City portal is the access web page. 
The elements of ServiceProviderForm are loginForm, 
providerName, RelayState, acsURI. LoginForm is for 
authentication in identity provider. ProviderName is the 
name of service provider providing the service. RelayState is 
the redirected service page after ACS authentication. 
AcsURI is the URL to verify SAMLResponse in identity 
provider. 
The 
U-City 
service 
provider 
generates 
SAMLRequest in a XML format. SAMLRequest is sent to 
authentication provider, that is, Identity Provider, through the 
user’s browser. The authentication provider parses the 
SAMLRequest and process user authentication. The 
authentication provider generates a SAMLResponse. The 
authentication provider sends SAMLResponse to the 
Assertion Consumer Service (ACS) through the user browser. 
The 
ACS 
in 
the 
service 
provider 
receives 
the 
SAMLResponse sent by the authentication provider and 
validates it. If it is o.k., then the service provider gives the 
user a permit to log in UTOPIA. Now, the user can 
successfully log in to UTOPIA and use the wanted U-City 
service. 
 
 
 
77
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

 
Figure 5.  The sequence diagram of security management in UTOPIA. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper explained the security management of U-City 
management system which uses cloud computing heavily.  
Our U-City management system, UTOPIA, adopted SAML-
based SSO as a user authentication methodology for our 
security management facility. It is the first and the only U-
City management system to use SSO currently. Users can 
use the services of UTOPIA through the U-City portal with 
unified authentication which uses one-time login for all 
UTOPIA services. The work is still in progress since we 
have been continuously adding many organizations and more 
services and in future work, we will continue to support a 
more fine-grained privilege management.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
This study was supported by the Seoul Research and 
Business Development Program (10561), Smart (Ubiquitous) 
City Consortium, Seoul Grid Center. We would like to give 
thanks to Mr. Cheol Sang Yoon, Mr. Tae Ho Hong, Mr. Eui 
Dong Hwang, Mr. Kyoung-gyu Lee and the staffs of Seoul 
Grid Center and the members of Smart (Ubiqitous) City 
Consortium for their contribution to this research. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. W. Park, C. H. Yun, S. Kim, H.Y. Yeom and Y. W. Lee, 
“Cloud Computing Platform for GIS Image Processing in U-
City,” 
13th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Communication Technology (ICACT), pp. 1151-1155, 2011. 
[2] Gartner’s Cloud Computing website [online], May 2011, 
Available from: http://www.gartner.com/technology/research/ 
cloud-computing/index.jsp. 
[3] Amazon S3 Availability Event: July 20, 2008 [online], May 
2011, 
Available 
from: 
http://status.aws.amazon.com/s3-
20080720.html. 
[4] Extended Gmail outage hits Apps admins [online], May 2011, 
Available 
from: 
http://www.computerworld.com/action/ 
article.do?command=viewArticleBasic&articleId=9117322. 
[5] Google’s response to Google Docs concerns. [online], May 
2011, Available from: http://googledocs.blogspot.com/2009/ 
03/just-to-clarify.html. 
[6] T. Gross, “Security Analysis of the SAML Single Sign-on 
Browser/Artifact 
Profile,” 
Annual 
Computer 
Security 
Applications Conference, vol.19, pp. 298-307, 2003. 
[7] U-City of Seoul website [online], May 2011, Available from : 
http://info.seoul.go.kr/. 
[8] U-City of Hwasong Dongtan website [online], May 2011, 
Available http://www.udongtan.or.kr. 
[9] Alessandro Armando, Roberto Carbone, Luca Compagna, 
Jorge Cuellar, Llanos Tobarra, “Formal Analysis of SAML 
2.0 Web Browser Single Sign-On: Breaking the SAML-based 
Single Sign-On for Google Apps,” the 6th ACM workshop on 
Formal methods in security engineering, 2008 
[10] P. Beynon-Davies, “Personal identity management as a socio-
technical network,” Technology analysis & strategic 
management, vol.22, no.4, pp. 463-478, 2010. 
[11] G. Bick, M. C. Jacobson and R. Abratt, “The Corporate 
Identity Management Process Revisited,” Journal Of 
Marketing Management, vol.19, no.7-8, pp. 835-856, 2003. 
[12] Y. Y. Chan, “Weakest Link Attack on Single Sign-On and Its 
Case in SAML V2.0 Web SSO,” Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, vol. 3982, pp. 507-516 , 2006. 
[13] Trusted Computing Group website [online], May 2011, 
Available from: http://www.trustedcomputinggroup.org. 
[14] H. S. Kim, “Cloud Computing and Personal Authentication 
Service”, Information & Communications Magazine, vol. 20, 
no. 2, pp. 11-92, 2010. 
[15] A. Litan, “Where String Authentication Fails and What You 
Can About It,” Gartner Research, 2009. 
[16] Y. Oh, T. Obi, J. S. Lee, H. Suzuki, and N. Ohyama, 
“Empirical analysis of internet identity misuse: case study of 
south Korean real name system,” he 6th ACM workshop on 
Digital identity management (DIM '10), pp. 27-34, 2011. 
[17] S. K. Un, N. S. Jho, Y. H. Kim and D. S. Choi, “Cloud 
Computing Security Technology,” Electrical Communication 
Trend Analysis, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 79-88, 2009. 
[18] H. S. Jung, C. S. Jeong, Y. W. Lee and P. D. Hong, “An 
Intelligent Ubiquitous Middleware for U-city: SmartUM,” 
Journal of Information Science and Engineering, vol. 25, no. 
2, pp.375-388, 2009. 
[19] S. W. Rho and Y. W. Lee, “U-city Portal For Smart 
Ubiquitous Middleware," 2010 The 12th International 
Conference Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), 
pp. 609-613, 2010. 
[20] S. W. Rho, C. H. Yun and Y. W. Lee, "Provision of U-city 
web services using cloud computing," 13th International 
Conference on Advanced Communication Technology 
(ICACT), pp. 1545-1549, 2011. 
78
CLOUD COMPUTING 2011 : The Second International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-153-3

