A Survey of Cognitive Radio Management Functions 
 
Ola Ashour Mohammed 
Department of Electrical, Computer and Software 
Engineering, UOIT 
Oshawa, Canada 
ola.ashoor@gmail.com 
Khalil El-Khatib, Miguel Vargas Martin 
Faculty of Business and Information Technology, 
UOIT  
Oshawa, Canada 
{khalil.el-khatib, miguel.vargasmartin}@uoit.ca
 
Abstract— Due to the fast growth in wireless communication 
services, the need for radio spectrum increased. However, most 
of the suitable radio spectrum has already been allocated using 
long term licenses. A considerable part of the allocated 
spectrum is underutilized over time and space. Cognitive 
Radio (CR) technology has arisen to solve the spectrum 
scarcity problem by allowing cognitive radio devices to 
opportunistically make use of the unused frequency bands in 
the allocated spectrum, which are termed white spaces or 
spectrum holes. Four CR functions have to be performed to 
allow CR devices to efficiently utilize the available spectrum 
holes without interfering with licensed devices already 
operating in the allocated spectrum. This paper presents a 
survey of the CR technology, its architecture and operation, a 
detailed description of the four CR functions, and the 
techniques and processes used in each function.  
 
Keywords-Cognitive Radio; Spectrum holes; Spectrum 
decision;  Spectrum Sharing;  Spectrum Mobility.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
   The radio spectrum is a natural resource managed by 
governments, which have assigned fixed portions of this 
spectrum to various operators using long term licenses. With 
the trend of using wireless devices continue to increase, 
spectrum usage increases on a daily bases, and it is becoming 
certain that there is a real need for more spectrum bands to 
facilitate the implementation of new wireless services. 
However, it is hard to find free bands, as most of the suitable 
spectrum bands have already been assigned.  
   Recent measurements [1] showed that a considerable part 
of the allocated radio spectrum is underutilized due to 
temporal and geographic disparities in how the allocated 
spectrum is used. The unused frequency bands in time or 
space are usually termed spectrum holes or white spaces. 
One way to make efficient use of these spectrum holes is to 
use Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA) techniques, which 
enable secondary (unlicensed) users to make use of the 
spectrum when primary (licensed) users are not using it.  
   Primary Users (PUs) have rights to access a certain part of 
the available spectrum and hence have a higher priority in 
accessing the spectrum. On the other hand, Secondary Users 
(SUs) can utilize the spectrum under the condition of not 
interfering with PUs. Thus, SUs need devices that have the 
ability to determine whether the spectrum is being utilized at 
a specific location and at a certain time [2].  
   Cognitive Radio (CR) is an important enabling technology 
for DSA which helps SUs make efficient use of the radio 
spectrum. CR is a wireless communication technology based 
on Software Defined Radio (SDR), where each device is 
capable of determining its location, sensing its environment 
and learning about its radio resources [3]. The device can 
dynamically adjust its operational parameters, such as 
transmission frequency and power, to opportunistically 
utilize the empty frequency bands without disturbing PUs 
[2], [4]. A CR device has two main characteristics which are 
cognitive capability and re-configurability [2], [4]. The 
cognitive capability allows the device to sense the medium 
and 
determine 
the 
available 
spectrum 
bands. 
Re-
configurability enables the CR device to adjust its operating 
frequency, modulation technique and transmission power 
without the need for hardware modification. 
   After the transition from analog TV to digital TV 
transmissions, large amounts of frequencies in Very High 
Frequency (VHF) and Ultra High Frequency (UHF) bands 
have been freed up. These unused frequency portions on the 
TV broadcasting (UHF and VHF bands) are referred to as 
TV White Spaces (TVWS). Frequencies in the TV broadcast 
bands benefit from high bandwidth, long transmission ranges 
and better building penetration.  
   A White Space Device (WSD) is a device that can make 
use of the available white spaces when not being used by 
incumbent transmitters (TV transmitters or Wireless 
microphones). This device should not interfere with any of 
the PUs operating on that band.  
   This paper will provide an overview on CR architectures, 
its operation in both licensed and unlicensed bands, and a 
detailed description of the CR functions. A classification for 
each cognitive radio function will be also discussed. The rest 
of the paper is organized as follows: Section II provides a 
background of the regulation for utilizing white spaces and 
the countries that started making use of the available white 
spaces. The architecture of the cognitive radio network is 
then discussed in Section III. Section IV illustrates the 
operation of a CR device in the licensed and unlicensed 
bands. In Section V, CR spectrum management functions are 
presented and then a detailed description of the techniques 
used in each function is discussed in Sections VI, VII, VIII 
and IX. A conclusion is presented in Section X. 
II. 
BACKGROUND   
   While the USA was not the first country to switch to digital 
TV, they did become leaders in making the decision to 
utilize 
white 
spaces. 
The 
Federal 
Communications 
Commission (FCC) allowed unlicensed radio transmitters to 
operate in the unused frequency portions of the broadcast 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-323-0
COCORA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

television spectrum [5]. These unlicensed radio transmitters 
(secondary devices) have to make sure that they will not 
interfere with licensed users [6]. The FCC ruling stated that 
secondary devices must both consult a database which, given 
a certain a certain location, would be able to provide a list of 
the available channels at that location, and must also perform 
a real-time spectrum sensing every minute to ensure that no 
licensed devices such as wireless microphones exist. 
   On September 23, 2010 a Memorandum Opinion and 
Order was released by the FCC [7], in which the final rules 
for utilizing white spaces for unlicensed wireless devices was 
determined. The mandatory requirement for using spectrum 
sensing was eliminated, paving the way for geo-location 
based channel allocation. Spectrum sensing had been 
removed from FCC rules due to many reasons: 1) it is time-
consuming, 2) it increases development cost, and 3) it 
inappropriately protect other unlicensed devices, which 
should not be protected from interference, as it cannot 
differentiate between licensed and unlicensed devices. 
   In early 2011, the FCC released an order [9] conditionally 
designating nine TV white space database operators, 
including for example, Google, Motorola, and HP. Microsoft 
was later added to the list of approved operators.  The FCC 
stated that a trial period of 45 days is required for all 
database operators before being able to announce the public 
availability of each database. FCC stated also that, using 
multiple database operators will create a healthy competitive 
basis between the operators Spectrum Bridge’s database was 
the first trial that began on the 19th of September, 2011.  
   The second country to make a decision was the UK, when 
Ofcom published a document on September 2011, which 
expressed their intention to support commercial utilization of 
white spaces [10]. In that document, Ofcom mentioned that 
their approach is based on using geo-location databases 
rather than alternative approaches like sensing or beacons. 
Ofcom also explained the UK’s preference for a harmonized 
approach to WSDs across Europe, as it believes that this 
harmonized European approach would deliver greatest 
benefits for citizens and consumers. Ofcom said that it will 
continue the development of new business opportunities 
while waiting European-wide regulatory decisions.   
III. 
COGNITIVE RADIO NETWORK ARCHITECTURE 
   Cognitive Radio Networks (CRNs) or secondary networks 
do not have licenses to access the spectrum and can be 
referred to as un-licensed networks. CRNs can be classified 
based on their architecture [8], [11] as infrastructure-based or 
ad hoc networks. An example of infrastructure-based 
network is shown in Fig. 1 [8]. These networks have 
secondary Base Stations (BSs) or secondary Access Points 
(APs) that can coordinate the communication between 
secondary devices in their coverage areas. The secondary 
APs can be connected together through a wired network 
(Core network) to allow communication between SUs in 
different coverage areas.  
    
 
 
Fig. 1.  Infrastructure-based CRN [8]. 
 
   Ad hoc or distributed CRNs do not require an 
infrastructure. SUs or CR users can directly communicate 
with each other using certain communication protocol (Wi-Fi 
or Bluetooth) or they can utilize the available spectrum 
bands for their communications as shown in Fig. 2 [8].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.  Ad hoc CRN [8].  
   
   CRNs either infrastructure-based or ad hoc networks 
usually work inside the transmission range of primary 
networks as shown in Fig. 3 [12]. Primary networks or 
licensed networks refer to already existing infrastructure-
based wireless networks like mobile networks that are 
allocated certain frequency bands for their operation. The 
infrastructure of these primary networks consists of base-
stations that can control the activities of PUs.  
   A CR device always has to determine the available white 
spaces in its location, to avoid interfering with users 
operating in the licensed band. In infrastructure-based CRNs, 
CR devices have two different ways to determine the a-
vailable spectrum holes. The CR devices can sense the 
medium and send the sensed information to the base station, 
which performs the spectrum decision, spectrum sharing and 
spectrum mobility functions. The other way of determining 
the available spectrum holes is through the base station itself, 
which can obtain a list of the available spectrum holes by 
contacting a database of incumbents. This approach will be 
covered in detail in Section VI-B. 
   In ad hoc CRNs, each device should have a cognitive 
ability, which allows the device to sense the medium and 
determine the available white spaces in its location. CR 
devices can cooperate in determining the available spectrum 
holes by sharing the sensed information with each other 
(cooperative sensing). A CR device may also get a list of the 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-323-0
COCORA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

available spectrum holes in its location by connecting to a 
database of incumbents. 
IV. 
USAGE PRIORITY IN LIENSED BAND  
   A CR user can operate in licensed and unlicensed band as 
well [2]. In licensed band operation, the priority is for PUs 
operations. SUs can use the spectrum when not being  
 
 
 
Fig. 3. CRNs operate inside the coverage area of primary networks [12]. 
 
used by PUs. SUs have to vacate the channel whenever a PU 
appears and move to another available channel. In unlicensed 
band operation, all users have equal opportunity for spectrum 
access (no priorities). 
V. 
COGNITIVE RADIO SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT 
FUNCTIONS 
   A CR device has to perform four basic functions to be able 
to manage the available spectrum holes in its location [2], 
[12]. These functions, illustrated in Fig. 4, are: White Space 
Determination, Spectrum Decision, Spectrum Sharing, and 
Spectrum mobility.   
 
CR Functions
White Spaces 
Determination
Spectrum 
Characterization
Spectrum 
Selection
Spectrum 
Decision
Spectrum 
Sharing
Hand off
Connection 
Management
Spectrum 
Mobility
Re-
Configurability
 
 
Fig. 4.  Cognitive Radio Functions. 
   The main function of a CR device is to determine the 
available white spaces at a certain place and at a specific 
time. After determining the available spectrum holes, the 
spectrum decision is performed by selecting the best channel 
for the operation of a CR. Channel selection is usually done 
based on specific criteria, which could be the policy, Quality 
of Service (QoS) or avoiding interference to other CR 
devices. As the spectrum is shared among multiple SUs, 
Spectrum sharing is required to coordinate how SUs can 
coexist and access the same spectrum without interfering or 
colliding with each other. In Spectrum mobility, a CR device 
has to vacate the channel and move to another available 
channel if a PU appears on that channel.  
VI. 
DETERMINING AVAILABLE SPECTRUM HOLES 
   The basic function of any CR device is to be able to 
determine the available spectrum holes which vary in time 
and space. A CR device should have the capability to 
determine its location as the available spectrum differs from 
one place to another. Also, the device has to repeat the 
calculation periodically as the available spectrum varies with 
time. Fig. 5 shows a hierarchal description for the 
approaches used in determining the available spectrum holes.   
A. Spectrum Sensing  
   Spectrum sensing allows a CR user to periodically sense 
the spectrum and determine its availability for use by SUs. 
There are two main categories of spectrum sensing 
techniques [2], namely, Primary transmitter detection and 
Primary receiver detection (Fig. 5). 
 
Determining Available 
White Spaces
Geo-Location 
Database
Spectrum Sensing
Primary Receiver 
Detection
Primary Transmitter 
Detection
Matched Filter 
Detection
Energy Detection
Feature Detection
 
 
Fig. 5.  Methods used for white spaces determination. 
    
   In the case of primary transmitter detection, the medium is 
considered available if the CR device cannot hear the signal 
sent from any primary transmitter. Three methods [2], [4], 
[13] can be used for primary transmitter detection. These 
methods are matched filter detection, energy detection, and 
feature detection.  
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-323-0
COCORA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

   The matched filter detection is the optimal detection in the 
presence of stationary Gaussian noise. This method 
maximizes the received Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR), but it 
requires prior information about the characteristics of the 
PU’s signal. The matched filter operates by correlating the 
pattern that needs to be detected (known information about 
the signal) with the received signal. If the magnitude of the 
resulting signal is above a certain threshold; the medium is 
considered busy otherwise the medium is free. The matched 
filter is a fast detection technique, but it requires previous 
knowledge about the signal to be detected.  
   In the energy detection, no prior information about the 
primary transmitter signal is required. In this technique, a CR 
device measures the energy in a certain frequency band if it 
is above a predefined threshold; the medium is considered 
busy. If the measured value is below the threshold the 
medium is considered free and can be used by SUs. One of 
the concerns of using energy detection is that it just detects 
the presence or absence of a signal, but it cannot differentiate 
whether the detected signal is from a primary transmitter or 
from a secondary transmitter. Another concern is adjusting 
the threshold value of the detector as this value is affected by 
the noise level. 
   The feature detection, also called cyclostationary detection, 
depends 
on 
detecting 
the 
cyclostationary 
(built-in 
periodicity) feature of the modulated signal for detecting the 
presence of a signal. This kind of detector is better than 
energy detector as it is more robust against the uncertainty in 
noise power, but requires more observation time and is 
computationally complex. 
   A main problem in the primary transmitter detection is the 
hidden node problem. Where, a CR user may be shadowed 
from detecting the signal of a primary transmitter, due to the 
presence of an object that block the transmitter signal, as 
shown in Fig. 6 [2]. The hidden node problem can be solved 
by using cooperative spectrum sensing or cooperative 
detection, which allows the CR devices to share the sensed 
information with each other. This results in a higher 
detection capability, but comes with the cost of additional 
overhead 
   The primary receiver detection technique is the most 
efficient technique in determining spectrum holes. In this 
technique, the CR user needs to detect primary receivers in 
its communication range and avoid interfering with them.  
Primary receivers detecting is not an easy process. Usually, 
primary receivers, such as televisions or cellular phones, are 
passive, which makes it hard for the CR devices to detect 
them or determine their location.  One way to allow a CR 
device to detect a primary receiver [14] is by utilizing the 
leakage power of the Local Oscillator (LO), which is emitted 
by the RF front end of the primary receivers. This method is 
currently feasible only in TV receiver detection. 
   Interference temperature is a model introduced by the FCC 
[15] to accurately measure and limit the amount of 
interference at the receiver. Interference temperature dictates 
the cumulative amount of interference from all the undesired 
RF energy sources that exist at a receiver at any point of 
time. Interference temperature provides a higher protection 
for the receiver against harmful interference. A CR user can 
use the channel while it does not surpass the limit on 
interference temperature. 
B. Geo-Location Database  
   In the Geo-location database approach, a CR device does 
not use spectrum sensing to determine the free spectrum;  
 
 
 
Fig. 6.  Shadowing uncertainty [2]. 
 
instead it depends on an up-to-data database of incumbents. 
The database stores information about all primary 
transmitters and their locations. It also stores terrain 
information. The data base uses the information it has to 
calculate available whitespaces at the CR user`s location. 
According to FCC regulation [6], a CR device should have 
the capability to determine its location, and a way to connect 
to the internet to be able to access the database. The process 
of determining the available whitespaces is done as follows. 
First, the CR device provides identifying information to 
register with the database. Then the CR device calculates its 
location and send it to the database, which uses some 
propagation models to calculate the available white spaces at 
the user`s location. After that, the database will send a list of 
the available white spaces to the user. The database may also 
inform the device with the maximum allowable transmit 
power for its operation. In this case, the device can use its 
adaptable power control to ensure that the transmitting power 
does not exceed the maximum allowed value. Using a 
database to calculate spectrum holes overcomes the problem 
of false alarm that can happen with spectrum sensing and 
thus provides more efficient use of the spectrum. 
   Microsoft presented an approach for a geo-location 
database called “SenseLess: A Database Driven White 
Spaces Network” [16]. The SenseLess architecture consisted 
of a logically centralized entity called SenseLess Service. 
Base stations and CR devices are connected to this central 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-323-0
COCORA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

entity which is responsible for determining the available 
white spaces for any given location. Two components mainly 
constitute the SenseLess service, the back-end store and the 
SenseLess engine. The back-end store consisted of a terrain 
server and a database of incumbents, such as TV transmitters 
(their location, antenna height, transmission power) and 
wireless microphones. The database is also used to cache the 
computed white spaces for different locations. The terrain 
server store high resolution terrain elevation data which can 
be obtained from one of the publicly available terrain maps. 
Sophisticated signal propagation modeling is used by the 
SenseLess engine to compute the available white spaces at 
any given location. Results showed that the Longley-Rice 
(L-R) with terrain propagation model [17] gave accurate 
results when determining the available white spaces for any 
given location.   
   In [18], a White Space Database (WSDB) was used to 
control the transmit power levels of the White Space Devices 
(WSDs). WSDs use one of the geo-location capabilities to 
determine their location and send it to the database. The 
WSDB sends a list of the available channels to the WSD to 
ensure that the device will not cause interference to primary 
incumbents. The database will also inform the device with 
the transmit power level that it should not exceed. The sum 
of all WSDs transmit powers should be kept below a certain 
level to avoid making interference to PUs. Considering these 
limitations an optimization problem was formulated to 
control the transmit power while maximizing the total 
throughput of the system uplink. Solution to the optimization 
problem becomes the same like the water-filling algorithm 
problem. Simulation results showed that in the case of using 
co-channel, increasing the number of users cause the 
spectrum efficiency to increase. While in case of adjacent 
channel the spectrum efficiency decrease by increasing the 
number of users. 
VII. SPECTRUM DECISION 
   Spectrum decision is the capability of a CR device to 
choose the most appropriate channel for its operation. 
Channel selection should satisfy Quality of Service (QoS) 
requirements of SUs and at the same time ensures that they 
do not cause interference to PUs. Spectrum decision consists 
of three functions, which are spectrum characterization, 
spectrum selection and CR re-configurability [19], [11].  
   The first step after determining the available spectrum 
holes is to characterize them based on PUs activities and 
conditions of the radio environment.  As the CR user 
opportunistically utilizes the channel; channel availability 
can’t be guaranteed during the whole period of its 
transmission because a PU may appear at any time. 
Modeling PUs activities can be used to predict future usage 
of the spectrum based on the historical information of 
previous spectrum usage. The condition of the radio 
environment is another factor that is used to characterize the 
channel based on interference, the number of users utilizing 
the same channel, and the strength of the received signal. 
Once the channel characterization is done, a channel that 
satisfies QoS requirements of the SU is selected. The last 
step is to adjust the transceiver parameters of the CR device 
to be able to communicate on the selected spectrum band. 
VIII. SPECTRUM SHARING 
   Spectrum sharing is the most challenging function among 
CR functions. It addresses the problem of coordinating the 
transmission of CR devices to allow them to coexist and 
share the medium without causing interference to each other. 
Spectrum sharing can be categorized according to 
architecture, scope, spectrum allocation behavior, spectrum 
sharing models and spectrum access techniques [2], as 
shown in Fig. 7. 
   The spectrum sharing architecture can be centralized or 
distributed. In centralized spectrum sharing, a central unit is 
responsible for allocating the spectrum and controlling 
access to it. In distributed spectrum sharing, spectrum 
allocation and access is done by each node according to a 
certain policy specified by the node itself. 
      The spectrum allocation behaviour can be cooperative or 
non-cooperative spectrum sharing. In the cooperative 
spectrum sharing, the CR devices cooperate together to avoid 
interference with each other. Each CR device adjusts its 
transmission power taking into account other devices 
transmission. In the non-cooperative spectrum sharing, each 
CR device behaves in a selfish manner. A CR device will 
transmit without considering if its transmission will affect 
other devices transmission. Thus, in the non-cooperative case 
there will be high interference between CR devices, which in 
turn will reduce the spectrum utilization. 
   The spectrum access techniques can be classified as 
overlay spectrum sharing and underlay spectrum sharing. In 
the overlay spectrum sharing, SUs can opportunistically 
make use of the spectrum when not being used by PUs to 
avoid causing interference to PUs. In the underlay spectrum 
sharing, SUs can transmit at the same time with PUs as long 
as their transmission is below the noise floor of PUs. In this 
case, SUs use spread spectrum techniques and can only 
transmit over short range. 
   The spectrum sharing scope in infrastructure-based CRNs, 
can be classified to intra-cell spectrum sharing and inter-cell 
spectrum sharing [20]. The intra-cell spectrum sharing is 
related to spectrum sharing between CR users in the same 
cell. The inter-cell spectrum sharing is related to spectrum 
sharing between different cells. 
   The two spectrum sharing models are exclusive allocation 
model and common use model [20]. In the exclusive
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-323-0
COCORA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

Centeralized
Distributed
Spectrum Sharing
Architecture
Cooperative
Non-
Cooperative
Allocation 
Behaviour
Overlay
Underlay
Access 
Techniques
Inter-Cell
Intra-Cell
Scope
Exclusive
Common-
use
Model
 
 
Fig.  7.  Spectrum Sharing Categorization. 
 
allocation model, each CR user is allocated a different 
channel to mitigate the interference between CR users. This 
model is optimum in maximizing the capacity of the 
network, but it provides unfair resource allocation in 
networks that have limited spectrum availability. Although 
the focus of this approach is on spectrum allocation, power 
allocation has to be considered to avoid interfering with PUs.        
   In the common use model, several CR users can 
simultaneously use the same channel by adjusting their 
transmission power to minimize interference. This model is 
preferred in networks with limited spectrum holes; as it can 
provide fairness in the allocation of the available spectrum. 
However, the achieved capacity is lower than that of the 
exclusive model. 
   Several research papers have been proposed to address the 
spectrum sharing problem in CRNs. The main differences 
between papers addressing spectrum sharing techniques are 
in the model they used for spectrum sharing and the 
objective of the network.   
   In [21], a combined power/channel allocation method was 
applied in a WiFi-like spectrum sharing scenario in TV white 
spaces. Three types of Secondary Users (SUs) were defined 
which are protected, interfered and out of range SUs. The 
network goal was to increase the number of supported SUs 
while reducing the interference secondary devices cause to 
each other. They used the NBS to allocate transmit power for 
Secondary Access Points (SAPs). SAPs cooperate by 
exchanging the information through relaying nodes. These 
relaying nodes are the interfered SUs that can hear from 
more than one SAP. SAPs compete on their transmission 
powers to maximize the number of supported SUs. SAPs 
have to decrease their power until there is no overlapping 
between their coverage areas. Two stage of cooperation were 
made. In the first stage, only neighboring SAPs cooperate 
and compete for power control, while in the second stage, all 
the next hop neighboring SAPs can cooperate. When the 
SAPs are highly overlapped, the algorithm can switch to 
channel allocation instead of power allocation to enhance the 
network performance. The switch is done if the number of 
interfered secondary users was above a certain number. 
Simulation results showed that the number of iteration 
required to reach optimality is decreased by SAPs 
cooperation. The number of supported users increased while 
the average SAP throughput decreased.  
   A downlink channel assignment and power control for an 
infrastructure-based 
cognitive 
radio 
network 
was 
implemented in [22]. The opportunistic spectrum access 
problem was formulated as a non-cooperative game in which 
the game players are the base stations. Each base station 
bargain to increase the number of supported CRs.  Channel 
allocation was done by the base stations, which randomly 
assign channels to users. A distributed power allocation is 
then applied using the Iterative Water Filling algorithm. 
Results showed that the pure non cooperative game might 
have multiple Nash equilibrium points [23] that are 
undesirable and may lead to non-convergence. To obtain 
better results, the Nash bargaining solution was applied in 
which the cooperation of base stations was required. 
Simulation results showed that a unique optimal solution was 
achieved by using the Nash bargaining solution.  
IX. 
SPECTRUM MOBILITY  
   Spectrum mobility is the process of performing a seamless 
transition from one channel to another available channel. 
After a CR user selects the channel and starts transmitting on 
a certain frequency band, a PU may appear on the same 
channel; in this case the CR user has to move to another 
empty channel and vacate this channel to PU to avoid 
causing interference to the PU. The SU may also change its 
channel to access another spectrum hole with better QoS.  
Spectrum mobility consists of two processes [24], spectrum 
handoff and connection management. 
   In the spectrum handoff process, the SU transmission is 
transferred from its current channel to another empty 
channel. Three events can trigger the spectrum handoff 
process. The first event is the arrival of a PU in a channel 
occupied by a SU. The second is the spatial movement of 
SUs to a place where their coverage overlap with PUs 
already utilizing the channel. The third is the degradation of 
the link quality. 
   The spectrum handoff process consists of two phases, 
evaluation phase and link maintenance phase. In the 
evaluation phase, the SU keep monitoring the environment to 
determine if an event that trigger spectrum handoff occurred, 
then the SU moves to the next phase (Link maintenance). In 
the Link maintenance phase, the SU pauses its transmission 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-323-0
COCORA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

on the current channel and continues the transmission on 
another available channel. 
   Connection management process is used to compensate for 
the unavoidable handoff delay, which happens when the SU 
transmission is transferred from a channel to another, by 
adjusting the parameters of the protocol stack according to 
the existing situation. 
X. 
CONCLUSION 
   In this paper, we have presented a comprehensive 
overview of the CRN architecture and operation in licensed 
and unlicensed bands. The paper focused on the four CR 
spectrum management functions, white space determination, 
spectrum decision, spectrum sharing, and spectrum mobility. 
The white spaces can be calculated using either spectrum 
sensing or geo-location database. Most of the papers in the 
literature use spectrum sensing to calculate white spaces. 
However, the geo-location database approach is more 
accurate and efficient. Also, it overcomes spectrum sensing 
problems such as false alarms.  The decision to select one of 
the white spaces depends on characterizing all the available 
white spaces based on the PUs activities and the conditions 
of the radio environment. The CR device transceiver is then 
adjusted to operate on the selected band. Sharing the 
spectrum is a very interesting and challenging function 
throughout the CR functions. Spectrum sharing is concerned 
with the way that enables all the CRNs to coexist and share 
the same spectrum without interfering with PUs or with each 
other. The spectrum sharing function was comprehensively 
covered according to different aspects, architecture, scope, 
allocation behavior, sharing models, and access techniques. 
The spectrum mobility was used to avoid interfering with 
PUs by transferring CR users to another available channel if 
a PU appears on that channel. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  "Report of the spectrum efficiency working group," FCC 
Spectrum Policy Task Force, Nov 2002. 
[2]  I. F. Akyildiz, W. Y. Lee, M. C. Vuran, and S. Mohanty, "A 
Survey on Spectrum Management in Cognitive Radio 
Networks," IEEE Communications Magazine, April 2008 
pp. 40–48.  
[3]  "Facilitating opportunities for flexible, efficient, and reliable 
spectrum 
use 
employing 
cognitive 
radio," 
Federal 
Communications Commission, 2005. 
[4]  A. Garhwal and P. P. Bhattacharya, "A Survey on Dynamic 
Spectrum Access Techniques for Cognitive Radio," 
International 
Journal 
of 
Next-Generation 
Networks 
(IJNGN), vol. 3, Dec 2011 pp.  15-32.  
[5]  "Unlicensed Operation in the TV Broadcast Bands," Federal 
Communications Commission, Notice of proposed rule 
making, May, 2004. 
[6]  "Unlicensed Operation in the TV Broadcast Bands," Federal 
Communications Commission, Nov 2008. 
[7]  "Unlicensed Operation in the TV Broadcast Bands," Federal 
Communications Commission, Sept 2010. 
[8]  K. C. Chen, Y. J. Peng, N. Prasad, Y. C. Liang, and S. Sun, 
"Cognitive Radio Network Architecture: Part I - General," in 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on 
Ubiquitous Information Management and Communication, 
ACM, 2008 pp. 114-119.  
[9]  "FCC,White 
Space 
Database 
Administrators 
Guide," 
[Online]. 
http://www.fcc.gov/encyclopedia/white-space-
database-administrators-guide [retrieved: Jan, 2014] 
[10]  "Ofcom,Implementing 
Geolocation," 
[Online]. 
http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/consultations/geolocation/st
atement/ [retrieved: Jan, 2014] 
[11]  M. T. Masonta, M. Mzyece, and N. Ntlatlapa, "Spectrum 
Decision in Cognitive Radio Networks: A Survey," 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 15, Issue: 
3, Nov 2012 pp. 1 - 20.  
[12]  E. Z. Tragos, S. Zeadally, A. G. Fragkiadakis, and V. A. 
Siris, "Spectrum Assignment in Cognitive Radio Networks: 
A Comprehensive Survey," IEEE Communications Surveys 
& Tutorials, vol. 15, Issue: 3, Jan 2013 pp. 1 - 28.  
[13]  "E3 White Paper Sensing," Nov. 2011. [Online]. https://ict-
e3.eu/project/white_papers/E3_White_Paper_Sensing.pdf 
[retrieved: Jan, 2014] 
[14]  B. Wild and K. Ramchandran, "Detecting Primary Receivers 
for Cognitive Radio Applications," in New Frontiers in 
Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks, 2005. DySPAN 2005. 
2005 First IEEE International Symposium on , Nov 2005 pp. 
124 - 130.  
[15]  "Establishment of an Interference Temperature Metric to 
Quantify and Manage Interference and to Expand Available 
Unlicensed Operation in Certain Fixed, Mobile and Satellite 
Frequency Bands," Federal Communications Commission, 
Nov 2003. 
[16]  R. Murty, R. Chandra, T. Moscibroda, and P. Bahl, 
"SenseLess: A Database-Driven White Spaces Network," in 
IEEE Transations on mobile computing, Feb 2012 pp. 189 - 
203.  
[17]  "Longley-Rice Methodology for Evaluating TV Coverage 
and Interference," OET BULLETIN No. 69, Feb 2004. 
[18]  S. Y. Lee, M. K. Kwon, and S. H. Lee, "Transmit power 
control scheme for TV White space wireless system," in 
Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), 2011 13th 
International Conference on. IEEE , Feb 2011 pp.  1025 - 
1029.   
[19]  I. F. Akyildiz, W.-Y. Lee, and M. C. Vuran and S. Mohanty, 
"NeXt generation/dynamic spectrum access/cognitive radio 
wireless networks: A survey," Computer Networks, vol. 50, 
May 2006 pp. 2127-2159.  
[20]  W. Y. Lee and I. F. Akyildiz, "Joint Spectrum and Power 
Allocation for Inter-Cell Spectrum Sharing in Cognitive 
Radio Networks," in New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum 
Access Networks, 2008. DySPAN 2008. 3rd IEEE 
Symposium on, Chicago, Oct 2008 pp.  1- 12.    
[21]  B. Jankuloska, V. Atanasovski, and L. Gavrilovska, 
"combined power/channel allocation method for efficient 
spectrum sharing in TV white space scenario," in 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on 
Cognitive Radio and Advanced Spectrum Management, 
ACM , 2011 pp.  59:1 – 59:5.    
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-323-0
COCORA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

[22]  G. Hosseinabadi, "Downlink Channel Assignment and 
Power Control for Cognitive Radio Networks Using Game 
Theory". 
[23]  M. Felegyhazi and J. P. Hubaux, “Game theory in wireless 
networks: a tutorial”, EPFL technical report, LCA-
REPORT-2006-002, Feb, 2006. 
[24] I. Christian, S. Moh, I. Chung, and J. Lee, "Spectrum 
Mobility in Cognitive Radio Networks," Communications 
Magazine, IEEE, June 2012 pp. 114 - 121. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-323-0
COCORA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

