Cyclostationarity Detection of DVB-T Signal:
Testbed and Measurement
Matthieu Gautier1, Marc Laugeois1 and Philippe Hostiou2
1CEA, LETI, Minatec, Grenoble, France,
2TeamCast, Centre Espace Performance, F35769 Saint-Grégoire, France,
matthieu.gautier1@cea.fr, marc.laugeois@cea.fr, philippe.hostiou@teamcast.com
Abstract— In this paper, realistic performance of Digital Video
Broadcasting - Terrestrial (DVB-T) spectrum sensing are investi-
gated for cognitive radio applications. To this end, an implemen-
tation of a cyclostationarity detector is proposed as an efﬁcient
means for signal detection under low Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR)
conditions. This paper focuses on the design of a hardware testbed
that performs the cyclostationarity detection, and introduces a
measurement campaign that has been performed in order to
have a realistic validation of the proposed solution. Measurement
results show that SNR down to -6 dB could be detected by our
hardware demonstrator.
Keywords—TV
White
Spaces,
Cyclostationarity
detection,
FPGA, Measurement.
I. INTRODUCTION
The performance of sensing algorithms is fundamental in
establishing the opportunistic communication of a cognitive
radio (CR) system [1]. Many scenarios have been investigated
in the context of CR network. The most likely to occur in the
short term is the unlicensed usage of TV bands often referred
to as the TV White Space (TVWS) scenario. This scenario
was made possible by the FCC in the US in 2008, with
some restrictions which include high-sensitivity requirements
for primary user detection [2]. In the context of this scenario,
standardization has been very active, especially under the
IEEE802.22 banner [3].
In Europe, the TV bands primary user is the DVB-T trans-
mitters and cyclostationarity detector has been proposed as the
most promising technique for DVB-T signal sensing. By using
cyclostationary features induced by the Cyclic Preﬁx (CP), it
allows OFDM (Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing)
based signals detection at low SNR.
If
the
theoretical
aspect
of
this
detector
has
been
thoughroughly addressed in literature [4][5][6], solutions need
to be proposed for its hardware implementation in order to
achieve a good architecture-performance tradeoff. Indeed, in
an operational system, the sensing block has to be imple-
mented on a real hardware platform. Then, all theoretical
functions have to be expressed as logical blocks and an explicit
dimensioning of all links between blocks and data format must
be carefully performed. In [7], an efﬁcient implementation of
a cyclostationarity detector was proposed by our team. The
a priori knowledge of the DVB-T signal nature helps avoid
the implementation of a large FFT operator as used in the state
of the art architectures [8][9].
This paper focuses on the design of a tesbed that performs
the hardware architecture introduced in [7] that performs the
detection of DVB-T signals for the TVWS scenario. Some
spectrum sensing testbeds have already been developed: most
of them concern the energy detection [10][11] or collaborative
sensing [10][12] and those that deal with cyclostationarity
detection are high level demonstration [13] or dedicated to
other bands (802.11n [14] and 802.11g [15]), not dedicated to
the TVWS scenario.
The other objective of this paper is to achieve realistic
performance of the cyclostationarity detector using the pro-
posed testbed. To this end, a measurement campaign has
been performed with the platform and results from these
measurements are given in this paper.
This paper consists of 5 parts. Following this introduction,
Section II introduces the cyclostationarity detector and its
hardware implementation dedicated to DVB-T signals. In Sec-
tion III, the platform used for the demonstration is described.
Section IV details the experimental validation of the detector
by giving some measurement results. Finally, conclusions are
drawn and outlook is provided.
II. CYCLOSTATIONARITY DETECTOR FOR DVB-T SIGNALS
This section derives the theoretical equation used by cyclo-
stationarity detector and introduced the hardware architecture
(presented in [7]) suitable to DVB-T signals.
A. Cyclostationarity based OFDM detector
For the DVB-T signal sensing, the proposed technique is
based on the a priori knowledge of the OFDM modulation
based DVB-T physical layer. The algorithm, described in [6]
aims at detecting the cyclostationarity of the DVB-T signal
through the analysis of the Fourier decomposition of its second
order momentum. It exploits the structure of the OFDM sym-
bols which contains the same pattern at its beginning and end;
the so called cyclic preﬁx. By computing the autocorrelation
of the incoming signal with a lag corresponding to the symbol
duration, the cyclic preﬁx is emphasized while the rest of the
correlation tends to zero. This is due to the fact that the data
portion of the OFDM symbols is uncorrelated over consecutive
symbols. Thus, the mathematical expectation of the correlation
signal is time periodic, also referred to as the cyclostationary
nature of the OFDM signal s[n].
64
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

Let us now consider the autocorrelation of this signal:
Rs(u, m) = E {s[u + m]s∗[u]} .
(1)
Under the condition that all subcarriers are used, the auto-
correlation of an OFDM signal is written as [6]:
Rs(u, m) = Rs(u, 0) + Rs(u, N)δ(m − N) . . .
. . . + Rs(u, −N)δ(m + N),
(2)
with N being the number of subcarriers and δ being the Dirac
function.
The ﬁrst term of (2) is the power of the received signal.
Energy detectors, derived only from this term, provide poor
performance at low SNR. To increase the performance of the
detector at low SNR, we focus on the last two terms of (2)
to build a cost function. The terms Rs(u, N) and Rs(u, −N)
correspond to the correlation induced by the cycle preﬁx. It
can be shown [16] that Rs(u, N) is a periodic function of
u which characterizes the signal s. Rs(u, N) has a period
α−1
0
= N + D with D being the length of the cyclic preﬁx.
As this function depends on u in a periodic way, the signal is
not a stationary but a cyclostationary signal. Its autocorrelation
function can be written as a Fourier series:
Rs(u, N) = R0
s +
k= N+D
2
−1
X
k=− N+D
2
, k̸=0
Rkα0
s
(N)e2iπkα0u.
(3)
In (3), Rkα0
s
is the cycle correlation coefﬁcient at cycle
frequency kα0 and at time lag N. This term can be estimated
as follows:
Rkα0
s
(N) = 1
U
u−1
X
u=0
s(u + N)s∗(u)e−2iπkα0u,
(4)
where U is the observation time.
The basic idea behind the cyclostationarity detector is to
analyze this Fourier decomposition and assess the presence of
the signal by setting a cost function related to one or more
of these cyclic frequencies. This cost function is compared
to some reference value. This technique was introduced in a
more general context in the early 90s by Gardner [17][16].
Recent papers have applied this approach to the opportunistic
radio context [4][5][6]. They mainly differ in the way the
harmonics are considered. In our study, the proposed cost
function exploits both the fundamental and several harmonics
as expressed in (5):
Js(Ks) =
1
2Ks + 1
Ks
X
k=−Ks
Rkα0
s
(N)
2 ,
(5)
where Ks is the number of harmonics that are considered.
It can be observed that the cost function is only built upon
Rs(u, N), while Rs(u, −N) is omitted. Indeed, it is quite easy
to prove that
Rkα0
s
(N)
2 =
Rkα0
s
(−N)
2 [6].
Introduced in [7], the hardware integration of this algorithm
is presented in the following chapter.
Figure 1.
Ideal autocorrelation signal of an OFDM symbol burst.
B. Hardware architecture for DVB-T detector
The DVB-T standard deﬁnes three FFT sizes: N=2048,
4096 or 8192 for a channel bandwidth Bs of 8MHz. The
cyclic preﬁx over FFT size ratio D/N can also vary: 1/32,
1/16, 1/8, 1/4. Considering all the conﬁgurations leads to very
highly complex hardware architecture. However, in practice,
deployment considers a smaller set of parameters depending
on the country. For instance, in France, the set of parameters
used is N=8192 and D/N=1/32, only this set will be used to
design our architecture.
A key characteristic that will be exploited in the architecture
design stems from the broadcast nature of the DVB-T signal.
This means that detector sensitivity can be increased signiﬁ-
cantly by very long integration time. This is a relevant feature
since sensitivity requirements for primary user detection are
very challenging (typically SNR=-10dB [18]). It also changes
the way that the reference signal is used to deﬁne the de-
cision variable. When undertaking this calibration phase, the
secondary system needs to consider a reference noise value
which is independent of the signal presence.
When considering long (ideally inﬁnite) integration time,
the autocorrelation function deﬁned in previous section tends
to a rectangular signal as depicted in Fig. 1, the cyclic ratio
being
D
N+D. In this case, the Fourier coefﬁcient is written as:
Rkα0
s
(N) =
A
2πk

sin( 2πkD
N + D) + j

1 − cos( 2πkD
N + D)

,
(6)
Each coefﬁcient power is given by:
|Rkα0
s
(N)|2 =




AD
N+D
2
,
k = 0,
2

Figure 2.
Cyclostationarity detector for DVB-T signals.
with Kn being the number of harmonics that are considered.
For example, considering the French set of parameters
(D/N=1/32) and considering the ﬁrst 4 signal harmonics -3;+3
and one noise harmonic (i.e., Ks=3 and Kn=1), the decision
variable V can be expressed as follows:
V = Js(Ks)
Jn(Kn) = 2
7
P3
k=−3
Rkα0
s
(N)
2
R−33α0
s
(N)
2 +
R33α0
s
(N)
2 .
(9)
Hardware architecture:
Introduced in [7], the proposed cyclostationarity detector
hardware architecture is shown in Fig. 2 for the parameters
Ks =3 and Kn=1.
First, the autocorrelation is computed on the I/Q complex
samples. The IIR (Inﬁnite Impulse Response) integrator then
averages over a number of symbols tuned by setting the
integration time parameter to achieve the required sensitivity.
The supervisor, a Finite State Machine (FSM), then triggers
the writing into a buffer that stores 8192 ﬁlter output samples
(equivalent to the length of an OFDM symbol). Then, using a
faster clock, the Fourier harmonics are computed sequentially.
The sine generator computes sequentially the required sine
function of the Fourier taps of interest. The Multiply ACcu-
mulate (MAC) function enables the Fourier coefﬁcient to be
obtained for these taps. The sequence is as follows. First the
reference harmonics -33; +33 are generated to compute the
noise reference power. Then the harmonics of interest for the
DVB-T signal 0;-1;+1;-2;+2;-3;+3 are calculated. The power
of each harmonic is summed up to obtain the cyclostationarity
estimator value. Finally the decision engine gives the ﬁnal
result by comparing the estimated value to the decison value
according to (9), which provides a hard decision output of the
detector.
This technique holds theoretically for inﬁnite integration
time to guarantee the rectangular shape of the autocorrelation
estimator. Whenever a ﬁnite integration is performed, detection
performance is improved by increasing the integration ability
Complexity
Latency
Slices
RAM blocks of 18kbits
Mult
Detector
1600
122
23
Depends on n
Total
25280
232
128
TABLE I. COMPLEXITY EVALUATION OF THE DVB-T DETECTOR.
Figure 3.
Platform overview.
of the ﬁlter. The integration ability of the ﬁlter depends on the
length of the ﬁlter denoted n.
The complexity of such a detector hardware implementation
is determined on a Xilinx Virtex 4 target technology using
the ISE XST synthesis tool. Results are provided in Table I.
The complexity is compared with the total resource available
in the FPGA. Table I shows that 6% of the slices, 52%
of the RAM blocks and 17% of the multipliers have been
used to perform the detection. If the ﬁnal implementation will
integrate this detector and a PHY layer for the opportunistic
communication, this complexity seems quite high (especially
the memory blocks) and a new version of Xilinx FPGA should
be used for the ﬁnal implementation.
III. TESTBEDS DESCRIPTION AND SPECIFICATIONS
A. Overview of the demonstator
Fig. 3 shows the testbed used to validate the detection of
DVB-T signal. The testbed consists of two parts:
• The modulator is a standard TeamCast DVB-T prod-
ucts [19]. A video stream is pulse shaped and transposed
in the TV channel according to the DVB-T standard. It
emulates a base station broadcast of the DVB-T network.
• The receiver performs two functions: the "sensing block"
and the "DVB-T demodulator". It then provides a video
stream and the decision variable provided by the detector.
A PC controls and supervises the testbeds using RS232
links. Three software Human-Machine interfaces have been
developed, one to control the setting of the DVB-T modulator,
one for the DVB-T demodulator and one that controls the
detector characteristics and supervises the measurements.
A measurement consists in scanning a 8MHz UHF channel
and then in detecting if this channel is vacant. The detection
is based on the decision variable as deﬁned by (9).
B. Hardware speciﬁcation of the receiver
Fig. 4 provides an overview of the architecture of the
receiver used to test the proposed architecture. The receiver
is composed of two parts: a RF board that performs the
translation of the RF UHF signal to IQ baseband signal and a
digital board that executes the baseband algorithms.
The RF board is composed of an analog part and a digital
part. The analog Downconverter block allows the transposi-
tion of the UHF band (470 - 860MHz) to an Intermediate
Frequency (IF) of 240MHz. An Analog to Digital Converter
(ADC) then converts the signal into samples. The sampling
frequency is 73.4 Mhz corresponding to 8 times the symbol
66
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

Figure 4.
Receiver architecture.
frequency Fs. To ensure a constant level at the input of the
ADC, two automatic gain control (AGC) loops are imple-
mented, one at RF and one at IF.
The digital IF signal is then processed by an FPGA that
performs the baseband transposition. The different elements
are: a bandpass ﬁlter that attenuates the adjacent channels,
an I/Q demodulation, a Direct Digital Synthesizer (DDS) that
performs the baseband translation and ﬁnally decimators to
switch from 8Fs to Fs.
The IF and RF AGC guarantee the level of the digital signal
into the range between -75 dBm and -35 dBm. The power is
computed using the outputs of the ADC. The gain of the AGC
is linear within this range, thus ensuring no distortion of the
input signal. The RF board also contains a speciﬁc chip that
performs the DVB-T decoding.
This I/Q stream is then transmitted to the Digital board via
a high-speed serial link. The I/Q samples are received at the
frequency Fs of 64/7 MHz. The digital board is composed of
an FPGA Xilinx Virtex-4 FX60 and memories (both SDRAM
and ﬂash). The hardware architecture of the detector detailed
in Section II is implemented on this board.
An important remark is that the IF AGC has not been
integrated in the platform reducing the range of the input
signal. Under this condition, the thermal noise of the receiver
PT h has been measured at -80 dBm.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL MEASUREMENTS
In this section, realistic performance results of the proposed
detector are given from a measurement campaign. In this
campaign, the channel is considered to be an AWGN (Additive
White Gaussian Noise) one as Line of Sight conditions are
performed. In our scenario, the primary system is the French
DVB-T (i.e., FFT size of 8192 and a cyclic preﬁx of 1/32).
First, the false alarm are induced by the thermal noise and,
then, by a secondary system that already communicates in the
channel.
Figure 5.
Mean of decision variable versus Pin for different ﬁlter length n.
A. Decision variable distribution
First, we observed the distribution of the decision variable
V according to (9) as a function of the receiver input power
Pin. In practice, the power of noise harmonic comes from
two sources: the thermal noise PT h, which is constant, and
the autocorrelation noise which is proportional to the input
power PA = kAPin. The power of useful harmonics is also
proportional to the input power. Assuming that, in the useful
harmonics, the power of the thermal noise is negligible relative
to the power of the signal, the decision variable V can be
written:
V =
kPin
PT h + kAPin
=
k
1
SNR + kA
,
(10)
with k and kA constant, SNR = Pin/PT h and kPin >> PT h.
Fig. 5 shows the mean of decision variable V versus Pin
for different ﬁlter length n= 4, 32, 64 and 128.
According to the curves of Fig. 5, three ranges of receiver
input power can be distinguished:
• Range 1: When the input received power is lower than
-100 dBm, (10) is no longer valid, and the noise becomes
dominant compared to the signal. The harmonics are only
noise harmonics and V =0 dB.
• Range 2: Pin for between -100 dBm and -80 dBm, the
curve is approximately linear, and V is proportional to
Pin.
• Range 3: For powers higher than -70 dBm, V is constant
and only depends on n.
Finally, we note the inﬂuence of the ﬁlter length n. The
larger n is, the higher the decision variable is. For high input
powers (range 3), V is 11 dB for n=4 and 27 dB for n=128.
B. Detection probability
The detection probability pD is the probability that the
system detects the DVB-T signal when it is present in the
channel. These probabilities are obtained (leading to a false
alarm probability of 10%) when the detector is matched with
the transmitter (i.e., FFT size of 8192 and a cyclic preﬁx
of 1/32). Measurements are performed for different received
power levels of the primary signal ( -90 dBm<Pin< -70 dBm).
67
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

Figure 6.
Detection probability versus SNR for different ﬁlter length n.
Fig. 6 shows the performance of the algorithm for different
ﬁlter length n = 4, 32, 64 and 128.
Thus, for the detection of a DVB-T signal (8k, 1/32) and a
target of 95% of successful detection, the measurement results
show that the detection of SNR down to 10 dB could be
achieved with a ﬁlter length n=4, SNR down to -2 dB with
n=32, SNR down to -5 dB with n=32 and SNR down to -6
dB with n=128.
C. False alarm: Another DVB-T signals
So far, the false alarms correspond to the case where the
detector detects a signal while no signal is present at the
receiver input. In this part, we analyse another kind of false
alarms: when a secondary transmitter uses the same channel
with a DVB-T signal having different characteristics than the
primary transmitter DVB-T.
The detector is set on an FFT of 8192, a cyclic preﬁx of
1/32 and a ﬁlter size n=64. To test the inﬂuence of the size of
the cyclic preﬁx, the false alarm probability is computed for a
secondary transmitter using cyclic preﬁx of 1/16, 1/8 and 1/4
(with a given FFT size of 8192). To test the inﬂuence of the
size of the FFT, the false alarm probability is computed for a
secondary transmitter using FFT sizes of 4096 and 2048 (with
a given cyclic preﬁx of 1/32).
The measurements are performed under high SNR condi-
tions (input power Pin of -40 dBm). The detection probability
pD is plotted versus the false alarm probability pF A for
different sizes of cyclic preﬁx (Fig. 7) and for different sizes
of FFT (Fig. 8).
The measurement results show that the size of the cyclic
preﬁx has more inﬂuence on the number of false alarm than
the length of the FFT. Thus, when the secondary transmitter
uses an FFT of 8192 and a cyclic preﬁx different from the
one of the detector, the detection probability is decreasing,
the detection being impossible for CP=1/16. However, if the
secondary transmitter uses an FFT size different than the one
used by the detector, the number of false alarm is low and the
detection is feasible.
Figure 7.
Detection probability versus false alarm probability for different
sizes of cyclic preﬁx.
Figure 8.
Detection probability versus false alarm probability for different
sizes of FFT.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
Scenarios have a strong inﬂuence on architecture and its
performance tradeoffs. In the secondary spectrum usage of
licensed TV bands, interference is not allowed, and much
attention must be paid to sensitivity. In this paper, DVB-T
signal sensing has been addressed using the cyclostationarity
detector. The motivation of this study is to achieve realistic
performance of this detector for the TVWS scenario. This pa-
per focuses on the design of a hardware testbed that performs
the cyclostationarity detection and introduces a measurement
campaign.
The receiver could not reach very low sensitivity because
only one AGC has been implemented. However, this limitation
is not prohibitive in the use of the algorithm. We have shown
that, with a thermal noise of -80 dBm, the architecture could
achieve the detection of SNR down to -6 dB.
The inﬂuence of the ﬁlter length has been highlighted with
a 16 dB sensitivity gain between n=4 and n=128. Finally, the
false alarm and detection performance will help the setting
of the detection threshold according to the desired strategy of
detection.
68
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

Future work is to update the RF board of the receiver with
the integration of the IF AGC and to perform measurements
with realistic broadcast channel conditions [20] with both
multipaths and frequency dispersive characteristics.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research leading to these results was derived from the
French national project ANR-INFOP.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Mitola III and G. Q. Maguire Jr, “Cognitive radio: making software
radios more personal,” IEEE Personal Communications, vol. 6, no. 4,
pp. 13–18, 1999.
[2] Ofﬁcial announcement of FCC, “FCC adopts rules for unlicensed use
of television white spaces,” available from http://www.fcc.gov,
15.03.2011, November 2008.
[3] IEEE 802.22, “Wireless Regional Area Networks ("WRANs"),” avail-
able from http://www.ieee802.org/22/, 15.03.2011.
[4] M. Ghozzi, M. Dohler, F. Marx, and J. Palicot,
“Cognitive Radio:
Methods for Detection of Free Bands,” Elsevier Science Journal, Special
Issue on Cognitive Radio, vol. 7, Sept 2006.
[5] J. Lunden, V. Koivunen, A. Huttunen, and H. Vincent Poor, “Spectrum
Sensing in Cognitive Radios Based on Multiple Cyclic Frequencies,”
http://arxiv.org/abs/0707.0909, 15.03.2011, July 2007.
[6] P. Jallon, “An algorithm for detection of DVB-T signals based on their
second order statistics,” EURASIP journal on wireless communications
and network, 2008.
[7] Dominique Noguet, Lionel Biard, and Marc Laugeois, “Cyclostationar-
ity Detectors for Cognitive Radio: Architectural Tradeoffs,” EURASIP
Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, 2020.
[8] V. Turunen, M. Kosunen, A. Huttunen, S. Kallioinen, P. Ikonen,
A. Pärssinen, and J. Ryynänen,
“Implementation of cyclostationary
feature detector for cognitive radios,” IEEE International Conference
on Cognitive Radio Oriented Wireless Networks and Communications
(CROWNCOM09), June 2009.
[9] Y. Tachwali, M. Chmeiseh, F. Basma, and H. H. Refai, “A frequency
agile implementation for IEEE 802.22 using software deﬁned radio
platform,” IEEE Globecom 2008, December 2008.
[10] D. Cabric, A. Tkachenko, and R. W. Brodersen, “Experimental study
of spectrum sensing based on energy detection and network coopera-
tion,” ACM 1st Int. Workshop on Technology and Policy for Accessing
Spectrum (TAPAS06), August 2006.
[11] J.Y. Xu and F. Alam, “Adaptive energy detection for cognitive radio:
An experimental study,” IEEE International Conference on Computers
and Information Technology (ICCIT09), December 2009.
[12] S.M. Mishra, D. Cabric, C. Chang, D. Willkomm, B. Van Schewick,
S. Wolisz, and B.W. Brodersen, “A Real Time Cognitive Radio Testbed
for Physical and Link Layer Experiments,”
IEEE New Frontiers in
Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN05), Nov. 2005.
[13] M. Ghozzi, B. Zayen, and A. Hayar, “Experimental Study of Spectrum
Sensing Based on Distribution Analysis,”
18th ICT-MobileSummit
Conference, June 2000.
[14] S. Kandeepan, G. Baldini, and R. Piesiewicz, “Experimentally detecting
IEEE 802.11n Wi-Fi based on cyclostationarity features for ultra-wide
band cognitive radios,”
IEEE International Symposium on Personal,
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC09), Sept. 2009.
[15] L. Biard, D. Noguet, T. Gernandt, P. Marques, and A. Gameiro, “A
hardware demonstrator of a cognitive Radio system using temporal
opportunities,”
IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Radio
Oriented Wireless Networks and Communications (CROWNCOM09),
June 2009.
[16] W. A. Gardner and M. Spooner,
“Signal Interception: Performance
Advantages of Cyclic-Feature Detectors,” IEEE Transactions on Com-
munications, vol. 40, no. 1, Jan 1992.
[17] W. A. Gardner and G. Zivanovic, “Degrees of cyclostationary and their
application to signal detection and estimation,” IEEE Signal Processing,
vol. 22, no. 3, March 1991.
[18] S. J. Shellhammer, “Spectrum sensing in IEEE 802.22,” IAPR Workshop
on Cognitive Information Processing, June 2008.
[19] TeamCast, “Description of DVB-T modulator,” available from http:
//www.teamcast.com/en/maj-e/c2a2i19508/, 15.03.2011.
[20] TeamCast,
“Description of RF Channel Simulator,”
available
from http://www.teamcast.com/en/maj-e/c1a2i19493/,
15.03.2011.
69
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

