An Application-Oriented Routing Protocol for
Multi-hop Cognitive Radio Networks
Ba-Lam To∗, Thuong-Van Vu∗, Thi-Mai-Trang Nguyen∗ and Anne Fladenmuller∗
∗ University of Pierre and Marie Curie (UPMC)
Laboratory of Computer Science of Paris 6 (LIP6)
4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris, France
Email: {Ba-Lam.To, Thi-Mai-Trang.Nguyen, Anne.Fladenmuller}@lip6.fr, Thuong-Van.Vu@phare.lip6.fr
Abstract—A challenge for routing in cognitive radio networks
is the intermittent connection due to the occupying and releasing
licensed channels of primary users. To solve this problem, the
routing protocol will choose the most stable channel (the channel
with the longest average length of idle period) to build up the
stable path. This approach, however, can lead to the increase of
channel competition between cognitive users since the most stable
channels are preferred to be utilized by all cognitive users. In this
paper, an application-oriented routing protocol is proposed. The
main motivation is to reduce the channel competition between
cognitive users by ﬁnding the appropriate path according to the
application of cognitive users. Simulation results show that our
proposed routing protocol reduces the loss ratio and increases
the throughput signiﬁcantly.
Index Terms—cognitive radio; application-oriented; routing;
stability
I. INTRODUCTION
In wireless communication, the most valuable resource is
the radio spectrum. However, according to recent studies[1][2],
while the assigned spectrum (licensed spectrum) is under-
utilized in various geographical locations and time, the un-
licensed spectrum is always overloaded because of the growth
of wireless services. To reduce the waste of licensed spectrum
usage and provide more available spectrum resource for un-
licensed users, an efﬁcient way is allowing unlicensed users
to opportunistically access the licensed spectrum without pe-
nalizing Quality of Service (QoS) of licensed users. Cognitive
Radio (CR) [3] is envisaged as the sufﬁcient technology that
aims to ﬂexibly use wireless radio spectrum. Each node in the
Cognitive Radio Network (CRN) is equipped with a cognitive
radio which has capabilities of sensing the busy channel,
reconﬁguring the radio parameters and switching to another
channel. Due to the information collected during the sensing
process, the CR users will use the idle licensed channel during
vacant time and immediately release the channel whenever CR
users detect any use of licensed users on this channel.
One of the most important problems in routing in multi-hop
CRN is the intermittent connection. Unpredicted operation of
primary users (PU) prevents secondary users (SU) from having
a stable usage of the licensed spectrum. The intermittent
connection will lead to frequent route corruptions whose
consequence is that the re-routing process must be called
several times, increasing transmission delay and packet loss.
Although there are many routing protocols proposed for CRN,
only few of them tackle the intermittent connection problem.
There are two possible methods used to solve the problem
of intermittent connection: corruption avoidance method and
corruption reaction method. In the corruption reaction method
[4][5], the proposed routing protocols deﬁne mechanisms to
recover the route in case that the route is corrupted. Therefore,
network can avoid the performance degradation whenever the
route is corrupted due to the coming back of primary users.
In the corruption avoidance method, the proposed routing
protocols [6]-[11] deﬁne mechanisms to select the most stable
route in order to avoid frequent changes of route and improve
network performances. By considering the spectrum stability
as the metric in the routing protocol, nodes will select the most
stable link for each hop and obtain the most stable route.
The above channel selection algorithm [6]-[11] is designed
with cross layer approach in which the channel information
is collected by lower layers and used by network layer for
routing decision. Even though this channel selection algorithm
can help nodes to choose the most stable channel, it still leads
to some problems. Firstly, by forcing all CR nodes in an
area to operate over the most stable channel, the competition
among CR nodes for the same channel resources will cause
contention and collision problems in which the consequence
will be an increase of end-to-end delays or a decrease of
throughput. Secondly, the stable-channel approach will under-
utilize the ability of operating on different channels which
cognitive radio offers. Therefore, a novel spectrum allocation
strategy is needed to provide better spectrum utilization in
CRN.
As each application has its own trafﬁc pattern which decides
the transmission behaviour, the channels can be allocated to
CR users according to their application types. For example,
with Constant Bit Rate (CBR) Voice over IP (VoIP) applica-
tions or Delay Tolerant Network-liked applications in which
the transmissions usually happen in short period of time, the
channels which are not stable and often idle will be the
appropriate candidate channels. Therefore, taking into account
the type of applications, we can provide better channel alloca-
tion strategy in which the channel competition or interference
19
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

will be reduced. In this paper, we introduce the Application-
Oriented Stability (AOS) metric which helps nodes using
unreliable and non-elastic delay applications to choose the
channels which can be used more frequently even though these
channels are not stable. The most stable channel (the channel
with the longest average length of idle period) will be reserved
to the nodes using reliable and elastic delay applications.
By this channel allocation strategy, radio spectrum resource
is utilized more efﬁciently and network performance will be
improved.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we discuss works related to stable routing in
cognitive radio network. Section III will study channel usage
pattern according to application and describe the network
model. In Section IV, we analyse the Application-Oriented
Stability metric in detail and present the application-oriented
routing protocol. Simulation results are illustrated in Section
V. Finally, Section VI concludes this paper and ﬁgures out the
future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Some stability routing techniques in cognitive radio network
already exist. In [8], the authors ﬁrst deﬁne the maximum link
hold-time as the maximum length of available period before a
cognitive link is considered to be failed. After that, the authors
expressed the link hold-time as a function of the maximum link
hold-time and the primary user usage pattern. The route hold-
time then will be derived as the accumulated hold-time of links
which compose the route. Finally, the routing metric based on
the route hold-time and end-to-end throughput is proposed.
Sharma et al. propose in [7] a new routing metric for multihop
cognitive networks. This new metric includes the stability
factor, also known as the average channel availability time
which is calculated as weighted moving average of previously
measured availability times and the time measured in the
current measurement duration. Same remarks apply on [9][10],
where the proposed routing metric is based on the channel
utilization which depends on the average duration of available
period of the channel. [6] proposes a collaborative strategy for
route and spectrum selection in cognitive radio networks. The
routing metric includes the spectrum stability factor used to
gauge the variation of the spectrum. In [11], the authors use a
threshold to decide whether the channel is stable. The channel
will be considered as stable if its average available time is
larger than the threshold. Otherwise all unstable channels will
be excluded from the spectrum opportunity.
Our work differs from the previous proposals in two aspects:
ﬁrst, taking into account the application of cognitive users
when allocating the channel using our stability parameter, and
second, considering the length variance of idle periods which
can lead to the wrong channel selection.
III. NETWORK MODEL AND TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
A. Network Model
We consider a cognitive radio network composed of primary
users and cognitive users. Primary users are nodes which
hold licenses for speciﬁc spectrum bands, and can occupy
their assigned spectrum. Therefore, primary users will be
provided a reliable communication environment regardless
of time and space. Cognitive users use opportunistically the
licensed channels to send their data when they detect the
disappearance of primary users. We assume that all cognitive
users are equipped with cognitive radios which have abilities
of reconﬁguring transmission parameters and scanning the
channels for opportunistic transmission.
We also consider that each primary channel will follow
an ON-OFF model in which channel alternates between state
ON (active) and state OFF (inactive) [12]. An ON/OFF state
models a time slot in which the primary user is or is not
occupying a channel. The cognitive users can utilize the OFF
time slot to transmit their own signals. Suppose that each
channel changes its state independently. The ON-OFF channel
model is depicted in Figure 1. The channels are assumed to
Fig. 1.
The channel state for ith channel
be organized in two separate channel sets: a common control
channel (CCC) and a set of data channels. All cognitive users
in the network will use the CCC to send packets for contending
the data channel or to exchange local information and routing
control information. The set of data channel is used for data
communication. Each data channel has bandwidth w. We also
assume that all sensing information are accurate.
B. Trafﬁc Analysis
In this section, Voice over IP (VoIP) on behalf of unreliable
and non-elastic delay applications and File Transfer Protocol
(FTP) on behalf of reliable and elastic delay applications will
be studied through different topologies and channel patterns
in order to ﬁnd the most appropriate channel pattern for each
type of application.
To study the impact of channel idle time on the performance
of VoIP and FTP, we deploy different test cases which are
different in the number of nodes (Figure 2). The detail of
basic parameters used in each test case are described in Table
I. Beside that, in each test case, ON-OFF model is used to
model the channel availability at each node.
Fig. 2.
Network topology of test cases
In each test case, we ﬁrst create an UDP/CBR(VoIP) con-
nection from source node to destination node and keep data
20
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
Comments
Flat Grid
1000x1000
Simulation space. Here, a ﬂat ﬁeld
1000mx1000m
Node
MobileNode
The PU/SU that is recognized in ns-2
as a mobile wireless node
Bandwidth
2Mbps
The bandwidth of wireless network
Stack delay
9.5-10.5ms
A delay that allows a packet to go
through OSI stack at node in ns-2
Propagation
model
Two-Ray
Ground
A propagation model supported by ns-2
to simulate the signal propagation
Interference
model
Thermal
Threshold
If a packet power is lower than a min-
imum threshold (set ﬁxed), packet will
get dropped
UDP/CBR
rate
64kbps
Rate for application UDP/CBR
TCP/FTP
varied
Rate which claims as much as possible
from the remained bandwidth
Duration
300s
A runtime for data transfer in a test case
Protocol
overhead
5%-10%
Extra information exchanged between
nodes besides data transfer (e.g. rout-
ing packets of Routing layer used to
establish path for data from source to
destination)
Data in UDP
packet
160 bytes
Data in each UDP packet
UDP loss ra-
tio accepted
3%
Loss ratio is acceptable to application
MAC layer
AOS-MAC
A modiﬁed version of MAC802.11
supported by ns-2. AOS-MAC is im-
plemented to allow the secondary users
to transfer data on the licensed channel
transparently to primary users
UDP trafﬁc
UDP/CBR
UDP constant bit rate at 64kbps
Data in TCP
packet
512 bytes
Data in each TCP packet
TCP trafﬁc
TCP/FTP
The rate of FTP trafﬁc is varied (FTP
claims the bandwidth as much as pos-
sible)
transferring continuously in 300ms. All nodes in the network
will choose the channel using the same criteria (e.g. the most
stable channel which its length of idle time is varied for
testing purpose) for data transmission. After that, we vary
the length of channel idle time and observe the network
performance which is shown through the throughput. We then
create TCP/FTP connection and follow the same procedure as
we did in case of UDP/CBR(VoIP) connection. The simulation
is repeated 20 times for each test case.
The results are shown in Figure 3. The length of channel
idle period (the OFF period) is varied from 2.1ms to 18.7ms.
From Figure 3(a), two observations are deduced. Firstly, the
network throughput will reach its maximum value and keep
stable when the length of channel idle time reaches a threshold
value. For instance, in the case there are 6 cognitive hops in
the network, the network throughput will achieve its maximum
value (78kps) when the length of channel idle time reaches
the value of 15ms. Then the network throughput still stay at
the maximum value even though the length of channel idle
time continues to increase. Secondly, the threshold value of
length of the channel idle time will be increased when there
are more cognitive users in the networks. If cognitive users
use the stability metric for channel selection, there are more
channel competition when there are more cognitive users in the
network. Hence, the consequence is that the length of channel
idle time need to be increased in order to achieve the maximum
value of network throughput.
The above observations are also applicable in case that
application is FTP (Figure 3(b)). However, there is a difference
between both cases. The difference is that, to achieve the
threshold value of network throughput, the length of channel
idle time in case of FTP need to be much longer than the
length of channel idle time in case of VoIP. For example, from
Figures 3(a) and 3(b), in the case of there are 2 cognitive users
in the network, network throughput will achieve the maximum
value when the length of channel idle time in case of VoIP
and in case of FTP is equal to or greater than 4ms and 16ms
respectively. In case there are 6 cognitive users in the network,
the length of channel idle time in case of VoIP needs to be
equal to the threshold value of 17ms for the convergence of
network throughput. With FTP, the length of channel idle time
must be much longer.
With the above observations, it is obvious that the channels
composed to built up the path should be allocated according
to the application of cognitive users.
IV. APPLICATION-ORIENTED ROUTING
In this Section, the Application-Oriented Stability (AOS)
parameter is described in detail, and a routing protocol using
AOS as a routing metric is provided.
A. Application-oriented stability
This section will present the AOS parameter. The objective
of AOS is to help CR nodes to ﬁnd appropriate channels for
transmitting data according to CR nodes’ application type.
For FTP application, CR nodes will look for the most stable
channel. For VoIP application, CR nodes will look for the
channel which are idle frequently even though these channels
are not the most stable channel.
The AOS parameter is composed by two components:
stability S and total idle time I. The stability S describes
the average length of idle time period in which the unlicensed
users can access the channel. This component presents the
stability of the channel. The total idle time I is calculated by
summing up all the idle periods of channel from the time when
CR node joins the network, starts to sense the surrounding
environment and obtains the available information about the
channel. By considering the total idle time I in conjunction
with the stability S, we can identify the channels which are
vacant frequently and has biggest total idle time. If we have a
channel pattern as Figure 1, the stability S and the total idle
time I will be derived as follow:
The stability:
S = αS + (1 − α)ti
(1)
where ti is the length of the ith idle period of the channel in
the current measurement duration and α is the smooth factor
The average available time of the channel S is calculated as
the weighted sum of the past S and the current measured
21
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

(a) VoIP Throughput
(b) FTP Throughput
Fig. 3.
The relationship between the throughput of VoIP, FTP and the idle length of channel
length of the idle time period of the channel. Each time the
channel changes from the OFF state to the ON state, the value
of stability component is re-calculated and updated. The most
stable channel will have the largest value of S
The total idle time:
I =
N
X
i=1
ti
(2)
where ti is the length of the ith idle period of the channel.
N is the number of idle period from the time when CR node
joins the network, starts to sense the surrounding environment
and obtains the available information about the channel until
the current measurement.
The total idle time of the channel I is calculated as the total
idle time from the time when node joins the network, senses
the surrounding environment and obtain the ﬁrst information
about the channel until the measurement time. Each time the
channel changes from the OFF state to ON state, the value of
idle level component is re-calculated and updated.
As the objective of AOS parameter is helping CR nodes
to choose the appropriate channel according to CR nodes’
application type, the AOS parameter will be deﬁned as follow:
AOS =
"
c
S + 1 − c
I
S ln I
#
+
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=1
(ti − S)2,
S ≥ Sthreshold
(3)
where c is the application indicator. c will equal to 0 if the
application is VoIP and equal to 1 if the application is FTP.
Sthreshold is the lower bound for S. The lower bound of S
will guarantee that the channel will be normally available in a
period of time that is enough to ensure CR nodes will transmit
a packet successfully
The ﬁrst part of AOS is deﬁned to ﬁnd the most appropriate
channel for applications. With FTP application (c = 1), the
most stable channels will be preferred. With VoIP application
(c = 0), the preferred channels are the channels which are less
stable than the most stable channels, but the idle frequency is
high. The second part of AOS is used to avoid the variation in
length of channel idle periods. Otherwise, the large variation
in length of channel idle periods can cause the wrong channel
selection.
Based on the AOS parameter, path metric will be derived
as follow:
M =
X
i∈P,j∈Ci
AOSij
(4)
Where P is the end-to-end path. M is the path metric. Ci is
the set of available channels for Cognitive Node i belonging
to the path P
B. Application-Oriented Routing
In this section, we introduce our protocol using on-demand
routing approach. When an application of CR node demands
to transmit data, CR source node will initiate route discovery
by broadcasting route request packet on CCC. After that,
each intermediate node along the routes to destination will
add the AOS information of channels into the route request
packet in sequence. Whenever route request packets reach the
destination node, destination node will use AOS information
of channels to calculate the metric of each path and choose
the path with minimum metric as the route of source node to
the destination node.
Based on Ad-hoc On-Demand Distance Vector (AODV)
routing protocol in NS-2 (version 2.31) [13] and CRN Simu-
lator [14], Application-Oriented Routing Protocol (AORP) is
implemented. Route REQuest (RREQ) packet format, route
discovery and route selection are modiﬁed to implement AORP
1) Route Request Packet Format: To implement AORP, the
RREQ packet needs to be modiﬁed to carry all information
along the path which allow destination node to choose the
appropriate path for source node. Each RREQ will contain
complete information about a path between the source node
and destination node: the address of intermediate node, the
incoming channel used to communicate with its precedent
node, the outgoing channel used to communicate with its
successor node and the AOS value of the path associated
with the intermediate node’s outgoing channel. Beside that, the
source node or intermediate nodes use neighbour IP address
to send RREQ packets to its neighbours. In addition, the
22
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

application indicator c is also added to help intermediate node
and destination node calculate the value of AOS and choose
the appropriate path for source node according to the source
node’s application. The format of RREQ packet is depicted in
Figure 4.
Fig. 4.
Route Request Packet Format
2) Route Discovery: When an application of CR node
demands to transmit data and CR node has not the route
to the destination, source node will initiate multiple RREQ
packets and send a RREQ packet to each neighbours on CCC.
Each RREQ packet will contain the AOS value of the channel
which has the minimum value of AOS among the common
channels between source node and its neighbour. Whenever
each intermediate node along the paths to destination receives
a RREQ packet, it uses the Intermediate node Entry (IE) to
check whether the RREQ packet is already forwarded by it.
If the RREQ packet is not forwarded by the intermediate
node yet, the intermediate node will create multiple the RREQ
packets. The number of RREQ packets is equal to the number
of its neighbours. For each pair of intermediate node and its
neighbour, the intermediate node adds its address into the
RREQ packet, puts the channel used to communicate with
its precedent node in the incoming channel ﬁeld of RREQ
packet, puts the channel with the minimum value of AOS in
the outgoing channel ﬁeld of RREQ packet and updates the
AOS value. Finally, the intermediate node sends the RREQ
packets to its neighbours on CCC.
3) Route Selection: When the destination node receives
a new RREQ packet, it will follow the below procedure to
handle this packet:
Step 1: If there does not exist a path from the source node
to destination node, then choose the route stored in RREQ and
go to step 3, else go to step 2.
Step 2: If there exist a path from the source node to
destination node, then compare the AOS value of existing path
with the AOS value stored in the arrived RREQ. If the AOS
value of existing path is less than or equal to the AOS value
stored in RREQ, then ignore the RREQ packet, else update
the path from source node to destination node to the new path
stored in the arrived RREQ.
Step 3: Destination node sends ROUTE REPLY packet on
licensed channel in unicast mode.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
We study the proposed metric Application-Oriented Sta-
bility (AOS) through a simulation using ns2. The ON-OFF
model and the AOS metric will be implanted in the MAC
layer and Routing layer respectively. A MAC (named AOS-
MAC) is modiﬁed from MAC IEEE 802.11 supported by ns2.
AOS-MAC is implemented to allow secondary users (SUs)
to transfer data on the channel transparently to primary users
(PUs). In order to do this, SUs only send trafﬁc in OFF periods
and do not access the licensed channel in ON periods when
PUs are present.
Two test cases are designed to validate the proposed ON-
OFF model and the AOS metric. Throughout the simula-
tions, we consider all topologies created in a ﬂat area of
1000m × 1000m. In each test case, a number of intermediate
nodes are placed between source node and destination node.
Each intermediate nodes has its own accessible channel list. In
addition, two connections TCP/FTP and UDP/VoIP are kept to
maintain data transfer during the running time of the scenario.
To evaluate the performance of AORP, together with AORP,
we will implement another routing protocol S-AODV. S-
AODV is a modiﬁed version of AODV in which the most
stable channel will be selected for data transmission. The
routing metric of S-AODV is 1
S (S is presented in Formulation
(1) ). We then compare the network performance in the case
that routing protocol is AORP with the network performance
in the case that routing protocol is S-AODV.
Initially, test cases will be executed by using the S-AODV
and then, will be run again by using AORP. The numerical
results are collected, computed and analysed to deduct the
performance obtained by using S-AODV and AORP. The
performance of test cases are evaluated by two parameters
throughput and packet loss. These parameters are mainly
affected by the end-to-end (e2e) delays between source and
destination because throughput is calculated by total packets
in bytes over the duration of data transfer, while packet loss is
counted by a delay time-out mechanism in TCP/FTP or a play-
out delay threshold in UDP/VoIP application. In summary, the
e2e delay affects directly to total packets sent successfully in
a duration of data transfer which is set ﬁxed (300s) in test
cases. When e2e delay increases, less packets can reach to the
destination. For ease to follow, below is the topologies of all
test cases. Nodes in orange are source node and destination
node of VoIP connection and nodes in blue are source node and
destination node of FTP connection while the other nodes in
white are the intermediate nodes. VoIP application is run with
constant bit rate 64kbps. FTP is run with variable rate which
claims the bandwidth (maximum 2Mbps) as much as possible.
Channels with odd identiﬁers (1, 3, 5, etc.) should be preferred
by VoIP application while channels with even identiﬁers (2, 4,
6, etc.) should be preferred by FTP application. In the work
of AORP, the quality of channel will be associated to AOS.
23
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

Typically, the smaller the identiﬁer is, the better the quality of
the channel is.
Details for each test case result will be provided from Figure
7 to Figure 8 and Table II
Fig. 5.
2 connections VoIP and FTP with less channel diversity in data ﬂow
Fig. 6.
2 connections VoIP and FTP with channel diversity in data ﬂow
TABLE II
TRAFFIC FLOW IN EACH TEST CASE
Test case
Trafﬁc ﬂow in case that routing protocol is
AORP
Test case 1
VoIP trafﬁc from node 0 to node 6 through
node 2, 4 via channel 1
FTP trafﬁc from node 1 to node 7 through
node 3, 5 via channel 2
Test case 2
VoIP trafﬁc from node 0 to node 7 through
node 2, 5 via channels 3-1-3
FTP trafﬁc from node 1 to node 6 through
node 3, 4 via channels 4-2-4
In test case 1 and test case 2 (Figures 5 and 6), the
performance of S-AODV is improved by AORP. This happens
because by using S-AODV, all applications will try to use
the most stable channels which have the largest average idle
periods. Therefore, due to the AOS-MAC, all nodes have
to compete with one another to take the channel and send
the packet on the same channel. As the consequence, some
packets might wait for a certain time before MAC is free again
for being sent. This drawback could introduce the additional
processing delay and increase the e2e delay, thus, increase
the packet loss and reduce the performance for both VoIP
connections and FTP connections. Compared to case with
AOS, the applications will try to use the channels which
are preferred to their needs. With the difference of preferred
channel, nodes will not need to compete channels for data
transmission and packets will not wait much for MAC to
get free. Consequently, the AOS could lead both types of
connection (VoIP and FTP) to the better performance.
However, in the concern of AORP, the diversity of channels
could also give beneﬁt to packets from the same ﬂow. The
throughput in Test case 2 (Figure 8(b)) is better than the
throughput in Test case 1 (Figure 7(b)) because the path chosen
in Test case 2 is composed by different channels while the
path chosen in Test case 1 is composed by the same channel.
The packets on path composed by different channels can avoid
the channel competition and intra-ﬂow interference caused by
the transmission of packet belonging to the same ﬂow. The
channel competition and intra-ﬂow interference would also
introduce the additional processing delay, thus, reducing the
throughput as shown in Test case 1.
Regarding the total packet loss (Figure 7(a) and Figure
8(a)), the number of total lost packets is reduced signiﬁcantly
by using the AORP routing protocol instead of S-AODV. In
case of S-AODV, all cognitive nodes are forced to use the
most stable channel. In addition, the VoIP application is set
to run with a low bit rate 64kbps while FTP application is
set to claim the bandwidth as much as it can. According to
this conﬁguration, the packets of VoIP application would be
sent out the channel later than packets of FTP application. As
the consequence, these packets suffered from the additional
processing delay (mentioned in previous paragraphs) and the
packet e2e delay will exceed the play-out delay threshold
of VoIP application. This play-out delay violation will cause
packets to get dropped at destination and hence increase the
packet loss of VoIP application, resulting in the increase in
the total number of lost packets. On the contrary, in case of
AORP, VoIP trafﬁc and FTP trafﬁc are separated on ﬂows
which have different interest of channels. By this way, there
is no channel competition between nodes relaying VoIP trafﬁc
and nodes relaying FTP trafﬁc. Therefore, the total packet loss
is reduced dramatically.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have proposed an application-oriented
routing protocol in cognitive radio network. We studied the
transmission behaviour of VoIP and FTP applications to ﬁgure
out the appropriate channel for each type of application.
Based on this study, the application-oriented stability metric
and application-oriented routing protocol are proposed to ﬁnd
an appropriate path according to the application running in
cognitive nodes. Through simulations, the application-oriented
routing protocol was shown to outperform S-AODV. In the
future, we envisage to investigate more applications’ transmis-
sion behaviour to provide more efﬁcient channel allocation
and route composition schemes. We also consider channel
bandwidth in conjunction with application-oriented stability
parameter to ﬁnd path satisfying the demand of cognitive
users’ applications. Additionally, the scenarios with more con-
current trafﬁc ﬂows will be examined to verify the scalability
of AORP.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported by the internal project LIP6-ENST
proposed to enhance the research collaboration between Uni-
24
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

(a) Test case 1 - Loss
(b) Test case 1 - Throughput
Fig. 7.
Test case 1 - No channel diversity
(a) Test case 2 - Loss
(b) Test case 2 - Throughput
Fig. 8.
Test case 2 - Channel diversity
versity of Pierre and Marie Curie and Telecom ParisTech.
Authors would like to thank Associate Professor Naceur
Malouch from University of Pierre and Marie Curie for his
valuable discussions about the routing techniques in CRN. Our
thanks go also to Professor Philippe Martins from Telecom
ParisTech for his remarks on spectrum sensing techniques and
MAC layer aspects in CRN.
REFERENCES
[1] FCC, ”Spectrum policy task force report”, ET docket no. 02-155, Novem-
ber 2002.
[2] FCC, ”Notice for Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM 03 322): Facilitating Op-
portunities for Flexible Efﬁcient, and Reliable Spectrum Use Employing
Spectrum Agile Radio Techologies”, ET docket no. 03 108, December
2003.
[3] J. Mitola, ”Cognitive Radio: an integrated agent architecture for software
deﬁned radio”, PhD dissertation, Computer Communication System Lab-
oratory, Department of Teleinformatics, KTH, Stockholm, Sweden, May
2000.
[4] A. Sampath, L. Yang, L. Cao, H. Zheng, and B.Y. Zhao, ”High
Throughput Spectrum-aware Routing for Cognitive Radio Based Ad-hoc
Networks”, Third International Conference on Cognitive Radio Oriented
Wireless Networks and Communications, May 2008.
[5] G. Zhu, M.D. Felice, and I.F. Akyildiz, ”STOD-RP: a spectrum-tree based
on-demand routing protocol for multi-hop cognitive radio networks”,
IEEE Global Telecommunication Conference, pp. 1-5, November 2008.
[6] S. Deng, J. Chen, H. He, and W. Tang, ”Collaborative Strategy for Route
and Spectrum Selection in Cognitive Radio Networks”, Future Generation
Communication and Networking, pp. 168-172, December 2007.
[7] M. Sharma, A. Sahoo, and K. D. Nayak, ”Channel Selection under Inter-
ference Temperature Model i Multi-hop Cognitive Mesh Networks”, IEEE
Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks,
pp. 133-136, April 2007.
[8] G. Lei, W. Wang, T. Peng, and W. Wang, ”Routing Metrics in Cognitive
Radio Networks”, IEEE International Conference on Circuits and Systems
for Communications, pp. 265-269, May 2008.
[9] L. Gong, S. Deng, W. Tang, and S. Li, ”Anti-intermittence source routing
protocol in distributed cogtive radio network”, International Conference
on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing, pp.
1-6, October 2008.
[10] H. He, L. Gong, W. Tang, J. Wang, and S. Li, ”Spectrum-aware Anti-
intermittence Routing in Distributed Cognitive radio Network”, Interna-
tional Conference on Communication, Circuit and System, pp. 236-240,
July 2009.
[11] L. Qin, J. Wang, and S. Li, ”Stability-Driven Routing And Spectrum
Selection Protocol in Cognitive Radio Networks”, IEEE International
Conference on Communication Technology and Applications, pp. 269-
273, October 2009.
[12] H. Su and X. Zhang, ”Opportunistic MAC Protocols for Cognitive Radio
Based Wireless Networks”, The 41st Annual Conference on Information
Sciences and Systems, pp. 363-368, March 2007.
[13] The network simulator NS-2. http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns. August 2010.
[14] Cognitive
Radio
Cognitive
Network
Simulator.
http://stuweb.ee.mtu.edu/ ljialian/. August 2010.
25
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

