Analyzing the Effect of Spectrum Mobility on Mobile IPv6 in Cognitive Radio 
Networks 
Manoj Kumar Rana 
SMCC 
Jadavpur University 
Kolkata, India 
e-mail: 
manoj24.rana@gmail.com 
Bhaskar Sardar  
Dept of IT 
Jadavpur University 
Kolkata, India 
e-mail: 
bhaskargit@yahoo.co.in 
Swarup Mandal 
Delivery Head 
Wipro Limited 
Kolkata, India 
e-mail: 
swarup.mandal@wipro.com 
Debashis Saha 
MIS Group,  
Indian Institute of 
Management (IIM) 
Calcutta, Kolkata, India 
e-mail: ds@iimcal.ac.in 
 
 
Abstract— In cognitive radio (CR) networks, the secondary 
users (SUs) may encounter frequent IP handoffs due to high 
spectrum mobility, even if they remain static spatially i.e., their 
network attachment does not change. However, mobile IPv6 
(MIPv6) was not originally designed to deal gracefully with 
such handoffs induced by spectrum mobility only. As a result, 
the performance of the data applications running in SUs may 
degrade severely. This paper presents a simulation based 
investigation to gauge the seriousness of the issue and to 
suggest possible solutions. We have developed a CR Attribute 
Model, and implemented MIPv6 over it in the well-known 
simulator ns-3. For SUs, we have considered three spectrum 
selection strategies, namely Greedy (GDY), Most Recently 
Used (MRU), and Least Frequently Used (LFU). In each case, 
we have analyzed how the number of IP handoffs increases 
with rise in spectrum mobility, resulting in degraded 
throughput performance in SUs. Our study reveals that MIPv6 
is unable to work properly in CR networks mainly due to high 
default values of router advertisement (RA) interval, lifetime 
period of care-of-address (CoA), and duplicate address 
detection (DAD) period. So, we need to customize MIPv6 – in 
terms of appropriating the pre-set values of RA interval, 
lifetime for CoA, and DAD period – to make it work properly 
in CR networks, where spectrum mobility is high. 
Keywords- Cognitive Radio Network; Spectrum Mobility; IP 
handoff; MIPv6; Throughput; Simulation; ns-3. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recent studies have revealed that significant parts of 
licensed spectrums remain underutilized for long duration; 
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) reported 
that the utilization of licensed spectrum ranges from as low 
as 15% to 85% [1]. To improve the spectrum utilization 
maximally [1], cognitive radio (CR) networks harp on 
dynamic spectrum allocation, permitting opportunistic 
access to the unused spectrum by the unlicensed users [2][3], 
known as secondary users (SUs), when subscribed 
customers, known as primary users (PUs) are not using the 
spectrum. SUs are equipped with cognitive capability as well 
as re-configurability that enable them to figure out currently 
unused spectrum holes, decide the best spectrum hole to 
utilize, and exploit that spectrum. SUs have the ability to 
detect reappearance of PUs. As soon as the presence of PU is 
detected, SU evacuates the spectrum immediately and moves 
to another currently unused spectrum, if available. This 
process of switching from one spectrum to another is called 
spectrum mobility/handoff [4] by SUs. 
Today, the wireless environment is highly heterogeneous, 
where multiple wireless access systems coexist over a certain 
area. If we assume that they all implement CR technology in 
their own spectrum [5][6], the spectrum handoff in such 
heterogeneous environments may give rise to two scenarios: 
(1) if the SU switches spectrum within the same system, only 
spectrum handoff occurs (which is referred to as intra-system 
spectrum handoff), (2) if the SU switches to a spectrum of a 
completely different system, a spectrum handoff is followed 
by IP handoff (which is referred to as inter-system spectrum 
handoff) [7]. Figure 1 illustrates these two types of handoffs, 
where dotted lines indicate only spectrum handoff and solid 
lines indicate spectrum handoff as well as IP handoff. 
Conventionally, it has been assumed that IP handoffs occur 
only due to spatial mobility of users in wireless networks. 
But, in CR networks, spectrum handoff may result in IP 
handoff even in absence of spatial mobility. From Figure 1, it 
is clear that the unavailability of unused spectrum in SU’s 
current wireless network during spectrum mobility results 
into inter-system spectrum handoff that leads to an IP 
handoff. It is to be noted that the number of IP handoffs may 
be very high in case of high spectrum mobility, and so, IP 
handoff 
becomes 
a 
more 
common 
event 
in 
CR 
environments. This work mainly focusses on inter-system 
WiFi 
WiMAX 
PU 
SU 
Free Slot
Time 
Figure 1.  Spectrum mobility in CR networks 
GDY 
GDY 
MRU 
LFU 
ch1
ch2
ch3
ch1
ch2
ch3
t1
t2
t3 
t4 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

spectrum handoff. 
The number of IP handoffs depends on the network 
parameters, such as PU arrival rate, PU channel holding 
time, and the number of SUs. In CR networks, the number of 
IP handoffs for an SU may be quiet high even when the SU 
is stationary. In modern wireless LAN (WLAN) and Long 
Term 
Evolution 
(LTE) 
or 
LTE-Advanced 
(LTE-A) 
networks, the channel usage occurs in discontinuous 
reception mode, where a PU uses a channel for a 
transmission and immediately releases the channel for the 
transmissions from other users [8]. For instance, for data rate 
of 20 kbps and transmission size 1000 byte, the average 
channel holding time is (1000*8/20000)=0.4 sec. So, for 
such small PU channel holding time with significant PU 
arrival rate, the duration of each spectrum hole becomes very 
small and SU interruption frequency becomes very high. It 
makes the CR network environment very dynamic for the 
SUs. This, in turn, poses a new set of challenges for the 
mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) protocol [9], the de-facto standard for 
IP handoff management. Even if the SUs are static, they 
have to invoke MIPv6 to handle IP handoff triggered by 
spectrum mobility. MIPv6 was originally designed for 
handling spatial mobility only, and so is not optimized for 
frequent IP handoffs due to inter-system spectrum mobility. 
It is well known that the handoff procedure in MIPv6 takes a 
significant amount of time, approximately 1.896 sec to 2.47 
sec [10]. So, the net temporal overhead due to multiple IP 
handoffs becomes very high during the complete lifetime of 
a data connection for an SU, which degrades the data 
throughput significantly, giving rise to several new issues for 
CR networks. Recent research works on CR networks mainly 
focus on reducing the spectrum handoff latency [11][12], not 
exploring the IP handoff issues much.  
Hence, the objective of this paper is to investigate the 
performance of the standard MIPv6 [9] in CR networks, in 
particular, the effect of spectrum mobility on MIPv6. To this 
end, we have developed the following modules in network 
simulator ns-3 [13]: (1) a cognitive radio attribute module 
(CRAM) to simulate a typical CR network consisting of 
IEEE 802.11 WLAN and WiMAX, (2) three basic spectrum 
selection algorithms, namely greedy (GDY), most recently 
used (MRU), and least frequently used (LFU), (3) our own 
MIPv6 according to the descriptions given in RFC 6275 [9]. 
In the first set of simulations, our objective is to identify 
the issues of MIPv6 when used in CR networks. We have 
investigated the simulation traces and observed that the high 
values of router advertisement (RA) interval, lifetime of 
care-of-address (CoA), and duplicate address detection 
(DAD) timers are responsible for poor performance of 
MIPv6. In the second set of simulations, we have set RA 
interval, lifetime of CoA, and DAD timer to sufficiently 
small values (as deemed fit by us). Then, we have measured 
the number of IP handoffs and throughput performance of 
SUs for different spectrum selection algorithms by varying 
the PU arrival rate, PU channel holding time, and the number 
of SUs in the CR networks.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, we discuss recent research works on spectrum mobility 
and IP mobility in CR networks. Section III provides a brief 
description of our model implementation in ns-3. Section IV 
illustrates the MIPv6 issues noted in CR networks. In 
Section V, we analyze the number of IP handoffs and its 
impact on throughput performance of the SUs. Finally, 
Section VI concludes the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
To access the Internet services using CR networks, the 
SUs cycle through three phases: spectrum handoff phase, IP 
handoff phase, and data transmission phase. The spectrum 
handoff phase consists of channel sensing, handoff decision, 
pause, and channel switching functions [4]. Similarly, IP 
handoff phase consists of RA, CoA formation, and tunnel 
setup [9]. The phase transition is illustrated in Figure 2. 
During data transmission, if reappearance of PU occurs, then 
SU moves to channel sensing phase where the SU attempts 
to find spectrum holes to switch to another empty channel. If 
an empty channel is unavailable, the SU continues sensing 
the busy set of channels, repeating channel sensing and pause 
phases continuously. In spectrum decision phase, the SU 
decides the best channel to switch to, based on available 
channels. The selection logic is closely related to the channel 
characteristics, and the operations of the PUs and the SUs. In 
the channel switch phase, SU changes its operating channel. 
If the channel switch occurs in the same system, data 
transmission begins immediately; otherwise, the SU 
encounters an additional MIPv6 handoff. 
Though many recent research works focus on spectrum 
mobility in CR networks, only a few research works focus on 
the resulting IP handoff and problems thereof faced by SUs. 
A. Spectrum Handoff 
Wang et al. [11][12] have proposed a dynamic 
programming based greedy algorithm to determine the 
optimal target channel sequence, and proved that greedy 
algorithm provides better results in terms of time complexity. 
Figure 2.  Mobility phase diagram in CR networks 
Transmission 
Channel 
Sensing 
IP 
Handoff 
Channel 
Switch 
Pause 
Spectrum 
Decision
Select 
Successful 
Unsuccessful 
Timeout 
PU Interruption 
Intra-System Switch 
Inter-System 
Switch 
MIP Complete 
PU Interruption 
Spectrum 
Handoff 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

To optimize the data delivery time, a traffic-adaptive 
spectrum handoff mechanism is proposed in [12]. It changes 
the target channel sequence of spectrum handoffs based on 
traffic conditions. Southwell et al. [14] analyzed spectrum 
handoff delay, considering the cost of channel switching and 
congestion due to multiple SUs, with prior knowledge of 
heterogeneous channels. They have proposed a fast 
algorithm to determine the best single-user decision, 
depending on other user’s plans without communicating with 
each other. 
B. IP Handoff 
In [7], M. Kataoka et al. have proposed a MIP protocol 
based Cognitive Radio system architecture to reduce the 
handoff delay. The system architecture follows a hierarchical 
structure consisting of a wired and a wireless part. However, 
the downside of this protocol is that the control node 
becomes a bottleneck and may result in a single point failure. 
Chen et al. [15] have proposed a cross-layer protocol to 
optimize the data transmission time in Cognitive Radio LTE 
networks. Since the authors assumed homogeneous LTE 
network, they did not use MIPv6. Instead they used Standard 
LTE handoff mechanism which takes only a few 
milliseconds and so, there is no such noticeable impact of IP 
handoff in the transmission time. 
The above proposals have been made to reduce the IP 
handoff latency in CR networks. To the best of our 
knowledge, no efforts have been reported thus far in the 
literature to investigate the issues of network layer mobility 
management protocols, such as MIPv6 in CR networks. 
Also, no prior works exist to show the impact of spectrum 
mobility on MIPv6. These observations call for a detailed 
analysis of MIPv6 in CR networks which may give us an 
insight into the practical design issues of MIPv6 and the 
impact of spectrum mobility on IP handoffs. In this paper, 
we have attempted to identify those issues in MIPv6 and 
shown that MIPv6 must be customized to work properly in 
CR networks. 
III. 
COGNITIVE RADIO ATTRIBUTE MODEL (CRAM) 
We have implemented CRAM in ns-3 [13]. It takes 
traffic parameters and spectrum selection strategy as input. 
We describe CRAM in the following three subsections. 
A. Traffic Parameter 
We consider one WLAN network with C1 number of 
channels and one WiMAX network with C2 number of 
channels. At any point in time, each of these channels can be 
occupied by a PU or a SU or remains empty. For simplicity, 
we have assumed homogeneous traffic parameters for all 
channels. Let us assume that the arrival rate of both PU and 
SU is Poisson. Let λp (arrival/second) be the arrival rate of 
PUs and λs (arrival/second) be the arrival rate of SUs. Let the 
service time for PUs and SUs be Xp (second/arrival) and Xs 
(second/arrival), respectively; both follow exponential 
distribution. If ρp and ρs denote the channel utilization for the 
transmissions of PUs and SUs, respectively, then the overall 
utilization is: 

s
p





 

It is to be noted that ρ≤1. We denote by Ip the inter arrival 
time of the PUs. Due to memory less property, it follows 
exponential distribution with rate λp. As given in [12], we 
have, 

p
E I p

1
]
[



Ip is the sum of E[Xp] and spectrum hole duration. The 
mean spectrum hole duration E[XS] is the mean service time 
for the SU, i.e., 

]
[
]
[
]
[
p
p
S
E X
E I
E X


 

To allow the SU to utilize the channel, the spectrum hole 
duration must be greater than 0, i.e, 

0
]
[

E X SH
 


0
]
[
1
,


p
p
E X
or

 


1
]
[
,

p
p
E X
or

 

The CRAM model takes C1, C2, λp, and E[Xp] as input 
parameters. To obtain ρs we use M/M/C queuing model, 
where C denotes number of channels being used to serve the 
SUs. According to the definition of the M/M/C queue, the 
average number of SUs in the system can be written as [16]: 










s
s
s
s
s
S
D C
C
E N





,
1
]
[
 

where, 

2
1
C
C
C


 

and 







 





1
0
1
1
!
)
(
!
)
(
1
1
!
)
(
,
C
k
C
C
k
C
C
C
C
D
s
C
s
k
s
s
C
s
s
s







 

Using the above formula, we can compute ρs, taking C 
and E[NS] as inputs. 
B. Spectrum Selection Strategies 
We 
have 
implemented 
three 
spectrum 
selection 
strategies: Greedy (GDY) [11][17], Most Recently Used 
(MRU) [18], and Least Frequently Used (LFU) [19]. These 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

strategies are implemented based on the statistical 
information of the channels. In GDY strategy, the SU 
selects the first empty channel without any pre-estimation 
of its freeness. Typically, the works [12][17] on modeling 
and analysis of spectrum mobility events assume GDY 
strategy (called first-come-first-served in their system 
model). The GDY strategy is an opportunistic one; it 
selects the empty channel at random, not targeting to utilize 
the spectrum holes optimally [11]. In contrast, several other 
research works [11][15][18][19] adopt selection strategies 
to utilize spectrum holes efficiently for the purpose of load 
balancing among channels as well as reducing data 
transmission time and improving throughput of SUs. These 
works consider the typical heterogeneous CR network 
environment [15] with multiple PUs and SUs [11][18][19]. 
We also assume this type of scenario in this work. MRU 
and LFU are selected as two efficient spectrum selection 
strategies based on the concept applied in [18] and [19], 
respectively. In MRU strategy, the SU selects the channel 
which has been used most recently by a PU, expecting a 
lengthy absence of PUs in that channel in near future. In 
LFU strategy, the SU selects the channel which has been 
least used by the PUs thus far, hoping that it will remain so 
in near future too. 
In Figure 1, we have illustrated spectrum selection by a 
SU using these three strategies. At the time t1 and t2, the SU 
follows the GDY strategy to switch channel. At time t1, the 
SU selects the spectrum hole of the first channel even though 
channel 3 is also empty. Similarly, at time t2, the SU selects 
the spectrum hole of the first channel of WiMAX network. 
At time t3, the SU follows MRU strategy and selects the 
spectrum hole of channel 2 of the WiFi network as it is used 
most currently among the free channels. At time t4, the SU 
uses LFU strategy to switch to channel 2 of WiMAX 
network as the usage percentage of the channel by PU is less 
than other free channels. 
C. CRAM Implementation in ns-3 [13] 
We 
used 
the 
Time, 
Timer, 
Simulator, 
and 
RandomVariable classes to implement CRAM. The Time 
and Timer classes are used to schedule a task, such as 
assigning a channel to a SU/PU for a particular time interval 
and cancel it after completion of the task. The Simulator 
class is used for initial scheduling of the entire task in the 
simulation, i.e., it starts the PU and SU transmissions. The 
RandomVariable class is used to generate exponentially 
distributed random numbers. We used two schedulers: 
channel scheduler (Figure 3) and SU scheduler. The channel 
scheduler takes the mean value of λp and E[Xp] as input. 
Following the distribution, the sequence generator generates 
a large number of sequences (over 1000). Each sequence 
consists of PU service time and duration of spectrum holes. 
During simulation, it makes the state of the channel either 
busy or free, based on the generated values. In the PU busy 
state, the channel scheduler starts the PU timer and makes 
the state as busy. After expiration of the PU timer, the free 
timer starts and the channel state becomes free. It would 
remain free up to the spectrum hole duration of the current 
sequence unless an SU sends a busy trigger. The SU busy 
trigger changes the channel state into busy. After expiration, 
it queries for the next sequence. A channel sensor database is 
designed that acquires the channel information.  
In SU scheduler (Figure 4), user inputs its data 
transmission time and the spectrum selection strategy. The 
spectrum selection strategy acquires the channel information 
from all channels of all systems and makes a decision. It 
outputs the next channel number (k) and the remaining free 
time. If it gets the free time slot, it starts transmission timer, 
giving a busy trigger to the kth channel scheduler. The start 
transmission functionality makes the SU’s WiFi or, WiMAX 
netdevice state into ‘UP’. The Stop Transmission function 
makes the SU’s corresponding state into ‘Down’ state. If 
anytime the spectrum selection strategy cannot find a free 
channel, it pauses for a predefined timer value. After 
Sequence 
Generator 
PU Busy 
SU Busy 
Free 
Channel Sensor 
Database 
λp 
E[Xp] 
SU Busy 
Trigger 
Expired 
Expired 
Time Left 
Last Use Time, Free Time Left, Usage % 
Next 
Sequence 
Figure 3.  CRAM Channel Scheduler 
Figure 4.  CRAM SU Scheduler 
Transmission Time Left 
Start Transmission
Device 
Stop 
Transmission 
Expired 
k, Time Slice 
Interface 
Down 
Information of 
Channel 1, 2, 3 … 
Channel k 
Scheduler 
Interface 
Up 
Pause 
Expired 
Time Slice 
Selection 
Algorithm 
Strategy 
Time 
Slice 
SU Busy Trigger 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

expiration of the pause timer, it again runs the spectrum 
selection strategy. 
IV. 
MIPV6 ISSUES IN CR NETWORKS 
We have developed our own MIPv6 module for ns-3 (as 
it is not available currently) on top of CRAM. 
A. Simulation setup 
We have considered a WLAN with 10 channels and a 
WiMAX network with 20 channels. SU is opportunistic to 
WLAN. We used constant position mobility model for the 
SUs because we are not interested in spatial mobility. We 
used λp=1.5 and E[NS]=4. The average connection length is 
480 bytes for exponentially distributed connections [20]. So, 
when the data rate of primary connection is 19.2 Kbps, we 
have E[Xp]=(480*8)/(19.2*103)=0.2 sec. The Pause timeout 
value and spectrum handoff delay are set as 0.05 sec and 
0.01 sec, respectively. Correspondent node (CN) and SU are 
running ‘UDP Echo’ application and transferring packets at 
the rate of 80 Kbps. The whole simulation is run for 1000 
sec. However, we present only the results selected from 100 
sec to 200 sec to highlight the design issues. 
B. High RA Interval and Lifetime Period 
If the duration of spectrum holes is very small, an SU 
may switch from one network (say WLAN) to another (say 
WiMAX), reside there for a very short time, and then may 
return to WLAN again. When the SU switches to WiMAX, 
the address configured in WLAN still remains valid for some 
more time. If it returns to WLAN quickly, it could use the 
previously configured CoA in WLAN, giving rise to two 
issues. First, when the SU is in WiMAX, another SU in 
WLAN may configure the same CoA and execute DAD 
procedure. The DAD procedure detects the address as valid 
for obvious reasons. So, when the SU returns to WLAN 
quickly, duplicate addresses would exist in WLAN even if 
DAD procedure detects no duplicity. Second, the binding 
update and tunnel setup procedures in MIPv6 are always 
triggered after the completion of DAD procedure. So, if the 
SU uses previously configured CoA in WLAN, those 
procedures are skipped. Since MIPv6 is not triggered, the 
tunnel set up between the SU and its home agent (HA) would 
still be the older one and the traffic would not be redirected 
towards the SU. As a result, the performance of the SU 
degrades drastically.  
In Figure 5, we illustrate the impact of high RA interval 
and lifetime duration on packet flow in CR networks. First, 
we used MaxRAInterval=3 sec and MinRAInterval=1 sec as 
given in [10]. So, after switching back to WLAN, the SU 
does not perform MIPv6 operations for a long time due to 
high RA interval and lifetime period. This is evident from 
long gaps in packet sequence number in Figure 5. Next, we 
decreased the values of RA interval to MaxRAInterval=0.07 
sec and MinRAInterval=0.03 sec. The corresponding 
simulation result (Figure 5) shows that MIPv6 is unable to 
work gracefully, resulting in long gaps in packet sequence 
number. So, we further reduced the values of RA intervals to 
7ms (MaxRAInterval) and 3ms (MinRAInterval), and then 
we found that all MIPv6 operations are completed 
successfully (Figure 5). We also observed that, under this 
circumstance, a large number of control packets are being 
generated, leading to congestion. So, we argue that the RA 
interval and lifetime period must be set considerably low in 
order to be appropriate for use in CR networks. 
C. High DAD Period 
RFC 6275 [9] has mentioned the default DAD period as 
1 sec. It may be higher than the considered duration of 
spectrum holes in CR networks. Whenever an SU switches 
to a new network, the address configuration procedure – in 
particular, the DAD procedure – consumes almost the entire 
time, and hence, the spectrum hole cannot be used for data 
transmission (Figure 6). So, the throughput of SUs degrades 
in CR networks. For this reason, the DAD period must also 
be reduced to make MIPv6 more effective in CR networks. 
V. 
ANALYSIS OF IMPACT OF SPECTRUM MOBILITY 
We have made some changes in the simulation setup, 
described in Section IV-A, to bring in more randomness in 
the availability of spectrum holes. The channels of CRAM 
are characterized as high usage and low usage to benefit 
Figure 5.  Behaviour under High and Low RA Intervals 
MinRAInterval = 1 s, MaxRAInterval = 3 s, Preferred LifeTime  = 3 s, Valid LifeTime = 5 s 
MinRAInterval = 30 ms, MaxRAInterval = 70 ms, Preferred LifeTime = 1.5 s, Valid LifeTime = 2 s 
MinRAInterval = 3 ms, MaxRAInterval = 7 ms, Preferred LifeTime = 0.5 s, Valid LifeTime = 1 s 
Figure 6.  Behaviour under High and Low DAD Values 
Incomplete IP handoff 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

from LFU and MRU strategies. We used λp, E[Xp], and 
E[NS] variables to control the emptiness of the channels 
(Table I). Also, to alleviate the problems explained in 
Section IV, we have taken 7 msec and 3 msec for 
MaxRAInterval and MinRAInterval, respectively. The 
preferred and valid lifetime values are assumed to be 0.5 sec 
and 1 sec, respectively. 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETER VALUES 
Variable 
Parameter 
Other Parameter Values 
λp 
(E[XP])LOW=0.1, (E[XP])HIGH=0.3, E[NS]=4 
E[Xp] 
(λp)LOW=1, (λp)HIGH=1.5, E[NS]=4 
E[NS] 
(λp)LOW=2.0, 
(λp)HIGH=2.5, 
(E[XP])LOW=0.1, 
(E[XP])HIGH=0.3 
 
We have randomly assigned either (E[Xp])HIGH or 
(E[Xp])LOW values in all 30 channels, while keeping E[NS]=4. 
Increasing λp, increases the frequency of spectrum holes but 
with reduced duration of each. From Figure 7, we observe 
that (i) up to λp≤2.8, the number of IP handoffs increases, (ii) 
for 0.1≤λp≤2.2, all IP handoffs complete successfully due to 
sufficiently large spectrum holes. As a result, the throughput 
of the SU is reduced due to the lengthy handoff operation of 
Simulation Parameter Values MIPv6 as shown in Figure 8. 
For 2.2˂λp≤2.8, only few IP handoffs were not completed 
due to the small duration of the spectrum holes. As a result, 
there was not such a drastic degradation in the throughput of 
the SUs as shown in Figure 8. But, for λp>2.8, the spectrum 
holes became very small. So, the SUs could not get the 
opportunity to perform spectrum handoff as well as IP 
handoff for most of the time. In this case, SUs cycle between 
pause and channel sensing phases (Figure 2), thereby 
reducing the throughput performance of the SUs drastically 
(Figure 8). 
For λp≤2.2, the MRU strategy performs better than LFU 
and GDY strategies (Figure 8) because the MRU strategy 
always finds the freest channel, i.e., the SU can use the 
channel for a long time without needing to perform frequent 
IP handoffs. But that is not true for the other two strategies. 
However, for the range λp>2.2, the spectrum hole duration 
becomes very small and is consumed by the MIPv6 handoff 
procedure in all the three spectrum selection strategies. In 
this case, since MRU always selects the longest spectrum 
hole, it wastes more time than the other two strategies. For 
0.1≤E[Xp]≤0.4, the number of IP handoffs was increasing. In 
particular, for 0.1≤E[Xp] ≤0.3, all IP handoffs were 
completed successfully leading to throughput degradation 
due to lengthy MIPv6 handoff operation (Figure 9). But, for 
0.3<E[Xp]≤0.4, most of the IP handoffs were incomplete. As 
a result, the throughput of the SUs dropped quickly (Figure 
9). Also, for E[Xp]>0.4, the number of IP handoffs was 
reduced because the SUs were mostly cycling between 
channel sensing and pause phases (Figure 2). As a result, the 
throughput of the SUs degraded sharply (Figure 9). 
Figure 7.  Variation of IP handoff with PU arrival rate 
Figure 8.   Effect of PU arrival rate on throughput of SU 
Figure 9.   Impact of PU service time on throughput of SU 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our study reveals that MIPv6 cannot work properly in 
CR networks due to high values of RA interval, lifetime 
period of CoA, and DAD period – especially when the 
spectrum holes are becoming smaller. So, the values for 
these parameters must be reduced to appropriate levels for 
use in CR environment. We have also analyzed the number 
of IP handoffs resulting from spectrum mobility in the 
absence of spatial mobility. Those results indicate that, 
unless the afore-mentioned parameters are properly tuned, 
the number of IP handoffs escalates with increase in the 
number 
of 
spectrum 
handoffs, 
resulting 
in 
severe 
degradation of data throughput. Also, the throughput of an 
SU (irrespective of the GDY, MRU or LFU strategy used) 
depends upon various values of the PU arrival rate and the 
PU service time. For lower values of these traffic parameters, 
MRU and LFU have better performance than GDY has; but, 
for higher values of the traffic parameters, GDY is better 
than MRU and LFU. So, in dynamic spectrum availability 
scenario, designing an adaptive spectrum selection strategy 
would be a good approach to enhance the overall throughput 
of the SU. Thus, in effect, our analyses clearly indicate that 
more research efforts are needed to optimize MIPv6 before it 
is used in CR networks. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
FCC, 
ET 
Docket 
No 
03-222, 
2003, 
Retrieved 
from 
http://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~liu/289I/Material/FCC-03-322A1.pdf, 
January, 2016. 
[2] 
J. Xiao, R. Q. Hu, Y. Qian, L. Gong, and B. Wang, “Expanding LTE 
network spectrum with cognitive radios: From concept to 
implementation”, IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 2, 
April 2013, pp. 12-19.  
[3] 
B. Sayrac, H. Uryga, W. Bocquet, P. Cordier, and S. Grimoud, 
“Cognitive radio systems specific for IMT systems: Operator’s view 
and perspectives”, Telecommunication Policy, vol. 37, March-April 
2013, pp. 154-166. 
[4] 
I. Christian, S. Moh, I. Chung, and J. Lee, “Spectrum mobility in 
cognitive radio networks”, IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 50, 
June 2012, pp. 114 – 121.  
[5] 
K. -C. Chen, Y. -J. Peng, N. Prasad, Y.-C. Liang, and S. Sun, 
“Cognitive radio network architecture: part I -general structure”, 
Proc. Intl conf Ubiquitous Information Management and Commun, 
January 2008, pp. 114-119. 
[6] 
K.-C. Chen, Y.-J. Peng, N. Prasad, Y.-C. Liang, and S. Sun, 
“Cognitive radio network architecture: part II - trusted network layer 
structure”, Proc. Intl conf Ubiquitous Info Mngmnt and Commun, 
January 2008, pp. 120-124. 
[7] 
M. Kataoka, T. Ishikawa, S. Hanaoka, M. Yano, and S. Nishimura, 
“Evaluation of inter base station handover for cognitive radio”, 
Proceeding on IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium, January 2008, 
pp. 251-254. 
[8] 
J. F. Weng, B. H. Ku, J. C. Chen, and W. T. Chen, “Channel holding 
time of packet sessions in all-IP cellular networks”, Proc. IEEE 
ICPADS, December 2014, pp. 404-411. 
[9] 
C. Perkins, D. Johnson, and J. Arkko, “Mobility support in IPv6”, 
RFC 6275, IETF, 2011. 
[10] J. S. Lee, S. J. Koh, and S. -H. Kim, “Analysis of handoff delay for 
Mobile IPv6”, Proc. IEEE VTC, vol. 4, September 2004, pp. 2967-
2969. 
[11] L.-C. Wang, C.-W. Wang, and C.-J. Chang, “Optimal target channel 
sequence for multiple spectrum handoffs in cognitive radio 
networks”, IEEE Transactions on Communication”, vol. 60, 
September 2012, pp. 2444-2455. 
[12] L.-C. Wang, C.-W. Wang, and C.-J. Chang, “Modeling and Analysis 
for Spectrum Handoffs in Cognitive Radio Networks”, IEEE 
Transactions on Mobile Computing”, vol. 11, July 2012, pp. 1499-
1513. 
[13] Network 
simulator 
(ns), 
version 
3, 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.nsnam.org/, January 2016. 
[14] R. Southwell, J. Huang, and X. Liu, “Spectrum mobility games”, 
INFOCOM, 2012 Proceedings IEEE, March 2012, pp. 37-45. 
[15] Y. –S. Chen, C. -H. Cho, I. You, and H. -C. Chao, “A cross-layer 
protocol of spectrum mobility and handover in cognitive LTE 
networks”, Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, vol. 19, 
September 2011, pp. 1723-1744. 
[16] J. Sztrik, “Basic queueing theory”, University of Debrecen, Faculty of 
Informatics, 2011. 
[17] C. –W. Wang, L. –C. Wang, and Adachi F., “Modeling and Analysis 
for Reactive-Decision Spectrum Handoff in Cognitive Radio 
Networks”, Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference 
(GLOBECOM 2010), December 2010, pp. 1-6. 
[18] S. –U. Yoon, and E. Ekici, “Voluntary Spectrum Handoff: A Novel 
Approach to Spectrum Management in CRNs”, IEEE International 
Conference on Communications (ICC), May 2010, pp. 1-5, 23-27.  
[19] G. Yuan, R. C. G.rammenos, Y. Yang, and W. Wang, “Performance 
Analysis of Selective Opportunistic Spectrum Access With Traffic 
Prediction”, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 59, no. 
4, May 2010, pp. 1949-1959. 
[20] ETSI, “Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS): 
Selection Procedures for the Choice of Radio Transmission 
Technologies of the UMTS”, Technical Report UMTS 30.03, version 
3.2.0, April 1998. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

