Citizens Broadband Radio Service Spectrum Sharing Framework - A Path to New 
Business Opportunity for Mobile Network Operators? 
Seppo Yrjölä 
Nokia Networks 
Oulu, Finland 
email: seppo.yrjola@nokia.com
 
 
Abstract—The paper seeks to identify mobile network 
operators’ business opportunities in the new Citizens 
Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) shared spectrum access 
framework. More flexible and scalable use of the 3.5GHz 
spectrum aims to increase the efficiency of spectrum use in 
delivering fast growing and converging mobile broadband and 
media services while paving way to new innovations, e.g., in the 
area of Internet of Things and 5G. The opportunity analysis 
indicated that the mobile network operators could benefit 
significantly from the new, shared CBRS bands enabling to 
cope with increasing asymmetric media data traffic and to 
offer 
differentiation 
through 
improved 
quality 
and 
personalization of services. Heterogeneous network assets 
leveraging 3GPP LTE evolution were found to be the key 
enabler while regulatory actions may frame the availability of 
spectrum and limit the economic value for an operator. The 
concept of co-opetition was found useful to characterize the 
business environment regarding CBRS spectrum sharing.  
Keywords-business opportunity; mobile network operator; 
mobile broadband; cognitive radio; Citizens Broadband Radio 
Service. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We have witnessed the rapid growth of wireless services 
with a large range of diverse devices, applications and 
services requiring connectivity. The number of mobile 
broadband (MBB) data subscribers, connected ‘things’ and 
the amount of data used per user is set to grow significantly 
[1] leading to increasing spectrum demand. The US 
President’s Council of Advanced Science & Technology 
(PCAST) report [2] emphasized the need for novel thinking 
within wireless industry to meet the growing spectrum crisis 
in spectrum allocation, utilization and management. The 
essential role of spectrum sharing and dynamic spectrum 
access were underlined to find a balance between the 
different systems and services with their different spectrum 
requirements and system dynamics. For any spectrum 
sharing framework, where several radio systems operate in 
the same spectrum to be a feasible and attractive, early 
cooperation across regulation, business and technology 
domains is essential. Collaboration in the technology and 
innovation domain between industry and research enables 
validation of the enabling technologies and new concepts 
while ensuring economies of scale and scope in 
implementation. Furthermore, regulation has a key enabler 
role through spectrum harmonization and providing 
incentives for early adopter while on the other hand defines 
limiting factors and competition framework. The spectrum 
regulation has played central role in the wireless ecosystems 
in creating current multibillion business ecosystems, for 
MBB operator businesses via exclusive Quality of Service 
(QoS) spectrum usage rights and at the same time for 
unlicensed Wi-Fi ecosystem drawing from the public 
spurring innovations. 
So far, only a subset of the spectrum sharing research has 
reached the regulation domain, the early studies on cognitive 
radio (CR) on license exempt access with intelligent user 
terminals and spectrum sensing as the general interference 
mitigation technique as one example. Furthermore, several 
spectrum sharing concepts widely studied, standardized and 
supported by national regulatory authorities (NRA) has not 
scaled up commercially as expected, TV White Space 
(TVWS) [3] and [4] being the latest example. Based on the 
decade of profound CR and in particular unlicensed TVWS 
concept studies, a couple of novel licensing based sharing 
models have recently emerged and are under regulatory 
discussion and early stage standardization, the Licensed 
Shared Access (LSA) [5] from Europe and the Citizens 
Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) 3 tier Spectrum Access 
System (SAS) from the US [6]. For these prominent 
spectrum sharing concepts currently under research, 
particularly the SAS, there is not much prior work available 
regarding their business model analysis. An initial evaluation 
of the general spectrum sharing concept from the business 
modeling point of view can be found in [7] and LSA focused 
analysis from [8] and [9]. That work is extended by focusing 
on more systemic, complex dynamic CBRS SAS sharing 
concept and analyzing the Mobile Network Operator (MNO) 
business opportunities using co-opetitive (co-operation and 
competition) business opportunity framework. This paper 
investigates: 
 
1) How can CBRS spectrum sharing be defined for 
MNOs? 
2) What are MNOs’ business enablers and opportunities 
regarding CBRS? 
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, the 
CBRS 3 tier sharing framework and the SAS models are 
presented and defined for a MNO in Section II. Theoretical 
background for co-opetitive business opportunity framework 
is introduced and elements framing business opportunities 
derived and evaluated in Section III. Finally, conclusions are 
drawn in Section IV. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

II. 
CITIZENS BROADBAND RADIO SERVICE SPECTRUM 
SHARING FRAMEWORK 
The key policy messages of the PCAST report were 
further strengthened in 2013 with Presidential Memorandum 
[10] stating that “…we must make available even more 
spectrum and create new avenues for wireless innovation. 
One means of doing so is by allowing and encouraging 
shared access to spectrum that is currently allocated 
exclusively for Federal use. Where technically and 
economically feasible, sharing can and should be used to 
enhance efficiency among all users and expedite commercial 
access to additional spectrum bands, subject to adequate 
interference protection for Federal users, we should also 
seek to eliminate restrictions on commercial carriers' ability 
to negotiate sharing arrangements with agencies. To further 
these efforts, while still safeguarding protected incumbent 
systems that are vital to Federal interests and economic 
growth, this memorandum directs agencies and offices to 
take a number of additional actions to accelerate shared 
access to spectrum.” 
Followed by intense discussion and consultation with the 
industry the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
released Report and Order and Second Further Notice of 
Proposed Rulemaking to establish new rules for shared use 
of the 3550-3650 MHz band in April 2015 [6]. The FCC sees 
the opening of the 3.5 GHz Band as “a new chapter in the 
history of the administration of one of our nation’s most 
precious resources—the electromagnetic radio spectrum.” 
The framework defines a contiguous 150 MHz block at 
3550-3700 MHz for MBB that the FCC calls Citizens 
Broadband Radio Service. The 3550-3650 MHz spectrum is 
currently allocated for use by the US Department of Defense 
(DoD) radar systems and Fixed Satellite Services (FSS) 
while the 3650-3700 MHz spectrum incumbents are the FSS 
and the grandfathered commercial wireless broadband 
services. FCC prefigures CBRS as an “innovation band” 
where they can assign spectrum to commercial MBB 
systems like the 3GPP LTE on a shared basis with 
incumbent radar and FSS systems and promote a diversity of 
Heterogonous Network (HetNet) technologies, particularly 
small cells. The sharing framework consists of three tiers: 
Incumbent Access (IA), Priority Access (PA) and General 
Authorized Access (GAA), as shown in the Figure 1. 
 
Incumbent
Access (IA)
Priority Access (PA)
General Authorized Access (GAA)
Incumbent
Access (IA)
General Authorized 
Access (GAA)
3550-3650 MHz
3650-3700 MHz
Federal radars
(naval, ground-based),
FSS earth stations
Federal radars 
(ground-based),
Grandfathered FSS
 
Figure 1.  The US CBRS 3-tiered authorization framework with the FCC’s 
spectrum access models for 3550-3650MHz and 3650-3700MHz spectrum 
segments. 
The PA users will obtain a FCC PA license (PAL) to 
operate up to 70 MHz of the 3550-3650 MHz spectrum 
segment and are protected from harmful interference from 
the GAA operations. PA layer covers critical access users 
like hospitals, utilities and governmental users and non-
critical users, e.g., MNOs. PA users receive short term 
priority 
authorization 
to 
operate 
within 
designated 
geographic areas with PALs such as 3 year 10 MHz unpaired 
channel in a single census track, awarded with competitive 
bidding. During the first application window only, an 
applicant may apply for up to two consecutive three-year 
terms for any given PAL. Licenses will be permitted to hold 
no more than four PALs in one census tract at one time. This 
will ensure availability of PAL spectrum to at least two 
licensed users in the geographic areas of highest demand. 
PALs are assigned specific frequencies within their service 
area, and their frequency assignment should not be 
dynamically controlled by the SAS database. At the end of 
its term, a PAL will automatically terminate and may not be 
renewed.  
The third GAA tier will operate under a licensed-by-rule 
framework and will be allowed throughout the 150 MHz 
band without any interference protection from other CBRS 
users. This framework aims to facilitate the rapid 
deployment of compliant small cell devices while 
minimizing administrative costs and burdens on the public, 
licensees, and the FCC. GAA users may use only certified, 
Commission approved CBRS devices and must register with 
the SAS with information required by the rules, e.g., operator 
ID, device identification, and geo-location information. 
CBRS Devices (CBSDs) which are fixed stations, or 
networks of such stations will be assigned spectrum 
dynamically by the FCC selected SAS which could be 
multiple. User equipments, e.g., handsets are not considered 
as CBSDs. SAS controls the interference environment and 
enforces exclusion zones to protect higher priority users as 
well as takes care of registration, authentication and 
identification of user information. As the IA users have 
primary spectrum rights at all times and in all areas over PA 
and GAA, all the CBRS users must be capable of operating 
across the entire 3.5 GHz band and discontinuing operation 
or changing frequencies at the direction of the SAS to protect 
IA. Automated channel assignment by a SAS will simply 
involve instructions to these users to use a specific channel, 
at a specific place and time, within 3550-3700MHz. 
It will be mandatory for all the CBRS users to protect the 
IA users in the band. Based on nature and critical 
requirements of the federal incumbent the FCC adopted rules 
to require Environmental Sensing Capabilities (ESCs) to 
detect federal spectrum use in and adjacent to the 3.5 GHz 
the band. The federal IA user protection will be adopted in 2 
phases. In the first phase, a large portion of the country 
outside the static exclusion zones will be available after SAS 
is commercially available and FCC approved, at the second 
phase, the rest of the country, including major coastal areas, 
will become available as exclusion zones will be converted 
to protection zones through the ESC system detecting federal 
incumbent use. The SAS receives input from ESCs and if 
needed, could order commercial tier users to vacate a 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

spectrum resource in frequency, location, or time which 
when in proximity to federal incumbent presents a risk of 
harmful interference. Prospective ESC operators must have 
their systems approved through the same process for SASs 
and SAS administrators. An ESC consists of one or more 
commercially operated networks of device-based or 
infrastructure-based sensors that would be used to detect 
signals from federal radar systems in the vicinity of the 
exclusion zones. Within 60 seconds after the ESC 
communication of a detected federal system signal, the SAS 
must either confirm suspension or relocation of operations to 
another unoccupied frequency. 
The opportunistic GAA with no interference protection 
from other CBRS users is planned to provide a low-cost 
entry point into the CBRS band for a wide array of users and 
services first while PAL system operations have to wait 
auction process estimated to start after the US 600 MHz 
incentive auctions targeted for 2016. For the meanwhile, the 
FCC has encouraged multi-stakeholder groups to consider 
various issues raised by the rules. The Wireless Innovation 
Forum (WINNF) Spectrum Sharing Committee [11] with 
representatives from the MBB, Wireless broadband, Internet, 
Internet of Things (IoT) / machine to machine (m2m) and 
defense ecosystems has started initial standardization work 
on interfaces between a MBB system and a SAS work 
targeted to allow sharing of the CBRS within 2016. The US 
Government has initially identified an additional 2 GHz of 
spectrum below 6GHz owned by DoD and other users for 
future shared commercial use conditionally if the spectrum 
sharing at 3.5 GHz proves successful. This paves way to 
make licensed spectrum sharing a third mainstream way of 
licensing spectrum to commercial users complementing 
traditional exclusive licensing and unlicensed spectrum 
access. The FCC has vision to repeat WiFi success through 
lowering the entry barrier QoS spectrum for new entrants 
and verticals, e.g., enterprise, utilities, healthcare, public 
safety, smart cities, etc. 
III. 
BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES OF CBRS FOR MNOS 
A. Co-opetitive business opportunity framework 
In this section, we analyze the business opportunities of 
CBRS for MNOs. An entrepreneurial opportunity can be 
defined as the possibility to serve customers better and 
differently [12] framed by enablers, limiting factors as well 
as challenges caused by the business context. In the CBRS 
context, business opportunities are made to create and 
deliver value for the stakeholders, value that is co-created 
among various actors from MBB, wireless and incumbent 
ecosystems as a joint effort. An equally important aspect is 
the ability of the stakeholders to capture value, i.e., obtain 
profits [13], which in the context of this study can be called 
value co-capture. Furthermore, value co-creation can be seen 
as a cooperative and the parallel value co-capture as a 
competitive process [14]. The third term co-opetition 
illustrates the increased system complexity of the CBRS 
business environment, where companies simultaneously 
compete and cooperate with each other not only over 
spectrum but also over customers. Figure 2 below depicts the 
framework used in this paper to develop and frame the 
business opportunities for MNOs. 
 
Value
Co-capture
Value
Co-creation
Value
Co-opetition
Enablers
CBRS 
business 
opportunity
 
Figure 2.  The Co-opetitive business opportunity framework 
B. Analysis of the business opportunities 
In the analysis for the business opportunity elements of 
the CBRS, five key ecosystem roles are identified: the 
national regulator authority, federal incumbent, MNOs, SAS 
administrator, 
infrastructure 
vendors 
and 
device/chip 
manufactures. In the systemic framework change like CBRS, 
all the stakeholders play a vital role in adopting of novel 
CBRS concept and spectrum sharing in general. In addition 
when developing and analyzing the opportunity frame 
authors argue that three domains; regulation, business, and 
technology, affecting spectrum sharing concept should 
proceed in tandem. Enabling, limiting and challenging 
elements framing the business opportunities for the MNO are 
next discussed and listed in Table 1. 
Business and technology elements can be identified as 
enablers for value co-creation. Fast growing demand and 
lack of exclusive spectrum combined with the drastic 
changes in the consumption habits will urge the adoption of 
novel more flexible and efficient spectrum management 
concepts. Framework radically unbundles investment in 
spectrum, network infrastructure and services, which enables 
novel services and business models. Furthermore, different 
spectrum sharing schemes are high in regulators agenda with 
aims to lower the entry barrier to spectrum for new 
alternative types of operators which could consider entering 
the wireless broadband business. Utilization of the LTE 
ecosystem scale and harmonization will reduce risk related 
technology maturity and provide tools to seamlessly 
integrate additional capacity to MNOs HetNet, e.g., through 
Carrier Aggregation (CA) [15], LTE Unlicensed (LAA) [16] 
and Self Organizing Network (SON) [17] technologies. Big 
data analytics capabilities will play a major role in coping 
with the SAS dynamic requirements and enabling low 
transaction costs.  
Regarding limiting factors, sound, sustainable and 
harmonized regulatory environment can be the limiter that 
needs to be addressed before MNO can co-create and co-
capture value from it with ecosystem partners. The limited 
spectrum availability in frequency, time or location with 
potential restriction and uncertainties may negatively 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

influence the MNOs outlook on shared use and the spectrum 
valuation. A specific technology item to be considered is the 
degree of business (MNOs) and mission (DoD) critical 
information needed to share and resulting need for the ESC 
system. In addition to MNO opportunities, it is essential to 
consider reciprocal incentives for the current federal 
spectrum holders to further transition to CBRS.  
Policy risk and uncertainty are the main elements of the 
co-opetitive 
challenges 
in 
the 
competitive 
domain. 
Fragmented national and global market structure deprives 
economies of scale and scope, raising costs and hampering 
innovation in the ecosystem. Furthermore, introduction of 
sharing models may influence the MNOs current exclusive 
spectrum licensing model and availability in the future. The 
regulatory approach and in particular the 3-tier concept could 
unbundle investment in spectrum, network infrastructure and 
services. Faster access to spectrum with lower initial 
investment (annuity payments for spectrum rights) enables 
local ‘pro-competitive’ deployments and further expands 
sharing mechanism for pooling spectrum and infra resources 
between operators. At the same time, the complexity of the 
CBRS framework and the SAS might influence the value of 
the spectrum and the required time of recovering the network 
investments. On the competence domain, MNOs need to pay 
attention to dynamic capabilities needed to deploy, manage 
and optimize multilayered HetNets under sharing conditions. 
Traditional MNOs support for the 3.5GHz spectrum in their 
networks is paramount to encourage chip and device 
manufacturers to support the whole 3.5GHz band 
introduction with competitive terminals. Attractive and 
dynamic spectrum market with potentially lower transaction 
costs may increase and change competition, e.g., through 
introducing new and alternative operator types locally and 
from other business domains. 
TABLE I.  
ELEMENTS FRAMING BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES 
 
Business opportunity framing elements 
Enablers 
 Lack of exclusive spectrum triggers new spectrum access approaches 
 Consumers MBB consumption habits are changing towards asymmetric multi-device usage 
 Shared spectrum allocation improves overall spectrum use efficiency 
 Regulators considering shared spectrum framework in the EU and the US 
 Unbundles investment in spectrum, network infrastructure and services 
 Additional lower cost capacity to cope with asymmetric traffic and improve performance 
 Better QoS spectrum may increase dense urban area business 
 Additional GAA capacity for offloading 
 May lower entry barriers for challenger MNOs and new alternative type of operators 
 Harmonized LTE technology base leverage HetNet asset optimization and offers scale 
 Big data and analytics capabilities with Internet domain 
Limiters 
 Limited spectrum availability and predictability limit MNO business opportunities 
 Need for global and national regulation outside of the US may slow down entry - Harmonization 
is a precondition to scale and enable potential benefit fully. 
 Real incentives for the federal incumbents unclear or missing 
 Federal incumbent special requirements in particular related to security and need for sensing  
 Regulatory framework restrictions may reduce the economic value 
 Degree of information sharing of business critical (MNOs) and secret information (Federal 
incumbent) and needed ESC system 
 Standardization of SAS functionalities for 3GPP ecosystem and technologies needed 
Challenges 
 Uncertainty and risks related to regulation in timing, term, licenses and flexibility creates 
exposure and risk for a MNO to proceed with the investment. 
 Impact on exclusive spectrum licensing model and availability in the future  
 Attractive and dynamic spectrum market with potentially lower transaction costs. 
 May increase and change competition. New operator types, and from other business domains. 
 Increased technical and operational complexity (SAS) with related capital and operational costs 
 New competencies and capabilities needed for network management and optimization 
 Timely availability of full band base stations and terminals and potential impact on cost and 
complexity 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

In summary, in order to realize the business potential of 
the CBRS, MNOs have occasion to simultaneously co-create 
and co-capture value with ecosystem players in a co-
opetitive 
business 
environment 
where 
co-operation 
(spectrum) and competition (customers & services) exist 
parallel to each other. MNOs are in unique position to 
leverage additional multi-tiered capacity CBRS concept 
offers. Faster access to QoS licensed small cell optimized 
spectrum without mandatory coverage obligations will help 
them to timely cope with booming asymmetric data needs. 
Additional scalable and flexible spectrum resource leveraged 
with LTE technology enablers will enable MNOs to better 
retain and grow existing customer base with changing 
demand and consumer habits, offer differentiating services 
and explore new vertical segments. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
This paper discussed the transformative role of the novel 
Citizen Broadband Radio Service framework in the future 
mobile broadband networks as an endeavor to meet the 
growing 
traffic 
demand 
and 
changing 
consumption 
characteristics of the customers while paving the way to 
make licensed spectrum sharing a third mainstream way of 
licensing spectrum to commercial users complementing 
traditional exclusive licensing and unlicensed spectrum 
access. We utilized co-opetitive business opportunity 
framework for understanding mobile network operator’s 
enablers and opportunities and how they are framed from 
policy, technology, and business perspectives in the future, 
CBRS shared spectrum networks. 
We argue that policy and regulation will be on the one 
hand the key enabler in the path toward shared spectrum 
access and on the other hand will play key role in removing 
limiting and challenging elements critical in the first steps of 
that path. In particular, the sharing framework for the priority 
access licenses should be attractive and feasible to encourage 
mobile broadband industry to invest which could lower the 
barrier for change and furthermore create economies of scale 
across tiers and for the whole ecosystem.  
More flexible and scalable use of the spectrum aims to 
increase the efficiency of spectrum use in delivering fast 
growing and converging mobile broadband, media and 
Internet content to meet changing consumer needs. The 
proposed opportunities enable mobile network operators to 
retain existing customers, acquire new customers and 
strengthen overall market position by offering improved 
personalized mobile broadband data services timely. 
Furthermore, through unbundling investment in spectrum, 
network infrastructure and services co-operative business 
opportunities may open with vertical segments, new 
alternative operator types and the internet domain. 
Mobile operators are optimally positioned towards these 
business opportunities in parallel with their traditional 
business model leveraging technology enablers from mobile 
broadband 3GPP LTE evolution and big data analytics while 
waiting for the more optimized cognitive 5G solutions. 
This paper serves as a starting point for analyzing the 
business enablers, opportunities and business environment 
around CBRS. We saw that the concept of co-opetition could 
be used to characterize the business environment regarding 
spectrum sharing. However, future work is needed to expand 
research to cover also other key stakeholders and to dwell 
deeper into the framework of value co-creation, co-capture 
and co-opetition for identifying MNOs’ business models and 
ecosystem relations in the new CBRS concept and in the 
third opportunistic GAA layer in particular. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work is supported by Tekes – the Finnish Funding 
Agency for Technology and Innovation. The authors would 
like to acknowledge CORE++ project consortium: VTT, 
University of Oulu, Centria University of Applied Sciences, 
Turku University of Applied Sciences, Nokia, PehuTec, 
Elektrobit, Anite, Finnish Defence Forces and FICORA. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Cisco white paper: Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global 
Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2014–2019. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-
provider/visual-networking-index-vni/white_paper_c11-
520862.html [retrieved: 2015.12.04] 
[2] The White House: Realizing the Full Potential of 
Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth. 
President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology 
(PCAST) Report, 2012. 
[3] FCC: 
White 
Spaces. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.fcc.gov/topic/white-space [retrieved: 2015.12.04] 
[4] Ofcom: TV White Spaces Pilot. [Online]. Available from:  
http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/spectrum/tv-white-
spaces/white-spaces-pilot/ [retrieved: 2015.12.04] 
[5] ECC: Licensed Shared Access (LSA). ECC Report 205, 2014. 
[6] FCC: Report and Order and second FNPRM to advance 
availability of 3550-3700 MHz band for wireless broadband, 
2015. 
[7] J. Chapin and W. Lehr, “Cognitive radios for dynamic 
spectrum access – The path to market success for dynamic 
spectrum access technology,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 45, 
no. 5, 2007, pp. 96-103.  
[8] M. Matinmikko et al., “Business benefits of Licensed Shared 
Access (LSA) for key stakeholders,” In O. Holland, H. 
Bogucka & A. Medeisis (eds.) Opportunistic Spectrum 
Sharing and White Space Access: The Practical Reality. John 
Wiley & Sons, 2015. 
[9] P. Ahokangas, M. Matinmikko, S. Yrjölä, H. Okkonen, and T. 
Casey, “ "Simple rules" for mobile network operators' 
strategic choices in future cognitive spectrum sharing 
networks,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol.20, no.2, 
2013, pp. 20-26. 
[10] The White House: Expanding America’s Leadership in 
Wireless Innovation. Presidential Memorandum, 2013. 
[11] WINNF Spectrum Sharing Committee. [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.wirelessinnovation.org/spectrum-sharing-
committee [retrieved: 2015.12.04] 
[12] D.Hansen, R. Shrader, and J. Monllor, “Defragmenting 
Definitions of Entrepreneurial Opportunity, Journal of Small 
Business Mgmnt,” vol 49, Iss. 2, 2011, pp. 283-304. 
[13] J. West, “Value Capture and Value Networks in open source 
vendor strategies,” In: Proc. of the 40th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 2007. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

[14] A. Brandenburger and B. Nalebuff, “Co-opetition,” New 
York: Doubleday, 1998. 
[15] 3GPP: Technical report TR 36.808: Evolved Universal 
Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Carrier Aggregation; 
Base Station (BS) radio transmission and reception,” 2012. 
[16] 3GPP: Study on Licensed-Assisted Access using LTE. RP-
141646, 2014. 
[17] 3GPP: Telecommunication management; Principles and high 
level requirement. 3GPP TS 32.101 V12.0.0 [Rel-12], 2014.
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

