Muhammad Adnan Qureshi, Muhammad Umar Khan, Mahmood Ashraf Khan 
Centre for Advanced Studies in Telecommunication (CAST), COMSATS  
Islamabad, Pakistan 
{muhammad_adnan , umar_khan, mahmoodashraf}@comsats.edu.pk 
Emerging Applications of Cognitive Radios  
 
 
 
Abstract— As per recent Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC) report, it has been observed that licensed spectrum 
bands are not being fully utilized by licensed users. Instead of 
exploring new spectrum bands at higher Giga hertz range, 
white spaces in existing frequency bands can be utilized for 
communication. 
Recently, 
cognitive 
radios 
have 
been 
introduced as being capable of increasing the spectral 
efficiency by opportunistically access both the licensed and 
unlicensed spectrum bands. In this literature, we have targeted 
some important applications of cognitive radios and surveyed 
the challenges facing by cognitive users in these applications. 
Keywords- cognitive radios; cognitive radio applications; CR 
emerging application 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Cognitive radios are one of the computer-intensive 
systems which are also called to be “radio with a computer 
inside or a computer that transmits” [1]. Due to increasing 
use of wireless systems and scarce of the conventional static 
spectrum, policies have been formulated for unlicensed 
wireless 
devices 
by 
the 
Federal 
Communications 
Commission to opportunistically use spectrum holes in 
licensed bands, most importantly, the void spectrum spaces 
of TV band spectrum [2]. The expanding Cognitive Radio 
(CR) technology has proved itself a reliable technique of 
enhancing the spectral efficiency by employing the features 
of time, frequency, and space domains having harmless 
interference with previous systems.  
The CR technology has equipped wireless radios and has 
given them a new dimension, they have the capacity to alter 
and modify several parameters to work with more 
intelligence and take decisions [3]. Cognitive radios are fully 
capable of choosing its own frequency in bandwidth rather 
than using predefined channels in accordance with the 
spectrum and network needs at hand. CRs are capable of 
cooperating very efficiently towards the possible use of the 
frequency band, as well with the presence of several 
cognitive radios and old system, non-cognitive, radios. 
CR technology plays a major part in coming up with the 
appropriate use of the limited frequency band. It turns to help 
in contributing the ever increasing facilities for growing 
wireless appliances, like the TV spectrum through a smart 
grid, citizen safety, GSM network and body area network 
band for medical equipment. To take greater advantage of 
newly born opportunities, several standards, like “IEEE 
802.22, IEEE 802.11af, ECMA 392, IEEE SCC41, and ETSI 
RRS)” are either in the development phase or are being 
finalized [7]. CR technology can use both licensed and 
unlicensed frequency bands for communication. The 
FM/AM, TV, GSM and satellite band spectrum, HAP 
control spectrums are a few examples of licensed frequency 
bands. License holder has the power to control the given 
spectrum; therefore he can independently monitor and 
control noise factors present in the way of user equipment to 
ultimately achieve the quality of service (QoS).  
Improvement in overall spectrum utilization for cognitive 
radios is achieved through active adjustment and adaptation 
to localized band availability [8].  It equips the secondary 
users (unlicensed users) to utilize the unused frequency band 
possessed by the primary users (licensed users) in the 
interference range which is below a certain threshold level. 
The Cognition Cycle (CC) plays a central role in making 
each SU to observe and learn, and will help to make the right 
decision at the right time for optimal performance of the 
network or close to optimal at all time. In particular, the 
network wide performance is significantly enhanced because 
of the cognition cycle as it enables the secondary users to use 
under-utilized spectrum opportunistically while maintaining 
the interference levels to a minimum for primary users. 
In recent years, many advancements in CR technology 
have been evolved, for example, in addition to the licensed 
frequency band the unlicensed portions of the spectrum has 
also been reserved which could be used without any license 
by radios following a predefined set of rules. There can be a 
number of parameters to define that rule, one of that might 
be maximum power radiated per hertz (power spectral 
density) [6]. The prime advantage of utilizing the unlicensed 
spectrum is twofold, first to minimize the cost of purchasing 
licensed bands through auctioning which ultimately builds 
the burden on consumer end and hence the use of technology 
is finally discouraged. The other big gain is that it promotes 
innovation as the designers have the inherent constraint to 
use the same band for their cognitive radio architectures. 
These unlicensed bands have been shown to play an 
important role in wireless communications. This is reflected 
in the 2.4 GHz unlicensed systems such as Bluetooth, 
cordless phones and Wi-Fi-802.11b/g/n. Despite all the 
benefits of unlicensed bands, there is a limit to which we can 
further use them as if all the devices start using these bands 
then there would be too much interference that no 
communication would be possible. 
Cognitive radios can be categorized into three main 
network paradigms: underlay, overlay, and interweave [6]. 
In case of underlay network paradigm, cognitive users are 
only allowed to operate if and only if the level of 
interference caused towards non-cognitive users is below a 
threshold. In overlay systems, cognitive radio uses excellent 
signal processing and coding to maintain or improve the 
communication of non-cognitive radios and at the same time 
get some extra bandwidth for their own communications. 
Finally, for interwoven systems, cognitive radio uses 
cunning 
strategy 
for 
exploiting 
spectral 
holes 
opportunistically 
without 
interfering 
with 
other 
transmissions. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

The paper is structured as follows; Section II will cover 
the trending applications of cognitive radios and it is the core 
section of the paper. The applications which have been 
covered are; application of cognitive radios in wifi scenario, 
TV band devices, wireless broadband access, medical body 
area networks, smart grid networks, cellular networks, 
military applications and public safety networks. Finally, at 
the end, Section III will draw the paper conclusion. 
II. 
COGNITIVE RADIO APPLICATION AREAS 
Even though there is sound assurance of the fact that 
cognitive radio is an intelligent, smart and self-conscious  
technology, a variety of other interesting applications are 
also sprouting up stretching from commercial to health 
related; from Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA) to 
interoperability applications towards the concept  of  
universal transportable devices. However, the most preferred 
and favorite for technology developers right now is Dynamic 
Spectrum Access (DSA) and they see it as an extremely 
important application of CR technology [5]. 
 
A. Improvement in Spectrum Utilization for Wifi 
CR techniques provide an appealing as well as 
fascinating strategy to dynamic spectrum allocation (DSA) 
[5]. As shown in Figure 1 a surprisingly simple and 
straightforward scenario exhibits 20 dB SINR betterment for 
wireless LAN (WLAN) employing cognitive radio strategies 
in an interference atmosphere setup over that offered by the 
existing IEEE 802.11a physical layer standard. 
The experiment [5] narrows down to the license-free 
band 5.8 GHz ISM (industrial, scientific, and medical) to 
make the assessment of technique effectiveness with 
reference to frequency-band utilization of IEEE 802.11a/g 
PHY- layer with the CR model of such a WLAN radio. 
Through the proposed experimental setup, a typical 
standardized OFDM physical layer of 802.11a/g WLAN was 
developed and afterwards simulation was successfully done 
to assess the exploitation of the spectrum for both the cases; 
fixed channel assignment strategy vs dynamic spectrum 
allocation technique based on cognitive radio concept. It can 
be considered as the simplest application of cognitive radios. 
 
 
Fig. 1.  Enhancement of SINR relating to standard technique and CR 
B. TV Band Devices 
The TV band devices (TVBDs) can be classified into two 
main categories: fixed and portable [7]. Maximum power 
radiated by Fixed TVBDs is not greater than 4W; possessing 
PSD of 16.7 mW/100 kHz from a fixed pre identified 
location.  They're expected to either use geo location 
functionality or be appropriately setup in a predefined never 
moving spot and possess the ability to extract a summary of 
accessible channels from an authorized list of channel bank. 
Frequency channels which are permitted to be used for fixed 
TVBDs cannot exist adjacent to primary user operating 
channels ranging from channels between 2 and 51 apart from 
channels 3, 4 and 37 which are an exception case. In case of 
portable TVBDs, they are allowed to use channels between 
21 and 51 excluding channel 37 and maximum power 
constraint for radiation is set to be 100 mW with the power 
spectral density of 1.67 mW/100 kHz in non-adjacent 
frequency channels while PSD constraint for adjacent 
frequency channels is 0.7 mW/100 kHz. Portable devices are 
furthermore divided into two additional modes of operation: 
mode-I and mode-II. Mode-I devices don't require geo 
location functionality or permission to access a database. 
Mode II devices require geo location functionality as well as 
the way to approach a database for listing of accessible 
channels. 
A sensing-only device is some type of handheld TVBD, 
which makes use of RF spectrum detection to acquire and 
pull out a listing of accessible television stations. The 
sensing-only equipment like the one mentioned will be able 
to broadcast on any number of readily accessible channels 
within the band of frequencies ranging from 512-608 MHz 
(corresponding TV channels 21-36) and 614-698 MHz 
(corresponding TV channels 38-51), and generally are 
limited to an utmost transmission power of 50 mW with a 
power spectral density of 0.83 mW/100 kHz on non-adjacent 
channels and 40 mW with a power spectral density of 0.7 
mW/100 kHz on adjoining channels [7]. Aside from that, a 
sensing-only device is required to make sure with an 
exceptionally higher level of assurance that it will not 
contribute to local radio transmissions of the primary users. 
The necessary power levels for detecting the signals are: 
NTSC Analog TV: -114 dBm, mean value across a 100 kHz 
frequency band; ATSC digital TV: -114 dBm, mean value 
across a 6MHz frequency band; Low power wireless 
microphone signals: -107 dBm, mean value across a 200 kHz 
frequency band. A TVBD might start working over a TV 
station when there is no TV; it takes only a time period of 30 
seconds to identify the cordless microphone as well as any 
other below average power auxiliary equipment transmitting 
signals over the threshold range. A TVBD is required to 
accomplish in service supervision of the working station at 
the very least one time after every 60 seconds period. All 
transmissions are brought to a halt as soon as the TV, a 
cordless microphone or similar lower power auxiliary gadget 
signal is detected over the TVBD in service channel. 
 
 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

 
 
       TABLE 1.  PARAMETERS & APPLICATIONS 
 
 
Channels 
Fixed device 
Sensing only 
Channels ranging from 2 to 51 
except 3, 4 and 37.  
Only Non-adjoining channels  
Channels 21 to 
51 excluding 37 
Power 
constraints 
4 W 
50 mW 
Prospective 
applications 
of CR 
Cellular backhaul (base station, 
relay stations), Smart grid stations 
 
Public safety, 
Femto-cell 
 
C. Wireless Broadband access in TV bands 
 
 Cognitive Radio (CR), a present day technology has 
already been prevailed as a central framework in increasing 
wireless access methods, including the IEEE 802.22 also 
known as  Wireless Regional Area Networks (WRANs) [2].  
An excellent utilization of IEEE 802.22 is the wireless 
broadband internet connection in non-urban as well as far off 
areas, offering results are very much similar to existing 
broadband access systems such as cable modems and digital 
subscriber line (DSL). WRAN networks are expected to take 
advantage of the infrequently employed ultra high frequency 
(UHF) TV band spectrum, providing wireless solutions 
including data, speech, and video traffic maintaining 
satisfying levels of quality of service (QoS). 
D. Medical Body Area Netwroks  
In the past few years we have seen accelerating curiosity 
pertaining to supervision of medical patients in hospitals for 
crucial indicators such as human body temperature, blood 
oxygen, blood pressure, and ECG. Generally most of these 
vitals are supervised by on-body receptors which are then 
hooked up to cable connections to a bedroom screen. The 
MBAN is an appealing substitute for getting rid of these 
electrical wires, consequently enabling sensors to easily and 
reasonably obtain a number of needed parameters 
immediately and communicate the observing details 
wirelessly which would mean that doctors can react 
exponentially fast. 
Typically, the 2.4 GHz ISM frequency spectrum is not 
well suited for life-critical healthcare systems because of the 
interference and bottleneck caused by wireless IT systems’ 
medical facilities. By making use of 2360 to 2400 MHz 
frequency band specified for body area networks on 
alternative basis, Quality of Service (QoS) for such life-
crucial monitoring devices could perhaps be much better 
ensured. Furthermore, the frequency band ranging from 2360 
to 2400 MHz  is specifically next to the 2.4 GHz frequency 
band wherein a number of wireless systems are already 
available right now which may often be used again for 
MBANS like IEEE 802.15.4 standard devices [7].  This 
certainly will end up in cheap implementations owing to 
economies of scale, and finally result in larger arrangements 
of medical body area networks(MBAN)  and as a 
consequence, there would be immense  advancement in 
patient health-care. 
 
 
Fig.  2.  MBANs Basic Architecture  
    Transmissions from body area network devices would 
likely to be of data only (without voice). It is strongly 
recommended that the frequency band ranging from 2360 to 
2400 MHz should be classified into two categories: band-I in 
the frequency range 2360 to 2390 MHz and band-II in the 
frequency range 2390 to 2400 MHz while in the 2360-2390 
MHz frequency range, body area networks operation is 
confined for indoor use exclusively. And for the frequency 
range 2390 to 2400 MHz, body area network operation is 
permitted pretty much anywhere [7]. A contention-based 
protocol, which is unrestricted, is proposed for gaining 
access to the medium. The maximum amount of emission of 
bandwidth for body area networks is allowed to be 5 MHz. 
The utmost transmission power should not meet or exceed 1 
mW. 
E. Smart Grid Networks 
Remodeling of the previous century power grid right into 
an intelligent smart grid will probably be advocated by many 
nations as a means of handling electrical power self-reliance 
and durability, global warming and catastrophe challenges. 
The smart grid constitutes 3 abstract-level tiers, from a 
technological innovation point of view: the physical 
electrical power tier, communication networking tier, 
together with the application layer [5]. The smart grid 
manages the electrical power in a manner in which electric 
power is produced, transported, used up and charged. Putting 
intellect through the entire freshly networked power grid 
boosts grid durability, enhances demand management and 
responsiveness, and incorporates distributed sources of 
energy, and also essentially lowers expenses towards the 
customers and service provider.  
              
 
Fig. 3.  Smart Grid Network 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

A smart grid network has normally three building blocks: 
o 
The home area networks (HANs) which generally 
connect on-premise devices and intelligent meters, 
dispersed alternative sources and plug-in electric 
powered automobiles. 
o 
The field area networks (FANs) or advanced metering 
infrastructure (AMI) which assists transmit data linking 
sites (through intelligent metering) together with a 
network gateway, that might be a power substation, a 
utility rod-fitted appliance, or just a transmission tower 
system. 
o 
The wide area networks (WANs) that function as being 
the central resource for interaction among utility data 
center and the aggregation points/network gateways. 
F. Cellular Networks 
In the last decade, usage of the cellular networks has 
increased considerably, with consumers always hoping of 
staying connected regardless of their different locations and 
time. Beginning of smart phones and social networking era , 
increasing usage of  multimedia websites which includes 
daily motion, facebook, YouTube, and flicker, releasing of 
innovative gadgets for example e-readers etc have 
additionally enhanced the dramatical improvement in the 
usage of mobile networks for conventional data services , 
e.g., web surfing and electronic mail. Now this offers not 
only new possibilities for innovative businesses but at the 
same time it’s a real challenge for cellular operators. The 
increasing number of data services creates an opportunity as 
they add to the overall revenue. But, it becomes challenging 
as in some geological regions, mobile networks have become 
congested because of the limited bandwidth acquired by 
cellular operators. Recent studies indicate that the broadband 
internet bandwidth shortfall is anticipated to come closer to 
300 MHz by 2014 [7]. 
For applications requiring access to the network, two 
scenarios are usually kept in view. Primarily are hotspots, 
like in airports and game stadiums, mainly because people 
arrive in massive numbers at majority of these spots. Let us 
consider the scenario of an athletic ground, participants in 
this modern age possess smart phones which have cameras 
by means of which they can easily take photographs of the 
proceedings of the sporting activity and share them with their 
friends through social media sites.  This kind of video and 
graphic data adds massive load on mobile phone network. 
During a research investigation by Cisco, it is concluded that 
this picture and video data can cause up to 60 percent 
increase [7]. These days a fraction of the multimedia content 
could be very easily diverted to ISM (industrial, scientific, 
and medical) band used in WiFi networks. Nevertheless, 
because of the huge amount of information produced within 
a smaller region, both ISM band Wifi networks as well as 
cellular networks are likely to be jammed. If this particular 
type of multimedia content (images, video etc) can be side 
tracked to some other extra channel, for example TVWS, 
then the mobile network may possibly be utilized for other 
speech services offered by the network with a significantly 
more effective manner, and as a result reaping the benefits 
for both the user as well as cellular operator.  
Femto-cell can be seen as the second access network 
application. These days many cellular operators provide 
miniaturized base stations whose visual appearance is just 
like a Wi-Fi router or access point, individuals can purchase 
them and install them within their houses. These mini base 
stations also called Femto-cells which can be used in areas 
having bad coverage areas like basements. These femto-cells 
and cellular operators use the same frequency range [7].  
 
               
 
            Fig. 4.  Basic Architecture of Cellular Network 
G. Military 
The capability to improve interoperability connecting 
several dissimilar radio standards, combined with the ability 
to observe the existence of interferers, CR device has turned 
into a must-have technology gadget. This cutting edge 
technology provides you with added benefits by means of 
safeguarding and shielding the ongoing communications, 
recognizing the adversary transmissions, as well as revealing 
of tracks of opportunity.  
The U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) has dedicated 
lots of energy and efforts to revolutionary state-of-the-art 
wireless applications over the last few years and has now 
developed packages for instance, Joint Tactical Radio 
System (JTRS), SPEAKeasy radio system, and Next 
Generation (XG) to make it possible for the development of 
an intelligent and a smart communication agent [5]. 
H. Public Safety Networks 
General consumer protection and crisis situation 
feedback is nevertheless an additional sphere where exactly 
CRs have acquired loads of interest and attention. For quite a 
few years public safety and security organizations have 
desperately needed a whole lot more spectrum share to help 
ease 
frequency 
over-crowding 
and 
greatly 
improve 
interoperability. 
Equipped 
with 
spectrum 
sharing 
functionality, CRs can show their usefulness simply by using 
a portion of the pre-existing spectrum which is not frequently 
used at the same time help in taking care of call priority and 
response time. On top of that, Cognitive Radios may play a 
significant part in further enhancing interoperability by 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

allowing gadgets to bridge communications between areas 
by making use of separate frequencies and modulation 
forms. 
 Public 
safety 
high-risk 
workers 
have 
become 
considerably important turning out to be backed up with wifi 
enabled mobile computing devices, laptop systems, together 
with mobile camcorders to enhance most of the functionality 
and capability to instantaneously team up making use of 
centralized control, co-workers, in conjunction with other 
groups [7]. Specified cordless support services relating to 
community protection and safety stretch out ranging from 
web surfing, speech to text messaging, electronic mail, 
database accessibility, graphic transmission, video media 
buffering, along with other wideband features. Video 
monitoring spy cameras coupled with sensor devices are 
increasingly becoming immensely important resources to 
enhance the eyes and ears concerning general public 
protection and security organizations. Correspondingly, 
information rates, integrity, as well as lag time specifications 
differ from service to service. 
In comparison, RF band frequencies designated for the 
consumer's safety and security purpose are increasingly 
becoming jam-packed, particularly in metropolitan areas. 
Aside from that, primary users originating from various areas 
and associations usually are not able to connect in the course 
of crisis situation. As shown in Figure 5, these kinds of 
cognitive devices could possibly be positioned in a number 
of ultra-powerful crisis responders’ automobiles coupled 
with wireless routers or access points. This approach elevates 
the strain from mobile handheld devices to acquire cognitive 
ability to lessen the situation in which various critical 
responders might use several radios nowadays and most 
probably in the foreseeable future to a greater extent. 
 
Fig. 5.  Public Safety Network 
CR was indeed recognized as a promising solution to 
supercharge effectiveness and usefulness of RF band. 
Equipped with Cognitive Radios, customer safety operators 
can make use of a whole lot more RF band for day-to-day 
operations from area to area and time to time. By working 
with the appropriate spectrum collaborating partners, public 
security personals are also able to get access licensed RF 
bands and professional operator networks. For instance, the 
public protection people might possibly roam on wireless 
networks in 700 MHz frequency range and possibly several 
other frequency bands throughout the spots in which public 
security wireless services are inaccessible and the places 
where there exists at the moment a working public coverage 
network, however considerably more data capacity is needed 
to respond proficiently and resourcefully for a critical 
situation.  
So it will remain to be witnessed the way in which 
Cognitive Radio concept will assist the top priority 
distribution and routing of data packets by means of its very 
own specialized network together with the general public 
wireless networks, consequently safeguarding time-critical 
priority data packets from losses or  postponement caused by 
network over-crowding. This goes beyond the borders of 
spectrum recognition to content recognition, from the PHY 
layer towards the App layer. 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
CR technology can play an important role in order to 
make an excellent use of the limited spectrum to compliment 
the rapidly growing desires and needs pertaining to wireless 
applications, such as the common man basic safety, 
intelligent power grid, and the wireless broadband internet, 
mobile networks to even healthcare applications. At the same 
time, challenges continue to exist due to the fact that CR-
enabled networks are expected to exist together with 
incumbents as well as cognitive users and are required to 
minimize interference in a manner that they will more 
effectively facilitate these kinds of applications from end to 
end. 
IV. REFERENCES 
[1] S. Haykin, “Cognitive radio: Brain-empowered wireless 
communications,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 23, no. 2, 
pp. 201–220, Feb. 2005. 
[2] Quan, Zhi, Shuguang Cui, H. Poor, and Ali Sayed. 
"Collaborative wideband sensing for cognitive radios," Signal 
Processing Magazine, IEEE 25, no. 6, pp. 60-73, 2008.  
[3] Mitola III, Joseph, and Gerald Q. Maguire Jr. "Cognitive radio: 
making 
software 
radios 
more 
personal," Personal 
Communications, IEEE 6, no. 4, pp. 13-18, 1999.  
[4] Mahonen, Petri, Marina Petrova, and Janne Riihijarvi. 
"Applications of topology information for cognitive radios and 
networks," In New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access 
Networks. 2nd IEEE International Symposium on, pp. 103-114. 
IEEE, 2007. 
[5] Maldonado, David, Bin Le, Akilah Hugine, Thomas W. 
Rondeau, and Charles W. Bostian. "Cognitive radio applications to 
dynamic spectrum allocation: a discussion and an illustrative 
example," In New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access 
Networks, 2005.  First IEEE International Symposium on, pp. 597-
600, 2005.  
[6] Goldsmith Andrea, Syed Ali Jafar, Ivana Maric, and Sudhir 
Srinivasa. "Breaking spectrum gridlock with cognitive radios: An 
information theoretic perspective."Proceedings of the IEEE 97, no. 
5 , pp. 894-914, 2009.  
[7] Wang, Jianfeng, Monisha Ghosh, and Kiran Challapali. 
"Emerging 
cognitive 
radio 
applications: 
A 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

survey." Communications Magazine, IEEE 49, no. 3, pp. 74-81, 
2011.  
[8] Yau, K-LA, F-AG Tan, Peter Komisarczuk, and Paul D. Teal. 
"Exploring new and emerging applications of Cognitive Radio 
systems: Preliminary insights and framework." In Humanities, 
Science and Engineering (CHUSER), 2011 IEEE Colloquium on, 
pp. 153-157, 2011. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

