Software Defined Radio Transceiver Front−ends 
in the Beginning of the Internet Era 
 
Silvian Spiridon1,2 
1POLITEHNICA University of Bucharest, Electronics, Telecommunication and Information Technology Department 
2Now with Broadcom Corporation, Bunnik, The Netherlands 
silvian.spiridon@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— A mobile terminal today embeds a large number of 
technologies that maximize its interconnection capabilities. 
Regardless it is long or short range communication, the 
wireless terminal is definitely enabled to communicate 
efficiently over a large number of wireless standards. 
Nonetheless, the ideal candidate for such a mobile terminal 
radio front-end is the Software Defined Radio (SDR). This 
paper overlooks the key features required for a SDR in the 
beginning of the internet era and brings light on what is the 
best way to approach the SDR receiver design. 
Keywords-Software defined radio transceiver; multi-standard 
radio receiver 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Communication is an intrinsic part of the human nature. 
Through communication information is conveyed. Today’s 
communication is driven by the Internet. 
The Internet foundations were laid in 1960s by the USA 
military research projects aimed at building distributed 
computer networks. The internet mass global spread was 
delayed due to lack of networking infrastructure and limited 
number of PC users. But, in mid 1980s the PC market 
boomed due to IBMs Personal Computer based on Intel 
80286 microprocessor and operated by Microsoft’s Disk 
Operating System (MS-DOS). This combination formed the 
template for all PC developers and vendors. 
Hence, during the 1990s, it was estimated that the 
number of Internet users doubled each year, with a brief 
period of explosive growth in 1996 and 1997. By end of 
2011, the Internet reached 32.5 users per 100 inhabitants 
worldwide, see Fig. 1, [1]. 
In order to show the strong relation between the IT 
industry and the communication sector, Fig. 1 plots the 
number of worldwide subscribers of fixed and mobile 
telephone networks and Internet users. The Internet access 
connects the two sectors. 
The Internet was initially developed as a “wired” 
network. Nevertheless, as Fig. 1 reveals the latest trends 
show the communication sector is strongly going mobile, as 
today the mobile subscribers number surpasses the fixed 
telephony ones by a factor of five. 
Therefore, radio circuits designers need to account this 
trend and focus on the development of efficient solutions that 
maximize the mobile’s terminal wireless interconnectivity. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
Users per 100 Inhabitants
Fixed Telephony
Mobile Telephony
Internet
 
Figure 1.  Internet usage – the driving force behind the need for SDRs 
 Section II overviews the historical development of 
wireless transceivers and defines the need for SDRs as the 
next step in the optimization process of wireless front-ends. 
Section III overviews the generic SDR structure that is 
implemented in today’s Systems on a Chip (SoCs), while in 
Section IV a designed receipt is proposed for the SDR 
receiver (SDRR) front-end. 
Finally, the paper is concluded by Section V, which also 
overlooks the future developments. 
 
II. 
THE NEED FOR SOFTWARE DEFINED RADIOS 
A basic modern communication system is comprised by a 
large array of mobile equipment connected into wireless 
networks. 
The communication between all these equipment is 
regulated by various communication standards, depending on 
the type of wireless network in which they operate. 
Our lives today are bounded by the Internet. As presented 
in Section I, Internet access is possible over a wide array of 
wireless standards. 
Hence, purely on the communication side, the present 
mobile equipment requires compatibility with all the 
standards 
maximizing 
its 
interaction 
capabilities: 
GSM/GPRS, UMTS, LTE, Bluetooth, Wireless LAN, LTE, 
WiMAX or DVBH.  
Unifying the various communications standards is not a 
real possibility, given the huge number of users dedicated to 
a given wireless standard. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

 
Figure 2.  Software Defined Radio Transceiver Generic Block Schematic. 
 
Therefore, there is a need of mobile equipment that 
enables wireless communication across the various wireless 
environments. 
The first obvious solution was to incorporate for each 
standard a separate dedicated IC or Application Specific 
Integrated Circuit (ASIC) into the mobile device. One still 
has to have in mind the first Nokia mass production GSM 
mobile phone. The Nokia 1011 developed in the early ‘90s, 
was built from more than two dozen separate ICs and 
weighted about half a kilo [2]. By mid 2000’s, solutions 
offering fully integrated quad-band GSM SoCs, [3] were 
already available. 
A first step in reducing the cost for radio frequency (RF) 
front-end chips was enabled by the CMOS technology 
scaling. It opened the possibility of building “combo” 
ASICs, combining two or more SoCs on the same IC (e. g., 
BRCM2071 [4] that integrates Bluetooth, GPS and FM radio 
or BCM4325 [5] that incorporates W-LAN, Bluetooth and 
FM radio). However, these circuits still contain one RF 
front-end per communications standard. 
Moving forward, the natural step in the development of 
multi-standard communication is building a reconfigurable 
ASIC, able to ensure compatibility with the wide array of 
communication standards in use today. Such and approach is 
efficient from two main reasons [6]: 
 
One “universal” design is required; thus design, 
packaging and testing costs are minimized, and 
 
As the “universal” ASIC is compatible with a wide 
array of wireless communication standards the 
previous various ASICs can be merged; thus the 
overall area of ASICs comprised in a mobile 
terminal is minimized. 
In the “digital” realm the first step on this path is the 
development of the new multi-core Digital Signal Processor 
(DSP) architectures [7]. Such processors optimally leverage 
the power consumption with the IC cost, or equivalently its 
die area.  
The idea behind it is to enforce as much parallel 
processing as possible to maintain a maximum “usage” of 
the chip die area during operation. 
In this context, it is required to develop an RF transceiver 
capable to interface such a DSP. This RF transceiver is the 
Software Defined Radio (SDR). 
III. 
TODAY’S SOFTWARE DEFINED RADIO  
TRANSCEIVER FRONT-ENDS 
The RF transceiver SDR must employ a versatile 
architecture, able to change its characteristics dynamically 
given the particularities of each wireless standard and 
communication burst it has to handle. 
The software driven System-on-a-Chip (SoC) combining 
such a re-configurable RF front-end and a multi-core DSP 
represents the Software Defined Radio (SDR). The block 
schematic of such a system is depicted in Fig. 2. 
The four main blocks comprising the SDR RF front-end 
of Fig. 2 are: 
 
the frequency synthesizer (FS), 
 
the receiver (RX), 
 
the transmitter (TX), and 
 
the auxiliary circuitry (AUX) 
The transceiver acts as a signal conditioning block. It 
either prepares the received signal for digital demodulation 
or it shapes the digitally modulated signal for the wireless 
transmission. 
The DSP drives the RF front-end via the digital interface. 
By dynamically changing the transceiver settings, its 
performance can be adjusted depending on the requirements 
(e. g., noise or linearity performance, output power level) of 
the particular communication burst. 
.
Digital Interface 
To 
DSP 
RX 
TX 
Frequency 
Synthesizer 
Auxiliary circuitry 
SoC 
PCB 
Printed Circuit Board (PCB) 
Components 
RX LO 
TX LO 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

 
 
a. 
b. 
Figure 3.  Software Defined Radio Simplified Block Schematic (FS and AUX not shown): 
a. Mitola’s Concept; b. SDR embedding analog signal conditioning. 
 
The FS is the RF transceiver “heart”. Its beat is 
represented by the generation of the local oscillator (LO) 
signals which drive the receiver (RX LO), respectively the 
transmitter (TX LO). 
The task of any wireless receiver is to condition the 
incoming wanted signal such as it can be properly 
demodulated. 
Oppositely to the RX, the TX chain must ensure the up 
conversion on the RF frequency of the digitally modulated 
baseband signal. In the transmitter case the accent is placed 
on avoiding the disturbance of adjacent radio frequencies and 
maintaining a good signal integrity. 
The auxiliary circuitry is mainly formed by the front-
end’s biasing block. 
Fig. 6.a reveals the optimal choice from system level 
perspective for the TX and RX implementation. This multi-
standard RF transceiver concept was coined by Mitola in [8]. 
Basically the RX is only an Analog-to-Digital Converter 
(ADC) and the TX is a Digital-to-Analog Converter (DAC). 
Of course, the transceiver requires a FS system to generate 
the ADC and DAC clocks. 
In reality, due to practical implementation constrains, 
today’s SDRs require analog signal conditioning blocks in 
between the antenna and the ADC and in between the DAC 
and the antenna (e. g., [6],. [9-11]). The SDR concept shown 
in Fig. 6.b relaxes the ADC and DAC electrical 
specifications by ensuring for the wanted signal the 
frequency 
translation 
and 
additional 
selectivity 
and 
amplification. 
IV. 
A DESIGN RECEIPT: 
THE SOFTWARE DEFINED RADIO RECEIVER FRONT-END 
In order to enhance the wireless system robustness and 
maximize the link budget, the latest wireless standards are 
very flexible (e. g, the IEEE 802.11g W-LAN uses BPSK, 
QPSK, QAM-16 and QAM-64 modulations on OFDMA 
carrier support). 
Considering the abovementioned trend, as previously 
discussed it results the SDR is the natural solution for the 
radio front-end. For the receive side, the software re-
configurable hardware solution is the Software Defined 
Radio Receiver (SDRR). 
As in-depth analyzed in [12], given the huge amount of 
information the SDRR designer(s) need to handle, a 
structured approach of the design process is the enabling 
factor in finding and implementing the optimal circuit 
design.  
First the most suited architecture for the SDRR front-end 
needs to be identified. The homodyne architecture stemmed 
out as the best choice that matches very well the high level of 
integration of the current deep sub-micron CMOS processes 
[13, 14]. Fig. 4 presents the re-configurable homodyne radio 
receiver [6]. 
The incoming RF signal is picked-up by the receiver’s 
antenna and is amplified by one of its LNAs. Multiple LNAs 
can be integrated, depending on the envisaged use. The 
amplified RF signal is then converted to current in the mixer 
input gm-stage and down-converted directly to baseband by 
mixing with a local oscillator signal of equal frequency. 
Hence, at the mixing stage output the signal has a spectrum 
spanning from DC to a maximum frequency that is 
dependent on the wireless communication standard [15]. 
After mixing, the signal is conditioned by a low pass 
filter (LPF) and a variable gain amplifier (VGA), before its 
conversion to digital spectrum by an analog-to-digital 
converter (ADC). 
Second the designer has to be enabled to handle 
efficiently the large amount of information comprised in the 
wireless standards. The most effective way to do so is based 
on simple and efficient models suited for manual analysis. 
In [16], the author introduces the SDRR generic blockers 
diagram as a very efficient tool in evaluating, in a standard 
independent approach, the filter partitioning for channel 
selection in multi-standard radio receivers. By mapping all 
blockers and interferers arriving at the receiver’s antenna, the 
generic blockers diagram enables the designer to evaluate 
proficiently the trade-off between the analog low pass filter 
order and the ADC specifications of resolution and speed, or 
equivalently the trade-off between its area and power 
consumption. Thus the optimal analog low pass filter order is 
determined. 
 
RX in 
TX out 
RX 
ADC 
TX 
DAC 
Digital Interface 
To 
DSP 
 
RX 
Analog Signal 
Conditioning 
TX 
Analog Signal 
Conditioning 
RX in 
TX out 
RX 
ADC 
TX 
DAC 
Digital Interface 
To 
DSP 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

 
Figure 4.  Software Defined Radio Transceiver Block Schematic [6]. 
 
 
In [17], the author introduces the smart gain partitioning 
strategy for multi-standard radio receivers. The strategy aims 
to aid the designer in identifying the optimal leverage 
between the receiver noise and linearity performance. 
Depending on the received signal strength, the receiver can 
change its noise or linearity characteristics accordingly (e. g., 
for large signal inputs the receiver will require a highly linear 
response, while it can tolerate more noise).  
In the analysis from [17], the receiver gain thresholds at 
which the changes are triggered are calculated for various 
commercial standards. Thus, the designer is enabled to 
optimally handle the gain-noise-linearity partitioning. Of 
course, in order to enhance the model accuracy all these 
results should subsequently be completed by CAD 
simulations. 
Third the designer needs to develop the SDRR front-end 
design strategy from both the system level and transistor 
level perspectives and to use this strategy to design the front-
end’s building blocks. As described in [18], the strategy 
needs to ensure the SDRR building blocks have the 
following characteristics: 
 
high linearity and low noise, 
 
immunity to particular technology characteristics 
and 
 
easiness of the design porting. 
Basically, these targets are achieved by building modular 
RF, respectively baseband circuits, based on differential or 
pseudo-differential transistor pairs [18], respectively low 
power feedback amplifiers [19, 20]. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE TRENDS 
This paper presented an overview of the key feature of 
software defined radio transceivers front−ends in the 
beginning of the internet era. The need for mobile equipment 
able to maximize its interconnection capabilities in 
conjunction with the VLSI integration have open the door for 
the SDR approach. Multi-core digital signal processors 
interfaced by flexible analog front-ends represent today’s 
SDR. 
Their 
transceiver 
front-ends 
employ 
a 
versatile 
architecture, able to change its key parameters dynamically  
(i. e., gain, noise, linearity performance and power 
consumption) based on the particular characteristics of the 
radio burst it handles.  
Today’s SDR front-ends are embedding analog signal 
conditioning blocks. Nevertheless, looking into the future 
and considering the rate at which the CMOS technology 
scales down, more and more signal processing is translated 
from the analog into the digital domain.  
By making use of the relative inexpensive digital gates 
the modern transceivers analog circuits content is reduced 
[21]. This will impact the architecture of choice for all of the 
three key functional building blocks of the Fig. 5 SDR. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to acknowledge Prof. M. Bodea, 
and Dr. F. Op’t Eynde for the fruitful discussions on the 
topic. 
 
 
ADC 
LNA 
MIX 
LPF 
LO I&Q 
VGA 
 
  
Signal Processor 
 
 
 
 
 
High Frequency 
Part (HF) 
Low Frequency  
Part (LF) 
Digital Control 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

REFERENCES 
[1] Intl. Telecom. Union – Telecommunication Sector Statistics, 
Available on-line at: 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ICTEYE/Indicators/Indicators.aspx. 
[2] Nokia 1011, Wikipedia − the free encyclopedia, Dec 2012. 
Available on-line at: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nokia_1011 
[3] K. Muhamad et al, The First Fully Integrated Quad-Band 
GSM/GPRS Receiver in a 90-nm Digital CMOS Process, 
IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, August 2006, vol. 41, 
Issue 8, pp. 1772-1783. 
[4] Broadcom BCM2071 − Bluetooth + GPS + FM Combination 
('Combo') Chip Solution, Data-sheet available on-line at: 
http://www.broadcom.com/products/Bluetooth/Bluetooth-RF-
Silicon-and-Software-Solutions/BCM20751 
[5] Broadcom BCM4325 − Low-Power 802.11a/b/g with 
Bluetooth 2.1 + EDR and FM, Data-sheet available on-line at: 
http://www.broadcom.com/products/Bluetooth/Bluetooth-RF-
Silicon-and-Software-Solutions/BCM4325 
[6] S. Spiridon, Analysis and Design of Monolithic CMOS 
Software Defined Radio Receivers, PhD Thesis, Ed. Tehnică, 
2011. 
[7] Multi-core processor, Wikipedia − the free encyclopedia, Dec 
2012.  
Available on-line at:  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-core_processor 
[8] J. Mitola, Software radios – survey, critical evaluation and 
future directions, IEEE Nat. Telesystems Conf., 1992, pp. 
13/15 – 13/23. 
[9] J. Craninckx et. al, “A Fully Reconfigurable Software-
Defined Radio Transceiver in 0.13μm CMOS,” Digest of 
Technical Papers of the International Solid State Circuit 
Conference ISSCC 2007, pp. 346-347 and 607. 
[10] M. Ingels et. al, “A CMOS 100 MHz to 6 GHz software 
defined radio analog front-end with integrated pre-power 
amplifier,” Digest of Technical Papers of the Europeean Solid 
State Circuit Conference ESSCIRC 2007, pp. 436-439. 
[11] M. Ingels et. al, “A 5mm2 40nm LP CMOS 0.1-to-3GHz 
multistandard transceiver,” Digest of Technical Papers of the 
International Solid State Circuit Conference ISSCC 2010, pp. 
458-459. 
[12] S. Spiridon, C. Dan and M. Bodea, “Overcoming the 
challenges of designing CMOS Software Defined Radio 
Receivers front-ends embedding analog signal conditioning,” 
Proc of the 13th Intl. Conf. on Optimization of Electrical and 
Electronic Equipment, OPTIM 2012, pp. 1207-1210. 
[13] T. H. Lee, The Design of CMOS Radio-Frequency Integrated 
Circuits, Cambridge University Press, 2nd Ed., 2004, pp. 710-
713. 
[14] S. Spiridon, C. Dan and M. Bodea, Defining the Optimal 
Architecture for Multi-Standard Radio Receivers Embedding 
Analog Signal Conditioning, Intl. Journal on Advances in 
Telecommunications, vol 5, no. 1&2, 2012, pp. 33–41. 
[15] S. Spiridon et. al., “Deriving the Key Electrical Specifications 
for a Multi-standard Radio Receiver,” Proc. Of the First Intl. 
Conf. on Advances in Cognitive Radio COCORA 2011, April 
2011, pp. 60-63. 
[16] S. Spiridon, C. Dan, M. Bodea, “Filter partitioning optimum 
strategy in homodyne multi-standard radio receivers,” Proc. 
of the 7th Conf. on Ph.D. Research in Microelectronics and 
Electronics, PRIME 2011, July 2011, pp.9-13. 
[17] Spiridon et. al, “Smart gain partitioning for noise – linearity 
trade-off optimization in multi-standard radio receivers,” 
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference Mixed 
Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, MIXDES 2011, 
June 2011, pp. 466-469. 
[18] S. Spiridon et al., “An Analysis of CMOS Re-configurable 
Multi-standard Radio Receivers Building Blocks Core,” 
Revue 
Roumaine 
des 
Sciences 
Techniques, 
serie 
Électrotechnique et Énergétique, tome 56, nr. 1, 2011, pp. 99-
108. 
[19] V. Giannini et. al, “Flexible baseband analog circuits for 
software-defined radio front-ends,” Journal of Solid State 
Circuits, vol. 42, no. 7, July 2007, pp. 1501-1512. 
[20] S. Spiridon, F. Op’t Eynde, “An optimized opamp topology 
for the low frequency part of a direct conversion 
multi-standard radio transceiver,” Proceedings of the First 
International Symposium on Electrical and Electronics 
Engineering, ISEEE 2006, October 2006, pp. 11-16. 
[21] F. 
Op’t 
Eynde, 
“Maximally-Digital 
RF 
Front-end 
Architectures,” Invited paper at the European Microwave 
Week, EuMW 2010. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

