Evaluation of Deterministic Medium Access Based on a  
Cooperative Cognitive Radio Approach 
 
Yashar Naderpour, Dimitri Block, Uwe Meier 
inIT - Institute of Industrial Information Technologies 
Ostwestfalen-Lippe University of Applied Sciences 
Lemgo, Germany 
e-mail: {yashar.naderpour, dimitri.block, uwe.meier}@hs-owl.de 
 
 
Abstract — Caused by increasing demands for wireless devices 
in the last decade, license-free bands such as the 2.4 GHz ISM 
band become more and more crowded. As a consequence, 
interferences are inevitable. To avoid impairments caused by 
interferences, there have to be mechanisms to prevent 
coexisting systems to interfere with each other in license-free 
bands. Especially in industrial application fields, a reliable and 
deterministic medium access is required. In this paper, we 
evaluate an inter-system cooperation approach, which is 
designed to be aware of interferences, to ensure reliable real-
time communication and further to protect investment for 
existing wireless systems. In a selected industrial scenario, it 
outperforms a non-cooperative approach especially in presence 
of interference. Further, it ensures a reliable communication 
for more than 99% of the real-time data packet transmissions 
also in presence of interference. 
Keywords - cognitive radio; control channel; deterministic 
medium access; inter-system automatic configuration 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Cognitive radio (CR), “firstly introduced by Joseph Mitola 
in 1999, is an emerging concept in the world of wireless 
communication” [1]. CR system is aware of its radio 
environment and therefore, detects interfering radio devices, 
which are called primary users (PUs). CR also identifies 
temporal and spectral opportunities for secondary user (SU) 
utilization. 
However, 
such prediction-based opportunity 
identification are prone to errors. Therefore, providing a 
deterministic medium access approach, which is able to be 
aware of its radio environment and to manage spectrum 
efficiency is highly desirable for CRs. 
These solutions are also enablers for new industrial 
automation 
(IA) 
applications. 
IA 
applications 
require 
deterministic wireless medium access for reliable operation in 
real-time applications. As many wireless technologies – also 
for IA applications – share the same wireless channels such as 
the 2.4 GHz ISM band, a proper coexistence behavior is a 
fundamental requirement. 
In this work, a proposed cooperative CR approach [2] is 
implemented and evaluated, which is called inter-system 
automatic configuration (ISAC). To the best of our knowledge, 
the proposed approach has not been implemented or evaluated 
yet. 
ISAC’s design has mainly three goals: 
a) Interference awareness 
b) Ensuring real-time and reliable communication 
c) Investment protection for existing wireless systems 
The first goal is necessary for IA applications to provide the 
second 
goal, 
real-time 
performance 
and 
reliable 
communications. ISAC systems aim to avoid interference with 
other wireless systems and protect themselves from being 
interfered. 
The third goal focuses on implementation requirements. The 
ISAC approach unifies the spectrum utilization management. It 
is suitable for being integrated into existing industrial wireless 
solutions such as industrial WLAN, Bluetooth, WirelessHART, 
ISA100.11A, and ZigBee. The integration of the approach shall 
be therefore simple with minor protocol adaption. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II summarizes 
fundamentals about medium access and control channel usage. 
Section III illustrates the ISAC approach. Section IV specifies a 
selected measurement scenario, which is used for experimental 
evaluation. Section V analyses the results, and discusses the 
outcome. Finally, Section VI provides a conclusion for this 
paper. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
IA applications provide harsh requirements for medium 
access methods (MAMs). To fulfill the requirements a 
cooperative approach among the users sharing the same 
environment with a proper controlling is necessary. A control 
channel (CC) is mandatory for this approach. In this section, 
the key issues MAMs and CCs are discussed in more detail. 
A. Medium Access Methods 
Multiple wireless devices utilize shared spectral, temporal, 
spatial resources. Therefore, wireless MAMs are approaching 
the issue of coexistence in different ways. They can be 
categorized into non-adaptive MAMs, adaptive MAMs, and 
cognitive MAMs [2][3]. They are briefly described in the 
following subsections. 
 
 Non-Adaptive Medium Access Methods 
Non-adaptive MAMs use for example time-, frequency-, and 
code-division multiple-access (TDMA, FDMA, CDMA) [4]. 
They do not include any mechanism to mitigate interference 
and rely on central planning by a dedicated device or manual 
configuration. Due to their synchronous structure, non-adaptive 
MAMs require only a little communication overhead. Radio 
systems based on these MAMs provide a deterministic medium 
access in case of no interference. They are not aware of 
interference and therefore, show a poor coexistence behavior. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-403-9
COCORA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

 Adaptive Medium Access Methods 
While non-adaptive MAMs show poor coexistence behavior, 
adaptive MAMs are aware of the radio environment. They are 
aware of the radio environment to a certain degree to improve 
the performance. Examples of such methods are carrier sense 
multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) [4], 
ALOHA [5], and adaptive frequency hopping (AFH) [6]. 
Adaptive MAMs mitigate interference with others in order 
to approach error-free transmissions. On the other hand they 
have no deterministic behavior. Thus, adaptive MAMs require 
a communication overhead and additional synchronization 
effort. Adaptive MAMs can be distinguished with respect to the 
feedback instant of time: Listen-before-talk (LBT) [4] and 
listen after talk (LAT) [4]. LBT requires feedback before 
transmission. Such a medium access mechanism is CSMA/CA. 
If no new interference appears during transmission, LBT 
MAMs will ensure an error-free transmission. 
In contrast to LBT MAMs, LAT MAMs react on a feedback 
instant of time after packet transmission. Typically, they are 
based upon service degradation such as packet reception 
failure. An example is Bluetooth AFH. After some packet loss 
in a certain frequency channel, it will be avoided for further 
packet transmissions by channel blacklisting for a specific time 
duration. Because LAT MAMs react after packet transmission, 
they cannot guarantee error-free transmissions. 
 
 Cognitive Medium Access Methods 
Adaptive MAMs have a reactive nature. In contrast, 
cognitive MAMs are based on proactive approaches. They try 
to model the radio environment and adapt the wireless 
communication 
accordingly 
in 
order 
to 
improve 
the 
transmission performance and increase the spectrum efficiency. 
They can be classified into autonomous and cooperative 
approaches. 
Autonomous CR systems improve the performance of a 
single radio system opportunistically. While, cooperative 
systems negotiate the resource allocation and optimize the 
performance of several systems in a certain environment. This 
negotiation requires a communication opportunity, which can 
be achieved via a control channel (CC). 
B. Control Channel 
The CR needs to sense the spectrum and select an 
appropriate channel for the SU communication. To achieve 
this, cooperative CRs communicate with each other via a CC 
[1]. Basically, the CC is a logical channel. Its implementation 
offers two possibilities: 
1) Common control channel: The control messages are being 
exchanged on the same channel as used for the wireless 
solutions but during idle data phases. This solution is easy from 
a hardware point of view but requires a sophisticated time 
scheduling, which might conflict with desired real-time 
application. 
2) Dedicated control channel: A separate physical channel is 
reserved for the exchange of control messages. Depending on 
the available hardware structure, the dedicated CC might use 
the same transceiver unit as the data messages. As mentioned 
before, the same sophisticated time scheduling is necessary. If 
two transceiver units for the data and control messages are 
available, the time scheduling is drastically simplified. 
A separate transceiver unit might also support a wired CC if 
the application tolerates it. Further examples are given in [7]. 
III. INTER-SYSTEM AUTOMATIC CONFIGURATION 
The cooperative ISAC concept was published in [2] as work 
in progress. This paper contributes ISAC’s implementation 
aspects, its evaluation and comparison with other approaches. 
The ISAC network consist of two different entities: ISAC 
supervisor and ISAC client. The ISAC network requires a 
single central ISAC supervisor and permits multiple ISAC 
clients. The ISAC supervisor uses the CC for communication. 
A. Supervisor 
The most important entity in an ISAC network is the ISAC 
supervisors for resource management. 
ISAC Supervisor
Master
Slave
RM
Resource allocation
ISAC Client
Data 
Transmission
Sensor
 Resource status
 
Figure 1. Basic ISAC network consist of ISAC supervisor and ISAC client 
connected via control channel (red arrows) 
Thereby, the term resources refers to the hyperspace 
introduced in [8] consisting of multiple dimensions such as 
spectrum, time, code and the spatial dimension. The tasks of 
the ISAC supervisor are (i) resource allocation and (ii) 
interference mitigation. Therefore, it is equipped with the CR 
features of resource sensing and resource occupancy prediction.  
Client 
Supervisor
RARQ
RARS
 
T
Adapt to 
allocated 
resource
Check RAOs
Update RAOs
T
 
Figure 2. Sequence diagram of resource allocation negotiation between 
ISAC client and ISAC supervisor 
As shown in Figure 1, the ISAC supervisor consists of two 
different wireless devices: Resource sensing device (sensor) 
and resource management device (RM). The sensor is 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-403-9
COCORA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

responsible for resource sensing and predicting future behavior. 
Figure 2 shows the resource allocation negotiation procedure 
for two client. In case an ISAC client requests a resource 
allocation (RARQ), the RM selects the optimal resource 
allocation opportunity (RAO) according to the resource 
utilization capabilities of the ISAC client. Next, the RM 
response with the allocated resources (RARS) and the ISAC 
client tunes accordingly. 
RM
Sensor
Channel quality indicator
T
T
Observation
Prepare channel 
quality indicator
Update RAOs
Prediction
Channel quality indicator
Observation
Prepare channel 
quality indicator
Update RAOs
Prediction
 
Figure 3. Sequence diagram of cyclic resource status reporting from sensor 
to resource manager 
Additionally to resource allocation, the ISAC supervisor has 
to mitigate interferences, which could be either observed by the 
ISAC client or the ISAC supervisor’s sensor. The sensor 
informs the RM about the resources status based on the 
resource sensing and prediction outcome. Then, the RM 
determines RAOs as illustrated in Figure 3. In case an ISAC 
client detects an interference within its utilized resources, it 
initiates a resource allocation negotiation within the limited 
resource utilization capabilities. 
B. Client 
The ISAC clients are resource users. The ISAC clients are 
independent wireless systems. In IA such wireless systems are 
Bluetooth piconets, WirelessHART mesh networks, or WLAN 
infrastructure networks. These wireless systems are used 
already for multiple applications like controlling or monitoring 
tasks. Each ISAC client has to provide a communication 
interface to the central ISAC supervisor. Typically, a good 
choice for the integration is the central management device of 
the 
certain 
wireless 
system 
like 
Bluetooth 
master, 
WirelessHART gateway, or WLAN access point, respectively. 
The ISAC client’s tasks are to (i) request for resource 
allocations from the ISAC supervisor and tune accordingly, and 
optionally to (ii) inform the ISAC supervisor about 
interferences. In order to reach the first task, the only 
mandatory requirement for the ISAC clients is to have tuning 
capabilities. 
In order to reach the optional second task, the ISAC clients 
have to be equipped with sensing capabilities either listen-
before-talk features such as WLAN and WirelessHART 
CSMA/CA or packet loss notification features. The sensing 
outcome can be used to initiate a resource allocation 
negotiation as mentioned above. 
C. Control Channel 
The ISAC CC is used for the communication between the 
ISAC supervisor and ISAC clients, and within the ISAC 
supervisor between RM and sensor. Further, the ISAC concept 
requires a dedicated CC, which has to be always available for 
communication. So, it has to be guaranteed that the CC never 
gets interfered by some PUs, SUs or any other kind of 
interferences. 
IV. IMPLEMENTATION 
The introduced general ISAC concept is implemented and 
evaluated within an IA scenario. The specific ISAC network 
setup is shown in Figure 4. 
Master
Slave
 Control Channel
Data Channel
 Control Channel
Secondary Users
ISAC 
client 1
RM
Slave
Master
Data Channel
Primary User
CCA
Sensor
MM4
ISAC 
supervisor
CCA
ISAC 
client 2
 
Figure 4. Measurement setup with interfering PU and SU containing an 
ISAC network with two ISAC clients 
The master uses a frequency channel called data channel 
(DC) for data transmissions to its slave. Three frequency 
channels are available for data transmission. These three 
channels are named CH1, CH2, and CH3. These are the 
available spectral resources. Hence, the implementation is 
limited to spectral resources and does not consider the 
management of other resources such as temporal, code or 
spatial resources. 
Another type of frequency channel is the dedicated CC, 
which is named CH0. For simplicity reasons, we assume that 
CH0 is not interfered by any primary user. In the following 
sections the SU and PU setups are discussed. 
A. Secondary User Setup: ISAC Clients 
In order to address a crowded IA scenario, we evaluate the 
ISAC network with two ISAC clients. Both ISAC clients are 
independent wireless systems performing real-time data 
transmission 
tasks. 
In 
order 
to 
lower 
the 
network 
implementation complexity, both ISAC clients are operating 
identically in a master-slave constellation, which is common in 
IA scenarios. 
The master and slave are implemented in the microcontroller 
MSP430 of Texas Instruments (TI) with the narrowband 
transceiver CC2500. The master transmits data packets of fixed 
size and content while the slave returns the received data 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-403-9
COCORA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

packets to acknowledge the correct reception. Important 
features and selected time parameters are summarized in Table 
I. 
TABLE I: SU ISAC CLIENT MASTER AND SLAVE TEST-BED FEATURES 
Platform 
µC MSP430 with transceiver CC2500 
Channel 
CH0 
CH1 
CH2 
CH3 
Center frequency 
2.43 GHz 
2.44 GHz 
2.45 GHz 
2.46 GHz 
Channel Type 
CC 
DC 
DC 
DC 
Spectrum sensing 
No 
RSSI-based CCA prediction 
Sample time 
- 
~ 90 µs 
Traffic  
RARQ 
Real-time data transmission 
Type 
Event-based 
Cyclic 
Period 
- 
40 ms 
Acknowledgment 
- 
Data echo 
QoS 
No 
PLR in % 
Packet duration 
~1.2 ms 
~2.7 ms 
Switching time 
~ 100 µs 
Bit error detection 
CRC-16 
 
Each ISAC client starts communication on the default DC. 
The master is equipped with the sensing feature listen-before-
talk by a clear channel assessment (CCA) based on the received 
signal strength indication (RSSI) within its current DC. In case 
of successful CCA the data transmission is continued in the 
current DC. Otherwise the current DC is interfered by the PU 
or the other ISAC client. As shown in Figure 5, before next 
data transmission, the master tunes to the CC in order to initiate 
a resource allocation negotiation. The ISAC supervisor 
response with the new allocated DC. After receiving the 
response from ISAC supervisor, the master tunes to the 
previous DC in order to notify the slave about the new 
allocated DC. The master tunes to the new allocated DC, when 
the slave successfully acknowledges (ACK) the notification. In 
case the notification is unsuccessfully acknowledged from 
slave, the master continues sending notification till receiving 
successful acknowledged from slave. 
Data
ACK
RARQ
RARS
40 ms
~12 ms
~10 ms
40 ms
CH1
CH2
~100µs
T
T
CC
Data
ACK
~12 ms
~100µs
Data
ACK
~12 ms
T
 
Figure 5. Timing diagram of master-slave resource allocation change 
within real-time data communication 
The master does not stop data transmission during resource 
allocation negotiation. In case 
of resource allocation 
negotiation between master and supervisor failure, the master 
will tune to previous DC and will try to continue data 
transmission. With the next CCA failure, the master initiates a 
new resource allocation negotiation with ISAC supervisor. 
Therefore, the master does not lose any data transmission. The 
master performs the CC communication within its idle time. As 
a consequence, data transmission is always in real-time. 
B. Secondary User Setup: ISAC Supervisor 
The ISAC supervisor contains the sensor and the RM 
specified in Table II and Table III, respectively. The sensor and 
RM are also implemented in the microcontroller TI MSP430 
with the narrowband transceiver TI CC2500. 
TABLE II: SU ISAC SUPERVISOR SENSOR TEST-BED FEATURES 
Platform 
µC MSP430 with transceiver CC2500 
Channel type 
CC 
Center frequency 
2.43 GHz 
2.45GHz 
2.46GHz 
Data packet duration 
~1.2 ms 
Bit error detection 
CRC-16 
Spectrum sensing 
MM4-based DCs occupancy prediction 
Acknowledgment 
No 
Traffic type 
Cyclic 
Idle time 
30 ms 
Duty cycle 
~4 % 
Period 
~31.2 ms 
 
The sensor senses all DCs periodically. Then, it determines 
two measures derived from the Markov model MM4 published 
in [2][9]. The first measure is the busy distance expressing the 
observed mean count of consecutive occupied samples within a 
certain DC, which are interfered by PUs. The second measure 
is the idle distance expressing the mean count of consecutive 
non-occupied samples, respectively. Based on the difference 
between the busy and idle distances, the DCs are sorted 
according to their quality. This information is given to the RM 
as DC quality indicators. Hence, the DC quality indicators 
provide information about the amount of interference of each 
DC. 
TABLE III: SU ISAC SUPERVISOR RESOURCE MANAGER TEST-BED 
FEATURES 
Platform 
µC MSP430 with transceiver CC2500 
Channel type 
CC 
Center frequency 
2.43 GHz 
 
Data packet duration 
~1.2 ms 
Bit error detection 
CRC-16 
Traffic 
RARS 
Type 
Event-based 
 
The RM has the responsibility to update the RAO. 
Therefore, it stores the very last DC quality indicators 
permanently. Hence, upcoming resource allocation decisions 
are based on the last stored DC quality indicators. 
C. Primary User Setup 
TABLE IV: PU TEST-BED FEATURES 
Platform 
Vector Signal Generator SMBV100A 
PU type 
 Cyclic IEEE 802.11g-like transmission 
Center frequency 
2.45 GHz 
2.45GHz 
2.46GHz 
Data packet duration 
~2 ms 
TX power 
15 dBm 
Traffic type 
Cyclic 
Idle time 
10 ms 
Duty cycle 
~16.7 % 
Period 
~12 ms 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-403-9
COCORA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

A selected PU activity is based upon IEEE 802.11g-like 
transmissions, which is common in IA scenarios. The PU 
activity is generated by a vector signal generator. Further 
important features and selected time parameters for the PU are 
summarized in Table IV. While the SUs are sensitive to the 
radio environment, the PU performs cyclic data transmission 
without feedback from the radio environment based on 
CSMA/CA. The PU is a single device, which transmits data 
packets with a duration of 2 ms and a period of 12 ms. It is 
important to note, that only CH2 is interfered by the PU. 
V. 
RESULT AND ANALYSIS 
In this section, we present the ISAC results in comparison to 
an appropriate reference. 
A. Implementation Validation 
The cyclic SU and PU emissions using ISAC are illustrated 
in the measured spectrograms in Figure 6 and Figure 7. The 
measurements were done with the real-time spectrum analyzer 
Tektronix RSA6114A. The horizontal and vertical axis 
represent the frequency and the time, respectively. CH0 is CC 
and CH1, CH2 and CH3 are the defined DCs. 
PU
SU1 – Master 
Switch to CH3
 
Figure 6. Spectrogram of the resource allocation negotiation with RARQ 
and RARS within the control channel of SU master and slave to avoid PU 
interference 
The spectrogram ranges from 2.43 GHz to 2.48 GHz and has 
a duration of 100 ms. 
Figure 6 shows the cyclic operation of the PU interfering 
CH2 where an ISAC client is transmitting data. This PU 
activity causes packet loss. The ISAC client detects PU 
activity and sends a RARQ to the RM. Then, according to 
RARS from the RM, the ISAC client tunes to the allocated free 
DC and therefore, bypasses future activity of the PU.In case 
of multiple ISAC clients, the RM allocates different DCs to 
each ISAC client while observing the PU interference. 
As shown by the example in Figure 7, the PU interferes CH2 
only while the ISAC clients transmit data in CH1 and CH3. 
B. Experimental Results 
For evaluation, we measured the QoS within two different 
scenarios, which differ in the presence of PU interference. 
Within each scenario, we performed experiments for three 
different medium access types: Non-sensing (NS), non-
cooperative (NC), and ISAC-based medium access. The 
implementation of the latter one was introduced in Section IV. 
Control Packet
SU1 - Master
SU2 - Master
SU1 - Slave
SU2 - Slave
PU
 
Figure 7. Spectrogram of two SU master-slave data transmissions within 
different frequency channels allocated by the resource manager 
The NC medium access neglects the usage of the 
cooperative ISAC concept. I.e. each SU client works 
independently. In this setup, the master performs a CCA based 
on MM4 before each data transmission in the default DC CH2 
as published in [2][9]. In case of CCA failure, the master 
switches to the backup DC CH3 after informing the slave. 
Hence, they try to omit the backup DC as much as possible. 
The NS medium access even reduces the complexity of the 
non-cooperative medium access. The master does not sense the 
spectrum in terms of any CCA. Therefore, it is not able to 
predict spectrum occupancy or to detect PU interference. The 
master does not tune to any other channel either. Hence, there 
will be data transmission collisions and packet loss. The 
experiments are performed with a measurement duration for 
1000 data packet transmissions, which are repeated 5 times and 
are averaged to result in a representative evaluation. Thereby, 
the master of both real-time wireless systems for each 
experiment determines the packet loss rate (PLR) as a measure 
of QoS. For each failure in receiving the correct ACK, the 
master increase the number of packet losses. Figure 8 and 
Figure 9 show the result of all experiments in case of PU 
interference absence and presence, respectively. The horizontal 
and vertical axis represent the medium access types in different 
devices and the PLR, respectively in Figure 8 and Figure 9. 
 
Figure 8. PLR (vertical axis) of two master-slave constellations (index 1 
and 2) for the medium access methods (horizontal axis) non-sensing (NS), 
non-cooperative (NC) and ISAC in absence of PU 
83,2%
83,2%
0,8%
0,9%
0,1%
0,1%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
NS-1
NS-2
NC-1
NC-2
ISAC-1
ISAC-2
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-403-9
COCORA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

They show the PLRs for both real-time wireless systems. 
Clearly, NS medium access has the worst performance in both 
scenarios. This results from its non-cooperative and non-
adaptive medium access. In case of no PU interference, the two 
real-time wireless systems interfere each other. 
The same disturbance can be observed also for the NC 
medium access but the PLR is below one percent without PU 
activity. The NC medium access avoids the PU interference 
much better than the NS medium access. However, the PLR is 
above 25% with PU activity. 
 
Figure 9. PLR (vertical axis) of two master-slave constellations (index 1 
and 2) for the medium access methods (horizontal axis) non-sensing (NS), 
non-cooperative (NC) and ISAC in presence of PU 
The best performance can be seen for the ISAC-based 
medium access. The PLR is below one percent even in 
presence of PU interference. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper introduces a cooperative cognitive radio approach 
implementation providing a deterministic medium access called 
inter-system automatic configuration approach (ISAC). Its 
performance is evaluated to face the increasing demands for 
industrial wireless devices in license-free bands. ISAC focuses 
on the industrial automation requirements of (i) interference 
awareness, (ii) ensuring real-time and reliable communication, 
and (iii) investment protection for existing wireless systems.  
A central radio device manages the allocation of resources such 
as frequency channels, time slots and spatial resources in a 
cooperative 
inter-system 
manner 
to 
ensure 
reliable 
communication. Further, a sensing radio device reports the 
resource status continuously for awareness of non-cooperative 
wireless systems and other interferences in the radio 
environment. Additionally, each cooperative wireless system 
has to negotiate resource allocations and to notify interferences. 
Therefore, a single device has to be replaced or updated with an 
appropriate communication interface and configuration with 
adaption capabilities. This minor modification of existing 
wireless systems ensures investment protection. It is important 
to note that ISAC’s central radio device communication is 
performed in a dedicated control channel. 
The evaluations are done for a selected industrial scenario in 
a test-bed based on multiple radio devices with TI MSP430 
microcontroller and TI CC2500 narrowband transceiver. Two 
industrial wireless systems with a real-time master-slave 
constellation are deployed and act as secondary users. They 
cooperate via the control channel with the central resource 
manager radio device. Thereby, three different frequency 
channels serve as resource opportunities, which are partly 
interfered by a non-cooperative primary user. The primary user 
represents an infrastructure-based IEEE 802.11 wireless system 
often applied in factory automation. The interferences are 
sensed and reported via a control channel in terms of frequency 
channel occupancy prediction with an additional radio device. 
To show the benefits of cooperation, ISAC’s performance is 
compared with a (i) non-cooperative and with a (ii) non-
cooperative non-sensing approach, which are also introduced 
and explained in detail. Thereby, ISAC outperforms both 
approaches especially in the presence of primary user 
interference. 
Hence, 
cooperation 
increases 
interference 
awareness significantly. Further, ISAC ensures a reliable 
communication for more than 99% of the real-time data packet 
transmissions independently of primary user interference 
presence. Hence, reliable communication can be ensured. 
Further investigations shall advance the resource allocation 
to multiple dimensions such as time and spatial resources. 
Additionally, hybrid allocation schemes mixing central and 
distributed decision-making may be evaluated to lower latency 
especially for temporal resource allocation without losing the 
benefits of central management. Also, the evaluation of a 
common control channel may be investigated, which shares the 
same licensed-free band for convenience reasons and further 
investment protection. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is based on the research project 17041X11 of the 
German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Hossain and V. K. Bhargava, “Cognitve Wireless 
Communication Network” in Springer, Vancouver, Canada, 2007. 
[2] D. Block and U. Meier, “Wireless Deterministic Medium 
Access: A Novel Concept Using Cognitive Radio”. The Third 
International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio - 
COCORA 2013, Apr 2013, pp 35-38. 
[3] D. Block, Y. Naderpour, G. M. Shrestha, and U. Meier, 
“Performance Evaluation of Cognitive Wireless Medium Access 
Method in Industrial Coexisting Environment”, Emerging 
Technologies & Factory Automation (ETFA), 2012 IEEE 17th 
Conference on, vol., no., Sept.2013, pp 30-34. 
[4] T. S. Rappaport, “Wireless communication,” New Jerssey, 
USA, Prentice Hall, 2002. 
[5] N. Abramson, “The ALOHA System: Another Alternative for 
Computer Communications,” in Proceedings of the Nov 17-19, 
1970, fall joint computer conference. ACM, 1970, pp. 281–285. 
[6] “Bluetooth Core Specification v1.2,” 2003. 
 
[7] J. Marinho and E. Monteiro, “Cognitive Radio: Survey on 
Communication Protocols, Spectrum Decision Issues, and Future 
Research Directions”, Springer science business media LLC, 
2011, New York, USA,. 
[8] K. Ahmad, P. Ostfeld, U. Meier, and H. Kwaśnicka, 
“Exploitation of Multiple Hyperspace Dimensions to Realize 
Coexistence Optimized Wireless Automation Systems”, Industrial 
Informatics, IEEE Transactions on , vol.6, no.4, Nov. 2014, 
pp.758,766. 
[9] K. Ahmad, U. Meier, and S. Witte, “Predictive opportunistic 
spectrum access using Markov models”, Emerging Technologies 
& Factory Automation (ETFA), 2012 IEEE 17th Conference on , 
vol., no., Sept. 2012, pp.1,10, 17-21. 
 
92,2%
92,8%
26,7%
26,7%
0,9%
0,8%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
NS-1
NS-2
NC-1
NC-2
ISAC-1
ISAC-2
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-403-9
COCORA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

