Analysis of Sharing Economy Antecedents for Recent Spectrum Sharing Concepts 
 
 
Seppo Yrjölä 
Nokia 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: seppo.yrjola@nokia.com 
Miia Mustonen 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland  
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: miia.mustonen@vtt.fi 
Marja Matinmikko 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: mmatinmi@ee.oulu.fi 
Petri Ahokangas 
Oulu Business School 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: petri.ahokangas@oulu.fi
 
 
Abstract—The exponential growth of wireless services with 
diversity of devices and applications depending on connectivity 
has inspired the research community to come up with novel 
concepts to improve the efficiency of spectrum use. Recently, 
several spectrum 
sharing system 
concepts have 
been 
introduced and widely researched to cope with spectrum 
scarcity, though, to date, only a few have reached the policy 
and standardization phase. Moreover, only a subset of these 
concepts has gained industry interest with pre-commercial 
deployments and lucrative business model characteristics. This 
paper analyzes sharing economy business antecedent factors of 
the three topical regulatory approaches for spectrum sharing: 
global TV White Space (TVWS), Licensed Shared Access 
(LSA) from Europe, and Citizens Broadband Radio Service 
(CBRS) from the US. A comparison is made between these 
concepts to identify similarities and differences for developing 
a successful scalable sharing concept. Key factors for a sharing 
economy enabled scalable business model are introduced 
including platform, reduced need for the ownership, leverage 
of underutilized assets, adaptability to different policy regimes, 
trust, and value orientation. The results indicate that all 
analyzed sharing concepts meet basic requirements to scale, 
TVWS radically lowering entry barrier, LSA leveraging key 
existing assets and capabilities of mobile network operators, 
and CBRS extending the business model dynamics. The 
Sharing Economy provides a dynamic framework for 
analyzing and developing the spectrum sharing business 
models. 
Keywords-business 
model; 
Citizens 
Broadband 
Radio 
Service; 
cognitive 
radio; 
sharing 
economy; 
spectrum 
management; Lisensed Shared Access; TV White Space. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We have seen the exponential growth of wireless 
services, applications and devices, requiring connectivity. 
Furthermore, the number of mobile broadband (MBB) 
subscribers and the amount of data consumed is set to grow 
significantly [1], leading to increasing spectrum demand. 
Both the European Commission (EC) [2] and the US 
President’s Council of Advanced Science & Technology 
(PCAST) [3] have recently emphasized the need for novel 
thinking within wireless industry to cope with the growing 
capacity crunch in spectrum allocation, utilization and 
management. The prominence of dynamic spectrum access 
and spectrum sharing has been emphasized in improving the 
efficiency of the spectrum utilization through balancing 
across domains with different spectrum dynamics. For any 
spectrum sharing framework to emerge and scale, close 
cooperation between research, regulation and across industry 
domains is essential. The collaboration between research and 
industry plays a central role in validating enabling platforms, 
technologies and innovations. The spectrum regulation and 
standardization has played a central role in enabling current 
multibillion business ecosystems: For the MBB via exclusive 
Quality of Service (QoS) spectrum usage rights, and at the 
same time for unlicensed wireless local area network (Wi-Fi) 
ecosystem drawing from the public spurring innovations. 
Without sound and sustainable business models for all the 
key industry stakeholders, new concepts will not become 
deployed in a large scale. 
To date, only few of the Dynamic Spectrum Access 
(DSA) concepts from research have crossed the threshold 
into policy domain. Furthermore, several spectrum sharing 
concepts supported by National Regulatory Authorities 
(NRA) and standardization have not to date scaled up in the 
wireless services market, the TV White Space (TVWS) 
being the latest example. After a decade of profound 
unlicensed TVWS concept research, standardization and 
trials in the US [4] and the UK [5] with their key learnings, 
license based sharing models have recently emerged and are 
under regulatory discussion, standardization and pre-
commercial trials. The most prominent novel spectrum 
sharing concepts are the Licensed Shared Access (LSA) [6] 
from Europe and the three-tiered Citizens Broadband Radio 
Service (CBRS) from the US [7].  
Development of business models for spectrum sharing 
can benefit from the previous work on business models in 
the Internet business domain. Scalable business model 
analysis has been developed by Amit and Zott [8] as a model 
of e-business based on four independent dimensions: 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

efficiency, complementarities, lock-in, and novelty. Rappa 
[9] classified the Web-based business models as brokerage 
model, advertising model, information-intermediary model, 
merchant model, manufacturer direct model, affiliate model, 
community model, subscription model, and utility and hybrid 
models. Bouwman et al. [10] differentiate in their business 
model analysis business model effects: organizational 
structure, services, technology, revenue, and environmental 
factors: regulation, technology, market. Hallowell [11] stated 
a scalability paradox that while the reduction of scalability is 
often caused by human intervention, the competitive 
advantage based on differentiation is also gained by human 
intervention. Stampfl identified and categorized the 
antecedents of business model scalability into five mutually 
exclusive factors in the explorative business model 
scalability model [12], which Stephany adapted into his 
sharing economy definition [13].  
For all of the three spectrum sharing concepts there is no 
prior work available in particular regarding their business 
model design comparative analysis. An initial evaluation of 
the general spectrum sharing concept from the business 
modeling point of view can be found in [14]. Business 
modelling for the TVWS network was discussed in [15], and 
the LSA focused strategy and business model analysis in 
[16][17]. Business model typology and scalability analysis 
for the LSA and the CBRS were done in [18]. We extend 
that work by focusing on analyzing and comparing the 
viability and attractiveness of all three spectrum sharing 
concepts using sharing economy [19] antecedent factors. 
This paper investigates: 
How do recent spectrum sharing concepts support the 
antecedents for business model scalability in the sharing 
economy framework? 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, the 
TVWS, the LSA and the CBRS sharing concepts are 
introduced in Section II. Theoretical background for the 
sharing economy is introduced in Section III. The business 
model characteristics and sharing economy antecedents for 
the TVWS, the LSA, and the CBRS spectrum sharing 
concepts are derived and analyzed in Section IV. Finally, 
conclusions are drawn in Section V. 
II. 
OVERVIEW OF RECENT SPECTRUM SHARING 
CONCEPTS 
This section presents the three prominent spectrum 
sharing frameworks and system concepts under discussion in 
regulatory domain: the TVWS, the LSA and the CBRS. The 
common intention of the concepts is to improve spectrum 
usage efficiency by allowing new users to access a spectrum 
on the space or time basis when not being used by the 
incumbent system(s) currently holding the spectrum usage 
rights. Detailed description and the status of the TVWS, the 
LSA, the CBRS, and the concepts and technologies, under 
continuous revision can be found for example in [4][5], 
[20][21], and [22][23], respectively. 
A. TV White Space 
In this section, the opportunistic TV White Space concept 
utilizing terrestrial broadcasting Ultra High Frequency 
(UHF) spectrum is discussed in general level. TVWS 
standardization is spread to several organizations around the 
world, and there is no single dominant standard, technology 
or solution to date. In addition to Wi-Fi based technologies 
focused on in this paper, also other radio technologies like 
Long Term Evolution (LTE) and Worldwide Interoperability 
for Microwave Access (WiMAX) have been experimented 
for TVWS. 
The TVWS aims to improve spectrum efficiency through 
utilizing the unused and underutilized spectrum in space and 
time based on databases.  In this concept, license-exempt 
White Space Devices (WSDs) obtain the available channel 
information via a certified Geo-Location Database (GLDB), 
which optimizes the effective reuse of the spectrum, and 
ensures interference free operation for the incumbent 
licensed users. The GLDB stores and periodically updates 
TV licensees’ Digital Terrestrial TV (DTT) network 
infrastructure and channel occupancy information, and in the 
case of the UK, the Program Making and Special Events 
(PMSE) service usage data. In the operations phase, to 
access the TVWS spectrum, WSD base stations reports 
locations to a GLDB, which computes and returns the 
available TV channels for WSDs. Figure 1 below depicts an 
overview of the TVWS framework, and how access to white 
spaces based on the GLDB would work in the UK case. In 
the preparatory phase, the GLDB will deploy the basic 
operational 
dataset 
provided 
by 
the 
Office 
of 
Communications (Ofcom) consisting of DTT coexistence 
data, location agnostic data, PMSE data, and unscheduled 
adjustments data. A master WSD would first consult a list of 
DBs provided by Ofcom hosted Website. Then, it would 
select its preferred GLDB from the list, and send to it its 
location and device parameters. The GLDB would then 
return details of the allowed frequencies and power levels 
[5]. 
 
Figure 1.  Overview of TV White Spaces framework in the UK. 
In the US, the FCC has finalized the TVWS regulation 
[24], followed by the Infocomm Development Authority 
(IDA) of Singapore [25] in 2014 and Ofcom from the UK in 
2015 [5]. The ECC prepared European level technical 
framework in the European Conference of Postal and 
Telecommunications (CEPT) FM53 working group [26]. 
The TVWS regulatory frameworks to date have been 
unprotected and license-exempt, applicable for deploying the 
most prominent TVWS Wi-Fi version of IEEE 802.11af 
[27]. The FCC has temporarily certified several companies 
Ofcom list
of databases
DTT coverage
database
PMSE usage
database
Slave
Master
3rd party
GLDB
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

including Google, Microsoft, and Spectrum Bridge as 
geolocation database operators. In UK, Fairspectrum, 
Nominet UK, Sony Europe, and Spectrum Bridge are 
qualified to provide database services for the TVWS. The 
first use cases of the TVWS in the US have been fixed 
Wireless Internet Service Provisioning (WISP) for rural 
communities 
and 
industry 
verticals, 
where 
another 
connection technology, typically Wi-Fi, is needed between 
the User Equipment (UE) and the TVWS Customer Premises 
Equipment (CPE). 
B. Licensed Shared Access (LSA) 
The EC communication based on an industry initiative 
promoted spectrum sharing across wireless industry and 
different types of incumbents [28]. In 2013, the Radio 
Spectrum Policy Group (RSPG) of the EC defined LSA as 
[2] “a regulatory approach aiming to facilitate the 
introduction of radio communication systems operated by a 
limited number of licensees under an individual licensing 
regime in a frequency band already assigned or expected to 
be assigned to one or more incumbent users. Under the LSA 
framework, the additional users are allowed to use the 
spectrum (or part of the spectrum) in accordance with 
sharing rules included in their rights of use of spectrum, 
thereby allowing all the authorized users, including 
incumbents, to provide a certain QoS.”  
The recent development in policy, standardization and 
architecture has focused on applying the LSA to leverage 
scale and harmonization of the Third Generation Partnership 
Project (3GPP) ecosystem. This would enable MBB systems 
to gain shared access to additional harmonized spectrum 
assets not currently available on exclusive basis, particular 
the 3GPP band 40 (2.3-2.4 GHz) as defined by the CEPT 
[29]. The European Telecommunications Standards Institute 
(ETSI) introduced related system reference, requirements 
and 
architecture 
documents 
[21][30][31] 
from 
the 
standardization perspective. In the LSA concept, the 
incumbent spectrum user, such as a PMSE video link, a 
telemetry system, or a fixed link operator, is able to share the 
spectrum assigned to it with one or several LSA licensee 
users according to a negotiated sharing framework and 
sharing agreement. The LSA model guarantees protection 
from harmful interference with predictable QoS for both the 
incumbent and the LSA licensee.  
The LSA architecture consists of two new elements to 
protect the rights of the incumbent, and for managing 
dynamics of the LSA spectrum availability shown in Figure 
2: the LSA Repository (LR) and the LSA Controller (LC). 
The LR supports the entry and storage of the information 
about the availability, protection requirements and usage of 
spectrum together with operating terms and rules. The LC 
located in the LSA licensee’s domain grants permissions 
within the mobile network to access the spectrum based on 
the spectrum resource availability information from the LR. 
The LC interacts with the licensee’s mobile network in order 
to support the mapping of LSA resource availability 
information (LSRAI) into appropriate radio transmitter 
configurations 
via 
Operation, 
Administration 
and 
Management (OAM) tools, and to receive the respective 
confirmations from the network. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The LSA architecture reference model. 
The LSA system for 2.3-2.4 GHz band has been 
validated in field trials in Finland, Italy and France. 
Architecture, implementation and field trial results are 
presented, e.g., in [32] – [35]. The second use case currently 
being considered in European regulation is the application of 
LSA to the 3.6-3.8 GHz band [36]. For this band, the 
incumbent usage is less dynamic, and the LSA band 
availability is guaranteed in the license area for a known 
period. This allows extension to more innovative use cases, 
such as local networks using small cells, as there is no need 
for additional frequency resource or existing infrastructure to 
support dynamic handover. 
C. Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) 
As the LSA policy discussion started in Europe, in the 
US the CBRS concept started to gain interest as a 
complementary spectrum management approach. In the US, 
the PCAST report [3] in 2012 suggested a dynamic spectrum 
sharing model as a new tool to the US wireless industry to 
meet the growing crisis in spectrum allocation, utilization 
and management. The key policy messages of the document 
were further strengthened in 2013 with Presidential 
Memorandum [37] stating “…we must make available even 
more spectrum and create new avenues for wireless 
innovation. One means of doing so is by allowing and 
encouraging shared access to spectrum that is currently 
allocated exclusively for Federal use. Where technically and 
economically feasible, sharing can and should be used to 
enhance efficiency among all users and expedite commercial 
access to additional spectrum bands, subject to adequate 
interference protection for Federal users.” 
In Figure 3, the US three-tier authorization framework 
with the FCC’s spectrum access models for 3550-3650MHz 
and 3650-3700MHz spectrum segments is illustrated. While 
the general CBRS framework could be applied to any 
spectrum and between any systems, the current regulatory 
efforts in the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
are concentrated on the 3550-3700 MHz band as the first use 
case [7]. The standardization process for the CBRS is 
ongoing in the Wireless Innovation Forum (WinnForum) 
LSA 
Controller
Regulator
Incumbent
LSA 
Repository
LSA3
LSA2
LSA1
Operator
OAM
LSAOAM
LSRAI
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

[23], and for the specific spectrum band in the 3GPP [38]. 
The three tiers are: 
1) Incumbent Access (IA) layer consists of the existing 
primary operations including authorized federal users and 
Fixed Service Satellite (FSS) earth stations. The IA is 
protected from harmful interference from the CBRS users by 
geographic exclusion zones and interference management 
conducted by the dynamic Spectrum Access System (SAS), 
2) Priority Access (PA) layer includes critical access 
users like hospitals, utilities, governmental users, and non-
critical users, e.g., Mobile Network Operators (MNOs). PA 
users receive short-term priority authorization (currently, a 
three year authorization is considered) to operate within 
designated geographic census track with Priority Access 
Licenses (PALs) in 10 MHz unpaired channel. PALs will be 
awarded with competitive bidding, and with ability to 
aggregate multiple consecutive PALs and census tracks in 
order to obtain multi-year rights and to cover larger areas. 
Any entity eligible to hold a FCC license could apply for a 
PAL and is protected from harmful interference from the 
General Authorized Access (GAA) layer. 
3) General Authorized Access layer users, e.g., 
residential, business and others, including Internet service 
providers are entitled to use the spectrum on opportunistic 
license-by-rule 
regulatory 
basis 
without 
interference 
protection. In addition to the 50% GAA spectrum availability 
floor specified to ensure nationwide GAA access availability, 
the GAA could access unused PA frequencies. GAA 
channels are dynamically assigned to users by a SAS. The 
addition of the third tier is intended to maximize spectrum 
utilization, and to extend usage from centralized managed 
Base Stations (BSs) to stand-alone GAA access points 
(CBSDs). 
 
Figure 3.  The US 3-tiered CBRS spectrum access model and band plan.  
The SAS dynamically determines and assigns PAL 
channels and GAA frequencies at a given geographic 
location, controls the interference environment, and enforces 
exclusion zones to protect higher priority users as well as 
takes care of registration, authentication and identification of 
user information. In 2016, the FCC finalized rules for CBRS 
[7], and introduced the light-touch leasing process to make 
the spectrum use rights held by PALs available in secondary 
markets. Under the light-touch leasing rules, PA Licensees 
are free to lease any portion of their spectrum or license 
outside of their PAL protection area (PPA) without the need 
for the FCC oversight required of partitioning and 
disaggregation. This allows lessees of PALs to provide 
targeted services to geographic areas or quantities of 
spectrum without additional administrative burden. Coupled 
with the minimum availability of 80 MHz GAA spectrum in 
each license area, these rules will provide the increased 
flexibility to serve specific or targeted markets. Furthermore, 
the FCC will let market forces determine the role of a SAS, 
and as such, a stand-alone exchanges or a SAS-managed 
exchanges are permitted. 
In the dialog between industries [39], the FCC and the 
main incumbent user, United States Department of Defense 
(DoD), it is assumed that in addition to informing database 
approach, there is a need to introduce a Non-Informing 
Approach, requiring Environmental Sensing Capability 
(ESC). The ESC architecture and implementation scenarios 
discussed include a dedicated sensing network for a SAS, 
collaborative sensing by commercial network BSs, or their 
combination. According to the FCC rules [7], the SAS must 
either confirm suspension of the CBSD’s operation or its 
relocation within 300 seconds after the ESC detection 
communication, or other type of notification from the current 
federal user of the spectrum band. 
III. 
BUSINESS MODEL AND SHARING ECONOMY 
ANTECEDENTS 
Business models in general are built to exploit a business 
opportunity [40], in connection with the company and its 
external business environment [41]. In order to gain and 
sustain competitive advantage, companies must continuously 
develop and renew their business models. In the 
development of any new spectrum sharing concept, it is 
essential to consider the underlying business opportunities 
and the business model elements that are attractive and 
feasible for all the key stakeholders. Authors in [42] define 
business model in general as a framework across three 
analytical building blocks: a) focus of the business (activities 
that provide the basis for value creation and capture), b) 
locus of the business (i.e., defining the potential and 
scalability of business), and c) modus of business (simplicity 
and dynamism of business). The discussed spectrum sharing 
concepts confront the MBB and the wireless industry with 
strategic 
environmental 
changes, 
such 
as 
emerging 
competitive market structures, policy and regulatory changes 
as well as technology complexity, which all require 
companies to adapt or reinvent one or more aspects of their 
business model designs. In the following, the theoretical 
frameworks used to analyze how business models and their 
key elements could evolve and scale in response to novel 
spectrum sharing models are introduced.   
Potential for scalability is an important aspect when 
developing a business model, and synchronizing it to the 
respective business opportunity is crucial. The scalability of 
the business model and its key elements has been shown to 
be the primary driver for the venture growth [43], and the 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

attractor towards venture capital investments [44]. Vertical 
scalability approach scales-up a system by adding more 
resources into the system nodes, while the horizontal scale-
out approach adds more nodes to the whole system. Stampfl 
identified and categorized the antecedents of business model 
scalability into five mutually exclusive factors in the 
explorative 
business 
model 
scalability 
model 
[12]: 
technology, cost and revenue structure, adaptability to 
different legal regimes, network effects, and user orientation. 
The emerging sharing economy framework has leveraged 
these scalability factors with focus on resource efficiency 
and on-demand platform [45]. Through studying recent early 
adopters of the framework, Stephany [13] defined sharing 
economy as “the value in taking the underutilized assets and 
making them accessible online to a community, leading to a 
reduced need for ownership of those assets.” Furthermore, 
the framework originated from collaborative individual peer-
to-peer community consumption has lately evolved to 
corporations and governments participating the ecosystem as 
buyers, sellers or lenders [46]. Proposed sharing economy 
antecedent factors used in assessing business model 
characteristics of the spectrum sharing concepts are: 
a) Platform for online, on-demand accessibility,  
b) Reduced need for the ownership, 
c) Utilization of underutilized assets, 
d) Adaptability to different legal and policy regimes, 
e) Communities and trust, and 
f) Value creation and user orientation. 
Each of these antecedent factors relate to the specificities 
of the focus, locus and modus of the business in question. 
IV. 
ANALYSIS OF THE SPECTRUM SHARING CONCEPTS 
The three spectrum sharing models, the TVWS, the LSA, 
and the CBRS, introduced and discussed in Section II are 
next analyzed and compared against the sharing economy 
criteria presented in Section III. The summary of the sharing 
economy antecedent analysis is given in Table 1. 
A. Platform 
Sharing economy business models are hosted through 
platforms and automatized processes that enable a more 
precise, real-time measurement of available capacity, and the 
ability to dynamically making that capacity accessible. This 
dynamic adaptability to short-term changes, and automatic 
configuration of radio infrastructure and user equipment is 
the key differentiator to static sharing concepts, e.g., in the 
Industrial, Scientific and Medical (ISM) spectrum bands. 
The global 3GPP ecosystem with scale and harmonization 
will be the common technology scalability factor for the 
LSA and the CBRS approaches, while the TVWS has 
heritage on the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE) Wi-Fi ecosystem at the ISM bands. 
Compared to the LSA and the CBRS, regulatory and 
standardization actions for the TVWS have been concluded. 
However, to date the TVWS platform has not reached a 
tipping point, in spite of support from several major IT 
companies providing the GLDB. Interference constraints and 
strict technical requirements entail dedicated radio designs. 
Furthermore, radio ecosystem has not scaled due to scattered 
standardizations, lack of mobile operators’ interest, and the 
lack of certainty for the long-term availability of white 
spaces. 
The deployment of the LSA system will require 
relatively small changes to the existing mobile broadband 
infrastructure. MNOs can utilize existing network off-the-
shelf, and build additional LSA controller as an added Self 
Organizing Network (SON) functionality on top of the OAM 
system. In the LSA system, envisaged for the 2.3-2.4 GHz 
band, spectrum control is inside the MNO domain, and 
diffusion towards cognitive networks, in large, could be 
retained within MNOs control. Furthermore, the LR has low 
complexity compared other sharing concepts as sharing will 
be static or semi-static and binary between the incumbent 
and the licensee. 
In the CBRS model with higher dynamics, the third 
opportunistic GAA layer and sensing function will require a 
more complex SAS system. In managing a higher volume of 
dynamic transactions, big data analytics capabilities of 
Internet players could become of need and bring competitive 
advantage. In the radio access side, higher dynamics in the 
spectrum control across the PA and the GAA layers and 
operator service areas will necessitate advanced spectrum 
analytics 
and 
horizontal 
co-existence 
management. 
Furthermore, with tight response time requirements this 
could also affect radio design of base stations. On the other 
hand, the PAL and the GAA layers with the common SAS 
will offer opportunities to common markets for licensed and 
licensed-by-rule equipment, and services across customer 
segments. Higher frequency and the small cell focus layer 
enables CBRS operators to utilize their fixed optical infra 
assets in backhauling. In addition to this, the GAA layer has 
an optimal opportunity to leverage emerging LTE unlicensed 
and Wi-Fi ecosystems to scale and complement LTE 
operator and stand-alone solutions. 
B. Reduced Need for the Ownership 
The second factor deals with the superior value 
proposition and transactions that offer access over 
ownership, and ability to realize more choices with rapidity 
and lower initial costs. Sharing economy are spawning a 
variety of efficient new as-a-service (aaS) business models. 
In the unlicensed TVWS concept, only device 
authorization is needed before starting operations on 
practically free spectrum, which radically lowers the entry 
barrier compared to two other concepts. Unlimited number 
of users are administratively imposed, rather than voluntarily 
chosen. Concept scores well in terms of efficiency of 
frequency bands utilization and rapidity of access. In the UK 
TVWS concept, the unlicensed approach is complemented 
with a licensed option for devices that must be manually 
configured. 
The LSA concept offers lower cost spectrum without 
coverage obligations, with QoS guaranteed by licensing. For 
a greenfield operator, the up-front investment in spectrum 
license combined with needed infrastructure continues to set 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

an entry barrier. Therefore, the second use case of LSA on 
the band 3.6-3.8 GHz envisaged for more local licenses and 
deployment without need for existing mobile infrastructure 
or specific network management tools provides opportunities 
that are more prominent for new entrants. Extra capacity 
could in addition offer a scale-out opportunity with a 
wholesale service. The PAL operator in the CBRS could 
deploy similar kind of business model designs.   
The CBRS three-tiered regulatory approach could 
disruptively unbundle investment in spectrum, network 
infrastructure and services. Access to low cost spectrum with 
lower initial annuity payments for spectrum rights enables 
local ‘pro-competitive’ deployments, and further expands 
sharing mechanism for infra resources between operators. 
Furthermore, the light-touch leasing process will make the 
spectrum use rights held by a PA licensee available in 
secondary markets. The CBRS concept has potential on a 
longer term to reduce the need for parallel network 
infrastructure when spectrum, and related radio access infra 
assets are tradable, and hosted and shared on-demand and as-
a-Service. 
 
C. Utilization of Underutilized Assets 
Access and deployment of the underutilized assets on-
demand is essential to generate continuous revenue early. 
The value of the shared spectrum resources is highly 
dependent on the availability, liquidity and predictability. 
 Future availability of the shared TVWS spectrum assets 
is uncertain particularly in the dense urban areas. In rural 
area, TVWS operators are optimally positioned to create 
revenues from savings in spectrum costs, extended coverage 
and increased relative capacity. Coverage has potential to 
extend the customer base, while capacity could increase the 
Average Revenue Per User (ARPU). On the other hand, non-
guaranteed QoS, heterogeneous incumbent users, and TV 
channel properties limit usability and the scope of services of 
the shared resources. 
In the LSA approach, a sharing framework and binary 
sharing agreement negotiated between regulator, incumbent 
and licensee guarantee QoS and statistically known 
availability in advance. The LSA sharing framework could 
be initiated on a voluntary basis, but the regulator also may 
impose it. Availability of spectrum assets is highly 
dependent on the regulation, and the LSA was studied in the 
context of 2.3 GHz spectrum band as the starting point. The 
second use case currently under discussion is the 3.6-3.8 
GHz band, in which case the predictability of spectrum 
availability is even higher, as dynamic changes in spectrum 
availability do not occur. Similar predictability is possible 
for the second tier PAL operator in the CBRS. Utilizing extra 
capacity established MNOs could create differentiating value 
proposition around QoS and Quality of Experience (QoE), 
and have option to expand to capacity wholesale and hosting 
services. 
While the third opportunistic GAA layer offers the Wi-Fi 
ecosystem type innovation environment, the availability, and 
particularly the QoS is not guaranteed. This has limited 
MNOs interest, based on traditional business models with 
need for the high upfront investments. On the other hand, 
both traditional MNOs and alternative operators could use 
the GAA layer with free spectrum resource for offloading 
and nomadic Wi-Fi type of Internet access. On dense urban 
environment, new business model designs and revenue 
structures could emerge combining spectrum with other 
shared assets, e.g., small cell hosted solution as-a-service 
(SCaaS), advertisement & transaction based models, and 
enabling new vertical segments within Internet of Things 
(IoT). Furthermore, the three-tier model offers network 
operators unprecedented flexibility and scalability through 
the ability for to move between the PA and the GAA tiers. 
This allows for the use of much shorter leasing periods, 3 
years, without requiring a lessee to forgo their investment if 
their lease does not renew via simply converting from PA to 
GAA tier. For a new market entrant, this enables to try out 
their new service utilizing the GAA tier without having to 
invest in spectrum with future option to choose buy a PA 
license when / where needed depending on the market and 
interference protection needs. In the system level, this 
flexibility and scalability between tiers combined with the 
secondary market provisions will improve spectrum 
efficiency in capacity, and particularly in value as spectrum 
can be regularly re-allocated to the most valuable use. The 
complexity of the CBRS introduces new independent or 
integrated roles to the ecosystem related to SAS 
administration, sensing operator and future spectrum broker 
that could increase transaction costs in early development. 
New technology introduction should be continuously 
assessed in relation with added complexity and transaction 
costs. 
D. Adaptability to Different Legal and Policy Regimes 
The 
harmonization 
of 
spectrum 
management 
is 
indispensable to unlock a wide range of positive externalities 
throughout the entire value chain. Scalability of all sharing 
concepts could be limited by fragmented national incumbent 
use 
cases, 
related 
different 
incumbent 
protection 
mechanisms, 
and 
regulatory 
differences 
affecting 
repository/database and spectrum management system 
architectures and implementations. 
 The TVWS concept is regulated and standardized the 
US and Europe / the UK with variants, e.g., in Singapore and 
Canada. While having a negative impact on the platform 
scale, the low administrative burden approach of the TVWS 
offers low entry barrier to the market.  
Existing European LSA regulatory framework offers 
legal certainty and security with relatively high initial 
administrative burden. This protects the turf for established 
players, but limits the scalability through high entry barrier 
during the early macro deployments on the 2.3 GHz band. 
While the LSA offers visibility and predictability needed for 
high up-front investments in spectrum and infrastructure, 
both the CBRS and the TVWS regulatory approaches are 
pro-competitive targeting to lower administrative burden and 
entry barrier. The higher frequency small cell use cases of 
the LSA envisage opportunities that are more prominent for 
new entrants, and similar kind of business model designs 
than the PAL layer in the CBRS. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

The CBRS will have advantage on leveraging the 
common US market. Sharing concepts in Europe require a 
harmonized framework in regional standardization and 
regulation to reach economies of scale. The regulatory and 
standardization actions needed with regulated or highly 
political incumbents’ ecosystem (like defense, media and 
broadcasting) will potentially limit the scalability of all the 
frameworks. Uncertainty is introduced with the short PA 
licensing terms, and the GAA with opportunistic access only. 
E. Communities and Trust 
Making spectrum accessible is not enough; the 
underutilized assets need to move within the community. 
The trust is the trigger of collaborative shared consumption 
that makes the system grow and scale. The creation of a 
critical mass ecosystem with positive network effects is 
important for all three approaches with new context model 
based spectrum administrator and broker roles. 
The TVWS concept rules out the possibility of 
decentralized agreement over accepted interference levels 
and is prone to the tragedy of the commons as number of 
competitive users grows. Heterogeneous GLDB operators in 
terms of services and business models may have additional 
negative impact to the community and the trust factor. 
The repository or database is the vehicle to accomplish 
trust in all the models. Trust in the predictability of QoS and 
pragmatic incumbent protection is built on binary 
agreements and implemented in LSA Repository. In the 
CBRS, the database approach is complemented by the ESC 
for defense incumbents. Additional challenge for the CBRS 
is protection of MNOs business critical information assets in 
a SAS, and to meet stringent DoD’s Operational Security 
(OPSEC) requirements. 
In network externalities, business model designs 
represent a co-opetitive situation between MBB, wireless 
Internet and Internet domains. TVWS operators leverage 
their niche through tailoring according to local customer 
segment they serve benefiting of extended coverage. 
Furthermore, particularly in rural use cases, communication 
bit rates could be increased to level that enables access to 
Internet and media services to new user group. 
In case LSA licensees have existing infrastructure and 
dedicated resources in other mobile bands, they can utilize 
their connectivity scale and customer base to achieve instant 
critical mass, and use existing consumer ownership on 
connectivity for lock-in. New entrants in the case of LSA 
and CBRS could build their critical mass and lock-ins using 
Internet ‘innovation’ ecosystems, and consumer and 
customer data ownership on apps and services.  
Shared spectrum local small cell deployments in all the 
sharing concepts scale out ecosystems from legal and real 
estate aspects to radio planning and site camouflaging, as 
small cells will attach to structures and building assets not 
owned by traditional operator. This creates additional 
opportunities for sharing and collaboration between 
operators and various specialist companies like infrastructure 
owners and providers, real estate and street furniture owners, 
utility service companies and backhaul providers. 
F. Value Creation and User Orientation 
Sharing economy platforms create reciprocal economic 
value. Simplicity of the offer built around user knowledge 
driven ‘demand pull’ is critical in differentiating with 
existing service, as well as in scaling new spectrum sharing 
enabled services. 
In the TVWS concept, unlicensed users’ QoS is not 
protected. To date, the primary commercial ‘niche’ use case 
has been the non-competitive Fixed Wireless Access (FWA) 
WISP, in which a single GLDB serves a set of unlicensed 
WSDs belonging to local WISP providing Internet access to 
unserved rural areas. Free spectrum facilitates local niche 
services, e.g., for various IoT vertical start-ups. FWA use 
cases need specialized devices seen as extra complexity by 
users. 
MNOs could utilize the surplus LSA spectrum in 
strengthening 
customer 
satisfaction 
through 
fulfilling 
existing need pull with familiar services and simplicity of the 
offer built on existing customer data via customer experience 
management tools. In general, spectrum sharing technologies 
should only be visible to end user through benefits offered in 
availability, coverage, capacity, data rates, or as decreased 
service costs. Both the LSA and the CBRS can also facilitate 
introduction of innovative local business model designs. For 
MNOs, they enable differentiation opportunities in serving 
more heterogeneous customer segments, e.g., consumers and 
enterprises, and for alternative type operators like Internet 
players faster efficient access to new systems and services. 
Local and Internet players are uniquely positioned to offer 
differentiation around existence of their extensive user 
knowledge. On one hand, operators prefer specialized 
services, or enhanced QoS traffic delivery for a fee to 
content, application, or over-the-top service providers. On 
the other hand, new entrants from Internet domain, in 
particular, on the GAA layer would like to see broadband as 
a utility, transparent and non-exclusive basis.  
In addition to provide mandatory spectrum availability 
information brokerage, the LSA repository, the SAS, and the 
GLDB administrators can capture value through selling 
advanced information regarding the quality of the shared 
spectrum based on information from both the incumbents 
and other sharing users. These value added services will be 
framed by regulatory action, and their value will increase 
with the number of service users, creating a positive network 
externality. On the other hand, for operators the added 
complexity of the spectrum management can be seen as 
increased transaction and opportunity costs. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The exponential growth of wireless broadband services 
with diversity of devices and applications has inspired 
research community to come up with novel concepts to 
improve the efficiency of spectrum use. Recently, several 
spectrum sharing system concepts have been introduced and 
widely studied to cope with spectrum scarcity, though to date 
only a few has developed into pre-commercial deployments.  
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

TABLE I.  
SPECTRUM SHARING BUSINESS MODEL ANTECEDENT FACTORS 
Antecedents 
Sharing model 
 
TVWS 
LSA 
CBRS 
a) Platform 
+ Technology platform standardized and may 
thus be adopted quickly 
- Based on evolving technologies scores on 
flexibility, but may lack scale and 
harmonization 
- Interference constraints and strict technical 
requirements requires specialized radios 
- Uncertainty of spectrum assets has limited 
interest of major technology vendors and 
MNOs. 
+ Utilizes existing 3GPP ecosystem assets and 
scale 
+ Network management system automatization 
based spectrum control function (LC) 
+ Simple repository function (LR) fullfills static 
and semi-static use cases 
+ Protects and leverages MNOs infrastructure 
investments 
+ Extend 3GPP ecosystem to unlicensed and 
standalone LTE unlicensed 
+ Dense urban deployments have additional 
utility and infra assets to share, e.g., fixed 
optical infra 
- Requires new intelligent and near real time 
SAS and ESC sensing functions.  
- New capabilities in big data & spectrum 
analytics needed to manage horizontal 
interference, co-existence and transactions 
- New spectrum band and introduced dynamism 
impacts BS and UE radios 
b) Reduced 
need for the 
ownership 
+ Offers access to practically free spectrum 
+ Scores well in terms of efficiency of 
frequency bands utilization and rapidity of 
access 
- Unlimited number of users administratively 
imposed, rather than voluntarily chosen 
+ Enables faster access to lower cost capacity 
spectrum without coverage obligations 
+ Protects the turf on existing MNO infra with 
radio upgrades 
+/- Based on traditional exclusive licensing 
model with relatively high up front license 
payment 
+ Expands sharing into other assets, e.g., with 
local venue owners 
+ Unbundles investment in spectrum, network 
infrastructure and services 
+ Spectrum access with low initial annuity 
payments 
+ Access to local spectrum driven by business 
needs, when and where 
+ Expands sharing into other assets, e.g., with 
local venue owners. 
c) Utilization 
of 
underutilized 
assets 
- Future availability of the shared UHF 
spectrum assets is uncertain particularly in 
dense urban areas 
- Heterogeneous incumbent users and TV 
channels properties 
- Non-guaranteed QoS may limit scope of 
services 
 
+ Availability of spectrum assets dependent on 
regulation, currently LSA  considerd for 2.3 
GHz and 3.6 GHz spectrum band. 
+ MNO connectivity model as is 
+ Differentiation  through extra data capacity 
and high speed enabling QoS and QoE pricing 
+ Option to expand to capacity wholesale 
service 
+ For MNOs low cost offloading 
+ Nomadic Wi-Fi type of Internet access on 
dense urban environment hot spots 
+ PAL – GAA tier flexibility 
+ Spectrum and small cell hosted solution 
(SCaaS)  
+ Enables new vertical segments: IoT 
- Concerns over the QoS predictability 
particularly with and at GAA layer and 
neighboring users across census tracks 
- Transaction costs increase in early 
development with increased complexity 
d) 
Adaptability 
to different 
legal and 
policy regimes 
+/- Regulated and standardized the US and 
Europe / UK with variants, e.g., in Singapore 
and Canada. 
+ Low administrative burden 
+ Low entry barrier enables quick access to 
the market 
 
+ Legal certainty and security with existing 
regulatory framework  
+ Requires a harmonized framework in regional 
standardization and regulation in order to reach 
economies of scale 
+ Initial European focus but very generic 
concept adaptable to other regimes 
- National regulation with incumbent ecosystem 
+ Low administrative burden with low entry 
barrier on GAA 
- Uncertainty with short PA license term and 
GAA with opportunistic access only 
- Need regulation and standardization with 
incumbent ecosystem (DoD) 
- Initially US federal specific, need adaptability 
to other regimes 
e) 
Communities 
and trust 
+ Geo-location database is trust vehicle to 
protect incumbent users’ QoS 
- Heterogeneous GLDB operators in terms of 
services and business models 
- Rules out the possibility of decentralized 
agreement over accepted interference levels 
- The tragedy of the commons 
- Business model uncertainty limits 
incentives to invest 
+ Trust in predictability of QoS and pragmatic 
incumbent protection build on binary 
agreements and implemented in LR. 
+ Protection of LSA licensee business critical 
information quaranteed 
+ Use existing consumer ownership on 
connectivity with existing known services for 
lock-in 
+ Small cell ecosystem could introduce new 
players & shared asset opportunities 
+ Trust implemented using the SAS  
+ Internet giants ‘innovation’ ecosystems to 
trigger communities 
+ Customer data ownership on apps and 
services for customer lock-in 
+ Small cell ecosystem introduces new players 
and shared asset opportunities 
+/- Complemented by sensing as defense 
incumbents lack of trust in GLDB 
- Protection of MNOs business sensitive 
information assets in SAS uncertain 
- DoD OPSEC requirements 
f) Value and 
user 
orientation 
+ Main current use case is to provide Internet 
to rural unserved areas 
+ Free spectrum facilitates local niche 
services, e.g., for various IoT vertical start-
ups 
+/- Spectrum market related new value added 
service opportunity for database providers 
utilizing positive network externality 
- Unlicensed users’ QoS not protected 
- Requires special user equipment 
+ Clear business model as is 
+ Additional capacity to serve customers with 
improved QoS and QoE 
+ Customer experience management as a tool 
for value differentiation 
+ Can open the market to new players with 
local licenses 
+ Flexible regulatory framework allows 
facilitates introduction of innovative local 
business model designs  
+ Local and Internet players offer 
differentiation based on user knowledge. 
+ Enables heterogeneous segments, e.g., 
consumers, enterprises, IoT 
+ Introduces new roles: SAS admin, broker and 
sensing 
+ Local services, e.g., media broadcasting and 
advertisement 
 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

This paper discussed business model characteristics and 
sharing economy scalability criteria, and evaluated recent 
spectrum sharing concepts, the TV Whites Space, the 
European Licensed Shared Access and the US Citizens 
Broadband Radio Service, with respect to these criteria.  
For a spectrum sharing concept to be adopted, it is 
essential not just to develop technology enablers to meet 
regulatory criteria but also to provide a scalable business 
model design for all the stakeholders. Harmonization and 
scalability of the platform and automation of processes will 
drive economies of scale and trigger early market opening. 
The model must be able to offer superior value proposition 
that offer access over ownership and ability to realize more 
choices with lower initial transactions costs compared to 
exclusive models. Value of the shared spectrum resources 
are highly dependent on its availability, liquidity and the 
predictability. Access and deployment of the underutilized 
assets on-demand is essential to generate continuous revenue 
early. Scalability of all sharing concepts could be highly 
impacted by fragmented national incumbent use cases, 
related different incumbent protection mechanisms and 
regulatory differences. Trust is the trigger of all collaborative 
shared consumption that makes system grow and scale. The 
creation of a critical mass ecosystem with positive network 
effects is important for all three approaches with new 
database spectrum administrator and broker roles. Simplicity 
of the offer built around user knowledge driven ‘demand 
pull’ is critical in value differentiation for existing services as 
well as in scaling new spectrum sharing enabled services.  
The analysis indicates that the TVWS concept actively 
promoted by the US and the UK administrations, benefits 
from practically free spectrum and low entry barrier. 
However, to date the level of market acceptance has 
remained low mainly due to uncertainties related to the 
available spectrum assets, platform scale, and predictability. 
Moreover, unlicensed non-guaranteed QoS has limited the 
scope of services and business model designs. The LSA 
provides high predictability and certainty for both the 
incumbent and the LSA licensee, leverages existing 
platforms and capabilities, and preserves low impact to the 
ecosystem and business models. The opportunistic third tier 
of the CBRS concept lowers entry barrier to new alternative 
operators, scale out ecosystem with new roles, and foster 
service innovation particularly. Similarly, the higher 
frequency small cell use cases of the LSA envisages more 
flexible and scalable opportunities for new entrants, and 
novel business model designs. On the other hand, introduced 
dynamism will increase system complexity, and requires 
novel technology enablers in building trust and ensuring 
pragmatic predictability in the spectrum management 
platform while minimizing additional transaction costs. 
The Sharing Economy provides a dynamic framework 
for analyzing and developing the spectrum sharing business 
models. In the future, spectrum sharing concept business 
modelling studies will need to be expanded to cover novel 
ecosystem roles and stakeholders. In particular, co-operative 
business model with traditional mobile network operators 
and local alternative operators will be an important aspect to 
research. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by Tekes – the Finnish Funding 
Agency for Technology and Innovation. The author would 
like to acknowledge the 5thGear CORE++ and JoiNtMaCS 
project consortia. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Cisco white paper. Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global 
Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2015-2020. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-
provider/visual-networking-index-vni/mobile-white-paper-
c11-520862.pdf 2017.02.27 
[2] RSPG Opinion on Licensed Shared Access. RSPG13-538, 
Radio Spectrum Policy Group, Nov. 2013. 
[3] The White House, Realizing the Full Potential of 
Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth, 
President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology 
(PCAST) Report, July 2012. 
[4] FCC, Second Memorandum Opinion and Order (FCC 08-
260), FCC, Washington, DC, USA, Sep. 2010. 
[5] Ofcom, Statement on Implementing TV White Spaces. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/consultations/white-
space-coexistence/statement/tvws-statement.pdf 2017.02.27 
[6] ECC, Licensed Shared Access (LSA), ECC Report 205, Feb. 
2014. 
[7] FCC, FCC 16-55: The Second Report and Order and Order on 
Reconsideration finalizes rules for innovative Citizens 
Broadband Radio Service in the 3.5 GHz Band (3550-3700 
MHz). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-16-
55A1.pdf 2017.02.27 
[8] R. Amit and C. Zott, "Value creation in e-business," Strategic 
Management Journal, vol. 22, no. 6/7, pp. 493-520, 2001. 
[9] M. A. Rappa, "The utility business model and the future of 
computing services," IBM Systems Journal, vol. 43, no. 1, 
pp.32-42, 2004. 
[10] H. Bouwman and I. MacInnes, "Dynamic business model 
framework for value Webs," in the Proceedings of the 39th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Hawaii, 
USA, vol. 2, p. 43, Jan. 2006. 
[11] R. Hallowell, "Scalability: the paradox of human resources in 
e-commerce," International Journal of Service Industry 
Management, vol. 12, no. 1, pp.34-43, 2001. 
[12] G. Stampfl, R. Prügl, and V. Osterloh, "An explorative model 
of business model scalability," Int. J. Product Development, 
vol. 18, nos. 3/4,  pp.226-248, 2013. 
[13] A. Stephany, The Business of Sharing: Making it in the New 
Sharing Economy, Palgrave and Macmillan, 2015. 
[14] J. Chapin and W. Lehr, "Cognitive radios for dynamic 
spectrum access - The path to market success for dynamic 
spectrum access technology," IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 45, 
no. 5, pp. 96-103, 2007. 
[15] Y., Luo, L., Gao, and J., Huang, "Business Modeling for TV 
White Space Networks, " IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 53, pp. 
82 – 88, 2015. 
[16] P. Ahokangas, M. Matinmikko, S. Yrjölä, H.Okkonen, and T. 
Casey,""Simple rules" for mobile network operators' strategic 
choices in future spectrum sharing networks," IEEE Wireless 
Commun., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 20-26, 2013. 
[17] P. Ahokangas et al., "Business models for mobile network 
operators in Licensed Shared Access (LSA)," IEEE 
International Symposium on Dynamic Spectrum Access 
Networks (DYSPAN), pp. 263 – 270, 2014. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

[18] S. Yrjölä, P. Ahokangas, and M. Matinmikko, "Evaluation of 
recent spectrum sharing concepts from business model 
scalability point of view," IEEE International Symposium on 
Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (DYSPAN), pp. 241-
250, 2015. 
[19] A. Sundararajan, "The Sharing Economy: The End of 
Employment and the Rise of Crowd-Based Capitalism," MIT 
Press, May 2016.  
[20] M. Mustonen et al., "Cellular architecture enhancement for 
supporting the European licensed shared access concept," 
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 37 – 43, 2014. 
[21] ETSI, System Architecture and High Level Procedures for 
operation of Licensed Shared Access (LSA) in the 2300 
MHz-2400 MHz band. TS 103 235, 2015. 
[22] M. Sohul, M. Yao, T. Yang, and J. Reed, "Spectrum Access 
System for the Citizen Broadband Radio Service," IEEE 
Commun. Mag., vol. 53, no. 7, 2015, pp. 18-25. 
[23] The WINNF Spectrum Sharing Committee, "SAS Functional 
Architecture," 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://groups.winnforum.org/d/do/8512 2017.02.27 
[24] FCC, 
White 
Spaces. 
[Online]. 
Avaialable 
from: 
http://www.fcc.gov/topic/white-space 2017.02.27 
[25] Info-Communications Development Authority of Singapore. 
"Regulatory framework for TV White Space operations", June 
2014. 
[26] CEPT, the regulatory framework for TV WSD (White Space 
Devices) using a geolocation database and guidance for 
national implementation, ECC report 236, May 2015. 
[27] IEEE Standards Association. "Part 11: Wireless LAN 
Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) 
Specifications, Amendment 5: Television White Spaces 
(TVWS) Operation", 2013. 
[28] EC, Promoting the shared use of radio spectrum resources in 
the internal market, COM (2012) 478, European Commission, 
Sept. 2012. 
[29] CEPT, Harmonised technical and regulatory conditions for 
the use of the band 2300-2400 MHz for Mobile/Fixed 
Communications Networks (MFCN), CEPT, ECC Decision 
(14)02, June 2014. 
[30] ETSI, Mobile Broadband services in the 2300-2400 MHz 
frequency band under Licensed Shared Access regime. ETSI 
TR 103.113, 2013. 
[31] ETSI, System requirements for operation of Mobile 
Broadband Systems in the 2300 MHz -2400 MHz band under 
LSA. ETSI TS 103 154, 2014. 
[32] M. Matinmikko et al., "Cognitive radio trial environment: 
First live authorized shared access-based spectrum-sharing 
demonstration," IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 
30-37, Sept. 2013. 
[33] S. Yrjölä et al., "Licensed Shared Access (LSA) Field Trial 
Using LTE Network and Self Organized Network LSA 
Controller," Wireless Innovation Forum European Conference 
on Communication technologies and Software Defined Radio 
(WInnComm-Europe), pp. 68-77, Oct. 2015. 
[34] Italy, "World's first LSA pilot in the 2.3-2.4 GHz band," Input 
contribution to ECC PT1 #51, ECC PT1(16)028, Jan. 2016.  
[35] RED Technologies, "Ericsson, RED Technologies and 
Qualcomm Inc. conduct the first Licensed Shared Access 
(LSA) 
pilot 
in 
France," 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.redtechnologies.fr/news/ericsson-red-
technologies-and-qualcomm-inc-conduct-first-licensed-
shared-access-lsa-pilot-france 2017.02.27 
[36] ECC PT1, "Operational guidelines for spectrum sharing to 
support the implementation of the current ECC framework in 
the 3 600-3 800 MHz range", ECC PT1(16)82 Annex 20, Apr. 
2016. 
[37] The White House, Expanding America's Leadership in 
Wireless Innovation, Presidential Memorandum, June 2013. 
[38] The 3GPP R4-168006: Relevant requirements for Band 48 
introduction 
in 36.104, 
TSG-RAN4 
Meeting 
#80bis, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia, Oct. 2016. 
[39] FCC, Amendment of the Commission's Rules with Regard to 
Commercial Operations in the 3550-3650 MHz Band, FCC, 
Docket 12-354, 14-49, 2014. 
[40] C. Zott and R. Amit, "Business model design: An activity 
system perspective. Long Range Planning, vol. 43, no. 2-3, 
pp. 216-226, 2010. 
[41] D. 
Teece, 
"Business 
models, 
business 
strategy 
and 
innovation," Long Range Planning, vol. 43, no. 2-3, pp. 172-
194, 2010. 
[42] A. Onetti, A. Zucchella, M.V. Jones, and P. P. McDougall-
Covin, 
" 
(2012) 
Internationalization, 
innovation 
and 
entrepreneurship: business models for new technology-based 
firms. J Manag Gov, vol 16, pp. 337-368, 2012. 
[43] L. Berry, V. Shankar, J. Parish, S. Cadwallader, and T. 
Dotzel, "Creating new markets through service innovation," 
MIT Sloan Management Review, vol. 47, no. 2, 2006, pp.56-
63. 
[44] N. Franke, M. Gruber, D. Harhoff, and J. Henkel, "Venture 
capitalists' evaluations of startup teams: trade-offs, knock-out 
criteria, and the impact of VC experience," Entrepreneurship: 
Theory & Practice,  vol. 32, no. 3, pp.459-483, 2008. 
[45] S. Choudary, M. Van Alstyne, and G. Parker, "Platform 
Revolution: How Networked Markets Are Transforming the 
Economy--And How to Make Them Work for You," John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., Mar. 2016. 
[46] A. Sundararajan, "From Zipcar to the Sharing Economy" 
HBR, June 2013. 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

