Developing Cognitive Strategies for Reducing Energy Consumption in Wireless 
Sensor Networks 
 
Elena Romero, Alvaro Araujo, Javier Blesa, Octavio Nieto-Taladriz 
Electronic Engineering Department 
Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingenieros de Telecomunicación 
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid 
Madrid, Spain 
{elena, araujo,jblesa,nieto}@die.upm.es 
 
Abstract— 
Due 
to 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies, wireless data traffic is growing with a rate 
higher than 25% annually. Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) 
represent nowadays one of the most rapidly expanding sectors 
in wireless networks. In this context, applying reducing power 
consumption in WSN scenarios is a great challenge to face in 
order to make this kind of networks sustainable. In this paper, 
we present some work in progress ideas about different 
opportunities in power consumption reduction for WSN taking 
advantage of the opportunities presented by applying 
Cognitive Radio (CR) capabilities to WSN. Cognitive 
characteristics provide some features that make WSNs 
different to Cognitive Wireless Sensor Networks (CWSNs). 
However, 
cognitive 
capabilities 
entail 
extra 
power 
consumption too. Therefore, the design of strategies must be a 
task that involves the overall design across all layers of the 
communication protocol and not only specific improvements 
without considering consumption in a holistic way. 
Keywords - WSN; Power management; Cognitive radio; 
Network optimization 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Global data traffic in telecommunication annually grows 
with a rate higher than 50%. While the growth in traffic is 
stunning, the rapid adoption of wireless technology over the 
complete globe and the penetration through all layers of 
society is even more amazing. Over the span of 20 years, 
wireless subscription has risen to 40% of the world 
population, and is expected to grow to 70% by 2015. Overall 
mobile data traffic is expected to grow to 6.3 exabytes per 
month by 2015, a 26-fold increase over 2010 [1]. This 
expansion leads to an increase of the energy consumption by 
approximately 10% per year. 
A major portion of this expanding traffic has been 
migrating to mobile networks and systems. This increasing 
demand for wireless communication presents an efficient 
spectrum utilization challenge. To address this challenge, 
Cognitive Radio (CR) has emerged as the key technology, 
which enables opportunistic access to the spectrum.  Briefly, 
CR is defined as a wireless radio device which can adapt to 
its operating environment via sensing in order to facilitate 
efficient communications [2]. Moreover, it can facilitate 
multimode radio interfaces that can operate in multiple 
standards with its adaptation property. 
Adding cognition to the existing WSN infrastructure will 
bring many benefits. In fact, WSN is one of the areas with 
the highest demand for cognitive networking.  In WSN, node 
resources are constrained in terms of battery and power of 
computation but also in terms of spectrum availability. 
Regarding spectrum scarcity, most WSN solutions 
operate in unlicensed frequency bands. In general, they use 
ISM bands, like, the worldwide available 2.4 GHz band. This 
band is also used by a large number of popular wireless 
applications (Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, Zigbee and IEEE 802.15.4). 
For this reason, the unlicensed spectrum bands are becoming 
overcrowded with the increasing use of WSN based systems. 
As a result, coexistence issues in unlicensed bands have been 
subject of extensive research [3][4] and in particular, it has 
been shown that IEEE 802.11 networks can significantly 
degrade the performance of Zigbee/802.15.4 networks when 
operating in overlapping frequency bands [4]. 
In this scenario, Cognitive Wireless Sensor Networks 
(CWSN) emerge as a new paradigm that can help mitigate 
very important problems like spectrum scarcity, interferences 
or reliable connections. Due to the number of nodes, its 
wireless nature, and its deployment in difficult access areas, 
CWSN nodes should not require any maintenance. In terms 
of consumption, this means that the sensors must be 
energetically autonomous and therefore the batteries cannot 
be changed or recharged. In this kind of scenarios lifetime of 
the nodes ranges typically between 2 and 5 years, making 
power consumption a dramatic requirement to establish [5].  
Considering all these points, it is extremely important to 
optimize every step of wireless communications (ranging 
from the manufacture of equipment for basic functions). 
Thus, green networks and communication approaches 
require a holistic approach to energy optimization in 
communication systems inspiring a new research field.  
The structure of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II present the related work in CWSNs and some 
efforts related to reduce energy consumption. Section III 
focuses on the power consumption challenge in CWSNs. 
Section IV presents a group of strategies for power 
consumption reduction for CWSN sorted by the cognitive 
feature chosen for developing the strategy. Finally, 
conclusions and future work are presented in Section V.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, state of the art on Cognitive Radio from a 
low-power WSN communication perspective is provided. 
CWSN is a young technology and we can find few works 
about CWSN in a generic way [6]. Most of works introduce 
the idea of CWSN and promoting the research on this topic. 
Along the same line, [7] presents an overview of CWSNs, 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

discussing the emerging topics and the potential challenges 
in the field. The main advantages are discussed and possible, 
but vague, solutions to the problems are suggested. In [8], 
the main design principles, topologies, algorithms, sensing 
and decision techniques, advantages, application areas and 
architectures of CWSN are exposed. In [9], the vision and 
advantage of a holistic approach to cognition in sensor 
networks is provided. In [10], a methodology, a theoretical 
framework, and some novel ideas on performance modelling 
are presented. 
Talking about reduce power consumption in general CN, 
there are several approaches. In a bottom-up review of low-
power design, the first level can be focused on circuit 
choices (error correction, rake parameters, and drive 
currents). Second level is system parameters such us 
modulation, coding, carrier, filtering, sample rate or 
algorithms. Third level is radio knowledge of consumed 
power and final level is the application development. Most of 
the research works focus on achieving power-efficient 
spectrum use. In [11], a transmission power management is 
proposed to minimize interference with primary users and to 
guarantee an acceptable QoS level for the cognitive 
transmission. A method of spectrum sharing with multi-user 
cognitive network based on interference temperature limits 
model is proposed in [12]. Taking into account the channel 
occupancy probability is possible to develop a variable 
power-bandwidth 
efficiency 
strategy. 
Reducing 
the 
bandwidth efficiency by 50% can increase the battery life by 
400% [13]. In [14], the power constraint is integrated into the 
objective function named power efficiency. 
If we move to the specific area of consumption reduction 
in CWSN, there is still much work to do. Focusing on low-
power networks, Gür and Alagöz [15] notice the importance 
of CR features to improve power consumption, as in [8] 
where it is noted that CR could be able to adapt to varying 
channel conditions, which would increase transmission 
efficiency, and hence help reduce power used for 
transmission and reception. 
Some advices are given in [6] as “implementing 
spectrum sensing in all nodes in a WSN may not be efficient 
in terms of energy consumption”. In [9], two main problems 
related with energy consumption are listed:  network lifetime 
maximization and energy efficient routing.  
A routing scheme optimizing size of transmitted data and 
transmission distance is proposed in [16], while [17] focuses 
on reducing power consumption in the sensing step. It is 
noted the importance of carrying out this task adopting a 
cross layer approach for spectrum sensing and optimizing the 
sensing procedure with respect to energy consumption. 
In [10], Bdira and Ibnkahla remark that energy-aware 
routing studies do not use to address application layer 
constraints 
(distributed 
or 
centralized processing 
of 
information, whether information relayed is urgent or 
essential) even though recent literature is rich in cross-layer 
optimization suggestions. 
Even the research in this area looks to be very interesting 
(as the references prove), the use of Cognitive Radio to 
improve energy consumption in WSN is not a mature 
research area. Some ideas are given, but real proposals and 
improvements are missing. In this scenario, CWSN has 
much potential to provide. In this paper, we propose different 
approaches to improve power consumption strategies with 
cognitive features.  
III. 
COMSUMPTION CHALLENGES IN CWSN 
Cognitive Radio emerges as a new paradigm that allows 
the use of techniques and can help to mitigate very important 
problems like spectrum scarcity, interferences or reliable 
connections. We can say that CR is an intelligent wireless 
communication system that is aware of its surrounding 
environment, and adapts its internal parameters to achieve 
reliable and efficient communication (in terms of power 
consumption too) [18]. 
CRs open up new control dimensions for reducing energy 
consumption with their agility and adaptation properties. 
However, the cognitive technology will not only provide 
access to new spectrum but also provides better propagation 
characteristics. CR networks could achieve a wide variety of 
enhancements by adaptively changing system parameters 
like modulation, transmission power, carrier frequency, data 
rate and constellation size. This will certainly improve power 
consumption, network life and reliability in a WSN. 
With these capabilities, a CWSN node can select the best 
strategy meeting its goals. A CWSN node could decide on 
the most appropriate strategy and acts accordingly. For this 
purpose each node has an optimization module that manages 
various parameters to decide the best policy in each case. 
The energy efficiency should be one of these optimization 
policies embedded in the optimization module. 
However, there are intrinsic challenges related to the CR 
capabilities such as hardware complexity, algorithmic 
problems, and design problems. Indeed, the added 
complexity of the nodes to enable cognitive capabilities 
makes nodes have higher energy consumption. Sensing state, 
collaboration among devices (that requires communication) 
and changes in transmission parameters are not free in terms 
of consumption.  
In this way, all steps must be taken into account for a 
holistic optimization.  Reducing power consumption requires 
optimization across all the layers of the communication 
systems. This paper addresses the different options provided 
by CR in the design of low-power WSN. 
IV. 
ENERGY OPTIMIZATION STRATEGIES 
As 
mentioned 
above, 
the 
reduction 
of 
power 
consumption is a task that involves the overall design across 
all layers of the communication protocol. Focusing layer by 
layer, several strategies for optimizing the consumption can 
be listed for each level, but we believe that due to CR 
characteristics, address the problem of consumption in a 
holistic approach has more advantages. 
Our proposal is to divide the opportunities to optimize 
energy consumption in 3 aspects, namely those that obtained 
through the sensing of the spectrum, those related to the 
capability to change transmission parameters and those that 
depend on the ability to share knowledge of the network.  
The first two aspects derive directly from the cognitive 
capabilities added to the WSN nodes. However, the third 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

aspect, related to the communication between devices, 
although essential for CR, is one of the basic characteristics 
of WSN, now enriched with cognitive information.  
A. Ability to sense the spectrum. 
Related with the ability of being conscious at any time of 
the spectrum features and changing the transmission 
parameters dynamically 
we 
can 
list 
the 
following 
optimization strategies. 
 
Use less noisy channels implies less number of 
retransmissions: Often in WSN scenarios, due to 
congestion of the network and low power 
transmission, 
some 
packets 
are 
lost 
forcing 
retransmissions. CR provides the ability to sense the 
spectrum and change transmission parameters 
according to them. Thus, if in sensing step a less 
noisy channel is found may be optimal to change the 
transmission to this channel in order to avoid 
duplicate transmissions and reducing the global 
consumption of the network. 
 
Use 
less 
saturated 
channels 
implies 
lower 
transmitted power: In the same way as in the 
previous case, cognitive features provide the ability 
to transmit in less noisy channels. If the transmission 
is made through a channel less saturated we can 
reduce the transmission power by ensuring that 
messages reach their destination. Taken into account 
that  communication is one of the most energy 
expensive tasks, reduce power transmission saves 
power to the network 
 
Use less noisy channels provides the possibility of 
using 
more 
efficient 
modulations: 
Power 
consumption could be reduced by using less robust 
modulations with lower consumption. More energy 
can be conserved by dynamically adopting the 
modulation according to instantaneous traffic load 
and congestion of channels [13].  
B. Capability to change transmission parameters 
Network 
can 
reduce 
power 
modifying 
several 
transmission parameters linked with sensed information. 
Examples of these parameters are: using less transmission 
power, using less memory, less microprocessor cycles, or an 
oscillator with lower frequency. For this challenge the 
following strategies could be used: 
 
Change communication parameters based on data 
rate requirements: Network devices can modify their 
communication parameters (modulation, channel, 
interleaving, etc.) to avoid a specific data rate with 
low power optimization. Network can use the most 
low power consumption wireless interface for a 
required data rate. 
 
Adaptative 
communication 
based 
on 
QoS 
requirements: because of the spectrum knowledge 
network can send more important packets using a 
better modulation, frequency channel or emitter 
power, but with a power penalty. Also, network can 
use crowd channels to transmit packets with low 
QoS requirements.   
 
Change transmission parameters according to 
spectrum: As it is said in section A, it is possible to 
change channel, power transmission or modulation 
parameters depending on the interferences found in 
the spectrum.  
C. Ability to share knowledge of the network 
CWSN paradigm allows modifying several parameters 
with influence in power consumption. These parameters 
belong to all stack levels, from application layer to physical 
radio interface. Spectrum knowledge, sharing information 
and collaboration are essential to achieve this goal. Strategies 
for achieving this goal are: 
 
Devices with higher consume could be switched off: 
One of the parameters that can be shared with other 
network nodes is the consumption of each node. In 
this way, the entire network could be aware of what 
nodes consumptions are higher or lower or in what 
circumstances (overcrowded channels) these values 
could vary. Thus, the network can be aware of the 
"black spots" and ensure that these nodes have fewer 
messages to be routed thus reducing the overall 
consumption of the network. 
 
Load balance could be used to take advantage of 
consumption and decrease overall consumption: 
Despite what is said in the previous point, sometimes 
load balance could be beneficial to reduce the overall 
consumption of the network even when using a 
priori nodes with higher consume. If nodes with the 
lowest consumption get stressed their batteries could 
be depleted, which would force in the future to pass 
all messages by nodes with higher consumption. 
Due to the ability of the network to share 
information about nodes consumption and remaining 
battery, this action could be taken. 
 
Transmitting with power enough to reach only some 
nodes: Taking into account that the network is aware 
of the topology, the packets could be sent directly to 
the destination if it is within range but if it is not the 
case, instead of increase transmission power, 
messages could be sent to intermediate nodes, which 
then forward the packet to other nodes until the 
destination is reached. This multi-hop transmission 
allows to take advantage of the exponential decrease 
in radiated power to save overall power consumption 
in the network by shortening the distance between 
nodes taking advantages of the density of nodes [5]. 
 
Developing more energy efficient protocols and 
routing algorithms: Related to the above three points, 
there is a vast field of investigation related with 
routing schemes. It could be combined data from 
individual nodes consumption, load balancing, 
distance between nodes, number of hops to reach the 
destination, noise in channels, etc. In this area, 
several papers in WSN scenarios have published 
[19][20], but adding CR capabilities further enriches 
the possibilities for consumption reduction. 
 
Switching off the sensing state if it is no necessary: 
Knowing the behavior of the network and being 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

aware of the history, nodes can decide to turn off the 
sensing state to reduce individual consumption and 
thus also the overall consumption of the network. 
 
Change 
on/off/idle 
mode 
based 
on 
latency 
requirement: packets can be stored in a node for a 
long time, limited by latency limit. During that time 
the receiver can be switch off and to save power. 
Transmitter node gathers information for a more 
efficient communication.  
 
Decrease security depending of power constraints. 
Security processing is one of the most important 
microprocessor activities. Ciphering, key generation 
or other countermeasures are critical for power 
consumption. A cognitive algorithm could change 
security depending of power consumption. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Due to the number of nodes, its wireless nature, and that 
they may be deployed in difficult access areas, power 
consumption in CWSN nodes is one of the more recurrent 
problems of this kind of networks. This work in progress 
presents some ideas in order to reduce power consumption 
for Cognitive Wireless Sensor Networks scenarios. 
The introduction of Cognitive Radio capabilities in WSN 
provides a new paradigm for power consumption reduction 
but also implies some challenges to face. This reduction of 
consumption is a task that must involve the overall design 
across all layers of the communication protocol. 
Our proposal is divided in three blocks depending of the 
opportunities to optimize energy consumption. These blocks 
are: 1) Strategies related to the sensing of the spectrum 
capability, 2) Strategies related to the ability to change 
transmission parameters and finally, 3) Strategies depending 
on the ability to share knowledge of the network. 
As a preliminary test for these ideas, some scenarios have 
been implemented with very simple low power optimization 
algorithms. Results show as a simple cognitive radio strategy 
can reduce between 94% (changing the wireless interface 
accordingly to data rate) to 40% (choosing less noisy 
channels) amount of power. Also we can check other curious 
issues such as the opportunity of change data-packet size 
depending on the transmission context is very important to 
reduce energy consumption. These tests must be completed 
with more complex algorithms in order to be presented.  
Current 
green 
wireless 
communications 
research 
directions have to consider Cognitive Radio capabilities to 
enable power reduction in Wireless Sensor Networks.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was funded by the Spanish Ministry of Science and 
Innovation through the Secretariat of State for Research, under 
Research Grant AMILCAR TEC2009-14595-C02-01, and through 
the General Secretariat of Innovation under Research Grant P8/08 
within the National Plan for Scientific Research, Development and 
Technological Innovation 2008-2011. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Cisco Systems Inc. “Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile 
Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2010–2015”, White Paper, Feb. 2011. 
[2] S. 
Haykin, 
“Cognitive 
Radio: 
Brain-Empowered 
Wireless 
Communications,” IEEE JSAC, vol. 23, no. 2, Feb. 2005, pp. 201–20. 
[3] I. Howitt and J. Gutierrez. “IEEE 802.15.4 Low Rate – Wireless 
Personal Area Network Coexistence Issues”. Procs of IEEE Wireless 
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2003. 
[4] D. Cavalcanti, R. Schmitt, and A. Soomro. “Achieving Energy 
Efficiency and QoS for Low-Rate Applications with 802.11e” Procs 
of IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference 
(WCNC), 2007. pp. 2143-2148 
[5] C. C. Enz, N. Scolari, and U. Yodprasit. “Ultra Low-Power Radio 
Design for Wireless Sensor Networks”. Procs of IEEE International 
Workshop on Radio-Frequency Integration Technology: Integrated 
Circuits for Wideband Communication and Wireless Sensor 
Networks, 2005. pp. 1-17 
[6] D. Cavalcanti, S. Das, J. Wang, and K. Challapali. “Cognitive Radio 
based Wireless Sensor Networks”. Procs of 17th International 
Conference on Computer Communications and Networks, 2008. pp. 
1-8 
[7] A.S. Zahmati, S. Hussain, X. Fernando, and A. Grami. “Cognitive 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks: 
Emerging 
Topics 
and 
Recent 
Challenges”. Procs of IEEE Toronto International Conference 
Science and Technology for Humanity 2009. pp. 593–596 
[8] O. B. Akan, O. B. Karli, and O. Ergul, "Cognitive Radio Sensor 
Networks". IEEE Network, vol. 23, no.4, pp. 34-40, July 2009. 
[9] G. Vijay, E. B. A. Bdira, and M. Ibnkahla. “Cognition in Wireless 
Sensor Networks: A Perspective”. IEEE Sensor Journal. Vol 11. No 
3. March 2011. pp. 582-592. 
[10] E. Bdira and M. Ibnkahla “Performance Modeling of Cognitive 
Wireless Sensor Networks Applied to Environmental Protection”. 
Procs 
of 
IEEE 
Global 
Telecommunications 
Conference. 
GLOBECOM 2009. pp. 1-6. Dec  2009. 
[11] D. J. Kadhim, S. Gong, W. Xia, W. Liu, and W. Cheng. “Power 
Efficiency Maximization in Cognitive Radio Networks,” Procs of 
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, 2009. 
pp. 1-6 
[12] H. Junwei and Z. Yunxiao. “A Nonlinear Optimized Power Control 
Algorithm for Multiuser Cognitive Networks”, Procs of IEEE 
International Conference on Network Infrastructure and Digital 
Content, 2009. pp. 1-5. 
[13] D. Grace, J. Chen, T. Jiang, and P. D. Mitchell. “Using Cognitive 
Radio to Deliver „Green‟ Communications”. Procs of the 4th 
International Coference on CROWNCOM, 2009, pp. 22-24. 
[14]  I. Aissa, M. Frikha, and S. Tabbane,”A dynamic power management 
procedure in cognitive radio,” Wireless Days (WD), 2010 IFIP , pp. 
1-5. 
[15] G. Gür and Fatih Alagöz. “Green Wireless Communications via 
Cognitive Dimension: An Overview”. IEEE Networks. Volume: 25 
Issue:2 pp. 50 – 56 
[16] I. Glaropoulos, V. Fodor, L. Pescosolido, and C. Petrioli “Cognitive 
WSN transmission control for energy efficiency under WLAN 
coexistence”. Procs. 6th International Conference on Crowncom 
2011. pp. 261-265. 
[17] L. Stabellini and J. Zander. “Energy-Aware Spectrum Sensing in 
Cognitive Wireless Sensor Networks: a Cross Layer Approach”. 
Procs 
of 
IEEE 
Wireless 
Communications 
and 
Networking 
Conference WCNC 2010. pp. 1-.6 
[18] J. Mitola. “Cognitive Radio: An Integrated Agent Architecture for 
Software Deﬁned Radio”. Ph.D. dissertation, Royal Inst. Technology, 
Stockholm, Sweden, 2000. 
[19] F. Bouabdallah, N. Bouabdallah, and R. Boutaba. “Load-Balanced 
Routing Scheme for Energy-Efficient Wireless Sensor Networks”, 
IEEE GLOBECOM 2008. pp. 1-6.  
[20] K. Jang, K. Kim, and H. Younl. "An energy Efficient Routing 
Scheme for Wireless Sensor Networks". Procs of Computational 
Science and its Applications. pp. 399-404 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

