Wireless Deterministic Medium Access: A Novel Concept Using Cognitive Radio
Dimitri Block
inIT, Institute of Industrial Information Technologies
Ostwestfalen-Lippe University of Applied Sciences
Lemgo, Germany
e-mail: dimitri.block@hs-owl.de
Uwe Meier
inIT, Institute of Industrial Information Technologies
Ostwestfalen-Lippe University of Applied Sciences
Lemgo, Germany
e-mail: uwe.meier@hs-owl.de
Abstract—The growing demand for coexistence of wireless
systems in industrial automation applications must be met by a
implementation of a deterministic medium access. Therefore,
we propose a novel concept which is based on inter-system
communication. It optimizes spectrum efﬁciency by handling
resource reservations in the frequency and time domain. It
is also aware of its environment by cooperatively mitigating
interferences. Further, it requires only minor modiﬁcations of
existing wireless solutions.
Keywords-deterministic medium access. cognitive radio. con-
trol channel. inter-system protocol
I. INTRODUCTION
The demand for wireless devices has been continuously
growing in the last decades. Especially license-free bands
such as the 2.4 GHz ISM band become more and more
crowded. The range of application ﬁelds rises for wireless
devices, too. Some application ﬁelds are mobile telephones,
remote control, monitoring, notiﬁcation services, Internet
access and multimedia streaming. Many high data rate
application demands will arise in the near future due to
trends like the so called smart-phones. It creates a need for
the coexistence of license-free bands.
The growing demand in consumer applications de-
creases the costs of standard components such as wire-
less transceivers. Thus, the number of wireless solutions
increases also for industrial automation (IA) applications.
Wireless solutions enable monitoring and controlling tasks
for long distances and hard-to-reach locations. They also
decrease the dependence on expensive, failure-prone wired
connections and replace outwearing sliding contacts.
Wireless solutions are also enablers of new IA applica-
tions with even more challenging requirements for coexisting
license-free bands. They require a deterministic medium
access and data transmission behavior. However, currently
the license-free bands do not guarantee any speciﬁc medium
access.
In this work-in-progress paper, we propose a novel cogni-
tive radio approach focusing on IA. The approach has mainly
three goals:
1) To provide a deterministic medium access,
2) To apply only minor modiﬁcations to existing wireless
solutions especially to all slave nodes, and
3) To be aware of its environment.
The ﬁrst goal is necessary for IA applications to ensure
real-time performance and reliable communication. In ad-
dition to IA applications, a deterministic medium access
improves security application.
The second goal focuses on low implementation require-
ments. While only few devices require the usage of a
new protocol, most devices do not need any additional
functionality. They use their protocol-speciﬁc interference
reporting functionality such as packet loss notiﬁcation in a
speciﬁc time slot and channel. Hence, most of the existing
and widely used wireless systems only require an adaption
of the master device such as an access point in case of an
IEEE 802.11 system [1].
Finally, the approach targets environmental awareness
– the third goal. Hence, it does not interfere with other
detectable and predictable wireless systems but protects
itself from being interfered. The interference mitigation is
performed for several dimensions such as time, frequency
and space.
The paper is structured as follows: Section II discusses the
three categories of medium access methods: non-adaptive,
adaptive and cognitive. In Section III the novel medium
access method and its three components (the supervisor,
the clients and the control channel) are introduced. Finally,
Section IV discusses open issues and Section V concludes
the paper.
II. MEDIUM ACCESS METHODS
The coexistence requirements for wireless communication
raised the number of medium access methods (MAMs).
There are
• Non-adaptive MAMs,
• Adaptive MAMs and
• Cognitive MAMs.
These are described in the following sections.
A. Non-adaptive Medium Access Methods
Non-adaptive MAMs are for example multiple access
methods such
as time-, frequency-
and code-division
multiple-access (TDMA, FDMA and CDMA) [2]. They
do not include any mechanism to mitigate interference
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

but rely on central planning by a dedicated device or on
manual conﬁguration. Due to their synchronous structure,
non-adaptive MAMs require only a little overhead of com-
munication. In consequence, it is easy to implement and to
provide a deterministic MAM. However, they do not adapt to
the environment by ignoring interference but interfere with
others. Due to such drawbacks it is advisable to use adaptive
MAMs.
B. Adaptive Medium Access Methods
While non-adaptive MAMs represent straight forward
approaches, adaptive MAMs are aware of the radio environ-
ment. They react to a feedback from the radio environment to
mitigate packet loss. Such methods are for example ALOHA
[3], carrier sense multiple access with collision avoidance
(CSMA/CA e.g., applied in IEEE 802.11 DCF [1]) and
adaptive frequency hopping (AFH e.g., applied in Bluetooth
[4]).
Adaptive MAMs mitigate interference with others and
ensure error-free transmission. On the other hand they have
no deterministic behavior. Thus, adaptive MAMs require
an overhead of communication and/or synchronization. For
example in CSMA/CA the receiver has to wait for an
unknown and random period of time for packet transmission.
Further, adaptive MAMs can be distinguished with respect
to the moment of feedback: Listen before talk (LBT) and
listen after talk (LAT) MAMs. LBT requires feedback before
transmission. Such a MAM is for example CSMA/CA. It
senses the channel before transmitting. Hence, if the channel
is classiﬁed as idle a permission for packet transmission
is provided. The adaption of LBT MAMs is based on
the current state of the channel. If no new interference
appears during transmission, LBT MAMs will ensure error-
free transmission.
While LBT MAMs react on feedback before transmission,
LAT MAMs adapt to new situations. This can be concluded
from the evaluation of previous transmissions. In this context
AFH is a good case in point. AFH is based on the spectrum
spreading technique FHSS, which switches – called hopping
– between multiple non-overlapping narrow-band frequency
channels in a (pseudo) random manner. If there is a packet
loss in a speciﬁc channel, AFH will block the channel for
future use. The adaption of LAT MAMs basically depends
on the state of the channel for previous transmissions.
Therefore, LAT MAMs are not able to guarantee error-free
transmission, even if no new interferences appear during data
transmission.
C. Cognitive Medium Access Methods
Although adaptive MAMs improve the quality of trans-
mission by mitigating interference, they suffer from the
system centric approach and missing abilities to collaborate
in any way with different systems. In consequence, adaptive
new
ISAC
ISAC 3
ISAC 1
ISAC 2
Figure 1.
Example coverage range of the system ”new ISAC”
MAMs are suboptimal for inhomogeneous radio environ-
ments. Collaboration would improve the efﬁcient usage of
spectrum, time and space. Further, collaboration reduces
overlapping resource allocation.
MAMs which are aware of their environment – more than
only by adaption – can be called cognitive MAMs. They are
not limited to collaborative approaches. Cognitive MAMs in
general adapt to the environment by sensing channels, pre-
dicting channel occupancy, negotiating sensing information
and transmission parameters, and adequate tuning. Further,
cognitive MAMs are able to adapt themselves ﬂexibly in
more than one dimension (e. g. time, frequency and space).
III. INTER-SYSTEM AUTOMATIC CONFIGURATION
METHOD
We propose a novel MAM called inter-system automatic
conﬁguration MAM (ISAC MAM). The approach is operat-
ing between systems. A system is for example a wireless
network based on IEEE 802.11 with one access point
and several stations. For proper operation ISAC has to be
supported by each system operating in the same frequency
band.
Each system consists of several types of devices. From
the ISAC MAM point of view, system devices are either
ISAC supervisors or ISAC clients. An ISAC supervisor is a
dedicated device which performs processes and negotiations.
An ISAC client includes only minor supporting and adapting
tasks. Each system must have one ISAC supervisor while
having an unspeciﬁed number of ISAC clients. The commu-
nication between ISAC supervisors is done via a dedicated
channel called ISAC control channel.
A. Supervisor
The most important device in an ISAC MAM system is
the ISAC supervisor. It has two main tasks: (i) to handle re-
source allocation and (ii) to mitigate interferences. Resource
allocation is performed by resource allocation negotiation
and by resource reversion negotiation. In the following we
discuss the tasks of an ISAC supervisor for an IEEE 802.11
(WLAN) system as example.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

t
t
new
ISAC
ISAC 3
ISAC 1
t
resource allocation request:
RAO 1, RAO 2, ..., RAO N
resource allocation responds:
RAO 5, RAO 6, RAO 12
resource allocation responds:
RAO 2, RAO 5
resource allocation acknowledgement:
RAO 5
Adapt to
RAO 5
Adapt to
RAO 5
Adapt to
RAO 5
Figure 2.
ISAC resource allocation negotiation
Table I
EXAMPLES OF RESOURCE ALLOCATION OPPORTUNITIES
Opportunity No.
Dimension
Unit
Type
Value
Frequency
MHz
Minimum
2402
1
Frequency
MHz
Maximum
2422
Time
%
Duty cycle
100
Frequency
MHz
Minimum
2407
2
Frequency
MHz
Maximum
2427
Time
%
Duty cycle
100
...
Resource Allocation Negotiation: If a new ISAC su-
pervisor requires resources, it has to initiate a resource al-
location negotiation. The negotiation principle is illustrated
in Fig. 2.
First, the initiating ISAC supervisor has to broadcast a
resource allocation request. This message also contains a
list of resource allocation opportunities (RAO). The RAOs
are limited in each dimension (see Table I). Each RAO is
associated with a speciﬁc operation mode of that particular
system. Hence, the RAO 1 is associated with WLAN channel
1 and RAO 2 with WLAN channel 2.
All ISAC supervisors in the coverage range (see Fig. 1)
participate in the negotiation. After receiving the request,
they check which RAOs are not conﬂicting with their own
operation or to which RAOs their operation is able to adapt
while proper operation will be guaranteed. The identiﬁers
of the coexistence capable RAOs are sent to the initiating
ISAC supervisor with the resource allocation responds.
After receiving all responds, the initiating ISAC super-
visor has to choose the optimal RAO. An optimal RAO is
permitted by all ISAC supervisors. The initiating ISAC su-
pervisor broadcasts a resource allocation acknowledgement
containing the identiﬁer of the optimal RAO.
Finally, the initiating ISAC supervisor informs its own
system about the optimal operation mode. If necessary,
the other ISAC systems also adapt their operation mode.
The chosen optimal RAO is considered allocated until it is
reverted or until the associated ISAC supervisor is no longer
accessible.
Resource Reversion Negotiation: If some resource allo-
cation is no longer needed, an ISAC supervisor can revert the
t
t
initiating
ISAC
ISAC 3
ISAC 1
t
resource allocation reversion notification:
RAO 5 
resource allocation reversion 
acknowledgement
resource allocation reversion 
acknowledgement
Figure 3.
ISAC resource reversion negotiation
t
t
ISAC
supervisor
other ISAC
supervisor
ISAC
client
t
protocol specific
interference notification
protocol specific
resource assignment
interference
detection
interference notification:
IR
interference notification
acknowledgement
adapt to IR
Figure 4.
ISAC interference notiﬁcation
allocation by performing a resource reversion negotiation.
The principle is illustrated in Fig. 3.
The initiating ISAC supervisor broadcasts a resource
allocation reversion notiﬁcation containing the concerned
RAO. The ISAC supervisors in the coverage range acknowl-
edge the notiﬁcation with a resource allocation reversion
acknowledgement. Then the resource allocation is canceled
and it is no longer considered allocated.
Interference Notiﬁcation: The second main task of an
ISAC supervisor is to mitigate interferences. The source
of an interference may be an unknown wireless system. It
may also be an ISAC system which is out of the ISAC
supervisor’s coverage range, but close enough to disturb the
communication of the ISAC system (see ISAC 2 in Fig. 1).
An interference can be observed by the ISAC supervisor or
even by an arbitrary ISAC client due to its cognitive features.
If an interference is observed, an ISAC system mitigates
the interference and its ISAC supervisor informs other
ISAC supervisors about the interference. This principle is
displayed in Fig. 4. In case the ISAC client observes an
interference, it informs the ISAC supervisor. This is done
in the speciﬁc protocol used by the particular ISAC system
(e. g. IEEE 802.11). The ISAC supervisor may detect an
interference. Then the ISAC supervisor broadcasts an inter-
ference notiﬁcation. The notiﬁcation contains the interfered
resources speciﬁcation (IRS). IRSs use the same structure as
RAOs but represent interfered resource speciﬁcations, which
are also called black holes [5]. The notiﬁcation is responded
by an interference notiﬁcation acknowledgement. Thus, if the
informed ISAC supervisors want to allocate resources later
on, they know the IRSs.
Additionally, the ISAC supervisors have to take care of
their own system. Therefore the protocol speciﬁc adaptive
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

MAM is used. In our example the ISAC clients shall take
care of the IRs by using CSMA/CA. In case some IRSs
cannot be mitigated by protocol-speciﬁc adaptive MAMs,
the ISAC supervisor has to initiate a resource allocation
negotiation.
B. Client
An ISAC system contains one ISAC supervisor and an
arbitrary number of ISAC clients. The ISAC clients do
not use the control channel. Owing to the fact that they
only have to communicate with the ISAC supervisor, the
communication protocol is system-speciﬁc and therefore not
part of this paper. Hence, in a WLAN ISAC system an
arbitrary client communicates with its supervisor using IEEE
802.11 packet frames.
In order to detect interferences, ISAC clients should also
be equipped with cognitive features. ISAC clients mainly
have two tasks: (i) to adapt to resource assignment instructed
by their ISAC supervisor and (ii) to inform their ISAC super-
visor about interferences. While the ﬁrst task is mandatory,
the second one may be optional. These tasks has already
been discussed in detail in the previous section.
C. Control Channel
The ISAC control channel is used for the communication
between ISAC supervisors. Using a control channel is a well-
known cognitive radio approach (see [6]). Therefore, the
control channel is commonly reserved for ISAC supervisor
communication. To guarantee proper operation the control
channel always has to be available.
We consider that the ISAC control channel is in itself a
speciﬁc wireless technology, although it is not necessary.
In contrast to the conditions given in the context of wired
communication, it is easy to setup such systems. They also
allow for temporary radio systems such as adhoc inter-
vehicular communication systems. However, the disadvan-
tage is that the control channel might be temporarily not
available, as in the case of non-deterministic interferences
or due to degradation of radio propagation conditions. This
problem can be solved by data redundancy and packet
retransmissions.
While an ISAC system itself may use any speciﬁc pro-
tocol, the ISAC control channel uses a common protocol.
The control channel also has to be a-priori known to avoid
time-consuming discovery and synchronization techniques.
Hence, the ISAC control channel cannot use cognitive
MAMs.
Further, to enable fast varying network scenarios, the
control channel itself cannot be managed in a centralized
manner. For this reason, an optimal MAM is distributed and
non-cooperative. Therefore, we suggest an adaptive MAM.
To realize a non-cooperative approach LAT cannot be used.
Thus, the optimal control channel is based on an adaptive
MAM using LBT.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the growing demand for coexistence of
wireless technologies, especially in license-free frequency
bands, is met by the introduction of a new approach. The
approach focuses on the requirements of industrial automa-
tion to ensure a deterministic medium access.
The approach handles inter-system reservation of re-
sources such as frequency and time. In other words, it
ensures efﬁcient usage of available resources. In addition to
resource reservation, it handles interference mitigation, co-
operatively. Therefore, it is aware of the radio environment.
Further, the approach brings only minor modiﬁcations to
existing wireless solutions. Hence, the approach is also easy
to implement.
The inter-system communication itself is performed via
a ﬁxed control channel. This control channel is also based
on wireless communication. The control channel has to be
constantly available. In some scenarious this could be a
challenge. Further, we conclude that the optimal control
channel shall use an adaptive medium access method of
listen-before-talk type.
V. FUTURE WORK
This paper discusses a novel approach, which requires
some future work. Most importantly, the protocol for the
wireless communication of the control channel has to be
speciﬁed. Further, sample implementations have to be pro-
vided and appropriate simulations have to be performed. The
results shall be veriﬁed by measurements.
REFERENCES
[1] “IEEE
Standard
for
Information
technology–
Telecommunications
and
information
exchange
between
systems
Local
and
metropolitan
area
networks–Speciﬁc
requirements Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations,” IEEE Std
802.11-2012 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.11-2007), 29 2012.
[2] T. Rappaport, Wireless communications: principles and prac-
tice.
Publishing House of Electronics Industry, 2004.
[3] N. Abramson, “The ALOHA System: Another Alternative for
Computer Communications,” in Proceedings of the November
17-19, 1970, fall joint computer conference.
ACM, 1970, pp.
281–285.
[4] “Bluetooth Core Speciﬁcation v1.2,” 2003.
[5] S. Haykin et al., “Cognitive radio: brain-empowered wireless
communications,” IEEE journal on selected areas in commu-
nications, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 201–220, 2005.
[6] J. Marinho and E. Monteiro, “Cognitive radio: survey on
communication protocols, spectrum decision issues, and future
research directions,” Wireless Networks, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 147–
164, 2012.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-267-7
COCORA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

