Cooperative jam Technique to Increase Physical-layer 
Security in CWSN 
 
Alvaro Araujo, Javier Blesa, Elena Romero, Octavio Nieto-Taladriz 
E.T.S.I. Telecomunicacion 
Electronic Engineering Department 
Universidad Politecnica de Madrid 
Madrid, Spain 
{araujo,jblesa,elena,nieto}@die.upm.es 
 
Abstract— This paper considers the problem of secure 
communication in Wireless Sensor Networks in the presence of 
non-colluding 
passive 
eavesdroppers. 
Cognitive 
networks 
capabilities such as spectrum sensing, share information and 
collaboration to optimize the communications can be used to 
avoid attacks. A collaborative jamming technique is proposed to 
increase Cognitive Wireless Sensor Networks security and a 
counter measurement against eavesdropped attacks. Three types 
of scenarios are defined: attacker location known, attacker 
location unknown, and attacker and relay co-location. Each new 
scenario adds a difficulty to the countermeasure to the previous 
one. Simulations show as Secrecy Outage Probability decreases 
until 10% with a standard number of relay nodes in the network. 
As a result, cooperative jamming strategies are seen to be highly 
effective for increasing the secrecy in Wireless Sensors Networks.  
Keywords-WSN; cognitive; jamming; collaborative; security 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) is one of the fastest 
growing sectors in recent years. The unlicensed Industrial, 
Scientific and Medical (ISM) spectrum bands, used by these 
networks, are becoming overcrowded. The cognitive paradigm 
has appeared to solve spectrum scarcity, interference and 
reliable connections problems. 
Cognitive Wireless Sensor Networks (CWSN) are based on 
the cycle sensing spectrum monitoring, analyzing for 
environment characterization, reasoning to chose the best 
communication strategy, and sending to provide adaptation and 
collaboration. 
Cooperation 
between 
devices 
regarding 
information sharing and taking decisions allows better 
spectrum use, lower energy consumption and better data 
reliability. CWSN are used in systems with critical data 
(telecare 
monitoring, 
military 
scenarios) 
and 
critical 
applications (safety home system, infrastructure protection, 
etc.). Hence, security is a fundamental challenge to face. 
Cognitive nature of the system introduces an entire new suite of 
threats and attacks that are not easily mitigate. 
 The broadcast characteristic of the wireless medium makes 
difficult to shield transmitted signals form unintended 
recipients. Security in wireless data transmission has 
traditionally been developed using cryptographic techniques at 
the network layer. The main drawback of this approach when 
deployed to WSN consists in limited resources, which cannot 
support the execution of complicated encryption algorithms, 
resulting in shorter keys that are easier to discover. WSN nodes 
can also be captured and attackers use reverse-engineered and 
become an instrument for mounting counterattacks. 
Physical-layer security becomes a very interesting approach 
in the past few years [1]. The main idea behind physical-layer 
security is to limit the amount of information that can be 
extracted at the ‘bit’ level by unauthorized receivers with the 
exploitation of all available Channel State Information (CSI). 
The fundamental problem in WSN is the difficulty to obtain a 
full CSI. Cognitive paradigm allows the spectrum monitoring 
and provides this information to the network.  
In this paper, a selective jam technique to increase physical-
layer security in CWSN using cognitive capabilities is 
presented. This technique can operate independently of the 
higher layers to complement security requirements. 
The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section II, 
works in physical-layer security for WSN are reviewed. In 
Section III, we formulate the technique description. Section IV 
provides its evaluation. Finally, the collusions are drawn in 
Section V. 
II. 
PHYSICAL-LAYER SECURITY APPROACHES 
In this section, we introduce schemes that could be used to 
achieve physical layer security against different attacks in 
WSN. 
In recent years, the main issues of secure channel capacity 
have drawn much attention in the information theory 
community. Most of the works are focused in schemes to 
obtain the secrecy capacity with different CSI approaches. 
Barros and Rodrigues in [2] developed a secure communication 
protocol to ensure wireless information-theoretic security based 
on: common randomness via opportunistic transmission, 
message reconciliation, common key generation via privacy 
amplification and, finally, message protection with a secret 
key. It was shown that the protocol is effective in secure key 
renewal even the presence of imperfect CSI. 
Other methods have been proposed to avoid attacks based 
on exploitation of channel characteristics. The Radio 
Frequency (RF) fingerprinting system implemented by [3] 
consists of multiple sensor system that captures and extracts RF 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

features from each receiver signal. An intrusion detector 
processes the feature sets and generates a dynamic fingerprint 
for each internal source identifier derived from a few packets. 
This system monitors the temporal evolution and alerts when a 
strange fingerprint is detected. In [4], L. Xiaohua and E.P 
Ratazzi propose a precoding scheme, in which the transmitted 
code vectors are generated by singular value decomposition of 
the 
correlation 
matrix, 
which 
describes 
the 
channel 
characteristic features between the transmitter and the intended 
receiver. Because of the difference in the multipath structure of 
the transmitter-receiver channels, even intruders, which have 
 
Figure 1.  Cooperative Jamming Scenarios 
a perfect knowledge of the transmission code, vectors, cannot 
achieve to acquire the true messages due the difference in the 
locations of the intruders and the legitimate users. 
Code approaches improve resilience against jamming and 
eavesdropping. In [5], a combination of turbo coding and 
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) cryptosystem is 
proposed. An error in the received ciphertext could cause a 
large number of errors in plaintext after coding. Depending of 
the channel condition, this method can be adopted to choose 
the number of redundant bits required to protect the 
information in order to achieve high efficiency. Another 
technique is Spread Spectrum Coding, which signal is spread 
by a pseudo-noise sequence over a wide frequency bandwidth 
much wider than that contained in the frequency ambit of the 
original information. The main difference between convention 
cryptographic systems and spread-spectrum systems lies in 
their key sizes. Traditional systems can have a very large key 
space. However, in a spread-spectrum system, the key space is 
limited by the range of carrier frequencies and the number of 
different sequences. In [6], a method is proposed to enhance the 
physical layer security of Code Division Multiple Access 
(CDMA) system by using AES operation to generate the 
scrambling sequences.  
Data protection can also be facilitated using power 
approaches. The method proposed in [7] ensures perfectly 
secure communications. This method shows that perfect 
secrecy can be achieved when the intruder’s channel is noisier 
than the receiver’s channel. Artificial noise is generated using 
multiple antennas or the coordination of helping nodes, and is 
injected into the null-subspace of the intended receiver’s 
channel. 
According to the proposal in work [8], discriminatory 
channel estimation is performed by injecting artificial nose to 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

the left null space of the legitimate receiver’s channel to 
degrade the estimation performance of the eavesdropper. By 
exploiting the channel feedback information from the 
legitimate receiver at the beginning of each communication 
stage, a multistage training-based channel estimation scheme is 
proposed [9] to minimize the normalized mean squared error of 
channel estimation at the legitimate receiver subject to a 
constraint on the estimation performance attainable by the non-
legitimate receiver. 
Most of these approaches can be improved using cognitive 
capabilities. Cognitive paradigm provide a new scenario 
because of the spectrum sensing, the protocols to share 
information 
and 
the 
collaboration 
to 
optimize 
the 
communications. In this paper a collaborative jamming 
technique is proposed to increase CWSN security and a counter 
measurement against eavesdropped attacks. 
III. 
COOPERATIVE JAMMING SCENARIO 
CWSN avoid one of the main constraints to use jamming 
techniques, the knowledge of the CSI. In a cooperative scenario 
there are several network entities. We consider a four-terminal 
system composed of a legitimate source (S), a legitimate 
destination (D), one or more relay nodes (R) and an 
eavesdropper (E). All these agents have cognitive capabilities 
and different radio interfaces. In this approach, the normally 
inactive nodes in the relay network can be used as cooperative 
jamming sources to confuse the eavesdropper and provide 
better performance in terms of security. Depends of the nodes 
nature three types of scenarios are defined (Fig. 1): attacker 
location known, attacker location unknown, and attacker and 
relay co-location. Each new scenario adds a difficulty to the 
countermeasure to the previous one. 
A. Attacker location known 
In the proposed cooperative jamming strategy any available 
jamming power will only be allocation to information 
transmitters, while D and S remain inactive. If E is detected by 
the network, nodes can use the location information to increase 
jamming over the attacker zone.  
Relay pool replay the message to the D and produce a 
jamming with the same communication features over the E 
zone. Closer nodes to the attacker manage the coordinated 
jamming. Thus, E can not listen the transmitted information 
and the communications in the rest of the network is not 
affected.   
B. Attacker location unknown 
In this approach, both the source and the destination nodes 
act as temporary helpers to transmit jamming signals during 
transmission phase in which they are normally inactive. The 
transmitter and the temporary helpers can perform cooperative 
jamming in the jamming subspace, which will allow the 
legitimate receivers to us beamforming to reject interference 
from this subspace. Note that cooperative jamming requires the 
receiver to broadcast the jamming subspace so that the 
interference can be aligned at the desired receiver without a 
loss of information. Although E may also be aware of this 
subspace, it cannot remove the jamming signal since it sees 
different channels from the transmitters and jammers. 
C. Attacker and relay co-located 
A most complicated issue is when E is co-located with the 
helper node. A secure countermeasure in this case is to have the 
destination jam the relay while it is receiving data from the 
source in the first phase. This intentional interference can then 
be subtracted out by the destination from the signal it 
ultimately receives via the relay. 
Protocol sequence is as follows. Directional jamming is 
produced by D while S sends data to the R-E node. R node 
detects an adding of real data and jamming signal. When replay 
data arrive D, a subtraction of jamming signal is done to 
recover the real sent data. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
In order to compare the security using this cooperative 
jamming technique with current system metrics are necessary. 
For this propose, secrecy rate and secrecy outage probability 
are defined. The secrecy rate is a reliable transmission rate on 
the main channel, which remains undecodable at the 
eavesdropper. In Gaussian channels, it is represented by the 
different of the mutual information of the source-to-receiver 
information and the source-to-eavesdropper channels, with the 
secrecy capacity being the maximal achievable secrecy rate. 
When 
larger 
networks 
with 
multiple 
transmitters/receivers/eavesdroppers, as well as additional 
nodes such as relays are considered, we can define the 
corresponding secrecy rate (capacity) regions, or the aggregate 
secrecy sum rate (capacity).  
A performance metric suitable for non-ergodic channels is 
the Secrecy Outage Probability (SOP), which describes the 
probability that a target secrecy rate is not achieved. The SOP 
characterizes the likelihood of simultaneously reliable and 
secure data transmission. 
The efficacy of this scheme for different example scenarios 
using these metrics is presented. In order to simulate the attack 
and the countermeasurements a new CWSN simulator has been 
used. This simulator has been developed over the well known 
Castalia simulator. Modifications improve Castalia and include 
new cognitive features. The CWSN simulator responsibilities 
are: the scenario definition, the simulation of spectrum state, 
the communications between nodes and the implementation of 
cognitive behaviors, attacks and countermeasures.  
Several simulations have been executed in the simulators to 
extract results and to draw conclusions of the work. Attacker 
location known strategy has been selected for these 
simulations. The number of nodes in the simulation is 34 
nodes, including one emitter user, one destination node, one 
attacker (eavesdropper) and a variable number of cooperative 
jammer relays for both scenarios. Both scenarios are 50x50 
meters. In the first scenario the D-E distance is 30 meters while 
in the second scenario D-E distance is 45 meters. Jamming is 
better focalized in the second scenario because the penalty in 
the destination node is less that in the first one. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

We have developed two graphics that summarize the 
results. In the Fig. 2, the percentage of received packets in the 
destination node and the eavesdropper is showed for the first 
scenario. Number of packets decrease with the number of 
collaborative jammer relay nodes. Using only ten nodes for the 
collaboration strategy, less than 50% of packets are received. 
However, destination node receives fewer packets because of 
the jamming, but this rate is enough for a good communication.  
Figure 2.  Received Packets in the receiver and the attacker 
Figure 3.  Secrecy Outage Probability for different scenarios 
In Fig. 3, the SOP for the two different scenarios depending 
of number of nodes is showed. In both scenarios SOP is very 
similar. We can conclude that attacker location is not a real 
problem using this technique. Using 20 nodes for the 
collaborative jamming technique SOP is less than 25%, 
increasing system security in a significant way. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this article, we presented a cooperative jamming strategy 
for physical-layer security in multi-user wireless sensor 
networks as a supplement to encryption at higher layers. 
Depending on the nature of the nodes, three types of 
scenarios are defined: attacker location known, attacker 
location unknown, and attacker and relay co-location. A 
simulation framework has been used to simulate different 
scenarios. From the simulation results, we showed that the SOP 
decreases with a standard number of relay nodes in the 
network. Also, attacker location is not a problem for this kind 
of strategies. 
Cooperative jamming strategies with assistance from 
external helpers or inactive neighboring nodes are seen to be 
highly effective for increasing the secrecy of the transmitted 
data. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This work was funded by the Spanish Ministry of Science 
and Innovation through the Secretariat of State for Research, 
under Research Grant AMILCAR TEC2009-14595-C02-01, 
and through the General Secretariat of Innovation under 
Research Grant P8/08 within the National Plan for Scientific 
Research, Development and Technological Innovation 2008-
2011. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Y. Shiu; et al., "Physical layer security in wireless networks: a tutorial," 
Wireless Communications, IEEE, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 66-74, April 2011. 
[2] 
J. Barros and M.R.D. Rodrigues, "Secrecy Capacity of Wireless 
Channels," Information Theory, 2006 IEEE International Symposium on, 
vol. 1, pp. 356-360, July 2006. 
[3] 
C. Sperandio and P.G. Flikkema, "Wireless physical-layer security via 
transmit 
precoding 
over 
dispersive 
channels: 
optimum 
linear 
eavesdropping," MILCOM 2002. Proceedings, vol. 2, pp. 1113- 1117, 
Oct. 2002. 
[4] 
L. Xiaohua and E.P Ratazzi, "MIMO transmissions with information-
theoretic secrecy for secret-key agreement in wireless networks," 
Military Communications Conference, 2005. MILCOM 2005. IEEE, vol. 
3, pp. 1353-1359, Oct. 2005. 
[5] 
H. Yongsun Hwang and H.C. Papadopoulos, "Physical-layer secrecy in 
AWGN via a class of chaotic DS/SS systems: analysis and design," 
Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 2637-2649, 
Sept. 2004. 
[6] 
G. Noubir, “On Connectivity in Ad Hoc Network Under Jamming Using 
Directional Antennas and Mobility,” 2nd International Conference in 
Wired and Wireless Internet Communications, vol. 1, pp. 54-62, 2004. 
[7] 
S. Goel and R. Negi, "Secret communication in presence of colluding 
eavesdroppers," Military Communications Conference, 2005. MILCOM 
2005. IEEE, vol. 3, pp. 1501-1506, Oct. 2005. 
[8] 
T.H. Chang, Y.-W.P Hong and C.-Y. Chi; "Training Signal Design for 
Discriminatory Channel Estimation," Global Telecommunications 
Conference, 2009. GLOBECOM 2009. IEEE, vol. 1, pp. 1-6, Dec. 2009. 
[9] 
I. Csiszar and J.Korner, "Broadcast channels with confidential 
messages," Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 24, no. 3, 
pp. 339-348, May 1978. 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

