Cognitive Wireless Sensor Networks Framework for Green Communications Design  
 
Alvaro Araujo, Elena Romero, Javier Blesa, Octavio Nieto-Taladriz 
E.T.S.I. Telecomunicacion 
Electronic Engineering Department 
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid 
Madrid, Spain 
{araujo,elena,jblesa,nieto}@die.upm.es 
 
 
Abstract— Cognitive Wireless Sensor Networks is an emerging 
technology with great potential to avoid traditional wireless 
problems such as reliability, interferences and spectrum 
scarcity. Because of the Wireless Sensor Network fast growth 
and the use of batteries, current rate of power consumption 
per unit of data cannot be sustained. Therefore, one of the 
major challenges face today is low power consumption in 
Wireless Sensor Networks.Cognitive Wireless Sensor Networks 
framework is a key issue in green communications because of 
many protocols, strategies and optimization algorithms could 
be tested. In this paper a framework composed of a network 
simulator with cognitive capabilities and low power Cognitive 
Wireless Sensor Networks real devices with a feedback relation 
is presented. The benefits of the proposed framework are 
demonstrated with three different scenarios and simple 
cognitive green communications strategies. Results show how 
new concepts have been integrated in the framework with good 
results and as simple cognitive radio strategies can reduce 
large amount of power. 
Keywords-cognitive; framework; low power design; 
wireless sensor networks 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Wireless network power consumption has not been an 
important research issue because it has been insignificant in 
comparison with wired network consumption. Over the 
recent years, wireless and mobile communications have 
increasingly become popular with consumer. According to 
[1], global mobile data traffic will increase 26-fold between 
2010 and 2015 (in 2010 global mobile data traffic grew 2.6-
fold). Mobile data traffic will grow at a compound annual 
growth rate of 92 percent from 2010 to 2015, reaching 6.3 
exabytes per month by 2015. Taking into account this 
prediction, the current rate of power consumption per unit of 
data cannot be sustained. 
In regards to wireless networks, one of the fastest 
growing sectors in recent years was undoubtedly Wireless 
Sensor Networks (WSN). According to the report [2], WSN 
market will grow rapidly from $0.45 billion in 2011 to $2 
billion in 2021. WSN are increasingly introduced into our 
daily lives. Potential fields of applications are from home 
control to military scenarios or critical information 
infrastructure protection. In this kind of scenarios, lifetime of 
the nodes typically ranges from 2 to 5 years, making power 
consumption a dramatic requirement to establish. Thus, 
reducing energy consumption is one of the most important 
challenges to face when designing WSN. 
Recently, to increase lifetime (as well as other very 
important problems like spectrum scarcity, interferences or 
reliable connections), most WSN rely on the new cognitive 
paradigm. Cognitive Network is an intelligent wireless 
communication system that is aware of its surrounding 
environment, and with the possibility to adapt its internal 
parameters to achieve reliable and efficient communications 
(in terms of power consumption too) [3]. This solution 
benefits from “free” environmental energy according to the 
“green” philosophy, which is to reduce the carbon footprint 
and to improve reliability of power supply automations.  
In order to enable design and development of new green 
protocols and power reduction techniques for Cognitive 
Wireless Sensor Networks (CWSN) and evaluate their 
performance, simulation and emulation environments are 
necessary. The challenge in simulators is to determine if 
these simulations provide us a good enough correspondence 
with real deployments. In this paper, a complete simulation 
and emulation framework for CWSN using regular standards 
is presented. The simulator is based on the Castalia simulator 
including all the cognitive modules. The simulations are fed 
with real CWSN devices to provide a more realistic 
approach.  
The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, 
works in CWSN simulator and emulator frameworks are 
reviewed. In Section 3, new CWSN framework is described. 
In Section 4, a proof of concept is shown. Finally, the 
conclusions are drawn in Section 5. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Because of the novel research field, there are not many 
specific frameworks for green communications design over 
CWSN. It is natural that most of works are based on WSN 
simulators.  
There are several WSN simulators used by researchers to 
develop their works. For example, NS-2 [4] is one of the 
most well-known simulators. Most of the WSN research 
society uses this simulator, although the latest release was in 
2008. NS-3 will be its substitute, but it is still in the early 
stages. OMNET++ [5] is another framework very well-
known among researchers. It proposes a modular library 
which could be used to develop network simulators. Only by 
composing different modules, the developer can create its 
own simulator or scenario. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

Several other simulators have been developed for WSN. 
TOSSIM based on the TinyOS operative system, COOJA, 
OPNET, GloMoSim, JSim, NetSIm, QualNet, etc. are more 
WSN simulators without cognitive features.  
In [6], Vijay, et al. show different approaches to CWSN, 
like architectures or techniques. Inside the techniques 
section, an implementation of cognitive solutions over 
OPNET simulator is mentioned [7]. They implement a 
comparison between standard ZigBee protocol and a new 
one with a CR mode, which can detect incumbent users. 
However cognitive features are basic. 
In SEnsor Network for Dynamic and cOgnitive Radio 
Access (SENDORA) FP7 project simulator platforms have 
been developed. In [8], the SENDORA system level 
simulator is described. The simulator is based on the network 
simulator NS2, enhanced with the Miracle extension, which 
provides the support of multi-layer, multistack architecture, 
and a more realistic propagation model to simulate different 
network protocols over the same physical channel. The 
Miracle modules are: 
 
Sengine: manages the sensing information 
coming from the Sensing module. Optionally it 
manages 
the 
cooperative 
sensing 
communications. 
 
WSNNet: takes care of routing issues. It fills 
the packet field related to the next hop for the 
communication. 
 
WSNMAC: implements the S-TDMA based 
access scheme. Sensors are synchronized to a 
timeframe. 
 
WSNPhy: manages the transmission power. 
Sensors use the minimum transmission power 
that allows them to receive and decode 
correctly all the packets with a given 
probability.  
 
Sensing: implements the sensing process and all 
sensing algorithms.  
 
Channels: simulates the transmission over a 
channel and enables the sensing process. 
Others, 
even 
more 
important 
aspects, 
such 
as 
collaborative spectrum sensing, information sharing or 
output data obtaining are not yet implemented in any CWSN 
simulator. 
A lot of work on CWSN simulation should be done in 
order to get the next step in the development cycle: the 
implementation. Only few works could be found on CWSN 
implementation. An example of implementation is [9]. The 
AUTOMAN system is used as a platform to create a 
monitoring 
application. 
The 
system 
controls 
power 
consumption and voltage fluctuation in a WSN. This is one 
of the first real systems that use cognitive capabilities to 
improve some network parameters.  
After the simulation stage, researchers usually use a test-
bed, before the real implementation. There are multiple test-
beds for specific developments. Two are the most important 
test-beds nowadays: TWIST [10] and VT-CORNET [11] 
because of their general purpose features and their quality.  
The TKN Wireless Indoor Sensor Network Test-bed 
(TWIST) 
is 
a 
multiplatform, 
hierarchical 
test-bed 
architecture developed at the Technische Universität Berlin. 
The self-configuration capability, the use of hardware with 
standardized interfaces and open source software make the 
TWIST architecture scalable, affordable, and easily 
replicable. The TWIST instance at the TKN office building 
is one of the largest remotely accessible test-beds with 204 
SUT (system under test) sockets, currently populated with 
102 eyesIFX and 102 Tmote Sky nodes. The nodes are 
deployed in a 3D grid spanning 3 floors of an office building 
at the TUB campus, resulting in more than 1500 m^2 of 
instrumented office space.  
The Virginia Tech COgnitive Radio NEtwork Testbed 
(VT-CORNET) is a collection of Cognitive Radio nodes 
deployed throughout a building at the Virginia Tech main 
campus. The test-bed consists of a total of 48 Software-
Defined Radio nodes. Test-bed is implemented with a 
combination of a highly flexible RF front end, and an openly 
available Cognitive Radio Open Source System framework. 
Research on CWSN simulators is emerging, but it is in a 
primary state. The simulation with a high number of nodes is 
necessary in WSN scenarios. It is very expensive to build a 
lot of real devices to test a concrete low power strategy. The 
integration of real data devices and a high number of nodes 
is only possible using a feedback relation. Currently, there is 
not a CWSN simulator with standard protocols and real 
devices feedback that uses cognitive characteristics for 
intelligent energy management in order to test new policies, 
to assess collaboration schemes or to validate different 
optimization mechanisms. SENDORA, the only simulator 
with cognitive capabilities does not use real device data for 
the power model. Therefore, an implementation of a new 
completely cognitive module over a WSN simulator, 
specifically Castalia Simulator [12], based on OMNET++ 
framework and a new CWSN device with three different 
radio standard interfaces is proposed. 
 
III. 
CWSN FRAMEWORK 
 Most common network simulators have tested energy 
models, but these are theoretical models covering general 
cases. So, it is necessary to introduce real measured data by a 
cognitive radio prototype developed to make these 
simulations become more realistic. Thus, it is also possible to 
find differences in commercial solutions using the same 
technology. 
Moreover, the deployment of a network of real devices is 
very difficult and expensive, especially a network with large 
number of devices. This is the great advantage of the 
introduction of simulators. By adding data taken from 
functional prototypes to simulation results, the accuracy of 
simulations is better. 
Thus, the combination of both elements results in a 
complete and useful framework to validate optimization 
mechanisms for energy consumption. 
 As seen in Section 1, cognitive characteristics are 
applicable to intelligent energy management. Thus, it is 
important to provide a CWSN Framework to test new 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

policies, to assess collaboration schemes and to validate 
different optimization mechanisms.  
CWSN framework is composed of two fundamental 
elements: a network simulator and low power cognitive radio 
real devices.  
A. CWSN Simulator 
The CWSN simulator described in this section is based 
on the Castalia simulator. This base simulator has been 
chosen because it is focused on WSN, is based on 
OMNET++, 
which 
has 
a 
modular 
and 
simple 
implementation, and its physical layer and radio models are 
most realistic. For a good intelligent energy management 
mechanism simulation, the new simulator has to provide 
spectrum sensing capabilities, multiple frequencies, channels 
and modulations, Virtual Control Channel (VCC) to share 
cognitive information, primary and secondary users, an 
optimizer, and results and data graphical representation. 
Although Castalia simulator physical layer is one of the 
best ones compared with other simulators, a sensing block is 
critical for simulating cognitive networks. Castalia simulator 
supports most common modulations and is also prepared to 
include new ones. Moreover, some typical radios for WSN 
are included, such as CC1010 or CC2430. Interference is 
another important aspect of the sensing module. Detected 
noise in the spectrum is very important for the behaviour of 
the network. For this reason, the interference model should 
be very precise. 
It is mandatory to implement real different wireless 
radios in each node allowing changes in all the interesting 
parameters: modulation, transmission power, consumption, 
etc. Each wireless interface is associated with a power 
consumption model. The consumptions model are described 
in a file where reception modes, transmission power levels, 
delay transition between different power mode matrix, power 
transition matrix, and different sleep levels power are 
defined. Researchers can easily add new features (sleep 
mode, transmission parameter). 
Cognitive networks can be distinguished from others due 
to the adaptation of their parameters according to 
information gathered about the environment. It is very 
important that the information could be shared between 
nodes. A Virtual Control Channel (VCC) has been 
implemented for that purpose. The low power protocol-based 
mechanisms need all the network information for a correct 
optimization. 
Normally, WSN simulators make differences in the 
nodes only when the technology implements it. For example, 
coordinators and end nodes on ZigBee protocol. In a CWSN 
simulator, a new difference between nodes should be 
implemented: primary users (PU) and secondary users (SU). 
Finally, when the simulator executes an application or 
scenario, the developer needs a simple way to extract the 
results. For that requirement, changes in the resource 
manager module are necessary. 
Once the requirements have been explained, the CWSN 
simulator will be described on detail. 
Castalia structure has been modified in order to provide 
the simulator with Cognitive power manager support. Fig. 1 
and Fig. 2 show the new simulator structure. 
Fig. 1 shows the Castalia node internals. There are 
several radio interfaces, one resource manager and one CR 
module. The communication between nodes is through 
Virtual Control Channel (VCC). Application uses sensor 
manager as physical interface. 
In Fig. 2, the CRModule internals are showed. There are 
four main components: repository, optimizer, policy, and 
executor. Access is the VCC interface.   
 
 
Figure 1.  Castalia node internals adapted to cognitive radio 
 
Figure 2.  Castalia cognitive radio module (CRModule) internals 
Radio of the communication modules provides new API 
methods for changing the active channel. This change 
enables developers perform spectrum scans and hops among 
channels.  
These changes transform Castalia into a simulator 
capable of running cognitive experiments for green 
management design. The simulator is equipped with a new 
module which includes all these cognitive features, the 
CRModule. This module structure is composed of the 
following elements [13]: 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

 
Repository: Which retrieves information about 
the local and/or remote nodes: information 
learned, decisions made or current state. The 
kind of information stored depends on the 
context and the requirements of the system. 
Some of the modules which feed the repository 
with information are: communication modules, 
applications, the resource manager and the 
optimizer. 
 
Access: This module allows a local repository 
access to the repository of remote nodes. At the 
same time, it exports a subset of the local 
repository to remote nodes. 
 
Policy: Enforces the requirements for the global 
system depending on several factors, not only 
power consumption, but interferences or noise, 
quality of service, etc. 
 
Optimizer: 
It 
processes 
the 
repository 
information bearing in mind the requirements 
imposed by the policy module. Decisions 
regarding the behaviour of the local node are the 
results of these processes. They are stored in the 
repository and evaluated by the executor. 
 
Executor: This module performs the decisions 
made by the optimizer. 
Since all the elements are developed as Castalia modules, 
they communicate and access each other via the OMNET++ 
message system. Besides, it provides the Virtual Control 
Channel (VCC), a new method for sharing cognitive 
information among the CR modules of the nodes. CR 
modules can access to exported information of remote 
repositories through this channel. It allows CR modules to be 
aware of their surroundings and, even, the whole network. 
Power model can be fed from real device measures. This 
framework uses real devices implementations to measure 
different power characteristics that are included in the power 
model. That feedback provides better accuracy and the 
simulation is closer to a real scenario. There are other 
features that are interesting, but very difficult to integrate in 
the simulator like fading or blocking. We are planning to 
continue integrating real features in the simulator to improve 
the accuracy. 
B. CWSN devices 
A test-bed platform to develop cognitive radio 
communications for WSN and to obtain power model data 
has been implemented (Fig. 3). 
CWSN device is looking for optimizing communications 
in real time according to different application needs. 
Therefore, the device design has to consider power 
consumption, data rate, reliability, and security in order to be 
useful for a large number of applications. 
For our goal, power consumption is a very important 
challenge. It is necessary to control the consumption of each 
separate component, and to implement shared strategies that 
try to reduce the overall consumption of the network. 
Interference with other wireless devices or noise 
problems has to be avoided, which implies that nodes have to 
change their frequency and modulation as fast as possible. 
For this reason the prototype has three different network 
interfaces. The reduction of interference can be an important 
factor to reduce the consumption of the network. 
CWSN need to connect to different kinds of standard 
commercial devices or internet gateways. Consequently a 
much extended-use wireless solution as an interface has to be 
implemented. 
This prototype has to be capable of collecting data about 
the state of the network and of sharing the information with 
other nodes. In addition, each node will be able to change 
protocol parameters, the entire protocol and wireless 
interfaces in real time. Thus, it is mandatory to coordinate all 
the network devices. 
Figure 3.  Cognitive Wireless Sensor Network Device prototype 
The control function is made by a Microchip 
PIC32MX795F512H, which is a 32-bit flash microcontroller. 
This is a high performance processor with low consumption 
and low cost. In addition, Microchip provides a lot of  
CWSN platform has three radio interfaces: 
 
A WiFi Microchip device which can handle data 
rates of 2Mbps and uses a band operation between 
2.412 GHz - 2.484 GHz. WiFi is based on the IEEE 
802.11 standards.  
 
MiWi interface, a Microchip protocol which can 
handle data rates about 250kbps and uses a band 
operation between 2.405-2.48 GHz. This is a 
proprietary 
wireless 
protocol 
designed 
by 
Microchip Technology that uses small, low-power 
digital radios based on the IEEE 802.15.4 standard 
for WPAN.  
 
Last interface is based on Texas Instruments 
CC1010. It can handle data rate of 76.8kbps and 
uses a band operation around 868 Mhz. This 
interface provides a new communications band in 
an ISM frequency. 
Software has to discover other nodes, sense the radio-
electric environment, exchange configuration information, 
establish communication channels, and switch on or off the 
radio interfaces and sleep or wake up the node. The network 
manages data routes optimizing consumption, data rate, 
reliability and security. 
Three wireless interfaces have been used in this device, 
with different standards and protocols. The integration of a 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

new interface or device in the consumption model of the 
simulator is very easy. The real device measures and fill the 
file are only necessary 
IV. 
DEMOSTRATIVE USE OF THE FRAMEWORK 
In this section, the results of simulations related to green 
communications design are presented. The goal is not the 
algorithm or mechanism itself. The goal is to check that 
several new policies, collaboration schemes or optimization 
mechanisms can be implemented in this framework. 
The reduction of power consumption is a task that 
involves the overall design across all layers of the 
communication protocol. Focusing layer by layer, several 
strategies for optimizing the consumption can be listed for 
each level, but due to cognitive characteristics, address the 
problem of consumption holistically has more advantages. 
The opportunities to optimize energy consumption can be 
divided in three blocks: that get through the sensing of the 
spectrum, those related to the capability to change 
transmission parameters and those that depend on the ability 
to share knowledge of the network. Each scenario uses a 
strategy of a different block. 
First scenario is related to the capability to change 
transmission parameters. It is composed by five nodes with 
802.11 and 802.15.4 radio interfaces. Four nodes are sending 
data to the central node. In this scenario nodes simulate two 
different applications. The first one is a multimedia 
application where both bit rate and packet size are high. The 
transmission rate needs a WiFi interface while WPAN has 
not the capacity for multimedia applications. However, in a 
WSN, general applications have only sensing functions 
(temperature, light, etc.) where the bit rate and the amount of 
information are very low. In this case, the low-power 
optimization strategy consists on using the interface with less 
power consumption for a specific data rate. When the data 
rate is high only 802.11 is possible, but for a specific data 
rate 802.15.4, is better because of its less power 
consumption. This algorithm could be dynamically changed 
according to other constraints as battery life, distance 
between nodes or quality of service. Real data is used in the 
power model from a MRF24J40MA-based device for 
802.15.4 protocol and MRF24WB based device for WiFi 
transmissions. In the simulation the power measures over the 
CWSN device are included (Wi-Fi transmission 74.8 mW 
and WPAN transmission 3.6 mW). As shown in Fig. 4, when 
the data rate is high 802.11 is used for transmission, but 
when data rate decreases 802.15.4, is better because of its 
less power consumption. The second part of this figure 
(zoomed in Fig. 5) shows the consumption with WiFi and 
WPAN common sensing application with the same packet 
size and the same interval between messages.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Power consumption for the Cognitive algorithm and WiFi 
Figure 5.  Detail of power consumption for the Cognitive algorithm and 
WiFi 
Using a low power protocol system saves the 94% of 
energy (Fig. 4). Only in the commutation period, where the 
nodes need to communicate the interface change, the 
consumption is similar to WiFi. After that, the energy saving 
is considerable. The second scenario simulates an application 
whose nodes send packets with the maximum payload 
allowed by the simulator (1000 bytes with 802.11 and 100 
bytes with our implementation of the WPAN protocol). The 
application starts sending a package every 10ms and the time 
is increased until the bit rate reached by 802.11 is supported 
by the WPAN protocol (reached at time 600). Fig. 6 shows 
how the consumption of WPAN in the first period of the 
simulation time is greater than WiFi because WPAN needs 
more transmissions for the same data. It means that 802.15.4 
does not reduce the consumption of every application with a 
low bit rate but a cognitive module choosing the right 
protocol in every time can achieve that goal. 
 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

Figure 6.  Power consumption for the Cognitive algorithm and WiFi 
(Scenario 2) 
The third scenario shows optimization through the 
sensing of the spectrum. It consists of two nodes with 
802.15.4 radio interfaces. One of them (the receiver node) 
moves through space and the other (transmitter node) is fixed 
(Fig. 7). Within the path of movement experienced by the 
mobile node, sometimes node B will be closer to the node A 
than others. In a common network design, the node A will 
transmit information with a power fixed. That makes that 
certain packets will lost (by distance between nodes) and 
others were transmitted with more power than necessary. 
Adding cognitive capabilities to this scenario, the network 
could be aware of the minimum power necessary to ensure 
the reception of packets while minimizing energy 
consumption. For this simulation, a power model real data 
from a MRF24J40MA-based device for 802.15.4 protocol 
has been used. 
Figure 7.  Mobile node scenario 
In Fig. 8, power consumption of transmission node (node 
A in Fig. 7) is shown. Dotted line represents the 
consumption of node A in a network without cognitive 
capabilities and the solid line shows the consumption of the 
same node when the low power consumption algorithm is 
added. Hanging power transmission in relation to distance 
between nodes can reduce power consumption. Using this 
simple algorithm implies a reduction of up to 60% in some 
sections.  
Increasing the complexity of algorithms or dealing with 
the problem of consumption in a holistic way (combining 
several techniques), it will be possible to obtain higher 
reductions. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Power consumption for the Cognitive algorithm and 802.15.4 
(Scenario 3)  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
WSN power consumption became an important problem 
to face because of the use of batteries and their fast growth. 
The new cognitive paradigm has appeared to cope with very 
important network problems like spectrum scarcity, 
interference or reliable connections. Cognitive network 
features open up new interesting research challenges. 
Cognitive capabilities have to be applied to green 
communication design in WSN.   
At this moment, it is important to provide a CWSN 
Framework to test new policies, to assess collaboration 
schemes and to validate different optimization mechanisms. 
In this article CWSN framework is presented. The 
framework is composed of a network simulator and low 
power CWSN real device. A new cognitive module has been 
developed over Castalia simulator and different real 
interfaces and power models have been integrated. CWSN 
platform has been build using a microcontroller and three 
different radio interfaces (IEEE 802.11, IEEE 802.15.4, and 
CC1010-based interface in 868 MHz band) because it is 
necessary to face different situations. This framework uses 
real devices implementations to measure different power 
characteristics that are included in the power model. This 
feedback achieves simulation results closer to a real scenario 
than regular simulator ones. 
The benefits of the proposed CWSN framework have 
been demonstrated by implementing three scenarios. Very 
simple low power optimization strategies have been 
implemented using this framework. Results show how new 
concepts have been integrated in the simulator with good 
results and how a simple cognitive radio strategy can reduce 
large amount of power.  
In conclusion, this framework represents a good 
opportunity for the development of new green wireless 
communications strategies for the new paradigm of CWSN. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was funded by the Spanish Ministry of 
Science and Innovation through the Secretariat of State for 
Research, under Research Grant AMILCAR TEC2009-
14595-C02-01, and through the General Secretariat of 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

Innovation under Research Grant P8/08 within the National 
Plan 
for 
Scientific 
Research, 
Development 
and 
Technological Innovation 2008-2011.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Cisco Systems Inc, Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global 
Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2010–2015. White 
Paper. Feb. 2011. 
[2] P. Harrop and R. Das, Wireless Sensor Networks 2011-2021, 
The new market for Ubiquitous Sensor Networks (USN), 
IDTechEx, July 2011.  
[3] J. Mitola, Cognitive Radio: An Integrated Agent Architecture 
for Software Deﬁned Radio, Ph.D. dissertation, Royal Inst. 
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 2000. 
[4] Y. Xue, H. S. Lee, M. Yang, P. Kumarawadu, H. Ghenniwa, 
and W. Shen, Performance evaluation of ns-2 simulator for 
wireless sensor networks, in Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, 2007. CCECE 2007. Canadian Conference on, 
pp. 1372 –1375, April 2007. 
[5] G. Pongor, Omnet: Objective modular network testbed, in 
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Modeling, 
Analysis, 
and 
Simulation 
On 
Computer 
and 
Telecommunication Systems, ser. MASCOTS ’93. San Diego, 
CA, USA: Society for Computer Simulation International, pp. 
323–326, 1993. 
[6] G. Vijay, E. Bdira, and M. Ibnkahla, Cognitive approaches in 
wireless sensor networks: A survey, in Communications 
(QBSC), 2010 25th Biennial Symposium on, pp. 177 –180, 
May 2010. 
[7] D. Cavalcanti, S. Das, J. Wang, and K. Challapali, Cognitive 
radio based wireless sensor networks, in Computer 
Communications 
and 
Networks, 
2008. 
ICCCN 
’08. 
Proceedings of 17th International Conference, pp. 1 –6, Aug. 
2008. 
[8] L.Pescosolido, F. Lo Presti, G. Maselli, C. Petrioli A. 
Cammarano, F. Cuomo, P. Grønsund, O.Grondalen, R. 
Thobaben, and P. Fouillot, Performance of SENDORA 
networks, January 2011. 
[9] K. Shenai and S. Mukhopadhyay, Cognitive sensor 
networks,in Microelectronics, 2008. MIEL 2008. 26th 
International Conference, pp. 315 –320, May 2008. 
[10] V. Handziski, A. Köpke , A. Willig, and A. Wolisz, TWIST: 
A scalable and reconfigurable testbed for wireless indoor 
experiments with sensor networks,  Proc. 2nd Int. Workshop 
Multi-Hop Ad Hoc Networks: From Theory to Reality 
REALMAN, p.63, 2006. 
[11] T.R. Newman, A. He, J. Gaeddert, B. Hilburn, T. Bose, and 
J.H. Reed, Virginia tech cognitive radio network testbed and 
open 
source 
cognitive 
radio 
framework. 
2009 
5th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Testbeds 
and 
Research 
Infrastructures 
for 
the 
Development 
of 
Networks 
Communities and Workshops, pp. 1-3, 2009. 
[12] D. Pediaditakis, Y. Tselishchev, and A. Boulis, Performance 
and scalability evaluation of the Castalia wireless sensor 
network simulator, in Proceedings of the 3rd International 
ICST Conference on Simulation Tools and Techniques, ser. 
SIMUTools ’10. ICST, Brussels, Belgium, Belgium: ICST 
(Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and 
Telecommunications Engineering), pp. 53:1–53:6, 2010. 
[13] J. Rabaey, A. Wolisz, A.O. Ercan, A. Araujo, F. Burghardt, S. 
Mustafa, A. Parsa, S. Pollin, I.H. Wan, and P. Malagon, 
Connectivity Brokerage - Enabling Seamless Cooperation in 
Wireless Networks.(A White Paper), October 2010. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://bwrc.eecs.berkeley.edu/php/ 
pubs/pubs.php/1484.html  <retrieved: February, 2012> 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-197-7
COCORA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

