Efficient Mid-end Spectrum Sensing Implementation for Cognitive Radio 
Applications based on USRP2 Devices 
 
Daniel Denkovski, Vladimir Atanasovski and Liljana Gavrilovska 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technologies 
Ss Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje 
Skopje, Macedonia 
{danield, vladimir, liljana}@feit.ukim.edu.mk 
 
 
Abstract—Spectrum sensing is a cornerstone task in cognitive 
radio environments supporting dynamic spectrum access by 
spectrum opportunities discovery. It must be reliable and 
accurate in order not to harm the primary system by incorrect 
spectrum opportunities decisions. Mid-end spectrum sensing 
devices are spectrum sensing devices with satisfactory signal 
detection performances and reasonable price. This paper 
presents an efficient and flexible mid-end spectrum sensing 
solution (an USRP2 based spectrum sniffer implementation) 
that offers many sensing functionalities and detection 
capabilities by implementing several sensing modes of 
operation and detector types. Additionally, the paper presents 
several usage possibilities of this USRP2 spectrum sniffer 
implementation proving its efficient employment in various 
spectrum sensing applications. 
Keywords- spectrum sensing, cognitive radio, USRP2 based 
sniffer implementation, detector, operation mode. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Dynamic spectrum access is an increasingly popular 
networking paradigm aiming to resolve frequency spectrum 
scarcity problems that come from the traditional fixed 
frequency resources reservation policies. Cognitive radios 
incorporate the dynamic spectrum access functionality 
striving to access and use the temporary available frequency 
bands and dynamically adapt to changing environment 
conditions.  
Spectrum sensing is a crucial aspect in cognitive radio 
since it enables the secondary users to be spectrum aware 
and facilitates the spectrum opportunities discovery process. 
There are various and numerous spectrum sensing 
implementations that can be generally classified into three 
groups: high, low and mid-end sensing devices. High-end 
spectrum sensing devices mainly refer to spectrum analyzers 
and these devices’ main characteristic is their high precision 
in terms of signal detection. However, the high accuracy 
reflects in high price, which may make them inappropriate 
for certain cognitive radio applications. On the other hand, 
the low-end spectrum sensing devices are cheap solutions 
having low precision and, thus, limited applicability in 
different applications. They often result in false conclusions 
about the spectrum opportunity. The mid-end spectrum 
sensing devices are a trade-off between price and accuracy. 
They are cheaper sensing solutions than the high-end 
spectrum analyzers and offer solid detection performances. 
All spectrum sensing solutions may employ various 
spectrum sensing techniques [1]. However, energy detection 
is most commonly used technique due to its simplicity and 
satisfactory detection capabilities. 
The spectrum sensing devices can be used in many 
spectrum related applications. Besides their main function to 
detect spectrum opportunities in cognitive radios, they can 
be also used in long and medium term spectrum 
measurements [2, 3]. Furthermore, different cooperative 
sensing [4, 5] and data fusion techniques can be 
implemented to achieve better detection capabilities in the 
cognitive environment. The input from the sensing devices 
can be also used for planning of medium and long term 
spectrum sharing strategies, either between primary and 
secondary users or between the secondary users in the 
cognitive network.  
This paper presents an efficient and flexible mid-end 
USRP2 
based 
spectrum 
sensing 
(i.e., 
sniffer) 
implementation. The developed sniffer implementation 
extends the spectrum sensing capabilities of the basic GNU 
radio USRP2 sensing implementation (used in [6]) 
introducing several detector types and different modes of 
operation of the sniffer. This sensing implementation can be 
used to perform wideband and band-specific spectrum 
measurements and can be utilized in various cognitive radio 
applications. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the 
spectrum sniffer implementation based on USRP2 hardware 
with all comprising GNU radio based and extended 
processing blocks and the functionalities and possibilities of 
the sniffer. Section III presents several possible sensing 
relevant 
applications 
of 
the 
USRP2 
based 
sniffer 
implementation. Section IV concludes the paper and 
presents directions for the future work. 
II. 
USRP2 BASED SPECTRUM SNIFFER IMPLEMENTATION 
This section elaborates on a custom design and 
development of a versatile USRP2 based spectrum sensing 
(i.e., sniffer) implementation using the off-the-shelve 
available USRP2 hardware and accompanying GNU Radio 
software.  
81
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

Universal Software Radio Peripheral 2 (USRP2) [7] is a 
hardware platform for development of various radio 
applications. Its motherboards are enabled to use various 
daughterboards covering different frequency ranges. The 
USRP2 hardware supports fast and high precision analog-
to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion and Ethernet 
interface for connection to host computers. This results in 
wider band signals support, as well as increased dynamic 
range of the system.  GNU Radio [8] is an open source 
software development toolkit that provides the basic signal 
processing blocks required to make the USRP2 hardware a 
software defined radio (SDR) programmable platform. GNU 
Radio applications are primarily written in python with the 
performance-critical signal processing written in C++.  
The USRP2 based sniffer implementation is developed 
as a C++ application that includes the GNU Radio basic and 
USRP2 specific blocks. This sensing implementation is 
based on the logic of the original GNU radio python based 
implementation usrp_spectrum_sense.py, with extended 
functionalities and support of several additional features. 
Moreover, the C++ realization of the sniffer eliminates the 
C++ to/from python parsing resulting in better sensing 
performances. 
This 
subsection 
presents 
the 
sniffer 
architecture and the possibilities provided by the sniffer, i.e., 
the supported detector types and modes of operation. 
1) USRP2 based sniffer architecture 
The sensing-relevant input parameters in the developed 
USRP2 C++ based sniffer implementation are: starting and 
end frequency, decimation factor, FFT size, gain, detection 
type, tune time (if switching between frequencies is 
required) and dwell time (time spent at a measurement 
frequency point).  More details on the detection types of the 
sniffer and the modes of operation are given in subsections 
2) and 3), respectively.  
The developed USRP2 C++ sniffer implementation 
architecture along with all the included GNU Radio basic 
and extended blocks is depicted on Figure 1. The 
architecture 
consists 
of 
seven 
processing 
blocks: 
usrp2_source_32fc, 
gr_stream_to_vector, 
gr_fft_vcc, 
gr_fft_vfc, 
gr_complex_to_mag_squared, 
gr_complex_to_mag 
and 
the 
custom 
made 
gr_energy_detector_f 
processing 
block. 
Their 
key 
characteristics are: 
 
usrp2_source_32fc is a GNU radio USRP2 specific 
block that creates the USRP2 source and has the control 
of the hardware (it sets up the decimation rate and 
performs the tuning of the center frequency). 
 
gr_stream_to_vector is a GNU radio block that 
converts the input from the usrp2_source_32fc from 
stream of complex samples to vector of complex 
samples with size fft_size.  
 
gr_fft_vcc is a GNU radio processing block that 
transforms the vector of time samples with size fft_size 
into frequency domain vector of complex samples with 
size fft_size. 
 
gr_complex_to_mag is a GNU radio processing block 
that converts the complex vector of time samples with 
size fft_size into amplitudes vector with the same size.  
 
gr_fft_vfc is a GNU radio block that converts the vector 
of amplitudes per time to frequency domain complex 
vector with size fft_size. 
 
gr_complex_to_mag_squared 
is 
a 
GNU 
radio 
processing block that converts the complex vector 
(sample) in power vector (sample) summing the 
magnitude squared I and Q values and passing the 
output to gr_energy_detector_f block. 
 
gr_energy_detector_f is a custom made C++ processing 
block that performs the actual preprocessing of the 
measurement data. On initialization of this block the 
detection type, dwell and tune times are specified. This 
block constantly receives the vectors’ samples from the 
gr_complex_to_mag_squared block and performs the 
chosen preprocessing (detection type) during the 
specified dwell_time. The output of this block is packed 
into a message queue variable of type gr_msg_queue, 
timely read and post-processed by the main function. 
The output of the main function is the decisions vector 
for the occupancy in the inspected frequency span. The 
gr_energy_detector_f also initiates the tuning between 
sequential frequencies if required. 
 
Figure 1 illustrates the possibilities and features that the 
current USRP2 C++ sniffer implementation can offer. 
Several flow graphs are possible, based on the selection of 
the detection type and the mode of operation of the sniffer 
(subsections 2) and 3)). The current implementation of the 
sniffer also provides possibilities for remote control.  
2) Detector types 
The current USRP2 based sniffer implementation allows 
selection of five energy-based detector types. The main 
enabler of the different detection types is the custom made 
gr_energy_detector_f block. Besides the maximum hold 
detector as the basic implementation in GNU radio, it 
enables the following four other detection types to be used: 
minimum hold, mean hold, Higher-Order-Statistics Energy 
Detection (HOSED) type, as well as FFT Averaging Ratio 
(FAR) detection type. 
The minimum hold detector saves and returns the 
minimum value of the received power during the inspection 
time (dwell time) on a specific frequency band. Oppositely, 
the maximum hold detector returns the maximal value of the 
received power during the examination time. The mean hold 
detector calculates and gives at the output the average 
received power during the inspection time. When the 
previous three detection types are in use, the occupancy 
decision on frequency band of interest is based on 
comparisons with predefined threshold values. The higher 
order statistics energy detector, besides the average 
received power, calculates important higher order statistics 
such as skewness and kurtosis [9] of the received power 
during the inspection time. This valuable statistical 
82
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

 
Figure 1. USRP2 based sniffer application architecture 
information can be helpful in the detection process since it 
reflects some characteristics of the distribution of the 
receiving power and has proved to offer better detection 
performance than the classical average energy detector. The 
decision on the occupancy of the inspected frequency band 
in the case of HOS detection is made by comparison of the 
calculated statistics values with the statistics values of the 
system noise. The FFT averaging ratio detector [10] is a 
detector utilizing FFT analysis on the amplitude of the 
received time samples. The output of this energy detector 
type is the average PSD (Power Spectral Density) ratio of 
each frequency bin in the FFT analysis. Based on these 
output values, a decision is made whether a frequency band 
is occupied or not by comparing the referred with 
predefined threshold values.  
When using the first four detection types, the flow graph 
of the sniffer is consisted of the following five blocks: 
usrp2_source_32fc, 
gr_stream_to_vector, 
gr_fft_vcc, 
gr_complex_to_mag_squared 
and 
gr_energy_detector_f  
block, if using FFT. If FFT is not used (fft_size=1), the 
gr_fft_vcc is excluded from the previous flow graph (Figure 
1). When FAR detection is selected the sniffer flow graph 
consists of the following six blocks: usrp2_source_32fc, 
gr_stream_to_vector, 
gr_complex_to_mag, 
gr_fft_vfc, 
gr_complex_to_mag_squared  and gr_energy_detector_f 
blocks, as the FFT analysis is performed on the amplitude of 
the time samples (Figure 1). 
3) Modes of operation 
The custom made C++ sniffing implementation enables 
the USRP2 hardware to work in three modes of operation: 
real-time measurement mode, sweeping measurement mode 
and hybrid measurement mode. 
The real-time measurement mode supports real-time 
measurements on 25 MHz of bandwidth at most. The 
samples gathered from the USRP2 hardware are post-
processed in the GNU radio host computer environment, 
employing FFT (Fast Fourier Transform) analysis of the 
received data. This allows various frequency resolutions, but 
high FFT size values (higher than 1024) are not 
recommended since the number of operations to calculate 
FFT transform increases exponentially as the FFT size rises. 
This can cause disturbance of the operation of the USRP2 
due to the higher processing requirements and the inability 
of the host computer to process in-time all data coming from 
the USRP2. Before the actual FFT analysis of the samples, 
time windowing is performed in order to reduce the spectral 
leakage (a side-effect coming from the time restrictions). 
The current implementation uses the Hamming Window. In 
addition, FFT overlapping is used and the overlapping 
frequency points are dropped to reduce the non linear 
response of the DDC at the edges of the FFT analysis. The 
real-time measurement mode utilizing FFT is consisted of 
five processing blocks (Figure 1) This mode of operation 
can be also performed without FFT analysis of the data, 
excluding the use of gr_fft_vcc  block.  
The sweeping mode of operation of the sniffer enables 
particular values for the resolution bandwidth in the range 
195.3125 KHz – 25 MHz, corresponding to the respective 
decimation factors of the digital-down-conversion process. 
Here, the USRP2 periodically switches the center frequency 
between sequential frequency bands, with the chosen 
resolution bandwidth size, to cover the full requested 
frequency span. This mode of operation is employed when 
the required frequency span is higher than the largest 
possible receiving bandwidth size of 25 MHz. When using 
this mode of operation, only four blocks are connected in 
the flow graph: usrp2_source_32fc, gr_stream_to_vector, 
gr_complex_to_mag_squared and gr_energy_detector_f, 
where the gr_energy_detector_f initiates the switching 
between the sequential frequency bands, when the dwell 
time at a frequency band is expired. 
The sweeping mode of operation can be jointly 
combined with FFT analysis to multiplicatively increase the 
resolution bandwidth of the USRP2 hardware, resulting in 
hybrid mode of operation of the sniffer. This mode of 
operation can offer higher sensing performances due to the 
increased frequency resolution as well as reduced sweep 
time requirements. When targeting a particular resolution 
bandwidth size, the number of sweeps (consequently the 
sweep time) to cover the full span of interest can be reduced 
by the usage of the highest receiving bandwidth (lowest 
possible decimation factor) and specific FFT size to support 
83
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

 
Figure 2. 2.4 GHz ISM duty cycle results of the USPR2 sniffer in 
hybrid mode and spectrum analyzer, RBW =100KHz and sweep=1s 
 
 
Figure 3. Wideband (460–2200 MHz) duty cycle results in working day 
busy hour (12:00–18:00 hours) gathered using the USPR2 sniffer  
in hybrid mode  
 
 
the resolution bandwidth requirement. This mode of 
operation utilizes five processing blocks (Figure 1): 
usrp2_source_32fc, 
gr_stream_to_vector, 
gr_fft_vcc, 
gr_complex_to_mag_squared and gr_energy_detector_f, 
where the last is in charge of initiating the switching 
between frequency bands. 
The following section presents several sensing related 
applications of the previously elaborated USRP2 sniffer 
implementation.  It shows its versatility and potentials for 
practical usage. 
III. 
USRP2 SNIFFER APPLICATIONS 
The basic application of the developed USRP2 based 
sniffer implementation is in the area of assisting the dynamic 
spectrum access process, i.e., to serve for detection and 
localization of secondary spectrum access opportunities. 
Several applications engaging the USRP2 based sniffing 
have been included in part of the authors’ previous work. 
The applications are classified in two types: energy detector 
based applications and HOS detector based applications, 
each elaborated in more details in the subsequent 
subsections. 
A. Applications based on energy detector 
The classical energy detection technique employed by 
the USRP2 based sniffer implementation is consisted of the 
minimum hold, maximum hold and the mean hold detector 
types. This subsection presents two applications of the 
USRP2 based energy detector, the first focusing on 
frequency spectrum measurements, the second on data 
fusion and dynamic radio environmental maps (REMs) 
derivation. 
1) Medium and long term spectrum measurements 
The classical energy detector in the USRP2 sniffer 
implementation can be included in medium and long term 
spectrum 
measurement 
campaigns. 
Wideband 
measurements can mainly employ the sweeping and hybrid 
mode of operation of the sniffer, while band–specific 
measurements can be performed with the real-time 
measurement mode of the sniffer (if the bandwidth of 
interest does not surpass the USRP2 hardware limitations, 
i.e., the maximal bandwidth of 25 MHz).  
Ref. [11] shows the usage of the USRP2 sniffer 
implementation for the 2.4 GHz ISM band inspection. The 
measurement 
setup 
includes 
the 
USRP2 
hardware 
comprising the RFX2400 daughterboards. The focus on the 
campaign was on the definition of the measurement 
methodology for the referred frequency band. The USRP2 
based sniffer implementation is used mainly in the sweeping 
and hybrid operational mode with maximum hold energy 
detection type. The results prove that this USRP2 sniffer 
implementation offers sensing and detection performances 
comparable to high end-devices performances. Moreover, it 
has been verified that the hybrid mode of operation of the 
sniffer offers significantly better performances than the 
classical sweeping operational mode (Figure 2 [11]). 
Wideband measurements have been also performed with 
the energy detector of the USRP2 based spectrum sniffer 
implementation using WBX daughterboards [7]. The 
USRP2 sniffer implementation is used in hybrid operational 
mode with mean hold detection for these measurements 
employing FFT with size 16 and receiving bandwidth of 1 
MHz, resulting in resolution bandwidth of 62.5 KHz. Figure 
3 plots the duty cycle results for the spectrum usage 
gathered in this campaign. 
B. Dynamic Radio Environmental Maps Creation 
Additional application of classical energy detection 
option of the USRP2 spectrum sniffer implementation can 
be to provide input to the process of dynamic derivation of 
radio environmental maps (REMs). The USRP2 sniffers can 
be distributed on various locations in the observed 
environment and can report received power levels at 
specific frequency bands to a centralized fusion center. The 
fusion center gathers the spectrum data from the scattered 
USRP2 based sniffers and combines the information into 
REMs. This process can be performed in a dynamic fashion 
and can impact the discovery of the spatial distribution of 
the primary users in cognitive network. Therefore, it can 
facilitate the secondary system spectrum opportunities 
detection.  
Figure 4 depicts the results of a real-time REM 
calculation demo. The demo scenario consists of two 
WLAN signal sources, one access point and one laptop 
computer as a source. Four USRP2 sniffers are placed in an 
indoor environment and a fusion center dynamically 
interpolates (with modified IDW interpolation [12]) the data 
84
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

 
 
Figure 4. Real-time REM calculation demo: no source (upper right plot), 
one source (lower left plot), two sources (lower right plot) 
 
 
Figure 5. 2.4 GHz ISM spectrum conditions  
during USRP2 HOS detector demo 
 
 
 
Figure 6. HOS channel selection based on different 
utility factors settings  
 
 
 
from the scattered USRP2 sniffers. As seen on Figure 4, the 
interpolation data is able to roughly localize both signal 
sources. 
C. Applications based on HOS detector  
This part presents two applications of the HOS detector 
option of the USRP2 sniffer implementation in cognitive 
environments, i.e., a channel selection application and 
cooperative channel selection application. Both applications 
utilize the USRP2 sniffer implementation in sweeping 
measurement mode with HOS detection type. 
1) Channel selection based on HOS detection 
The HOS detector of the USRP2 sniffer implementation 
can be useful in cognitive radios in order to serve the 
channel selection process. Namely, the consideration of the 
higher order statistics values in the channel selection 
improves the decisions for the best channel. The impact of 
the HOS detection has been tested on USRP2 devices in a 
demo based on real environment conditions. The channels 
width in the demo is chosen to be 2.5 MHz and the center 
frequencies of the channels are chosen in the manner to 
include the WiFi channels center frequencies. The demo is 
focused on the full 2.4GHz ISM band (due to hardware 
limitations, RFX2400 daughterboards) and Figure 5 plots 
the environment conditions during the tests. The channel 
classification criteria is based on average, skewness and 
kurtosis values of the received power, each of the referred 
considered with utility factors a, b and c, respectively. The 
target is to select a channel with statistics closest to the 
system noise. Figure 6 plots the dependence of the channel 
selection probability and the utility factors settings. As can 
be noticed (considering the environment conditions), the 
worse results are gained when the channel selection depends 
mostly on the average received power. Predefined 
frequencies are chosen due to the USRP2 hardware non-
idealities – it has different noise power levels and different 
variations at different frequencies. The decisions on the best 
channel are more confident when the channel decision 
depends more on the skewness and kurtosis of the received 
power. The best performances in terms of channel selection 
are gained when the decision depends equally on the 
skewness and kurtosis of the received power, i.e., b=c=0.5. 
This result reflects the actual environment conditions 
(illustrated on Figure 5).  
The dependence of the channel selection with the 
sensing time duration is presented in Table I. Here, a 
channel is considered as free if the duty cycle of the channel 
occupancy is lower than 5% (5 dB above noise level criteria, 
inspection time 30 min), and the maximum received energy 
does not exceed 10 dB above average noise (the most green 
channels in Figure 5). The channel selection decision 
improves as the sensing period is higher and sensing period 
of 3.2 s yields a free channel selection probability of 1 (thus 
resulting in successful avoidance of busy channels, Table I).   
TABLE I.  
HOS DETECTION:  CHANNEL SELECTION PROBABILITY 
Sensing 
period 
Busy channel selection 
probability  
Free channel selection 
probability 
800 ms 
0.226037 
0.773963 
1600 ms 
0.118825 
0.881175 
3200 ms 
0 
1 
 
2) Cooperative channel selection based on HOS data 
The HOS detection option of the USRP2 based sniffer 
implementation has also been included in a cooperative 
demo comprising USRP2 based cognitive nodes. The 
cooperative nodes exchange their mean power, skewness and 
85
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

kurtosis values in distributed fashion according to the 
RAC2E [13] rendezvous protocol for cognitive ad-hoc 
networks. After a simple fusion (with averaging) of the 
gathered data, a source USRP2 based cognitive radio finds 
the best channel available and starts the communication with 
a destination USRP2 node. The targeted band in the 
cooperative demo is the 2.4 GHz ISM band and the 
environment conditions are the same as in the demo 
presented in the previous part (the tests were run 
simultaneously). The demo aims to prove how the 
cooperative exchange and fusion of the HOS data among the 
cooperative nodes improves the best channel decision.  
TABLE II.  
COOPERATIVE HOS DETECTION:  CHANNEL SELECTION 
PROBABILITY  
Sensing 
period 
Cooperative 
nodes 
Busy channel 
selection probability  
Free channel 
selection probability 
800 ms 
1 
0.226037 
0.773963 
2 
0.138968 
0.861032 
3 
0.071736 
0.928264 
1600 ms 
1 
0.118825 
0.881175 
2 
0.029412 
0.970588 
3 
0.014706 
0.985294 
 
The results (Table II) prove that, as the number of 
cooperative nodes increases, the channel selection process is 
more reliable (free channels are most probably to be chosen, 
whereas busy channels are effectively avoided). As can be 
noticed, with sensing period of 1600 ms and three 
cooperative nodes, the probability of selection of a busy 
channel is 1.5%, and the probability of selection of a free 
channel is 98.5%.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
Future wireless networks will focus on dynamic and 
flexible usage of spectrum resources. The importance of 
spectrum sensing is crucial in such cognitive environments. 
It provides support for spectrum awareness and dynamic 
spectrum opportunities detection. Therefore, providing 
simple and cheap spectrum sensing solutions with good 
accuracy is an important research challenge. The mid-end 
devices can be an efficient tool for spectrum sensing, but 
must be carefully configured and used depending on the 
actual application.  
This paper presents a flexible and efficient USRP2 based 
spectrum sniffer implementation. The main advantages of 
the developed C++ sniffer implementation are the support of 
different modes of operation and detection types, as well as 
better timing performances than the original python based 
GNU radio implementation. This enables the developed 
sniffer implementation to be implemented in various 
cognitive radio applications. Several of them were presented 
in the paper and they demonstrate the applicability potential 
of the USRP2 sniffer implementation in cognitive 
environments.  
Future work will focus on additional detector types 
implementation, as well as comparative analysis of the 
different detectors’ performances. The spectrum sniffer will 
be implemented in additional cognitive radio applications, 
i.e. different cooperative sensing and fusion methods can be 
tested in applications comprising the referred sniffer 
implementation. 
Furthermore, 
the 
USRP2 
sniffer 
implementation can be included in derivation of secondary 
spectrum usage strategies, such as spectrum driven policy 
derivation and integration into a policy based system [14]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Parts of this work were funded by the EC through the 
FP7 project FARAMIR (248351) [15]. The authors would 
like to thank everyone involved. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Ycek and H. Arslan, “A survey of spectrum sensing algorithms for 
cognitive radio applications,” IEEE Communications Surveys & 
Tutorials, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 116–160, 2009. 
[2] M. Lopez-Benítez et al, “Performance of spectrum sensing for 
cognitive radio based on field measurements of various radio 
technologies,” in Proceedings of the 16th European Wireless 
Conference (EW) 2010, Special session on Cognitive Radio, Lucca, 
Italy, April 12-15, 2010. 
[3] M. Wellens and P. Mähönen, “Lessons Learned from an Extensive 
Spectrum Occupancy Measurement Campaign and a Stochastic Duty 
Cycle Model”, Springer Mobile Networks and Applications, 2009. 
[4] Z.Quan et al, “An Optimal Strategy for Cooperative Spectrum 
Sensing 
in 
Cognitive 
Radio 
Networks”, 
IEEE 
Global 
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM) 2007, Washington, DC, 
USA, November, 2007. 
[5] J. Unnikrishnan et al, “Cooperative Spectrum Sensing and Detection 
for Cognitive Radio”, IEEE Global Communications Conference 
(GLOBECOM) 2007, Washington, DC, USA, Nov. 2007. 
[6] R. Vuyyuru et al, “Evaluation of Energy Based Spectrum Sensing 
Algorithm for Vehicular Networks, SDR Forum Technical 
Conference 2009, December 2009. 
[7] Universal Software Radio Peripheral 2 (USRP2). Information 
available at: www.ettus.com. 
[8] GNU Radio software development toolkit. Information available at: 
http://gnuradio.org/redmine/wiki/gnuradio. 
[9] D. N. Joanes, C. A. Gill, “ Comparing measures of sample skewness 
and kurtosis”, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D (The 
Statistician), Volume 47, Issue 1, pages 183–189, April 1998. 
[10] Z. Chen et al, “Demonstration on Real time Spectrum Sensing for 
Cognitive Radio”, IEEE Communications Letters, vol.14, no.10,2010. 
[11] D. Denkovski, M. Pavloski, V. Atanasovski and L. Gavrilovska, 
“Parameter settings for 2.4GHz ISM spectrum measurements,” 3rd 
International Symposium on Applied Sciences in Biomedical and 
Communication Technologies (ISABEL) 2010, Rome, Italy, 7-10 
November, 2010. 
[12] R. J. Renka , “Multivariate interpolation of large sets of scattered 
data,” ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software 14, 2, 139–148, 
1988. 
[13] V. Pavlovska, D. Denkovski, V. Atanasovski and L. Gavrilovska, 
“Novel Rendezvous Protocol for Asynchronous Cognitive Radios in 
Cooperative Environments”, the 21st Annual IEEE International 
Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications 
(PIMRC) 2010, Istanbul, Turkey, 26-30 September, 2010. 
[14] D. Denkovski, V. Pavlovska, V. Atanasovski and L. Gavrilovska, 
“Novel Policy Reasoning Architecture for Cognitive Radio 
Environments”, 
IEEE 
Global 
Communications 
Conference 
(GLOBECOM) 2010, Miami, USA, 6-10 December, 2010. 
[15] EC FP7 project FARAMIR, Information available at: http://www.ict-
faramir.eu.  
86
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

