Impact of Control Channel Design on Cooperative
Spectrum Sensing in Opportunistic Spectrum
Access Networks
Marco Petracca, Franco Mazzenga, Remo Pomposini, Francesco Vatalaro
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Italy
E-mail: {petracca,mazzenga,pomposini,vatalaro}@ing.uniroma2.it
Romeo Giuliano
RadioLabs, Rome, Italy
E-mail: romeo.giuliano@radiolabs.it
Abstract—In Opportunistic Spectrum Access (OSA) networks,
Secondary unlicensed Users (SUs) need a common Control
Channel (CC) to identify the spectrum opportunities, i.e., com-
mon spectrum holes unused by licensed Primary Users (PUs).
Typically, an interference-free CC is unrealistically assumed in
the literature. In this paper we evaluate the impact of the
availability and the characteristics of the CC on the performance
of cooperative spectrum sensing. We deal with the dimensioning
of an underlay Ultra-wideband (UWB) signalling network for
the exchange of sensing data among secondary Cognitive Radio
(CR) nodes avoiding harmful interference to PUs. To this aim, we
analyse the trade-off between the connectivity degree of a multi-
hop underlay UWB signalling network, directly related to the
possibility to perform cooperative sensing, and its coexistence
with PUs. It is observed that the correct dimensioning of the
UWB signalling network allows to achieve high accuracy of PU
detection without compromising primary systems.
Keywords - Cognitive Radio; Opportunistic Spectrum Access;
Ultra-wideband; Control Channel.
I. INTRODUCTION
A lot of experimental studies prove the inefﬁcient use of the
radio spectrum [1], [2]. This result does not comply with the
general belief that the available spectrum resources are not
sufﬁcient to meet the needs of the next generation wireless
networks. Within the Cognitive Radio (CR) context [3], ﬁxed
spectrum allocation policy could be replaced by innovative
forms of dynamic use, referred to as Dynamic Spectrum
Access (DSA) [4]. Among the DSA options it is of great
interest the so-called Hierarchical Access model (HAM) [5],
according to which an unlicensed secondary CR user (SU) can
access the spectrum licensed to a primary user (PU), provided
that harmful interference is avoided.
In the literature, mainly two HAM approaches have been
proposed [6]: “Spectrum Underlay”, also called horizontal
sharing since based on spreading signals transmitted by SUs,
for example by means of Ultra Wide Band (UWB) techniques;
“Spectrum Overlay”, also known as Opportunistic Spectrum
Access (OSA), according to which secondary nodes access the
unusued portion of band in a vertical way.
In order to guarantee protection to PUs [7], the underlay
approach imposes SU transmission power below the required
Work performed within the project SANDRA, funded by the European
Community’s Seventh Framework Programme.
maximum interference tolerance. This condition does not
allow to provide SUs with high data rate services for medium
and long range communications. The impossibility to make
the best use of the unused spectrum resources prevents the
underlay solution from achieving high values of spectral
efﬁciency.
Conversely, OSA is the most performing solution in terms
of achievable throughput, but it requires adaptive techniques
accounting for the state of transmission of the PUs in or-
der to allow the secondary nodes to identify the so-called
“spectrum opportunity” [6], i.e., common white spaces, at
a given location and time, agreed by a pair of SUs for
communication. The spectrum opportunity identiﬁcation re-
quires a dedicated control channel (CC) to implement efﬁcient
signalling protocols for realizing OSA among SUs. More in
general, a coordination among SUs is needed to improve the
performance in terms of detection probability of PUs by means
of cooperative spectrum sensing techniques [8]. Such methods
assume particular relevance for detecting the spectrum occu-
pancy when wireless channels are affected by shadow fading
[9]. For these reasons the CC plays a fundametal role in OSA
networks. Nevertheless, typically an interference-free CC is
unrealistically assumed in the literature. Indeed, the allocation
of a separate ﬁxed CC for exchanging information on spectrum
opportunities is very likely unavailable on PU networks with
fast varying spectrum usage [10], and anyway it can entail
waste of spectrum resources only for signalling data.
An interesting promising solution is represented by the
usage of an underlay UWB channel for sharing spectrum
sensing information, as proposed in [11]. Usually signalling
channels require low bit-rates and this feature permits to
extend the UWB radio coverage even for low transmission
power. This satisﬁes the double target of ensuring as wide
signalling coverage as possible with minimal interference to
PUs, allowing to continuously perform coordination for white
spaces exploitation. However, in [11], the authors consider just
one licensed transmitter in the area without facing the problem
of dimensioning the signalling network. Indeed, this issue
entails to take into account the trade-off between the amount
of sensing data exchanged on the secondary network and the
interference caused to the PUs by the underlay signalling.
In this paper, we propose to exploit the beneﬁts of both
36
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

Figure 1.
Interference scenario for secondary CR nodes and primary users.
HAM strategies by designing a two-tier OSA network, in
which overlay spectrum access for data transmissions is driven
by an underlay signalling network. We evaluate the impact
of the availability and the characteristics of the CC on the
performance of the OSA network in terms of cooperative
detection probability. To this aim, we analyse the trade-off
between the bit-rate of the CC and the connectivity degree of
the underlay network for the exchange of sensing data among
SUs. We also assess the maximum allowable density of the
UWB devices such that the coexistence with primary systems
is ensured, i.e., the interference caused by the signalling
network does not compromise the performance of PUs.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe
the interference scenario for evaluating the performance of
the underlay network in terms of accuracy of cooperative
sensing and coexistence with PUs. The model for the analysis
is detailed in Section III. Simulation results are reported in
Section IV. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section V.
II. INTERFERENCE SCENARIO
The interference scenario is shown in Figure 1. SUs can
opportunistically access the spectrum for sensing information
exchange provided that the interference level to PUs does not
exceed a predeﬁned threshold. We assume that the technology
used by all the PUs in the scenario is the Global System
for Mobile Communications (GSM). We considered three co-
sited Base Stations (BSs) situated at the center of an area
of 0.64 km2 in a suburban environment. We assume that
both PU terminals served by the BSs and SUs are randomly
distributed within the area in accordance to an uniform spatial
distribution. We suppose that BSs transmit at maximum power,
whereas PU terminals implement power control mechanisms.
This downbeat case is considered to demonstrate the capability
of SUs to perform spectrum sensing sharing on the UWB
underlay network even when hard interference conditions
occur. For the same reason, we disregard trafﬁc statistics of
PUs and SUs by assuming that all the devices continuosly
transmit on their frequency band. Hence, more conservative
results are expected by introducing a model accounting for
users activity.
For the propagation model among devices in the area, we
considered the following expression for path loss calculation:
L(d) =
MCL
Gtx · Grx
·
 d
d0
γ
(1)
where d > d0 is the distance (in m) between transmitter and
receiver, MCL > 0 is the minimum coupling loss for d0 = 1
m, γ is the path loss exponent and Gtx and Grx are the antenna
gains related to the transmitter and the receiver, respectively.
According to values in [12], we conservatively set γ = 2.5 for
outdoor propagation among UWB devices, while a path loss
exponent equal to 3 is assumed for both PU links (between
terminal and BS) and attenuation among PUs and SUs.
III. ANALYSIS
In this section we describe the proposed procedure to
evaluate the density of SUs in the area such that a connectivity
degree is reached guaranteeing the required level of protection
to PUs at the same time. This trade-off depends on the bit-rate
of the signalling channel. Then we provide an expression for
calculation of cooperative detection probability accounting for
the availability of the CC for exchanging sensing information
among SUs.
A. UWB signalling network connectivity and coexistence
We characterize the availability of the CC in terms of
the Outage Probability of the secondary underlay signalling
network, given by:
Pout = Prob {SINR < ρ0} ≤ α
(2)
s.t. 0 ≤ PSU ≤ Pmax
where ρ0 is the required QoS level for the sensing information
exchanging, α is the target outage probability and SINR is
the Signal-to-Noise plus Interference Ratio expressed by the
following formula:
SINR =
Eb
I0 + η0
=
" Eb
IP U,0
· BUW B
BP U
−1
+
Eb
η0
−1#−1
=
=
C
η

·

1 + (IBS + IT ) ·
Rb
BUW B
−1
(3)
where C is the received signal, Rb and BUW B are the bit-rate
and the bandwidth of the UWB devices, respectively, and η is
the thermal noise power given by:
η = η0 · BUW B · NF
where η0 = −174 dBm/Hz is the noise PSD and NF
is the corresponding noise ﬁgure. As indicated in (2), the
outage probability depends on both the interference from the
active PUs and the propagation conditions. Furthermore, it is
constrained on the transmission power of SUs, i.e., PSU, which
can not exceeds the maximum allowed power Pmax.
Since the control trafﬁc exploits an underlay channel known
by each CR node of the OSA network, the exchange of sensing
data among SUs does not cause interference to the overlay
communications. According to this assumption, in (3) we can
37
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

neglect the interference due to the other UWB nodes and we
only consider the interference caused by PU links, which is
deﬁned as:
IP U = IP U,0 · BP U = IBS + IT
(4)
where BP U is the bandwidth of the PU receiver and IP U,0
is the interference spectral density on UWBs due to the PUs.
IP U,0 is composed of two main interference contributions to
SUs due to PU BSs and PU terminals. These are given by the
following expressions:
IBS =
NBS
X
i=1
PBSi
L(di)
(5)
IT =
NT
X
i=1
PTi
L(di)
(6)
where NBS and NT are the number of PU BSs and PU
Terminals, respectively, di is the distance between the i-th
PU (BS or terminal) and the considered SU, while PBSi
and PTi are the transmission power of the i-th PU BS and
PU terminal, respectively. As shown in (3), the interference
terms are reduced by the ratio Rb/BUW B, which represents
a factor accounting for the signalling requirements and the
characteristics of the UWB devices. It means that for a given
UWB bandwidth and a ﬁxed transmission power, the higher
the bit-rate the worse the outage probability.
The proposed methodology for dimensioning a HAM cog-
nitive network can be synthesized as follows:
1) given the considered scenario (e.g., the propagation
characteristics, the number of interferers, the maximum
allowed transmission power, etc.), calculate the outage
probability of the signalling network under these condi-
tions;
2) verify if the obtained outage probability is above the
deﬁned threshold α:
2.1 if yes, we obtain the maximum UWB SUs trans-
mission power satisfying constraints that fulﬁll the
outage requirements;
2.2 if no, the transmission power of the UWB devices
is incremented in accordance to the regulatory
restrictions.
3) calculate the maximum coverage range of UWB SUs;
4) determine the connectivity of the UWB signalling net-
work with the obtained coverage. This metric is deﬁned
as the probability that a SU can reach all the other
SUs of the signalling network according to a multi-hop
architecture.
5) for a required connectivity degree, verify if the corre-
spondent density of SUs in the area is compliant with
the maximum number of UWB devices that guarantee
the established level of protection to PUs. This is ac-
counted for by the Probability of Coexistence, related
to the interference to PUs from the underlay secondary
network and calculated as:
Pcoex = Prob {IUW B < Ith}
(7)
IUW B is the average interference caused to PUs (BSs
or terminals) by the number NSU of transmitting SUs,
deﬁned as:
IUW B =
NSU
X
i=1
PSUi,0
L(di) · BP U = β
NSU
X
i=1
PSUi
L(di)
(8)
where:
PSUi,0 =
PSUi
BUW B
, β =
BP U
BUW B
are the PSD of DS-UWB devices and the ratio between
the bandwidths of PUs and UWB SUs, respectively.
This latter parameter is deﬁned since the ﬂat spectrum
approximation, valid for narrowband PU, is assumed
[13]. In (7) Ith is the allowable interference threshold.
It is directly derived from the Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(SNR) degradation, r, expressed as [13]:
r = η + IUW B
η
(9)
This parameter measures the impact of the UWB inter-
ference on the SNR with respect to the thermal noise
power N of the PU receiver chain. Once determined
the maximum allowed value for the SNR degradation,
namely rmax, the allowable interference threshold can
be easily calculated as:
Ith = (rmax − 1) · η
(10)
6) verify if the obtained probability of coexistence respects
the required level of protection to PUs:
6.1 if yes, the desired density of SUs is admitted.
Hence the connectivity degree is accepted.
6.2 if no, the bit-rate of the underlay signalling channel
should be decreased up to match both the coexis-
tence and connectivity requirements.
As shown by results presented in the next section, the de-
scribed methodology allows to ﬁnd a set of admissible pairs
of values for the number of SUs and the bit-rate, all providing
a desired connectivity degree subject to constraints on both
the maximum transmission power of SUs and the interference
to PUs.
B. Cooperative Detection Probability
Cooperative spectrum sensing techniques have been pro-
posed to increase detection probability of PUs especially in
shadowed or deeply faded channels However, in order to per-
form cooperative sensing a CC is required for the exchange of
sensing data among SUs. Typically an interference-free CC is
assumed in the literature, but actually the unavailability of such
a channel can reduce the cooperative sensing performance.
Hence the characteristics of the signalling channel should
be considered in the expression of the cooperative detection
probability.
We assume that a number of Cognitive Cluster Head Nodes
(CCNs) have been elected in the secondary network in ac-
cordance to a distributed algorithm using the UWB signalling
38
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

channel. CCNs are responsible for collecting sensing data from
the SUs within their coverage and processing these data to
decide on the availability of the spectrum holes. We also
assume that SUs associated with a CCN are in the same
PU activity area and that measurements taken by SUs are
independent. Then, by considering the AND decision rule,
that is a PU is considered idle only if an available band
is detected out of all sensing data, the detection probability
associated to the CCN decision is given by [14]:
PD(k) = 1 − (1 − pd)k+1 , k ≥ 0
(11)
where k is the number of sensing data collected from the
single CCN, which corresponds to the number of SUs within
its coverage, while pd is the detection probability of the single
SU. Note that we assume a collaborative CCN which performs
spectrum sensing together with the other SUs. The expression
in (12) is valid if a channel among the CCN and the k
SUs is available. Hence the average detection probability in
cooperative spectrum sensing can be deﬁned as:
P D(δSU) =
Nc
X
k=0
PD(k) · Prob {k|δSU}
(12)
where Nc is the number of SUs within the coverage range
of the considered CCN, δSU is the density of SUs in the
area and Prob {k|δSU} represents the probability of having
at least k SUs within the CN coverage with which to perform
cooperative spectrum sensing. It takes into account for the
availability and the characteristics of the UWB CC for sensing
information exchange among SUs. In other words, the cooper-
ative detection probability is strictly related to the connectivity
of the SU signalling network and its coexistence with primary
systems, as shown in the next section.
The average missed detection probability of cooperative
spectrum sensing can be then calculated as:
P MD(δSU) = 1 − P D(δSU)
(13)
IV. RESULTS
We carried out several simulations to assess the dimen-
sioning of a SU underlay signalling network accounting for
the trade-off between the level of protection to PUs and the
connectivity degree of the SUs. We also evaluate the accuracy
of the cooperative detection of PUs with respect to both the
characteristics of the signalling network and its coexistence
with primary systems. Results have been obtained using a
Monte Carlo-based approach. The values assumed for the
simulation parameters are reported in Table I. We assume a
maximum tolerance on the outage probability of the UWB
signalling data α = 5 %. Omni-directional antennas are
considered for both UWB SUs and PU terminals. We also
suppose that each PU BS transmits on 14 carrier frequencies.
As discussed in previous sections, typically low data rate
are needed for signalling channels. Hence we performed
simulations by assuming bit-rate ranging from 1 to 10 kbit/s.
In Figure 2 we report both the connectivity degree and the
probability of coexistence of the multi-hop underlay signalling
SUs
PU BSs
PU Terminals
B [MHz]
3000
0.4
0.4
fc [MHz]
3100
1805 ÷ 1825
1775 ÷ 1785
Pmax [dBm]
-6
43
33
γ
2.5
3
3
ρ0 [dB]
4.5
9
9
Grx [dBi]
1
12
1
Gtx [dBi]
1
12
1
Nf [dB]
5
9
9
Table I
VALUES FOR THE SIMULATION PARAMETERS
network as a function of the density of SUs in the area.
It is observed that the signalling bit-rate Rb impacts on the
percentage of connectivity among UWB devices. This can be
explained by looking at the formula in (3), where the term Rb
acts as a scaling factor reducing interference from the PUs to
the SU receiver. Hence, the lower the CC bit-rate the higher
the connectivity among UWB SUs. In other words, a higher
density of UWB devices in the area is needed to obtain a
required connectivity degree if the bit-rate increases due to
the smaller coverage range. Moreover, the reduction of the
SU SINR due to an increased number of active PUs implies a
lower percentage of connectivity, as highlighted in Figure 2.
As regards the probability that the underlay UWB signalling
Figure 2.
Connectivity degree and Probability of Coexistence vs density of
SUs in the area (with 300 PU terminals and 3 co-sited BSs).
network causes harmful interference to primary systems, the
obtained curves give an indication on the maximum allowed
number of SUs in the considered scenario. We consider
different values of the maximum interference tolerance rmax
with respect to PU terminals. The coexistence only depends
on the parameter β regardless of the bit-rate of the CC, as
indicated in (7) and (8). As expected, for a given density of
SUs in the area the higher the allowable interference threshold
the lower the probability to harm PU performance.
As we explained in Section III, the proposed methodology
allows to dimension the underlay UWB signalling network
such that a predeﬁned protection degree to PUs is guaranteed.
As an example, starting from the curves in Figure 2 related
39
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

to rmax = 0.1 dB and considering a coexistence requirement
of Pcoex ≥ 98.6 %, up to about 350 SUs can be tolerated
for the considered scenario. As shown by the connectivity
curves, this density of UWB devices implies a maximum
percenatge of connectivity of about 98.3 % for a signalling
bit-rate of 10 kbit/s. If a completely connected UWB network
is required, we have to decrease the bit-rate to 5 kbit/s. It is
Figure 3.
Performance of cooperative sensing in terms of detection probabil-
ity vs density of SUs of the underlay signalling network (150 PU terminals,
3 co-sited PU BSs, Pd=0.9).
Figure 4.
Performance of cooperative sensing in terms of detection probabil-
ity vs density of SUs of the underlay signalling network (150 PU terminals,
3 co-sited PU BSs, Rb=5 kbps).
worthwhile to remind that, by assuming collaborative spectrum
sensing among SUs, the percentage of connectivity of the
underlay network is directly related to the detection probability
performance, and consequently to an efﬁcient usage of spectral
resources. This is shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4, where we
report the cooperative detection probability as a function of
the density of UWB SUs in the area. Given a coverage range
and a detection probability of the single SU, the higher the
density of SUs in the area the more accurate the probability of
detecting PUs activity. When the bit-rate of the CC increases,
the lower coverage leads to a decrease of the cooperative
detection probability. This is due to the lower probability of
ﬁnding CR nodes within the coverage of the CCN in order
to maintain the same availability of the CC. Evidently, for a
given bit-rate an incresed detection probability of the single
SU results in better cooperative detection performance.
In Figure 5 and Figure 6, we report the performance of
cooperative sensing in terms of probability of missed detection
as deﬁned in (13). By taking into account for the availability
and the parameters of the CC, it is observed that the values
related to the expression of traditional cooperative sensing, i.e.,
PD(k), are obtained when the density of SUs in the considered
scenario is sufﬁcient to guarantee the maximum probability of
ﬁnding at least k SUs within the coverage of the CCN. The
Figure 5.
Performance of cooperative sensing in terms of probability of
missed detection vs the density of SUs of the underlay signalling network
(200 PU terminals, 3 co-sited PU BSs, Rb=5 kbps, Pd=0.8).
Figure 6.
Performance of cooperative sensing in terms of probability of
missed detection vs the density of SUs of the underlay signalling network
(200 PU terminals, 3 co-sited PU BSs, Pd=0.8).
trends of the curves related to the different values of k can
40
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

be explained looking at the Figure 7, where the probability
density function of k is reported for different number of SUs.
Given the outage probability of the signalling network, the
maximum transmission power of UWB nodes and the bit-rate
of the CC, and then the CCN coverage range, when more
sensing data are desired to perform cooperative detection, the
probability of having at least k SUs within the CCN coverage,
i.e., Prob {k|δSU}, increases with the increase of the SU
density. Hence, with the increase of the SU density a CCN
can actually exploit more sensing data, so achieving a more
accurate detection, up to reach the asymptotic value imposed
by the terms PD(k). In other words the number k of SUs with
Figure 7.
Probability of having k SUs within the coverage of the CCN vs
k (150 PU terminals, 3 co-sited PU BSs, Rb=5 kbps).
which to decide of performing cooperative spectrum sensing
depends on the density of SUs in the considered scenario.
For a lower bit-rate of the CC, the resulting increase in CCN
coverage leads to a minor density of SUs needed to obtain the
target performance in terms of detection probability, as shown
in Figure 6. In Figure 8 the cooperative detection probability
is plotted as a function of the probability that the proposed
UWB signalling network coexists with the primary systems
in the considered scenario. As expected, a more stringent
requirement on the maximum interference tolerance rmax
entails a more rapid degradation of detection performance.
Furthermore, the reduction in CC bit-rate allows to obtain
better accuracy of PU detection while maintaining the same
coexistence probability.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we faced the problem of the design of the
control channel in OSA networks. We proposed to exploit the
DS-UWB technology to realize an underlay signalling network
for spectrum opportunity identiﬁcation and cooperative spec-
trum sensing. We deﬁned a cooperative detection probability
accounting for the availability and the parameters of the
control channel. We proved that the correct dimensioning of
the proposed signalling network can provide SUs with a high
Figure 8.
Cooperative detection probability vs coexistence probability of the
underlay signalling network (150 PU terminals, 3 co-sited PU BSs, Pd=0.8).
availability of sensing data, thus increasing the accuracy of
PU detection while avoiding harmful interference to PUs.
Future research can pertain to the design of suitable sig-
nalling protocol over the proposed underlay UWB CC to
optimize the throughput in OSA networks.
REFERENCES
[1] FCC, “Spectrum policy task force report”, Tech. Rep. 02-135, Nov. 2002.
[2] V. Valenta, Z. Fedra, R. Marsalek, G. Baudoin, M. Villegas, “Towards
cognitive radio networks: Spectrum utilization measurements in suburban
environment”, IEEE Radio and Wirel. Symp., pp. 352-355, Jan. 2009.
[3] J. Mitola III and G. Q. Maguire Jr., “Cognitive radio: making software
radios more personal”, IEEE Pers. Commun., pp. 13-18, Aug. 1999.
[4] I. F. Akyildiz, W.Y. Lee, M. C. Vuran, S. Mohanty, “NeXt genera-
tion/dynamic spectrum access/cognitive radio wireless networks: A sur-
vey”, Computer Networks, vol. 50, pp. 2127-2159, May 2006.
[5] A. Ben Hadj Alaya-Feki, B. Sayrac, A. Le Cornec, E. Moulines, “Semi
dynamic parameter tuning for optimized opportunistic spectrum access”,
IEEE 68th Vehic. Technol. Conf., pp. 1-5, Sept. 2008.
[6] Q. Zhao and B. Sadler, “A survey of Dynamic Spectrum Access”, IEEE
Sign. Proces. Mag., pp. 79-89, May 2007.
[7] Federal Communications Commission, “Revision of part 15 of the com-
missions rules regarding ultra-wideband transmission systems, ﬁrst report
and order”, Washington, DC, ET Docket 98-153, FCC 02-48, 2002.
[8] J. Unnikrishnan and V. V. Veeravalli, “Cooperative sensing for primary
detection in cognitive radio”, IEEE Jour. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol.
2, no. 1, pp. 18-27, Feb. 2008.
[9] A. Ghasemi and E. S. Sousa, “Opportunistic spectrum access in fading
channels through collaborative sensing, IEEE Jour. Comm., vol. 2, no. 2,
pp. 71-82, Mar. 2007.
[10] P. Pawelczak, S. Pollin, H.-S.W. So, A. Bahai, R.V. Prasad, R. Hek-
mat, “Performance Analysis of Multichannel Medium Access Control
Algorithms for Opportunistic Spectrum Access”, IEEE Trans. on Vehic.
Technol., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 3014-3031, Jul. 2009.
[11] M. E. Sahin and H. Arslan, “System design for cognitive radio commu-
nications”, in Proc. CrownCom, Jun. 2006.
[12] IEEE P802.15 Working Group for Wireless Personal Area Networks,
“UWB Channel Characterization in Outdoor Environments”, Aug. 2004.
[13] R. Giuliano and F. Mazzenga, “On the coexistence of power-controlled
ultrawide-band systems with UMTS, GPS, DCS1800, and ﬁxed wireless
systems”, IEEE Trans. on Vehic. Technol., Vol. 54 , NO. 1, pp. 62-81,
Jan. 2005.
[14] Won-Yeol Lee and I.F. Akyildiz, “Optimal spectrum sensing framework
for cognitive radio networks”, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Commu-
nications, vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 1536-1276, Oct. 2008.
41
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

