Performance Analysis of Downlink CoMP Transmission in Long Term
Evolution-Advanced (LTE-A)
Maryem Neyja∗, Shahid Mumtaz†and Jonathan Rodriguez ‡
Instituto de Telecomunicac¸˜oes, Campus Universit´ario de Santiago, AVEIRO - PORTUGAL
∗ Email: neyja.maryem@av.it.pt
† Email: smumtaz@av.it.pt
‡Email: jonathan@av.it.pt
Abstract—Coordinated multi-point (CoMP) has evolved as a
performance-optimizing technique for cellular networks. In this
paper, we investigate two different spectrum allocation schemes
for CoMP (i.e., shared and dedicated) within the context of
Remote Radio Head (RRH) enabled heterogeneous network
(HetNet) topology. The traditional macro cell only layout serves
as baseline. Using spectral efﬁciency and average user throughput
as system level performance metrics, our results reveal that
CoMP based on shared spectrum outperforms the other two.
The scheme, therefore, has great potential for optimizing radio
resources and boosting the performance of next-generation mobile
networks.
Keywords–Coordinated multi-point (CoMP); Remote Radio Head
(RRH); user average spectral efﬁciency; throughput.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) Long
Term Evolution (LTE) technology, through its periodic re-
leases advances the capabilities of cellular network technology,
in order to meet the increasing demands for high-quality
and broadband multimedia services. Coordinated multi-point
(CoMP) and Remote Radio Head (RRH) have been recently
employed to enhance the performance of current wireless
systems. With these and other techniques, higher data rates
and higher capacity can be attained in LTE-A networks. The
main objective of CoMP is to form a cluster of adjacent
macro cells to improve User Equipment (UE) throughput and
average spectral efﬁciency [1]. However, the use of dedi-
cated spectrum in wireless network systems is foreseen as
the method implemented with CoMP to improve cell edge
coverage. Hence in this paper, we shall give a performance
analysis of downlink CoMP transmission in LTE-A network by
comparing the obtained results of deployed conventional macro
cell, CoMP using the shared spectrum (i.e., Frequency Reuse
Factor (FRF) one) and CoMP using the dedicated spectrum
(i.e., FRF = 3). These results are obtained using the MATLAB
Vienna LTE-A Downlink System Level Simulator.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
provides a basic understanding of CoMP technique beneﬁts
used with RRH, and a brief description of the proposed
scenario. Section III explains the simulation procedures and
methodology of Vienna LTE-A simulator. Section IV outlines
the ﬁnal results obtained, by deploying shared and dedicated
spectrum for CoMP and presents an insightful discussion.
Finally, Section V concludes this paper and presents the future
work.
II.
COORDINATED MULTI-POINT (COMP) IN LONG TERM
EVOLUTION-ADVANCED (LTE-A)
CoMP is the foreseen technology that improves not only
the cell edge throughput, but also, the coverage and system
efﬁciency by combining and coordinating the desired and
interfered signals from multiple transmission points [1]. CoMP
increases data rate and ensures consistent service quality and
throughput on wireless broadband networks. Hence, the UE
gets very consistent service performance and quality. Techni-
cally, CoMP allows a signal from another cell to be used as the
desired signal. It is an improvement not only for throughput
at the cells edges, but also, for the average cell throughput.
The UE is served simultaneously by multiple transmission
points from the same or different eNBs [2]. Coordinating
cells enhance the service quality and the throughput. CoMP
reduces the Inter-Cell Interference (ICI) by joining macro cells
and eliminating handover effect [3]. Therefore, cooperative
communication network improves system resource utilization
and data rate. Today’s deployed LTE-A networks are mostly
based on macro cells. Such networks are homogeneous or
HetNet [4]:
•
Homogeneous: All the BSs (transmitters) belong to
the same type;
•
Heterogeneous: The BSs belong to different types.
To improve the cell edge coverage and the cooperative ICI,
we will implement CoMP within HetNet, by deploying low
power nodes (small BSs) associated with macro cells. These
small BSs are formed and typically used to extend coverage
in cells edges and to add network capacity in areas with
dense data usage. The deployment of low-power nodes within
the macro cells is foreseen as the best solution to cover any
increased demand in cellular network trafﬁc. Now, the most
recent deployment in LTE-A consists of dividing the macro
BS functionalities into a Base Band Unit (BBU) responsible
for scheduling, and this is placed in a technical room (e.g.,
near the building). The RRH is the part responsible for all
the radio frequency operations such as the power amplifying,
ﬁltering and carrier frequency transposition. Hence, it is always
placed near to the antenna or it is integrated to it, and it
is connected to the BBU via an optical ﬁber [5]. Figure 1
shows the RRH antenna implementation, which helps the fast
coordination between transmission and reception points [6].
The optical link in between guarantee a very high transmission
rate. This new system architecture separates the digital radio
part BBU from the analog radio part RRH. Thus, it allows to
reduce the number of equipment pieces at the site, optimize
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

the operational cost, decrease the energy demand and increase
the efﬁciency of the network [7].
Figure 1. Remote Radio Head (RRH) Deployment
As it is depicted in Figure 2, CoMP technique is classi-
ﬁed into coordinated scheduling / coordinated beam-forming
(CS/CB) and Joint Point (JP). JP is divided into two different
types Joint Transmission (JT) and Transmission Point Selec-
tion (TPS).
Figure 2. Types of CoMP
As shown in Figure 3, CS/CB is characterized by multiple
coordinated transmission points sharing only the Channel State
Information (CSI) for multiple UE, while data for a signal user
is only available and transmitted from one Transmission Point
(TP) [8].
Figure 3. coordinated scheduling / coordinated beam-forming (CS/CB)
Next, we will detail the two parts of CoMP JP scheduling,
which is characterized by simultaneous control data transited
from multiple points to a single user.
Figure 4. Joint Transmission (JT)
Figure 4 shows that, for JT, the data is simultaneously
available at multiple coordinated TPs. Hence, simultaneous
data and control data are transmitted from multiple eNBs. JTs
convert an interference signal to a desired one [8].
Figure 5. Transmission Point Selection (TPS)
As seen in Figure 5, TPSs transmit data from one TP of
CoMP, among multiple TPs at each time instance and only
one cell is fast selected to perform the transmission. Thus, the
others are muted with simultaneous control data transmission
from multiple TPs. To sum up, in this paper we will work with
the JT CoMP scheduling.
To study the different possible network topologies and back-
haul characteristics of CoMP, 3GPP has focused on different
scenarios [9]:
•
Scenario 1: The same macro BS controllers coordi-
nation between the cells (sectors) where we will not
need any backhaul connection.
•
Scenario 2: The macro network coordinated cells
belonging to different radio sites.
•
Scenario 3: The macro cell and the low-power transmit
and receive points within its coverage are coordinated
and each point controls its own cell (with its own cell
identity).
•
Scenario 4: The same deployment as the latter, except
that the low-power transmit/receive points constitute
distributed antennas (via RRH) of the macro cell, thus
it is all associated with the macro cell identity.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

Figure 6. CoMP deploying RRH antennas
As depicted in Figure 6, the deployment of scenario 4, using
CoMP, allows each point to be controlled by its own BS
and all the RRH are controlled by the same BS. Overall, the
implementation of RRH within CoMP extends the cell-edge
coverage, thus, the average throughput of each UE increases
even in the area with dense data trafﬁc.
III.
SIMULATION PROCEDURE
The analysis of single-cell multi-user and multi-cell multi-
user scenarios require a large amount of operational and
computing effort. Thus, to reduce it, we utilize the freely
available Vienna LTE-A simulator version v1.8r1375. Basi-
cally, it is composed of LTE physical layer and LTE SLS.
As a free simulator under a non commercial open source
academic-use license, it enables researchers to implement and
test wireless cellular system algorithms in the context of LTE-
A [10]. The simulation for mobile communication systems
includes the LTE physical layer simulator and LTE SLS.
Both are widely employed to evaluate the associated cellular
network performances. LTE physical layer simulator focuses
on the performance of a transmission between BSs and Mobile
Station (MS)s. The performance metrics usually include the
Block Error Ratio (BLER), Signal Noise Ratio (SINR) and
achievable rate.
Figure 7. Component layers and model for simulation methodology [2]
Figure 7 shows the relationship between the LTE-A phys-
ical layer and other components in communications. For the
purpose of theoretical studies, the performance of modulation
and demodulation or coding and decoding schemes in different
radio channel models can be obtained from the LTE-A physical
layer simulator. The scenario for LTE-A SL Simulator gener-
ally consists of a network with multiple BSs and MSs. LTE
SLS focuses on the application layer performance metrics as
expressed by system throughput, user fairness, user-perceived
Quality of Service (QoS), handover delay or success rate. The
LTE SLS concentrates on the higher layers above the physical
layer, such as the MAC layer, transport layer, network layer,
and application layer. Figure 7 shows the component layers
related to LTE SLS. For the purpose of theoretical studies, the
performance of resource allocation, handover, cell deployment,
or other strategies can be obtained from LTE SLS [11].
Figure 8. Schematic block diagram of LTE-A SL Simulator [12]
In Figure 8, LTE SLS is done by pre-generating the param-
eters off-line and using them later during run-time. In this
section, we explain the simulation procedure using Vienna
LTE-A simulator and LTE SLS. The performances of LTE
SLS helps in simulating the totality of radio links between the
UE and eNBs, through a vast amount of power that would be
required [13]. Thereby, we deﬁne a Region Of Interest (ROI)
in which the UEs and eNBs are positioned during a simulation
length deﬁned by Transmission Time Intervals (TTI)s.
We will analyze the results of three implemented simulation
scenarios:
•
The basic macro-cell deployment,
•
The CoMP with RRH antennas deploying shared
spectrum (FRF = 1),
•
The CoMP with RRH antennas using dedicated spec-
trum (FRF >1).
The dedicated spectrum allows UEs to get not only enough
resources even at the cell edges, but also an increased av-
erage throughput of each UE, no matter where its location.
Accordingly, in dedicated spectrum we divide in multiple parts
our bandwidth, thus, it can cover all the macro cell’s area in
moderate way [14]. Also, we focus on dense trafﬁc area by
giving it a larger part of the bandwidth compared to others,
that may not need such a large part of the spectrum. However,
in the case of a shared spectrum, the use of all the bandwidth
in the cell center affects the edges coverage, where users are
starved of capacity.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

After exploring the spectral efﬁciency and the average
throughputs, we will compares the results. This is achieved
by setting the optional parameters in the loaded conﬁgure ﬁle
of Vienna LTE-A simulator which provides the inbuilt shared
spectrum scheduler. To implement the dedicated spectrum,
the concept of ’ffrscheduler’ is implemented in LTE SLS as
a scheduler which allows to specify two independent parts,
which are the Fully Reuse (FR) and Partly Reuse (PR)). LTE-
conﬁg.scheduler is the type of scheduler to use in this case,
with the Fractional Frequency Reuse (FFR) parameter which
provides FR and PR [15].
Figure 9. Resource Block Grid Schedule
Figure 9 shows the Resource Block (RB) grid is divided
into three equal parts for each RRH antenna using the FRF
= 3. Each PR part uses 1/3 of the remaining bandwidth 20
MHz. When simulating, only an integer-valued number of RBs
can be scheduled to the FR/PR parts, which means that, for
a 20MHz bandwidth (100 RB), the minimum value of FR is
0.01, as 100 is not divisible by 3 (99 is divisible by 3). So,
we have 99 RBs and each PR will takes 0.33.
IV.
RESULTS DISCUSSION
In this section, we present the simulation results and analyze
the performance of deployed basic macro-cell, CoMP using
shared then dedicated spectrum. Next, we explore various
performance metrics to show the effectiveness of the proposed
scenario such as:
•
The SINR,
•
The UE average spectral efﬁciency(bit/Hz),
•
The UE average throughput (Mb/s).
The following results are obtained by deploying basic macro-
cell and using Vienna LTE-A simulator.
Figure 10. Region Of Interest (ROI) with the different SINR values
Figure 10 shows the values of SINR represented in color
code. Blue refers to the lowest SINR value which means bad
quality connection for the users at the cell edge. Thereafter, the
colors go from blue with minimum SINR value -5 dB to red
with maximum SINR value 20 dB. The red signal is in the cell
center and it means uninterrupted connection for the desired
throughput. However, the cell edges have negligible coverage.
There are 19 tri-sector eNBs, present within the ROI (i.e., the
serving area).
Figure 11. UE Average spectral efﬁciency (bit/Hz) versus F(x)
From the graph shown in Figure 11, it can be said that
for a probability function F(x)= 0.5, the UE average spectral
efﬁciency is equal to 0.6 (bit/Hz).
Figure 12. UE Average throughput (Mb/s) versus F(x)
Figure 12 follows the same interpretation as the latter, for
F(x)= 0.5 the UE average throughput is equal to 2(Mb/s). In
the following graphs, we discuss the results of CoMP using
shared scheduling spectrum.
Figure 13. ROI with the different SINR values
Similarly, Figure 13 presents CoMP using shared spectrum
footprint. In this proposed scenario, we get SINR values higher
in RRH antennas sectors. The propagation of blue is reduced
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

and almost disappears, while the red is spreading in all the
cell area.
Figure 14. UE Average spectral efﬁciency (bit/Hz) versus F(x)
From the plot in Figure 14, it can bee seen that the UE
average spectral efﬁciency for F(x) = 0.5 is 2.9 (bit/Hz).
Intuitively, we can say that the implementation of CoMP using
shared spectrum increases the average spectral efﬁciency two
times compared to the previous scenario.
Figure 15. UE Average throughput (Mb/s) versus F(x)
The result plotted in Figure 15 shows that using a shared
spectrum combined with CoMP provides higher UE average
throughput than using only the conventional scheme. With the
conventional scheme, the average throughput is 2 (Mb/s), and
when RRH is combined with CoMP techniques, we obtain for
F(x) = 0.5 the average throughput of 9 (Mb/s).
Figure 16. Footprint of ROI with SINR values
Figure 16 is the result from CoMP using dedicated schedul-
ing spectrum. As we can see, implementing CoMP with a
dedicated spectrum scheduler grid makes the SINR values
higher in a big part of the cell. However, the SINR performance
decreases when we dedicate the spectrum.
As we can see in Figure 16, the effect of dedicating the
spectrum is causing a degradation of the SINR. Using shared
spectrum combined with CoMP provides higher SINR than
using dedicated spectrum.
Figure 17. UE average spectral efﬁciency (bit/Hz) versus F(x)
Figure 17 depicts the UE average spectral efﬁciency versus
F(x). From the graph for F(x)= 0.5 the average spectral
efﬁciency is 1.9 (bit/Hz). The performance decreases when
compared with previous CoMP results.
Figure 18. UE average throughput (Mb/s) versus F(x)
The graph of UE average throughput (Mb/s) is depicted
in Figure 18. For F(x)= 0.5 the average throughput is 1.25
(Mb/s). The throughput performance decreases with dedicating
the spectrum.
TABLE I. DIFFERENT MATLAB RESULTS
UE
average
spectral
efﬁciency
(bit/Hz)
UE
average
cell
throughput (Mb/s)
Basic macro BS
0.6
2
CoMP using shared spectrum
2.9
9
CoMP using dedicated spectrum
1.9
1.25
The performance was evaluated in terms of SINR, average
spectral efﬁciency and average throughput. The results show
that the SINR increases when we implement CoMP. The
average throughput and the average spectral efﬁciency are also
higher for CoMP using shared spectrum. The use of RRH and
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

CoMP methods almost double the average spectral efﬁciency
compared to that for conventional scheme. The throughput is
also higher when shared spectrum and CoMP are employed
simultaneously compared to that when CoMP using dedicated
spectrum is employed. This shows that shared spectrum within
CoMP methods can reduce the ICI effectively. The SINR
performance decreases with increasing the number of FRF
in dedicated spectrum. However, the average throughput im-
proves by approximately 9 times when shared spectrum within
CoMP techniques are employed.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we had focused on CoMP topology using
different frequency spectrum design shared and dedicated for
wireless communication systems, namely within the context of
RRH antennas, and HetNet scenarios. Performance results are
obtained not only in terms of UE average spectral efﬁciency,
but also in terms of UE throughput, that is now increasingly
became an important design indicator for planning, deploying
and optimizing next generation mobile networks. One of the
simplest ways of improving system performance is to enhance
the signal power. This goal can be achieved using LTE SLS
to joint transmission down link CoMP scheme. As the same
frequency bandwidth is used, the system is very sensitive to
ICI. The utilized CoMP scheme with dedicated spectrum is
introduced to improve the performance of cell edge users
by customizing the repartition of bandwidth. The use of
shared spectrum increases the cell average throughput. The
simulation setup is based on 3GPP Technical Speciﬁcation
Group reports. CoMP plays an important role in improving the
system performance and, therefore, this work can be extended
such that the optimal parameters are determined for the CoMP
and further parameters can be analyzed to optimize the system
capacity and end-to-end delay.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by The European Commis-
sion H2020 programme under grant agreement no. 671705
(SPEED-5G) project.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Lee, H. Seo, B. Clerckx, E. Hardouin, D. Mazzarese, S. Nagata,
and K. Sayana, “Coordinated multipoint transmission and reception in
lte-advanced: deployment scenarios and operational challenges,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 148–155, February 2012.
[2]
L. Chenand, W. Chen, B. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Chen, and D. Yang,
“System-level simulation methodology and platform for mobile cellular
systems,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 148–155,
July 2011.
[3]
M. Taranetz, T. Blazek, T. Kropfreiter, M. K. Mller, S. Schwarz, and
M. Rupp, “Runtime precoding: Enabling multipoint transmission in lte-
advanced system-level simulations,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 725–736,
2015.
[4]
A. Damnjanovic, J. Montojo, Y. Wei, T. Ji, T. Luo, M. Vajapeyam,
T. Yoo, O. Song, and D. Malladi, “A survey on 3gpp heterogeneous
networks,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 10–21,
June 2011.
[5]
I. L. Cherif, L. Zitoune, and V. Vque, “Performance evaluation of
joint transmission coordinated-multipoint in dense very high throughput
wlans scenario,” in 2015 IEEE 40th Conference on Local Computer
Networks (LCN), Oct 2015, pp. 426–429.
[6]
Y. Jie, A. Alsharoa, A. Kamal, and M. Alnuem, “Self-healing solution
to heterogeneous networks using comp,” in 2015 IEEE Global Com-
munications Conference (GLOBECOM), Dec 2015, pp. 1–6.
[7]
S. Yi and M. Lei, “Backhaul resource allocation in lte-advanced relaying
systems,” in 2012 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC), April 2012, pp. 1207–1211.
[8]
M. Sawahashi, Y. Kishiyama, A. Morimoto, D. Nishikawa, and
M. Tanno, “Coordinated multipoint transmission/reception techniques
for lte-advanced [coordinated and distributed mimo],” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 26–34, June 2010.
[9]
Y. N. R. Li, J. Li, W. Li, Y. Xue, and H. Wu, “Comp and interference
coordination in heterogeneous network for lte-advanced,” in 2012 IEEE
Globecom Workshops, Dec 2012, pp. 1107–1111.
[10]
A. Marotta, K. Kondepu, F. Giannone, S. Doddikrinda, D. Cassioli,
C. Antonelli, L. Valcarenghi, and P. Castoldi, “Performance evaluation
of comp coordinated scheduling over different backhaul infrastructures:
A real use case scenario,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on
the Science of Electrical Engineering (ICSEE), Nov 2016, pp. 1–5.
[11]
S. H. Park, O. Simeone, O. Sahin, and S. Shamai, “On remote radio
head selection for the downlink of backhaul constrained network mimo
systems,” in 2014 48th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and
Systems (CISS), March 2014, pp. 1–5.
[12]
J. C. Ikuno, M. Wrulich, and M. Rupp, “System level simulation of lte
networks,” in 2010 IEEE 71st Vehicular Technology Conference, May
2010, pp. 1–5.
[13]
D. Matsuo, R. Rezagah, G. K. Tran, K. Sakaguchi, K. Araki, S. Kaneko,
N. Miyazaki, S. Konishi, and Y. Kishi, “Shared remote radio head archi-
tecture to realize semi-dynamic clustering in comp cellular networks,”
in 2012 IEEE Globecom Workshops, Dec 2012, pp. 1145–1149.
[14]
K. Bkowski, M. Rodziewicz, and P. Sroka, “System-level simulations
of selected aspects of 5g cellular networks,” in 2015 International
Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), Aug 2015,
pp. 711–715.
[15]
Y. Wang, J. Xu, and L. Jiang, “Challenges of system-level simulations
and performance evaluation for 5g wireless networks,” IEEE Access,
vol. 2, pp. 1553–1561, 2014.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-551-7
COCORA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

