Tactical Applications of Heterogeneous Ad Hoc Networks – Cognitive Radios, Wireless 
Sensor Networks and COTS in Networked Mobile Operations 
 
Marko Suojanen 
Electronics and Information Technology Division 
Defence Forces Technical Research Centre 
Riihimäki, Finland 
marko.suojanen@mil.fi 
Jari Nurmi 
Department of Electronics and Communications 
Engineering 
Tampere University of Technology 
Tampere, Finland 
jari.nurmi@tut.fi 
 
 
Abstract— Military tactical communications systems will be 
facing great challenges in the near future. Performance of 
commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) technologies is improving at 
fast pace while at the same time life cycles of military equipment 
seem to remain long. The goal of this paper is to highlight a few 
interesting applications where development efforts of cognitive 
radio (CR), wireless sensor networks (WSNs), mobile ad hoc 
networks 
(MANETs) 
and 
commercial 
communications 
technologies would provide practical solutions from military 
point of view. The further work will focus on evaluation of CR as 
a part of heterogeneous military network. Importance of 
situational awareness on tactics and different technologies and 
their correspondence to tactical applications are discussed. 
Cognitive radio will find many applications in tactical networks 
but technical readiness is still lacking in some areas. A key issue 
in understanding the requirements of tactical networks is that the 
latest technology that is the most capable is not necessarily the 
most appropriate alternative. The focus should be on 
technologies whose effects on own actions and systems are 
understood thoroughly. This paper sets the groundwork for the 
research that aims at answering the question of what kind of 
military communications system should be built in the future if 
there are several requirements that limit the solution 
alternatives. The requirements to be considered are: 1) cost 
limitation, 2) limitation on number of units, 3) interoperability 
requirement, 4) mobility requirement and 5) performance 
requirement. 
 
Keywords—MANET; 
tactical 
networks; 
cognitive 
radio; 
wireless sensor networks; COTS; situational awareness 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Military tactical communications systems will be facing 
great challenges in the near future. Performance and capability 
of commercial civilian technologies are improving from 
generation to generation. Life cycles of military-grade 
equipment are typically much longer than life cycles of 
commercial technologies. On one hand, performance and high 
miniaturization level are tempting characteristics also in 
military applications. On the other hand, robustness of 
commercial technologies and security issues are not 
necessarily at the required level for military use. [1-3]  
For the past few decades several ad hoc research projects 
have been carried out and quite many interesting results have 
been achieved [4-10]. Still, there are many obstacles for 
widespread use of mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) [11-
13]. Ad hoc networks have not been widely deployed due to 
better applicability and management of hierarchical and fixed 
infrastructure based networks. Ad hoc networks at their best 
are self-organizable and communication is based on short hops 
between nodes. Every node acts as a transceiver and a router 
that delivers internal and external traffic to other nodes at one-
hop distance.  
If we look very far to the future, it is likely that every node 
in the network actually is a cognitive MANET node due to 
technological advances and reduced unit costs. The goal of 
this paper is to highlight a few interesting areas where the 
development efforts of cognitive radio (CR), wireless sensor 
networks (WSNs), MANETs and commercial communications 
technologies would provide practical solutions from military 
point of view. There have been many research efforts 
concerning cognitive MANETs. Cognitive radio networks and 
WSN-assisted CR have been considered in [4], [21], [23], 
[25]. Many COTS-related considerations have not focused on 
cognitive radio but tactical radio issues. Dual use of VHF and 
UHF bands in tactical networks is considered in [24]. Military 
use of CR has gained more attention in recent years. Authors 
have not discovered similar approaches that consider the use 
of CR, WSNs, and COTS in MANET from the performance 
and cost point of view with the main goal of optimal solution. 
The approach taken in this paper strives to understand the 
performance requirements, geographical coverage, mobility, 
connectivity, robustness and cost of the network. This paper 
sets the groundwork for a PhD research that aims at answering 
the question of what kind of military communications system 
should be built in the future if there are several requirements 
that limit the solution alternatives. The requirements to be 
considered are: 1) cost limitation, 2) limitation on number of 
units, 3) interoperability requirement, 4) mobility requirement 
and 5) performance requirement. 
   
The following sections are organized as described here. 
First, importance of situational awareness on the battlefield 
and tactics are discussed in section 2. Section 3 looks to the 
future and describes some military applications that might use 
CR and MANET technologies. In section 4, different 
technologies and their correspondence to tactical applications 
1
Copyright (c) The Government of Finland, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-323-0
COCORA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

are discussed. Section 5 concludes the paper and presents 
some research questions for further study. 
II. 
COGNITIVE AD HOC RADIO NETWORKS AND COTS IN 
TACTICAL APPLICATIONS 
One of the most important factors in tactical operations is 
knowledge of operating environment and clever methods to 
benefit from awareness of surroundings. On modern 
battlefield, it is very important to preserve the communications 
channels between units in every situation. Due to limited 
resources and lack of development in radio research all units 
cannot be equipped with state-of-the-art radios. Therefore, 
awareness of operating area and understanding of radio 
propagation in different terrain and conditions is important. 
Own operation can be fitted to current situation if the location 
of units, terrain models, mobility of units and radio parameters 
are known. 
In ideal circumstances, situational picture is received timely 
for the current and next phase of operation. Delivery of the 
situational picture could be handled as lightly as possible from 
the transmission point of view. Every node knows its own 
location and the nodes have a mechanism to report their own 
location to other nodes. Situational picture application shows 
the locations of own troops on the map and situation in the 
surrounding area based on the role of the user. The closer to 
the front line the user gets, the more time-critical situational 
information from the area is needed.  Situational picture 
should be seen as a whole without every detail at the strategic 
level but there should be alarms of abrupt changes that might 
change the strategic situation, e.g., related to the capability of 
certain battalion at certain location. The level of detail 
depends on the operative status of the person, i.e., he/she 
receives the most urgent information for the current situation. 
The required information depends on location, order of battle 
and the next planned mission among other things.  
Situational picture is formed by using as many sensors as 
possible. In the future, inexpensive nodes could run a 
situational awareness application as a background task without 
any effect on the user of the node. Since the continuous 
operation consumes a lot of energy in battery-operated nodes 
there should be a system-level mechanism that selects certain 
nodes to participate in the fusion of situational picture and lets 
other nodes sleep. This mechanism could be implemented as a 
part of the topology control messages. Coarse situational 
picture could be formed by a small number of capable sensors, 
and cheap sensors could be activated to create situational 
picture more fine-grained in areas of interest.   
One should not underestimate the role of usability that has 
been taken more seriously in the commercial products. Most 
soldiers are used to use high-end technology products in off-
duty so if these same methods would be used in military 
equipment, a great deal of resources could be saved in 
somewhere else than training the user interface of military 
equipment. Military-grade equipment has traditionally been 
heavy, large and hardly mobile. Large antenna structures and 
limited frequency bands create a challenge for modern mobile 
warfare. Networking capability of military units is also 
limited. The goal is to have a network that connects different 
communications systems more tightly together and guarantees 
the information flow to different units. Interoperability with 
some legacy systems could be provided by cognitive radios 
but interoperability with all previous military radio systems is 
unrealistic.      
Deployment of CR on the battlefield forms a great threat for 
blue tactical communications so it is vital to take these issues 
into consideration in own concept planning. Development of a 
communications system should not be solely based on 
technological points of view but combination of defense 
tactics, strategy and technology should be examined in a way 
that allows flow of information and operational procedures to 
be optimized. This could be achieved by doing a thorough 
requirement analysis in co-operation of joint strategy and 
technology perspectives. Self-organization and autonomy 
should be applied at lower levels of hierarchy. Future systems 
are expected to be semi-autonomous but they require man-in-
the-loop to confirm decisions, e.g., in offensive actions. 
There are contradictory challenges to implementation of 
future military communications systems; on one hand, there is 
a need to form clusters that cover large geographical area, on 
the other hand there is a need for systems that are highly 
mobile and have a great computing capability. Due to cost 
pressures, one has to balance between the number of units and 
the level of performance of each unit. It is probable that a cost-
fitted system consists of a large number of low-cost units and 
lesser number of very capable units that process data from 
low-cost units and connect those to faster networks. These 
requirements could be fulfilled by wireless ad hoc networks 
that are based on CR or software defined radios (SDRs). The 
use of SDR/CR based nodes as capable units allows the 
flexible collection of data from different units that operate at 
different frequency bands. 
III. 
FUTURE TACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF COGNITIVE RADIO 
AND WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORKS 
There is an ongoing progress towards software-defined 
technologies both in commercial and military applications. 
Software-defined functionality brings increased computing 
power and flexibility on the field but there are also evident 
challenges. The short-term challenge is to have versatile radios 
interoperable with each other and with new ones. In long-term, 
the situation may not be any better due to high unit costs of 
new multifunctional SDR/CR units. 
This section takes a view to the future by considering few 
tactical applications that might benefit from SDR/CR 
technology used in ad hoc fashion. The detailed descriptions 
are given in the following subsections. 
A. Geospectral awareness 
There are several simulation tools that estimate the 
coverage of radio transmissions of, e.g., cellular base stations. 
These software programs use geographic data that contains 
height of objects, terrain types and land cover classifications. 
In the future, SDR/CR nodes will have a very high processing 
capacity so it may be realistic to assume that radio propagation 
calculation based on the environment could be done on the 
2
Copyright (c) The Government of Finland, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-323-0
COCORA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

field. Requirements regarding power consumption and real-
time operation will remain challenging issues in the long-term.    
In this concept, SDR/CR performs at specific intervals 
calculation of radio environment that is based on accurate 
geographical data, height information, classification of terrain 
and radio wave propagation models depending on the selected 
frequency band. It is important to note that there is no need to 
have capability to real-time calculations. Calculation could 
also be done in a PC that is part of the backbone network and 
thus only visualization of the results is done at each node. 
Still, there are advantages of running the calculation in the 
node to limit the calculation load to communications link. 
As a result of calculation, SDR/CR forms a frequency-
selective awareness of the radio environment. Decisions can 
then be done based on that awareness. If the terminal is about 
to send a message to another terminal at known GPS location, 
based on the calculation the terminal knows where to move to 
have the best connection to other terminal. If the movement is 
for some reason impossible, the terminal can activate more 
appropriate waveform (automatically or by user action) to 
maximize the quality for that link. If the expected direction of 
interference is known, it can be used as a boundary condition. 
Then the user can move to a direction that minimizes antenna 
gain to threat direction and/or that maximizes the quality of 
the friendly communications link. Calculation is done at the 
selected frequency, since it would be very time-consuming to 
simulate wide frequency bands. Decisions, e.g., on frequency 
change could be made based on the spectrum awareness. 
Results of calculation are shown on the screen clearly with 
instructions on navigation to the best location in terms of radio 
environment. 
B. Sensor network gateway and high-capability sensor node 
SDR/CR node could act as a gateway or master node in a 
deployed WSN. Ad hoc sensor network collects sensor data 
and routes it towards SDR/CR that has high computing 
capability. In this type of scenario, backbone network and ad 
hoc sensor network do not have to be interoperable since 
SDR/CR acts as a gateway and provides transparent access to 
sensor data. SDR/CR has two waveforms onboard: both sensor 
network waveform and waveform for communication with the 
backbone network. Typically wireless sensors have limited 
resources so SDR/CR could also have some high-level sensors 
that require more processing power and higher data rate, e.g. 
video surveillance system.  
C. Distributed interference detection and mitigation 
Distributed interference detection would be an interesting 
military application. Dozens of nodes are distributed on an 
area and they are networked in ad hoc fashion. Every node 
knows its location. Nodes are routing the communications 
traffic in ad hoc fashion. Distant high power interference 
source is activated and the nearest pair of nodes detects that 
the quality of the link is too low for transmission. Instead of 
increasing the transmit power, the message is routed via other 
route. Nodes are aware of each other’s location, since the 
location data is shared for every node in the ad hoc network. 
The message is routed via second shortest path to destination 
node. If it is also interfered, new routes are tried until the edge 
of the network is reached. Based on the signal level, ad hoc 
network can estimate the direction of interference source and 
focus the traffic to the least affected route. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In previous section, a few interesting tactical applications 
were introduced where CRs, COTS devices, WSNs and ad hoc 
networks could provide improved performance by working in 
collaboration. Since the application requires the use of CR 
technology in every node, consideration of that application is 
not realistic in short- or mid-term perspective due to high unit 
costs of CR units.  
A. Node identities in tactical MANETs 
If the cost of the wireless military network is an issue, then 
other solutions than using CR technology in every node, 
should be found. In the typical military scenario, there are 
different network islands that should communicate seamlessly 
with each other. These islands may represent a variable-sized 
group of soldiers, WSNs or other surveillance networks. Some 
of the nodes are fixed; some of those are mobile moving at 
different speeds. A characteristic feature of this type of 
network is intermittently changing topology and traffic load at 
different times.   
Interesting topic to be considered in the research is the use 
of MANET functionality in mobile terminals. These terminals 
could be regular smart phones equipped with MANET 
technology that has a capability to connect and relay between 
other smart phones [21]. It is quite clear that MANET 
functionality between smart phones shows really important 
communications method after fixed infrastructure is not 
available or is destroyed. Base stations should be equipped 
with CR technology. 
B. Frequency issues and vulnerability of MANETs 
Typically the nodes in ad hoc network use the same 
frequency band that may be divided into separate frequency 
channels. The use of a common frequency band is possible 
due to limited transmission range and collision-detection and 
collision-avoidance methods. Frequency resources will be 
very limited in the future. The use of common frequency band 
enables the use of wide frequency bands that enable greater 
data rates. An application of direct-sequence spread spectrum 
and/or frequency-hopping in MANET is an interesting topic. 
Frequency-hopping provides robustness for the network but 
implementation is complex [14], [15]. Transmissions of other 
nodes and mobility in the same area cause interference and 
delays. These factors together lower the available transmission 
data rate. Due to low transmission power and radio 
transmission range, low probability of intercept (LPI) and low 
probability of detection (LPD) properties of ad hoc networks 
are satisfactory. The nodes are vulnerable under jamming but 
nodes have a possibility to deliver messages via optional 
routes unless the whole network is blocked. 
3
Copyright (c) The Government of Finland, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-323-0
COCORA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

C. COTS and cognitive radio in tactical applications 
Commercial communication technologies are more and 
more appropriate for military applications. There are many 
differences between a commercial CR and military CR. 
Requirements for military CR are e.g. robustness, long-term 
upgrade support from manufacturers, fast scanning speeds, 
very high frequency resolution, size, weight, power, 
interoperability with other communications equipment and the 
last but not least, security. Solutions should also be found to 
the question of how to counter hostile CR activities. CR 
traditionally preserves the capacity of the licensed primary 
users and tries to avoid interference to primary users at any 
cost. In tactical applications the same type of behavior is 
shown for neutral civilian bands but for the enemy bands the 
situation is totally different. Military CR tries to capture every 
signal that is possible from the enemy communications or tries 
to block every frequency that enemy tries to use for 
communications [16-20]. 
Many 
researchers 
have 
published 
results 
of 
communications simulation in recent years. The goal of those 
simulations has typically been optimization of network 
topology, performance of routing or MAC protocols, analysis 
of performance degradation due to mobility, calculation of 
radio transmission coverage or research of effects of external 
or mutual interference on communications [22]. The further 
study will examine these characteristics but the main focus of 
the research will be on evaluation of tradeoffs between 
performance of the network and cost of the network. Defense 
forces in many countries are facing the challenges of limited 
defense budgets, increased capability requirements, upgrading 
the military equipment in use and increasing prices of new 
military equipment. These challenges raise an important 
question: what level of capability and performance can be 
achieved at certain level of funding? The best capability and 
performance cannot be achieved with limited resources.      
A key issue in understanding the requirements of tactical 
networks is that the latest technology that is the most capable 
is not necessarily the most appropriate alternative to military 
applications. The focus should be on technologies whose 
effects on own actions and systems are understood thoroughly. 
If the lacking points are recognized and mitigated then the 
technology selection could be successful. It is essential to 
consider the special requirements that military environment 
poses on technology. New technology can be taken into use by 
applying old tactics. Other alternative is to develop both 
technology and tactics in parallel. The latter method will 
probably lead to a better solution in a tactical environment. 
Life cycle management is an important factor in defense 
technology procurement planning. The performance of new 
technological capability, related costs, improvement of 
technologies, 
interoperability 
and 
upgradability 
of 
technologies make in the end technology selection hit or miss.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER RESEARCH 
This paper delved into issues raised by CR, MANETs, 
WSNs and COTS technologies in tactical wireless networks. 
The goal of this paper was to highlight a few interesting areas 
where the development efforts of these technologies would 
provide practical solutions from military point of view. 
Recognized challenges should be mitigated when applying 
those methods to heterogeneous tactical networks. CR would 
provide better use of spectrum that is limited for military 
users. Commercial cellular networks, e.g. LTE and femto-cells 
seem promising and direct access between handsets might 
provide more capability to ad hoc connectivity on the 
battlefield. Frequency-hopping in tactical communications 
networks evidently provides more protection for handsets that 
operate at long ranges. LPI/LPD features are not so important 
for WSNs that operate over small range, e.g. tens of meters. 
The 
main 
research 
question 
is 
how 
a 
military 
communications network should be implemented in the future 
in order to reach severe performance requirements in different 
conditions but cost-efficiently. Cost-effectiveness has become 
a top priority lately with global economy recession, shrinking 
defense budgets and ever-increasing prices of military 
technologies. The focus should be on technologies whose 
effects on own actions and systems are understood thoroughly. 
Importance of situational awareness on tactics and different 
technologies and their correspondence to tactical applications 
were discussed. CR will find many applications from tactical 
networks but technical readiness is still lacking in some areas.  
This paper set the groundwork for a PhD research that 
focuses on the following topics. Further study aims at 
answering 
the 
question 
of 
what 
kind 
of 
military 
communications system should be built in the future if there 
are several requirements that limit the solution alternatives. 
The requirements to be considered are: 1) cost limitation, 2) 
limitation on number of units, 3) interoperability requirement, 
4) mobility requirement and 5) performance requirement. In 
particular, the following issues need to be taken into account. 
 
• How is the cost limitation defined? There should be 
dependence between cost limitation and performance. 
• Limitation on number of units comes from the fact that 
certain level of performance can be guaranteed to some 
percentage of units. It is not feasible to use many radios 
for one soldier. The cumulative performance may be 
better if every unit is co-operating than the performance 
of more expensive system where only few units have a 
high performance. 
• Performance should not be created by degrading 
interoperability of the systems but all systems should be 
interoperable.  
• Mobility requirement calls for high performance 
systems that can change position intermittently and can 
be functional even when moving at fast speed. 
• Performance requirement is provision of certain level of 
communications capability in every condition, e.g., 
robustness, 
interference 
tolerance, 
geographical 
coverage and appropriate transmission range. 
 
4
Copyright (c) The Government of Finland, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-323-0
COCORA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

REFERENCES 
 
[1] V. Kaul, C. Makaya, S. Das, D. Shur, and S. Samtani, “On the 
adaptation of commercial smartphones to tactical environments,” 
Military Communications Conference (MILCOM 2011), 2011, pp. 
2205–2210. 
[2] A. Hansson, J. Nilsson, and M. Sköld, “Scenario based comparison of 
cellular and ad-hoc tactical radio networks,” Military Communications 
Conference (MILCOM 2001), 2001, pp. 545–549. 
[3] G. F. Elmasry, “A comparative review of commercial vs. tactical 
wireless networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, October 2010, 
pp. 54–59. 
[4] D. R. Vaman and L. Qian, ”Cognitive radio mixed sensor and mobile ad 
hoc networks (SMANET) for dual use applications,” 2008 IEEE 
International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC 
2008), pp. 3304–3310. 
[5] H-L. Koo, B-h. Roh, Y-K. Park, S-E. Kim, and Y-S. Kim, “Data 
delivery with end-to-end QoS guarantee in tactical network 
interconnected with wireless ad-hoc network and heterogeneous 
networks,” 11th International Conference on Advanced Communication 
Technology (ICACT 2009), 2009, pp. 804–809. 
[6] H. Wang, B. Crilly, W. Zhao, C. Autry, and S. Swank, “Implementing 
mobile ad hoc networking (MANET) over legacy tactical radio links,” 
Military Communications Conference (MILCOM 2007), 2007, pp. 1–7. 
[7] O. Younis, L. Kant, K. Chang, and K. Young, “Cognitive MANET 
design for mission-critical networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, 
October 2009, pp. 64–71. 
[8] N. Suri et al., “Peer-to-peer communications for tactical environments: 
observations, requirements, and experiences,” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, October 2010, pp. 60–68. 
[9] L. Kant et al., “Network science based approaches to design and analyze 
MANETs for military applications,” IEEE Communications Magazine, 
November 2008, pp. 55–61. 
[10] J. Marsden, J. Treglia, and L. McKnight “Dynamic emergency response 
communication: the intelligent deployable augmented wireless gateway 
(iDAWG),” 2012 IEEE International Multi-Disciplinary Conference on 
Cognitive Methods in Situation Awareness and Decision Support, 2012, 
pp. 279–286. 
[11] G. Mao, “Research on wireless multi-hop networks: current state and 
challenges,” International Conference on Computing, Networking and 
Communications 2012, 2012, pp. 593–598. 
[12] L. Li, P. Vigneron, C. Brown, and M. Shi, “On designing bandwidth 
constrained mobile tactical networks for complex terrains,” IEEE 
Communications Magazine, February 2012, pp. 188–194. 
[13] J. L. Burbank, P. F. Chimento, B. K. Haberman, and W. T. Kasch, “Key 
challenges of military tactical networking and the elusive promise of 
MANET technology,” IEEE Communications Magazine, November 
2006, pp. 39–45. 
[14] T. Vanninen, M. Raustia, H. Saarnisaari, and J. Iinatti, ”Frequency 
hopping mobile ad hoc and sensor network synchronization,” Military 
Communications Conference (MILCOM 2008), 2008, pp. 1–7. 
[15] J. G. Andrews, S. Weber, and M. Haenggi, “Ad hoc networks: to spread 
or not to spread?,” IEEE Communications Magazine, December 2007, 
pp. 84–91. 
[16] R. Janka, “Applying cognitive radio concepts to next generation 
electronic warfare,” Software Defined Radio Conference 2010 
(SDR’10), 2010, pp. 265–270. 
[17] G. Thomas, “Situation awareness issues in tactical cognitive radio,” 
2012 IEEE International Multi-Disciplinary Conference on Cognitive 
Methods in Situation Awareness and Decision Support, 2012, pp. 287–
293. 
[18] Y-C. Liang, K-C. Chen, G. Y. Li, and P. Mähönen, “Cognitive radio 
networking and communications: an overview,” IEEE Transactions on 
Vehicular Technology, Vol. 60 , No 7, September 2011, pp. 3386–3407. 
[19] R. Umar and A. U. H. Sheikh, “Cognitive radio oriented wireless 
networks: challenges and solutions,” International Conference on 
Multimedia Computing and Systems (ICMCS  2012), 2012, pp. 992–
997.  
[20] B. Wang and K. J. R. Liu, “Advances in cognitive radio networks: a 
survey,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, Vol. 5, 
No. 1, February 2011, pp. 5–23. 
[21] J. Lopatka, “Cognitive wireless ad hoc networks in urban environment”, 
19th International Conference on Microwaves, Radar and Wireless 
Communications (MIKON 2012), pp. 810–813. 
[22] N. VanderHorn, B. Haan, M. Carvalho, and C. Perez, “Distributed 
policy learning for the cognitive network management system”, The 
2010 Military Communications Conference (MILCOM 2010), pp. 435–
440. 
[23] S. S. Kashi and M. Sharifi, “Connectivity weakness impacts on 
coordination 
in 
wireless 
sensor 
and 
actor 
networks”, 
IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, Vol. 15, No. 1, 2013. 
[24] J. Whitbeck et al., “Using UHF connectivity to off-load VHF messaging 
in tactical MANETs”, The 2011 Military Communications Conference 
(MILCOM 2011), pp. 961–966. 
[25] J. Yu et al., “Cognitive radio network as wireless sensor network (I): 
architecture, testbed, and experiment”, Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE 
National Aerospace and Electronics Conference (NAECON), 2011, pp. 
111–117.        
5
Copyright (c) The Government of Finland, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-323-0
COCORA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

