DVB-T Receiver Performance Measurements Under
Secondary System Interference
Jussi Kerttula and Riku J¨antti
Communications and Networking Department
Aalto University, School of Electrical Engineering
Espoo, Finland
jussi.kerttula@aalto.ﬁ, riku.jantti@aalto.ﬁ
Abstract—Interest to allow secondary use on television fre-
quency bands has been growing and recently Federal Com-
munications Commission (FCC) opened vacant TV channels
for unlicensed use. Many countries, especially in Europe, are
using DVB-T standard for providing terrestrial digital television
transmissions, whereas countries like U.S. rely on ATSC standard.
When assessing the impact and potential of secondary use,
primary system’s tolerance to interference must be known. In this
paper we provide essential interference tolerance measurement
results for DVB-T system that illustrate how secondary use
could impact its performance. We show how DVB-T receivers
BER behaves under interference and how bursty interference
signal affects compared to continuous interference. We also
calculate example protection distances for different secondary
transmitters.
Keywords-DVB-T; interference; secondary use; measurements
I. INTRODUCTION
Development of new wireless services and technology is
forcing us to rethink the methods how radio spectrum is
allocated. Static and exclusive allocations are able to provide
high protection for the licenced service, but often fail to be
efﬁcient and ﬂexible. The inefﬁcient use of allocated spectrum
can be seen from many measurement campaigns [1] [2], but it
is obvious that utilization also depends on the band. Bands
such as cellular phone bands and industrial, scientiﬁc and
medical (ISM) bands, are already now highly utilized. Some
radio bands that seem to be underutilized may be used by
aviation or safety related services that require high reliability
and therefore cannot in practice be used by secondary system.
Secondary use of inefﬁciently used bands is an interesting
possibility to improve spectrum utilization. Secondary system
operates on a non-interfering basis in the same band with
licenced primary system. Secondary use might be allowed to
certain group of secondary users or open to every user that is
willing to obey the given rules. TV frequencies have especially
been under investigation in many recent studies. Switchover
from analog to digital TV broadcasting has taken place in
many countries already and most of the remaining countries
will do it within few years. This switchover results to so called
digital dividend due to increased efﬁciency. Digital dividend
can be used to carry more channels or it can be released to
some other use, such as secondary system.
When exploring the secondary use of TV bands, the ef-
fects it causes to TV reception and how it should be taken
into account in network planning process must be carefully
assessed. In previous studies, interference tolerance limits for
digital signal on adjacent channels are measured in [3] [4]
for Advanced Television Systems Committee (ATSC) receivers
and in [5] for Digital Video Broadcasting Project’s terrestrial
(DVB-T) receivers. These clearly show that there is signiﬁcant
difference in performance between different standards but also
between different receivers. These measurements use Thresh-
old Of Visibility (TOV) as a limit for the interference. TOV is
in practice the same as Quasi Error Free (QEF) limit deﬁned
later in this paper. In [6] Bit Error Rate (BER) measurements
have been done for DVB-T reception when interfering signal
is analogue PAL-G TV-signal, but this is not comparable
to digital multicarrier interference signal due to different
waveform. BER is able to provide more information about the
impact of interference, than simple TOV limit. Interference
impact on much lower interference levels than the TOV limit
is reached and BER can show this. The aim of this paper is to
give an overview of DVB-T as a primary system and provide
relevant interference tolerance measurement results, mostly in
terms of BER, that can be used when analyzing the potential
and effects of secondary use of TV-bands.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II brieﬂy ex-
plains main features of DVB-T system that affects to se-
condary use. In Section III we introduce our measurement
setup and methodology. Measurement results are presented in
Section IV. In Section V we calculate what kind of protection
distances are needed to protect the primary users. Finally,
Section VI concludes our work.
II. DVB-T AS A PRIMARY SYSTEM
Television frequency band is often considered to be the
most attractive part of radio spectrum for use. Television
broadcasting uses relatively low frequency range that enables
long link distances. Transmitter locations are static and usu-
ally they have continuous transmission with ﬁxed channels.
This information is publicly available and can be used when
deciding which channels are available in speciﬁc location by
using geolocation database [7]. Generally, secondary systems
have to estimate spectrum availability in time, frequency and
temporal domains. However, TV transmissions are usually so
static and continuous that the time domain assessment can be
left out, which makes the situation much simpler.
75
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

DVB-T is a widely adopted terrestrial digital television stan-
dard that is being used e.g. in most European countries. It uses
orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM), where
transmitted data is carried by large number of closely spaced
orthogonal subcarriers. DVB-T system can utilize different
combinations of parameters depending on the given perfor-
mance requirements. Number of subcarriers, guard interval,
modulation and code rate can be modiﬁed and these affect to
the net bitrate, required carrier-to-noise ratio (C/N), mobility
and possible single frequency network use. System parameters
that are used in our measurements are presented in Table I.
This set of parameters is used for example in Finland and
Sweden and it gives 22.21 Mbit/s net bitrate [8].
When analyzing the interference tolerance limits of DTV,
error correction coding plays a signiﬁcant role. DVB-T system
uses a kind of concatenated structure that consists of inner
and outer coding. The outer code uses Reed-Solomon coding
which is very robust against bursty errors, while an inner
code uses convolutional coding which is good against random-
type errors. In addition to these coding methods, interleaving
and energy dispersal are used to improve the received video
quality. DVB-T systems use MPEG-2 or MPEG-4 video
compression. As a result even small bit error likely produces
noticeable and irritating ﬂaw in the video stream. Therefore
the target is to produce virtually error-free bitstream after
errordecoding at the receiving end. Evaluating the quality
of experience, or video quality is not so relevant, since the
transition from perfect to unacceptable quality is very rapid.
In practice the maximum acceptable error rate is decided
to be one uncorrected error event per hour, meaning BER of
10−11 at the input of MPEG-2 demultiplexer, and 2 × 10−4
after inner Viterbi decoding. This error level is also called
Quasi Error Free (QEF) level. Measurement results presented
in this paper maps this QEF limit to about 1.5 × 10−2 BER
before Viterbi decoding. For the parameters given in Table
I, the minimum C/N requirements to achieve QEF level are
given in [8] for Gaussian, Rician and Rayleigh channels, being
16.7dB, 17.3dB and 20.3dB, respectively. Rician channel is
modeling ﬁxed reception and Rayleigh channel model portable
reception. Based on these we can estimate the minimum
required power level by using following formula:
Pmin(dBm) = 10 log(kT0BF(C/N)min) + 30
(1)
where k = 1.3 × 10−23J/K is the Bolzmann’s constant,
T0 = 290K is the temperature, B = 7.6MHz is the receiver’s
noisebandwidth, F is receiver’s noise ﬁgure and C/Nmin is
the minimum signal quality to achieve QEF level. Result is
scaled form dBW to dBm by adding 30dB. When we expect
noise ﬁgure to be 8dB and Rician channel, the minimum
required signal power becomes −79.9dBm.
Protection ratios for adjacent channel and co-channel in-
terference are usually deﬁned as a function of power levels
between wanted TV-signal and interferer. This is also known
as Desired-to-Undesired ratio (D/U). Organizations such as
ITU-R, Nordig, DIGITALEUROPE/EICTA and Digital TV
−10
−5
0
5
10
−50
−45
−40
−35
−30
−25
Channel offset
Protection ratio [dB]
Adjacent channel protection ratios
 
 
DTG D−Book (2009)
Nordig Unified 2.1
EICTA MBRAI 2.0/1.0
Fig. 1.
DVB-T protection ratio speciﬁcations
TABLE I
DVB-T PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
Channel bandwidth
8 MHz
FFT size
8192 (8K)
Number of subcarriers
6817
Modulation
64-QAM
Code rate
2/3
Carrier spacing
1116 Hz
Useful symbol duration
896 µs
Guard interval
1/8
Group (DTG) provide protection ratio requirements and re-
commendations for receiver manufacturers and network plan-
ning purposes. Most of these speciﬁcations are presented in
Figure 1. These protection ratios are given against other DVB-
T transmissions. It can be seen that there is a large difference
between them. Requirements are generally looser for ﬁrst
adjacent channels N ±1 and image channel N +9 interference
tolerance than other adjacent channels.
A. DVB-T coverage and network planning principles
Compared to analog TV-system, the network planning pro-
cess is somewhat different for DVB-T system. This is due
to the fact that in DVB-T there either is or is not coverage at
certain time, whereas with analog system the coverage edge is
softer. Digital coverage rapidly changes from perfect reception
to no reception at all which make coverage area predictions
and network planning challenging.
DVB-T coverage area deﬁnition includes time and location
probabilities [9]. Receiving location is covered if service
can be perfectly received some wanted percentage of time.
This means that carrier-to-noise and carrier-to-interference
relations are above required threshold. Next level is so called
”small area” typically 100m x 100m and within this area the
percentage of covered receiving locations is deﬁned. Coverage
is ”good” when 95% of receiving locations are covered and
”acceptable” if the number is 70%. The total coverage area
that is achieved by using one or multiple transmitters consists
76
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

of a sum of these small areas that fulﬁll the given coverage
requirements.
Theoretical propagation models are used to estimate trans-
mitter coverage and to help network planning. Often used
model for broadcast networks is the ITU-R P.1546. It gives
relatively good results by taking into account e.g. terrain
topography with decent amount of complexity. This model
is commonly used when planning and coordinating TV-
frequencies. More complex models that are based on diffrac-
tion also exist, and they can potentially provide more accurate
results. These models are often used by network operators that
want to optimize their network.
DVB-T networks are already now usually interference li-
mited. In a typical implementation, interference reduces the
coverage radius of a broadcast station by up to few kilometers
when compared to noise limited case. The interference is
caused by other TV-transmitters that are using the same chan-
nel, despite that they are usually several hundred kilometers
apart. High-power transmitters in high masts and the relatively
low frequencies cause that the interference distances are long.
This means that it is not enough to allocate these frequencies
domestically, but in many cases also international coordination
is needed.
It is evident that if secondary use of TV-channels is allowed,
it will cause additional interference towards TV-services. The
important question is that how much additional interference
should be tolerated? The effect of this additional interference
could be assessed in many ways, for example in terms of
coverage probability degradation.
III. INTERFERENCE MEASUREMENTS
When exploring the opportunities for secondary use, the tol-
erance limits for interference should be carefully determined.
Tolerance limits are naturally different for different systems
and different parameter sets, but limits can vary between
different manufacturers signiﬁcantly. In the case of DVB-T
system, most of the previous interference measurements only
provide the hard QEF or TOV threshold, but we see that there
is a need for more detailed measurements as well.
A. Measurement setup
Measurement setup is shown in Fig. 2. DVB-T signal is ﬁrst
received via directional roof-top antenna. Adjustable attenuator
is used to change the DVB-T signal strength down to desired
level. Interfering signal is created with matlab and R&S
SMJ100A signal generator. Interference signal is then summed
to DVB-T signal and then split to receiver and to spectrum
analyzer. Tektronix RSA6114A spectrum analyzer is used to
measure all the power levels, taking the impedance match into
account. Finally, the signal is fed to DVB-T receiver. The
measured commercial receiver is able to give BERs before and
after Viterbi decoding. Therefore it is connected to computer
that records these values for later use and analysis. Also visual
quality of the received video stream can be analyzed via
television. QEF limit can also be found by visual assessment
with about ±1dB accuracy.
TABLE II
INTERFERENCE SIGNAL PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
Bandwidth
8 MHz
FFT size
2048 (2K)
Used subcarriers
1728
Modulation
QPSK
Carrier spacing
4464 Hz
Symbol duration
224 µs
B. Measurement methodology
Measurements are conducted at about 10 km distance from
a large DVB-T broadcast station. Channel #32 (558-566
MHz) was used as a desired channel and signal strength at
the receiver’s input is −57dBm without added attenuation.
Interference signal for all measurements is OFDM-signal
and its detailed parameters are shown in Table II. During
each interference measurement, the DVB-T signal strength is
constant and interference signal is changed.
Our measurements consisted of three different cases. First
receiver sensitivity and co-channel interference tolerance were
measured. The second case measured adjacent channel in-
terference tolerance for channels N ± 1 and N ± 2. Third
case examined how the effects of a non-continuous bursty
interference signal differ from a continuous interference signal.
In real scenario it is likely that secondary users don’t have
constant transmissions, but they can be timevariant. Bursty
signal is created by switching the same interference signal
between ON and OFF states. Our focus is not to provide only
TOV or QEF limit but to show in more detailed manner how
the BER behaves when interference is present. Most of our
measurements are done with Receiver-1, which is able to give
the BER numbers, but for comparison we also tested visually
the interference tolerance limits with two other commercial
receivers referred as Receiver-2 and Receiver-3.
IV. MEASUREMENT RESULTS
This section presents and analyzes the obtained measure-
ment results.
A. Sensitivity and co-channel interference
Sensitivity of the DVB-T receiver was measured by atte-
nuating the received signal level. Since we used ﬁxed roof-top
antenna, the radio channel is expected to be Rician. Figure
3 shows the BERs before and after Viterbi decoding as a
function of signal power. It can be seen that the Viterbi
decoding can correct all the errors when received power is over
−75dBm. The QEF limit is then reached at power level of
−79dBm. This is close to the simulated power limit presented
earlier in this paper. This −75dB limit is also chosen to be
used in most of the measurements in this paper, because it can
be considered to be the power level close to cell border.
Co-channel interference tolerance was measured with
−75dBm desired DVB-T power level. Results are shown in
Figure 4. It can be seen that interference does not cause
noticeable effect when D/U ratio is more than 28dB. The QEF
limit is achieved at 22dB D/U ratio. ITU-R BT.1368-8 gives
77
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

Adjustable
attenuator
Combiner
Splitter
R&S SMJ100A
Vector signal
generator
Tektronix
RSA6114A
Spectrum analyzer
DVB-T 
receiver
PC
RS-232
Antenna
Impedance
match
Fig. 2.
Measurement setup
−80
−75
−70
−65
−60
10
−8
10
−7
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
Received power [dBm]
BER
DVB−T receiver sensitivity
 
 
BER before any decoding
BER after inner Viterbi decoding
QEF limit
Fig. 3.
DVB-T receiver sensitivity
protection ratios between two interfering DVB-T signals. For
these used parameters the ratios are 19dB, 20dB and 23dB
for Gaussian, Rician and Rayleigh channels, respectively.
B. Adjacent channel interference
Adjacent interference tolerance determines whether a guard
channel is needed between the primary and secondary user or
what kind of guard distance should separate them. Measured
results for N ± 1 are shown in Figure 5. It can be seen that
N + 1 interference starts to degrade the BER when D/U is
less than −20dB. For N − 1 interference the performance
is better and the interference begins to affect when D/U is
less than −30dB. However the QEF limits are reached with
D/U ratios −30dB and −35dB, for N + 1 and N − 1,
respectively. ITU-R BT.1368-8 gives −30dB protection ratios
for both N ± 1 channel interference. Tolerance for N ± 2
channel interference are presented in Figure 7. Again it can
be seen that N − 2 channel tolerates more interference than
20
22
24
26
28
30
10
−7
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
D/U [dB]
BER
DVB−T receiver co−channel interference tolerance
 
 
BER before any decoding
BER after inner Viterbi decoding
QEF limit
Fig. 4.
Co-channel interference tolerance
N + 2. The QEF limits for N ± 2 channels are about 12dB
lower D/U level than for N ± 1. Protection ratios for all
the measured receivers are presented in Table III. It can be
observed that Receiver-2, which is an USB-stick type receiver,
have signiﬁcantly worse tolerance for interference on adjacent
channels beyond N ± 1 and it does not even meet the loosest
Nordig speciﬁcation. Receiver-1 and Receiver-3 are both set-
top boxes, and also their interference tolerance is much better,
meeting more stringent EICTA MBRAI requirements.
In order to see how desired power level affects to the inter-
ference tolerance, we also measured N+1 channel interference
using different desired power levels. These results are shown in
Figure 6 where only BERs before Viterbi decoding is plotted.
As seen from the other ﬁgures, the QEF limit is approximately
1.5 × 10−2 and this is also plotted in the ﬁgure. The impact
of noise naturally decreases when desired power is stronger.
Due to this, the QEF limits, in terms of D/U ratio, are not
the same for every desired signal strength. Stronger desired
78
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

−36
−34
−32
−30
−28
−26
−24
−22
−20
−18
10
−7
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
D/U [dB]
BER
DVB−T N±1 adjacent channel interference tolerance, DVB−T −75dBm
 
 
N+1 BER before any decoding
N+1 BER after Viterbi decoding
N−1 BER before any decoding
N−1 BER after Viterbi decoding
QEF
Fig. 5.
N ± 1 Adjacent channel interference tolerance
−34
−32
−30
−28
−26
−24
−22
−20
−18
−16
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
D/U [dB]
BER before Viterbi decoding
DVB−T N+1 channel interference tolerance
 
 
~QEF
−79dBm
−77dBm
−75dBm
−73dBm
−71dBm
−69dBm
−67dBm
−65dBm
Fig. 6.
N +1 Adjacent channel interference tolerance with different desired
power levels
TABLE III
MEASURED D/U PROTECTION RATIOS, DVB-T POWER −75dBm
N-3
N-2
N-1
N
N+1
N+2
N+3
Receiver-1
-50
-47
-34.5
22
-30
-42.5
-48
Receiver-2
-24
-26
-25
21
-30
-31
-32
Receiver-3
-45
-40
-34
21
-36
-46
-52
signals can tolerate more interference even in terms of D/U
ratio. However, with this change is not signiﬁcant when desired
signal is stronger than −75dBm, as seen from this ﬁgure.
C. Bursty interference
Bursty interference tolerance is measured by visually de-
termining the QEF limit, because bursty interference causes
the BER to variate signiﬁcantly and therefore these values
don’t give reliable results. Four bursty signals with different
transmit/silence ratios were used, and then also continuous
signal were measured for comparison. Shortest transmission
−48
−46
−44
−42
−40
−38
−36
−34
10
−7
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
D/U [dB]
BER
DVB−T N±2 adjacent channel interference tolerance, DVB−T −75dBm
 
 
N+2 BER before any decoding
N+2 BER after Viterbi decoding
N−2 BER before any decoding
N−2 BER after Viterbi decoding
QEF
Fig. 7.
N ± 2 Adjacent channel interference tolerance
N−3
N−2
N−1
N
N+1
N+2
N+3
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
Channel
D/U [dB]
DVB−T bursty interference tolerance, DVB−T −75dBm
 
 
0.2/2 ms
0.5/20 ms
10/10 ms
10/90 ms
continuous
EICTA MBRAI
Fig. 8.
Bursty interference tolerance, QEF limits
bursts were 0.2ms long and longest were 10ms. The results
are presented in Figure 8 along with the EICTA MBRAI
protection ratios. It can be seen that on co-channel the very
short bursts could operate about at about 6dB higher power
level. This improvement disappears or reduces on adjacent
channels. This receiver also fulﬁls the EICTA MBRAI speciﬁ-
cation. The average BER is normally slightly lower with bursty
interference signal compared to equal strength continuous one,
but BER during the burst determines whether errors occur or
not. Overall it can be said that there is no signiﬁcant difference
between the bursty and continuous signal tolerances.
V. PROTECTION DISTANCES
Interference tolerance levels of the primary systems is one
of the parameter that determines what kind of secondary use
is possible and how long the protection distances should be
between secondary transmitter and primary receiver. The limits
are difﬁcult to put into right perspective as plain dB values,
79
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

but based on them and by assuming something about the
secondary system, we can calculate example cases about the
protection distances.
Let us assume that we have a DVB-T receiver with ﬁxed
antenna at 10m height, located at the edge of the coverage area.
According to the Reference Planning Conﬁgurations (RPC)
deﬁned in [10], the corresponding minimum ﬁeld strength E
is 56dBµV/m. Now receiver input power can be calculated
if we know possible losses and antenna gain to transmitter
direction by using following equation
P[dBm] = E[dBµ]+G+10 log( λ2
4π )−10 log(120π)−90 (2)
where antenna gain G also includes the losses. Assuming that
G = 1.7dB to the direction of wanted signal and 600MHz
frequency, minimum input power becomes −75dBm.
Let us use three different type of secondary transmitters,
representing Wireless Regional Area Network (WRAN), Wire-
less Local Area Network (WLAN) and Wireless Personal Area
Network (WPAN) -type transmitters with Effective Radiated
Powers (ERPs) of 26dBm, 20dBm and 10dBm, respectively.
Propagation loss L(d) is calculated using modiﬁed Hata model
given in [11] for suburban environment. If the transmitting
antenna is located indoors, we assume that the indoor-outdoor
propagation causes additional 6dB attenuation. Now we can
calculate the minimum protection distance d from equation
PDV B − PR = Psec − L(d)
(3)
where PDV B is the received DVB-T power, PR is the
protection ratio for secondary interference and Psec is the
ERP power of secondary transmitter. We assume that DVB-T
receiver antenna is located at 10m height and it has 0dB gain
to the direction of interfering secondary transmitter. Protection
distances for different secondary transmitters are presented in
Table IV. It can be seen that co-channel use requires several
hundreds of meters protection distances even with small power
devices. Adjacent channel protection distances range from
less than meter up to 190 meters, but still 20dBm WLAN-
type secondary transmitter can interfere neighbors TV. Now
we assumed that DVB-T uses almost isotropic antenna and
there is only one secondary interferer. In practice, DVB-T
reception is often done with directive roof-top antennas with
gains of 10 − 15dB for the main lobe and less than 0dB
gains elsewhere. This reduces the interference in most cases,
but if the interferer hits the main lobe when being between
DVB-T receiver and transmitter, interference increases signif-
icantly. This is difﬁcult to avoid. We might also have multiple
interferers on different adjacent channels, causing cumulative
effect.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have presented measurement results
of DVB-T receiver performance when single transmitter is
causing interference. We use BER as a performance metric that
provides more information than visual error free assessment.
Visual errors begins to occur when BER after inner Viterbi
TABLE IV
PROTECTION DISTANCES
Secondary ERP and antenna location
26dBm
20dBm
10dBm
Channel (PR)
out 10m
out 5m
in 5m
in 2m
N(22dB)
5800m
950m
640m
310m
N ± 1(−30dB)
190m
50m
40m
21m
N ± 2(−42dB)
90m
20m
8m
< 1m
decoding reaches 2 × 10−4. Conducted measurements show
that interference begins to degrade BER several dBs before
errors can be visually seen. Tolerance for bursty interference
is almost similar compared to continuous interference and
therefore same limits can be used for both. However, deciding
the protection limits against secondary use is a challenge since
different organizations have difference in their speciﬁcations
and in practice the interference tolerance varies signiﬁcantly
between receivers. From calculated protection distances it can
been concluded that in most cases WLAN-type or smaller
transmitter can operate on adjacent channels without causing
too much interference, especially if secondary transmitter is
located indoors and one guard channel is left between it and
TV-channel.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme
FP7/2007-2013 under grant agreement no. 248303.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Lopez-Benitez, A. Umbert, and F. Casadevall, “Evaluation of spec-
trum occupancy in spain for cognitive radio applications,” in Proc. IEEE
69th Vehicular Technology Conf. VTC Spring 2009, 2009, pp. 1–5.
[2] M. A. McHenry. (2005) Nsf spectrum occupancy measurements
projects summary. Shared Spectrum Company. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sharedspectrum.com/measurements/
[3] G. L. Stuber, S. M. Almalfouh, and D. Sale, “Interference analysis of
tv-band whitespace,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 741–754, 2009.
[4] K. Salehian, Y. Wu, and G. Gagnon, “Performance of the consumer
atsc-dtv receivers in the presence of single or double interference on
adjacent/taboo channels,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 56, no. 1, pp.
1–8, 2010.
[5] B. Randhawa and S. Munday, “Conducted measurements to quantify
dvb-t interference into dtt receivers,” ERA Tech./Ofcom, Tech. Rep.,
October 2007.
[6] M. M. Velez, P. Angueira, D. De La Vega, A. Arrinda, and J. L. Ordiales,
“Dvb-t ber measurements in the presence of adjacent channel and
co-channel analogue television interference,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast.,
vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 80–84, 2001.
[7] M. Nekovee, “Cognitive radio access to tv white spaces: Spectrum
opportunities, commercial applications and remaining technology chal-
lenges,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum, 2010,
pp. 1–10.
[8] ETSI EN 300 744, “Digital video broadcasting (dvb); framing structure,
channel coding and modulation for digital terrestrial television,” Jan
2009.
[9] ETSI TR 101 190, “Digital video broadcasting (dvb); implementation
guidelines for dvb terrestrial services; transmission aspects,” Oct 2008.
[10] ITU-R, “Final acts of the regional radiocommunication conference for
planning of the digital terrestrial broadcasting service in parts of regions
1 and 3, in the frequency bands 174-230 mhz and 470-862 mhz (rrc-06),”
2006.
[11] ITU-R SM.2028-1, “Monte carlo simulation methodology for the use
in sharing and compatibility studies between different radio services or
systems,” 2002.
80
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

