Deployment Strategies in Competitive Wireless
Access Networks
Pamela Gonz´alez S´anchez 1,2, Jens Zander 1
1The Royal Institute of Technology KTH, Radio Communication Systems, 164 40 Kista, Sweden
2National University of Engineering UNI, P.O. Box5595, Managua, Nicaragua
Emails: dpgs@kth.se, jenz@kth.se
Abstract—The rapid growth of mobile internet trafﬁc has
forced wireless service providers to deploy increasingly higher
capacity in their wireless broadband access systems. The ﬂat
rate revenue streams in combination with the rapidly growing
costs associated with conventional access deployment is usually
referred to as the “revenue gap”. In this context, various schemes
for infrastructure sharing to reduce unnecessary duplication of
infrastructure present an interesting solution. Besides explicit
cooperation, competitive sharing (“coopetition”) where various
access providers provide partially overlapping coverage is one
interesting sharing mechanism. In this paper, we analyze such a
scheme and study how the operator should deploy their networks,
striking a balance between areas of exclusive coverage, where
each provider has a monopoly situation, and overlap areas with
provider competition, to achieve maximal proﬁtability. The com-
petition is based on the proportionally fair auction scheme. The
users behave selﬁshly as they bid for the various access providers.
The access providers compete with each other by selecting the so
called reservation price. Results are expressed in terms of Nash
equilibrium solutions, which are numerically derived for some
sample scenarios. Results indicate that the fraction of coverage
overlap does play an important role for both the performance of
the system and the proﬁtability of the service providers. As the
level of overlap between the two networks increases the revenue
that each base station gets decreases signiﬁcantly. In addition,
the user experienced throughput degrades considerably for low
demand but the cost per transferred Megabyte is not greatly
affected. Further, we conclude that a win-win situation for both
users and access providers can be achieved with a suitable overlap
coverage by two networks.
Index Terms—Wireless access markets; coverage overlap; com-
petition; resource allocation; Nash equilibrium
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Overview
The rapid increase of mobile internet trafﬁc has put the
spotlight on how the future wireless broadband access systems
should be deployed and operated at signiﬁcant lower costs per
transmitted bit than today. The ﬂat rate revenue streams in
combination with the rapidly growing costs associated with
conventional access deployment is usually referred to as the
“revenue gap. Nowadays, closing this “gap” is on top of the
priority list of wireless mobile service providers. Low cost
deployment and more efﬁcient utilization of existing resources
are key solutions to be investigated.
The traditional way of infrastructure deployment has been
that every service provider offers his own access system in
all locations, i.e., achieving “full” coverage by himself. This
has been possible in most mobile phone systems due to the
relatively low costs and high proﬁt margins. As the increasing
data rates require a much denser (and more expensive) network
of base stations, full coverage is no longer an option to
most service providers. Instead Infrastructure sharing, where
providers share infrastructure in low user density areas is one
possible alternative to offer better coverage and quality of
service (QoS) in a cost efﬁcient manner [1].
The sharing of wireless infrastructure, however, raises the
question of how resources and revenues should be divided
when multiple subsystems, managed by potentially competing
actors, are involved in delivering the access service. An
alternative would be to share the infrastructure implicitly by
establishing an open wireless access market wherein networks
not only compete for users on a long-term time-scale, but also
on a much shorter time-base. This could be realized with
an architecture where autonomous trade-agents, that reside
in terminals and access points (APs) or base stations (BSs),
manage the resources through negotiations [2]–[5].
In competitive multi-user networks, services are provided
to users that are assumed to be rational, choosing strategies in
order to maximize their own utility. This resource management
problem can be expressed as a noncooperative game and the
system performance can be analyzed in terms of the Nash
equilibrium, i.e., a set of optimal bids such that no single user
wishes to deviate from its bid given that the bids of the other
users remain the same and cannot further improve their utility
[6]–[8].
B. Prior Work
In [2], the authors developed a framework for studying
demand-responsive pricing in contexts where access points
(APs) with fully overlapping coverage compete for users.
Resources are partitioned through a proportional fair divisible
auction and they investigated if, and when, an open market
for wireless access can be self-sustained. They showed that in
scenario where access providers (APs) compete an open access
market results in better services at lower price, compared to
a case where APs cooperate. They utilized an architecture
where autonomous trade-agents manage the resources through
negotiations.
In [4], a market-based framework for decentralized radio
resource management in environments populated by multiple,
7
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

possibly heterogeneous, APs and the service provided to
the users is of ﬁle transfers, was introduced. The problem
addressed for the user is to determine how much resources it
should purchase from the different APs in order to maximize
its utility (“value for money”).
In [7], Maheswaran et al. introduced a bidding mechanism
for allocation of network resources among competing agents,
and study it from a game-theoretic perspective. Although they
proved the existence and the uniqueness of Nash equilibrium
in a decentralized manner, the user’s performance (QoS) and
service providers’ revenue have not been studied.
C. Our problem
In this work we study how competitive sharing (“coopeti-
tion”), where various access providers provide partially over-
lapping coverage in a competitive fashion, can reduce cost.
The scenarios studied can be illustrated as in Figure 1. We
analyze how the balance between areas of exclusive coverage,
where the provider has a monopoly situation, and overlap areas
with provider competition affects the proﬁtability of the access
providers. We also analyze how the user’s QoS is affected
by this level of overlap among networks and by trafﬁc load
variation. A game-theoretic approach and the proportionally
fair auction mechanism [9]–[11] are used aiming to answer
the following questions:
• How is the operator revenue affected by the level of
overlap and the trafﬁc load variations in the system?
• Is the user quality of service, QoS, in terms of available
data rate and cost per Megabyte affected by these two
parameters?
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we introduce our basic assumptions and describe the wireless
architecture-scenario, resource allocation mechanism, and
user demand model. Section III gives a thorough overview
of the user game. Section IV outlines the service providers’
strategy. In Section V we show the numeral results from
simulation and in Section VI we present out the conclusion.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
The system model with the basic assumptions, a description
of the scenario under consideration and the resource allocation
mechanism applied in this work are introduced in the follow-
ing.
A. Basic Assumptions - Scenario
Given the network deployment illustrated in Figure 1, the
problem for each BS is to select a reservation price, ǫ, so that
its expected revenue is maximized. When the user is in a non-
overlapping area, this user can only bid for resources from
the single BS that provides coverage of this area. This user
faces a monopolistic market, since the BS can charge any price
due to the absence of a competitor. Both, in overlapping and
nonoverlapping coverage the users may choose not to utilize
a speciﬁc BS if the price is too high.
Figure 1 illustrates the basic scenario under investigation,
where sm
i,j denotes the bid, in monetary units, that user j places
in auction i at BS m, in order to get a portion of the available
transmission time xi,j for a ﬁle transfer (Note that we have
assumed a purely time division multiplexed link). The link
user−SP indicates the link provided by access provider who
dominates the market in this area (i.e., the access providers
who provide coverage) and it is to this BS that users should
send a positive bid in order to be served.
We model a ﬁle download service, speciﬁcally, the down-
load time in a wireless TDMA system with N selﬁsh com-
peting users and m BSs with overlapping coverage areas.
The BSs are assumed to be identical in transmit power,
system bandwidth, minimum received signal to noise ratio
requirement, etc.
The resources that we focus on are downlink transmission
slots. These slots are allocated to different users in order to
share the downlink throughput among them. Allocation of the
resource is done through a proportional fair divisible auction.
We assume that the resource is inﬁnitesimally divisible and
that the cost associated with the ﬁle transfer depends on the
total time-duration and the monetary expenditure required for
the complete ﬁle download.
Fig. 1.
Basic scenario - Illustration of a wireless network architecture with
different percentages of overlap, which represents a system with different
levels of competition
As in [2] [4], we investigate a trade-agent-based model
for the auction bidding process.The trade-agents are entities
located in the BSs, who act selﬁshly on behalf of their users.
The main objective of each trade-agent is to maximize its
user’s utility (here computed as value for money). The portion
of the transmission time allocated to user j can be expressed
8
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

as follows:
xi,j(s)
=
si,j
si,j + Si,−j
∈ [0, 1),
(1)
where Si,−j
represents the strategies (bids) of all the
opponents’ trade-agents and it is equal to P
k̸=j si,k + ǫ
where the reservation price ǫ ∈ [0, ǫmax). The reservation
price is a nonzero price ﬂoor below which the resource will
not be sold. Note that by deﬁnition the price ﬂoor must be
nonzero as if it were zero, then there would be no price ﬂoor.
Assuming that the peak data-rate of a single user j on whose
behalf the trade-agent j is acting, remains unchanged during
the entire ﬁle transfer and that this applies for all the users,
i.e., Ri,j=Rz,j ∀ i, z, the total demand associated with the
other trade-agents, thus P
k̸=j si,k=P
k̸=j sz,k ∀ i, z.
Note that z is the last round of the auction. Due to these
assumptions, each trade-agent will place identical bids in all
the auctions.
B. Resource Allocation Mechanism - Proportionally Fair
Divisible Auction
As described in the previous section, the total transmission
time is divided via employing a proportional fair divisible
auction . In a proportional share allocation scheme each user is
characterized by a parameter that expresses the relative share
or amount of the resource that it should receive. Hereafter,
the bid that the user submits to the BS is used to express the
user’s share. In this work a dynamic system has been modeled
in which users are assumed to dynamically join and leave
the competition (game). Therefore, the portion of the resource
depends on both the number of users that enter the game and
the level of competition at different times. On light of this,
this mechanism allows ﬂexibility, since the users can decide
when to join or leave the competition, and ensures fairness,
which follows from the fact that the users always get a share
of the resource proportionally to their bids (as expressed in
Equation 1).
The auction process is held by an auctioneer located in the
BS (thus since the users’ trade-agents are also allocated in the
BS all the communication between the trade-agents and the
auctioneer is strictly local to the BS). This concept was intro-
duced in [9] and analyzed later in competitive environments
for networks with fully overlapping coverage in [2], [4]. We
examine the case where the ﬁle transfer requires z auctions to
complete, i.e., i = {1, ..., z} (see Figure 2).
Figure 2 illustrates the auction procedure associated with a
ﬁle transfer [4]. In this example trade-agent j initiates a ﬁle
transfer in auction 1.
Since, at the beginning of each allocation cycle, an interrupt
is generated in the system, too short a cycle may cause a large
overhead in the system, in the long run (i.e., in Operating
Systems each allocation cycle is in the order of milliseconds).
Fig. 2.
Illustration of auction procedure associated with a ﬁle transfer
On the other hand, a cycle of too long duration (i.e., cycles of
one minute) may induce a large delay for the ﬁle download,
thus, a degradation in the user QoS.
In our analysis, we assume that each auction is carried
out every one second [2], [4]. This means that each auction
determines the allocation of resources for the time after the
conclusion of the auction and that a new auction starts every
second. Note that the auction can proceed in parallel with
the usage of the link resources for downloading, but this
usage is according to the resource allocation determined by
the last auction. For simplicity of the analysis, we neglected
the overhead that can occur in a real system application.
In a proportional fair resource allocation mechanism, a user
knows exactly how much it has to “pay” over any interval
of time while this is active, considering that they choose how
much they will bid for the resource. The user cannot, however,
predict how much service time it will actually receive. This is
because the fraction of the resource, and therefore the service
time the user will receive, may change at any time depending
on the level of competition for the resource [10].
In each auction, user j is allocated a portion xi,j of the total
available transmission time during each auction TA (where
TA = 1 second), and depending on its peak data-rate Ri,j the
agent will be able to transfer a total of xi,jRi,jTA bits. After
participating in z auctions the ﬁle transfer is completed and
the trade-agent j awaits for a new request from its user to
enter the competition again.
C. User Demand Model
A demand function that consists of ﬁles with an expected
size q in Megabits is considered. Each ﬁle arrives to the system
of BSs according to a Poisson process characterized by an
intensity, λ.
D0 represents the potentially offered load, which can be
deﬁned as D0=qλ, and it is assumed that the aggregate
demand is perfectly known for all BSs [2].
III. USER GAME - UTILITY MAXIMIZATION
We focus in ﬁnding the Nash Equilibrium Point (NEP) for
the reservation price of the resource, ǫ, considering the two
9
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

games (competition among users for resources and among
BSs for users) in the competition area for different levels of
coverage overlap. This NEP is related to the Best Response
from the trade-agents (acting on behalf of the users). In the
monopolist area (non-overlapping coverage) only competition
among users is observed.
By obtaining the NEP we are able to analyze the BS’s
expected revenue with different levels of competition. These
results enable us to predict the users’ performance (in terms
of throughput and monetary expenditure per transferred ﬁle).
The users compete against each other for resources - while
trying to maximize their utility function in order to transfer
a ﬁle. This game is expressed later in Equation (2). For our
analysis, we assume that the ﬁle size is ﬁnite (and identical),
q = 1 Megabyte.
ϕ(s−j)
=
arg max
sj
Ui,j(sj, S−j)
(2)
∀
j ∈ {1, ..., N}, m ∈ {1, 2}.
In the above equation Ui,j(sj, s−j) is related to the
throughput, xi,jRi,j, associated with user j and is deﬁned as:
Ui,j
=
2
X
m=1
max

0, xi,jRm
i,j − sm
i,j

.
(3)
Deriving the ﬁrst order solution (i.e., as a linear equation)
of Equation (3) with respect to sm
i,j we can obtain the best
response (BR), which describes how trade-agent j should
react to the strategies (optimal bid that the trade-agent should
submit the BSs) of all the other trade-agents in order to
maximize its user’s utility. This would be expressed as follows:
sm
i,j
=
s
Rm
i,j(
X
k̸=j
sm
i,k + ǫm) −
X
k̸=j
sm
i,k + ǫm.
(4)
Since the peak transfer rate for all of the users is the same
over all auctions, and they all have to transfer the same size
ﬁle, then giving each user the whole channel (i.e., all of the
time slots) enables this user to complete and leave the system,
hence leaving all of the remaining resources for the remaining
users.
The monetary expenditure, Em, incurred by user j is given
by the summation of the bids submitted in all the auctions,
zj, required to download the ﬁle, as indicated in:
Em
j
=
zj
X
i=1
sm
i,j
(5)
IV. BASE STATION STRATEGY-REVENUE MAXIMIZATION
A. Open Access Market-Competing BSs
This game take place among BSs, who selﬁshly, try to
maximize their own expected revenue per second, as deﬁned
in Equation (6).
φm(ǫ−m)
=
arg max
ǫm
Φ(ǫm, ǫ−m),
(6)
where φm(ǫ−m) represents the best response (BR) function
associated with BS m. Equation (7) describes the NEP, which
is the solution to the competitive game among BSs.
ǫ∗
m
=
φm(ǫ∗
−m)
∀ m ∈ M.
(7)
The stability and uniqueness of the NEP for the games have
been calculated through successive iterations (negotiation)
between the BSs and users via mean of simulation. It has
been proved that symmetric wireless systems with proportional
share resource allocation mechanism converge to the NEP
reaching the nearest optimal performance [2]–[4], [6], [12].
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
The requests of the ﬁles to be downloaded by the users
arrive according to a Poisson process and the resources are
allocated once per second based on the NEP. In this work we
characterize the user’s performance (QoS) by using the average
user throughput and monetary expenditure per Megabyte. The
BSs’ performance is quantiﬁed by the average revenue per
second. The pathloss has been modeled as expressed bellow:
L(d)
=
35.3 + 38 log10 (d)
in units of dB,
(8)
where d denotes the distance between the BS and the
mobile terminal. In our experiment we have neglected shadow
fading and modeled interference as coming from constantly
transmitting BSs. As in [2], we use a truncated version of the
Shannon bound that has been adjusted to include efﬁciency
losses, leading to the peak data-rate:
Ri,j
=
min

W log2

1 + Γi,j
2

, Rmax

,
(9)
where W
=
3.84 MHz is the channel bandwidth, Γi,j
represents the signal to interference and noise ratio and Rmax
denotes the maximum bit-rate that can be achieve by the user.
A. Simulation Settings
Extensive simulations in
MATLAB were carried out
with a granularity of one second (auction cycle) for two
wireless access providers. Table. I summarizes the simulation
parameters that were used. These values have been taking
from the prior analysis introduced in [2].
10
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS VALUES
Parameters - with units in square brackets
Value
BS Transmit Power (P ) [W]
20
Users distribution
Uniform
Cell Radius [meters]
440
Number of Competing BSs (M)
2
File size (q) [Megabyte]
1
Maximum bite-rate (Rmax) [Mbit/s]
7
B. Simulation Results
Figure 3 shows the BR function for the non-cooperative
game under different levels of competition where there, in
average, 0.4 packets/BS/s enter the system. In this ﬁgure A
represents the percentage of overlap of the two wireless access
networks coverage.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Reservation Price BS2, ε2
Reservation Price BS1, ε1
 
 
BR BS1 φ(ε2) A=10%
BR BS2 φ(ε1)
BR BS1 φ(ε2) A=65%
BR BS2 φ(ε1)
BR BS1 φ(ε2) A=100%
BR BS2 φ(ε1)
Nash equilibrium point
Fig. 3.
Average revenue per BS as a function of the reservation price, ǫ.
Based on the results in Figure 3 we observe that there exist
at least one NEP in the system.
1. User Performance The experienced users’ QoS in terms of
throughput and average price per transferred ﬁle as a function
of the potentially offered load, D0, is shown in Figure 4.
These depend on the load demand density and are affected
by the level of competition introduced with the coverage
overlap between networks (representing different levels of
competition).
It can be observed that for low load demand, the throughput
experienced by users degrades considerably as the level of
competition increases. This is due to the fact that the fraction
of the resource that each user gets decreases as more users
fall in the competition area (in the overlapping coverage).
When the load density increases (2.4 Megabits/second and
higher, from λ=0.3 ﬁles/s) the throughput degradation is
slightly smaller leading to less negative impact on the user’s
experienced QoS, compared to fully overlapping coverage.
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
200
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1200
1400
 
 
File arrival rate, λ [files/BS/s]
Average user throughput [kbits/s]
Nonoverlapping
10% Overlapping
35% Overlapping
65% Overlapping
100% Overlapping
Potentially offered load, D0 [Mbit/BS/s]
0.8
1.6
2.4
3.2
4
4.8
Fig. 4.
Average throughput experienced by users for different levels of
overlapping coverage as a function of the potentially offered load, D0, (ﬁle
arrival rate λ).
Figure 5 shows the average price per transferred Megabyte
experienced by users. We observe that an architecture where
BSs compete and share their resources implicitly, combined
with autonomous trade-agents acting on behalf of the users,
has the potential to reduce price. For networks with low
demand density the average price per transferred Megabyte
is affected (small increment) in a low scale.
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Monetary expenditure per Mbyte [mu/MByte]
 
 
File arrival rate, λ [files/BS/s]
Nonoverlapping
10%   Overlapping
35%   Overlapping
65%   Overlapping
100% Overlapping
4.8
4
3.2
Potentially offered load, D0 [Mbit/BS/s]
2.4
1.6
0.8
Fig. 5.
Average price, p, per transferred Megabyte of data for different levels
of overlapping coverage as a function of the potentially offered load, D0, (ﬁle
arrival rate λ).
As illustrated in Figure 5, the resulting user’s monetary
expenditure per Megabyte increases rapidly as a function of
the potentially offered load, D0, and on a slightly basis as the
level of overlap (competition) is reduced.
2. Base Station’s Revenue; The average revenue associated with
the BS game for different levels of coverage overlap can be ob-
served in Figure 6. As the overlapping area by the two wireless
networks increases so does the level of competition and more
11
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

users experience an open access market. The reservation price
for the resource decreases as a consequence of the competition
leading to lower BS’s revenue.
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Level of coverage overlap in the system
 
 
Average revenue per BS  φ (ε1, ε2)
Representation of the level of competition between base stations
%
%
%
%
%
10% of Overlap
35% of Overlap
65% of Overlap
Completely overlaping
      Fully competition
Nonoverlap − Monopoly situation
Fig. 6.
Average base station’s revenue per second and slot associated with
the BS game as a function of the level of coverage overlap. On average 0.4
ﬁles/s arrive to each BS, each ﬁle is of size q = 8 Megabits.
Figures 4 and 5 show that the experienced user’s QoS is
affected for low demand density. However, we can notice
that for load density higher than 3.2 Megabits/second (λ=0.4
ﬁles/s) the degradation is slightly smaller leading to less
impact on the user’s experienced QoS and providing a great
gain (more than 50%) in the BS’s revenue.
Generally, our results indicate that both users and access
providers can beneﬁt when a suitable overlap coverage by
two networks is achieved. According to our results a proper
percentage of overlap might be approximately 35% based on
the interest or objective function of all the involved parties.
We investigated the behavior of the system by considering
only two wireless networks in order to get insight on to
which extent competition can be beneﬁcial for both providers
and users.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we analyzed a competitive sharing scheme
(“coopetition”) where two access providers provide partially
overlapping coverage in a competitive fashion as an option to
maximize their revenue. We study how the balance between
areas of exclusive coverage and overlap areas with provider
competition affects the proﬁtability of the access providers.
Access providers with symmetric wireless networks that
overlap partially in coverage compete with each other by
selecting a reservation price. It has been shown that, under
our assumptions, the system converges to a unique Nash
equilibrium point. Results indicate that the fraction of coverage
overlap does play an important role for both the performance
of the system and the proﬁtability of the access providers.
We observe that as the level of overlap increases the revenue
that each base station decreases signiﬁcantly. In addition,
the user’s experienced throughput degrades considerably
for low demand density meanwhile the cost per transferred
Megabyte is affected in a low scale. Further, we conclude that
a win-win situation for both users and access providers can
be achieved with a suitable coverage overlap by two networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Swedish International
Development Agency (SIDA), and VINNOVA (MODyS
project) for their partial support of this work. We would also
like to acknowledge Professor Gerald Q. Maguire for his
valuable comments, which have helped us to improve this
paper. The contributions from initial discussions with Dr. Ki
Won Sung, Saltanat Khamit and Dr. Johan Hultell are hereby
acknowledged.
REFERENCES
[1] J.
Markemdahl,
¨Osten
M¨akitalo,
J.
Werding,
and
B.
G.
M¨olleryd,
“Business
innovation
strategies
to reduce
the revenue
gap
for
wireless
broadband
services,”
Communications
and
Strategies
Journal,
vol.
1,
no.
75,
2009.
[Online].
Available:
http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:idt:journl:cs7502
[2] M. Blomgren and J. Hultell, “Demand-responsive pricing in open wire-
less access markets,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Vehicular Technology
Conference VTC-Spring, 2007.
[3] R. T. Maheswaran and T. Bac¸ar, “Nash equilibrium and decentralized
negotiation in auctioning divisible resources,” Group Decision and
Negotiation Journal, vol. 12, no. 5, 2003.
[4] M. Blomgren and J. Hultell, “Decentralized market-based radio resource
management in multi-network environments,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference VTC-Spring, 2007.
[5] R. T. Maheswaran and T. Bac¸ar, “Coalition formation in proportionally
fair divisible auctions,” 2003.
[6] D. Fudenberg and J. Tirole, Game Theory, 1991.
[7] R. T. Maheswaran and T. Bac¸ar, “Decentralized network resource
allocation as a repeated noncooperative market game,” in Proceedings
of the 40th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, vol. 5, 2001.
[8] D. Niyato and E. Hossain, “Radio resource management games in
wireless networks: an approach to bandwidth allocation and admission
control for polling service in ieee 802.16,” Wireless Communications,
IEEE Journal, vol. 14, no. 1, 2007.
[9] I. Stoica, H. Abdel-Wahab, K. Jeffay, S. Baruah, J. Gehrke, and
C. Plaxton, “A proportional share resource allocation algorithm for real-
time, time-shared systems,” in Proceedings of the 17th IEEE Real-Time
Systems Symposium, 1996.
[10] I. S. Hussein, H. Abdel-wahab, and K. Jeffay, “On the duality between
resource reservation and proportional share resource allocation,” in
Proceedings of Multimedia Computing and Networking, 1997.
[11] L. Abeni, G. Lipari, and G. Buttazzo, “Constant bandwidth vs. propor-
tional share resource allocation,” vol. 2, 1999.
[12] J. Hultell, “Access selection in multi-system architectures: cooperative
and competitive contexts,” Licentiate Thesis in Telecommunications,
Kungliga Tekniska H¨ogskolan KTH, Sweden 2007.
12
COCORA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-131-1

