LTE and WLAN Interference Suppression in CR Applications
Johanna Vartiainen and Risto Vuohtoniemi
Centre for Wireless Communications
University of Oulu
Oulu, Finland
Email: ﬁrstname.lastname@ee.oulu.ﬁ
Abstract—In traditional cognitive radio approach, spectrum is
divided into black and white spaces. Black space is reserved to
primary users (PU) as secondary users (SU) are able to transmit
in white space. A modern approach is that the black space is
divided into black and grey spaces to get more capacity. Grey
space leads to novel type of interference environment because of
interfering signals coming from PUs and other SUs. In addition,
novel CR applications like long term evolution advanced (LTE-A)
and internet of things (IoT) generate interfering signals. Thus,
interference suppression is needed. In this paper, the performance
of the forward consecutive mean excision algorithm (FCME)
interference suppression method is studied in the presence of
relatively narrowband interfering signals existing in the novel
CR networks. Real-world LTE and WLAN signal measurements
were used to verify the usability of the FCME IS method in
future CR applications.
Keywords–interference suppression; grey zone; cognitive radio;
LTE; WLAN; measurements.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Heavily used spectrum calls for new technologies and
innovations. Cognitive radio (CR) [1] [2] offers possibility
to effective spectrum usage allowing secondary users (SU)
to transmit at unreserved frequencies if they guarantee that
primary users (PU) transmissions are not disturbed. Earlier,
spectrum was divided into two zones (spaces): black and white
zone. As black zone was fully reserved to PUs and off limits
to secondary users, their transmission was allowed in white
zones where there were no PU transmissions. The problem in
this classiﬁcation is that if the spectrum is not totally unused,
secondary users are not able to transmit. Thus, the spectrum
usage is not as efﬁcient as it could be. Instead, spectra can be
divided into three zones: white, grey (or gray) and black zone
[3]. In this model, the SU transmission is allowed in white and
grey spaces, as black spaces are reserved for PUs.
Cognitive radio has several novel applications. Long Term
Evolution Advanced (LTE-A) is a 4G mobile communication
technology [4]. LTE-A exploits cognitive radio technology and
utilizes ﬂexible and intelligent spectrum usage. Its focus is on
high capacity. LTE-A enables one of the newest topics called
Wide Area IoT (Internet of Things), where sensors, systems
and other smart devices are connected to internet. Therein,
long-range communication, long battery life and minimal
amount of data, as well as narrow bandwidth are key issues. In
addition, Cognitive IoT (CIoT) has been proposed to highlight
required intelligence [5].
As cognitive radio technology offers more efﬁcient spec-
trum use, there are many challenges. One of those is that
the cognitive world is an interference-intensive environment.
Especially in-band interfering signals cause problems. There
are three main types of interference in CR: from SU to PU
(SU-PU interference), from PU to SU (PU-SU interference),
and interference among SUs (SU-SU interference) [6] [7].
The basic idea in CR is that SU must not interfere PUs.
Instead, SU may be interfered by PUs or other SUs. When
there are multiple PUs and SUs with different applications and
technologies, cumulative interference is a problematic task [8].
In grey spaces, there is interference from PU (and possible
other SU) transmissions. It is efﬁcient to mitigate unknown
interference in order to achieve higher capacity. Therefore,
interference suppression (IS) methods are needed.
Interference suppression exploits the characteristics of de-
sired / interfering signal by ﬁltering the received signal [9].
IS techniques include, for example, ﬁlters, cyclostationar-
ity, transform-domain methods like wavelets and short-time
Fourier transform (STFT), high order statistics, spatial process-
ing like beamforming and joint detection / multiuser detection
[10]. Filter-based IS is performed in the time domain. Optimal
ﬁlter (Wiener ﬁlter) can be deﬁned only if the interference
and signal of interest Power Spectral Densities (PSDs) are
known. Usually, those are not known, so adaptive ﬁltering is
an option. In ﬁlter-based IS, both computational complexity
and hardware costs are low but co-channel interference cannot
be suppressed, and no interference with similar waveforms
to signals can be suppressed. Cyclostationarity based inter-
ference suppression has low hardware complexity but medium
computational complexity. This may cause challenges in real-
time low-power applications. In transform domain IS, compu-
tational complexity is medium, but transform domain IS cannot
be used when interference and signal-of-interest have the same
kind of waveforms. However, waveform design may be used.
Transform domain IS has medium computational complexity
and low hardware complexity. High-order statistics based inter-
ference suppression is computationally complex, and multiple
antennas/samplers are needed, so its hardware cost is high and
computational complexity too. In beamforming, co-channel
interference as well as interference with similar waveforms
to the signal of interest can be suppressed, but because of
multiple antennas, the hardware cost is high. Its computational
complexity is medium.
The less about the interfering signal characteristics is known,
the more demanding the IS task will be. As most of the IS
methods need some information about the suppressed signals
and/or noise, there are some methods that are able to operate
blindly. Blind IS methods do not need any a priori information
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

about the interfering signals, their modulations or other char-
acteristics. Also the noise level can be unknown, so it has to
be estimated. Blind IS methods are well suited for demanding
and varying environments.
It is crystal clear that when operating in real-world with
mobile devices and varying environment, computational com-
plexity is one of the key issues. Fast and reliable as well as
cost-effective, powersave and adaptive methods are needed. In
this paper, a transform domain IS method called the forward
consecutive mean excision (FCME) algorithm [11] [12] is
proposed to be used for interfering signal suppression (IS) in
cognitive radio applications. The FCME algorithm is a blind
constant false alarm rate (CFAR) -type interference suppres-
sion method that is able to suppress all kind of relatively
narrowband (RNB) signals in all kind of environments and
in all kind of frequency areas. Here, RNB means that the
suppressed signal is narrowband with respect to the studied
bandwidth. The wider the studied band is the wider the
suppressed signal can be. First, cognitive radio applications
and interference environment are considered. Focus is on IS
in SU receiver interfered by PUs and other SUs. A scenario
that clariﬁes the interference environment is presented. The
FCME algorithm is presented and its feasibility is considered.
Measurement results for LTE and WLAN signals are used to
verify the performance of the FCME IS method.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II considers
future cognitive applications as in Section III, interference
environment in cognitive radios is studied. The FCME algo-
rithm is presented and its feasibility is considered in Section
IV. Measurement results are presented in Section V, and
conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II.
FUTURE COGNITIVE APPLICATIONS
Future applications that use cognitive approach include, for
example, LTE-A and cognitive IoT. LTE-A is an advanced
version of LTE. Therein, orthogonal Frequency Division Multi-
plex (OFDM) signal is used. In OFDM systems, data is divided
between several closely spaced carriers. LTE downlink uses
OFDM signal as uplink uses Single Carrier Frequency Divi-
sion Multiple Access (SC-FDMA). Downlink signal has more
power than uplink signal. Thus, its interference distance is
larger than uplink signals. OFDM offers high data bandwidths
and tolerance to interference. As LTE uses 6 bandwidths up
to 20 MHz, LTE-A may offer even 100 MHz bandwidth.
LTE-A offers about three times greater spectrum efﬁciency
when compared to LTE. In addition, some kind of cognitive
characteristics are expected [13] [14] [15]. RNB interfering
signals exist especially at grey zones. This calls for IS.
In the network ecosystem, it is expected that cognitive IoT
[5] [16] will be the next ’big’ thing to focus on. Wide-area IoT
is a network of nodes like sensors and it offers connections
between/to/from systems and smart devices (i.e., objects) [17]
[18]. Cognitive IoT enables objects to learn, think and under-
stand both the physical and social world. Connected objects
are intelligent and autonomous and they are able to interact
with environment and networks so that the amount of human
intervention is minimized. Therein, the long-range (even tens
y-z km
x-y km
0-x km
y km
z km
x km
black 
zone
grey 
zone
white 
zone
0 km
Figure 1.
White, grey and black zones.
of kilometers) connection of nodes via cellular connections is
expected. Data sent by nodes is minimal and transmissions may
seldom occur. Thus, there is no need to use wide bandwidths
for a transmission. This saves power consumption but also
spectrum resources. Proposed technologies include, e.g., LoRa
[19], Neul [20], GSM, SigFox [21], and LTE-M [22]. As
Neul is able to operate in bands below 1 GHz and LoRa
as well as SigFox operate in ISM band, LTE-M operates in
LTE frequencies. A common thing is that the ultra-narrowband
(UNB) signals are proposed to be used. For example, in LTE-
M, 200 kHz BW is to be studied. Maximum transmit power
is of the order of 20 dBm. In Neul, 180 kHz band is needed.
Most of those technologies are on the phase of development. In
any case, it is expected that the amount of narrowband signals
is growing. Thus, IS is required, especially when it is operated
in mobile bands.
III.
INTERFERENCE ENVIRONMENT IN CR
In modern CR, the spectrum is divided into three zones
- white, grey and black. In Figure 1, zone classiﬁcation is
presented. It is assumed that PU-SU distance is >y km in the
white zone, <x km in the black zone, and in the grey zone it
holds that x km <PU-SU-distance <y km [23]. It means that if
SU is more than y km from the PU, SU is allowed to transmit.
If SU is closer than y km but further than x km from the PU,
SU may be able to transmit with low power. Spectrum sensing
is required before transmission and there are interfering signals
so IS is needed to ensure SU transmissions. If PU-SU distance
is less than x km, SU transmission is not allowed.
Interference environment differs between the zones. White
space contains only noise. Therein, the noise is most com-
monly additive white Gaussian (AWGN) noise at the receiver’s
front-end, and man-made noise. This is related to the used fre-
quency band. Grey space contains interfering signals within the
noise which causes challenges. Grey space is occupied by PU
(and possible other SU) signals with low to medium power that
means interference with low to medium power. IS is required
especially is this zone. Black space includes communications
signals, possible interfering signals, and noise. In black space,
there are PU signals with high power and SUs have no access.
There must be some rules that enable SUs to transmit in grey
zone without causing any harm to PUs. According to [24], SU
can transmit at the same time as PU if the limit of interference
temperature at the desired receiver is not reached. In [2],
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

Figure 2.
Scenario with one macrocell and two microcells.
it is considered the maximum amount of interference that a
receiver is able to tolerate, i.e., an interference temperature
model. This can be used when studying interference from SU
to PU network. In [25], primary radio network (PRN) deﬁnes
some interference margin. This can be done based on channel
conditions and target performance metric. Interference margin
is broadcasted to the cognitive radio network. In any case, the
maximum transmit power of SUs is limited.
In our scenario presented in Figure 2, it is assumed that
we have one PU base station (BS), several PU mobile stations
and several SUs. SU terminals form microcells. Part or all of
SUs are mobile and part of SUs may be intelligent devices
or sensors (i.e., IoT). Between SUs, weak signal powers are
needed for a transmission. One microcell can consist of, for
example, devices in an ofﬁce room. They can use the same
or different signal types than PU. For example, in the ofﬁce
room case, a wireless local area network (WLAN) can be used.
Between the intelligent devices (IoT), UNB signals are used.
It is assumed that SUs operate at grey zone, so IS is required
to ensure the quality of SU transmissions.
SUs measure signals transmitted by PU base stations and
estimate relative distance to them. Using this information,
SUs know whether their short range communication will
cause harmful interference to the PU base station. To enable
secondary transmissions under continuous interference caused
by the PU base station this interference is attenuated by
interference suppression.
The secondary access point knows the locations of PU
terminals or SUs measure the power levels of the signals
coming from PU mobile terminals in the uplink. If it is
assumed that SUs know the locations of PUs, SUs do not
interfere with PUs. If SUs do not know PUs locations, their
transmission is allowed when received PU signal power is
below some predetermined threshold. If the level of the power
coming from a certain primary terminal is small, it is assumed
that secondary transmission generates negligible interference
towards primary terminal. However, it may happen that SUs
don’t sense closely spaced silent PUs.
Let us consider microcell 1 in Figure 2. There are one SU
transmitter SU TX1 and four terminals SU i, i = 1, · · · , 4. In
addition to the intended signal from SU TX1, SU 1 receives
the noise η, SU 2 receives PU downlink (PU BS) signal and
the noise η, SU 3 receives PU downlink (PU BS) and PU
uplink (PU 1) signals and the noise η, and SU 4 receives PU
downlink (PU BS) signal, signal from other microcell’s SU,
and the noise η. For example, if it is assumed that PUs are
in the LTE-A network and SUs use WLAN signals, receiver
SU 2 has to suppress OFDM signal, receiver SU 3 has to
suppress OFDM and SC-FDMA signals, and receiver SU 4
has to suppress OFDM and WLAN signals.
In addition, interfering and communication signals have to
be separated from each other. The receiver has to know which
signals are interfering signals to be suppressed and which
signals are of interest. An easy way to separate an interfering
signal from the intended signal is to use different bandwidths.
For example, in LTE networks, it is known that there are 6
different signal bandwidths between 1.4 and 20 MHz that are
used [4]. Especially if different signal type is used, it is easy
to separate interfering signals from our information signal. It
can also be assumed that interfering signal has higher power
than the desired signal. However, this consideration is out of
the scope of this paper.
IV.
THE FCME METHOD
The adaptively operating FCME method [11] was originally
proposed for impulsive interference suppression in the time
domain. It was noticed later that the method is practical also
in the frequency domain [12]. Earlier, the FCME method has
mainly been studied against sinusoidal and impulsive signals
which are narrowband ones. The computational complexity
of the FCME method is N log2(N) due to the sorting [12].
Analysis of the FCME method has been presented in [12].
The FCME method adapts according to the noise level,
so no information about the noise level is required. Because
the noise is used as a basis of calculation, there is no need
for information about the suppressed signals. Even though
it is assumed in the calculation that the noise is Gaussian,
the FCME method operates even if the noise is not purely
Gaussian [12]. In fact, it is sufﬁcient that the noise differs
from the signal. When it is assumed that the noise is Gaussian,
x2 (=the energy of samples) has a chi-squared distribution
with two degrees of freedom. Thus, the used IS threshold is
calculated using [11]
Th = −ln(PF A,DES)x2 = TCMEx2,
(1)
where TCME = −ln(PF A,DES) is the used pre-determined
threshold parameter [12], PF A,DES is the desired false alarm
rate used in constant false alarm rate (CFAR) methods,
x2 =
1
Q
PQ
i=1 |xi|2 denotes the average sample mean, and
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

Figure 3.
Agilent E4446. LTE1800 network downlink signals.
Q is the size of the set. For example, when it is selected
that PF A,DES = 0.1 (=10% of the samples are above the
threshold in the noise-only case), the threshold parameter
TCME = −ln(0.1) = 2.3. The FCME method rearranges the
frequency-domain samples in an ascending order according to
the sample energy, selects 10% of the smallest samples to form
the set Q, and calculates the mean of Q. After that, (1) is used
to calculate the ﬁrst threshold. Then, Q is updated to include all
the samples below the threshold, a new mean is calculated, and
a new threshold is computed. This is continued until there are
no new samples below the threshold. Finally, samples above
the threshold are from interfering signal(s) and suppressed.
The FCME algorithm is blind and it is independent of
modulation methods, signal types and amounts of signals. It
can be used in all frequency areas, from kHz to GHz. The
only requirements are that (1) the signal(s) can not cover the
whole bandwidth under consideration, and (2) the signal(s)
are above the noise level. The ﬁrst requirement means that the
FCME method can be used against RNB signals. For example,
10 MHz signal is wideband when the studied bandwidth is
that 10 MHz, but RNB when the studied bandwidth is, e.g.,
100 MHz. In fact, it is enough that the interfering signal does
not cover more than 80% of the studied bandwidth. However,
the narrower the interference is, the better the FCME method
operates [26].
V.
MEASUREMENTS
The interference suppression performance of the FCME
method against RNB signals was studied using real-world
wireless data. The results are based on real-life measure-
ments. Measurements were performed using spectrum analyzer
Agilent E4446 [27] (Figure 3). Three types of signals were
studied, namely the LTE uplink, LTE downlink, and WLAN
signals. All those signals are commonly used wireless signals.
Both LTE1800 network frequencies and WLAN signals were
measured at the University of Oulu, Finland. IS was performed
using the FCME method with threshold parameter 4.6, i.e.,
desired false alarm rate PF A,DES = 1% = 0.01 [12].
LTE1800 network operates at 2 × 75 MHz band so that
uplink is on 1.710 − 1.785 GHz and downlink is on 1.805 −
1.880 GHz [28]. LTE downlink uses OFDM signal as uplink
Figure 4.
LTE1800 network frequencies. Spectrogram of downlink signals
present.
Figure 5. LTE1800 network frequencies. Spectrogram of suppressed downlink
signals. The FCME method was used.
uses SC-FDMA. LTE assumes a small nominal guard band
(10% of the band, excluding 1.4 MHz case).
One measurement at 1.7 − 1.9 GHz containing 1000 time
domain sweeps and 1601 frequency domain points is seen
in Figure 4. Therein, only downlink signaling is present.
Downlink signals have larger interference distance than uplink
signals. Interfering signals cover about 30% of the studied
bandwidth. In Figure 5, situation after the FCME IS is pre-
sented. It can be seen that the signals have been suppressed.
On uplink signal frequencies where no signals are present (600
ﬁrst frequency domain samples), average noise value is −99
dBm before and after IS.
In Figure 6, ﬁrst line (sweep) of the previous case is
presented more closely. The FCME thresholds after two cases
are presented. In the ﬁrst case, the FCME is calculated using
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

1.8 GHz
1.85 GHz
1.9 GHz
−130
−120
−110
−100
−90
−80
−70
−60
Frequency domain samples
Signal power [dBm]
FCME threhsold
Figure 6.
IS using the FCME method for LTE downlink signals. Upper
threshold when the FCME calculated on 1.8 − 1.9 GHz, lower threshold
(dashed line) when the FCME calculated on 1.7 − 1.9 GHz.
frequencies 1.8 − 1.9 GHz (downlink). Interfering signals
cover about 60% of the studied bandwidth. The threshold is
−89 dBm (upper line). In the second case, the threshold is
calculated using both uplink and downlink frequencies 1.7−1.9
GHz when there is no uplink signals (like case in Figure 4),
i.e., SU is so far away from PU that only downlink signals are
present. Interfering signals cover about 30% of the studied
bandwidth. In that case, the threshold is −91 dBm (lower
dashed threshold). It can be noticed that when the studied
bandwidth is doubled and this extra band contains only noise,
we get 2 dB gain.
Next, both uplink and downlink signals are present. There
were 2001 frequency domain points and 1000 time sweeps.
Figure 7 presents one measurement at 1.7 − 1.9 GHz. Both
uplink and downlink signals are present. In Figure 8, one
snapshot when both uplink and downlink signals are present
is presented. Therein, both signals are suppressed.
In the WLAN measurements, 2.4 − 2.5 GHz frequency area
was used. There were 1000 sweeps and 1201 frequency domain
data points. In Figure 9, one snapshot is presented when there
is a WLAN signal present and the FCME algorithm is used to
perform IS. As can be seen, the WLAN signal is found.
Next, the desired false alarm rate (PF A,DES) values are
compared to the achieved false alarm rate (PF A) values in
the noise-only case. Figure 10 presents one situation when
there is only noise present. According to the deﬁnition of
the FCME method, threshold parameter 4.6 means that 1%
of the samples is above the threshold when there is only noise
present. Here, there are 1201 samples so PF A,DES = 1% = 12
samples. In Figure 10, 12 samples are over the threshold, so
PF A,DES = PF A. We had 896 measurement sweeps in the
noise-only case at WLAN frequencies. Therein, minimum 1
sample and maximum 19 samples were over the threshold as
the mean was 10 samples and median value was 9 samples.
Those were close of required 12 samples. Note that the
deﬁnition has been made for pure AWGN noise.
Figure 7.
LTE1800 network frequencies. Uplink and downlink signals
present.
1.7 GHz
−130
−120
−110
−100
−90
−80
−70
−60
−50
−40
−30
Frequency domain samples
Signal power [dBm]
FCME threshold
LTE uplink
LTE downlink
Figure 8.
LTE1800 network frequencies. Uplink and downlink signals
present. IS using the FCME method.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, the performance of the forward consecutive
mean excision (FCME) interference suppression method was
studied against relatively narrowband interfering signals ex-
isting in the novel cognitive radio networks. Focus was on
interference suppression in secondary user receiver suffering
interfering signals caused by primary and other secondary
users. Real-world LTE and WLAN measurements were per-
formed in order to verify the performance of the FCME
method. It was noted that the FCME method is able to suppress
LTE OFDM and SC-FDMA signals as well as WLAN signals.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

2.4 GHz
2.45 GHz
2.5 GHz
−125
−120
−115
−110
−105
−100
−95
−90
−85
−80
−75
Frequency domain samples
Signal power [dBm]
FCME threshold
Figure 9.
IS using the FCME method at frequencies 2.4-2.5 GHz where
WLAN signals exist. Threshold is -90 dBm.
2.4 GHz
2.45 GHz
2.5 GHz
−125
−120
−115
−110
−105
−100
−95
−90
−85
−80
−75
Frequency domain samples
Signal power [dBm]
FCME threshold
Figure 10.
IS using the FCME method at frequencies 2.4-2.5 GHz where
are no signals present. Threshold is -91 dBm. 1% = 12 samples are above
the threshold, as expected.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research of Johanna Vartiainen was funded by the
Academy of Finland.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Mitola III and G. Q. M. Jr., “Cognitive radio: making software radios
more personal,” IEEE Pers. Commun., vol. 6, no. 4, 1999, pp. 13–18.
[2]
S. Haykin, “Cognitive radio: Brain-empowered wireless communica-
tions,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 23, no. 2, Feb. 2005, pp.
201–220.
[3]
S. Haykin, D. J. Thomson, and J. H. Reed, “Spectrum sensing for cog-
nitive radio - the utility of the multitaper method and cyclostationarity
for sensing the radio spectrum, including the digital tv spectrum, is
studied theoretically and experimentally,” Proc. of the IEEE, vol. 97,
no. 5, May 2009, pp. 849–877.
[4]
3GPP, “The mobile broadband standard,” (2013), http://www.3gpp.org
[retrieved: Apr, 2015].
[5]
Q. Wu et al., “Cognitive internet of things: A new paradigm beyond
connection,” IEEE Journal of Internet of Things, vol. 1, no. 2, 2014,
pp. 1–15, [retrieved: Jan, 2016].
[6]
Z.
Chen,
“Interference
modelling
and
management
for
cogni-
tive
radio
networks,”
Ph.D.
dissertation,
Doctoral
Thesis
(sub-
mitted), Apr. 2011, http://www.ros.hw.ac.uk/bitstream/10399/2421/1/
ChenZ 0511 eps.pdf [retrieved: Jan, 2016].
[7]
K. Nishimori, H. Yomo, and P. Popovski, “Distributed interference
cancellation for cognitive radios using periodic signals of the primary
system,” IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun., vol. 10, no. 9, 2011, pp. 2971
– 2981.
[8]
J. Peha, “Spectrum sharing in the gray space,” Telecommunications
Policy Journal, vol. 37, no. 2-3, 2013, pp. 167–177.
[9]
J. Andrews, “Interference cancelation for cellular systems: a contempo-
rary overview,” IEEE Wireless Comm., vol. 12, no. 2, Apr. 2005, pp.
19–29.
[10]
X. Hong, Z. Chen, C.-X. Wang, S. A. Vorobyov, and J. S. Thompson,
“Cognitive radio networks - interference cancelation and management
techniques,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Magazine, Dec. 2009, pp. 76–84.
[11]
H. Saarnisaari, P. Henttu, and M. Juntti, “Iterative multidimensional
impulse detectors for communications based on the classical diagnostic
methods,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 3, Mar. 2005, pp. 395–
398.
[12]
J. Vartiainen, “Concentrated signal extraction using consecutive mean
excision algorithms,” Ph.D. dissertation, Acta Univ Oul Technica C 368.
Faculty of Technology, University of Oulu, Finland, Nov. 2010, http:
//jultika.oulu.ﬁ/Record/isbn978-951-42-6349-1 [retrieved: Jan, 2016].
[13]
P. Karunakaran, T. Wagner, A. Scherb, and W. Gerstacker, “Sensing
for spectrum sharing in cognitive LTE-A cellular networks,” cornell
University Library. http://arxiv.org/abs/1401.8226 [retrieved: Jan, 2016].
[14]
L. Zhang, L. Yang, and T. Yang, “Cognitive interference management
for LTE-A femtocells with distributed carrier selection,” in Vehicular
Technology Conference Fall (VTC), 2010, pp. 1–5.
[15]
V. Osa, C. Hearranz, J. F. Monserrat, and X. Gelabert, “Implementing
opportunistic spectrum access in LTE-advanced,” EURASIP Journal on
Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 99, 2012.
[16]
J. Tervonen, K.Mikhaylov, S. Pieska, J. Jamsa, and M.Heikkila, “Cogni-
tive internet-of-things solutions enabled by wireless sensor and actuator
networks,” in IEEE Conf. on Cognitive Infocommun. (CogInfoCom),
2014, pp. 97–102.
[17]
K. Ashton, “That ’internet of things’ thing,” RFID Journal, June 2009.
[18]
F. Xia, L. T. Yang, L. Wang, and A. Vine, “Internet of things,” Int.
Journal of Commun. Systems, vol. 25, 2012, pp. 1101–1102.
[19]
LoRa, http://lora-alliance.org/ [retrieved: Jan, 2016].
[20]
Neul, www.neul.com [retrieved: Jan, 2016].
[21]
SigFox, www.sigfox.com [retrieved: Jan, 2016].
[22]
Nokia, “LTE M2M - optimizing LTE for the internet of things,” in White
paper, 2014, http://networks.nokia.com/ﬁle/34496/lte-m-optimizing-lte-
for-the-internet-of-things [retrieved: Jan, 2016].
[23]
Z. Feng and Y. Xu, “Cognitive TD -LTE system operating in tv white
space in china,” 2013, iTU-R WP 5A, Geneva, Switzerland.
[24]
J. Mitra and L. Lampe, “Sensing and suppression of impulsive interfer-
ence,” in Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering
(CCECE), Canada, May 2009, pp. 219–224.
[25]
Y. Ma, D. I. Kim, and Z. Wu, “Optimization of OFDMA-based cellular
cognitive radio networks,” IEEE Transactions on Communications,
vol. 58, no. 8, 2010, pp. 2265–2276.
[26]
J. Vartiainen, J. J. Lehtom¨aki, H. Saarnisaari, and M. Juntti, “Analysis
of the consecutive mean excision algorithms,” J. Elect. Comp. Eng.,
2011, pp. 1–13.
[27]
Agilent, http://www.agilent.com [retrieved: Jan, 2016].
[28]
Nokia Siemens Networks, “Introducing LTE with maximum reuse of
GSM assets,” in White paper, 2011.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-456-5
COCORA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio

