Flexible Manipulator Inspired by Octopus 
Development of Soft Arms Using Sponge 
 
Shunsuke Hagimori and Kazuyuki Ito 
Dept. of Electrical and Electronics Engineering 
Hosei University 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: 10x2088@stu.hosei.ac.jp, ito@hosei.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—In this study, we focus on the intelligent behavior of 
an octopus and describe the development of a flexible 
manipulator. By using the developed manipulator, we show 
that grasping behaviors similar to those of an octopus can be 
realized by the dynamics of the body without computation in 
its brain. 
Keywords-flexible manipulator; octopus; many degrees of 
freedom; grasping. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In general, it is difficult to control a robot with many 
degrees of freedom. An advanced complex controller is 
required for controlling a robot. However, it is reported that 
some creatures—for example, a snake and an octopus—can 
exhibit complicated behavior such as locomoting, jumping, 
and grasping. A snake can locomote on rubbles using its 
many degrees of freedom [1]. Also, an octopus, for instance, 
is able to grasp various objects [2], [3], [4]. 
In our previous work to develop intelligent robots, we 
focused on the dynamics of the creature’s body. In [5], we 
proposed a snake-like robot that has flexible joints. Due to 
the flexibility of the joints, the snake-like robot could work 
on rubbles without complex control. 
In [6], we considered grasping by an octopus-like 
manipulator. An octopus has many degrees of freedom in its 
arms and can realize various intelligent behaviors. However, 
the brain of the octopus is very small, and how the octopus 
achieves intelligent behavior is currently an open question. 
Various studies about an octopus are currently being carried 
out [2], [3], [4]. Then, we focused on the dynamics of the 
arms of an octopus and hypothesized that some intelligent 
behaviors are realized by its dynamics instead of being 
controlled by its brain. We demonstrated that an octopus-like 
manipulator can grasp various objects without controlling 
each joint. However, as the links of the robot in [6] were 
rigid, it is difficult to grasp three-dimensional objects.  
In this study, we extend our previous work. We develop a 
simple flexible manipulator for grasping three-dimensional 
objects on the basis of the fundamental behavior of the 
octopus [2] and demonstrate that the grasping task can be 
realized very easily without a controller. 
This report consists of the following parts. Section II 
introduces the behavior of an octopus. Section III describes 
the 
proposed 
octopus-like 
manipulator. 
Section 
IV 
demonstrates that the proposed manipulator can grasp 
various unknown objects. Section V concludes the report. 
II. 
FUNDAMENTAL BEHAVIOR OF AN OCTOPUS 
It is reported that an octopus can stretch its arm from the 
root to the tip in sequence while keeping its curved shape, as 
shown in Figure 1(a). When the curved point contacts an 
object, the arm wraps around the object [2], [3], [4]. 
This fundamental behavior is effective in grasping 
unknown objects. In other words, if the arm stretches from 
the tip and the tip contacts the object first, the arm cannot 
wrap around the object, as shown in Figure 1(b). 
 The important question in this research is how we design 
the robot in order to realize octopus-like behavior. We focus 
on the dynamics of the flexible arm and hypothesize that the 
arm moves and wraps around the obstacle passively by 
simply adjusting the compliance of the muscles of the arm. 
In other words, the arm can grasp the unknown obstacle 
without a complex control signal from the brain [2], [3], [4], 
[6]. The grasping behavior is realized by the dynamics of the 
flexible arm [6]. 
 
No. 1
No. 2
No. 3
Sphere
Root of the leg
(b)
(a)
No. 2
No. 3
Sphere
Root of the leg
No. 1
Sphere
Root of the leg
Root of the leg
Sphere
Sphere
Root of the leg
Sphere
Root of the leg
 
Figure 1. (a) Effective strategy of an octopus and (b) failure mode. 
 
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

In this study, we developed an octopus-like manipulator 
with a simple mechanism and demonstrated that this 
fundamental behavior can be realized by the dynamics of a 
flexible material and the constraints of wires. 
 
III. 
OCTOPUS-LIKE MANIPULATOR 
To realize the fundamental octopus behavior, we 
developed a simple flexible manipulator. Figures 2–7 show 
the mechanism of the manipulator. The manipulator consists 
of the sponge arms, the rubbers that simulate the compliance 
of the muscles, and wires to move the arms. A motor can 
pull the wire via pulleys, and the wires close the arms. 
Note that the rubber is bonded to the sponge arm as it is 
stretched, as shown in Figure 2. In addition, the length of the 
stretching is increased from the root to the tip. From the 
tension of the rubber, the arm is twisted to a natural position, 
as shown in Figure 3.  
 
 
Figure 2. Rubber and sponge for an arm. 
 
 
Figure 3. Natural position (open position) of an arm. 
 
 
Figure 4. Structure of an arm. 
With the asymmetric tension (compliance), the shape of 
the arm is also asymmetric. The wires are pulled by rotating 
a motor, and the arms move from the root to the tip like an 
octopus. Because the arms are flexible, the shapes of the 
arms adapt to the unknown objects. Figure 5 shows the 
developed manipulator. We designed the manipulator to 
grasp an object from the upper part. Active pulleys with a 
motor are placed in the upper aluminum frame. Figure 6 
shows the top view of the arms. Three arms are installed 
under the pulleys via an aluminum frame at a 120° interval. 
Figure 7 shows the mechanism to move the arms. The wires 
are pulled by rotating the motor, and the three arms are 
closed at the same time. Then, the manipulator can grasp an 
object. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Developed manipulator. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Top view of the arms. 
 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 7. Mechanism to move the arms. 
 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENT 
Figures 8 and 9 show examples of the results.  
 
No. 1
No. 2
No. 3
No. 4
  
Figure 8. Structure of the manipulator. 
 
 
No. 1
No. 2
No. 3
No. 4
 
Figure 9. Experimental results of grasping a ball on the stand. 
 
 
In this experiment, the manipulator worked by simple 
operation. An operator just turns ON the switch of the motor, 
and the manipulator can grasp an object. Then, the operator 
turns OFF the switch. 
In this way, the manipulator could work only when 
turning the switch of the motor ON/OFF. 
We confirm that the developed manipulator realizes 
octopus-like motion and can grasp various unknown objects. 
In these experiments, we simply pulled the wires using the 
motor, and no complex control signals were required. The 
grasping behavior was realized passively by the dynamics of 
the body.  
In general, it is reported that much computation cost is 
required to control a robot with many degrees of freedom [7]. 
In contrast, the results of this research show that the 
proposed manipulator requires no computational cost. 
Necessary computation for controlling the arms was 
conducted by the dynamics of the arms instead of a computer. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, we focused on the intelligent behavior of an 
octopus. We developed a flexible manipulator that realized 
octopus-like grasping behavior, and we showed that the 
grasping of unknown objects could be realized by the 
dynamics of the body without complex control signals. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by the Japan 
Society for the promotion of science through the Grant-in-
Aid for scientific research (C) 24500181. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Gray, ―The Mechanism of Locomotion in Snakes,‖ Exp. 
Biol., Vol. 23, pp. 101-123, 1946. 
[2] G. Sumbre, Y. Gutfreund, G. Fiorito, T. Flash, and B. 
Hochner, ―Control of Octopus Arm Extension by a Peripheral 
Motor Program,‖ Science, vol. 293, no. 5536, pp. 1845-1848, 
2001. 
[3] Y. Yekutieli, G. Sumbre, T. Flash, and B. Hochner, ―How to 
Move with No Rigid Skeleton?‖ Biologist, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 
250-4, Dec. 2002. 
[4] Y. Gutfreund, T. Flash, G. Fiorito, and B. Hochner, ―Patterns 
of Arm Muscle Activation Involved in Octopus Reaching 
Movements,‖ J. Neurosci., vol. 18, no. 15, pp. 5976-5987, 
Aug. 1998. 
[5] K. Ito and R. Murai, ―Snake-Like Robot for Rescue 
Operations—Proposal of a Simple Adaptive Mechanism 
Designed for Ease of Use,‖ Advanced Robotics, vol. 22, no. 
6-7, pp. 771-785, 2008. 
[6] S. Kuroe and K. Ito, ―Autonomous Control of Octopus-Like 
Manipulator Using Reinforcement Learning,‖ In Sigeru 
Omatu, Juan F. DePaz Santana, Sara Rodríguez-
González, José M. Molina, Ana M. Bernardos,Juan M. 
Corchado Rodríguez, editors,Distributed Computing and 
Artificial Intelligence Advances in Intelligent and Soft 
Computing, vol. 151, pp. 553-556, 2012. 
[7] Y. Zhang and R. P. Paul, ―Robot Manipulator Control and 
Computational 
Cost,‖ 
Scholarly 
Commons. 
[Online]. 
Available from: http://repository.upenn.edu/cis_reports/621 
Feb. 1988. 
 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

