Metacognitive Support of Mathematical Abstraction Processes
Hans M. Dietz
Institute of Mathematics
University of Paderborn
D 33098 Paderborn, Germany
Email: dietz@upb.de
Abstract—A signiﬁcant and distinctive feature of human beings
is the ability of performing abstraction operations, e.g., when
forming categories of objects or even conscioulsy creating abstract
objects as it is typical in mathematics. Although the possible
range of corresponding abilities is certainly pre-determined by
individual genetic factors, a high-level abstraction performance
will typically be achieved gradually by an intensive practice
in solving abstraction prone problems. On the other hand,
mathematical abstraction is often considered to be a serious
obstacle in mathematics education. This raises the question
whether there are some basic principles of abstraction that could
be taught on a metacognitive level in order to support the
progress in abstraction abilities. The paper presents a concept of a
corresponding teaching experiment. We hope it will provide more
effective teaching as well as a better understanding of cognitive
processes underlying mathematical abstraction.
Keywords–Abstraction; Mathematics Education; Metacognition.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Basic mathematics courses belong to the greatest chal-
lenges for ﬁrst year university students from many many
disciplines. The author’s long run experience in conducting
such courses at the University of Paderborn indicates that one
main reason for that is the lack of appropriate study and
working techniques. As a remedy, we created a system of
in-teaching metacognitive support instruments [1] by means
of which ﬁrst improvements could already be achieved [2]
[3]. Even with this, we often see refusal or even fear of
the perceived abstractness of mathematics. Moreover, many
of the beginning students are quite unfamiliar with any kind
of abstractness. Hence, coping with mathematics becomes
particularly hard for them. This raises the question how to
facilitate the “access to abstraction” for them.
It is impossible to rise this question without referring to the
aspect of time, because good abstraction abilities are typically
achieved “by doing”, i.e., by solving problems that require –
or at least promote – a certain level of abstraction. Even math-
ematicians develop their abstraction skills within a lengthy
process of education and mathematical work. However, in our
basic courses for non-mathematicians, there is not enough time
to re-run along this path. As an alternative, we propose to
support some basic aspects of abstraction on a metacognitive
level, by explicitly “teaching abstraction principles”, with the
objective to accelerate the process of acquiring abstraction
skills.
In order to derive such rules, we discuss several
aspects of abstraction. A generally adopted hypothesis is that
abstraction operations are organized hierarchically. Piaget [4]
has described that, and how, this hierarchy is run through in
children’s development of mathematical thinking. The hierar-
chical nature of abstraction was also emphasized by Dubinsky
[5], [6] and Arnon et al. [7]. In contrast to the forementioned
ones the approach pursued here aims to additionally support
the construction of several layers of abstraction by explicit
metacognitive instruction. Although this work is still in an
early stage, we hope that it shall yield not only better teach-
ing instruments but a better understanding of the underlying
cognitive processes as well. –
The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we
highlight the need of abstraction in economics education.
The nature of abstraction and its “economics” is discussed
in Sections III, and IV. The following section deals with
operational aspects of abstraction. Section VI gives an outlook
of a forthcoming teaching project and possible applications of
the results.
II.
IS ABSTRACTION EDUCATIONALLY NEEDED?
It is often believed that abstraction is a matter of “pure
mathematics” rather than of its applications. However, prac-
tically this is not true. Especially in economics, there is a
particular demand of “abstraction” at least along three different
lines. First, fundamental economic phenomena are explained
with the help of abstract mathematical concepts. Look, e.g., at
a preference relation as described here:
x ⪯ y
:()
2x1 + 3x2  2y1 + 3y2.
(1)
The students must be able to read, understand, and handle
symbolic expressions like this. Second, modern economics
is interested in qualitative results that are valid under quite
general assumptions. Accordingly, these results rely on abstract
qualitative properties of the underlying models. And third, by
employing modern and sophisticated results of mathematics,
economics adopt the abstraction level of mathematics itself.
This conﬁrms that Devlin’s [8] statement “The main beneﬁt
of learning and doing mathematics is not the speciﬁc content;
rather it’s the fact that it develops the ability to reason precisely
and analytically about formally deﬁned abstract structures”
holds true for modern economics, as well as for other sciences.
III.
WHAT IS ABSTRACTION?
So far, ”abstraction” was used in quite general way. For the
purposes of this paper, we shall describe some speciﬁc aspects
of interest and put them in the general context.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

A. General Aspects
Everybody knows somehow and from somewhere “what is
abstraction”, as this word became present in a lot of domains
within the last two centuries. A common feature of many
conceptions of “abstraction” refers to the latin word abstrahere
in the philosophical sense of omitting unessential details of an
object in the process of inductive thinking, resulting in a new
– or simpler – entity, as it was described ﬁrst by Aristoteles.
The large number of publications on this subject indicates that
“abstraction” is a rather rich and complex notion. It is neither
possible nor the purpose of this paper to give a full account to
all essential aspects of it. Rather we shall concentrate on some
aspects that may be essential both from the cognitive point of
view and for teaching mathematics.
B. Abstraction as Mental Processes
Henceforth, we shall use “abstraction” in the narrow sense
to denote individual mental processes. Typically, these pro-
cesses result in abstract objects or, more precisely, in new – and
simpler – mental representations of previously present mental
objects or their relations, respectively, or even in the creation
of new mental objects. In particular, abstraction can lead to
a re-structured organization of mental knowledge structures
(Hershkowitz et al. [9]). In a wide sense, we understand
“abstraction” also as mental processes of understanding and
exploiting already existing abstract objects and concepts.
It is obvious that abstraction plays a prominent role in
those brain domains that are responsible for conscious thinking
and human language processing, but it is also quite reasonable
to assume that abstraction mechanisms already work in more
basic layers of the brain’s functional architecture, in particular,
when processing sensomotoric informations. Here, one of the
most basic operations is visual pattern recognition, possibly
followed by identifying simultaneously occuring similar pat-
terns. The occurence of patterns – or patterns of patterns –
is processed further by higher cognitive layers. A particular
task of these higher layers is to deﬁne categories of perceived
objects, like “animal”, “cat” vs. “dog”, etc. This task is highly
abstractive as it requires to detect essential common features
and to neglect non-essential features of the objects. Note that
whether some features are “essential” or not depends on the
underlying cognitive purpose. A further abstraction step is
performed by creating category labels, and yet another by
handling category labels instead of a variety of objects itself.
From there, a much higher level of abstraction is achieved
by including structural relations between categories or labels,
respectively. Altogether, it appears that abstraction processes
are organized within a complex architecture that mirrors the
functional brain architecture itself.
C. Mathematical Abstraction
When talking about mathematical abstraction we conﬁne
ourselves to abstraction processes connected with “understand-
ing mathematics” or “doing mathematics”, respectively. This
means that the objects of cognition themselves are representa-
tions of mathematical objects or relations. An early attempt
to give a formal description of mathematical abstraction is
due to Rinkens [10], where abstraction is understood as a
(non-injective) mapping. Here, we have to be more speciﬁc
w.r.t. the teaching objectives. We want to distinguish between
receptive, applicative and creative abstraction. By receptive
abstraction we refer to individual brain activities that provide
“understanding” of abstract concepts that have been deﬁned
beforehand by other individuals. To the opposite, creative
abstraction is concerned with the construction of new mental
representations without external inspiration. Applied abstrac-
tion means to employ abstract objects and relations, regardless
whether these have been created by other individuals or not.
Accordingly, enhancing receptive abstraction is the primary
concern of teaching, where active and creative abstraction play
an important role in problem solving, which comes into the
focus in the advanced stages of teaching.
Although complex, there are some particular aspects of ab-
straction that can be isolated. We shall consider the following
activities as basic aspects of abstraction:
•
encapsulation:
i.e., to see a number of objects as a whole entitiy, e.g.,
to see
e
4x2
23x+17
as e
something
(2)
•
symbolization:
i.e., introducing abstract referents (indices) for patterns
like expressions, relations, statements etc.; e.g.,
e
4x2
23x+17 = e a ,
(3)
•
analogization:
i.e., identifying common features in different objects
or domains and creating a new object out of them,
e.g., identifying the common property of squares,
rectangles, rhombus, etc., as being a quadrangle
•
class formation:
i.e., encapsulation of a number of analogized objects,
e.g., forming the class (or set) of quadrangles
•
structural synthesis:
e.g., grouping separate objects x and y to a pair (x, y)
being considered as a new object
The following activities work upon a certain stock of pre-
established abstract objects:
•
object embedding:
i.e., seeing a particular object as an element of an
appropriate category (set) in order to use category
properties rather than individual properties, e.g., as
here:
e
4x2
23x+17 = e'(x)
(4)
In the example, the left hand superscript expression
is interpreted as evaluation of some differentiable
function '; hence, results for the whole class can be
applied (e.g., the chain rule of differentiation).
•
switching embedding levels:
i.e., embedding/outbedding in nested structures; e.g.,
the changes of focus between a set and its elements
•
structure-object interchange:
that is, rendering structures, i.e., relations between dif-
ferent objects, to encapsulated objects of consideration
•
recursion:
i.e., establishing recursive structures within problems
or within problem solving strategies; e.g., when trying
to simplify the expression
A \ (B [ (A \ (B [ (A \ (B [ (A \ B))))))
(5)
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

This enumeration is by no means complete, but may sufﬁce
for the purpose of this paper.
IV.
THE ECONOMICS OF ABSTRACTION
As already mentioned, a signiﬁcant feature of creative
abstraction is to omit “unessential” details of the object under
consideration. However, what is “unessential” can vary heavily
with the underlying cognitive task. This can be observed in a
veriety of domains and is particularly true in mathematics.
For example, the set of the real numbers, equipped with the
usual addition and multiplication, represents different abstract
objects at the same time, e.g., a vector space, a ring, a ﬁeld, etc.
Which property is “essential” clearly depends on the problem
under consideration. Typically, the choice of the appropriate
abstraction will ease the solution of a problem – the problem
can be solved with less mental effort, within less time, with
deeper insight in its nature, etc. Sometimes, it is even impos-
sible to solve a given problem without appropriate abstraction.
So far, this phenomenon is clearly a social experience of the
mathematical community, but on the other hand, it can be re-
experienced by each individual that deals with mathematical
problems. Hence, our hypothesis is: A latent aversion against
abstraction can be reduced by the individual experience of
“economic beneﬁts” when using abstraction.
V.
OPERATIONAL ASPECTS OF ABSTRACTION
For the purposes of the project, we have to conﬁne
ourselves to selected aspects of abstraction. Our selection
takes into account the needs of abstraction within our math
course as described above, the degree of operationability, and
the degree of observability. Recall that we want to support
problem understanding and solving processes with the help
of metacognitive abstraction rules. These can be understood
as rules that guide and structure the working process rather
than providing particular abstraction results. From this point of
view, we shall concentrate on such aspects of abstraction that
appear to be in reach of such metacognitive rules. Examples
of such aspects are
•
encapsulation/analogization/symbolization
•
structuring
•
recursion techniques and
•
qualitative reasoning.
To illustrate the idea of abstraction meta-rules suppose that
the student’s problem under consideration is given by some
text, formula or so, henceforth called the document. The ﬁrst
of the forementioned abstraction aspects is closely related to
the visual input. Hence, we support it by the following meta-
rules:
(a)
Provide a clear visual organization of the document.
(b)
Identify large substructures.
If appropriate put them into containers/symbolize
them.
(c)
Identify similar patterns.
If appropriate symbolize them.
(d)
Identify repetition indicators w.r.t. tasks / structures.
Try to use one solution for all repeated tasks and one
principle to work with repeated structures.
For example, consider this task for students:
Task 1: Determine the operating minimum, given the follow-
ing cost functions:
1) K1(x) := 4x2 + 15 x + 42, x ≥ 0,
2) K2(x) := 242x2 + 72x + 117, x ≥ 0, ... 5) K5(x) :=
25x2 + 5x + 242, x ≥ 0.
Obviously, there are at least three different levels of ab-
straction on which this task could be fulﬁlled. We call the
least one level
(0)
Without any experience in abstraction-aided working,
the students would tend to solve each of the problems
1 to 5 individually, using only numerical computa-
tions. This would imply to perform the corresponding
ansatzes and solving techniques altogether ﬁve times,
and probably some of the students would try to
facilitate the computation somehow “on the way”.
We claim that by respecting the above rules progress to a
higher abstraction level could be promoted. Indeed, a better
visual organization of the task according to rule (a) might
already change the document as follows:
Task 1: Determine the operating minimum, given the follow-
ing cost functions:
1.
K1(x) := 244 x2 + 15 x + 142, x ≥ 0
2.
K2(x) := 242 x2 + 72 x + 117, x ≥ 0
...
...
5.
K5(x) := 125 x2 + 15 x + 242, x ≥ 0.
From here, looking both at the ﬁve repetitions as proposed
by rule (d) and at similar patterns as proposed by rule (c), the
students might more easily see the uniform structure
K (x) :=
x2 +
x +
, x ≥ 0,
(6)
where the gray boxes symbolize containers with different
contents. According to (d), we recommend to ﬁnd a uniﬁed
solution from here. Thus, it is appropriate to follow (c) and to
symbolize the contents of the boxes as
K (x) := a x2 + b x + c x ≥ 0.
(7)
Thus, we reach abstraction level
(1)
The problem can be solved at once in a symbolic
manner, yielding a result in terms of the parameters
a, b and c. Then, the desired ﬁve numerical results can
easily be obtained by just plugging in the appropriate
numbers.
Note that working on level 1 rather than on level 0 is quite
obviously advantageous; it pays in time savings, less error
sensitivity, qualitative insights, and also aesthetics. All these
advantages can be experienced by the students themselves and
they might also stimulate them to try such an approach again,
when solving other problems.
Analogous meta-rules can be formulated for structuring and
recursion techniques, although there we shall need and exploit
additional syntactical guidelines. But what about qualitative
reasoning? This refers to abstraction level
(2)
This level of abstraction is achieved when referring
to general classes of functions that are of economic
relevance. The students might observe that each K is a
neoclassic cost function. Thus, the operating minimum
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

– as the minimum average variable costs - is nothing
but the limit of the average variable costs as x # 0.
Now it is quite easy to obtain the same results as
above.
Clearly, to step here from level (1) is quite complex and
requires a solid theoretical background. It is clear that to work
on this level cannot – and shall not – be trained before this
solid theoretical background was laid out. But provided this
was done, a corresponding meta-rule could be
•
Try to work in economic categories rather than with
numeric examples.
To follow this rule, the students need a very clear overview
over the mathematical tools at their disposal. This overview is
supported by the toolbox concept as described in [2].
VI.
THE PROJECT
The forementioned meta-rules can only brought to life by
an intense training that shows how to use them and how they
can help to re-structure ones own work in order to gain more
progress within the same time. We intend to test and to improve
corresponding training measures within a voluntary project
group. These measures should
•
positively change the students’ attitude towards ab-
straction
•
increase the aceptance of (at least passive) abstraction
•
enhance the ability of active abstraction
•
enrich the regular teaching process.
The project group shall be constituted by random choice
from a set of voluntary applicants, hence there shall be
an untreated control group as well. The only incentive for
participating shall be the perspective of being able to cope
better with mathematics, but no examen credits shall be
promised. Before and after the series of training units we shall
perform guideline based interviews as well as observed and
videotaped working sessions. Through appropriatelydesigned
tasks, it shall be observed whether the students become more
apt to understand and use abstract approaches than before.
The training sessions shall focus on the different aspects of
abstraction, as mentioned above. Task 1 might serve as a
possible example: First, before the training starts, the students
are asked to solve a task of this kind by their own. Their
approaches and solutions are observed and video documented.
After that, we introduce the meta-rules and explain how they
work in this and other examples. It will be important to address
the beneﬁts of using abstract approaches as well. At the end
of the training sessions, the students shall be given another
set, and again their approaches and solutions are documented.
Ideally, there shall be a tendency to work on a (slightly) higher
abstraction level as at the beginning of the training.
VII.
CONCLUSION
In large and heterogeneous basic mathematics courses
students need support to manage mathematical abstraction.
We described some particular aspects of mathematical ab-
straction that, so our hypothesis, can be trained with the
help of metacognitive rules. Some examples of correspond-
ing metacognitive abstraction rules are provided. Further we
presented a framework for an appropriate ﬁeld study in order
to investigate the possible effects of a metacognitive-rule based
training. Performing such a ﬁeld study as well as adjusting the
training instruments is subject to future work.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. M. Dietz, “CAT – a Model for In-teaching Methodical Support for
Novices. (in german; original title: CAT – Ein Modell fuer lehrinte-
grierte studienmethodische Unterstuetzung von Studienanfaengern,” in
Biehler, R. et al. (Eds.), Teaching and Learning Mathematics in the
Transition Phase (in german; original title: Lehren und Lernen von
Mathematik in der Studieneingangsphase).
Springer, 2015, pp. 131–
147.
[2]
——, Mathematics for Economists · The ECOMath Handbook. (in
german, original title: Mathematik fuer Wirtschaftswissenschaftler · Das
ECOMath Handbuch).
Springer Gabler, Heidelberg et. al., 2012.
[3]
——, Semiotics in Reading Maths, in Kadunz, G. (ed.), Semiotic
Perspectives of Learning Mathematics (in german, original title: Semi-
otische Perspektiven auf das Lernen von Mathematik), Springer, Hei-
delberg, 2015, part IV, chapter 1, pp. 185–203.
[4]
J. Piaget, El nacimiento de la inteligencia en el nino. Critica, Barcelona,
1975 (1985).
[5]
E. Dubinsky, Reﬂective Abstraction in Advanced Mathematical Think-
ing, chapter 7 in: Tall, D. (Ed.), Advanced Mathematical Thinking,
Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1991, pp. 195-126.
[6]
D. Tall, Ed., Advanced Mathematical Thinking.
Kluwer, Dordrecht et
al., 1991.
[7]
I. Arnon, et al. APOS Theory. A Framework for Research and Curricu-
lum Development in Mathematics Education.
Springer, New York et
al., 2014.
[8]
K. Devlin, Introduction to Mathematical Thinking.
Devlin, Petaluma,
2012.
[9]
B. Hershkowitz, B. Schwarz, and T. Dreyfus, Abstraction in context:
Epistemic actions, in: N. Seel (Ed.), Encyclopedia of the Sciences of
Learning Vol. 32, No.2, New York: Springer, 2012, pp. 195-222.
[10]
H. D. Rinkens, Abstraktion und Struktur. Grundbegriffe der Mathe-
matikdidaktik (in German).
Henn Verlag, Ratingen, 1973.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

