Supporting Adaptability in Agent-Based Digital 
Healthcare Ecosystem 
Victor Renteaa, Fabrizio L. Riccib, Luca Dan Serbanatic, Andrei Vasilateanud 
a,c,d Faculty of Engineering Taught in Foreign Languages, Politehnica University of Bucharest  
Bucharest, Romania 
b,c Institute for Biomedical Technology, National Research Council 
Rome, Italy 
a victorrentea@gmail.com, b fabrizio.ricci@itb.cnr.it, c luca@serbanati.com, d andrei.vasilateanu@upb.ro  
 
Abstract—The paper describes a new direction towards 
supporting a continuity of care by using the more natural and 
expressive paradigm of digital ecosystems. We introduce the 
conceptual model and architecture of the Digital Healthcare 
Ecosystem focusing on the reflection of the real to the virtual in 
healthcare followed by a “contamination” of the virtual in the 
real. We also propose a nature-inspired, agent-based approach 
to an adaptive mechanism supporting the evolution of the e-
health services in the ecosystem. The mechanism is based on 
aggregation, migration and selection strategies inspired from 
biomimicry and distributed evolutionary computing. 
Keywords-virtual healthcare record; digital healthcare 
ecosystem; biomimicry; multi-agent systems; virtual organisms; 
adaptability 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The paper presents the conceptual model of a system 
supporting the following objectives with applicability in the 
e-health domain: to ensure a continuum of care on 
managerial, informational and relational dimensions, and to 
offer new opportunities to the stakeholders in the health 
system by introducing an evolution mechanism for the e-
health services. Building towards these goals, we take 
inspiration from nature’s mechanisms and shift the paradigm 
to a Digital Healthcare Ecosystem (DHE). 
Like any other IT-supported domain, e-health also faces 
the gap between the business and IT, with domain specific 
peculiarities. An important concern of the stakeholders is the 
continuous alignment to norms that will probably increase in 
complexity due to the current trends towards wide 
interoperability. A rising number of e-services will be 
required from part of the e-health organizations, some of 
which will be also available for e-enabled healthcare actors. 
DHE attempts to provide a solution to this issue by 
disseminating and evolving the local human creative energy 
to meet future needs for e-services. 
We start by an overview of the current healthcare and e-
health context then introduce the theoretical background for 
our new direction based on biomimicry, digital ecosystems 
and multi-agent systems. Section III holds the description of 
our concept of Digital Health Ecosystems. After an overview 
of the base principles, we investigate how to achieve a 
seamless integration between the real and the virtual worlds 
in healthcare by relying on intertwined control loops. 
Starting with reflecting the real in the virtual, we introduce 
an evolutionary mechanism to produce better or locally 
innovating solutions that can influence back the reality in a 
positive way. Section IV resumes our current research and 
sets directions for future steps. 
II. 
THE STATE OF THE ART 
A. Healthcare context 
In the past two decades, much of the growth in health 
expenditures has been attributable to chronic conditions in 
the context of global population ageing. Future health reform 
should address changed health needs through care 
coordination and support for patient self-management [2].  It 
is clear that efficiency and effectiveness of the health system 
and healthcare management of aged population become 
prime issues in the attempt of mobilizing the full potential of 
all people of all ages. The solution requires a shift of 
paradigm in healthcare towards patient-centric care provided 
by multidisciplinary teams in different settings along the 
continuum of a disease. To support the continuity of care for 
chronic pathologies, Information and Communications 
Technology (ICT) needs to address different dimensions of 
business modeling: informational, managerial and relational. 
B. E-Health context 
Supported by ICT, the management of chronic 
conditions, home recovery, patient empowerment and 
coordination of clinical pathways with multiple actors 
become possible [16]. IT adoption allows innovating or re-
engineering healthcare sectors to promote the economic 
sustainability of healthcare services and improve their 
quality.  
The existing healthcare information systems are not 
suitable to meet these requirements because they are oriented 
to acute disease care, emphasize short encounters of patients 
with their caregivers, favor diagnosis and treatment of only 
the current symptoms and usually support the caregiver’s 
activity in solitude. Following the patient-centric trend, we 
consider that a solution should go along three directions:  
1. Integration of healthcare systems in order to share 
common information health state of each individual;  
2. Support of all various business processes in the health 
system ranging from patient care provision to health 
104
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

governance with coordination, control, alert, and monitoring 
services; 
3. Promotion of the collaboration between caregivers, 
organizations and patients by creation of ad-hoc teams of 
stakeholders involved in one patient’s care. 
C. Biomimicry 
Biomimicry is the science that studies nature, its systems, 
processes and elements and takes creative inspiration from 
them for the design of modern technology [3]. In computer 
science, biomimicry produced Nature Inspired Computing 
with several branches of which we are interested in 
Biologically-Inspired Computing. BIC takes inspiration from 
nature for the development of complex problem-solving 
techniques such as Evolutionary Algorithms (EA), neural 
networks and swarm intelligence.  
The method employed by using biomimicry tends to be 
ad-hoc and un-formalized [3] and generally involves an 
engineer or scientist observing an area of biological study 
which seems applicable to a research problem they are 
currently tackling. The biological mechanisms need then be 
well understood, abstracted and applied to the non-biological 
system whilst also being aware of its particularities.  
An ecosystem is a natural unit made up of living (biotic) 
and 
non-living 
(abiotic) 
components, 
from 
whose 
interactions emerge a stable, self-perpetuating system [11]. 
In Computer Science, [20]Digital Ecosystems are a new 
research area that builds upon Multi-Agent Systems, Service 
Oriented Architectures and Evolutionary Computing. 
D. Multi-Agent Systems 
A software agent is a piece of software that acts 
autonomously in an environment to achieve its design 
objectives. A Multiple-Agent System (MAS) is a system 
composed of several software agents collectively capable of 
reaching goals unachievable by an individual agent or a 
monolithic system [4]. 
Healthcare is and has been a field of interest for the use 
of software agents [5] because the agent-based paradigm is a 
natural way of representing many recurrently occurring 
situations in medical environments such as: absence of a 
central control, bounded resources of a caregiver, and 
knowledge and data distribution. Research projects have 
targeted specific use-cases of healthcare, such as workflow-
oriented care plan monitoring or the establishment of agent-
based virtual organizations around a patient [6]. Also, recent 
research in agent development has stressed the need for 
collaborative environments such as e-health to focus also on 
organization- and artifact-based agent environment [18].  
When mapping natural ecosystems in the virtual 
intelligent agents can conceptually represent organisms 
despite their lack of mobility and evolution. Even if mobility 
is added in Mobile Agent Systems, the lack of evolution 
limits the resemblance with their biological counterparts.  
E. Service-Oriented Architectures 
Trying to support adaptability in DHE, we need a 
modular reusable paradigm to software development that 
allows us to modify the virtual to comply with the changing 
reality. Often considered as developing the concepts of 
modular programming and distributed computing [7], SOA 
is the best choice. This encompassing paradigm is an 
approach to organizing software in the form of independent, 
interoperable services. A service is the encapsulation of 
some related software functionalities accessible by clients in 
network. It is exercised consistent with constraints and 
policies as specified by the service description and can be 
discovered using some interpretable metadata. The same 
service can have multiple implementations. It can be 
composed and recomposed from other services or participate 
in service compositions to fulfill multiple business 
requirements. SOA does not take into account evolutionary 
semantics and context-awareness for services. This is why it 
has been suggested [9] that the SOA approach is not 
adequate to face the dynamic interactions between evolving 
organizations and a shift of paradigm towards an Ecosystem-
Oriented Architecture is required. However, we believe that 
any attempt to change the paradigm should build upon the 
current largely embraced technologies and one of the goals 
of our research is to investigate how such a shift can be 
achieved. 
Our work builds towards the great promise of SOA that 
the marginal cost of creating the nth application is virtually 
zero, as only the combination of existing software is required 
[8]. Taking into consideration the complexity of e-health, the 
approach should build upon the latest technologies in 
interoperability, such as Semantic Web Services.  
F. Digital Ecosystems 
The term digital ecosystem (DE) is being increasingly 
used for describing the future developments of ICT in e-
business towards the so-called digital business ecosystems 
[17]. According to [1], we consider a DE as “an open, 
loosely coupled, domain clustered, demand-driven, self-
organizing and agent-based environment within each species 
is proactive and responsive for its own benefit and profit”. 
A rigorous and somewhat revolutionary approach 
referring to digital ecosystems is that of [10] that aims to 
establish a novel form of Distributed Evolutionary 
Computing by creating a digital counterpart of biological 
ecosystems. The basic idea is to combine an Evolutionary 
Algorithm with the migration of solutions to face a dynamic 
stream of requests for software from a heterogeneous User 
base. The “organism” and the basic building block is the 
Agent that represents a software service or a SOA-style 
aggregation of services. In the envisioned distributed system, 
Agents move around Users to find the environments in 
which they prove most useful to subsequent requests for 
applications. Applications are assembled on-demand using a 
Genetic Algorithm (GA) seeded with the Agents “living” in a 
Habitat associated with that User. Our approach takes great 
inspiration from this work to which adds several innovating 
features, highlighted in the last section. 
III. 
THE DIGITAL HEALTH ECOSYSTEM 
A primary goal of our research in Digital Ecosystems is 
to explore the possibility to employ in the e-health domain 
the strengths of biological ecosystems, such as self-
105
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

organization, adaptability, self-manageability and the ability 
to provide hierarchical solutions to complex problems [20]. 
In front of complex information-intensive decision tasks in e-
health, we are attempting to move the control process in the 
virtual world, where information is fast and efficiently 
accessible. For doing this, we need to increase the 
permeability between the two worlds through bridges that 
must be added in the form of sensors and actuators, which 
bring in the virtual the state of the reality and act upon it, 
respectively. 
Due 
to 
the 
increased 
complexity 
of 
coordinating the processes in e-health, the traditional 
software controller responsible for this task is replaced in 
DHE with a mechanism that relies on evolution. The 
decisions are no longer taken based on an implicit or explicit 
rule set, but derive from a process of evolution that runs in a 
context reflecting the reality. Evolution mechanisms in the 
virtual operate both retrospectively, to align the virtual to 
changes sensed in the reality, and prospectively, to generate 
different models to propose or impose, depending on the 
case, to the real world. To be useful, the virtual must always 
remain in close contact with the real, such that any 
autonomous evolution of one of them must rapidly be 
followed by the other. In essence, the DHE tries to speed up 
the evolution process at a different level, by mapping the real 
to the virtual, evolving a solution or a proposition and then 
using it to influence back the real world. 
Until now, the digital had to react to changes in the 
uncontrolled reality, but due to the recent advances in 
pervasive computing it is now becoming possible for the 
virtual to act upon the real in its turn and to achieve goals 
emerging from virtual.  
The entities inhabiting the DHE are partitioned in two 
groups (Figure 1): entities that map a real entity into the 
virtual world and purely virtual entities without any real 
counterpart. The latter are further distinguished into passive 
virtual artifacts and proactive virtual agents, such as those 
that will perform monitoring and maintenance tasks in DHE. 
When mapping the real into the virtual, we recognize 
between mapping in an agency relationship or in a pure 
representational purpose. In this sense, an avatar is a 
proactive agent working towards the goals of the stakeholder 
it represents, but also following additional objectives related 
to the virtual environment in which it lives. On the other 
hand, an artifact is a passive or reactive entity, defined as a 
“first-class abstraction introduced to model and engineer 
general-purpose computational environments for multi-agent 
systems” [18]. An artifact is the virtual projection of a real 
entity, either physical (e.g. device, drug, operation room) or 
digital (e.g. software application, resource, database). 
Following a discussion on the control mechanisms in 
action, the rest of this chapter presents the system by 
following the natural flow, from real to virtual and back to 
real, focusing on the DHE distinctive features and the new 
evolution mechanism residing in the virtual world. 
A. Control loops 
In the real world the patient’s health care is a typical 
control loop process where activities of human analysis 
(observation and diagnosis), planning (care plan delivering), 
and execution (treatment) must be completed by evaluation 
in order to measure the progress in the care. 
DHE can support this process in its various activities but 
only being aware that the reality has been and will be the 
origin and destination of any immersion in the virtual. The 
virtual itself appears due to a need in the reality and therefore 
is subordinated to it. As a consequence, for the virtual to be 
helpful it must be able to influence the real world, thus 
closing the main control loop of DHE. 
Both worlds aim at improving the current situation by 
inspiring one from another and evolving creative solutions. 
The virtual should accurately reflect the most relevant 
aspects of the reality and be kept in tight contact by 
continuous update processes. In DHE, evolution processes 
take place in a context that mimics the real situations. 
Feedback information to assess the alignment between the 
two worlds is needed. In this way a second control loop is 
identified. 
The evolution processes in DHE produces a creative 
energy that can be used for the benefit of the reality. 
Sometimes the evolution in the virtual may anticipate 
changes in the real and new ideas in virtual may accelerate 
the evolution of the real world by “osmosis”. The proposals 
the DHE issues may be presented to stakeholders that can 
decide for restructuring the actual systems. Information 
about the success or failure of the solutions is reported back 
in the DHE and constitutes the feed-back for controlling 
future evolutions. 
The three control loops are presented in Figure 2. 
B. Virtualization 
In DHE, the avatars live in an environment populated by 
artifacts (abiotic components) and governed by norms and 
laws inherited from the real world. Avatars are able to 
organize themselves in hierarchical structures mimicking the 
real organizational structures. Their proactivity follows some 
goals that are derived from the roles, goals and concerns of 
those real stakeholders that they represent and act as vectors 
for the self-conscious initiative of the humans. 
Mapping the real to the virtual in this case is addressed 
differently depending on the role each stakeholder plays. In 
the case of the patient’s avatar we are interested in an 
accurate reflection in the virtual of his/her health state, while 
for the doctor’s avatar his/her medical knowledge is 
important to be reflected. For the former, we rely on our past 
research on the Virtual Healthcare Record [19], a complete 
 
Figure 1. The Digital Health Ecosystem 
106
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

and authoritative representation of the patient’s current 
health state, clinical history and ongoing care processes, 
including information on demographics, past medical 
history, normal values of vital signs, medications and 
treatment plans. We designed our conceptual model for the 
virtual health state of the patient, by applying successive 
abstractions to the reality. The health state concept is an 
ideal, as we can never reach a perfect match between the real 
situation of the patient’s health and the digitally represented 
health state. However we can strive towards it by multiplying 
the observations resulting from a diagnostic investigation 
process where additional investigations are needed to build a 
useful, reliable health information set that can be further used 
in decisions. 
Activities in the ecosystem may be initiated by certain 
situations in the environment and in turn modify it.  Such a 
situation is a MedicalAct and can be a condition found in the 
health state of the patient or a lack of knowledge thereof. An 
activity in the health ecosystem is transmitted through the 
stakeholder avatars in the digital ecosystem as an event or as 
a data flow. Subsequently, this will favor some activities to 
be executed by the digital ecosystem agents and may also 
change the knowledge about the real world. This means that 
activities inside the DHE are indirectly and partially 
determined by actions and events in the real world.  
Clinical events, changes in the health state of the patient 
arrive through the information flow inside the digital 
ecosystem and can change the state of the patient avatar. A 
need in the real world is transformed into a care goal in the 
DHE. Reacting to this change in the environment, avatars 
representing different healthcare providers are assembled 
into an ad-hoc multidisciplinary team, having a structure 
generated by the process of solving that care goal. 
In the paper, the focus is on the living environment of the 
avatars in DHE, filled with artifacts among which 
projections of the applications used by stakeholders. The 
digital part of the healthcare ecosystem reflected in DHE 
must be flexible and adaptable to support the dynamic 
stakeholder activity and organization. 
C. The virtual organisms 
We will refer to virtual organisms (VO or, hereafter, in 
short, organism) as a kind of virtual artifacts that can evolve 
autonomously, that is, change internal structure according to 
changes in their living environment. Although they lack 
proactivity, the collective behavior of the avatars regarding 
those reproduces the mechanisms we observe in the natural 
ecosystems, allowing them to evolve in ways similar to 
physical organisms. A VO can be used for various types of 
structured solutions, but in the paper we will focus on 
evolving software applications in a SOA meaning.  
The VOs live near avatars that own and support their 
existence by providing them with living Habitats. The 
abiotic environment for VOs is a set of interconnected 
Habitats, each with its particular living conditions. The 
avatar uses the population in its Habitat for solving local 
requests for applications and effects explicit control on this 
population through new VO addition and removal. In this 
way the relations between avatar, Habitat and organism were 
defined. The following will further address the evolution of 
the organisms in the network of Habitats (Figure 3). 
The living conditions of the Habitat change according to 
the application requests received, allowing potentially useful 
VOs to live longer and forcing the non-fitting to emigrate or 
die. Focused not only on software creation but also on its 
adaptation, we believe that after an application was 
generated similar requests will follow, due to the continuous 
change in the e-health domain. In order to gather more VOs 
for subsequent software changes, we set the environment of 
our Habitat stateful by storing every new application request. 
Based on the past requests, a fitness landscape can be 
calculated for the evaluation of incoming organisms and the 
estimation of their future usefulness and survival. In our 
approach, the avatar has full control over the parameters of 
the bio-mimicked processes in its Habitat, although 
recommendations will be formulated. 
Virtual organisms represent software components or 
applications and carry a semantic description of their 
functionality and an executable component consisting in 
either a service or a service aggregation, in a SOA-style. On-
demand software assembling and modification requires a 
component-oriented model of which SOA is the current state 
of the art [7] and a great degree of interoperability, featured 
Figure 2. Real to Virtual to Real 
 
Figure 3. Virtual Organisms in the network of Habitats. 
The picture represents, from left to right: the weighted 
network of Habitats, each with its own avatar; the 2 types of 
VO migration; the structure of a Habitat with a specific 
landscape fitness; the meaning of an VO.
107
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

by the use of semantic descriptions for services [12]. The 
executable component of a composite VO is an encoding of 
the entire SOA workflow and represents its genetic material 
(genotype). Unlike other entities in DHE, autonomic 
evolution of VOs is possible by applying recombination and 
mutation on their genotype. 
Special attention should be addressed to the distinction 
between genotype and phenotype, because it takes more than 
a genotype to produce a phenotype. In biological terms, the 
phenotype of an organism is the manifestation of its 
genotype in a given environment [13]. Similarly, we 
consider the phenotype of a VO to reflect the actual behavior 
of its executable component when operating in deployment 
environment. Examples of phenotype attributes include 
response time, availability, cost, quality and security. The 
same individual, carrying the same executable component, 
that is, the same genotype, expresses a different behavior in 
different environments, that is, a different phenotype [13]. 
Even though the distinction between genotype and 
phenotype is generally not present in today’s EAs [14], it 
cannot be overlooked in our scenario, as the execution of a 
distributed SOA application depends on a variety of factors 
including different configuration parameters, geographical 
location, local resources, legacy systems and usage pattern.  
When offering a software solution to an application 
request, we are interested in knowing not just the genotype 
but also the phenotype, i.e., the future actual behavior. 
Unfortunately, the entire phenotype cannot be known at 
generation time and querying, deductive, inductive or 
recommendation-based strategies could be employed to 
gather as many information as possible. We must also admit 
the multi-purpose optimization nature of the task, the variety 
of algorithms that can be employed and the difficulty to build 
a proper fitness function. Thus emerges the need of 
decoupling the application generation task and allowing 
various implementations to coexist in the form of engineer 
agents (as in “genetic engineering”). Whatever their 
implementation may be, these agents start with the 
population within the Habitat, localized and probably useful 
to the user, on which then apply an EA and derive a solution 
to produce the application requested. Although we admit the 
need of a type of EA, we do not commit ourselves to a 
genetic algorithm as [10] nor to any other particular 
algorithm. Instead, we only require that in each Habitat an 
engineer agent is in function. At this point, evolution has 
been added to our system, as an essential component of an 
ecosystem’s stability. 
There are additional key features that enable the strength 
of biological ecosystems: population dynamics, local 
interactions and spatial distribution. A natural consequence 
of the distinction between genotype and phenotype is the 
possibility that a solution inefficient in Habitat A may be of 
great help in Habitat B, operating within other conditions. On 
the other hand, the organism with a strong genotype has high 
chances of being useful in other Habitats in response to 
similar requests. In order to produce the best individuals, a 
mechanism for migration is required, that is, moving in the 
former case and copying in the latter case. While copying is 
intuitively best used for highly fit individuals and enable fast 
dissemination of quality software, moving weak organisms 
to other Habitats helps in maintaining diversity throughout 
the digital ecosystem and escaping the local optima locking 
[14]. Mechanisms such as organism’s life duration should be 
enforced in order to limit the dissemination process when 
copying and to force low-quality solutions to eventually 
disappear after several migrations. 
The feed-back produced by the migration success on the 
migration path is a simple improvement to Distributed 
Evolutionary Computing that eventually leads to self-
organization of the Habitat network based on similar 
application requests [10]. Links between Habitats are 
weakened or strengthened by the migration success, i.e., 
when the organism proved useful in the remote Habitat 
(Figure 4). This represents a form of Hebbian learning [15] 
in which Habitats are seen as neuronal cells.  
The migration mechanism represents a paradigm shift 
from pull-based, currently used with SOA, to push-based 
mechanisms, in which avatars collaborate on their own will, 
proactive for the society’s benefit, to provide the real world 
with the best possible software with the lowest possible cost. 
D. Influencing the reality 
The final purpose of the DHE is to influence the reality 
by proposing a new or updated model, obtained through 
evolution. The virtual organisms produced in DHE lead to 
the creation of new e-health services in the reality, 
contextualized and adapted to the requirements, better or 
even completely new in that context. If such a proposal is 
accepted and deployed, it leaves the virtual world and 
becomes an artifact in the real world, that is, deployed 
software. Given a VO is a solution with applicability in the 
reality, its constituting elements must also be elements 
brought from the real world, i.e., artifacts representing 
software entities. As such, the responsibility of the DHE is 
not to invent new software from scratch but to evolve 
solutions by combining real components, seen as the 
manifestation of the human creative power in front of 
different problems. From this point of view, DHE is an 
enabler of global evolution based on local human creativity. 
In DHE, the healthcare organizations will probably 
benefit most from evolving software e-services to conform to 
the norms, best practices and local specific requirements. For 
better understanding, the software adaptation to a change in 
the healthcare norms is presented next. The change in 
deploy_agent(ag) 
ag.max_cycles = ∞ 
for each h in ag.friendly_habitats 
 send_success_feedback(h) 
for each conn in this_h.connections 
 if randomTrue(conn.strength) and 
   not conn.remote_h in ag.visited_habitats 
  copy(ag,conn.remote_h) 
Figure 4. Successful agent usage algorithm 
ag is set to “perpetuating”, links are established or 
strengthened with the habitats in which ag was used, 
and ag is randomly migrated to connected Habitats 
108
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

legislation is pushed in the DHE where subsequently 
threatens 
the 
compliancy 
of 
the 
current 
software 
applications. The avatar senses the situation and tries to 
adapt each impacted application deployed within its 
organization. For each of them, the previous request is edited 
accordingly to the change in norms and re-issued in the local 
Habitat. The decisions of the avatar may rely on a Belief-
Desire-Intention model following the preferences and goals 
of the individuals in a community. Within several limits, the 
reality need not even be notified about the event, being 
shielded or at least helped in front of the continuous change.  
The adapting of software services can prove useful also 
for those people that run locally deployed software, for their 
own use, most probably software clients. The evolution of 
the applications may offer a richer interface, self-adaptability 
to 
changes 
in 
provider-side 
and 
even 
support 
contextualization of e-health services. A form of evolution,   
context adaptation relies on ad-hoc connections between 
avatars in DHE that enable the migration of virtual 
organisms towards the local Habitat to support in context-
dependent applications.  
For both use-cases, the specific interests and preferences 
for software are reflected by the connections of the local 
Habitat within the Habitat network, gathering the most useful 
selection of software available. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our research in Digital Healthcare Ecosystems is part of 
the project “An innovative approach to health care by a 
seamless integration of real and virtual worlds” which is now 
in the inception phase. This phase consists in defining the 
conceptual model of the DHE and in interviews with the 
involved stakeholders in order to achieve an accurate view of 
the business processes. The paper presents our research on 
evolutionary processes in DHE that is inspired from [10] to 
which adds the following contributions. The genotype of a 
virtual organism in DHE is not just an unordered set of genes 
but fully encodes the workflow it represents. The evolution is 
not strictly based on a genetic algorithm but various EAs are 
allowed, as different evolution mechanisms will help 
improve diversity of the VOs. Another improvement is the 
explicit specification that the evolved virtual organisms do 
not manifest proactivity in a MAS way. Instead, they follow 
nature-mimicked processes without being able to interfere, 
and therefore are seen as virtual artifacts in DHE. 
In the paper, e-health services are created to support the 
evolution of software in a dynamic environment reflecting 
the reality. Our approach relies on a self-organizing network 
of localized Habitats that provide a scalable approach 
towards automatic composition from among numerous 
distributed services, therefore building towards the SOA 
great promise [8]. A great potential of DHE is to become an 
enabler of global evolution based on local human creativity 
manifested as disparate distributed services. The results of 
initial simulations of the evolution mechanisms are very 
promising but, to be relevant, must rely on an estimated 
usage profile, which we plan of building next. On the other 
hand, other applications for the evolution mechanisms are 
possible and will be analyzed in further work, including 
evolving and adapting treatment plans and wellness 
assistance for a patient having a monitored health state.  
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Chang, M. Quaddus, and R. Ramaseshan, “The vision of 
DEBI Institute: digital ecosystems and business intelligence”, 
DEBII, 2006. 
[2] K. Thorpe, L. Ogden, and K. Galactionova, “Chronic 
conditions account for rise in medicare spending from 1987 to 
2006”, Health Aff, Feb. 2010, doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2009.0474. 
[3] C. Hastrich, "Biomimicry: A tool for innovation" [online], 
2007. Available from: http://www.biomimicryinstitute.org/ 
about-us/biomimicry-a-tool-for-innovation.html [14.05.2011]. 
[4] M. Wooldridge, “Introduction to MAS”, Wiley, 2002. 
[5] A. Villar, A. Federici, and R. Annicchiarico, "Agents and 
Healtcare: A Glance to the Future", Birkhauser, Agent 
Technology and e-Health, pp. 141-148, 2008. 
[6] G. Leonardi, S. Panzarasa, S. Quaglini, M. Stefanelli, van der 
Aalst W.M.P. "Interacting Agents through a Web-based 
Health Serviceflow Management System", Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, vol. 40(5), pp. 486–499, 2007. 
[7] D. Krafzig, K. Banke, and D. Slama, “Enterprise SOA: 
Service-Oriented Architecture Best Practices”, Prentice Hall, 
2004. 
[8] G. Modi, "Service oriented architecture & web 2.0”, 
Technical report, Guru Tegh Bahadur Institute of Technology, 
2007. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.gsmodi.com/files/ 
SOA_Web2_Report.pdf [14.05.2011]. 
[9] P. Ferronato, “Architecture for digital ecosystems, beyond 
SOA”, 
IEEE 
Digital 
EcoSytems 
and 
Technologies 
Conference, 2007 
[10] G. Briscoe, M. Chli, and M. Vidal, “Creating a Digital 
Ecosystem: Service-oriented architectures with distributed 
evolutionary computing” in JavaOne Conference. Sun 
Microsystems, 
2006. 
[online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/0712.4159 [14.05.2011] 
[11] M. Begon, J. Harper and C. Townsend, "Ecology: Individuals, 
Populations and Communities", Blackwell Publishing, 1996. 
[12] P. Rajasekaran, J. A. Miller, K. Verma, A. P. Sheth, 
"Enhancing Web Services description and discovery to 
facilitate composition", First International Workshop on 
Semantic Web Services and Web Process Composition 
(SWSWPC 2004), LNCS 3387, pp. 55-68. 
[13] E. Lawrence, "Henderson’s dictionary of biological terms", 
Pearson Education, 2005. 
[14] M. Shackleton, R. Shipma and M. Ebner, “An investigation of 
redundant genotype-phenotype mappings and their role in 
evolutionary search”, Congress on Evolutionary Computation, 
pp. 493–500, IEEE Press, 2000. 
[15] D. Hebb, “The Organization of Behavior”, Wiley, 1949. 
[16] G. Demiris, et. al., “Patient-centered applications: use of 
information technology to promote disease management and 
wellness” Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association (JAMIA), vol. 15, Jan. 2008, pp. 8-13. 
[17] F. Nachira, P. Dini and A. Nicolai, “Digital Business 
Ecosystems”, European Commission, 2007. 
[18] A. Ricci, M. Viroli and A. Omicini, "CArtAgO: An 
Infrastructure for Engineering Computational Environments 
in MAS", 3rd Workshop “Environments for Multi-Agent 
Systems”, E4MAS 2006. 
[19] L.D. Serbanati, F.L. Ricci, G. Mercurio, A. Vasilateanu  Steps 
towards a digital health ecosystem.”, Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics”. in press, doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2011.02.011. 
[20] S. Levin, "Ecosystems and the biosphere as complex adaptive 
systems", Ecosystems, vol. 1, pp. 431– 436, 1998 
109
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

