The Impact of Human Factors on Digitization: 
An Eye-tracking Study of OCR Proofreading Strategies 
Flavia De Simone, Barbara Balbi, Vincenzo 
Broscritto, Simona Collina, Roberto Montanari 
Università Suor Orsola Benincasa 
Centro Scienza Nuova 
Naples, Italy 
e-mail: flavia.desimone@centroscienzanuova.it 
Federico Boschetti, Anas Fahad Kahn 
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche 
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale “A. Zampolli” 
Pisa, Italy 
 
e-mail: federico.boschetti@ilc.cnr.it
barbara.balbi@centroscienzanuova.it                                                      fahad.kahn@ilc.cnr.it 
vincenzo.broscritto@studenti.unisob.na.it 
simona.collina@unisob.na.it 
roberto.montanari@unisob.na.it 
 
 
Abstract— An Optical Character Recognition (OCR) System is 
a piece of software that can scan a printed text and translate it 
into a digital format that can be subsequently edited with a 
computer. Often the output from OCR software does not 
correspond closely enough to the original text and a manual 
correction phase is needed in order to improve accuracy. The 
aim of the study presented in this paper is to test human 
strategies in proof correction by means of an eye-tracker. The 
experiment, which we designed to investigate these strategies 
consisted in a proofreading task. Participants were divided into 
two groups: a target group that was trained in how to carry 
out the task and a control group that had not been so trained. 
The performances of each group were evaluated in terms of 
accuracy and time of execution. Results highlighted an effect of 
learning, an optimization strategy of the target group resulting 
in higher accuracy and lower time of execution of the task. The 
practical implications of these results will be discussed. 
Keywords - Optical Character Recognition; Eye-tracking; 
Reading; Cognitive processe. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Of all the processes that impact on the production of 
resources in the Digital Humanities, the digitization of texts 
by means of an Optical Character Recognition (OCR) 
system, and in particular the correction phase, is one of the 
most complex. This is due both to how resource and time 
consuming it can be, and also because of the role that human 
factor issues play in ensuring the accuracy of the final output 
[1]. On the other hand, the accuracy of digitized corpora is a 
fundamental requirement for any further phases of analysis 
and treatment of texts, such as for instance linguistic 
annotation. To improve the effectiveness of OCR systems, 
we believe that it is important to study the role of human 
factors in proofreading activities and to use this information 
to develop strategies in order to make systems more adaptive 
to users’ needs [2]. The adaptivity of a system, or a machine, 
is its ability to adapt to its human operator and to thereby 
reduce his or her cognitive workload [3]. The background to 
the present study is in human factor psychology, a branch of 
psychology dedicated to the study of human-machine 
interaction with a strong connection with cognitive theories 
[4]. 
In the following, we present related work needed to place 
our research and experimental efforts in Section II. We delve 
into the details of our experimental procedure in Section III.. 
Finally, we conclude and introduce future work in Section 
IV. 
II. 
THEORIES AND MODELS 
Reading is the complex outcome of a learning process 
which permits the conversion of a visual representation into 
a phonological form. The success of the process implies that 
there is access to a background store of memories containing 
not only morphological and phonological information but 
also semantic and syntactic knowledge. Nevertheless, the 
process is rapid, taking only a matter of milliseconds, it is 
error free most of the time, and partially unconscious as 
proved by the Stroop effect [5]. The Stroop paradigm is one 
of the most commonly used technologies for studying lexical 
production. The task is very simple: participants are asked to 
name the color of the ink used to write a word without 
reading the word. The dependent variable is the time to 
response. Participants are found to perform the task 
significantly faster when the color of the ink corresponds to 
the meaning of the word, despite the fact that they are 
instructed to ignore the content of the words themselves.  
One of the most well-known models for explaining the 
reading process is the Dual Route Cascaded Model [6], 
which hypothesizes that two different mechanisms are 
involved in reading aloud. One mechanism, the lexical route, 
assumes that an expert reader has a mental representation for 
every learned word and the visual recognition of the written 
word directly activates the internal representation thus 
speeding up the reading process. The other mechanism, the 
non-lexical route, is applicable to non-words or new words 
for which a mental representation is not available. In this 
case, the reader decomposes the words into constituents 
(graphemes) 
and 
then 
applies 
graphemes/phonemes 
conversion rules.  
The first step of the reading process in both routes is a 
visual recognition phase. This is well explained by the model 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

of word perception developed by McClelland and 
Rummelhart [7] in which the first level of processing 
corresponds to visual features that differentiate letters (e.g., 
the letter E is formed by one vertical and three horizontal 
tracts). Starting from this theory we decided to work on this 
visual level to introduce errors into the OCR output, as 
explained below in Section III-B. 
So far, we have described models which have been 
developed to explain chronometric data and error corpora, 
but research on reading processes enjoyed a significant boost 
in the 70s with the introduction of eye-tracking technology 
into the sciences. Eye-tracking technology has made it 
possible to study eye movements and to infer underlying 
cognitive processes, in particular selective attention, that is, 
the ability to elaborate a stimulus by ignoring all competing 
stimuli [8]. Although attention can be oriented regardless of 
eye movement it is more often eye-driven. To better 
understand this process it is necessary to introduce some 
additional concepts [9]: 
• 
foveal vision: the fovea is a small region in the 
retina with a diameter of 1,55 millimeters where visual 
acuity is at its highest;  
• 
smooth pursuit movements: slow eye movements 
that follow an object moving in the visual field, keeping it 
into the fovea; 
• 
saccades: rapid movements of the eyes that change 
the fixation point;  
• 
fixations: the maintaining of the eyes on a portion 
of the visual field for a time longer than 250 milliseconds; 
fixations have two main attributes: location and duration. 
Previous studies have used eye-tracking technology in 
OCR domain. In particular, Rello and Baeza-Yates [10] use 
the eye-tracker to evaluate the readability of digital texts that 
contain OCR errors (among other types of errors). Ishiguro et 
al. [11] apply eye-tracking to study the achievement of 
multiple tasks at the same time, such as face recognition, 
object detection and text reading. In order to monitor these 
activities, each region of interest is processed by the suitable 
recognizer, which is OCR in the case of text. Buscher et al. 
[12] use the eye-tracker on OCR documents, in order to 
annotate which areas are read and which areas are skimmed. 
Starting from this scientific background, we developed 
an eye-tracking study with the specific aim to investigate 
reading strategies in proofreading task. 
III. 
EXPERIMENT 
In the study presented below, we tested for two different 
aspects: 
1- 
the first related to a question of methodology: the 
possibility of studying the visual strategies adopted by OCR 
proofreaders by means of eye-tracking technology; 
2- 
a learning effect: the influence of learning on 
proofreading strategies. 
Towards this aim we compared performances in 
proofreading tasks of two groups of participants, a group 
trained for the task and an untrained group, using eye-
tracking instruments. We expected that the group trained to 
the task to be more rapid and accurate in the execution of the 
task. 
 
A. Participants 
 
Thirty subjects volunteered in the experiment.  The age 
range was between 20 and 45 years old. They all were Italian 
mother-tongue speakers. They had normal or corrected to 
normal vision. None of the participants received any money 
or course credits for participation. In addition, none of them 
had any previous experience in proofreading. They were 
equally distributed into two groups: a target group (TG) 
undergoing a learning phase for the proofreading task before 
the proper experiment and a control group (CG) that received 
no training for the task. 
 
B. Materials 
 
The text used for the experiment was an OCR scan 
extracted from the book “Gomorra” written by Roberto 
Saviano. We opted for a contemporary Italian text for 
reasons of ease and familiarity of semantic and syntax.  
 
 
Figure 1: An example of experimental materials 
 
The text was integrated into a web platform and divided in 
thirty screens: each screen was composed of four sessions 
and each session was made up of two parts, an image 
obtained by a high-resolution scan (600 DPI) and a line 
containing the output of the OCR software, an editable text, 
where the errors to be corrected by participants could be 
presented (Figure 1). Orthographical errors were manually 
inserted in the OCR output by the experimenter. Errors were 
letters substitutions of two types: “rn” instead of “m” and 
vice versa, “O” instead of “o” and vice versa[13;14]. 
 
C. Equipment 
 
To control visual behavior of participants and acquire eye 
movement data an eye-tracker was used. We opted for a 
remote, non-contact system, FaceLab (Figure 2), as it was 
suitable for use in a controlled environment, a laboratory, 
with a task presented via computer desktop. The system 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

consists of an infrared pod and two cameras posed on the 
desk at the base of the computer monitor. Before data 
acquisition, the eye-tracker is calibrated and cameras 
position is adjusted for each participant to increase data 
accuracy. 
One great advantage of this system, compared to a 
wearable system, is the stability and accuracy of the resulting 
data due to the upright and stable position of participants. 
This favors calibration and avoids the kind of data loss that 
might result from wireless connection issues. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D. Procedure 
 
The experiment was carried out in a quiet ad-hoc 
prepared room. Participants were seated in front of a 17” 
computer 
monitor 
with 
a 
maximum resolution of 
1280x1024 at 60 Hz. The two groups of participants 
received different instructions. Participants in the TG were 
familiarized with the task in a learning phase in which they 
could correct thirty screens of text before starting with the 
experiment proper. They were informed that in the 
experiment they would find the same errors as in the 
learning phase. The entire procedure lasted about one hour. 
Participants in the CT were asked to pass directly to the 
experimental phase without any specific training. This 
experiment lasted about half an hour. 
 
E. Results  
 
To evaluate the accuracy of performances the number of 
detected errors has been acquired and analyzed. A statistical 
test on frequencies (chi-squared) revealed a significant 
effect of learning (Figure 3): participants inserted in the TG 
corrected a significant major number of errors respect to CG 
(p<.004).  
To compare the strategies adopted by the two groups we 
focused on three metrics: the time to complete the task, the 
mean number of fixations and the mean fixation duration 
[15]. To extract metrics about fixations we designed two 
Areas of Interest (AOIs) for each of the sessions into which 
the text is divided, the image and the OCR editable text (see 
Section III-B). Statistical tests on the means (t-test) 
highlighted that the two groups adopted two different visual 
strategies: TG tended to be more rapid in executing the task 
compared to CG (p<.06) because the participants mostly 
focused their attention on the OCR output as can be inferred 
by an higher number of fixations (p<.02; Figure 4) and a 
longer fixation duration (p<.0003; Figure 5). 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Taken together the data confirm the two hypotheses: the 
suitability of the adopted methodology to study human-
factor issues in digital era and the learning effect, an 
advantage in terms of accuracy and time of execution, on 
proofreading strategies. Our next step will consist in the 
application of the same methodology to study the strategies 
adopted by expert proofreaders; in addition, we are also 
looking into the possibility of verifying the strategies 
adopted by proofreaders to correct different types of errors 
(syntactic, semantic). The main aim of this direction of 
study is to use the knowledge acquired to design and 
develop OCR systems that are ever more adaptive to human 
users’ needs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. FaceLab 5.0 
 
Figure 3. Number of detected errors for each subject. 
 
 
Figure 4. Mean number of fixations per AOIs (image: green bar; 
OCR output: red bar) for each group 
 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 5. Mean fixation duration per AOIs (image: green bar; OCR output: 
red bar) for each group 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Nagy, “At the frontiers of OCR”. Proceedings of IEEE, 80 
(7), pp. 1093-1100, 1992. 
[2] H. Lieberman, F. Paternò, M. Klann and V. Wulf, “End-user 
development: An emerging paradigm”. In End user 
development. Springer Netherlands, pp.1-8, 2006. 
[3] L. A. Zadeh, “On the definition of adaptivity”. Proceedings of 
the IEEE, 51(3), pp. 469-470, 1963. 
[4] C. D. Wickens, J. G. Hollands, S. Banbury and R. 
Parasuraman, Engineering psychology & human performance. 
Psychology Press, 2015. 
[5] J. Stroop,  “Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions”. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18 (6), pp. 643-662, 
1935. 
[6] M. Coltheart, K. Rastle, C. Perry, R. Langdon and J. Ziegler, 
“DRC: A dual route cascaded model of visual word 
recognition and reading aloud”. Psychological Review, 108 
(1), pp. 204-256, 2001. 
[7] J. L. McClelland and D. E. Rumelhart, . “An interactive 
activation model of context effects in letter perception: Part 1. 
An account of basic findings”. Psychological Review, 88, pp. 
375-407, 1981. 
[8] L. Pei – Lin, “Using eye tracking to understand learners' 
reading process through the concept-mapping learning 
strategy”. Computers & Education, 78, pp. 237-249, 2014. 
[9] K. Rayner, “Eye movements in reading and information 
processing: 20 years of research”. Psychological Bulletin, 
124(3), pp. 372-422, 1998. 
[10] L. Rello and R. Baeza-Yates, “Lexical quality as a proxy for 
web text understandability”. Proceedings of the 21st 
International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW '12 
Companion). ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 591-592, 2012. 
[11] Y. Ishiguro, A. Mujibiya, T. Miyaki and J. Rekimoto. “Aided 
eyes: eye activity sensing for daily life”. Proceedings of the 
1st Augmented Human International Conference (AH '10). 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 25, pp. 7, 2010. 
[12] G. Buscher, A. Dengel, L. van Elst and F. Mittag, 2008. 
“Generating and using gaze-based document annotations”. In 
CHI '08 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI EA '08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 
3045-3050, 2008. 
[13] D. Fiset et al., “Features for identification of Uppercase and 
lowercase letters”. Psychological Science, 19 (11), pp. 1161-
1168, 2008. 
[14] F. Peressotti and J. Grangier, “The role of letter identity and 
letter position in orthographic priming”. Perception & 
Psychophysics, 61 (4), pp. 691-706, 1999. 
[15] M. Just and P. Carpenter, “Eye Fixations and Cognitive 
Processes”. Cognitive Psychology, 8, pp. 441-480, 1976. 
 
 
 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

