The Cerebellum in the Ouroboros Model, the “Interpolator Hypothesis” 
 
Knud Thomsen 
Paul Scherrer Institut 
PSI, NUM, ASQ 
CH-5232 Villigen, Switzerland 
knud.thomsen@psi.ch 
 
 
Abstract—The Ouroboros Model offers a novel cognitive 
architecture with an algorithmic backbone of iterative and self-
referential processing. All memory content is organized into 
meaningful pieces of data, chunks and schemata, which are 
laid down as a kind of snapshots of all activations at a relevant 
point in time. This entails a grainy structure of memory 
content. Whereas a core process of "consumption" analysis 
can naturally be defined taking advantage of this parcellation, 
it necessitates interpolation for fine nuances, especially for the 
representation of intermediate values during transients. It is 
hypothesized 
that, 
in 
the 
vertebrate 
brain, 
essential 
interpolation functionality is provided by the cerebellum. 
Findings concerning movement control as well as the 
involvement of the cerebellum in more abstract, cognitive, 
tasks can be interpreted as reflecting a function of the 
cerebellum as a co-processor, i.e., a general interpolator, 
boosting representations in cerebral cortex areas, which are 
reciprocally connected with cerebellar cortex areas. In this 
paper, it is sketched how the new "interpolator hypothesis" 
can explain manifold observations while embracing previous 
theories of the function of the cerebellum.  
Keywords - schemata; consumption analysis; iterative 
processing; grainy memory structure; interpolation; co-processor 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Strikingly diverse proposals have been made concerning 
the function of the cerebellum, and, so far, no consensus has 
been reached. Here, a novel functional account is proposed, 
which addresses a general need for interpolation and seems 
to allow to reconcile many of the previous concepts.  
The paper is structured as follows. Sections II and III 
provide a short summary of key tenets of the Ouroboros 
Model.  Motivation for an interpolation function and the 
“interpolator hypothesis” are formulated in Section IV. Hints 
from actual brains are presented in Section V. The relation to 
existing conceptions is clarified in Section VI, and one 
particular example supporting the interpolator hypothesis 
relating to motor control is described. Conclusions and future 
work are outlined in Section VII. 
II. 
THE OUROBOROS MODEL IN A NUTSHELL 
In a series of recent papers, the Ouroboros Model has 
been introduced as a novel attempt at explaining a wide 
range of findings pertaining to cognition and consciousness 
of natural and also of artificial agents [1-5]. It has been 
suggested how, within a single approach centered around a 
principal algorithmic process on a suitably structured 
memory, one can explain human cognitive performance and 
also formulate prescriptions of how to achieve comparable 
capabilities with artificial agents implemented in hard- or 
software, all iteratively and recursively following a similar 
self-steered evolutionary program.  
Minds are seen as primarily data processing entities; an 
iterative and self-referential universal algorithmic layout on 
the basis of suitably stored data structures is essential [1,2].  
A. Action and Memory Structure 
The Ouroboros Model sees memory entries as effectively 
organized into (non-strict) hierarchies of schemata. Memory 
is made up of meaningful chunks, i.e., combinations of 
features and concepts belonging together [4]. In living 
brains, neural assemblies are permanently linked together 
when once co-activated in the right manner. Later re-
activation of any one of the linked features excites the entire 
schema. In particular, also currently missing features are 
biased and thus expectations are triggered.  
B. Principal Algorithmic Backbone 
At the core of the Ouroboros Model lies a self-referential 
recursive process with alternating phases of data-acquisition 
and -evaluation. A monitor process termed 'consumption 
analysis' is checking how well expectations triggered at one 
point in time fit with successive activations; these principal 
stages are identified: 
 
... anticipation,   
 
action / perception,  
 
evaluation,  
 
anticipation, ...  
These steps are concatenated into a full repeating circle, 
and the activity continues at its former end, like the old 
alchemists' tail-devouring serpent called the Ouroboros. 
Most importantly, there is no detrimental circularity involved 
if the succession of the processing steps in time is well taken 
into account: teeth and tail of the name-giving snake belong 
to well distinct points in time.  
C. Consumption Analysis 
Any occurring activation, such as sensory-related, excites 
the associated schemata. The one with the highest activation 
is selected first. Other schemata, which possibly are also 
applicable, are inhibited and their activation suppressed. 
Taking the first selected schema and ensuing anticipations 
active at that time as reference and basis, consumption 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

analysis checks how successive activations fit into this 
activated frame structure, i.e., how well lower level input 
data are "consumed" by the chosen schema. Features are 
assigned / attributes are 'explained away' and inhibited for 
immediate reuse [6].  
If everything fits perfectly, the process comes to a 
momentary partly standstill and continues with new input 
data. If discrepancies surface, they have a strong impact on 
the elicited actions that follow [2]. In case of severe 
mismatch, the first schema is altogether discarded and 
another, new, conceptual frame is tried. The actual 
appropriateness of a schema can vary over a wide range. In 
any case, consumption analysis delivers a gradual measure 
for the goodness of fit between expectations and actual 
inputs.  
III. 
CONCEPT FORMATION 
Two special types of occasions are specifically marked in 
the Ouroboros Model as interesting by the outcome of the 
consumption analysis when attention is triggered leading to 
higher than baseline excitement and to stronger activations; 
preferentially for these cases, new entries are laid down 
quickly in (episodic) memory [4]:   
 
Events, 
when 
everything 
fits 
perfectly; 
i.e., 
associated neural representations are stored as kind 
of “snapshots” of all concurrent activity, making 
them available for guidance in the future as they 
have proved useful once. 
 
Constellations, which led to an impasse or problem, 
are worthwhile remembering, too; in this case, for 
future avoidance.  
In addition: 
 
Associations and categorizations are gradually 
distilled from the statistics of co-occurrences.  
Novel categories and concepts can also be assembled on 
the spot by combining (parts of) existing memory entries 
following an external trigger [2].  
Just the same as old memories, new concepts are laid 
down in the form of cohesive packages, immediately 
effective again as schemata, frames or scripts. Building 
blocks include whatever representations are active at the time 
when such a snapshot is taken, including sensory signals, 
abstractions, previously laid down concepts encompassing 
features relating to probable transients and causal structure, 
and also prevalent emotions and longer lasting moods. They 
might, in some cases, but need not correspond to direct 
representation units like words. At subsequent occasions, 
they will serve for controlling behavior, by guiding action 
towards or away from the marked tracks, depending on the 
sign of the associated emotion value (which was originally 
itself distilled from consumption analysis [2]).  
IV. 
NEED FOR INTERPOLATION 
Some structure and parcellation of all memory content 
into well separated schemata most probably is dictated quite 
generally by the need to keep the total amount of stored data 
manageable. It is a consequence of the generation of many 
entries as snapshots and ad-hoc assemblies seen from the 
Ouroboros Model´s perspective. Even in the case when a 
schematic relation, e.g., representing a movement, is distilled 
from repeated similar activations, it is most probably laid 
down economically as distinct (end)points, and the complete 
transient in between is not stored in arbitrary detail.  
While perfectly suited for a process like consumption 
analysis, a coarse-grained structure of memories poses a 
challenge when details finer than available in the form of 
local recordings are needed, and in particular, when smooth 
transients in time are demanded for whatever actions.  
With a focus on time, it seems obvious that interpolation 
can significantly enhance cortical representation capabilities 
over what is possible with only unitary activity.  
A. Various time scales 
The transition between distinct and separated stepping 
stones, decisive for the overall coherence of activity 
according to the Ouroboros Model, is affected by diverse 
processes at different timescales and levels of detail.  
Starting from extended timescales, emotions and moods 
ensure some coherence and continuity of perceptions and for 
the actions of an agent [2].  
Over short to medium durations in the order of seconds, 
the flow of action according to the Ouroboros Model is 
mediated by shared constituents, i.e., common attributes and 
features, of thus concatenated, otherwise distinct, schemata.  
Closer to the short-term limit of action, both for bodily 
movements and also for abstract cognitive processes, it is 
hypothesized that representations pertaining to intermediate 
values are calculated from more directly accessible 
neighboring reference points by means of some type of 
averaging and interpolation.  
Remarkable, at the other end of the timescale again, 
given the intrinsic dynamic characteristics of neural action, 
generating some truly constant level is not completely trivial 
and appears to mandatorily require some form of averaging.   
All timescales are addressed in the Ouroboros Model by 
schemata including explicitly dynamic features, which code 
for changes and transients. Their effective resolution will be 
enhanced by interpolation again.  
B. The interpolator hypothesis of the cerebellum 
The novel proposal here is that the cerebellum provides 
fine-grained values for features in between well established, 
separately and distinctly represented reference points, i.e., 
interpolations between cerebral activations, which specify 
directly available values in a coarser way.  
The cerebellum is thus seen as a dedicated co-processor 
working in close interplay with the cerebral cortex, greatly 
expanding the total achievable resolution of representations 
in living brains.  
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION IN VERTEBRATE BRAINS 
As a theory of human cognition, the Ouroboros Model at 
some point needs to demonstrate the correspondence of the 
proposed structures and processes with actual facts from real 
brains. This is work in progress; first proposals have been 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

presented in indentifying the hippocampal structures as 
providing an efficient rapidly established index to more 
extensive and detailed content like memory entries, laid 
down in cerebral cortex [5].  
A. Selected hints from anatomy and established findings  
First, looking only at a very coarse level, the cerebellum 
grew in tight lockstep with the cerebral cortex in its 
evolutionary trajectory in mammals, probably generally in 
vertebrates [7, 8]. Over long times, the cerebellum did not 
change in its comparatively simple internal cytoarchitectonic 
structure in rather diverse animals.  
A very uniform layout lead early to the suspicion that the 
cerebellum does one and the same operation to all input 
arriving there. Some gross correspondence between different 
areas in cortex and sectors of the cerebellum is observed but 
the detailed organization into areas is well distinct from what 
is found in cerebral cortex [9, 10]. Input routes and the 
output tracts appear to establish links in separated closed 
loops between delimited patches of cerebellar cortex and 
distinct areas of cerebral cortex; in detail, parts of the body 
are not represented continuously over an extended area of the 
cerebellar cortex. Instead, representations are fractured into 
small discontinuous patches in an apparently uncorrelated 
manner with diverse sensory and motor areas arranged in 
close neighborhood [9, 11].  
Mossy fiber and Climbing fiber input pathways converge 
on the level of single Purkinje cells [12].  
Signals carried by relatively small numbers of input and 
also output fibers are in between expanded enormously with 
granule cells being by far the most numerous neurons in the 
brain. They are the origin of very many parallel fibers. It has 
been argued earlier that this stark contrast in numbers allows 
for (internal) very fine-grained encoding (and pattern 
separation) [13]. There is considerable evidence that mossy 
fiber input codes are preserved in synaptic responses of 
granule cells; this "similar coding principle" works as an 
ideal noise-reducing filter allowing the transmission of weak 
sensory inputs in a graded fashion [14]. In the following, 
temporal aspects shall be emphasized in particular.  
Purkinje cells are triggered in a differential way by either 
a vast number of inputs from parallel fibers piercing their 
extended dendritic trees (eliciting simple spikes), or, by a 
single climbing fiber (sparking complex spikes). The 
response of synapses on Purkinje cells to input from parallel 
fibers is reduced if this parallel fiber activation "predicts" 
climbing fiber activity for this cell, i.e., if the latter arrives 50 
- 200 ms later [15]. Persistent long term depression of the 
involved connections ensues after repeated pairings [16].  
B. Effecting Interpolation 
Interpolation by the cerebellum is hypothesized as being 
performed between reference points, i.e., between somehow 
distinct representations in the cerebral cortex, which are 
temporarily related, overlap to some extent or are in close 
timely vicinity like constituents of an overarching schema. 
As a prototypical example benefitting from interpolation, one 
can take a reaching movement including a start- and an end 
point as a goal, see Figure 1.  
It is assumed that interpolation first is performed in a 
feed forward manner by determining a shortest trajectory 
between supporting points in a high-dimensional space 
defined by the activated feature representations in cerebral 
cortex, following a principle of least action. The interpolated 
values are then relayed back to the same cortex areas.  
The simplest case would be the determination of a 
representation for some finely distinguished nuances 
between the endpoints of a scale for a single (dynamic) 
variable. When many feature dimensions are involved, 
derived intermediate values would lie in a hyper plane.  
According to the interpolator hypothesis, in the example 
of a straight movement, all effected activations for starting- 
and end point, required muscles, expected sensory feedback 
as well as usual duration are taken into account; dimensions 
specifying an abstract goal for actually performing the 
movement come in addition. All considered feature 
dimensions are contributing according to some weight.  
In any case, the resulting trajectory in this high 
dimensional space is hypothesized to be derived according to 
a suitably implemented principle of least action.  
There exist uniquely outstanding points, i.e., when a 
given reference-point and the result of the interpolation are 
exactly equal; the obvious case would be a correctly reached 
intermediate or end point of a trajectory.  
VI. 
RELATIONS TO PREVALENT CONCEPTUALIZATIONS 
While not following any of the numerous existing 
proposals concerning the computational functions of the 
cerebellum (to the best knowledge of the author), it seems 
that the above advanced “interpolator hypothesis” fits rather 
well with observations and the prevailing ideas [13, 16, 17].  
Very sketchy still, a core proposal of the interpolator 
hypothesis is that the vast number of granule cells effectively 
leads to an only very smoothly changing excitatory input to 
the numerous contacted Purkinje cells, influenced by a huge 
number of each very finely graded and reliably coded 
dimensions. Based on this input, Purkinje cells can deliver 
very high action-potential firing rates, which are probably 
effective as rather constant values in the further processing. 
Special action, as expected for the exact coincidence 
between any preset value and an interpolation result, is then 
postulated to be signaled by climbing fiber input to Purkinje 
cells. This triggers the Purkinje cell (complex spike) and 
shuts it off for some time interval immediately afterwards 
when no addition or correction is required.  The timing of the 
process could fit nicely if suitable anticipated values were 
effective at the outset; climbing fiber feedback activation via 
the inferior olive will arrive with a delay compared to the 
parallel fiber input.  
Purkinje cells, in turn, provide the such calculated 
interpolated values via deep cerebellar nuclei to the same 
cortex areas which first prompted the interpolation operation.  
Climbing fiber activation would thus be a confirmation 
signal rather than an error signal. As has been pointed out, 
“error” and “learning” do not make immediate sense if 
connections between identical features are affected [12].   
Learning would be different in different phases; for 
system “set-up” during maturation, or, after a massive 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

change, pronounced long term adaptations can be expected. 
In contrast, during “normal operations” no large persistent 
modifications in the cerebellum seem to be required. This 
matches with the experimental fact that genetically 
engineered mice exhibit normal motor learning in the 
absence of long term depression, LTD, at the parallel fiber - 
Purkinje cell synapse [18]. Consequently, learning, which 
takes place involving cerebellar activation, might mainly be 
implemented in the connected cerebral cortex areas [19, 20].  
For body movements, also when only imagined, distinct 
postures are separated by a time interval, dictated by basic 
physics; it is therefore clear that a failure to follow a smooth 
path between them can be interpreted as a timing problem. 
Timing has been postulated as a main function of the 
cerebellum [21, 22].   
Disturbances in postural tone and smooth movement 
were historically among the first deficiencies associated with 
cerebellar dysfunction [23]. Complex movements have been 
described as being broken down into components.  
Figure 1 depicts a comparison between healthy control 
subjects (traces a) and c)) and patients with cerebellar 
damage (traces b) and d)). Moving, e.g., a finger from one 
point in space (A) to a prescribed goal (B), a healthy subject 
draws a straight line, whereas patients with a lesioned 
cerebellum produce wiggly trajectories (A’ to B’), bearing 
witness to struggling for control and fine tuning. Comparing 
traces c) and d), latency after a go-signal in one and the same 
patient is higher for the impaired limb, in which the onset of 
action is reported as coincident with the reaching of the first 
hold point for the faultless movement. Here, especially the 
second hint is interesting; this illustration, based on [23] and 
[24], can be interpreted as an action with the impaired limb 
only starting at the instant when consumption analysis 
detects a discrepancy, i.e., a deviation from a set goal or 
reference. The figure is based on the work of G. Holmes in 
the 1920s, and it would be very interesting to scrutinize these 
old findings [23, 24].  
 
 
Figure 1.  Sketch of principle findings contrasting healthy subjects (traces 
a and c)) with ones suffering from cerebellar damage (traces b and d)).  
According to the Ouroboros Model, for any deviation 
between feedback and expectation, consumption analysis 
triggers attention and also delivers some affective signal 
(computed first in cingulate cortex areas). If the cerebellum 
is involved in calculating required intermediate values it is 
no wonder that it is activated at times when deviations are 
detected.  
Failures to provide fitting interpolations would certainly 
provoke errors. In the realm of abstract cognition, the 
corresponding errors would most probably manifest as 
“dysmetria of thought” [25].  
More cerebellar activity is probably linked to cases in 
which wider and more daring interpolations are needed and 
thus there is a higher risk to make an error. It can naturally 
be hypothesized that cerebellar activation increases with 
escalating requirements for interpolation.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Extensive detailed work is still needed. In particular, 
formalization and numerical simulations are required to 
illuminate details concerning timing and how to implement 
interpolation in a biologically plausible manner, most 
probably adhering to a principle of least action, with neural 
networks as found in the cerebellum.  
At present time, it can be stated, that the tight 
interweaving of computational and neural perspectives 
appears to offer a fresh look and a new promising approach.  
For functional activation studies, predictions can be made 
concerning differences and similarities of cerebellar 
contributions to movements, e.g., comparing the drawing of 
a complex figure either by hand and with a pencil or with a 
big brush and using wide arm movements: timing and also 
the involvement of the body would differ vastly but in the 
proper reference frame the abstract specifications for 
supporting points and their smooth interpolation, i.e., 
transients, should be rather similar.  
The interpolator hypothesis proposes a new, coarse-
grained and overarching picture. Preliminary evidence is 
presented that the cerebellum serves useful and deemed 
necessary functions as an interpolator for deriving fine-
grained representations from distinct supporting points 
defined by activations in cerebral cortex and effectively 
referring to different points in time. This hypothesis, which 
is motivated by the Ouroboros Model, is testable, and it 
appears to comply with rather general considerations. At first 
sight, the interpolator hypothesis not only seems able to 
explain available observations but also to reconcile several 
diverse approaches and distinct earlier proposals documented 
in the literature.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
A number of insightful comments and very helpful 
suggestions for improvements by six unknown referees and 
the editor are gratefully acknowledged.    
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Thomsen, "The Ouroboros Model in the light of venerable 
criteria", Neurocomputing 74, 121-128, 2010. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[2] K. Thomsen, "The Ouroboros Model, Selected Facets" in: C. 
Hernández et al. (eds.) From Brains to Systems. New York 
Dordrecht Heidelberg London: Springer, 239-250, 2011.  
[3] K. Thomsen, "Consciousness for the Ouroboros Model", 
Journal for Machine Consciousness 3, 163-175, 2011. 
[4] K. Thomsen, "Concept Formation in the Ouroboros Model", 
Third Conference on Artificial Gerneral Intelligence, AGI 
2010, Lugano, Switzerland, March 5-8, 2010. 
[5] K. Thomsen, "Ouroboros Model Mapped to Brain", 8th IBRO 
World Congress of Neuroscience, Florence, 14-18 July, 2011.  
[6] A. Yuille and D. Kersten, “Vision as Bayesian inference: 
analysis by synthesis?” Trends in Cognitive Science 10, 301-
308, 2006.   
[7] D.A. Clark, P.P. Mitra, and S.S.H. Wang, “Scalable 
architecture in mammalian brains”, Nature 411, 189-193, 
2001. 
[8] S. Herculano-Houzel, “Coordinated scaling of cortical and 
cerebellar number of neutrons”, Frontiers in Neuroanatomy 4, 
1-8, 2010.  
[9] E. Manni and L. Petrosini, "A century of cerebellar 
somatotopy: a debated representation", Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience 5, 241-249, 2004. 
[10] P.L. Strick, R.P. Dum, and J.A. Fiez, “Cerebellum and 
Nonmotor Function”, Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 32, 413-434, 
2009.  
[11] T. Wiestler, D.J. McGonicle, and J. Diedrichsen, "Integration 
of sensory and motor representations of single fingers in the 
human cerebellum", J. Neurophysiol 105, 3042-3053, 2011.  
[12] I.E. Brown and J.M. Bower, “Congruence of Mossy Fiber and 
Climbing Fiber Tactile Projections in the Lateral Hemispheres 
of the Rat Cerebellum”, The Journal of Comparative 
Neurology 70, 429-459, 2001.  
[13] D. Marr, “A Theory of Cerebellar Cortex”, J. Physiol. 202, 
437-470. 1969.  
[14] B. Bengtsson and H. Jörntell, "Sensory transmission in 
cerebellar granulae cells relies on smilarly coded mossy fiber 
inputs", Proc. Nat. Ac. Sc. 106, 2389-2394, 2009. 
[15] S.S.H. Wang, W. Denk, and M. Häusser, "Coincidence 
detection in single dentric spines mediated by calcium 
release", Nature Neuroscience 3, 1266-1273, 2000. 
[16] M. Ito, “Cerebellar Long-Term Depression: Characterization, 
Signal Transduction, and Functional Roles”, Physiological 
Reviews 81, 1143-1195, 2001.  
[17] J.S. Albus, (1971). "A theory of cerebellar function". Math. 
Biosciences 10 (1–2): 25–61. 
[18] M. Yuzaki, "Cerebellar LTD vs. motor learning − Lessons 
learned from studying GluD2", Neural Networks, PMID: 
22840919, 2012. 
[19] V. Tomassini et al., "Structural and Functional Bases for 
Individual Differences in Motor Learning", Human Brain 
Mapping 32, 494-508, 2011.  
[20] R. D. Seidler, A. Prushotham, S.G. Kim, K. Uğurbil, D. 
Willigham, and J. Ashe, "Cerebellum Activation Associated 
with Performance Change but Not Motor Learning", Science 
296, 2043-2046, 2002.  
[21] R.B. Ivry, R.M. Spencer, H.N. Zelaznik, and J. Diedrichsen, 
“The Cerebellum and Event Timing”, Ann. N.Y. Acad, Sci. 
978, 302-317, 2002. 
[22] M. Manto et al. “Consensus Paper: Roles of the Cerebellum in 
Motor Control – The Diversity of Ideas on Cerebellar 
Involvement in Movement”, Cerebellum 1, 457-487, 2012. 
[23] C. Ghez and W.T. Thach, “The Cerebellum” in E.R. Kandel, 
J.H. Schwartz, T.M. Jessell, S.A. Siegelbaum, and A.J. 
Hudspeth, Eds., “Principles of Neural Science”, 5th Edition, 
McGraw-Hill, 2013.  
[24] C. Ghez, private communication, 2013. 
[25] J.D. Schmahmann, "Disorders of the Cerebellum: Ataxia, 
Dysmetria of Thought, and the Cerebellar Cognitive Affective 
Syndrome", J. Neuropsychiatry 16, 367-378, 2004.  
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

