Connectome Pathways in Parkinson’s Disease Patients with Deep Brain Stimulators 
Connectome Pathways in Parkinson’s Disease Patients with DBS 
Giorgio Bonmassar and Nikos Makris 
AA. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, MGH, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, USA.  
e-mails: gbonmassar@partners.org and nmakris@partners.org  
 
 
Abstract— The overarching goal of this paper is to optimally control 
the implanted programmable generator (IPG), a critical device that 
delivers electrical currents or potentials to treat neurological 
symptoms in patients with Parkinson’ Disease (PD). Current IPG 
programming is based on trial and error empirical assessment, which 
makes the treatment implementation cumbersome, long, frustrating 
and expensive for the patient. Furthermore, the manifestation of the 
effects of IPG programming in some patient populations (e.g., 
dystonia) can be apparent after days, weeks or even months, which 
makes the trial and error approach unmanageable. Thus, the optimal 
IPG programming is critical to alleviate the patient’s neurological 
symptoms. Their programming relies on parameter definition, such 
as electrode pair, amplitude and frequency. The positioning of the 
electrodes in a specific anatomical target region of interest (ROI), 
such as STN is limited by the surgical procedure and presurgical 
planning. Knowledge of the morphometry of the target ROI and its 
topographic relationships with surrounding anatomical structures 
such as whiter matter fibers (such as the internal capsule and the H1 
and H2 fields of Forel) and other gray matter structures (such as the 
zona incerta, the substantia nigra and the red nucleus) allows the 
precise positioning of the stimulating electrode pair.  We show that 
connectome imaging technology provides the necessary detailed and 
comprehensive in-vivo imaging of white matter fiber architecture. 
Based on our previous DBS studies, we present a novel numerical 
head model to develop a novel IPG programmer to assist neurologist 
in the patient management. 
Keywords-deep brain brain stimulation; DBS; Parkinson’s 
Disease; PD; MRI; DTI; implanted programmable generator; IPG; 
programming; connectome; STN 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
More than 100,000 Parkinson’ Disease (PD) patients 
worldwide have been treated with Deep Brain Stimulation 
(DBS) during the last twenty years resulting in 25–75% 
improvement of movement disorder symptoms of PD. The 
outcome of DBS neurosurgery depends principally on the 
precision of the implanted electrode placement and the ability 
to find the optimum settings for the Implantable Pulse 
Generator (IPG), a critical device for post-operative clinical 
management [1]-[3]. Although the theoretical basis of DBS 
for PD targets, such as the subthalamic nucleus (STN) and the 
internal part of globus pallidus (GPi) has been studied 
extensively in the 1980s and early 1990s, the exact 
mechanism of how electrical stimulation affects brain cells is 
not known with certainty. Given that in PD loss of 
dopaminergic cells leads to excessive activity in the STN and 
GPi, it is thought that IPGs correct this abnormal activity by 
injecting high-frequency electrical pulses. With respect to 
neurosurgery per se, DBS involves minimal permanent brain 
changes, however, there can be side effects, which are 
variable. Most common side effects with STN implants are 
ataxic gait and tonic muscle contractions, paresthesias and 
diplopia, as well as behavioral manifestations such as 
depression, mania and impulse dysregulation. These are 
thought to be related mainly to (a) misplacement of the 
implanted electrodes, (b) local deformation of tissue and 
tissue scaring due to surgery, and (c) suboptimal 
programming of the IPG. Currently, there is no realistic DBS 
model for IPG programming taken from actual patients with 
DBS implant as proposed herein.  The state-of-the-art 
numerical DBS modeling is based on a wire or set of wires, 
which represents the virtual DBS implant, superimposed to 
healthy human brains [1, 2] (IARIA).  Such models are 
incomplete since they do not take in consideration an accurate 
anatomical modeling of the fine-grained composition of the 
anatomic structures and their surrounding architecture 
involved in the stimulation, anisotropic dielectric constants 
and the tissue scar from the surgery.  Therefore, for an 
enhanced VPS model and IPG programming we need detailed 
knowledge about the i) structural and functional anatomy of 
the targets and surrounding tissue, ii) encapsulating tissue 
around the electrode and iii) conductivity and permittivity 
along x, y, z, s. Post-surgical management may last several 
years after surgery and can be difficult. Easily adjustable or 
programmable IPGs (with no need of further surgery) are 
extremely helpful and, probably the most important tools for 
the neurologist to manage the PD patient long term. 
Therefore, safe and successful use of DBS relies heavily upon 
our capability to program (or adjust) the IPG. Usually, in 
most patients there is a reduction in levodopa medication 
after DBS surgery of the STN. If IPG programing is optimal, 
besides minimizing side effects and a safer use of DBS in PD, 
it can reduce or discontinue pharmacological treatment in 
post-surgical patients with PD. However, optimal IPG 
programming needs detailed knowledge of anatomical 
structure and function of the brain circuitry involved. Thus it 
seems plausible that developing and testing new IPGs 
optimized by Virtual Patient Stimulator (VPS) models, which 
are informed by precise anatomical and physiological data in 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

the individual patient will improve the therapeutic effects of 
neurostimulation on brain circuitry and the brain structures 
affected in PD. In section II we introduce: (A) the MRI 
acquisition methods used, (B) the numerical electromagnetic 
simulations performed. In section III we outlined the 
tractography and electromagnetic fields estimated by our 
simulations as well as the predicted neuronal firing 
frequency. In section IV we discussed our results and 
presented the conclusion of our study. 
 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Overview of study design 
The study is based on ex-vivo analysis of collected 7 Tesla 
(7T) T2* and Connectome diffusion MRI data.  
 (a) Structural T2* 7 Tesla MRI  This ex-vivo brain consisted 
of MRI data of a hemisphere fixed in Periodate-Lysine-
Paraformaldehyde (PLP) using the following parameters: 
T2*-W, 
100 
m3 
isotropic 
resolution, 
TR/TE/flip=40ms/20ms/20°, 1600×1100×896 matrix.  (b) 
Connectome DSI data are transformed into DTI data to 
estimate 
complex 
relative 
permittivity 
tensor 
D
å*

 d
 *
, where ε* is the tissue complex relative 
permittivity D is the DTI tensor and d is the diffusivity.  The 
vmPFC-BG tract is delineated using diffusion Connectome 
data as shown in Figure 1(b). DTI/DSI data are visually 
validated by comparing the computed fiber tracks with 
anatomical atlases with particular emphasis to the basal 
ganglia region.  Finally, DTI/DSI data provide detailed 
information on the fiber tract connectivity between the STN 
and other parenchymal areas that is useful for DBS 
programming [3] and basic neuroscience research. The 
diffusion data set was collected on the MGH Connectome 
scanner with a diffusion weighted spin echo EPI sequence 
(1.53 mm3 resolution, 1402 matrix, FoV 210 mm, 95 slices, 
128 diffusion directions at 5000 s/mm2 and 10 b=0 
acquisitions, TR 8.8 s, TE 57 ms, 3x GRAPPA acceleration, 
64 channel head array) and the T1-weighted anatomical was 
collected on the MGH 7 T scanner with a 3D FLASH (0.43 
mm3 resolution, 5122 matrix, FoV 205 mm, 352 slices, FA 
30°, TR 35 ms, TE 10.2 ms, 32 channel head array). 
One dataset was obtained from the Human Connectome 
Project (Washington Univ-Minnesota), with high spatial 
resolution of 1.25 mm (isotropic) (highest b-value of 3000 
s/mm2), on T1-weighted anatomical images. The Washington 
U-Minnesota datasets diffusion dataset was collected with a 
diffusion weighted spin echo EPI sequence (1.253 mm3 
resolution, 1682 matrix, FoV 210 mm, 111 slices, 89/90/91 
diffusion directions at each of 1000 s/mm2, 2000 s/mm2 and 
3000 s/mm2 collected with LR and RL phase encoding and 6 
b=0 acquisitions, FA 78°/160°, TR 5.52 s, TE 89.5 ms, 6/8 
partial Fourier, 3x multiband acceleration, 1488 Hz/px, 32 
channel head array) and the T1-weighted anatomical was 
collected with a 3D MPRAGE (0.73 mm3 resolution, 3202 
matrix, FoV 224 mm, 256 slices, FA 8° non-selective water 
excitation, TR 2.4 s, TE 2.14 ms, TI 1 s, asymmetric echo, 2x 
GRAPPA acceleration, 210 Hz/px, 32 channel head array). 
 
Figure 1. Anatomy of the subthalamic region using histology (c) and MRI 
(a, b, d, e). 
 
Figure 2. Diffusion imaging tractographic results in the 3 Tesla 
Washington U-Minnesota datasets. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

B. Numerical Model of Deep Brain Stimulation implant 
One or two bilateral implants, as shown by the post-operative 
MRI, are modeled as insulated wire(s) connected to the left 
and/or right targets in the head [4].  The wires are modeled as 
a Perfect Electrical Conductor and the dielectric is modeled 
as Teflon.  A four-electrode connection [3] and the scar tissue 
are modeled in full detail reaping the benefits of the proposed 
100 m3 isotropic resolution based on the actual Medtronic 
electrode set that will be used.  The four electrodes are 
modeled as PEC and the scar tissue is modeled with the 
known dielectric properties.   
III. 
RESULTS 
In the following, we present preliminary results for structural 
imaging.  
Figure 1 shows diffusion tractography results on a T1 
anatomical image.  We performed whole brain tractography 
using our state-of-the art tractography algorithm [5] capable 
of handling multiple fiber crossings. Subsequently, tracts 
connecting the STN and other brain regions were extracted. 
As seen in Figure 2, shows a zoomed-in portion of the tracts 
connecting the STN, including the ansa lentricularis fibers 
(green) and the other fiber bundles (blue, red). Thus, high 
spatial resolution, as in the connectome data, is critical for 
accurate tracing of these tracts, which can lead to a better 
understanding of the neural fiber bundles connecting STN 
and other sub-cortical regions around the STN. Note that, a 
slight misplacement of the electrode could result in the 
excitation of a completely different neural network, resulting 
in unwanted side effects. Figure 3.A shows the spatial 
distribution of electric field amplitude overlaid with the 
precise anatomy of the area surrounding the DBS implant.  
The field produced for the narrow bipolar stimulation 
configuration 1-2 is shown for three different encapsulation 
layer conditions.  There were no differences in electric field 
calculated at the baseline (no encapsulation) or at the chronic 
stage, with a peak intensity of the electric field in both cases 
equal to 7.54 V/mm. Conversely, the electric field changed 
dramatically for the acute stage, where the higher 
conductivity of CSF generated a peak electric field equal to 
3.59 V/mm, i.e., less than half compared to baseline or 
chronic stage. Furthermore, the model at the acute stage 
resulted in an electric field that was more spread along the 
electrode and asymmetric compared to the chronic stage.  The 
electric field for the acute-stage model was characterized by 
higher intensity at 10mm distance from the electrode (20.33 
mV/mm vs. 3.97 mV/mm). Differences in electric field 
between acute vs. chronic model (Figure 3.B) were also 
visible in the vicinity of the electrode (left), on the cortex 
(middle) and on the scalp (right).  The stimulation was 
attenuated by the encapsulation, with 18% reduction in 
electric field amplitude delivered in the acute case and only 
14% in the chronic case. The electromagnetic solution 
analysis was performed both in the area that surrounds the 
electrode and far from the electrode, i.e., on the scalp.  We 
estimated the potential distribution for the electrode 
configuration 1-2 in the baseline case and compared our 
results with those reported in the literature.  We report for the 
potential a drop of 84% within 4 mm of the electrode (Figure 
3.C), which is in agreement with the results provided in [6]-
[9] for bipolar DBS with ± 1 V voltage. 
In Figure 3.D is shown the typical output of the neuron 
model with 117 neurons/axons, which is the status either one 
or zero indicates the absence or presence of an action 
potential. The neuron modelled was the same done by 
McIntyre [6], in the modeling of DBS. The electrical 
parameters were:  conductivity=0.7/Ohm-m, membrane 
capacitance=0.1 uF/cm2/lamella membrane, and membrane 
conductivity=0.001 S/cm2/lamella membrane. The pulse 
parameters were: width = 0.1 //ms, amplitude= 3V. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In order to avoid misplacements of the implanted electrodes, 
as well as to accurately target the sensorimotor parts of the 
nucleus at its dorsolateral zone [7], we need to have an 
accurate mapping and clear anatomical understanding of the 
subthalamic region. Although the allowed margin of error is 
5 mm, in excellent neurosurgical procedures the error does 
not exceed 1 mm. However, in routine DBS practice, the 
margin of error is variable and several times misplacement of 
electrodes is such that the STN can be entirely missed. Thus 
the use of atlases with an estimate of the intersubject 
variability like the ones proposed in this study would be very 
useful in routine DBS neurosurgery.  
Accurate tracing of the fiber connections from the STN and 
surrounding sub-cortical regions (e.g., substantia nigra) is 
critical for understanding the effect of stimulation on the 
neural fiber bundles connected to the STN. A small 
misplacement of the electrode (by a few millimeters) can 
result in excitation of a completely different neural circuit in 
the brain. Thus, accurate localization of the STN and the 
surrounding subcortical structures in the diffusion MRI 
(dMRI) images along with tractography of the associated 
fiber network is an essential component of our proposed 
work. Since the subcortical structures of interest are very 
small (only a few millimeters), high spatial resolution of the 
dMRI images is extremely important to accurately delineate 
these structures. 
The next step will include to validate the model at a patient 
level. The model outlined in this abstract will be tested to 
check if it provides valid prediction of some or all side effects 
recorded in the patient and surfaced during IPG programming 
at different parameter settings. 
V. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
National Institute of Health, National Institute of 
Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering 1R21EB016449-
01A1. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES 
[1] E. B. Montgomery, Deep brain stimulation programming : principles and 
practice. Oxford UK ; New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 
[2] C. C. McIntyre, S. Miocinovic, and C. R. Butson, "Computational 
analysis of deep brain stimulation," Expert Rev Med Devices, vol. 4, Sep 
2007. pp. 615-22. 
[3] C. C. McIntyre, S. Mori, D. L. Sherman, N. V. Thakor, and J. L. Vitek, 
"Electric field and stimulating influence generated by deep brain stimulation 
of the subthalamic nucleus," Clin Neurophysiol, vol. 115, Mar 2004. pp. 589-
95. 
[4] L. Angelone, J. Ahveninen, J. Belliveau, and G. Bonmassar, "Analysis of 
the Role of Lead Resistivity in Specific Absorption Rate for Deep Brain 
Stimulator Leads at 3 T MRI," IEEE Trans Med Imaging, Mar 22 2010. pp. 
1029-38. 
[5] S. A. Mohsin, N. M. Sheikh, and U. Saeed, "MRI-induced heating of deep 
brain stimulation leads," Phys Med Biol, vol. 53, Oct 21 2008. pp. 5745-56 
[6] T. Eichele, et al. "Prediction of human errors by maladaptive changes in 
event-related brain networks," Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, vol. 105, , Apr 22 
2008, pp. 6173-8. 
[7] J. M. Henderson, J. Tkach, M. Phillips, K. Baker, F. G. Shellock, and A. 
R. Rezai, "Permanent neurological deficit related to magnetic resonance 
imaging in a patient with implanted deep brain stimulation electrodes for 
Parkinson's disease: case report," Neurosurgery, vol. 57,discussion E1063, 
Nov 2005. p. E1063 
[8] Y. Rathi, B. Gagoski, K. Setsompop, O. Michailovich, P. E. Grant, and 
C. F. Westin, "Diffusion propagator estimation from sparse measurements in 
a tractography framework," Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv, vol. 
16, 2013. pp. 510-7. 
[9] N. Yousif, R. Bayford, P. G. Bain, and X. Liu, "The peri-electrode space 
is a significant element of the electrode-brain interface in deep brain 
stimulation: a computational study," Brain Res Bull, vol. 74, Oct 19 2007. 
pp. 361-8, 
[10] S. Miocinovic, et al. , "Computational analysis of subthalamic nucleus 
and lenticular fasciculus activation during therapeutic deep brain 
stimulation," J Neurophysiol, vol. 96, Sep 2006. pp. 1569-80. 
[11] A. M. Kuncel and W. M. Grill, "Selection of stimulus parameters for 
deep brain stimulation," Clin Neurophysiol, vol. 115, Nov 2004. pp. 2431-
41. 
[12] C. C. McIntyre, A. G. Richardson, and W. M. Grill, "Modeling the 
excitability of mammalian nerve fibers: influence of afterpotentials on the 
recovery cycle," J Neurophysiol, vol. 87, Feb 2002. pp. 995-1006. 
[13] B. A. Strickland, J. Jimenez-Shahed, J. Jankovic, and A. Viswanathan, 
"Radiofrequency lesioning through deep brain stimulation electrodes: a pilot 
study of lesion geometry and temperature characteristics," J Clin Neurosci, 
vol. 20, Dec 2013. pp. 1709-12.
 
 
Figure 3. Electromagnetic and neural simulations. (A) Electric field |E| for: baseline (left), acute (middle), and chronic (right). (B) ∆EA-C between the 
acute and the chronic stage (left), on the cortex (middle row), and on the scalp (right) (C) Distribution of the potential in the vicinity of the electrode. (D) 
Example of firing state. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

