Enhancing Learning Objects for Digital Education
Tiago Thompsen Primo
Samsung Research Institute
Campinas, Brazil
Email: tiagoprimo@gmail.com
Abstract—This research presents a method to describe Learning
Objects as Semantic Web compatible Ontologies. The proposed
method divides the Ontologies among three layers. The ﬁrst is
composed of the knowledge domain, the second by the Learning
Objects (LOs) and their relations, and the third is responsible for
knowledge inference and reasoning. As study case, we present the
Ontologies of Learning Object Metadata (LOM) and Brazilian
Metadata for Learning Objects (OBAA) metadata standards
as part of the Layer One. The Layer Two composed by the
description of sample Learning Objects based on the properties
and restrictions deﬁned by the Layer One ontologies. Layer Three
describes the knowledge inference axioms, which we deﬁned
as Application Proﬁles. Our current results can summarize a
contribution to Ontology Engineering for Semantic Web applied
to Digital Education.
Keywords–Digital Education; Adaptive Learning; Computa-
tional Intelligence; Mobile Computing; Smart Environments.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Technology Enhanced Learning has the purpose of easing
the knowledge retention and improve the learning performance
in formal, non-formal or informal environments. Researchers
and companies are always exploring new educational method-
ologies and artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms seeking to ﬁnd
the “secret recipe” to help teachers increase the educational
performance of their students.
Despite current achievements, [1], [2], [3], are skeptic
regarding formal learning in classrooms. According to these
authors, there is no clear evidence that the usage of technology
in classroom environments can increase the learning retention.
We believe that there are two main causes for that: (i)the lack
of standardized technological artifacts (Learning Objects) for
sharing of educational content between students and educators
[4], [5], [6] and (ii) the focus on the role of technology as
support to current pedagogical models, provide class statistical
analysis[7], [8] and enhance ludic experiences. This research
will focus on the item (i).
Nowadays, we have a plethora of alternatives to access
information. Television, the Internet, and mobile devices are
platforms that ease the access to several kinds of educational
contents. Many of them are hard to reuse [9]. The challenge
resides in designing Learning Objects that are standardized,
easy to share and able to leave a trace of performance measures
among its application in different educational domains.
To deal with such complex domain that involves variables
such as usage context, academic proﬁle, cognitive styles,
among many others, we believe that the technologies of the
Semantic Web [10] and the Knowledge Representation and
Reasoning [11] seem to be promising.
The contributions for educational systems can be classiﬁed
in three areas [12]: (1) Information Storage and Retrieval; (2)
Autonomous Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Inference and
(3) Communication and Information Persistence over time. In
this research, we are focusing on Information Storage and
Retrieval.
Considering this, we must comply with variables that are
related to the learning progress of a student. It is perceived
from many perspectives (e.g., Pedagogy, Philosophy, Psychol-
ogy, Human Computer Interaction) [13]. It became necessary
to design a ﬂexible and interoperable approach to model
the Learning Object and those variables inside educational
environments [14], [15], [16]. We believe that this is the
ﬁrst step to achieving large-scale personalization [17], [18] in
educational systems.
Therefore, we propose a method to use the standards and
technologies of Semantic Web associated with ontological rep-
resentations to describe Learning Objects. Also, we present our
ﬁndings and experiences developing and deploying Semantic
Web Learning Objects.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
presents detailed information regarding the built Knowledge
Representation; Section III discusses the challenges and op-
portunities to explore this work further and, in Section IV, we
provide our concluding remarks and future work.
II.
BUILDING THE KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION
The users in educational domains can be classiﬁed ac-
cording to their roles. They can be teachers, students, tutors,
administrators, between several other classiﬁcations; Learning
Objects are digital or non-digital; and the relationships be-
tween the user(s) × Learning Object and user × user, have
several associated properties. For example, Learning Objects
can be associated with content relation; users can be related
to authorship or activity like assessment, sharing or reading.
There are alternatives in the Knowledge representation and
reasoning area to represent this kind of domain. We choose to
use Ontologies due to their popularity and availability of design
tools for Semantic Web. Web Ontology Language (OWL)
ontologies were the most nature choice since it is based on
description logics. This representation allows to cope with
incomplete information and also to manage consistency check
of the students proﬁle during information updates.
The proposed ontologies are divided into three layers. The
Layer One is composed of ontologies that describe metadata
schemas, for instance, the Learning Object Metadata (LOM)
Ontology; Layer Two ontologies describes a User Proﬁle,
Learning Objects or their relationships with properties from
a Layer One Ontology; and Layer Three Ontologies compre-
hend the description of Applications Proﬁles that will provide
reasoning over the Layer One and Layer Two.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

To describe the method we use several key terms of
OWL ontologies: Class: describe concepts of a domain, a
structure that can encompass a set of Data Properties or
Object Properties and individuals; Properties: is a binary
relation on individuals; Object Properties: relations between
individuals; Data Properties: relationships among individuals
and an eXtensible Markup Language (XML) Schema Datatype
value or a literal; Axiom: a premise or a point to begin the
reasoning process; Range: links a property to either a class
description or a data range; Domain: it is used to link a
property to a class description; Cardinality: it is a restriction,
deﬁnes the maximum or minimum number of individuals to
link with a property; Individuals: represent the objects in the
domain that we are interested in.
A. Describing Layer One Ontologies
The ﬁrst thing to consider is the application domain: A
Standard for User Proﬁle representation; an educational meta-
data standard; a relationship standard; among other possible
top layer descriptions.
The Layer One ontologies are used to describe classes and
properties that are used to represent individuals in the Layer
Two ontologies. This layer stores ontology with the semantics
of a metadata schema, considering: cardinality; data ranges;
association properties; and the necessary axioms to describe
the application domain.
For example, Layer One ontologies can comprehend LOM
Metadata Standard [19]; Brazilian Metadata for Learning Ob-
jects (OBAA) metadata standard [20] or Friend of a Friend
(FOAF) metadata standard. The nature of those ontologies
regards properties to describe a context, a domain or their
members.
To design Layer One ontologies, we propose the following
set of practices: Metadata classes became OWL Class and
OWL Subclass; Metadata Properties became OWL Data Prop-
erties and OWL Object Properties according to their semantic;
We describe the semantics of metadata as restriction axioms.
Building Layer One Ontologies regards the deﬁnition of
the properties that are necessary to describe the Layer Two in-
dividuals and the Layer Three ontologies Application Proﬁles.
We deﬁne a few steps to follow to describe this kind of
ontology:
•
Study and understand the whole standard;
•
deﬁne the set of Classes and Properties exactly like the
standard incorporating their Ranges and Cardinalities;
•
choose a Reasoner to test the ontology;
•
provide a Universal Resource Identiﬁer (URI) to pub-
lish the ontology.
To exemplify the design of Layer One Ontology, we will
use as case study the LOM Metadata Standard for three rea-
sons: LOM is considered an international standard to describe
Learning Objects [21]; It is commonly used by researchers in
educational technology, and, there is an opportunity to describe
a standardized LOM OWL ontology.
LOM is a massive educational standard. We will deﬁne
some classes and properties. The chosen LOM group (LifeCy-
cle) is sophisticated enough (cardinality restrictions, domain,
and range restriction) to demonstrate our method. The LOM
ontology is available to reuse through the following URI [22].
We choose to present the study case using the LOM
LifeCycle group because of its characteristics. It is relatively
small but preserves the semantic complexity of the larger
groups, such as General or Educational. Following we present
the Classes and Properties described according to our ontology
engineering approach. The LifeCycle group shows the LOM
metadata Standard group 2.
a) Deﬁning the Classes: Each metadata from LifeCy-
cle group becomes a class and a subclass with cardinality
restrictions according to the chosen standards. For instance,
Contribute is a subclass of Life Cycle and has a cardinality
max 30.
b) Deﬁning the Properties: Properties can be classiﬁed
as Data Properties or Object Properties. Data Properties are the
data itself (e.g., has name String “James”). Object Properties
describe the relationships between classes and individuals (e.g.
has classes). Object Properties are also associated with the
metadata cardinality (e.g., Max 10 has classes)
The cardinality restrictions can be used with Object Prop-
erties. They can be used to group individuals with speciﬁc
characteristics. As an illustrative example of those relation-
ships, refer to Figure 1.
In Figure 1, at its center, it is illustrated a sample Learning
Objects Individual that is divided into two parts. The number
one (1), shows a generic Learning Objects representation
model; The number two (2) illustrates the usage of the Object
Properties Contribute, in this case, named LOM:hasContribute.
As can it be seen, there are three individuals represented.
The higher Layer Learning Objects Individual and two
other ontological individuals linked by the Object Properties
LOM:hasContribute and each one of them with speciﬁc Data
Properties.
This kind of relationship allows, for instance, the reuse
of the individuals LO + LOM:hasContribute + ID1 and/or
LO + LOM:hasContribute + ID1 in different versions of
Learning Objects.
This example was prepared to exemplify the description of
Learning Objects with such ontology engineering method; the
next section will present the characteristics of the Layer Two
Ontologies.
B. Describing Layer Two Ontologies
The Layer Two ontologies have the role in describing User
Proﬁles, Learning Objects and their relationships during their
life-cycle in an application domain. These ontologies import
the properties of the n Layer One ontologies allowing the
standardized description of individuals.
These ontologies can be stored in some formal repository,
e.g., a Triple-Store, or even just deﬁning a URI for its access.
This alternative gives ﬂexibility to content designers that can
only build and publish their contents on the Web.
As a plus, it is possible to apply reasoning algorithms to
verify the consistency of an individual trough some Layer One
ontology. For instance, if we describe a Learning Object as an
ontological individual of the LOM Layer One ontology, we can
verify if the cardinality, range, and value space were correctly
used. Also, if some description is incorrect we can apply
an explanation algorithm to understand what was described
wrong.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Sample Learning Objects with Life Cycle information
Layer Two ontologies are appropriate to describe: User Pro-
ﬁles; Learning Objects; application contexts; and relationships.
Each one of them can be described in one or several ontologies.
There is a hurdle to consider when dealing with granularity
matters. Higher granularities allow by on side to delimit the
processing unities and reduce computer processing, but, by the
other hand, the human cost to break the information in several
ontologies are elevated. We need to take this into consideration
when describing an application domain with this method
For example, the description of a Learning Object as in-
stance of the LOM ontology is performed within the following
steps: convert or create a Learning Object; create an OWL ﬁle
to represent the information of the Learning Objects; import
the LOM OWL ontology; describe the individuals to represent
information of the Learning Objects; create Object Properties
and Data Properties relationships as necessary.
To illustrate this scenario, we present the Ramis Learning
Object. Ramis uses two metadata standards, IEEE-LOM and
OBAA. The underlying purpose for its creation was to simulate
the description of an interoperable Learning Object compatible
with three hardware platforms: Internet, Digital Television, and
Mobile Devices. We started our conversion by analyzing that
meta-information and illustrate its complexity with Figure 2.
Figure 2, has the indication 1 that emphasizes the higher
layer individual; the indication 2 the Object Properties hasRe-
quirement; the indication 3 the Object Properties hasPlatform-
SpeciﬁcFeatures; the indication 4 emphasizes the Object Prop-
erties hasSpeciﬁcRequirement; The indication 5 the Object
Properties hasSpeciﬁcOrComposite and ﬁnally the indication
6 the Object Properties hasOrComposite. Each individual has
its own set of Data Properties.
C. Describing Layer Three Ontologies
Layer Three ontologies are mainly developed to represent
Application Proﬁles. [23] deﬁnes an Application Proﬁle as
compositions of metadata elements from one or more metadata
schemas. They are used to describe an application domain.
This work adds to the application proﬁles computations
means to reason knowledge and verify the consistency of Layer
Two individuals. This process can be used to derive, for ex-
ample, the users that have speciﬁc pedagogical characteristics,
which Learning Objects can be used in a particular domain.
Those inferences are made exploring the deduction rules of
OWL ontologies.
An Application Proﬁle ontology will be composed, at least,
of a class with an axiom that will infer the individuals that
match the axiom description. For example, we can create a
class UsersWithSpecialNeeds with an axiom that describes that
ontological individual with the property hasVisual is inferred
as an instance of the class UsersWithSpecialNeeds. To create
Layer Three ontologies we can use as many classes with
domain axioms as necessary.
The Layer Three ontology is in charge of the reasoning over
the Layer Two ontologies. To this proposal, we classify this
type of ontology as Application Proﬁle. Application Proﬁle
is an ontology composed of a class or a set of classes that
describes speciﬁc domain knowledge and has at least one
axiom for reasoning.
The reasoning is useful to verify if a Learning Object is
adequately described according to some standard; to provide
inferences according to speciﬁc domain characteristics; infer
new relationships between Learning Objects; to support some
analytical processes; among others.
To describe the Application Proﬁle OWL ontology, we
must consider: What is the knowledge to be derived from the
Layer Two ontologies? Is it possible to retrieve by an SPARQL
query? Reasoners are not extremely powerful; one axiom is
enough? How many classes are necessary?
As an example, we shall describe an Application Proﬁle
that will infer Learning Objects, only if this Learning Object
has a particular set of metadata. Considering this, we present
the OBAA Lite Application Proﬁle. This Application Proﬁle
was developed by [24]. The current research used OBAA
and LOM standards to deﬁne the minimum set of metadata
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. The representation of individuals for the Ramis OWL ﬁle
Figure 3. OBAA Lite Ontology Axiom
information that is necessary to describe domain speciﬁc
Learning Objects. Figure 3 presents the class and the axiom
built to infer which Learning Objects are compliant with the
OBAA Lite Application Proﬁle.
The current version of Ramis ontology does not get inferred
by the OBAA Lite application proﬁle because it does not
comply with its axiom. To have it correctly inferred, we had to
add the missing Data Properties and Object Properties to cope
with the OBAA Lite Application Proﬁle. The modiﬁcation has
resulted in the classiﬁcation of Ramis as a member of the
OBAA Lite Application Proﬁle class, as can be seen in Figure
4.
III.
DISCUSSION
There are several application development alternatives for
the educational domain. We can explore the authorship of
Learning Objects, development of Agents for Personalized
student courses, the suggestion of educational materials among
others. The present work had shown an alternative to represent
User Proﬁles and Learning Objects by ontologies to allow
a reasoning alternative for educational applications based on
Semantic Web. We classify this research as part of a broader
overview of an integrated ecosystem for digital education.
The use of computer technologies complements formal or
informal education. Educational system designers must think
about the teaching and learning process before building digital
Figure 4. The Ramis Higher Layer individual as member of the class OBAA
Lite
education platforms. The pedagogical plans, educational con-
tents, assessment and learning feedback, should be integrated
to allow the support of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) algorithms,
learning analytics or statistical measures.
Those algorithms were intended to analyze the students
learning performance according to the teacher’s pedagogical
behavior, learning style and inference of students behavior to
provide warnings and suggestions that can improve the learn-
ing performance and support the teacher educational activities.
To accomplish this, we must think about an ecosystem for
digital education.
Teaching with the support of educational technologies
should improve traditional non-digital methods and support
the three stages of learning (exposure, process, and feedback).
Usually, a teacher of mathematics preparing a class about
trigonometry, will search for concepts such as sine, cosine or
tangent at a school library, ask for word-of-mouth suggestions,
on-line websites, or even reuse previous classes materials. We
classify this as the Step A: Content Gathering.
After the selection of educational contents, the teacher,
based on experience gathered by years of student observation,
will organize the materials considering the average educational
performance of students. We classify this as the Step B: Class
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

organization.
Once the teacher organized the class, it is time to provide
the contents to the students and teach. We classify this as the
Step C: Class execution. Finally, the teacher will go home, or
to another class, the analysis of the success of the class will
be measured by assessment feedback, emotional responses,
or, in the next student’s essay. We classify this as Step D:
Signals Processing. Those steps, are the core scenarios of a
class, before the Execution Phase.
The Execution Phase is the holy grail of teachers. It can use
different kinds of educational contents, various personalization
features, pedagogical practices and methods of evaluation. The
essence remains the same. The role of educational technology
regards the design and adaptation of Components to support
each Phase of this process, allowing a Feedback and Person-
alization Phase to support the teacher activities.
Let us repeat the exercise of imagining the mathemat-
ics teacher preparing a trigonometry class from a different
perspective, the AI of an Integrated Ecosystem for Digital
Education. For that, we start backward, from the Step D:
Signals Processing will be the beginning. At this point, we can
analyze the student’s interactions with the educational contents
from the Step C. The time spent on each question, their
number of tentatives for solving puzzles, comments, among
an inﬁnite set of signal capture possibilities. AI algorithms
can cope with the Step B and use the Learning Objects from
Step A, by processing and reasoning over the learning signals;
identiﬁcation of usage patterns; measuring the students learn-
ing performance; identifying competencies to be developed;
measuring the engagement within a class and consequently
suggesting content compositions based on a measurable class
learning proﬁle.
The challenges to accomplish such ecosystem reside in
open architectures, metadata standards, communication pro-
tocols and policies regarding data privacy and security of
students and teachers. Also, we need to consider a standard
knowledge representation alternative to cope with information
interoperability.
The beneﬁts are far from being explored. For example, the
detailed usage logs for in-classroom data collection and anal-
ysis can be used to analyze and infer pedagogically relevant
data streams. Those data streams can be used to measure the
student engagement in Real-time or After-class.
The real-time analysis supports the teachers during their
classes. Those real-time analyses are challenging since they
have to establish a time-frame of signal analysis, e.g., last 30
seconds of data, which variables to choose such as students
eye tracking, page navigation, open content, the type of mate-
rial, students emotional inferences, among others. Mainly, the
research focus resides in the analysis of context similarities
between what is being thought and what are the reactions of
the students to it.
After-class measures support the teacher after and before
the class. They compute the percentage of students that were
engaged at each time-stamp, supports the teacher by presenting
a timeline of the course. The research at this stage can be
extended by deep-learning algorithms to infer the model of
learning from students or groups, recommender algorithms,
understand the behavior of students based on past actions, and
other big data statistics to support class preparation.
When dealing with this kind of data, it is an open ground
for research to identify what type of students and teachers
events may be necessary to build richer models of student
learning.
One of the challenges resides in assessing how well a
student learns the subject matter, without explicitly testing for
that in an exam. Thus, it is necessary to incorporate the metrics
into a greater model of student learning.
For instance a knowledge map, based upon which new
content could be suggested following what the student already
knows, how engaged he or she is, the learning style, and other
extracted metrics to personalize each students learning expe-
rience. Alternatively, the parameters may be used to design
targeted interventions in the teachers activities, for instance,
alerting him/her that the class engagement level is dropping.
Nevertheless, such interventions must be designed together
with educators to augment the teachers experience, and not
disrupt his/her day-to-day work.
The work of [25] divides the Semantic Web educational
applications into three columns. This article was able to
contribute with the two ﬁrst columns. To cope with the ﬁrst
column, an alternative to reduce computational costs related to
exploring SPARQL queries for simple application proﬁles. e.g.,
search Learning Objects with a particular property value. Our
primary challenge will be to reuse the educational ontologies
that are already available and are not compliant with Semantic
Web. Also, privacy is a delicate matter, especially in this case
when dealing with private and personal information.
The proposed method was built to consider a three layer
proposal for ontology engineering. It is important to mention
that the LOM ontology is considered complex due to its
speciﬁcations and restrictions. This fact, in some cases, caused
the reasoner to be overwhelmed with ontologies of the Layer
Two that were composed of many individuals. An alternative
could be to separate each group of the LOM metadata in a
single ontology. In the best case scenario, the reasoner would
only have to cope with a limited set of properties.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
There can be several application development alternatives
for the educational domain. We can explore the authorship
of Learning Objects, development of Agents for Personalized
student courses, the suggestion of teaching materials among
others. The present work had shown an alternative to represent
User Proﬁles and Learning Objects by ontologies to allow a
reasoning alternative for educational applications.
The given ontologies made use of the three layer proposal
to describe the knowledge domain. In each one, we described
and presented an example of them. The LOM ontology is
considered complex due to its speciﬁcations and character-
istics. This fact, in some cases, caused the reasoner to be
overwhelmed with ontologies of the Layer Two that were
composed of many individuals. An alternative could be to
separate each group of the LOM metadata in a single ontology.
In the best case scenario, the reasoner would only have to cope
with a limited set of properties.
Layer Two ontologies deal with a complex set of Data
Properties and Object Properties. Although it can be consid-
ered a complex ontology, in an automatic process we could
obtain several exciting beneﬁts such as Easy update, for
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

instance, an individual that is updated can be linked through
an Object Properties.
The reuse of some ontological individuals by other Learn-
ing Objects, for example, a technical individual that is common
to several other Learning Objects.
The described individuals can be validated according to a
Layer One ontology making it possible to build relationships
between Learning Objects ontologies by properties and com-
patible with the current Semantic Web stack.
The method to build a Layer Two ontology can be used
to describe the user proﬁle ontologies, educational domain
ontologies, relationship ontologies, or any other that might
describe an educational activity. Such amount of relationships
can lead to performance issues, in particular by the reasoner.
There is a lot of work that still needs to be done, es-
pecially when considering students privacy matters, content
usage rights, security policies over such information and, not
most important, public policies that stimulate and popularize
the principals of open knowledge leading to a large-scale
evaluation that can measure the effectiveness of this approach
for the current learning system.
As future work, we will explore a Triple-Store alternative
to index and store Layer Two Ontologies such as Learning
Objects (LOs), User Proﬁles and Relationships between them.
A Service Oriented alternative to integrating this proposal
with some current educational application and describe new
application proﬁles, to evaluate if the use of OWL-DL is the
adequate solution to represent such kind of knowledge and
explore the automatic conversion of Legacy Learning Objects
Repositories according to this proposal.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. d. Rosario, ICT in Education Policies and National Development.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan US, 2012, pp. 17–38.
[2]
B. Bruns, D. Evans, and J. Luque, Achieving world-class education in
Brazil: The next agenda.
World Bank, 2012.
[3]
A. Kirkwood and L. Price, “Technology-enhanced learning and teaching
in higher education: What is “enhanced” and how do we know? A
critical literature review,” Learning, Media and Technology, vol. 39,
no. 1, 2014, pp. 6–36.
[4]
H. Coelho and T. T. Primo, “Exploratory apprenticeship in the digital
age with ai tools,” Progress in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 1, 2016, pp.
1–9.
[5]
T. Primo, J. Silva, A. Ribeiro, E. Boff, and R. Vicari, “Towards
ontological proﬁles in communities of practice,” IEEE Multidisciplinary
Engineering Education Magazine, vol. 7, 2012, p. 13.
[6]
T. Primo, A. Behr, and R. Vicari, “A semantic web approach to recom-
mend learning objects,” Communications in Computer and Information
Science, vol. 365, 2013.
[7]
A. Koster, T. Primo, A. Oliveira, and F. Koch, “Toward measuring
student engagement: A data-driven approach,” in Proceedings of the
Thirteenth International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems
(ITS), Zagreb, Croatia, 2016.
[8]
A. Koster, T. Primo, F. Koch, . Oliveira, and H. Chung, “Towards an
educator-centred digital teaching platform: The ground conditions for a
data-driven approach,” in 2015 IEEE 15th International Conference on
Advanced Learning Technologies, July 2015, pp. 74–75.
[9]
R. Zilse, T. Primo, F. Koch, and A. Koster, An Analysis of Applying
the Short Bridge Method to Digital Education.
Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2016, pp. 94–102.
[10]
N. Shadbolt, T. Berners-Lee, and W. Hall, “The semantic web revisited,”
IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 21, no. 3, May 2006, pp. 96–101.
[11]
R. Brachman and H. Levesque, Knowledge Representation and Rea-
soning.
San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.,
2004.
[12]
T. Anderson and D. Whitelock, “The educational semantic web: Vi-
sioning and practicing the future of education,” Journal of Interactive
Media in Education, vol. 2004, no. 1, 2004.
[13]
F. Ricci, L. Rokach, B. Shapira, and P. B. Kantor, Recommender
Systems Handbook, 1st ed.
New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag
New York, Inc., 2010.
[14]
D. Dicheva, “Ontologies and semantic web for e-learning,” Handbook
on Information Technologies for Education and Training, 2008, pp. 47–
65.
[15]
A. Ruiz-Calleja, G. Vega-Gorgojo, J. I. Asensio-P´erez, M. L. Bote-
Lorenzo, E. G´omez-S´anchez, and C. Alario-Hoyos, “A Linked Data
approach for the discovery of educational ICT tools in the Web of
Data,” Comput. Educ., vol. 59, no. 3, Nov. 2012, pp. 952–962.
[16]
M. d’Aquin, “Linked data for open and distance learning,” Tech. Rep.,
2012.
[17]
G. Adorni, S. Battigelli, D. Brondo, N. Capuano, M. Coccoli, S. Mi-
randa, F. Orciuoli, L. Stanganelli, A. M. Sugliano, and G. Vivanet,
“Caddie and iwt: two different ontology-based approaches to anytime,
anywhere and anybody learning,” Journal of e-Learning and Knowledge
Society, vol. 6, no. 2, 2010.
[18]
A. Klaˇsnja-Mili´cevi´c, B. Vesin, M. Ivanovic, and Z. Budimac, “E-
learning personalization based on hybrid recommendation strategy and
learning style identiﬁcation,” Computers & Education, vol. 56, no. 3,
Apr. 2011.
[19]
I. Standards, “IEEE LOM ﬁnal standard metadata,” 2002.
[20]
R. Vicari, A. Ribeiro, J. Silva, and E. Santos, “Brazilian Proposal for
Agent-Based Learning Objects Metadata Standard-OBAA,” Metadata
and Semantics, vol. 108, 2010, pp. 300–311.
[21]
V. Devedzic, J. Jovanovic, and D. Gasevic, “The Pragmatics of Current
E-Learning Standards,” Internet Computing, IEEE, vol. 11, no. 3, 2007,
pp. 19–27.
[22]
LOM ontology accessed in february of 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://gia.inf.ufrgs.br/ontologies/LOM.owl
[23]
N. Manouselis and K. Kastrantas, “An IEEE LOM application proﬁle to
describe training resources for agricultural & rural smes,” Proceedings
of Metadata and Semanctis Research Conference, 2007.
[24]
J. M. C. d. Silva, “An´alise t´ecnica e pedag´ogica de metadados para
objetos de aprendizagem,” 2011.
[25]
T. Anderson and D. M. Whitelock, “The educational semantic web:
Visioning and practicing the future of education (special issue),” Journal
of interactive Media in Education, vol. 1, 2004.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

