A Model of Free Will for Artificial Entities 
Eric Sanchis  
University of Toulouse Capitole 
Toulouse, France 
e-mail: eric.sanchis@iut-rodez.fr 
Abstract—The impression of free will is the feeling according to 
which our choices are neither imposed from our inside nor 
from outside. It is the sense we are the ultimate cause of our 
acts. In direct opposition with the universal determinism, the 
existence of free will continues to be discussed. In this paper, 
free will is linked to a decisional mechanism: an agent is 
provided with free will if having performed a predictable 
choice C, it can immediately perform another choice C’ in a 
random way. The intangible “feeling” of free will is replaced 
by a decision-making process including a predictable decision-
making process immediately followed by an unpredictable 
decisional one. 
Keywords-free will; artificial entities; three-step decisionnal 
process; synthetic property. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Concepts produced by the human mind to characterize its 
own functioning, such as the properties of intelligence, 
autonomy or free will have a particularly important influence 
in our comprehension of the world. For this reason, they are 
continuously being revisited by philosophy, psychology, 
neurosciences, cognitive sciences but also computer 
sciences. In this latter area, it is undoubtedly the property of 
intelligence which has been the most studied in Artificial 
Intelligence, particularly in its most classical branch. Other 
properties, such as autonomy are studied in other fields of 
computer sciences (Software Agent, Multi-Agent Systems or 
Robotics), each one with their own issues.  
More complex, free will is the property according to 
which the human being would be the first source of his 
choices. No internal or external force would impose him a 
choice rather than another. In other words, only the 
individual would be at the origin of his acts. After the first 
characterizations of this property, a question immediately 
emerged: does free will exist? This question has fuelled the 
philosophical debate for several centuries with no 
satisfactory solution found [1]. Many philosophers, such as 
Spinoza or Nietzsche, refuted its existence. Others, such as 
Sartre, did not feel that way. Others still have or have had a 
mitigated opinion. Studies of free will carried out by 
neuroscientists since the end of the last century, such as 
those achieved by B. Libet [2], although informative on 
certain points, did not give a definitive answer either. 
Contrary to intelligence or autonomy, free will has 
received little attention in the computer science domain. A. 
Krausová and H. Hazan [3] examined the relevance to study 
free will within the General Artificial Intelligence field and 
answered by the affirmative. J. McCarthy [4] and R. 
Manzotti [5] tackled the free will problem within the 
classical Artificial Intelligence framework, the first via a 
logical formalization of the property reduced to a rational 
choice, the second by proposing a model sketch. 
The model of free will which is proposed in this paper 
results from previous work related to the autonomy of 
software agents [6]. That is not completely surprising 
because these two properties have common characteristics, 
such as the plurality of possibilities and freedom of choice. 
Free will is considered as a decision-making process 
structured in three stages, where an agent makes a first 
choice that is immediately called into question by making a 
second choice randomly selected. 
The paper is structured as follows. First, various aspects 
of free will are sketched, related to its nature and problems 
involved in the implementation of this property inside an 
artificial entity. The second section introduces a class of 
models called Two-Stage Models of Free Will. These models 
include the creation of the possible choices and the selection 
of the final choice. Sections 3 and 4 present the decision-
making process at the heart of the Three-Stage Model of 
Free Will. In conclusion, entities being able to be provided 
with free will and the needed conditions are identified. 
II.
THE FREE WILL PROBE
Free will is a complex property which creates several 
questions. The first one is the following: how to characterize 
the property of free will in a precise way? In fact, there is no 
single definition! Indeed, depending on the language, certain 
formulations of the property name will privilege the aspect 
of choice (in French, libre arbitre), others the aspect of will 
(in English, free will). It would rather be a perception, a 
sense that our choices belong to us, that they are not imposed 
to us neither from the outside, nor by an interior force which 
we would not control. It is the feeling that we are the main 
cause of our acts. Free will is mentally defined by physical, 
emotional and intellectual sensations that a person feels, 
giving birth to a specific global “feeling”. In the case of free 
will, this “sense” is expressed in terms of freedom, will and 
choice, a concise formulation of which could be: my will is 
free to choose. 
The second question is: why free will is so important? It 
is possible to identify at least two main reasons:  

Free will is considered as a specific property to 
humankind. As our knowledge progresses on the 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

animal societies, other properties we believed to be 
specific to human beings appear to be in fact … 
much less specific! Let us mention for example the 
capacity to use a complex language, to have 
empathy, to use a technical knowledge in tools 
construction.  

Free will constitutes a social pillar. Because we are 
provided with free will we are morally responsible
for our acts and criminally liable before society. 
Moreover, various studies showed that people had a 
more social behaviour when they believed in the 
existence of free will [7]. Denying the existence of
free will is undermining one of the human society 
bases. 
The third question is certainly the most important: does 
free will actually exist? Serious arguments denying its 
existence were put forward by philosophers and scientists. 
The threat mainly comes from the universal determinism
posed as the world’s general functioning principle. This is 
why the contents of this principle must be examined before 
any study of the property of free will. 
A.
Determinism and free will 
The concept of determinism is closely associated with the 
principle of causality (there cannot be an effect without a 
cause). Determinism is a janusian concept, i.e., a 
concept which has two faces like the Roman god Janus. 
Indeed, two kinds of determinisms can be distinguished: 
concrete determinisms and speculative determinisms. 
Concrete 
determinisms 
are 
determinisms 
whose 
existence could be proven in the form of a natural law (e.g., 
the law of gravitation) or explicitly built (e.g., a computer 
program). 
Speculative determinisms are not supported by any proof 
of their existence. Only a body of facts and evidence suggest 
that they can exist. Examples of speculative determinisms are 
social determinisms and the most representative of them: the 
universal determinism. 
The universal determinism is the principle according to 
which the succession of each event in the universe results 
from the principle of causality, the past and natural laws. 
According to the universal determinism, all is predetermined. 
That means that each event in the universe is given before it 
occurs. Thus, the existence of free will would be an illusion 
produced by our ignorance of the past and natural laws.  
On the other hand, the universal determinism is a fertile 
methodological framework because it is an essential engine 
of the scientific investigation. 
As part of the universal determinism, it is important to 
distinguish the occurrence of an event from its predictability. 
Although an event is predetermined, its predictability may 
not be effective as it appears in chaotic systems. This 
absence of predictability is often justified as being due to a 
lack of information. This lack of information is also used to 
deny the existence of indeterminism or to interpret chance. 
As a result, a system can be deterministic and predictable, 
deterministic and not predictable or not deterministic (thus 
not predictable) if the universal determinism is refuted. 
In short, the universal determinism (metaphysical 
principle) induces a methodology (scientific approach), 
which demonstrates the existence of concrete determinisms
(natural laws). But it is also a fossilizing metaphysical 
principle, which denies that our experience as a person is the 
first source of our choices. 
As neither the existence of the universal determinism nor 
the existence of free will can be demonstrated, philosophers 
have summarized the relationship between these two 
concepts with two points of view: 

Incompatibilism: the existence of a deterministic 
universe is in complete contradiction with the 
existence of free will. Between the two, it is 
necessary to choose. 

Compatibilism: there is no total opposition between 
a deterministic universe and free will. In particular, it 
is possible to freely act in a deterministic world. 
B.
The notion of cause 
Using the law of causality, determinism invokes the 
concept of cause. But is this notion actually easy to handle? 
The concept of cause 

returns to the past, most of the time unknowable: 
when we have a thought T or we have carried out an 
action A, we cannot specify in an irrefutable manner 
what all their causes were. 

is a multilevel concept: it applies at the same time at 
the social, psychological, biological and physical 
levels. We generally do not know how these various 
causal levels overlap. 

is protean: in each context where it appears, it 
presents itself in a different form. 

leads to a regression ad infinitum: the event E is the 
result of cause C, which is the result of cause CC, 
etc. 
Like determinism, the notion of cause also presents two 
faces: 

it can be an enlightening explanation of a precise 
experiment. For example, when I drop a stone it falls 
(effect) because the stone is subject to the gravitation 
law (cause). 

it can be unknowable due to an unknown past and 
composite contents.  
It results that in many cases, the general concept of cause 
brings more problems than solutions. 
In conclusion, the model suggested to interpret and 
implement the property of free will within an artificial entity 
will replace the problematic concept of cause by the concrete 
concepts of inputs and influences while the couple 
determinism/indeterminism will be replaced by the concepts 
of predictability/unpredictability. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

III.
THE TWO-STAGE MODELS OF FREE WILL
The characterization of free will in the form of a process 
including two stages [8] is assigned to the American 
philosopher and psychologist W. James. 
In this model of free will, a process is sequentially 
executed in two steps: 

At the first step, a certain number of possibilities are 
generated (some of them can be randomly created). 
Several futures are then possible: it is the freedom
aspect of the agent which is expressed. 

in the second stage, one of these possibilities is 
chosen, choice in which the chance does not 
intervene any more : it is the will part of the agent 
(Figure 1). 
Figure 1. Two-Stage Model of Free Will 
Since then, this model has been taken up directly or 
indirectly by several philosophers and scientists. B. Doyle 
listed a large number of these interpretations of free will that 
he classified under the generic expression Two-Stage Models 
of Free Will [9]. 
In Computer Science, J. McCarthy proposed a 
formalization of the concept which can also be considered as 
a Two-Stage Model of Free Will: 
“We present a theory of simple deterministic free will 
(SDFW) in a deterministic world. The theory splits the 
mechanism that determines action into two parts. The first 
part computes possible actions and their consequences. Then 
the second part decides which action is most preferable and 
does it” [4]. 
The important common points to the different Two-Stage 
Models of Free Will are the following: 

The generation of the future possible choices and the 
creation of the selection function are parts of the free 
will process. 

There is only one phase of choice that ends the 
process associated with free will. 

In addition to the concept of will, these models use 
in the first stage properties difficult to characterize 
with precision, such as intelligence or creativity. 
IV.
FROM THE “FEELING” OF FREE WILL TO THE 
“MECHANISM” OF FREE WILL
Free will is a complex property, i.e., it is difficult even 
impossible to have a thorough knowledge of it. It is a 
property with vague and elastic contours, with their contents 
changing according to the point of view that one can have. It 
authorizes different interpretations (ex: various Two-stage 
Models of the Free Will), when these interpretations are not 
contradictory. Lastly, for some free will exists, for others it 
does not exist. 
Tackling free will by considering only the “feeling” 
associated to it or the “impression” it causes poses problems 
because it requires to use concepts which raise the same type 
of problems of definition and scope (ex: conscience, will, 
freedom, first cause of an act). 
In order to solve these various problems, the model of 
free will described in the next section is based on the 
following points: 

Conscience and free will are decoupled. That means 
the implementation of free will in an entity does not 
require that this entity is provided with a brain or an 
advanced mental system. 

The choice aspect of free will is privileged over the 
will aspect. Indeed, the concept of choice can be 
defined with more precision than the concept of will.

The origin and the nature of the causes related to a 
choice are ignored. The concept of cause is replaced 
by the concepts of inputs and influences. 

Free will is considered as a precise decision-making 
process. Free will is interpreted as the possibility to 
question a first choice by combining in the same 
decision-making process a predictable choice and a 
random choice. 
V.
A THREE-STAGE MODEL OF FREE WILL
The suggested characterization of free will is the 
following: an agent is provided with free will if, after 
having made a predictable choice C, it can immediately 
make another choice C’ in a random way. In other words, 
the impalpable “feeling” of free will is replaced by a two-
component decision-making process including a predictable 
decision-making process immediately followed by a 
unpredictable decision-making one. 
A.
Model 
The Three-Stage Model of free will implements two 
modules sequentially executed, a predictable module and a 
unpredictable module, driven by causes modelled in the 
form of inputs and influences. 
1)
Inputs and influences 
We will say that a component (or module) has a 
predictable behaviour if the same entries applied to it always 
generate the same outputs.
The term of input must be understood in its most general 
signification (internal or external conditions, stimuli, states, 
etc). It was chosen for simplicity reasons: the concept of 
input has the advantage of making the nature of the causes it 
summarizes transparent. 
A module has an unpredictable behaviour if the same 
inputs applied to it at two different moments can produce 
different outputs. 
When an input must be represented but with no or little 
information about it the term of influence will be used. An 
influence materializes the complex aspect of a property by 
circumscribing its complexity in precise points of the model. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

In the Three-Stage Model of Free Will, influences are only 
present in the unpredictable component (Figure 2). 
Hereafter, the concept of entry will be only used to 
represent well-identified information having an effect on a 
choice module. Otherwise, the term influence will be chosen. 
Figure 2. Three-Stage Model of Free Will 
2)
The predictable component 
The predictable component provides an artificial entity 
with a regular behaviour: this module can implement a 
rational choice (e.g., in situation A, my interest is to make 
choice C) or an automatic behaviour (ex: each time I am in 
such a situation, I make this choice). In the first case, it is a 
thoughtful behaviour: the situation will be evaluated and the 
selected choice will be determined by taking into account 
various parameters, such as preferences, probabilities of 
occurrences of events, evaluation of consequences. In the last 
case, it is a constrained behaviour.  
The presence of the predictable module also materializes 
the coherent behaviour of the agent: some sense pre-exists to 
the selected choice. 
From a formal point of view, the predictable module is 
characterized by a set of choices Cp (1≤p≤N, N>1), a 
selection function and a set of inputs. From the N possible 
choices, the selection function and the inputs, the predictable 
module selects a choice Ci. 
Contrary to the various Two-Stage Models of Free Will, 
processes involved in the development of these N choices, 
the selection function and its inputs are considered being 
external to the property of free will. This means that it is 
necessary to have at one’s disposal a set of choices, an 
associated selection function and the values of inputs before 
free will can appear. 
The predictable decision-making process begins with the 
execution of the selection function. It is the first stage of the 
general process related to free will. 
To illustrate the key elements of a predictable module we 
will use the following example. Let us suppose that one task 
of an agent A is to go to a point P no more than ten 
kilometres. 
A regular behaviour of A could be: if it rains agent A
uses its car, if it does not rain and the sky is grey, A uses its 
bicycle. If the weather is nice, A reaches point P on foot. 
The choice function of the agent is controlled by a unique 
input: the weather state. The three possible choices are: to go 
by car, to use its bicycle, to walk. 
3)
The unpredictable component 
This module includes two elements: 

A switch, which, either does not interfere on choice 
Ci resulting from the predictable component, or 
activates an unpredictable choice function. In the 
first case, Ci is the final choice. In the latter case, the 
final choice could be different. 

An unpredictable choice function, which carries out 
a random choice on the N choices available during 
the execution of the predictable component plus an 
additional choice noted C0 called empty choice. This 
choice means that no choice is performed by the 
agent. It illustrates the situation where there is an 
inhibition of the choice resulting from the 
predictable component. Consequently, after the 
activation of the unpredictable component, the final 
choice Cj (0≤j≤N) may differ from choice Ci
selected by the predictable component. In particular, 
if j=0 there is inhibition of the choice resulting from 
the predictable module. 
The following points must also be noted: 

There is no creation or development of new choices 
by the unpredictable component. 

Without context it is difficult to associate a precise 
meaning to the empty choice C0. According to the 
situations, it can be interpreted in various manners 
like “no choice must be made” or “it is a veto”. 

The activation details of the switch and random 
choice function can be partially or completely 
unknown to the agent. This is why their conditions 
of activation are represented in the form of
influences. 
Let us assume that in the previous example, the sun is 
shining. The predictable component invites agent A to reach 
point P on foot. But A can decide for reasons (influences)
which are partly or completely unknown to it to call this 
choice into question: the switch is triggered. Then, A decides 
to select by random a choice among four: the three previous 
choices and the choice to remain where it is (C0 choice). This
unpredictable choice can be accomplished for example by 
using an appropriate computer program. It should be 
noted that the quality of the random choice function has a 
secondary importance in the global decision-making process. 
In this precise example, the concept of influence makes it 
possible to represent an intuition as well as a change of mood 
of A having caused the switch triggering. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

4)
A Three-Stage decision-making process 
To sum up, the decision-making process associated to 
free will is structured by three moments (Figure 3): 

The moment tD when the execution of the 
predictable choice function begins. The first stage
ends with the selection of a choice Ci. 

The moment tS when the entity decides to put into 
question the choice Ci. It is the second step of the 
decisional process. 

The moment tU when the execution of the
unpredictable choice function begins, leading to the 
final choice C. 
Figure 3. Temporal pattern of the decision-making process associated to 
free will 
The agent has expressed its free will when the three 
moments tD, tS and  tU took place. This process will be 
qualitatively different according to the nature of the agent. If 
the agent is an individual, these three moments will be lived 
more or less consciously. For an artificial agent, the 
decision-making process associated to free will is simply 
executed. 
B.
Discussion 
1)
Model justification 
a) Components articulation 
Let us justify the role of the model elements and their 
articulation. 
If the decision-making process associated to free will
implemented only the predictable choice module, the agent 
executing 
this 
decision-making 
process 
would 
be 
comparable to a classical program like an accounting 
programme or a flight tickets booking program. 
If the unpredictable component were the only one there, 
the agent would be stripped of rationality and condemned to 
an erratic functioning. 
Let us suppose that the two modules of choice are 
reversed. Firstly, subjected to influences, the agent performs 
an unpredictable choice. In a second step, according to
influences, the switch can give access to the predictable 
choice module, which according to the inputs, will select the 
rational choice. That means that the trigger of a coherent 
behaviour of the agent is controlled by influences, which is a 
very unsatisfactory functioning. 
If there were no switch, the two modules would be 
sequentially executed. In this case, only the result of the last 
executed choice module would be considered. In one case, it 
boils down to always having a rational behaviour, in the 
other case to systematically exhibiting a random behaviour. 
Lastly, the delicate concept of ultimate cause is replaced 
by the concrete notions of input and influence. Their values 
characterise the current state of the agent. The double 
advantage of the current state notion is that it avoids any 
reference to the origin of an event while synthesizing the 
agent’s history. 
b) The feeling of free will 
The choice to favour the decision-making aspect of free 
will rather than the will aspect makes it possible to design a 
model of this complex property. Conversely, the following 
question is worth asking: is this model compatible with the 
concept of free will? Formulated in another manner, the 
question becomes: does the proposed mechanism make it 
possible to recompose, at least partially, the feeling of free 
will? 
From a human point of view, it is undeniable that this 
three-stage decision-making process can give an individual 
the feeling that he is provided with free will since he has the 
impression of being the source triggering the unpredictable 
component. However, that does not mean that it is the unique 
situation where an individual can have the feeling to be 
provided with free will. 
2)
Comparison between Two-Stage and Three-stage 
Models 
Several aspects deeply differentiate Two-Stage and 
Three-Stage Models (Figure 4).  
Figure 4. Two-Stage Model vs. Three-Stage Model 
In the Two-Stage Model, the properties of intelligence
and creativity intervene in the first phase of the model 
because the creation of the possible choices is part of the 
process related to free will. Free will can thus be seen as a 
composition of heterogeneous properties which are complex 
to represent. In the Three-Stage Model, choices creation is 
not part of the free will process. This possibilities generation 
step (Stage 0) takes place before the expression of free will. 
The result is a much finer granularity of the Three-Stage 
Model than that of the Two-Stage Model. 
The Two-Stage Model only contains one phase of choice. 
This choice can be rational or not. It expresses the will aspect 
of the entity. The Three-Stage Model utilizes two 
consecutive choices, a predictable choice followed by a 
random choice. However, the concept of choice is much 
simpler to implement than the concept of will. 
Lastly, the main weakness of the Two-Stage Model is not 
discriminating enough. Let us take as example a chess 
program. First, it will analyse the chess position, will 
generate the different possibilities and will choose the best 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

move. The program functioning corresponds perfectly to the
Two-Stage Model of Free Will. It is then legitimate to 
conclude that a chess program is provided with Free Will. 
According to the Three-Stage Model, a chess program is not 
provided with Free Will.
3)
Model utilization 
a) A critical analysis of a philosophical concept from a 
computational point of view 
The human cognitive system produces complex mental 
concepts, such as the concepts of conscience, will, autonomy
and free will, partly characterized by other mental concepts
with vague contents. 
The computational approach of a concept, such as free 
will imposes a clarification of the essential components of 
the property to obtain an operational model of this concept. 
This clarification concerns at the same time the choice of the 
selected elements, their contents and their relationship. 
Although this method leads to a simplified representation 
of the concept, it has the advantage of distinguishing with 
precision what was kept and what was left out of the 
property. When new knowledge is available or when the 
importance given to some features of the concept is changed, 
it will still be possible to update the model. 
Conversely, reasoning about the model makes it possible 
on the one hand to identify, reduce and isolate the fuzzy 
areas of the property, and on the other hand to address its 
paradoxical aspects. 
The result is a bidirectional questioning leading to a 
reciprocal enrichment between concept and model. 
b) Design of a synthetic property  
The pursued approach is similar to that of synthetic 
biology: developing a synthetic property starting from data 
related to a precise philosophical concept. It is an 
engineering approach, which consists in improving the 
understanding of a property by disassembling and rebuilding 
it in a computational form after identifying its essential 
aspects. 
It will be possible to put together this synthetic property
with other synthetic properties in order to create artificial 
characters. 
c) Creation of artificial characters 
The architecture of the unpredictable component
provides a great flexibility to the creator of synthetic 
characters. Indeed, the concepts of influence, switch and 
unpredictable choice can be interpreted in various ways. 
This interpretative wealth allows the implementation of a 
broad spectrum of software agents. 
For example, the agent’s unpredictable component could 
be influenced by an emotional module. According to the 
composition of this module and its interconnection with the 
unpredictable component, various levels of steerability of the 
agent could be simulated. In this context, a second aspect, 
which could also be studied, is the degree of coupling 
between emotions and free will. 
VI.
CONCLUSION
How to answer the question “Does free will exist?” It 
depends on the selected meaning of this property. 
According to the meaning presented in this paper, free 
will exists because it is associated with a precise decision-
making process. But as free will is a complex property with 
contradictory interpretations, it is not possible to give an 
absolute answer. 
The Three-Stage Model of Free Will is a decision-making 
process relying on a mechanism that is possible to implement 
in an artificial entity: this model presupposes neither the 
existence of a brain nor a spirit. Consequently, a natural or 
artificial entity that is able to exhibit this decision-making 
process structured by these three moments will be considered 
as being provided with free will. According to this model, 
free will is a global property of the agent: either the agent 
possesses this property or it does not have it. 
To the best of the author’s knowledge, among the living 
beings, only humans are able to trigger this structured 
decision-making process and consequently are provided with 
free will. 
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Kane (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Free Will, 2nd Ed. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011. 
[2]
B. Libet, C.A. Gleason, E.W. Wright, and D.K. Pearl, "Time 
of conscious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral 
activity (readiness-potential). The unconscious initiation of a 
freely voluntary act", Brain (1983) 106: pp. 623- 642. 
[3]
A. Krausová and H. Hazan, "Creating Free Will in Artificial 
Intelligence". In Beyond AI: Artificial Golem Intelligence, pp 
96-109, 2013. 
[4]
J. McCarthy, "Simple Deterministic Free Will", 2005. 
[Online] [retrieved: 12, 2017]. Available from: 
 http://www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/freewill2/freewill2.html 
http://informationphilosopher.com/solutions/scientists/mccart
hy/SDFW.pdf 
[5]
R. Manzotti, "Machine free will: is free will a necessary 
ingredient of machine consciousness?". In: Hernández C. et 
al. (eds) From Brains to Systems. Advances in Experimental 
Medicine and Biology, vol 718 (2011), pp. 181-191. Springer, 
New York, NY. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0164-3_15. 
[6]
E. Sanchis, "Autonomy with Regard to an Attribute", 
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Intelligent 
Agent Technology 2007 (IAT 2007), Silicon Valley, 
California 
(USA), 
pp. 
39-42, 
2007, 
doi:10.1109/IAT.2007.110. 
[7]
K. D. Vohs and J. W. Schooler, "The value of believing in 
free will: encouraging a belief in determinism increases 
cheating", Psychol Sci. 2008 Jan;19(1): pp. 49-54. doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02045.x. 
[8]
W. James, "The Dilemma of Determinism". In The Will to 
Believe and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy. Longmans 
Green and Co, New York, 1897. 
[9]
B. Doyle, Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy. Information 
Philosopher, 2011. [Online] [retrieved: 12, 2017]. Available 
from:   
http://www.informationphilosopher.com/books/scandal/ 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

