Experimentally Analyzing the Skill Acquisition Model using Task Performance and
Physiological Indices
Yoshimasa Ohmoto∗, Takahiro Matsuda∗ and Toyoaki Nishida∗
∗Department of Intelligence Science
and Technology
Graduate School of Informatics
Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan
Email: ohmoto@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, matsuda@ii.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, nishida@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Abstract—There are many tasks for which people need domain-
speciﬁc skills learned through long-term practice. Many skill
acquisition models were already proposed including the mental
states of the learners but a few studies tried to estimate the
mental states using objectively measured data. The purpose of this
study was to experimentally investigate the relationship between
the subjective mental states and the physiological indices for
development of a method to determine skill level in detail for the
skill acquisition task, using task performance and the learner’s
mental states. For the purpose, we conducted an experiment to
obtain the data of the physiological indices and a subjective report
of the feeling of difﬁculty during the skill acquisition task. As
a result of the analysis, we conﬁrmed the relationship between
them. In addition, we suggested an approach to identify task
features which was useful to acquire the skill and the stage of the
skill acquisition process via task performance and the measured
physiological indices.
Keywords–Skill acquisition model; mental state estimation;
physiological indices.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A skill is the ability to perform a task with pre-determined
results, often involving a given amount of time, energy, or both.
There are many tasks for which people need domain-speciﬁc
skills learned through long-term practice. We call this kind
of undertaking a ”skilling task.” To acquire the abilities for a
skilling task, people usually train by carrying it out repeatedly.
However, it is difﬁcult to learn the aptitude in question alone
because in many cases, people cannot objectively monitor their
skill level and task performance. Experts and instructors can
support learners, but the method for supporting learning a
skilling task has been established in few endeavors. Some sys-
tems are proposed to support learning based on performance.
Generally, if a person has acquired a skill (i.e., proﬁciency
or expertise), this means that person can efﬁciently carry
out a speciﬁc task. To assess skill level, the skilling task is
divided into some sub-tasks, and sub-task performance is rated.
However, to competently perform a job, many skilling tasks
require various sub-skills corresponding to the sub-tasks. In
this case, even when the learner acquires some sub-skills, a
situation may arise where he/she cannot synthetically use them.
In addition, it is often difﬁcult to rate skilling task performance
itself. In our previous study [1], we analyzed the process
for learning ballroom dancing. We found that the participants
became proﬁcient at making overall body motions in parallel
with each part of the dance and the motions of each body
part. In this situation, we could not segment the proﬁciency
of whole body motions, phases of the dance, and the motions
of each body part along with the time series; thus, we could
not deﬁne skill level in detail at a certain point in time.
Under such circumstances, human instructors focus on the
learner’s responses to unknown situations (such as questions
and answers), giving a new challenge and deliberately making
mistakes. In other words, they evaluate the skilling task model
that the learner has.
The important point is that we can use the learner’s recog-
nition of the skilling task to determine skill level. The Dreyfus
model of skill acquisition [2] shows how students acquire
abilities through formal instruction, in addition to practicing.
This model identiﬁes skill level based on four binary qualities:
(1) recollection (non-situational or situational); (2) recognition
(decomposed or holistic); (3) decisions (analytical or intuitive);
and (4) awareness (monitoring or being absorbed). The model
is intuitive, but no one knows how to evaluate the four factors
concretely. We considered an approach to estimate the learner’s
recognition (i.e., the learner’s mental state) from objectively
measured data during the skill acquisition process. For this
assessment, we used physiological indices that could gauge the
responses of the learner’s autonomic nervous system related
to his/her mental states. The physiological indices are usually
employed to ascertain mental stress.
The ﬁnal goal of this study was to develop a method to
determine skill level in detail for the skilling task, using task
performance and the learner’s mental states. For this purpose,
we experimentally investigated the relationship between the
subjective mental states and the physiological indices, as well
as the method, to estimate skill level based on the physiological
indices and task performance. We conducted an experiment to
obtain the data of the physiological indices and a subjective
report of the learner’s mental states.
Section 2 brieﬂy introduces previous works on the skill
acquisition model and assessing human stress. Section 3 ex-
plains the outline of the technique for appraising human stress
and the skill acquisition model via two dimensions: (1) task
performance and (2) the learner’s mental states. Section 4
describes the experiment and the analysis of the data. Section
5 establishes the discussion of the analysis, and Section 6 lays
out our conclusions.
II.
RELATED WORKS
We think the Dreyfus Model of skill acquisition [2] is
one of the most famous models of how students acquire
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

skills through formal instruction and practicing. This model
is used in a broad area, such as deﬁning an appropriate level
of competence, supporting to judge when a learner is ready
to teach others and so on. On the other hand, there are some
criticisms of this model [3]. According to these authors, there
is no empirical evidence for the presence of stages in the
development of expertise.
Kraiger et al. [4] attempted to move toward a training
evaluation model by developing a classiﬁcation scheme for
evaluating learning outcomes. They integrated theory and
research from a number of diverse disciplines and provided
a multidimensional perspective to learning outcomes. They
proposed
cognitive,
skill-based,
and
affective
learning
outcomes (relevant to training) and recommend potential
evaluation measures. The value of their construct-oriented
approach is that it provides a systematic framework for
conducting training evaluation research. They provided a
classiﬁcation scheme for learning outcomes for training
evaluation but they could not propose the method to identify
the outcomes objectively.
Mitchell et al. [5] assessed that participants’ self-efﬁcacy
goals, expected performance, and the degree to which
certain judgments required more or less cognitive processing
throughout the simulated job of an air trafﬁc controller. The
results showed that the participants during skill acquisition
reported reductions in their cognitive processing for working
on the task and for making self-efﬁcacy judgments. The
self-efﬁcacy was a better predictor of performance than were
expected score or goals on early trials, whereas the reverse
was true for later trials. This result showed that the mental
state is useful to estimate the skill level because the responses
changed along with the skill acquisition.
Langan-Fox et al. [6] summarized traditional models (Fitts
and Posner, 1967; Anderson, 1982; Schneide and Shiffrin,
1977). They pointed out that models of skill acquisition
largely ignore the experiences and dynamic internal processes
of a person while learning a skill. They attempt to highlight
the importance of a dynamic description of skill acquisition
in their research. Process-oriented factors such as motivation,
memory,
interruptions,
emotion,
and
metacognition
are
investigated in relation to skilled performance. However, their
discussions were conceptual and they did not experimentally
investigate.
Baumeister et al. [7] conducted a series of experiments
which
explored
the
possibility
that
praise
can
impair
subsequent performance. Three models were proposed: praise
leads to reduced effort, it implies a pressured demand for
good
performance
(which
impairs
performance),
and
it
generates self-attention, which impairs the automaticity of
skilled execution. As a result, the performance-demand model
received partial support, but it had difﬁculty accounting for
the ﬁnding that task-irrelevant praise impaired performance.
This suggested that we have to carefully think about the
learners’ mental state and the learning method when they
acquire skills.
III.
THE SKILL ACQUISITION MODEL, INCLUDING
MENTAL STATES
Some previous studies have proposed the skill acquisition
model, which considers learner’s mental states [2], [6].
There are also some studies focusing on the leaning process
named “learning curve” [8], [9], [10]. However, the mental
states were evaluated by human observation. In other words,
previous studies have not focused on how to measure,
evaluate, and use mental states via objective approaches to
the skill acquisition model. In addition, they have centered
on mental states through the lens of a speciﬁc skill level,
but have not concentrated on the dynamics of people going
through a learning process. This study aimed to develop
a technique for assessing a learner’s skill level based on
his/her performance and mental states. To do so, we ﬁrst
conﬁrmed the relationship between subjective reports on
mental states and the measured physiological indices. We
then interpreted the data and performance for estimating skill
level and the process of learning. In this section, we explain
the physiological indices, which were used to appraise mental
states, and propose the skill acquisition model, which has two
dimensions that deﬁne skill level.
A. Physiological indices for assessing mental states
In this study, we propose the skill acquisition model using
task performance and mental states. We especially focus on
how to gauge and use mental states in the skill acquisition
model. It is hard to use a learner’s behavior to evaluate mental
states because the learner’s behavior depends on the task and
skill level. However, when a learner feels that an activity
is difﬁcult, he/she feels mental stress due to his/her line of
thinking and stimuli from the endeavor. Therefore, we consider
stress useful for appraising a typical mental state in the learning
process.
Many previous investigations have reported on physiologi-
cal indices for estimating mental stress. However, in ongoing
daily interactions, we can often ﬁnd physiological responses
that are not related to the event happening at the time. One
reason is that people involved in continuous interactions often
plan their actions, such as what to tell and how to move.
Therefore, to assess human mental states, we had to consider
the context of an interaction and the response characteristics
of the physiological indices.
Physiological indices are biological reactions caused by the
autonomic nervous system; for example: brain waves, potential
differences in cardiographs, variations in blood pressure, pulse
waves, respiration, body temperature, muscle potential, and
skin conductance. In continuous interactions, some of these
are susceptible to noise from body motions. We used skin
conductance responses (SCR) and electrocardiograms (LF/HF
values) because these are relatively resistant to noise.
Since the underlying mechanisms of SCR and electrocar-
diograms are different, we expected that they could be used to
distinguish between different responses from various sources
of stress. Sweating is controlled by the sympathetic nervous
system [11] and can be elicited by emotional stimuli, intellec-
tual strain, or painful cutaneous stimulation. The underlying
mechanisms of SCRs are more related to anticipation, expec-
tation, and attention concentration [12]. We thus anticipated
that SCRs could be used to tell when someone is dealing with
an unexpected situation.
For electrocardiograms, the LF/HF value is calculated using
instantaneous heart rate. It shows heart rate variability (HRV),
which is controlled by the sympathetic and parasympathetic
nervous systems and humoral factors. The underlying mecha-
nisms of HRV are complex. Lacey and Lacey [13] suggested
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Task
performance
Actively trying to learn and 
searching for new ways
Passively trying to learn
or
Resigned to learn
Optimized or automated the 
ways to perform the task
Actively trying to learn and 
optimizing the ways
Feeling of difficulty
Figure 1. The outline of the skill acquisition model via two dimensions.
that it is caused by sensory intake and sensory rejection. In
addition, the parasympathetic nervous system responds quickly
(< 1 s) to stimuli. We thus thought that the LF/HF (HRV)
would show reactive responses based on external stimuli.
B. The skill acquisition model via two dimensions
We propose the skill acquisition model via two dimensions
- task performance and mental state - when a person feels that
a task is challenging (we call this a “feeling of difﬁculty”). Fig.
1 shows the model and the two dimensions. In the traditional
three phase model, Phase 1 corresponds to the lower left
part, Phase 2 corresponds to the upper part, and Phase 3
corresponds to the lower right part. The “task performance”
of the horizontal axis is the task result, which was quantiﬁed
objectively. The “feeling of difﬁculty” of the vertical axis is
a mental state, which was assessed based on the measured
physiological indices. The traditional skill acquisition model
assumes that task performance is (weakly) rising along with
an increase in skill levels. When a skill can be segmented into
small sub-skills, which are independent from each other, this
assumption may be true in the process of acquiring sub-skills.
However, attaining sub-skills does not contribute to gaining
overall aptitudes at more than a certain level for many skilling
tasks, such as ballroom dancing. In this case, the synthetic use
of sub-skills is often important, and the synthetic use itself is a
target of skill acquisition. When the learner practices synthetic
use through trial and error, task performance often decreases.
In our model, the trial and error process is included in the lower
part. When the task performance decreases but the difﬁculty
feeling is low, the model interprets that the process is trial and
error. We expected that the learner would circulate this model
through the skill acquisition process.
We assume that the skill acquisition process unfolds in
the following manner. The initial state of the learner is in
the upper or lower left part (i.e., performance is low). The
learner usually needs trial and error to learn the skilling task,
so the state of the learner is maintained or transitions to the
upper part. Through the learning process, task performance
increases and the learner’s state moves to the upper right part.
In this state, the learner can perform the task at hand more
efﬁciently than before, but he/she is not accustomed or does
not understand how to carry out the activity. Through practice
at this stage, the learner can synthetically and automatically
perform the task, and his/her state moves to the lower right
part. In a common case, the learner continuously performs trial
and error to ﬁnd better ways, so task performance sometimes
falls. In this case, the learner’s state is ready for the next stage
of the skill acquisition process. If the learner can ﬁnd clues for
better ways to perform the task, the skill acquisition process
advances to the next phase. If the learner cannot ﬁnd better
ways, the skill acquisition process terminates in the lower right
part of the stage.
IV.
EXPERIMENT
The purpose of this experiment was to investigate whether
the physiological indices were related to the subjective reports
about the feeling of difﬁculty toward the task, and whether
we could evaluate the state of transition in the proposed skill
acquisition model based on task performance and physiological
indices. We adopted a shooter game as a skilling task. Some
previous studies (e.g., [14]) have adopted a kind of shooter
game. The shooter game that we developed has features of
the skilling task. The advantages of the shooter game being
the skilling task include the following: (1) The learner needs
to obtain game playing skills (which is hard to verbalize);
(2) We can control the difﬁculty of a task; and (3) We can
easily analyze the skill acquisition process because we can
independently divide the time series of the game events, which
is the target of the skill acquisition. In addition, learners
can repeatedly play the game with high motivation. We con-
ducted an experiment in which the participants played the
shooter game repeatedly and we obtained the game scores and
physiological indices during game play. After the experiment,
we analyzed the data to conﬁrm the relationship between
the physiological indices and the subjective reports about the
feeling of difﬁculty. Furthermore, we examined the relationship
in the skill acquisition process.
A. Task
To achieve the best performance in the shooter game, the
player must cultivate some skills and gain some knowledge
such as operation procedures, scoring rules, the way to defeat
one’s enemies, the features of game stages, basic survival
patterns, and speciﬁc techniques to obtain a high score. Some
of them cannot be verbalized and the best method varies among
the players. To obtain game playing skills, the players must
practice repeatedly.
In this game, player uses two different method of attack;
gatling gun and homing missile. The gatling gun is quick and
out-range attack method. When the player uses the gatling
gun to destroy the enemies, the game score is minimum. The
homing missile is powerful but needs lock-on procedure near
the enemies. When the player uses the homing missile to
destroy the enemies, the game score increases exponentially
with increasing the number of lock-on target at the same time.
The player tries to obtain the game score as high as possible
by selectively using the two different attack. Of course, the
enemies attack the player so the player cannot always use the
homing missile to survive in the game.
In this experiment, the participants were only trained for
the ﬁrst stage of the shooter game, which was segmented into
eight parts. The patterns of combinations and the movements
of enemies were different in each part of the stage. When
the player used a suitable approach in each part of the stage,
his/her score was several times higher than that obtained using
an inappropriate procedure. There was a relaxation period
between each part of the stage. The average clear time was
designed to be about 150 seconds. The participants used a
joystick with two buttons. When the enemies hit the player
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Game control PC
Recording PC
Polymate
Video
camera
Experimenter
Participant
70-inch 
Monitor
Note PC
Figure 2. The experimental environment.
three times, the game was over. When the boss enemy was
destroyed, the game was cleared. After the game was over
or cleared, the participants could conﬁrm their score. They
were instructed what behavior produced a high score, but it
was difﬁcult to carry out such behavior during the game.
The participants acquired game playing skills through repeated
practice.
B. An experimental setting
The experimental setting is shown in Fig. 2. Each par-
ticipant sat in front of a 70-inch monitor that displayed the
game. A video camera was placed behind the participant to
record his/her behavior and the game playing screen. The
participant’s voice was recorded using microphones. Polymate
was used to measure SCR and the electrocardiogram. SCR
was gauged by connecting the electrodes to the ﬁrst and
third ﬁngers of the participant’s non-dominant hand. The
electrocardiogram was appraised by connecting electrodes with
paste to the participant’s left side, the center of the chest,
and both ears for ground and reference. The experimenter sat
out of view of the participant. The experimenter made notes
about the participant’s behavior and his/her subjective feeling
of difﬁculty in each part of the stage.
C. Participants
The participants in the experiment were 21 male un-
dergraduate students between the ages of 18 and 25 (with
an average age of 21.7). We eliminated the data of four
participants. We deemed that two did not acquire the skills
because their game scores did not increase throughout the
experiment. Regarding the other two participants, we failed
to measure the physiological indices because the electrodes
were removed. Therefore, we used the data of 17 participants
for the analysis.
D. Procedure of the experiment
The participants repeatedly played the game in the experi-
ment. The game was played a total of 50 times. The total time
of the experiment was about 240 minutes. The experiment was
divided into two sessions in the middle, and the participants
took a long rest in between them because playing the game
and acquiring the skills required a lot of concentration.
Each participant was brieﬂy instructed on the experimental
procedure. Electrodes for measuring SCR and the LF/HF elec-
trocardiogram values were then attached to the participant’s
left hand and chest. The participant then played practice games
twice. After a 2-minute relaxation period, the experimenter
started the video cameras and recording the physiological
indices. After that, the participant began an experimental
session. The participant played the game until it was over or
cleared. After playing the game, the participant relaxed for
30 seconds. The participant rested for 3 minutes every 10
games. In this, the experimenter scored the participant’s feeling
of difﬁculty subjectively and interviewed him/her about this
sentiment at each part of the stage. In the ﬁrst session of the
experiment, the participants played 30 games because many
games were over in the middle of the stage in the ﬁrst session.
E. Procedure of the analysis
The data obtained in the experiment are explained below.
1)
The game score of each game play
2)
The game score of each part of the stage
3)
The feeling of difﬁculty as scored by the experimenter
4)
The feeling of difﬁculty as scored by the participant
5)
The physiological indices during the game play
We used 2 as the task performance and 3, 4, and 5 as
the feeling of difﬁculty in our model; 3 and 4 were replaced by
5 after we conﬁrmed the relationship between the subjective
reports and the physiological indices. In the analysis, we used
data of the simple moving average (calculated from data for
the previous 10 games and shifted by 5 games). For example,
the ﬁrst data point was calculated from the data for 1 to 10
games, the second data point was calculated from the data for
5 to 15 games, and so on. The task performance took the value,
which was the product of the obtained game score at each part
of the stage, divided by the maximum game score of each part
of the stage. The feeling of difﬁculty took on the value +1 (i.e.,
felt difﬁculty at that part of the stage) and 0 (i.e., did not feel
difﬁculty at that part of the stage). The physiological responses
took a value that was the product of the total time over the
threshold (LF/HF: 3.0, SCR: 15.5) divided by the total time
of the part of the stage.
We had eight parts of the stage. The eighth part was the
battle with the boss enemy. We did not analyze the eighth
part because we could not objectively segment the battle with
the boss enemy. In this section, we analyzed the ﬁrst through
seventh parts of the stage.
F. Analysis of the relationship between the feeling of difﬁculty
and the physiological indices
We calculated correlation coefﬁcients between the values
of the task performance (TP) and the physiological responses
(PRs), and those between the values of the feeling of difﬁculty
(FD) and the physiological responses (PRs). The results are
shown in Table I. Between the values of the task performance
and the responses of SCR, there is a weak positive correlation
in one out of seven parts. Between the values of the feeling of
difﬁculty and the responses of SCR, there are weak positive
correlations in ﬁve out of seven parts, and strong correlations
in two out of seven parts. We could ﬁnd the correlations in all
parts of the stage between the values of the feeling of difﬁculty
and the responses of SCR. This means that we can conﬁrm the
relationship between the feeling of difﬁculty and SCR.
In our previous study, we reported that SCR relatively
reﬂected intrinsic stress (concentrating on the task, considering
it, and so on) and that LF/HF relatively reﬂected extrinsic
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS BETWEEN THE VALUES OF THE
TP AND THE PRS, AND THOSE BETWEEN THE VALUES OF THE FD AND
THE PRS.
section
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
TP, LF/HF
0.0080
-0.11
-0.15
0.038
-0.018
0.081
-0.079
TP, SCR
-0.14
-0.066
-0.043
-0.13
0.26
-0.000
-0.067
FD, LF/HF
-0.067
0.021
0.055
-0.16
-0.096
-0.034
0.092
FD, SCR
0.33
0.22
0.29
0.34
0.38
0.52
0.44
stimuli [15]. These results support the hypothesis. We expected
that SCR would respond when the participant considered how
to destroy enemies and what a bad point was in prior game
plays. Therefore, we could ﬁnd a relationship between the
feeling of difﬁculty and SCR. However, we expected that
the LF/HF would respond when the participant encountered
impressive game events such as getting a high score or making
a mistake. Impressive game events occurred independently of
task performance and the feeling of difﬁculty. Therefore, we
could not ﬁnd a relationship with LF/HF.
G. Analysis of the relationship between the LF/HF and SCR
in sections where task performance rapidly increased
If SCR reﬂects intrinsic stress, there is a link between SCR
responses and task performance, especially in the parts of the
task where it is important to plan how to destroy enemies. On
the other hand, there is no connection between them in the
parts of the task where the operational technique is important.
In addition, the LF/HF responses are independent of them. We
thus believe that the relationship between the LF/HF and SCR
in sections where task performance rapidly increased through
practice is important for assessing the skill acquisition process
in some parts of the stage. We refer to the section where task
performance rapidly rose as a “rapid increasing section (RIS).”
A rapid increasing section is deﬁned as a section in which
task performance rises past 0.1 after ﬁve games. If the task
performance continuously goes beyond 0.1 after ﬁve games, it
is regarded as one large section.
We compared the values of (LF/HF responses) - (SCR
responses) in rapid increasing sections, and looked at other
sections in each part of the stage as well. If the participant
did not have rapid increasing sections, we eliminated the par-
ticipant’s data from the analysis. We performed the Wilcoxon
signed-rank test. The results are shown in Table II. There are
signiﬁcant differences (SCR > LF/HF) in the ﬁfth (p = 0.0098)
and seventh parts (p = 0.0024). In the ﬁfth and seventh parts,
there is one optimized playing procedure. This means that
it is important to increase task performance to identify the
optimized procedure. In other words, the ﬁfth and seventh parts
are the sections where it is important to plan how to destroy
one’s enemies. This means that we may distinguish the task
features in the skill acquisition process using the transitions of
task performance and the physiological indices.
H. Analysis of the relationship between the LF/HF and SCR
in sections where task performance decreased
The rapid increasing section is a good example in the skill
acquisition process. However, task performance sometimes
decreases because the learner continuously performs trial and
error to ﬁnd better solutions. We refer to the section where
the task performance falls into a “plateau section (PS).” A
TABLE II. RESULTS OF THE WILCOXON SIGNED-RANK TEST BETWEEN
DATA IN NON-RIS AND THAT IN RIS.
section
mean in not-RIS
mean in RIS
p-value
1
-0.016
0.036
0.20
2
-0.0030
0.0078
0.85
3
0.0094
-0.019
0.94
4
0.0066
-0.023
0.13
5
-0.014
0.029
0.0098*
6
-0.0038
0.014
0.31
7
-0.016
0.051
0.0024*
TABLE III. RESULTS OF THE WILCOXON SIGNED-RANK TEST BETWEEN
DATA IN NON-PS AND THAT IN PS.
section
mean in not-PS
mean in PS
p-value
1
-0.036
0.023
0.011*
2
0.0070
0.0045
0.62
3
-0.00040
0.0081
0.32
4
-0.0031
0.010
0.32
5
-0.021
0.013
0.0032*
6
-0.0030
0.027
0.31
7
-0.038
0.039
0.018*
plateau section is one where task performance decreases after
ﬁve games. If task performance continues to drop after ﬁve
games, it is regarded as one large section. The plateau section
is important because it is the preparation phase for the skill
acquisition process.
We compared the values of (LF/HF responses) - (SCR
responses) in plateau sections and other sections in each
part of the stage. If the participant did not have the plateau
sections, we eliminated the participant’s data from the analysis.
We performed the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. The results are
shown in Table III. There are signiﬁcant differences (LF/HF >
SCR) in the ﬁrst part (p = 0.011), ﬁfth part (p = 0.0032), and
seventh part (p = 0.0018). In these parts, participants could
learn the optimized procedure in a step-by-step manner. In
addition, in many cases, the plateau sections appeared before
the highest score was updated. This suggests that plateau
sections comprise the preparation phase for the skill acquisition
process.
In this study, we know the maximum game scores in
each part of the stage. Therefore, we can determine that a
section is a plateau or a ceiling. However, in terms of general
skilling tasks, we cannot know the maximum performance of
the endeavor. Hence, we propose a method to identify plateau
sections using task performance and the learner’s mental state.
V.
DISCUSSION
This study aimed to develop a method to estimate the
learner’s skill level based on task performance and his/her
mental states. To achieve this, we conducted an experiment
to obtain data from the subjective reports of a feeling of
difﬁculty and the physiological indices during the skill acqui-
sition process. We then conﬁrmed the relationship between
the subjective reports of the feeling of difﬁculty and the
physiological indices. In addition, we suggested an approach
to identify task features (e.g., whether planning or operational
practice is required) and the stage of the skill acquisition
process (e.g., plateau section) via task performance and the
measured physiological indices. These could not be identiﬁed
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

in the traditional models because they could not be used to
assess the learner’s mental state using an objective technique.
We applied the results of the analyses to our proposed skill
acquisition model, then illustrated the typical states of the task
performance and physiological indices. The initial state of the
learner is the upper or lower left part (i.e., performance is
low). When the learner’s state is in the lower left part, his/her
state transitions to the upper part through trial and error for
skill acquisition. If the learner does not try to acquire an
ability, the skill acquisition process ends. In the upper left
part, task performance is low and physiological indices indicate
LF/HF > SCR because the learner usually pays attention to
understanding the task features for efﬁciently learning. After
understanding the task features and ﬁnding clues to improve
performance, the learner’s state advances to the upper right
part. In this state, task performance becomes higher than before
and physiological indices indicate LF/HF < SCR, especially
in the parts of the task where it is important to plan how
to carry it out. Through repeated practice, the learner comes
to synthetically and automatically perform the undertaking
and his/her state transitions to the lower right part. In this
state, task performance is high and the physiological indices
show no characteristic responses. When the learner is not
satisﬁed with his/her task performance or the way the activity
is carried out, he/she continuously strives to ﬁnd better ways.
In this state, task performance is maintained or decreases, and
the physiological indices indicate LF/HF > SCR. Thus, task
performance and the physiological responses suggest that the
learner’s state is ready to move on to the next stage of the skill
acquisition process. If the learner can ﬁnd clues to improved
ways of carrying out a task, the skill acquisition process moves
to the lower left part in the next stage. If the learner cannot do
so, the skill acquisition process terminates in the lower right
part in the current stage.
The most important contribution of this study is that we
experimentally analyzed the effects of the learner’s mental
states as based on the physiological indices. In a traditional
skill acquisition model, the impacts of the learner’s mental
states are conceptually proposed but not conﬁrmed objectively.
Of course, our study has some limitations. The most serious
limitation was that we could not ﬁnd signiﬁcant differences;
we only found them in three out of seven parts of the task. One
reason is that the characteristics of each part are different from
each other, such that planning or the operational technique
becomes important. Especially in the part where the opera-
tional technique is critical, the participants were absorbed in
practicing it, and it was difﬁcult to assess the changes in their
mental states. In this part, we had to ﬁnd other relationships
between the learner’s behavior and mental states, such as the
response time to an event between the physiological indices
and the reactive operation.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
The purpose of this study was to experimentally inves-
tigate the relationship between the subjective mental states
and the physiological indices for development of a method
to determine skill level in detail for the skilling task, using
task performance and the learner’s mental states. For the
purpose, we conducted an experiment to obtain the data of
the physiological indices and a subjective report of the feeling
of difﬁculty during the skill acquisition task. As a result of
the analysis, we conﬁrmed the relationship between them. In
addition, we suggested an approach to identify task features,
which was useful to acquire the skill and the stage of the skill
acquisition process via task performance and the measured
physiological indices. In the future work, we will analyze the
different features of the skill acquisition task and the method to
segement the task acqisition process for learning the different
features.
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is supported by Grant-in-Aid for Young
Scientists (B) (KAKENHI No. 16K21113), and Grant-in-Aid
for Scientiﬁc Research on Innovative Areas (KAKENHI No.
26118002) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology of Japan.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Yoshino, Y. Ohmoto, and T. Nishida, “Constructing knowledge
structure of ballroom dance from teacher’s instruction behavior.” IEICE
HCS (Japanese), vol. 114, no. 273, 2014, pp. 55–60.
[2]
S. E. Dreyfus and H. L. Dreyfus, “A ﬁve-stage model of the mental
activities involved in directed skill acquisition,” DTIC Document, Tech.
Rep., 1980.
[3]
F. Gobet and P. Chassy, “Expertise and intuition: A tale of three
theories,” Minds and Machines, vol. 19, no. 2, 2009, pp. 151–180.
[4]
K. Kraiger, J. K. Ford, and E. Salas, “Application of cognitive, skill-
based, and affective theories of learning outcomes to new methods of
training evaluation.” Journal of applied psychology, vol. 78, no. 2, 1993,
p. 311.
[5]
T. R. Mitchell, H. Hopper, D. Daniels, J. George-Falvy, and L. R. James,
“Predicting self-efﬁcacy and performance during skill acquisition.”
Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 79, no. 4, 1994, p. 506.
[6]
J. Langan-Fox, K. Armstrong, N. Balvin, and J. Anglim, “Process in
skill acquisition: Motivation, interruptions, memory, affective states, and
metacognition,” Australian Psychologist, vol. 37, no. 2, 2002, pp. 104–
117.
[7]
R. F. Baumeister, D. G. Hutton, and K. J. Cairns, “Negative effects of
praise on skilled performance,” Basic and applied social psychology,
vol. 11, no. 2, 1990, pp. 131–148.
[8]
C. Konrad, G. Schupfer, M. Wietlisbach, and H. Gerber, “Learning
manual skills in anesthesiology: is there a recommended number of
cases for anesthetic procedures?” Anesthesia & Analgesia, vol. 86,
no. 3, 1998, pp. 635–639.
[9]
F. E. Ritter and L. J. Schooler, “The learning curve,” International
encyclopedia of the social and behavioral sciences, vol. 13, 2001, pp.
8602–8605.
[10]
T. P. Grantcharov and P. Funch-Jensen, “Can everyone achieve pro-
ﬁciency with the laparoscopic technique? learning curve patterns in
technical skills acquisition,” The American Journal of Surgery, vol. 197,
no. 4, 2009, pp. 447–449.
[11]
E. F. Bartholomew, F. Martini, and W. B. Ober, Essentials of anatomy
& physiology.
Benjamin Cummings, 2007.
[12]
K. Hugdahl, Psychophysiology: The mind-body perspective.
Harvard
University Press, 1995.
[13]
B. C. Lacey and J. I. Lacey, “Two-way communication between the
heart and the brain: Signiﬁcance of time within the cardiac cycle.”
American Psychologist, vol. 33, no. 2, 1978, p. 99.
[14]
E. A. Day, W. Arthur Jr, and D. Gettman, “Knowledge structures and the
acquisition of a complex skill.” Journal of applied psychology, vol. 86,
no. 5, 2001, p. 1022.
[15]
Y. Ohmoto, S. Takeda, and T. Nishida, “Distinction of intrinsic and
extrinsic stress in an exercise game by combining multiple physiological
indices,” in Games and Virtual Worlds for Serious Applications (VS-
Games), 2015 7th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–4.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

