A Framework for Creativity-oriented Autonomy based on Online Social Networks 
 
Balasubramaniam Shekar, Shamit Bagchi 
Quantitative Methods and Information Systems Area 
Indian Institute of Management Bangalore  
Bangalore, India 
e-mail: shek@iimb.ernet.in, shamit.bagchi08@iimb.ernet.in 
 
 
Abstract—The paper deals with the problem of enabling 
greater autonomy in knowledge intensive organizations leading 
to innovation. Adoption of online social networks in 
organizations is a suggested solution. We draw lessons on 
autonomy and its effects from a real-world illustration. We 
examine the consequences of online social network adoption 
within businesses and societies. These may be viewed as self 
organizing systems. The autonomy-orientation of employees 
and members of a society is the underlying basis for this study. 
Stable states (attractors) in self organized systems are known 
to enslave or constrain the constituents of a system. The 
reduced enslavement in online social networks is a prominent 
feature of our proposed new attractor regime to which 
organizations in any society will shift. We discuss the enabling 
of this shift in terms of autonomy and self organization. 
Keywords-Organization Structures; Art Industry; Online 
Social Networks; Self-Organization Theory  
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Knowledge-intensive organizations 
of today need 
creativity and innovation as driving forces necessitating 
greater autonomy in decision making and execution of 
creative ideas into tangible results. 
The old paradigm of command and control to run an 
organization is no longer operant. Primary disadvantages 
include disharmony and erosion of creativity, resulting in 
high attrition rates and higher stress levels among 
employees.  The consequences for organizations have been 
lower performance and missed opportunity in harnessing the 
creative potential. Recent practices towards a flat structure of 
organizations have led to better levels of talent utilization. 
It may be noted that art galleries provide some answers 
as creative potential is what they thrive on. Now with the 
entry of new age tools such as OSNs (online social 
networks) [1], businesses and communication in general are 
rapidly adopting and using these tools. 
With the adoption of OSNs in businesses, it is imperative 
to provide more autonomy and independence to the 
employees rather than continuing to operate with the 
hierarchical command and control paradigm. The latter 
would result in a clash between the mindset of the top 
management and the employees. 
 
II. 
OBJECTIVE 
We elucidate and elaborate the reasons for heavy OSN 
adoption worldwide. This is done by deducing a new finding 
from existing self organization systems theory [2]. We 
propose 
methods 
to 
enable greater autonomy 
and 
consequently creativity within organizations. These methods 
involve online social network usage. We also elaborate on 
why this OSN based approach will be successful in 
organizations. This elaboration is done with the help of 
another research finding of ours, namely existence of weak 
ties in the art industry. This approach is formulated as a 
framework. 
The 
framework helps in 
enabling the 
achievement of autonomy to tackle the challenge of 
continuous innovation in knowledge intensive organizations. 
We have provided an illustration that helps in arriving at our 
claims and in providing a rationale for substantiating our 
claim. 
Existing literature talks about why autonomy is essential 
in prospector firms, i.e., firms that depend on innovation and 
differentiation [3]. Creativity arising out of autonomy and 
weak links is also discussed in some of the papers [3][4]. 
However, the existing literature focuses predominantly on 
usage of OSNs for knowledge management [5]. We instead 
argue for the adoption of OSN towards autonomy and not 
mere knowledge management. 
 
III. 
PRELIMINARIES 
A. Current Organization Structures 
Organizations of today are ―the large, vertically 
integrated, hierarchical organizations that have persisted 
throughout the latter half of the twentieth century.‖ [6]. The 
dominant form of control is by spurring competition. In 
order to further self interest employees are expected to either 
do as they are told, faster, better. Any deviation, is dealt by a 
punishment mechanism. This results in a highly competitive 
culture that gets built into the organization DNA. Such a 
culture is not sustainable in the long run.  
―Hierarchical systems arose from models of creating 
systems with a high degree of certainty and security and 
delineated boundaries of function, structure, order and 
logic.‖ [6]. Leaders emerge as perceived knowledge holders 
by influencing and tightly controlling workers‘ duties and 
hence most powerful. 
136
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

The way individuals connect with one another and with 
the institutions in their lives is evolving. This has led to 
decentralization of power with greater faith amongst peers.  
B. Ties and Relations in a network 
Organizations may be viewed as ‗holons‘ [7], or as 
networks of people, interacting among themselves based on 
their needs and with goals to achieve. In such networks, 
weak and strong ties indicate the strength of a relationship. 
However creativity is seen to increase with weak ties. 
Networks of optimal size and weak strength are more likely 
to boost creativity when they afford actors to access a wide 
range of different social circles. Weak ties are characterized 
by ―social relationships, which are typified by infrequent 
interaction, short history, and limited emotional closeness.‖ 
[4]. We draw heavily on the definition and attributes of 
Complex Adaptive Systems (CAS) [8]. 
C. Society as a self organizing system 
Processes of self-organization create order out of chaos. 
They are responsible for most of the patterns, structures and 
orderly arrangements which we find in the natural world. 
Many of those are present in the realms of the mind, society 
and culture. 
Society is a self-organizing system, because by 
definition, a society organizes itself without need for any 
external direction, manipulation, or control. The organization 
process in a self-organizing system refers to ―increase in the 
structure or order of the system behavior through a dynamic 
and adaptive process where systems acquire and maintain 
themselves, without external control. Structure can be 
spatial, temporal or functional.‖ [9]. 
D. Attractors 
Self-organization means that ―the system reaches an 
attractor, i.e., a part of the state space that it can enter but not 
leave. In that sense, an attractor is a region ―preferred‖ by the 
global dynamics: states surrounding the attractor (the 
attractor basin) are unstable and will eventually be left and 
replaced by states inside the attractor.‖ [2]. 
A self-organized configuration is more stable than a 
configuration before self-organization. The pattern formed 
by the stabilized interactions, mutual ―fittings‖ (or ―bonds‖) 
between the agents determines a purposeful or functional 
structure. Its function is to minimize friction between agents, 
and thus maximize their collective ―fitness‖, ―preference‖ or 
―utility‖.  Therefore, we may call the resulting pattern as 
―organization‖: the agents are organized or coordinated in 
their actions so as to maximize their collective synergy and 
not individual utility. 
However, this organization by definition imposes a 
constraint on the agents. Loss of freedom to visit states 
outside the attractor, i.e., states with a lower fitness or higher 
friction. The agents have to obey new ―rules‖ that determine 
allowable actions. They lose some of their autonomy  [2]. 
In a sense, the agents become subordinated (or 
―enslaved‖) [10] to the regulations of the collective. 
Different attractor regimes and imply a varying degrees of 
autonomy.   
E. Networks as Emergent Structures 
―The structure emerging from self-organization can often 
be represented as a network. Initially, agents interact more or 
less randomly with whatever other agents happen to pass in 
their neighborhood. Because of natural selection, however, 
some of these interactions will be preferentially retained, 
because they are synergetic. Such a preferentially stabilized 
interaction may be called a bond, relationship, or link. The 
different links turn the assembly of agents into a network. 
Within the network, the agents can now be seen as nodes 
where different links come together.‖ [2]. In this regard 
perhaps the most intuitive example is a social network that 
links people on the basis of friendship, trust or collaboration. 
 
IV. 
PROPOSED FRAMEWORK FOR 
ORGANIZATIONAL AUTONOMY 
A. Input 1: Online Social Networks 
This peer-dominated network has recently shifted online. 
Online communities and OSNs enable people to maintain 
their own profile on a website, which is akin to ego states. 
These also allow a person to connect with profiles of other 
members who are friends, acquaintances and contacts, thus 
creating a virtual network. ―What OSNs do is to try to map 
out what exists in the real world. In the world, there's trust. 
As humans fundamentally parse the world through the 
people and relationships they have around them, so at its 
core, what a social network does is map out all of those trust 
relationships. So this map can be called the social graph, and 
it's a network of an entirely new kind and has real world 
implications.‖ [1]. 
OSNs are increasingly mimicking the real world and yet 
are able to plug in some of the deficiencies of the real world 
arising out of geographical and temporal separation and 
persistence of communication. One can be in touch with 
multiple people from different spheres of their lives, at the 
same time and in the same virtual space. OSNs can be seen 
to be complex adaptive systems (CAS) as they evolve [8]. 
Most importantly, OSNs are based on broad patterns of 
independence and interaction without any hierarchy or 
coercive practices (gleaned from current adoptions such as 
Facebook, MySpace, LinkedIn, Mixi); an exploratory 
approach leads to sharing, learning and dissemination of 
information, knowledge and sometimes intense discussions. 
OSNs also have an independent structure to it, without any 
imposed rules. 
OSNs have this novelty wherein the social context 
becomes more important as we are influenced by the 
decisions of our closest friends or peers. 
B. Input 2: Observations from the Art industry  
Weak ties, creativity and independence lead to success in 
the art industry. From this perspective an art gallery has 
some unique features. An art gallery in most cases is run as a 
proprietary firm with a few employees. The proprietor is 
involved in the primary activities and decision making 
processes.  
137
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

The nature of this type of an art organization is 
significantly different as there is no joint coordinated effort 
to create a deliverable end-product. However from another 
perspective, the gallery itself runs based on the artworks 
created by affiliated artists. So there is a strong sense of co-
operation along with autonomy for the artists who can be 
seen as pseudo-employees.   
Apart from the gallery, middlemen exist in the industry - 
connecting artists to galleries, and, with knowledge of the 
varying art styles. Sometimes they may also act as curators. 
There is greater dependence on trust and the patronizing 
attitude of galleries towards artists, although contracts and 
agreements do exist too. 
Exhibitions for individuals and groups of artists are often 
held. Partnerships exist between different stakeholders, and 
this leads to benefits of social capital such as information, 
artworks and allied services, emotional support and socio-
political influence. In essence, weak ties and social 
organization-like structure are essential features of an art 
gallery. 
Art galleries give artists independence and complete 
autonomy and yet artists cooperate with the gallery to sell 
their works. So it is a mutually beneficial, symbiotic 
relationship. Artists and art entrepreneurs are predominantly 
free agents [11]. 
Often galleries thrive on partnerships with bigger 
galleries or museums, wherein events, shows and exhibitions 
are conducted by multiple galleries [12] – leading to a more 
collaborative rather than a purely competitive scenario. 
When these art galleries rely upon weak or arm‘s-length ties, 
they enjoy flexibility and access to diverse information in 
their networks [13]. Smaller cliques also get formed as 
inferred from discussions with art gallery owners. 
 
V. 
KEY FEATURES AND COMPONENTS OF THE PROPOSED 
FRAMEWORK 
Social self-organization means self-generation of order as 
an emergent phenomenon in a social system. In society self 
organization has reached an attractor or a current stable state, 
in which the hierarchical organization has become the 
dominant structure. Domination and coercion have become 
the prime methods for controlling employees. Individual 
freedom and independence have been drastically eroded. 
Non-hierarchical, flat organizations are being touted in 
industry and academia but are very difficult to implement 
due to complexity. This complexity arises out of overheads 
required for monitoring discipline and mismatch in 
allocating human resources. Newer, knowledge-intensive 
organizations are becoming network-oriented, dynamic 
systems. Identification of both creativity and discipline as a 
necessity for organization excellence [14] makes the 
implementation even more convoluted. 
The format of an OSN heavily leans towards a very open, 
autonomous system. Social networks allow multiple 
stakeholders to collaborate, co-create and co-command. 
―There is significant correlation between the use of social 
media and more collaborative working practices.‖ [15]. 
Members of an OSN are relatively free of artificially 
imposed, embedded instructional strategies. Community 
members share information, creative work. They identify and 
share methods and knowledge on resources in a context-
dependent manner. ―Approaches in such communities rely 
on human beings to locate, assemble, and contextualize the 
resources. Meaningful learning support ―anytime anywhere,‖ 
is combined with rich support with human-to-human 
interaction.‖ [5]. 
OSNs also create weak ties. The nature of an art gallery 
indicates that weak ties lead to success. Artists being highly 
independent do not want restraints by any organization setup 
and desire to work independently. They would like to work 
at their own pace and without any hindrance or interference 
and achieve artistic expression in the form of artwork. Any 
artificial speeding will actually lead to degradation of 
quality. 
Key components of the proposed organization structure 
would comprise of the following elements. These are based 
on lessons drawn from the art industry: 
i. 
High independence, autonomy in pursuing roles, 
decision-making and execution 
ii. 
Low on competition – to counter the psychological 
costs of competition 
iii. 
Cooperation for profits and benefits 
iv. 
Employees excelling in what they are best at and 
what they have a passion for 
v. 
Low on behavior change and control 
Here employees will get paid to be creative, to innovate, 
and to find new ways of doing things. Individual idea 
recognition and information gathering will be valued. With 
increased importance placed on information flow from 
diverse sources and joint decision making within the 
organization, top management in the hierarchy will cease to 
be decision makers and power wielders. 
Centuries-old practice of managing people through 
incentive structures – both rewards and punishment – based 
on an assumption of individual selfishness is going to decay 
[16]. Many successful institutions, specifically art galleries 
(as per our observations [11]) have turned to human 
cooperation to achieve desired ends. Recent work in 
evolutionary theory, behavioral and brain sciences suggests 
that collaborative systems work better and are attuned to 
higher human capacities. 
The complexity of the evolving operating environment 
consisting of OSNs demands a change in the management 
techniques. The homogenous composition of employees that 
companies thought they were dealing with has now 
disappeared. There is far more fragmentation and companies 
are operating in multi-contextual environments.  
People who like social media are used to sharing, 
collaborating, trusting and being transparent with regard to 
information. They are also becoming the biggest influencers 
of organization-wide adoption of online social networking. 
An OSN viewed as a radical change is a self organizing 
system - people are much more independent and 
individuality may be expressed comfortably by logging into 
such a system and being a part of it. Thus we see that an 
OSN is akin to a cultural organization where there is 
138
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

independence and autonomy leading to holistic individuality 
of the performer/artist. 
Autonomy may be defined as the degree to which one 
may make significant decisions without the consent of 
others. Low autonomy is associated with a low quality 
working life.  Autonomy is a human need, in a sense similar 
to one of those in Maslow‘s hierarchy of needs.  
Autonomy and strategy are interlinked through the vision 
of an organization. The polarized, two-fold ―Miles and Snow 
strategies‖ for firms are: 
(1) Defenders – they maintain a relatively stable offering (of 
products and services) to a relatively narrow, stable target 
market and gain competitive advantage through focusing on 
satisfying the demands and needs of their traditional 
customer base; and  
(2) Prospectors – who generate revenues through seeking out 
new customer markets and developing additional offerings. 
―For effectiveness of an organization, it helps if the 
structure supports the strategy. For instance, a strategy that 
emphasizes 
disciplined 
concentration 
on 
traditional 
customers and products—like the defender strategy—is best 
implemented with a structure that focuses and constrains the 
options of the CEO to service that market. On the other hand, 
a strategy that emphasizes innovation and differentiation—
like the prospector strategy—is best implemented in a 
structure that gives managers the freedom and authority to 
try different approaches. Structures with low autonomy entail 
frequent reporting and tend to constrain the actions of 
organizational members.‖ [3]. One of the means of achieving 
this autonomy (viz. OSN adoption) mandated for successful 
implementation of a prospector strategy  is developed and 
elaborated in the following section. 
 
A. Analogical Structures 
As already mentioned, OSNs are having unprecedented 
growth with adoption by more than a billion users. Hence we 
see a possible societal paradigm shift from competitive 
hierarchical organizations to creative and more collaborative 
organizations. We bring in the concept of an attractor here. 
OSNs are thus the new attractor (virtual attractor) to which 
society shifts as their usage spreads. Adoption is getting 
spurred by the network effect due to perceived and real 
benefits.  
Organizations and society may be viewed as social 
holons [7]. They are complex because not all parts comply to 
the same extent with the organizational architectural 
protocols. When a sufficient number of parts (individuals, 
groups) challenge/disobey/put stress on the protocols, there 
are two options; either the architecture adapts itself ―i.e. 
shifts or it collapses as seen in revolutions, rebellions, 
systemic failures etc.‖ [17]. We can apply the same argument 
in the usage of OSN. 
―Complex systems exhibit an unusual degree of 
robustness to less radical changes in their component parts. 
The behavior of many complex systems emerges from the 
activities of lower-level components. Typically, this 
emergence is the result of a very powerful organizing force 
that can overcome a variety of changes to the lower-level 
components.‖ [18]. We hypothesize that the effects of large 
scale adoption of OSNs within businesses are radical enough 
to make the complex societal system undergo a shift in 
paradigm. 
As seen earlier in Section II-B, moving into an attractor 
that is a stable state within any social self organizing system 
implies mutual adaptation among agents. They coordinate 
their actions to minimize friction and ―maximize synergy‖.  
This brings in constraints and a form of structure along 
with sub-ordination for the members. However, the 
constraints and regulations imposed by the collective in order 
to maximize synergy have led to enslavement of individuals.  
Our significant deduction is the reduction in enslavement 
(perceived and real) within OSNs. The proliferation of 
virtual relationships and increased communication which 
result from this reduction, is another deduction. 
Introduction of OSNs within organizations will lead to 
significant chaos in the short term as there is a schism 
between the old paradigm within organizations of control 
and hierarchy and the newly-found autonomy and individual 
power within OSNs. When OSN agglomerates have become 
the emergent across most organizations this chaos will 
subside and order will emerge once the virtual attractor is 
reached. This is also a new conceptual finding in terms of 
why and when an attractor shift happens in a complex 
adaptive self organizing system-- in this case, society. It 
primarily occurs only when an attractor regime provides 
greater autonomy and sufficient agents move towards so as 
to become the dominant attractor regime. This is a move 
away from an established, robust attractor to a new attractor. 
There may be an erosion of synergy in the process. However 
there is possibly an optimum autonomy level towards which 
each agent would trace the orbit within the state space and 
yet attain synergy.  This is depicted in Figure 1. 
The reduced enslavement in an OSN is the prominent 
feature of the proposed new attractor regime to which society 
will shift. The emergent structures (new organizations) in 
this phase of self organization will result in weak links 
(within employees) thus increasing creativity among OSN 
users.   
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Autonomy-based attractor orbit 
139
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

 
 
Figure 2. Stage of attractor shift 
 
The new attractor has a regime which provides greater 
independence. It comprises of agglomerates of OSNs within 
organizations. Greater autonomy and individuality is the 
emergent (property) within OSNs in this new system. Since 
social structures emerge out of society and interactions 
within members of the society, these social structures in turn 
can ―constrain or enable members‖. [19]. 
 We shape our buildings, Winston Churchill argued, then 
they shape us. OSNs will lead to a change in the way 
organizations and the society itself behaves. Most 
organizations will be compelled to adopt these social 
networks online which are distributed, decentralized systems 
with independence to participate. The agglomerates of OSNs 
as emergent structures will in turn affect the creation of a 
society which has new organizations and structures as an 
emergent. These are more individualistic, comprising of 
greater autonomy to its members and yet being collaborative.  
OSNs are the catalyst in the proposed societal paradigm 
shift: from a competitive hierarchical organization to a 
creative and .more collaborative organization that is high on 
autonomy, low on psychological costs of competition and 
low on behavior change. Metamorphosis of organizations, 
holistically modeled on OSNs, will be the end result. This 
entire paradigm shift is depicted in Figure 2. 
 
VI. 
AUTONOMY-GEARED CREATIVITY IN ORGANIZATIONS  
The second stage in Figure 2 can be modeled as a series 
of sub-stages as shown in Figure 3. We see that this virtual 
attractor has seen the emergence of agglomerates of OSNs. 
The adoption of OSNs will be championed by greater 
autonomy-seeking individuals or agents. These influencers 
will in turn propel the organizations towards adoption of 
OSNs. Within organizations as networks grow, splitting and 
breaking of links happens. This leads to intense activity for a 
while and then the network size again grows. In terms of 
attractors, this new phase of stabilizing around greater 
autonomy is the final stage. The degree of autonomy sought 
at each node goes up and as a result the overall autonomy 
seeking nature of the network goes up. This is a dynamic 
process. Optimum autonomy seeking behavior is different 
for different attractor regimes. The new stable state attractor 
in the emergent social organizations has the following 
properties:  
 
High Synergy within sub-networks  
 
High Creativity 
 
High Autonomy in all networks  
Usually enablement of autonomy is seen to erode 
synergy as the agents no longer are bound by the rules of the 
collective. However in sub-networks agents have sufficient 
autonomy due to the smaller size and responsibilities. 
However network splitting simultaneously increases both 
synergy and autonomy because of co-working smaller teams! 
Figure 3 shows state transitions within the state space 
which lead to dynamic equilibrium. Creation of feed-links 
between organizations or networks may take place. This 
means that some networks have higher autonomy and are 
thus more creative while other networks focus on innovation 
and execution of these creative ideas into tangible outcomes 
or output.  
Greater autonomy is needed to break away from an 
existing order and to reach the next order. This is possible 
through creativity or in combination with self organization to 
reach the next new order. The chaos generated and 
subsequent self-organization may be viewed as constituents 
that are part of the process. 
Autonomy leads to chaos and subsequent self-
organization leads to the next higher order. The autonomy 
needed to transition to subsequent orders is higher than the 
prior stages of autonomy. 
An optimal autonomy is needed to reach the maximum 
effective creativity in each order A0. The optimal level 
occurs when the maximum effective creativity out of which a 
new order arises is attained in a state. Beyond this, there is 
fall in collaboration and effectiveness, and thus creativity 
ceases to be beneficial to an organization. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Cycle of States constituting Dynamic Equilibrium 
 
 
140
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
The cyclic process of splitting of links in networks by 
autonomy seeking individuals can be managed better by 
means of adoption of OSNs. The nature of command and 
control that needs to be broken to become more innovative is 
explained using our framework. Starting from existing 
organization structures involving command and control 
based on hierarchy, the paper identifies the resultant-states 
that an organization and the society may reach in the longer 
term. We also discuss how this is to be done by means of a 
systematic methodology using OSNs.  
We suggest that OSNs create weak links which enhance 
creativity. We also show that OSNs increase autonomy 
which has been known to enhance creativity. OSNs provide 
a basis for systematic harnessing of knowledge as knowledge 
management is a stated benefit of their usage [5]. An 
amalgamation of the above, results in the proposed 
framework that is not available in current literature. 
Advantages of our framework include the transformation 
of creativity into organized innovation. This transformation 
is based on the agglomerates of OSNs within the 
organization. OSN agglomerates outside the organization can 
also be accessed for open innovation with external agencies. 
In our view it has proved to be quite tedious to implement 
flat, non-hierarchical organization structures as it involves 
mindset change. However a system comprising of an 
agglomerate of OSNs will help usher in this mindset change. 
Autonomy is sought after as a basic need in 
organizations. We explain the rationale behind its 
enablement through OSNs with the help of self organization 
theory. However autonomy also leads to chaos. Within 
organizations chaos may get generated in the short term. 
However the end result would be more agile, connected and 
innovative organizations. Knowledge-oriented organizations 
will need to adopt OSNs for survival. 
This will generate a need for a new set of tools and 
resources to track and measure new organizational 
parameters redefining productivity and efficiency 
From the self-organization perspective, future study 
could involve specific parameters that define OSNs as self-
organizing systems enabling the emergence of holistic 
individuality and autonomy. 
Another question that needs to be addressed pertains to 
the determination of optimal level of autonomy in an 
organization context. This is due to autonomy-seeking agents 
within the organization 
Self organization in this chaotic state leads to generation 
of new orders. These orders may pertain to practices, 
processes, methodologies, or strategies in the organization. 
Every greater order in terms of scale of impact requires 
higher autonomy in that area. This is bound by an optimal 
autonomy after which the effective creativity starts falling. 
The culmination would be a self-organized society with a 
form of socialization that enables individuals to establish a 
form of compatibility and satisfaction between their own 
interests and societal interests. It will mark the emergence of 
self-management in all areas.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank Indian Institute of Management Bangalore for 
supporting the research work behind this paper. We also 
thank the anonymous reviewers for helping in improving the 
clarity and quality of the paper. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. 
Grossman. 
(2010, 
December) 
TIME. 
[Online]. 
http://www.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,2036683
_2037183_2037185,00.html 02.01.2011 
[2] 
F. Heylighen, "Complexity and Self-organization," Encyclopedia of 
Library and Information Sciences, 2008. 
[3] 
D. M. Brock, "Autonomy of Individuals and Organizations: Towards 
a Strategy Research Agenda," International Journal of Business and 
Economics, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 57-73, 2003. 
[4] 
M. Baer, "The Strength-of-Weak-Ties Perspective on Creativity: A 
Comprehensive Examination and Extension.," Journal of Applied 
Psychology, vol. 95, no. 3, pp. 592-601, May 2010. 
[5] 
D. Wiley and E. Edwards. (2002) Commons Open Educational Re-
sources. [Online]. http://opencontent.org//docs/ososs.pdf 30.01.2011 
[6] 
B. J. Hilberts. (2010, October) Iconoclast @ work. [Online]. 
http://iconoclast.typepad.com/blog/etenen-drinken/ 10.12.2010 
[7] 
A. Koestler, The Ghost in the Machine. London: Macmillan, 1967. 
[8] 
A. Juarrero, Dynamics in Action: Intentional behaviour as a complex 
system.: MIT Press, 2000. 
[9] 
T. D. Wolf and T. Holvoet, "Emergence Versus Self-Organisation: 
Different Concepts but Promising When Combined," Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science , vol. 3464/2005, pp. 77-91, 2005. [Online]. 
www.springerlink.com/index/p7k83kc3fkj8e42n.pdf 10.03.2011 
[10] H. Haken, Information and Self-Organization, 2nd ed.: Springer, 
2000. 
[11] Multiple Authors. (2011, January) IIM Bangalore - B Shekar - 
Personal Webpage – Project on Cultural Entrepreneurship. [Online]. 
http://www.iimb.ernet.in/~shek/Audio_Rec_Several_Interviews_Indi
a_Art_Summit.mp3 28.06.2011 
[12] M. Jaipuria. (2010, June) IIM Bangalore - B Shekar - Personal 
Webpage – Project on Cultural Entrepreneurship. [Online]. 
http://www.iimb.ernet.in/~shek/AudioRec_Meenu_Jaipuria_Intervie
w.mp3 28.06.2011 
[13] M. S. Granovetter, "The Strength of Weak Ties," The American 
Journal of Sociology, vol. 78, no. 6, pp. 1360-1380, May 1973. 
[14] J. Collins, Good to Great. New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers, 
Inc., October 2001. 
[15] B. Wright. (2010, October) The Wall Street Journal. [Online]. 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014240527487037941045755455
70085715744.html#ixzz12YSOB7LW 10.01.2011 
[16] Y. 
Benkler. 
(2010, 
December) 
SantaFe 
Institute. 
[Online]. 
http://www.santafe.edu/research/videos/play/?id=06d53b42-20a9-
4234-998e-ac39f676b1e9 10.01.2011 
[17] A. Mostashari. (2008, OCT) COMPASS Presentations: Organizations 
as Complex Adaptive Systems (by Dr. Ali Mostashari). Microsoft 
PPT. [Online]. http://www.socio-technical.org/ 10.03.2011 
[18] J. H. Miller and S. E. Page, Complex Adaptive Systems: An 
Introduction to Computational Models of Social Life.: Princeton 
Univ. Press., 2007. 
[19] C. Fuchs. (2002, August) Vienna University of Technology. [Online]. 
http://www.self-organization.org/results/papers/pdf/hsicpaper4.pdf 
10.01.2011 
141
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

