The Role of Resonance in the Development and Propagation of Memes
Muneo Kitajima∗, Makoto Toyota† and J´erˆome Dinet‡
∗ Nagaoka University of Technology, 1603-1 Kamitomioka Nagaoka, Niigata, Japan, Email: mkitajima@kjs.nagaokaut.ac.jp
† T-Method, Chiba, Japan, Email: pubmtoyota@me.com
‡ Universit´e de Lorraine, 91 avenue de la Lib´eration, 54000 Nancy, France, Email: jerome.dinet@univ-lorraine.fr
Abstract—Meme is a type of behavior that is passed from one
member of a group to another, not through the genes but by
other means. This paper claims that the concept of resonance
should play an important role in the propagation of memes among
group members and the development of meme in individual
members. Dinet et al. pointed out that the concept of resonance
originally issued from physics that has been successfully applied
to cognitive processes for behavior selection; the Model Human
Processor with Real-Time Constraints (MHP/RT) model proposed
by Kitajima and Toyota is a unique model that incorporates
a resonance mechanism to connect perceptual-cognitive-motor
(PCM) processes that work synchronously, and memory processes
that work asynchronously with the environment. This paper
elaborates the resonance mechanism implemented in MHP/RT
and its associated multi-dimensional memory frames from three
perspectives: how resonance works in a single-action selection
process; what types of memes can exist in multi-dimensional
memory frames; how PCM processes and memory develop from
birth to the end of adolescence in terms of the detailed workings
of resonance. This paper concludes with the implications of the
mechanistic understanding of the role of resonance, the effect of
resonance malfunction and the effect of the existence of memory
that does not resonate with the real environment.
Keywords–Resonance; Meme; MHP/RT; Development.
I.
INTRODUCTION
At the 0-th order approximation, a person interacts with
the environment by running an endless stream of perceptions
involving the external and internal environments through the
ﬁve senses, i.e., taste, sight, touch, smell, and sound, via
sensory neurons as parallel processing, and acting in response
to the external environment using body parts, e.g., limbs, eye
balls, and so on, via motor neurons using serial processing (see
Figure 1). As s/he perceives the results of movement of his/her
body parts as well as the changes in the external environment
with the passage of time, the next cycle of perceptual-motor
processes occur. Interneurons between the sensory neurons
and motor neurons convert the input patterns to the output
patterns – this constitutes a Perceptual-Cognitive-Motor (PCM)
process.
Starting from this basic cycle (see Figure 1), Kitajima
and Toyota [3][4] constructed a comprehensive theory of
action selection and memory, Model-Human Processor with
Real-time Constraints (MHP/RT), that provides a basis for
constructing any models for an acting person (see Figure 2).
MHP/RT is an extension of Model Human Processor proposed
by Card, Moran, and Newell [5] that can simulate routine goal-
directed behaviors. The processes involved in action selection
is a dynamic interaction that evolves in the irreversible time
dimension. The purpose of MHP/RT is to explain the fol-
lowing three facts: 1) the fundamental processing mechanism
of the brain is Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP) [6],
which is referred to as Organic PDP (O-PDP) system in the
Figure 1. Continuous cyclic loop of perception and
movement ( [9, Figure 1]).
TABLE I. NEWELL’S TIME SCALE OF HUMAN ACTION. (ADAPTED FROM
NEWELL [10, PAGE 122, FIG. 3-3]).
Scale
Time Units
System
World
(sec)
(Theory)
107
months
106
weeks
SOCIAL
105
days
BAND
104
hours
Task
103
10min
Task
RATIONAL
102
minutes
Task
BAND
101
10sec
Unit Task
100
1sec
Operations
COGNITIVE
10−1
100ms
Deliberate Act
BAND
10−2
10ms
Neural Circuit
10−3
1ms
Neuron
BIOLOGICAL
10−4
100µsec
Organelle
BAND
development of MHP/RT; 2) human behavior emerges as a
result of competition of the dual processes of System 1, fast
unconscious processes for intuitive reaction with feedforward
control that connect perception with motor movements, and
System 2, slow conscious processes for deliberate reasoning
with feedback control; this is called Two Minds [7]; 3) human
behavior is organized under happiness goals [8].
MHP/RT consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part comprises
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

WMD (Word MD)-frame is the memory
structure for language. It is constructed on
a very simple one-dimensional array.
RMD (Relation MD)-frame is the memory
structure associated with the conscious in-
formation processing. It combines a set of
BMD-frames into a manipulable unit.
BMD (Behavior MD)-frame is the memory
structure associated with the autonomous
automatic behavior control processing. It
combines a set of MMD-frames into a ma-
nipulable unit.
PMD (Perceptual MD)-frame constitutes
perceptual memory as a relational matrix
structure. It incrementally grows as it cre-
ates memory from the input information and
matches it against the past memory in par-
allel.
MMD (Motion MD)-frame constitutes be-
havioral memory as a matrix structure. It
gathers a variety of perceptual information
as well to connect muscles with nerves us-
ing spinals as a reﬂection point. In accor-
dance with one’s physical growth, it widens
the range of activities the behavioral action
processing can cover autonomously.
Figure 2. MHP/RT and the distributed memory system implemented as multi-dimensional memory frames (modiﬁed from [4, Figure 3]).
cyclic PCM processes (see Figure 2, left), in which PDP for
these processes is implemented in hierarchically organized
bands with characteristic times for operations by associating
relative times (not absolute) to the PCM processes that carry
out a series of events in synchronous with changes in the
external environment. Table I shows the bands, i.e., biological,
cognitive, rational, and social bands, as deﬁned by Newell [10].
It should be noted that there is a gap between two adja-
cent bands; these two bands are non-linearly connected and
therefore it is inappropriate to understand the phenomena that
happen across these bands by constructing a linear model. The
phenomena occur by connecting what happens in a band to
what happens in its adjacent band non-linearly. A mechanism
is required to connect the phenomena; MHP/RT suggests that
this connection is provided by the resonance mechanism.
The bottom left and middle portions of Figure 2 show the
autonomous memory system consisting of multi-dimensional
memory frames of perception, motion, behavior, relation, and
word. These memory frames store information associated with
the corresponding autonomous processes deﬁned in the PCM
processes. The middle portion of Figure 2 shows the ﬁve
memory frames and their relationship with the PCM processes.
The right portion of Figure 2 provides brief explanations
of the respective memory frames. The important feature of
the memory system is that it works asynchronously with the
external environment. MHP/RT assumes that the synchronous
PCM processes, including the perceptual system, System 1,
System 2, and the motor system, and the asynchronous mem-
ory system communicate with each other through a resonance
mechanism. The concept of resonance has been borrowed
from physics to describe the linkage between the asynchronous
memory system and the synchronous PCM processes. As Dinet
et al. [1] suggested, apprehension of psychological phenomena
using concepts issued from physics is useful because the
majority of the interactions, including psychological interac-
tions, between humans and the environment (social or physical
environment) can be derived from physical processes.
The PCM process cycle in a human being continues from
his or her birth until death in the ecological system that consists
of the self and the environment. The linkage between the
memory system and the PCM processes through resonance
supports the development of the PCM processes. At the same
time, the PCM processes are accompanied by changes in the
connections of neurons that constitute the multi-dimensional
memory frames. The purpose of this paper is to understand
the development process from the viewpoint of the memory-
PCM linkage through resonance.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II focuses on
the role of resonance in the use of memory and its relationship
with the changes in memory when a human being interacts
with the environment. Section III extends the snap-shot view
of resonance explored in the previous section in the time
dimension to understand the nature of external objects that
generate sustainable resonance. We deﬁne these sustainable
objects as “memes” and this section describes how memes
propagate over time and space. Section IV describes the
development of the PCM processes and the multi-dimensional
memory frames from birth to the end of adolescence. Section V
concludes the paper by summarizing the contents and pointing
out implications derived from the considerations of the role of
resonance described in this paper.
II.
MEMORIZING THE RESULTS OF RESONANCE
The network of sensory neurons, motor neurons, and
interneurons shown in Figure 1 develop as a human being
interacts with the external environment in time. This section
starts by describing a general feature of the development
process in Section II-A, followed by the descriptions of
what is memorized in Section II-B, and how the resonance
mechanism relates to memory usage and memory formation
in Section II-C.
A. Forming an O-PDP System
Life emerges in a preexisting structure, which is the global
environment that surrounds the human being who is born, and
exists as a system that operates under the mechanism of PDP.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Life has evolved through adaptation to the global environ-
ments, which are characterized by the following preexisting
structures:
•
Atmosphere: ﬂuctuates at the meteorological scales
showing chaotic behavior,
•
Sea: has tidal currents and the surface layer is affected
by the atmosphere showing chaotic behavior,
•
Periodic circular structures: stable periods of ro-
tation and revolution around the sun with a close-
circular orbit as a planet of the solar system,
•
Gravity: upper vs. lower directions, deﬁned by the
earth’s gravity, and
•
Energy: future vs. past directions, deﬁned by the
direction of energy ﬂow as the dissipative structure
of the earth.
Life is formed under these preexisting structures and the
direction of the evolution of life is determined by the pressure
caused by these structures. Under the dissipative structural
space, i.e., the earth, the fundamental structural pressure is
a prerequisite to life, which is born and active in it, and
prescribes the direction of life evolution. Life is formed as an
adaptive body with the functional and structural features that
work most efﬁciently in the environment having the features
best conceived by the four concepts of Goals, Operators,
Methods, and Selection rules (GOMS) [5].
In the global environment before life occurred, there
existed multiple-layered structures equipped with means of
communicating information in a multi-dimensional space, in-
cluding such physical and chemical entities as light, sound,
heat, ion, etc. Under these preexisting conditions, life emerged.
Life interacts with the multi-dimensional environment by using
perception and motion as interfaces to it. Assuming the size
of dimension of perception and that of motor to be M and
N, respectively, the function of interface is represented as
mappings in the M ⊗ N space. Speciﬁc numbers of M and
N reﬂect the preexisting conditions of the environment.
B. Interneurons to memorize effective M ⊗ N mappings
Table I shows that human actions are hierarchically or-
ganized in four bands. In general, in-band closed processes
are executed in feedforward. Processes carried out in the
upper bands provide feedback to the processes carried out
in the lower bands. Life activities perform mappings of
M-dimensional perceptual input (Biological band) to N-
dimensional motor output (Biological band) by the system of
interneurons that belongs to the Cognitive band. Activities at
an upper band emerge, each of which is associated with a
part of the entire sequence of activities, i.e., a sub-sequence,
performed at a lower band. The action sequence belonging to
the lower band is segmented into sub-sequences, each of which
corresponds to one of activities in the upper band; due to the
ﬂuctuations in processing times of the upper-band activities,
relativization of processing times and functionalization of sub-
sequences occur. It is possible to establish an association
between the processing in the upper band activity (Cognitive
band) with an effective sequence of M ⊗ N mappings in the
lower band (Biological band) to form a hard-wired circuit of
interneurons that is characteristic of this processing, which is
the process of memory formation and development. Once the
memory is formed, life activities perform mappings of M-
dimensional perceptual input to N-dimensional motor output
by using the memory stored in the system of interneurons.
Sensory 
Neuron
Motor 
Neuron
Interneuron
Perceptual 
Development
Motor 
Development
Action 
Selection
Figure 3. Development of the sensory nervous system and the motor nervous
system, and interneurons connecting them with action selection process.
( [11, Figure 1]).
In addition, trajectories of the life activities ﬂuctuate, which
provides opportunities to the O-PDP system to develop by
adaptation.
The genealogy of DNA of vertebrates suggests that
Perception, Interneuron, and Motion as the basis for develop-
ment. Figure 3 shows that PIM is the basis of the formation of
the concept of the body based on neural circuits and the whole
is formed as PIM develops. Perception (P) captures various
kinds of environmental changes via the sensors with different
properties (M-dimension). Motor movement (M) is carried
out continuously and cyclically from one’s birth with gradual
development via the accuracy and strength (N-dimension).
Interneurons (I) memorize effective interlocked relationships
between P and M to form neural circuits naturally in the form
of feedforward (System 1) and more complex feedback to
increase the effectiveness of reactions (System 2). PIM devel-
ops by expanding behavioral-ecological bandwidth. Behavioral
ecological categories of vertebrates such as acquiring food,
raising children, and so on, are almost identical and within a
limited range. Everyday human life is performed cyclically in a
behavioral ecological band, which is expanded by performing
new actions to realize a goal within the limited behavioral
ecological categories and adding these to the existing band.
Actions are realized as an ad hoc adaptive combination
of various elements of the O-PDP system each time. Quasi-
stable relationships between elements are generated by local
relativization of the time relationship between the participating
elements and added to the existing band. Since each process of
performing actions is autonomous, it is possible for multiple
processes to be initiated in a certain environment, resulting
in coincidental parallel activities. Even if the timing of the
execution of two or more parallel processes changes, it is
possible for all of the processes to be completed within a
certain time range with or without any relationships in the
results. If the overall results are good, behavior selection
in the future might be changed by this memory associated
with rewards. Arbitrarily activated processes through conscious
System 2 thinking, which may or may not be directly related
to the current on-going external situation, can become a part
of these expanded memories. Conscious thinking facilitates the
expansion of memory.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

C. Conscious/Unconscious Processes Before/After an Event
MHP/RT maps M ⊗ N with the help of memory (Fig-
ure 2, left). It assumes the multi-dimensional memory frames
and the resonance mechanism for incorporating memory, i.e.,
interneurons, in the mapping process. Perception with the M-
dimensional perceptual information resonates with the contents
in the PMD-frame. The activation in the PMD-frame spreads to
the other memory frames. The activated portions of memory
frames resonate with the System 1 and System 2 processes
and are included in these processes. In the left portion of
Figure 2, the resonance processes are shown graphically by
•——•. It is suggested that the mirror-neuron system is
the physical/neurological support for the resonance in human
behavior [1] that can be regarded as the process of M ⊗ N
mapping. The mirror system is thought to directly match visual
input from an observed action with a stored motor program for
the same behavior (e.g. [12][13][14]). If that motor program
is then executed, the result is imitation.
MHP/RT assumes that actions are carried out by feedfor-
ward processes (System 1) or feedback processes (System 2)
with the help of the resonance mechanism for utilizing existing
memory. The processing principle of MHP/RT is that it should
work in one of four different modes when one looks at it
from a particular event that occurred at the absolute time
T [15]. These modes are called Four-Process in the MHP/RT
architecture. In Figure 2, these four modes are indicated where
appropriate to show how they are supported by the resonance
mechanism to utilize the contents stored in memory (System 1
and System 2 Before modes), and how they affect in forming
memory (System 1 and System 2 After modes) as described
below.
1) Rise of Resonance: Two modes work before the event.
In the time range of T−β ≤ t < T−β′, MHP/RT uses memory
for consciously preparing for what would happen in the future
(System 2 Before Mode), and in the time range of T − β′ ≤
t < T, it unconsciously coordinates motor activities to the
interacting environment (System 1 Before Mode), where β′ ∼
500msec and β ranges from a few seconds to hours, and even
to months. In these two modes, the part of memory activated
through resonance in response to perceptual processing could
resonate with System 1 processing and System 2 processing
(see Figure 2, left).
2) Convergence of Resonance: The other two modes work
after the event. In the time range of T < t ≤ T +α′, MHP/RT
unconsciously tunes the connections between sensory inputs
and motor outputs for better performance for the same event in
the future (System 1 After Mode), and in the time range of T +
α′ < t ≤ T + α, it consciously recognizes what has happened
and then modiﬁes memory concerning the event (System 2
After Mode), where α′ ∼ 500msec and α ranges from a few
seconds to minutes, and even to hours. In these two modes, the
results of action selection for the event at T would be reﬂected
in the network connections of the respective multi-dimensional
memory frames (see Figure 2, middle).
III.
MEME PROPAGATION BY MEANS OF RESONANCE
Memory is represented as a network of neurons. It is
initially activated through an M-dimensional multimodal sen-
sory input through a resonance mechanism, a large part of
which originates from the other human beings or artifacts
they have created; then the activation spreads in the connected
memory regions. The information generated by human beings
propagates among them by means of imitative behavior in
which resonance connects memory and the PCM processes
to carry out imitation. This raises the question of what causes
resonance to be maintained in humans. This section introduces
the Structured Meme Theory [16] which provides an answer
to this question.
A. What Can Resonate
The O-PDP system that deﬁnes a human being interacts
with the environment, which consists of not only inanimate
objects but also other O-PDP systems (people who interact
with him/her). Resonance is the mechanism by which action
is taken at appropriate times. Resonance increases when the
organism is in System 1 and 2 Before Modes of the MHP/RT,
but converges when in the System 1 and 2 After Modes
which effectively update the internal neural networks for future
resonance. This section describes what resonates in an O-PDP
system. The resonance mechanism, which is implemented by
means of mirror neurons [1] in the human brain, is incorpo-
rated in the MHP/RT as the mechanism for making available
the part of memory activated by perception in System 1 and
2 (see Figure 2, left).
The cyclic loop of perception and movement shown in
Figure 1 carries out continuous updates of network con-
nections of constituent neurons during the convergence of
resonance period in the MHP/RT. Human behavior is struc-
tured in four bands (biological, cognitive, rational, and social
bands) [10], and memory is constructed as ﬁve distinctive
multi-dimensional memory frames (see Figure 2, middle). This
suggests that the information is coming from an environment
where the informant could either be other humans or inani-
mate objects. This information will generate resonance in the
recipient of the information in a speciﬁc way that reﬂects the
states of the development of the multi-dimensional memory
frames. For a set of given external stimuli, a human being
generates resonance by using the current memory for carrying
out the next action and updates it. On the one hand, the
PCM processes utilize the resonance mechanism to create the
subsequent actions. On the other hand, the external entities,
that make resonance generate internally, are created ultimately
by humans. Human action associated with a band of the
Newell’s time scale could be associated with the part of
memory that participates via the resonance mechanism.
From the above argument, it is plausible to assume that a
human could create an entity that makes the others generate
resonance for performing the subsequent actions and vice
versa. This assumption represents what was meant by the term
“meme” that Richard Dawkins [17] coined in the 1970s, which
was conceptual and was not deﬁned clearly. The Structured
Meme Theory (SMT) proposed by Toyota et al. [16] deﬁnes
memes as entities that represent the information associated
with the objects that the brain can recognize.
Figure 4 depicts how memes propagate in the reality ﬁeld.
The process of propagation is facilitated by symbolization.
A symbolized meme enables human beings to think at ab-
stract levels. Suppose that Object-O1, Object-O2, or Object-O3
appear in the environment. Each of these resonates with
memory by using patterns stored in the PMD-frame and causes
activation of RMD-, BMD-, and MMD-frames. The part of
memory that is activated, Pattern-Pa (see Figure 4, bottom),
will be used in action selection through resonance. Any entities
in the environment that match Pattern-Pa are treated in the
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 4. Propagation of Meme
same way in the action selection process as Object-O[Pa].
Pattern-Pa will be given a unique name Symbol-Sa and it
will be stored in WMD-frame. In the future, when Symbol-Sa
appears in the environment in someone’s utterances, it might
resonate with Pattern-Pa. Symbol-Sa could be associated with
Object-O1, Object-O2, or Object-O3. Therefore Symbol-Sa
effectively functions as its abstraction, AbstractSymbol-ASa,
when it is used in communication. It is reasonable to assume
that the higher the resonance level of Symbol-Sa becomes, the
longer AbstractSymbol-ASa is maintained and inherited as an
effective communication medium.
B. Structured Meme
The recent consensus is that the range of information inher-
ited by the genes is limited to physical functions and infantile
behavior. Human beings need to acquire basic behavioral skills
and communication skills through the experience of acting in
the environment. As described in Section III-A, memes that
can cause resonance constitute an important part of experience.
This section explains that memes are structured in such a way
that the memory is structured in multi-dimensional memory
frames.
Figure 5 expands Pattern-Pa, that appears at the bottom of
Figure 4, and the processes shown in Figure 5 as “Mapping
Patterns on Brain” and “Mapping Patterns on WMD-frame”
in order to show which portions of the neural networks
would participate while a human being utilizes the WMD-
frame in communication. As shown by Figure 4, symbols
in the WMD-frame are gradually incorporated into the en-
vironment in the form of a thesaurus, i.e., lists of words in
groups of synonyms and related concepts, languages used for
person-to-person communication (individual language), which
might include not only direct but also metaphorical uses, and
languages used in cultural contexts (cultural language), in
which appropriate understanding of common sense that has
been established in the speciﬁc community, is essential for
successful communication. Thesauruses, individual languages,
and cultural languages increase their complexity in this order
in terms of the patterns they are linked with the objects in
the environment. Thesauruses are associated with the objects
in the environment that are encoded in the neural networks
in the initial development stage from the birth to 3 years.
Individual languages are associated with not only the objects
in the environment but also the symbols that have already been
incorporated in the environment. The same is true for cultural
languages.
The process of “Mapping patterns on symbols in WMD-
frame” shown in Figure 4 can be subdivided into three
processes based on the degree of complexity of mapping.
The patterns that were mapped on the thesauruses, individual
languages, and cultural languages are shown as Action-Level
Meme, Behavior-Level Meme, and Culture-Level Meme (see
Figure 5), respectively, that were introduced in the Structured
Meme Theory proposed by Toyota et al. [16] . The mechanism
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 5. Structure of meme
by which the three levels of memes and genes inherit infor-
mation is analogous to an information system. Genes serve
as ﬁrmware that mimics behavior-level activities. Action-level
memes serve as the operating system that deﬁnes general pat-
terns of spatial-temporal behavioral functions. Behavior-level
memes represent middleware that extends the general patterns
to concrete patterns. Culture-level memes act as application
tools that extend the concrete patterns to the ones that work
in a number of groups of people.
The relationships between the three levels of memes and
multi-dimensional memory frames are as follows:
•
Action-level memes represent bodily actions stored in
the MMD-frame;
•
Behavior-level memes represent behaviors in the en-
vironment stored in the BMD-frame; and
•
Culture-level memes represent culture stored in the
RMD-frame and the WMD-frame.
IV.
DEVELOPMENT OF PIM AND MULTI-DIMENSIONAL
MEMORY FRAMES
In Section II, we described the mechanism by which PIM
develops with the Four-Process by utilizing the resonance
mechanism. Section III described how the contents of multi-
dimensional memory frames, which could resonate with the
PCM processes running synchronously with the environment,
are maintained among human beings through communication.
This section describes the changes in the contents of PIM and
multi-dimensional memory frames over time as human beings
grow up from birth to the end of adolescent. This explains
human development in terms of PIM and multi-dimensional
memory frames (Figure 5, bottom).
This section elaborates the four stages in PIM develop-
ment as described in [9]. Table II shows the age range, rate
of autonomous development of perception and motion, and
the method of connecting sensory and motor neurons via
interneurons and the resultant control method. Figure 6 depicts
schematically the development of PIM (the sensory nervous
system and the motor nervous system characterized by the
functioning of interneurons connecting them (Figure 3)) and
the development of multi-dimensional memory frames that
shows the structured inter-connections of interneurons along
with each stage (Figure 2, center). The multi-dimensional
memory frames that develop at a particular stage are shown
by adding shades.
A. Stage 1
At 0 ∼ 6 years of age, feedforward loops are the dominant
control mechanism and these establish fundamental relation-
ships between MMD- and BMD-frames by means of “uplink-
ing.” In the ﬁrst half of this period, at 0 ∼ 3 years of age, sen-
sory and motor neurons experience rapid autonomous develop-
ment. Interneurons connect them by subordinate-intervention,
resulting in feedforward control (Figure 6-1A). During this pe-
riod, human beings establish inter-connections between PMD-
and MMD-frames, and PMD-, MMD-, and BMD-frames. The
former is related to action-level memes and the latter, to
behavior-level memes. These make integrated movements of
bodily actions possible on the basis of the relationships be-
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE II. PIM DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
Speed of Autonomous Development
Method for Establishing Connection
Resulting Control Mechanism
Stage
Age
Perception
Motion
Interneurons
1
0∼ 3
Rapid
Rapid
subordinate
Feedforward control
2
4∼ 7
Fast
Fast
memory-mediated
Limited feedback control
3
7∼ 12
Stable
Stable
memory-mediated-proactive
Wide feedback control
4
13∼ 18
Settled
Settled
memory-mediated-autonomous
Extended feedback control
tween the input from the perceptual system in the PMD-frame
and the output expressed as reﬂexive movements in the MMD-
and BMD-frames, for example, simple utterances (Figure 6-
1B).
B. Stage 2
In the latter half of this period, at 4 ∼ 6 years of age,
there is rapid autonomous development of sensory and mo-
tor neurons. Interneurons connect these by memory-mediated
interventions, resulting in feedback controls (Figure 6-2A).
During this period, human beings acquire the skill of behaving
in relation with other persons and the methods for conversing
with others such as the ability to explain using simple syntax.
Acquisition of utterances and combined motor movements
become possible by using the RMD-frame that connects simple
syntax of symbols in the WMD-frame by linking PMD-, BMD-
, and MMD-frames. At this stage, the conscious processes
of System 2 Before and System 2 After that make feedback
controls possible are initiated (Figure 6-2B).
C. Stage 3
Later, at 7 ∼ 12 years of age, parallel distributed activities
are almost complete. There is stable autonomous develop-
ment of the sensory and motor neurons. Interneurons connect
them by memory-mediated proactive interventions, resulting
in wider feedback controls (Figure 6-3A). During this period,
human beings acquire the skill of ﬁrst-order logical thinking
by using letters or symbols and that of cooperation with
other persons. These activities facilitate the development of in-
terconnections among the multi-dimensional memory frames,
resulting in very complex networks. Figure 6-3B) shows the
development of interconnections in the RMD- and WMD-
frames. The key is the presence of symbols that intervene be-
tween the various input and output connections; these symbols
are related to culture-level memes.
Structural development precedes procedural development.
The former refers to the development of connections between
PMD- and MMD-frames with the support of the BMD-frame.
The BMD-frame stores repetitive sequences of motor actions in
the MMD-frame as single units; therefore, the action sequences
in the BMD-frame can be carried out unconsciously. The
latter refers to the development of connections between WMD-
and RMD-frames. The connections start from spoken informal
language to more abstract structural representations of formal
language. The WMD-frame stores sequences of symbols as
language dissociated from the real world; the RMD-frame
stores a set of BMD-frames into a manipulable unit. The
connections between the contents in the WMD-frame and those
in the RMD-frame give reality to the contents in the WMD-
frame. Structural development and procedural development
interact with each other in the RMD-frame occasionally and
proceed in parallel. Procedural development in the RMD-frame
is critical to extend the range of behavior. Once elements in
the RMD-frame are compiled in the System 2 After mode, the
compiled rule can be used to initiate a behavior with longer
action steps.
D. Stage 4
Finally, at age 13 ∼ 18 years, parallel distributed activities
are complete. There is settled autonomous development of
sensory and motor neurons. Interneurons connect these using
memory-mediated autonomous intervention, resulting in even
wider feedback control
(Figure 6-4A). During this period,
feedback loops are established; these are used to form language
processing circuits in a single-layer, WMD-frame. During this
period, the ability of logical writing and the generation of
grammatically correct sentences by using ordinary language
affects signiﬁcantly the development process. The WMD-
frame can evolve autonomously and extensively; part of the
WMD-frame is associated with the BMD-frame and ultimately
connected with the real world but the rest of the WMD-frame is
dissociated from the real world because there is no connection
between the WMD-frame and RMD-frame (Figure 6-4B).
V.
CONCLUSION
Resonance connects remote systems enabling them to work
jointly. Human beings act in the environment by using two
systems: a cyclic PCM system that works in synchronization
with the environment and an autonomous memory system
that operates asynchronously with the environment. Based on
MHP/RT, this paper describes the hypothesis that the PCM
system and the memory system interact with each other via
a resonance mechanism. First, this paper shows that a single
action selection carried out by the PCM system was conceived
as a mapping of the input from the environment represented in
M-dimensional information in the PMD-frame on the output to
the environment represented in N-dimensional motor actions
in the MMD-frame, connected with the BMD- and RMD-
frames, and discusses the role played by resonance in the
PCM processes deﬁned by the MHP/RT and updates of the
memory represented by the multi-dimensional memory frames.
Second, in situations where the environment comprises objects
created by humans, i.e., artifacts such as symbols, manners,
language, and culture, this paper discusses how artifacts are
maintained over time and space with the help of resonance. A
necessary condition for the survival of artifacts is that they
resonate with human beings. This paper introduces action-
level, behavior-level, and culture-level memes to represent
resonating entities stored in memory. Third, we also described
the human development process from birth to the end of
adolescence in terms of the changes in PIM and memory,
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

taking into account the changes in memes that human beings
develop in memory as they grow older.
The argument this paper has profound implications for
cases where there is malfunction of resonance, and where
memory that fails to resonate as reality develops.
An example of the ﬁrst case is Autism Spectrum Disorder
(ASD). Is ASD a resonance problem? Imitation is a potentially
crucial aspect of social cognitive development [18] because
imitation is an efﬁcient tool for two main adaptive functions:
learning and communication. Imitation-based communication
is possible through the use of the two aspects of imitation:
imitating and being imitated [19]. These two aspects give rise
to two roles that partners can exchange by taking turns while
they synchronize matched activities. Neuroimaging studies
of interactive imitation have shown that such communicative
systems involve a coordination of bottom-up and top-down
processes. In accordance with some authors (e.g. [20]) and
based on the MHP/RT model, we hypothesize that perceptive-
motor resonance plays a more central role in imitation in
infancy than does a rational evaluation of the observed action.
Thus, because individuals with ASD have difﬁculties with
imitation, the nature of which remains unclear, it is plausible
to postulate that one of the main problems of ASD is related to
difﬁculties with the mechanisms underlying resonance. Several
studies have shown that very young children with ASD (M
Age < 48 months; for a synthesis: [21]) used imitation less
often when copying the actions of others, spent less time
looking at others’ faces and more time looking at the actions
of others; attentional, social and executive factors underlie
different aspects of imitation difﬁculties in this population.
In other words, ASD is characterized by a deﬁciency in
the development of imitation capacity, and this deﬁciency
implies a deﬁcit in mapping neural codings for actions between
sensory and motor modalities, rather than in motivation or
executive function [22]. Thus, ASD could be characterized by
abnormal development of these mappings and that of resonance
mechanisms.
Another important implication of our hypothesis is related
to the autonomous development of the WMD-frame at the
later stage of development. This paper showed that part of the
contents in the WMD-frame do not necessarily have reality,
which is established by linking the WMD-frame with the chain
of RMD-, BMD-, and MMD-frames. Systematic and logical
knowledge as a group norm could become part of the WMD-
frame through education. It could resonate with the symbols
that refer to the knowledge but would not resonate with real
objects in the environment. The larger the non-resonant part
of memory, the less the person will resonate with reality in the
environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number 20H04290. The author would like to thank Editage
(www.editage.com) for English language editing.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Dinet and M. Kitajima, “The Concept of Resonance: From Physics
to Cognitive Psychology,” in COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth Interna-
tional Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applica-
tions, 2020, pp. 62–67.
[2]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Simulating navigation behaviour based
on the architecture model Model Human Processor with Real-Time
Constraints (MHP/RT),” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 31,
no. 1, 2012, pp. 41–58.
[3]
M. Kitajima, Memory and Action Selection in Human-Machine Inter-
action.
Wiley-ISTE, 2016.
[4]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Decision-making and action selection
in Two Minds: An analysis based on Model Human Processor with
Realtime Constraints (MHP/RT),” Biologically Inspired Cognitive Ar-
chitectures, vol. 5, 2013, pp. 82–93.
[5]
S. K. Card, T. P. Moran, and A. Newell, The Psychology of Human-
Computer Interaction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
1983.
[6]
J. L. McClelland and D. E. Rumelhart, Parallel Distributed Processing:
Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition : Psychological and
Biological Models.
The MIT Press, 6 1986.
[7]
D. Kahneman, “A perspective on judgment and choice,” American
Psychologist, vol. 58, no. 9, 2003, pp. 697–720.
[8]
D. Morris, The nature of happiness.
London: Little Books Ltd., 2006.
[9]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Hierarchical Structure of Human Action
Selections – An Update of Newell’s Time Scale of Human Action,”
in Procedia Computer Science, BICA 2014. 5th Annual International
Conference on Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, vol. 41,
2014, pp. 321–325.
[10]
A. Newell, Uniﬁed Theories of Cognition (The William James Lectures,
1987).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.
[11]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Guidelines for designing artifacts for
the dual-process,” in Procedia Computer Science, BICA 2015. 6th
Annual International Conference on Biologically Inspired Cognitive
Architectures, vol. 71, 2015, pp. 62–67.
[12]
J. Decety, T. Chaminade, J. Gr`ezes, and A. Meltzoff, “A pet
exploration
of
the
neural
mechanisms
involved
in
reciprocal
imitation,” NeuroImage, vol. 15, no. 1, 2002, pp. 265 – 272.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1053811901909383[retrieved:March,2021]
[13]
M. Iacoboni and M. Dapretto, “The mirror neuron system and
the consequences of its dysfunction,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
vol. 7, no. 12, 2006, pp. 942–951. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1038/nrn2024[retrieved:March,2021]
[14]
M. Iacoboni et al., “Cortical mechanisms of human imitation,”
Science, vol. 286, no. 5449, 1999, pp. 2526–2528. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.286.5449.252[retrieved:March,2021]
[15]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Four Processing Modes of in situ Human
Behavior,” in Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures 2011 -
Proceedings of the Second Annual Meeting of the BICA Society,
A. V. Samsonovich and K. R. J´ohannsd´ottir, Eds.
Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: IOS Press, 2011, pp. 194–199.
[16]
M. Toyota, M. Kitajima, and H. Shimada, “Structured Meme Theory:
How is informational inheritance maintained?” in Proceedings of the
30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, B. C. Love,
K. McRae, and V. M. Sloutsky, Eds.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society, 2008, p. 2288.
[17]
R. Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene.
New York City: Oxford University
Press, 1976.
[18]
H. J. Stewart, R. D. McIntosh, and J. H. Williams, “A speciﬁc deﬁcit
of imitation in autism spectrum disorder,” Autism Res, vol. 6, no. 6,
Dec 2013, pp. 522–530.
[19]
J. Nadel, “Perception-action coupling and imitation in autism spectrum
disorder,” Dev Med Child Neurol, vol. 57 Suppl 2, Apr 2015, pp. 55–58.
[20]
M. Paulus, S. Hunnius, M. Vissers, and H. Bekkering, “Imitation
in
infancy:
Rational
or
motor
resonance?”
Child
Development,
vol. 82, no. 4, 2011, pp. 1047–1057. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/41289825[retrieved:March,2021]
[21]
G. Vivanti, D. Trembath, and C. Dissanayake, “Mechanisms of imitation
impairment in autism spectrum disorder,” J Abnorm Child Psychol,
vol. 42, no. 8, Nov 2014, pp. 1395–1405.
[22]
J. H. Williams, A. Whiten, and T. Singh, “A systematic review of action
imitation in autistic spectrum disorder,” J Autism Dev Disord, vol. 34,
no. 3, Jun 2004, pp. 285–299.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Stage 1
1A
1B
Stage 2
2A
2B
Stage 3
3A
3B
Stage 4
4A
4B
Figure 6. Development of PIM and multi-dimensional memory frames
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

