DailyExp : A Tool for Collecting Cognitive Performance and Physiological Data in Daily Life with
Engaging Behavioral Design
Xianyin Hu
Graduated School of Frontier Sciences
The University of Tokyo
Chiba, Japan
Email: shenyin@s.h.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Yuki Ban
Graduated School of Frontier Sciences
The University of Tokyo
Chiba, Japan
Email: ban@edu.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Shin’ichi Warisawa
Graduated School of Frontier Sciences
The University of Tokyo
Chiba, Japan
Email: warisawa@edu.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract—Experimental designs in cognitive science that rely
on laboratory-based settings are not only costly and time-
consuming but also fail to capture individuals’ cognitive states
as they naturally fluctuate over time in daily life. We presented
a practical tool implemented as a smartphone application that
aims to conveniently collect cognitive performance data in daily
life settings. This application is accessible from major mobile
platforms (iOS, Android), tied with a Fitbit account to collect
physiological data at the same time. We employed engaging
behavioral design to overcome several problems facing experi-
menting in wild, intended to improve data quality as well as
data collection efficiency.
Keywords—data collecting tool; engaging design; physiological
data; cognitive performance;
I. INTRODUCTION
Cognitive science has long focused on understanding the
mechanism of human cognition at an aggregate level, but
individual differences have become an increasingly important
topic. Recently, researchers have adopted a perspective that
views individuals’ cognitive states as a dynamic system that
fluctuate. It is also suggested that the fluctuation in cognition
is related to fluctuation in physiology from an embodied
cognition perspective [1]. In this study, we focused on inves-
tigating individual differences and intra-individual variations
in well-studied cognitive mechanisms. We addressed that the
experiment should be conducted in a well-designed way but
in a real-life environment rather than in a laboratory, since
the latter is not practical to accumulate a large amount of
data that covers both the population variation and intrapersonal
variations. Furthermore, laboratory environments may induce
high arousal levels that shift individuals’ cognitive and physio-
logical states due to nervousness and unfamiliar environment.
To address the above issues, we advocate an approach involv-
ing real-life big data accumulation of cognitive performance
and physiological signals. Previous attempts have been made
to adopt smartphones and smartwatches as assessment tools,
including iVitality [2], DelApp [3], Cognition Kit [4] and
UbiCAT [5]. These studies showed a good correspondence
between data obtained from the mobile-based tools and that
from the laboratory, indicating that mobile-based tools are
feasible for evaluating cognitive function. However, challenges
such as a lack of user engagement throughout a prolonged
experiment still exist in an experiment conducted in the wild
that depends largely on participants’ voluntary behaviors.
Fig. 1. Overview of the system design.
This study provided a practical implementation of a tool
for data collection of both cognitive performance, as well as
physiological data in daily life settings with engaging behav-
ioral design. An alpha version of the smartphone application
DailyExp is readily available that can conduct various classical
paradigms in cognitive science. The application was linked
with a widely used commercial smartwatch (Fitbit) to collect
physiological data at the same time. This application is ac-
cessible from major mobile platforms (iOS and Android). We
employed multiple practices of engaging behavioral designs to
overcome several challenges facing experimenting in the wild.
The paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we provide
a detailed description of the implementation that covers the
technical aspects to develop the tool. In Section 3, we eval-
uated the system through a one-month user study involving
ten participants. In Section 4, we discussed future directions
and potential enhancements to further improve the system. We
also discuss its potential applications in different domains of
cognitive science, showcasing its versatility. In Section 5 we
present a brief summary that highlights the achievements of
this paper.
II. IMPLEMENTATION
A. Implementation Details
Fig 1 showed the overview of the system design. The
mobile client of DailyExp was developed using React Native,
a web-based open-source framework for mobile application
development. React Native was chosen to ensure compatibility
across multiple platforms for iOS and Android devices. For
the server side, Firebase’s data storage service was utilized
to store data, including users’ daily summary data, cognitive
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 2. Screenshots of DailyExp. (a) The 2-back task. (b) The Stroop task.
(c) The FluidIQ task. (d) The post-task questionnaire.
performance data for various tasks, and physiological data
grabbed from the Fitbit server using Fitbit web API.
B. Cognitive Tasks
In the alpha version of DailyExp, three well-established
cognitive tasks were administrated to study working memory
(N-back), attention and executive function (Stroop), and fluid
intelligence (FluidIQ or Raven’s Progressive Matrices) as
shown in Fig 2. (a)-(c). These tasks were selected due to
their robustness and potential to have individual differences
and intrapersonal fluctuations in the corresponding cognitive
ability to be evaluated. Performance data with the timestamp,
problem context, users’ response, and reaction time will be
recorded and uploaded to the Firebase server.
C. Dealing with Unexpected User Behavior
An issue facing the experiment that relies on users’ vol-
untary behavior is that users do not always behave in a
desired manner. Predictable behaviors include forgetting to
wear the smartwatch, responding randomly without involving
the target cognitive process to be assessed, and an improper
understanding of the procedures for the tasks. These behaviors
will lead to a lack of data and noisy meaningless data.
To address these issues, our application implemented several
features to reduce unexpected behaviors. Firstly, we provided
reminders of wearing the smartwatch before the start of any
task. Secondly, practice mode with feedback will help users
familiarize themselves with the task procedure. Moreover, user
performance is recorded to monitor if it falls below a preset
threshold. Users will be notified of invalid conduction due
to their suboptimal performance. Another concern facing an
experiment in wild is that it is difficult to control factors that
are not the target of interest, such as physical activities and
caffeine intake, which give a great influence on the cognitive
and physiological state. As a solution, we provide a self-
report questionnaire (Fig 2. (d)) after completing the task. This
enables data to be nicely categorized and analyzed afterward.
D. Engaging Behavioral Design
We leveraged multiple practices of engaging behavioral
design aiming to improve the efficiency of data collection,
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 3.
Screenshots of DailyExp. (a) The encouragement view. (b) The
performance tracking view. (c) The rewards view. (d) The ranking view.
which is largely determined by user engagement. Fig 3. (a)
showed the encouragement view that popped up immediately
after each task conduction, notifying users about how well
they performed this time compared to the past. We expect
this action-reward link leads to the habitation of voluntary
conduction of cognitive tasks. Fig 3. (b) showed a performance
tracking view from a long-term perspective. The calendar
and line chart displayed the monthly task executions and
performance fluctuations, while the bar chart showed the task
executions for the current week. This feature took advantage
of human’s tendency to make more effort towards specific
goals when they feel in control of their actions. We expect
this feature to satisfy users’ desire for autonomy and increase
intrinsic motivation. Fig 3. (c) illustrated the monetary rewards
earned, along with detailed information, such as the amount
of time spent on each task and the corresponding rewards.
In addition to providing an external motivation, this feature
also promotes transparency of the experiment and is expected
to enhance the psychological safety of participants. Finally,
a ranking view (Fig 3. (d)) was implemented as a social
motivation leveraging the competitive mindset by allowing
users to see others’ task executions.
III. EVALUATION
To evaluate DailyExp, we recruited 10 students (M=6,
F=4, aged 21-27) to download the alpha version and used
it for one month. A monetary reward of 100 Japanese yen
was given for each valid task completion. Participants were
requested to fill out a brief questionnaire after the study, which
gathered information regarding their level of busyness during
the experiment period and identify the specific aspects of
DailyExp that motivated their engagement.
Throughout the study, we obtained a total of 833 rounds
of cognitive performance data, concurrently capturing corre-
sponding physiological data. Fig 4. (a) illustrated the distribu-
tion of task completions, with 322 rounds for the FluidIQ task,
290 rounds for the Stroop task, and 235 rounds for the N-back
task. A summary of user engagement was illustrated in Fig 5.
Six out of the ten users (user 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, and 10) actively
engaged with DailyExp, incorporating it into their daily lives
throughout the study period for more than ten days. Notably,
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

(a)
(b)
Fig. 4. (a) The total number of task completions for the three cognitive tasks
collected from 10 users over a month. (b) The count of users who voted for
screens that motivated their engagement. Users were allowed to make multiple
choices.
Fig. 5. User’s busyness and engagement. Ndays denotes the number of days
with task conducted. The cell color gradient indicated the number of task
types performed (etc., the darkest grey indicated a completion of all three
different tasks). Users printed in green ink are those who conducted tasks for
more than 10 days and were considered engaged, while users printed in red
ink were deemed not engaged.
among the remaining four users who were less engaged, three
reported being occupied with other commitments during the
experiment period. Therefore, we considered DailyExp to be
a practical tool for the continuous collection of data especially
over an extended period when individuals’ levels of busyness
may vary. Moreover, Fig 4. (b) highlights that the ranking
screen had a notable impact on the participants’ engagement,
as eight out of the ten users identified it as a motivating factor
for conducting tasks. This observation suggests that fostering a
sense of social competition could be a highly effective strategy
for user engagement within such a study.
IV. FUTURE WORK
In future works, we plan to expand the coverage of cog-
nitive aspects by administrating more cognitive batteries and
implement a web-based dashboard for experimenters which
would allow them to easily adjust system factors and design
their experiments. We expect DailyExp to be a useful tool
for creating a large-scale real-world cognitive performance
and physiology database. This database has great potential
to contribute to the field of cognitive science by providing
valuable information for understanding individual differences,
intrapersonal fluctuations, and the embodied nature of cogni-
tive processes. Potential research questions include studying
the impact of human rhythms on cognitive processes across
different timescales (e.g., daily circadian rhythm, monthly
menstrual cycle) and identifying biomarkers of cognitive pro-
cesses correlated with physiological features.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we demonstrated DailyExp as a data collection
tool for both cognitive performance and physiological data in
everyday life settings. The tool was evaluated by 10 users for
one-month usage and the results demonstrated its usefulness as
a practical smartphone application for conveniently collecting
data in daily life settings, with consistent usage by a significant
portion of users and successful data collection across multiple
tasks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JST SPRING, Grant Number
JPMJSP2108.
REFERENCES
[1] Tschacher, et al. Dynamical Systems Approach To Cognition, The:
Concepts And Empirical Paradigms Based On Self-organization, Embod-
iment, And Coordination Dynamics. Vol. 10. World Scientific, 2003.
[2] Jongstra S, et al. Cognitive testing in people at increased risk of dementia
using a smartphone app: The iVitality proof-of-principle study. JMIR
Mhealth Uhealth. 2017 May 25;5(5):e68.
[3] Tieges Z, et al. Development of a smartphone application for the objective
detection of attentional deficits in delirium. Int Psychogeriatr. 2015
Aug;27(8):1251–1262.
[4] Dingler T, et al. Building cognition-aware systems: A mobile toolkit for
extracting time-of-day fluctuations of cognitive performance. Proc ACM
Interact Mob Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 2017 Sep 11;1(3):1–15.
[5] Hafiz, et al. ”The ubiquitous cognitive assessment tool for smart-
watches: design, implementation, and evaluation study.” JMIR mHealth
and uHealth 8.6 (2020): e17506.
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

