A Position for Proactive Cybersecurity Policies for Military BCIs  
Ashley Boykin  
Capitol Technology University 
Cybersecurity Department  
Baltimore, USA 
e-mail: abboykin@captechu.edu  
Jayfus T. Doswell  
Juxtopia® Advanced Mixed Reality (JAMR) Lab 
The Juxtopia Group, Inc.  
Baltimore, USA 
e-mail: jayfus@juxtopia.com 
Abstract - More countries are considering equipping 
their soldiers with Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCI). 
Hence, these governments will require investment in 
access control policies that specifically target BCI to 
prevent the technology from becoming vulnerable to 
internal and external threats. Authors present a 
position 
on 
the 
importance 
of 
International 
cybersecurity policies to protect data from BCI and 
humans.  
Keywords – cybersecurity; policy; government; BCI; 
brain. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
     Access control policies and management refers to 
the methods in which users are granted or denied 
access to users or systems. Its foundation is 
upholding authentication, confidentiality, integrity, 
reliability, maintainability, availability and non-
repudiation to correctly grant and manage access to a 
needed resource or system [1].  
A. BCI Cybersecurity Overview  
     The international community has expressed 
interest in using Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCI)s 
(BCI) in a variety of industry sectors, ranging from 
medical and commercial space to military industries.  
Each of these industries has investigated how 
technological advancements in BCI can improve 
human performance in completing tasks more 
efficiently and at lower costs. For example, BCIs 
allow improved human capabilities to be enhanced by 
augmenting human skillset and physical capabilities. 
However, these technical advancements potentially 
pose a larger attack surface for cybersecurity 
professionals to consider. The results of a BCI 
cyberattack can have devastating and adverse 
consequences to 1.) BCI wearer’s health; and 2.) 
Provide an attacker with access to critical information 
ranging from an individual’s neurological state; 
active memory and thoughts; to neurological 
illnesses/diseases [2].   
     Hence, understanding the creative capabilities of 
humans 
to 
both 
create 
and 
disrupt 
BCI 
infrastructures, it is prudent to take proactive 
processes for creating policies to, not only bolster a 
BCIs security mechanisms, but also to enhance BCI 
access control capabilities to prevent critical data  
from 
becoming 
susceptible 
to 
well-meaning 
colleagues without the appropriate authorization to 
access the information.  
B. Non-Invasive BCI  
    Across the aforementioned industries, BCIs may 
be engineered with non-invasive and transcutaneous 
methods ranging from near-infrared spectroscopy 
(fNIRS) 
and 
electro-encephalogram 
(EEG) 
to 
transcranial magnetic stimulator (TMS) devices. The 
objective of BCIs is to assist human navigation of 
computer or other electro-mechanical systems or to 
extract neurological information from the human. 
Although fNIRS has positive advantages, such as 
being low-risk and provides high-spatial resolution, 
its main drawback is that it is not portable whereas 
EEG is portable. The disadvantage of EEG is that 
signals are able to be distorted by surrounding 
interference [3]. EEG and fNIRS are currently the 
best options for BCI implementation and research for 
military implementation. 
II.
BCI AND CYBERSECURITY 
A. HSPD-12 Access Control Guidelines 
     The Homeland Security Presidential Directive 12 
(HSPD-12) was established to streamline the process 
of access control regarding federal employees and 
contractors for the United States (U.S.) government. 
This directive forms the foundation for streamlining 
access control policies for greater interoperability 
throughout governmental agencies.    
     Typically, science innovates faster than policies 
allow. Therefore, it is a necessity that there are 
guidelines in place delineating strong access control 
policies for BCI users that are explored prior and 
alongside military-wide adoption of BCI for highly-
skilled soldiers.  Protection against bad actors as well 
as internal threats must be implemented alongside 
science, so that researchers will understand what and 
how to protect a person’s BCI and the critical data 
located within their system.  
B. Implementing Access Controls 
     The best course of action for using fNIRS is a 
unified physical and logical security system. This is 
because this method analyzes a current system’s 
capabilities and needs as well as its future needs and 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

goals. Therefore, this access control method will 
evolve with the BCI’s needs. The evolutionary access 
control will place the foundation for protecting the 
user and any components required for the BCI to 
operate successfully within its set of parameters.  
C. Military Medicine Access Control  
     Scientists have also discovered that brainwaves 
are unique to individuals [4]. Thus, it means that 
brainwaves can be considered a biometric feature to 
implement within access control mechanisms for 
wearers in the future. There have been instances 
where BCIs have proven beneficial to those suffering 
from 
neurological 
conditions. 
However, 
BCI 
cybersecurity researchers must determine, for other 
reasons, how to protect the identity of BCI wearers 
who may suffer from cognitive abilities and 
comorbidities as well as those who have neurological 
gifts and unique skill proficiency that make the 
individual a target.  
III.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
     In conclusion, strong cybersecurity access control 
policies must be implemented in governments, 
around the world, based on how soldiers and 
peacekeeping units are currently using BCIs and 
predictive how these specially skilled and protected 
individuals will use BCIs for battle, training and 
peacekeeping missions.  
   The adverse results from a prolonged cybersecurity 
attack can have devastating results on the wearer’s 
neurological system as well as provide an attacker 
with access to critical information.   
     The military’s exploration of incorporating BCI 
comes with a responsibility to ensure the proper 
access control policies are enabled and enforced 
alongside the research and development (R&D) 
phases and prior to implementation. In this way, 
vulnerabilities can be identified and policies can be 
created to bolder a user’s BCI efficiency as well as its 
internal and external security.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
    This research was supported by the Juxtopia® 
Advanced Mixed Reality (JAMR) program of The 
Juxtopia Group, Inc.  
REFERENCES
[1]
CIO Council, Executive Office of the President of the 
United States. Federal Identity, Credential, and 
Access 
Management 
(FICAM).
Roadmap 
and 
Implementation Guidance. [Online]. Available from 
https://www.idmanagement.gov/wp-
content/uploads/sites/1171/uploads/FICAM_Roadmap
_and_Implem_Guid.pdf. Retrieved March, 2019. 
[2]
J. Minguez and P. Usieto. “Avoiding brain hacking - 
Challenges of cybersecurity and privacy in Brain-
Computer 
Interfaces.” 
Available 
from 
https://www.bitbrain.com/blog/cybersecurity-brain-
computer-interface. Retrieved March, 2019. 
[3]
Grey Matters. Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCI)s. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
http://greymattersjournal.com/brain-computer-
interfaces/. Retrieved March, 2019. 
[4]
B. Armstrong, et. al. “Brainprint: Assessing the 
uniqueness, collectability, and permanence of a novel 
method for ERP biometrics,” Neurocomputing, vol. 
166, 
pp 
59-67, 
Oct. 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.neucom.2015.04.025.  
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

