Ecology of Spam Server Under Resilience Force
in the e-Network Framework
Katsuko T. Nakahira, Kakeru Yamaguchi, and Muneo Kitajima
Nagaoka University of Technology
Niigata, Japan
Email:katsuko@vos.nagaokaut.ac.jp,yukidaruma1232@yahoo.co.jp,mkitajima@kjs.nagaokaut.ac.jp
Abstract—We propose the concept “ecology of a spam server,”
based on the e-Network and resilience in an effort to clarify its
mechanism, which will contribute to the development of secu-
rity and network strategies. We consider the microstructure of
resilience with the e-Network framework and demonstrate three
stages of spam servers: secure but underlying, developing, and
critical. Using these features, we introduce the Evolution Diagram
(ED), a method for quantitatively representing the patterns of the
evolution history of a server. From this diagram, we derive three
indexes to measure resilience: maximum transmission potential,
continuity, and reproducibility. Through these indexes, we deﬁne
resilience, which is divided into eight classes depending on the
existence/absence of these three primitive features. We calculate
the resilience of the individual spam servers. This idea would lead
to useful tools for producing strategies not only for security but
also for Internet/country domain governance.
Keywords–ecology of spam server, resilience, e-Network, ED
transition diagram
I.
INTRODUCTION
In this study, we develop the concept “ecology of a spam
server” in an effort to understand the mechanism under which
spam evolves and spreads. In addition, we determine how it is
related to the e-Network [1].
Currently, spam is considered a principal factor that may
cause serious problems (e.g., decreasing one’s productivity due
to the slip of important mail and increasing the cost of admin-
istrating mail substratum). Many studies have been conducted
and a number of white papers have been published concerning
security-related spam. These studies have proposed a variety
of anti-spam strategies. For example, Graham [2] addressed
the following issues based on the userprovider conﬁguration
and networking scheme with some descriptions of advantages,
demerits, and roles of various categories: ﬁltering (signature-
based/Bayesian (statistical) rule-based (heuristic)/challenge-
response), secret address, junk address, penny per mail, mail
server blacklists, ﬁlters that ﬁght back (FFBs), slow senders,
laws, and complaints to spammers’ Internet Service Provider
(ISP)’s. Recently, other strategies have been developed. Li and
Hsieh [3] developed a group-based anti-spam framework. They
analyzed community behavior of spammers through a large
collection of spam mail to identify structures of spammers
using spam trafﬁc data collected on a domain mail server.
They suggested that the number of members in a group and
the number of groups with which a spammer is associated are
useful measures for developing group-based anti-spam strate-
gies. Stankovi´c and Simiˇc [4] proposed effective strategies
for defending against botnets, consisting of a list of measures
and activities along with some explanatory descriptions. Van
Staden and Venter [5] proposed anti-spam strategies for de-
tecting botnet activities and tracing botmasters.
Expanding this research, the objective of the present study
is to construct a method for estimating Internet governance
for each region in the world. To do this, we assume that
the spam server exists as social ecology. Thus, we must
understand spam servers’ behavior in the context of human
involvement. In this paper, we introduce two concepts, the e-
Network and resilience, to clarify the ecology of a spam server.
By deﬁnition, spam servers distribute spam mail. However, the
spam server is not installed as a “spam server” from the outset.
It “behaves” as a spam server at the moment but may return to
acting as a “normal” server at any time in the future. However,
it may continue to behave as a spam server, or even become a
worse spam server. How the behavior of a spam server changes
over time depends on several technological, human, and social
factors. This study regards this phenomenon as the ecology
of a spam server. This paper discusses dynamics in the e-
Network framework [1] and proposes resilience as a primary
force that shapes the behavior of spam servers.
e-Network. This study assumes that the ecology of a spam
server should emerge from interactions among the factors
deﬁned in the e-Network framework proposed by [1]. Table
I lists the fundamental components in the e-Network: human
factor, substratum factor, products factor, and environment
factor. The media, which are restricted to spam mail in this
study, connect them. The following are examples of interaction
between factors:
•
A user who intends to send spam mail must use PCs
and ISPs (human-substratum interaction).
•
A user sends spam mail to earn money (human-
environment interaction).
•
The registry must control Top Level Domain (TLD)s
(substratum-environment interaction).
Resilience force. Resilienceis deﬁned as “the ability of a net-
work administer and maintain an acceptable level of service in
the presence of various faults and [such] challenges to normal
operations” in the context of network risk management, focus-
ing on the relationship between security and resilience (e.g.,
see [6] and [7]). This study, however, reinterprets it within the
e-Network framework: a server that has become a spam server
might revert to a normal secure server as a result of interactions
between the substratum factor (server and network) and the
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. THE FRAMEWORK COMPONENTS IN E-NETWORK
component
role
variable
human factor
human behavior
user
substratum factor
the device for execution
client, server, the Internet
environment factor
surround human and substratum
law, freedom of speech, education, income, a custom, etc.
product
produced from interaction with human and substratum factor
information contents
media
connection device between the relation of all components
language, images, etc.
human factor, environment factor, and/or products factor. Some
interactions could be strong enough to make an insecure server
revert to a secure one, whereas others could be too weak
to make this happen. This paper metaphorically considers
that these interactions work as a source of forces, called
resilience force here.
Resilience force characterizes the state of a spam server
over time. It could be secure, developing, or critical. If the
resilience force of a server is strong, it allows the server to
revert to its secure state even if the server begins sending spam
mail. If the resilience force of a server is weak, a server that
has begun to send spam mail is likely to develop the spam-
sending activity to a critical state.
In the following sections, this paper regards the phe-
nomenon that a spam server changes its state over time as
the evolution of a spam server, and proposes the Evolution
Diagram (ED) for quantitatively representing the pattern of a
spam server’s evolution. An ED value, which is a cumulative
and integral value characterizing the evolution history of a
server, and its derivatives (e.g., reproducibility, continuity, and
potential) are candidates for expressing how resilience force
has worked on the server. In section 2, we introduce three
ecological stage of a server in the e-Network. In section
3, we develop the method how to measure strengths of re-
silience force with ED. In section 4, we construct ED transition
diagram and relate to resilience. In section 5, we discuss two
ecological scenarios for spam server. In section 6, we show
the results of observed ecology for spam servers.
II.
THREE ECOLOGICAL STAGES OF A SERVER IN THE
e-NETWORK
A server can be in one of the three ecological stages in the
e-Network: secure but underlying, developing, or critical. Each
of these stages is closely related to how the resilience force
works in the situation deﬁned by the detailed conditions of
the e-Network
around the server. Using Fig. 1, this section
explains the conditions of the elements of the e-Network (hu-
man (users), substratum, and environment (government)) and
their interactions, and introduces resilience force.
Stage 1: Secure but underlying. When a mail server installs
or starts mail service, it should be secure. However, it could
become a spam server just because it works as a mail server.
Therefore, the status of a mail server at this stage is “secure
and underlying” for several reasons. It is likely that a new mail
server is equipped with the latest versions of OS and protocol.
In addition, when a mail service is started, most users who
want to use this service are moral users. The scale of service
is just right for skilled administrators to run and maintain it
appropriately. The range of mail usage is limited: users use
the service simply to contact their friends, family, or business
partners. They tend to reject its immoral use. For these reasons,
Internet governance is maintained by the behavior of moral
users.
Moving to the underlying state. As time goes by, the conditions
that allow the server to keep its status secure may change,
and some problems may arise. The ﬁrst spam is generated.
However, this process occurs only occasionally. For example,
immoral users who join the service may send illegal spam e-
mail (e.g., junk mail). In order to deal with the increased num-
ber of users, the service provider must reinforce the server’s
substratum (e.g., deploy new servers or increase transmission
speed). As the number of servers grows and the transmission
rate increases, the administrator’s task of keeping the service
secure becomes more complicated. Due to the shift of service
users’ and providers’ structures, some mail servers may allow
a large amount of junk e-mail to be sent, mainly because the
administrator cannot distinguish good e-mail from junk e-mail.
Staying in the secure and underlying state. With strong re-
silience force, the service provider can stay in the secure
but underlying state by reducing the possibility of immoral
use through broadcast constraints, enhanced maintenance, and
skilled administrators.
Moving to the developing state. With weak resilience force,
a server moves to the developing stage, where it sends spam
mail chronically. This stage is triggered by worsening behavior
of users and/or the substratum. Some users may become
involved in immoral behavior, such as developing immoral
technology (e.g., virus software), hacking/cracking algorithms,
and automatically sending spam programs. The server provides
little maintenance, due to the lack of skilled administrators and
a poor engineering staff.
Stage 2: Developing. A strong resilience force originating
from the social system might produce several strategies to
improve the service server conditions and cause it to revert
to the secure and underlying stage. Otherwise, the number of
immoral service users will increase, and immoral technologies
will proliferate continuously and widely.
A strong resilience force originating from Internet gover-
nance results in increased control over these immoral behaviors
through laws or strict governance. These interventions involve
legal force to punish these immoral behaviors. Through these
strategies, most users and service providers avoid such spam
behavior and obey the law. The servers that are in the “devel-
oping” stage will revert to the “secure and underlying” stage.
Otherwise, the server may move to an even worse stage, the
critical stage.
Stage 3: Critical. With ultra-weak resilience or no resilience,
the server stays in the critical stage. Here, immoral behavior
and the use of immoral technology may reach the pandemic
level, and service providers cannot control their service quality.
Internet governance cannot control these conditions.
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

worse:  
   lack of control 
               skilled engineers 
   worse respond to 
               immoral situation 
               law 
better: 
   growth 
      skilled engineers  
   improve  
      technologies 
   better respond to 
      law / immoral situation
overloaded servers : maintenance
spam  
generate 
(occasional)
almost spam free
secured 
underlying
develop
critical
spam  
generate 
(chronic)
potential
good governance
good substratum
moral management
continuity
worse:  
   posted engineer 
   skille — immature 
better: 
   growth 
      skilled engineers  
   improve  
      technologies
bloated servers : maintenance
reproducibility
uncontrol
resilience force
ED characteristic
observe spam
length of spam
recur periodically
worst substratum
bad governance
immoral management
client: moral  
           users/technologies 
           manpowered spam
server : balanced power 
              well maintenance 
              skilled engineer
secured
client: moral / immoral 
            users / technologies  
              develop 
                  immoral technologies 
              penetrate 
                  server or virus
server : better/ worse  
              maintenance 
                 lack of  
                  management 
                  skilled engineers
complexed
pandemic 
  immoral users/technology
immoral servers 
    worst/no maintenance 
    earn by immoral service
spread / serve 
  immoral technologies
several changing  
to strict governance
control by law 
strict governance
Figure 1. Microstructure for resilience.
III.
EVOLUTION DIAGRAM AND ITS DERIVATIVES FOR
MEASURING STRENGTHS OF RESILIENCE FORCE
A. Evolution Diagram (ED)
An Evolution Diagram (ED) is a method of quantitatively
representing the pattern of evolution history concerning a
particular event (e.g., sending spam mail). For a given duration
of observation of an event, (e.g., 1 year), we obtain a series
of event-occurrence times as the data. We are interested in
the tendency of change in the density of event occurrences
over time, which should be related to the resilience force of
the agent, (i.e., the spam server) that generates the event. An
effective method of characterizing it is to analyze the data with
different time resolutions (e.g., 1 year, 1/2 year, 1/4 year, and
1/8 year) and record “observed” if there is an event occurs
in the time range or “not-observed” if there is none. Let
the minimum observation time for detecting spam mail be τ
(typically τ = 1sec), and the total observation time be T, which
is a multiple of τ. By assigning “1” if an event is observed
and “0” if none is observed, we can generate a series of 1s
and 0s with the length of T/τ, denoted as ⃗a = (a1, · · · , aT/τ).
In order to analyze the event-occurrence series in a variety
of time resolutions with an arbitrary observation time unit,
δt = j × τ, where j = 1, · · · , T/τ, we create ⃗b(j) =
(b1, · · · , bi, · · · , bL(j)) from ⃗a, where L(j) is the partition
number calculated by the following formula:
L(j) = ⌊
T
j × τ ⌋.
(1)
In here, any positive integers in the range are allowed, but
we use j = 1, 2, 4, · · · , 2n(= T) for the sake of brevity of
calculation.
The most coarse observation corresponds to LT/τ = 1,
and the most precise observation corresponds to L(1) = T/τ.
Here, ⃗b(j) represents a seriese of event occurrences for the
given time resolution δt = j × τ, as a series of 1s and 0s;
bj = 1 if the event is observed during the i-th observation
period with the time resolution of δt, or 0 if non is observed.
The ED value, I(j), is calculated from ⃗b(j) by applying the
following formula:
I(j) =
L(j)
∑
i=1
b(j)
i /L(j),
(2)
where I(j) has value between 0 and 1.
An ED is created by plotting ED values as a function of
j, where j = 1, · · · , T/τ, which is actually used to calculate
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. (a) Example of ED transition. (b) Example of calculation of
Continuity and Reproducibility.
TABLE II. ED-VALUES IN THE CASE OF T = 1, TOTAL NUMBERS OF
SPAMS ARE IN THE PARENTHESIS
Number of spams
1 spam
5 spams
10 spams
30 spams
per 1 month
1 month
2.00 (1)
2.25 (5)
2.34 (10)
2.48 (30)
2 months
2.13 (2)
2.99 (10)
3.17 (20)
3.45 (60)
continue
3 months
2.63 (3)
3.41 (15)
3.70 (30)
4.10 (60)
4 months
2.88 (4)
3.72 (20)
4.06 (40)
5.57 (120)
6 months
3.00 (2)
3.99 (10)
4.16 (20)
4.42 (60)
equal interval
4 months
3.50 (3)
4.37 (15)
4.64 (30)
5.06 (90)
3 months
4.00 (4)
4.99 (20)
5.57 (40)
6.34 (120)
the ED values. ED values increase monotonically to 1 as j
approaches its maximum value, T/τ, if if the server has sent
at least one spam mail during the observation period.
The total ED value for the k-th observation series is
calculated by summing the ED values for the actually taken j
values:
ED(k) =
∑
j={1,···,T/τ}
I(j).
(3)
B. Relationship between total ED values and Spam Sending
Patterns: Simulation
Table II presents the results of the calculation of total
ED values for artiﬁcially generated spam-sending patterns.
The length of observation T is set to T = 224 sec, which
is 194 days or 6.5 months, and j = 20, 21, 22, 23, · · · , 224.
The columns represent four different spam-sending patterns
in terms of the total number of spams (1, 5, 10 and 30). It
is assumed that spam-sending events occur periodically. For
example, when the total number of spams is 10, one spam
is sent every 3 days. The rows indicate the length of seven
spam-sending patterns: 2, 3 or 6 months, and recurring patterns
with 6-, 4-, and 3-month intervals. The ﬁgures in parentheses
indicate the total number of spams sent in a year in the 28
different spam-sending conditions, for referencing purposes.
The total ED values are not necessarily proportional to the
total number of spams. Comparison of the four cases where
the total number of spams per year is 20 indicates that “5
spams/month with the equal interval of 3 months (i.e., 5, 0, 0,
5, 0, 0, · · ·)” has the worst total ED value (4.99). The case “10
spams/month lasting 2 months (i.e., 10, 10, 0, 0, 0, 0, · · ·)” has
the lowest total ED value (3.17). The cases “5 spams/month
lasting 4 months (i.e., 5, 5, 5, 5, 0, 0, · · ·)” with the total ED
value of 3.72 and “10 spams/month with the equal interval of
6 months (i.e., 10, 0, 0, 0, 0, 10, 0, · · ·)” with the total ED
value of 4.16 are in-between.
IV.
RESILIENCE AND ED TRANSITION DIAGRAM
A. ED Transition Diagram
Introducing resilience, we can mark spam servers’ states or
degrees of healthiness. We derive resilience using an ED tran-
sition diagram as explained below. An ED transition diagram
is deﬁned on an x−y plane. Each point has (n−1)-th total ED
value as the x value and n-th total ED value as the y value.
Combining the points for n = 1, · · ·, we can draw a ﬁgure
with connected lines. In the following example, we calculate
total ED values by setting T = 220 , approximately 12 days.
If (n−1)-th and n-th week’s total ED values are different, we
judge that there have been some changes in conditions.
Figure 2 (a) presents ED transition diagrams for two ideal
cases. N is set to 20, with 1 week of observation time. In case
1’s simulation, spam is detected only once every 6 months;
the ED value is 2 when spam is detected and 0 when no spam
is detected. Therefore, the coordinates change in the order (0,
0) → (0, 2) → (2, 0), and a corresponding triangle appears.
In case 2’s simulation, spam is detected every week. The
coordinates change in the order (0, 0) → (0, 2) → (2, 2) → (2,
0), and a corresponding square appears. These two examples
demonstrate that if the same ED value is calculated from
different event occurrence patterns, different closed trajectories
are obtained. Using these features, we deﬁne three elements
for resilience: maximum transmission potential, continuity, and
reproducibility.
Maximum transmission potential. The maximum transmission
potential of resilience is determined from the area of the outer
edge in the ED transition diagram. It is calculated by the area
of a closed surface. In the example depicted in Fig. 2 (b),
the gray zone is the value of maximum transmission potential.
The outer edge of the ED transition diagram indicates the most
active spam transmitting in the period. The area depends on
the amount of spam transmission and the frequency for the
most malicious condition of the server.
Continuity. Continuity represents the line integral of the ED
transition diagram’s trajectory. Practically, we calculate the
Euclidean distances along the trajectory. The total distance
depends on the duration of spam-sending.
Reproducibility. Lastly, we characterize spam transmission
patterns by taking into account the direction of line segments
that constitute the ED transition diagram. Here, we deﬁne six
codes for yn as week n’s ED value:
·
S : yn−1 = 0, yn = a,
·
G : yn−1 = a, yn = 0,
·
_ : yn−1 = a, yn = a,
·
E : yn−1 = 0, yn = 0 (repetition of E is counted as
a single E),
·
U : yn−1 = a1, yn = a2 (a1 < a2),
·
D : yn−1 = a2, yn = a1.
For example, Fig. 2 (a) represents as ESGE, and Fig. 2
(b) represents as ES_UGS· · ·GE. In cases, Fig. 2 (a) has
single S and (b) has several S, which means condition (b) is
worse index value of reproducibility. Following these codes,
reproducibility can be deﬁned as the number of S.
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE III. CLASSIFICATION OF RESILIENCE FORCE, CHECKS ARE
GIVEN FOR MALICIOUS COMPONENTS
class No.
reproducibility (R)
continuity (C)
potential (P)
0
1(P)
√
2(C)
√
3(CP)
√
√
4(R)
√
5(RP)
√
√
6(RC)
√
√
7(RCP)
√
√
√
distance
area
fraction spam 
one time generation
massive spam 
periodic generation
massive spam 
one duration generation
senario 1
senario 2
fraction spam 
periodic generation
P
C
RP
RC
CP
R
RCP
Figure 3. Relation of 2 senarios for spam server ecology and
resilience class.
B. Resilience classes
Finally, we determine resilience for spam servers based
on three components: maximum transmission potential, con-
tinuity, and reproducibility. We set the threshold value of the
components to the values of the top 75% of these elements, and
estimated the normalized degree of resilience of each server.
Here, the normalization factor was the value for a server that
sent spam mail once during the period.
Table III lists the resilience classes deﬁned by counting the
components whose values exceed the threshold values.
Most servers are classiﬁed as class 0. The ratios of No. 6
(CR), No. 1 (P), and No. 7 (PCR) are higher. Hence, No. 6
(RC) is server to send a long period of time a small amount of
spam, No. 1 (P) is server to send a short period of time a large
amount of spam, No. 7 (RCP) is server to send a long period
of time a large amount of spam elements of the resilience has
a meaning separate. Each component of resilience has a
different meaning. Reproducibility R and continuity C mean
weakness of resilience. Reproducibility is a measure of server
status change and turbulence of ED value, and continuity is
strongly related to the reproducibility cause of generating a line
integral of ED transition. Hence, higher reproducibility and
continuity indicate weak resilience. Maximum transmission
potential is a useful component for measuring the strength
of resilience in contrast with continuity and reproducibility.
Even though maximum transmission potential is large whereas
continuity and reproducibility are low, better control and man-
agement of servers derive low continuity and reproducibility.
In a sense, maximum transmission potential functions with the
combination of continuity and reproducibility.
V.
TWO ECOLOGICAL SCENARIOS FOR SPAM SERVER
Using these analyses and simulations, we develop the
“ecology of a spam server.” Evans [8] summarized two distinct
cognitive systems underlying reasoning: system 1, which is
rapid, parallel, and automatic in nature; and system 2, which
involves abstract hypothetical thinking. Coordinating these two
systems, a human can make decisions. Applying this idea, we
construct two ecological scenarios for a spam server (Fig.
3). First, we set two parameters, distance and area, in the
ED transition diagram. Distance represents continuity with
periodic spam-sending from the server. When a spam server
tries to set the duration of a period, the server uses reasoning,
such as safety (undetected by the administrator) duration. In
this case, the distance is long but the area is small, as denoted
by the line indicated as scenario 2 in Fig. 3. Area represents
the maximum transmitting potential of the server. When a
spam server tries to send many spam mails, it does not need
to think about whether or not it has the potential to send
so much mail. The only behavior of the server or spammer
is sending spam without setting the duration of the period;
it simply sends while the administrator does not stop the
behavior. This behavior is denoted by the scenario 1 line in
Fig. 3. Usually, System 2 monitors how System 1 behaves
and warns System 1 when it captures System 1 attempts to
send a lot of spam mails. Compared with Fig. 1, this stage is
regarded as “secure but underlying.” If system 1 or 2 arises in
the server, the stage of the server will change to “developing.”
In this stage, if the resilience force is very strong, the server
recovers its two systems’ cooperation (i.e., the stage will return
to “secure but underlying”) . If the resilience force is weak, the
server’s two systems exhibit worse resonance: System 2 fails
to warn System 1 not to send spam mails and as a consequence
System 1 attempts to send spams more frequently in the
shorter duration. The stage of the server will then be “critical”
(upper right-hand area of Fig. 3). The stage of the server will
then be “critical” (upper right-hand area of Fig. 3). Many
resources are available to prevent changing to worse stages.
One is security technology. In addition, human ability (e.g.,
administrators’ management skills and users’ morality) is also
important. If human behavior does not change, the environment
(e.g., Internet governance or regional management laws) must
become stricter. Using analysis of spam servers’ ecological
features in the network’s geological regions, we encourage
regional management of the Internet. Finally, we observe
features of the regional ecology of spam servers to provide
several suggestions for management.
VI.
OBSERVED ECOLOGY OF SPAM SERVERS
We collected “spam mail headers,” which are the headers of
mail identiﬁed as spam by mail-ﬁltering software (SpamAssas-
sin) at our university. Observation was conducted from March
1, 2013, through February 28, 2014. We identiﬁed 1,733,929
domains and 21,332,168 spam headers. For demonstration
purposes, we randomly extracted 10,000 domains. The total
ED value of each domain was calculated by setting T = 1
year and j = 20, 21, 22, 23, · · · , 224. Note that the possible
total ED values are limited. Only 5,703 domains have a total
ED value of 2. As indicated in Table II, this value corresponds
to the spam-sending pattern “one spam mail sent in a year.”
In addition, 2,109 domains have a total ED value of 2.5.
Figure 4 plots the relationship between maximum transmitting
potential and continuity for 10,000 spam domains, which are
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
distance
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
area
0
20
40
60
80
100
(a)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
distance
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
area
0
20
40
60
80
100
(b)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
distance
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
area
0
20
40
60
80
100
(c)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
distance
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
area
0
20
40
60
80
100
(d)
Figure 5. Sample of several stage at senario 1 and 2 for several ccTLD area.
(a) senario 1 stage, (b) worst stage, (c) initial stage, (d) senario 2 stage.
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
area
distance
100
101
102
103
104
 0  2  4  6  8 10 12 14
area hist.
100
101
102
103
104
 0  10 20 30 40 50
distnce hist.
Figure 4. Relation of value of distance and area.
measured by the amount of outer area and line integral of
ED transition diagram, respectively. for 10,000 spam domains.
The graph depicts the distribution of each server’s area (left
side)/distance (right side). We ﬁnd that the distribution of
distancearea relationships exists between the four points in Fig.
3. Typically, large area and short distance are a healthy state
for the transmission of spam in a short term (1 to 3 weeks).
For this reason, the total ED value tends to become smaller.
This class is equivalent to sending 30 spams in a month
in Table II. Separating observed points in Fig. 4 from each
geological server, we can determine the regional features of
server management. In the graph, we show the histgram of area
(left side)/distance (right side) value. Histgrams’ horizontal
axis represents normalized value of area/distance, and vertical
axis represents the fraction of occurence. Figures 5 (a) through
(d) present observed typical examples of the four geological
regions’ ecology of spam servers. The contour indicates the
number of spam servers at the different values. We found
four types of ecology derived from Fig. 3. For example, we
regard (c) in Fig. 5 as “stable but underlying,” (a) and (d) as
“developing”, and (b) as “critical.” With the four features and
microstructure in Fig. 1, we can estimate the network region’s
server management. Fig. 5 (a) represents that a number of
servers are in the state of high continuity. In contrast, Fig. 5 (d)
represents many servers are in the state of high reproducibility.
Fig. 5 (b) shows a number of servers are in the state of high
continuity or reproducibility. We can ﬁnd these features in
each ccTLD area. With the results, we can guess how the
geological area’s Regional/National Internet Registry makes
Internet management policy: each Internet Registry has already
had effective strategies for the Internet communication with
speciﬁc reasons, or requires to enforce the area’s Internet
security of management.
VII.
CONCLUSION
In this study, we proposed the concept “ecology of a
spam server,” based on the e-Network and resilience in an
effort to understand the mechanism. First we considered the
microstructure for resilience with the e-Network framework
and demonstrated three stages for spam servers: secure but
underlying, developing, and critical. Each stage included sev-
eral features of potential/observe, continuity/length of spam,
and reproducibility/periodic recurrence. Using these features,
we introduced ED, a method for quantitatively representing
the pattern of evolution history concerning a particular event,
analyzing the data with different time resolutions and recording
observed events. Using the ED values, we generated an ED
transition diagram and deﬁned three components to measure
resilience: maximum transmission potential (calculated by
area of closed surface), continuity (line integral for the ED
transition diagram’s trajectory), and reproducibility (number
of restarts of spam emailing). Through these processes, we
deﬁne eight classes of resilience with these three components
and analyze tentative features of spam server behavior. Thus,
we can advance the study of the ecology of a spam server,
which will be a useful tool for producing strategies not only for
security but also for the Internet/country domain governance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The study described in this paper has been partially funded
by the Scientiﬁc Research Expense Foundation C Representa-
tive: Katsuko T. Nakahira (24500308).
REFERENCES
[1]
K.
T.
Nakahira,
“A
Framework
for
Understanding
Human
e-
Network – Interactions among Language, Governance, and more.
”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.maayajo.org/IMG/SIMC/paris-v2.
pdf[accessed2015-02-10]
[2]
P. Graham, “Different Methods of Stopping Spam.” [Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.windowsecurity.com/whitepapers/anti spam/Stopping
Spam.html[accessed2014-09-10]
[3]
F. Li and M. han Hsieh, “An Empirical Study of Clustering Behavior of
Spammers and Groupbased Anti-Spam Strategies,” in CEAS 2006 Third
Conference on Email and AntiSpam, 2006, pp. 27–28.
[4]
S. Stankovi´c and D. Simiˇc, “Defense Strategies Against Modern
Botnets,”
CoRR,
vol.
abs/0906.3768,
2009.
[Online].
Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/0906.3768
[5]
F.
V.
Staden
and
H.
S.
Venter,
“The
State
of
the
Art
of
Spam
and
Anti-Spam
Strategies
and
a
Possible
Solution
using
Digital
Forensics.”
in
ISSA,
H.
S.
Venter,
M.
Coetzee,
and
L.
Labuschagne,
Eds.
ISSA,
Pretoria,
South
Africa,
2009,
pp. 437–454. [Online]. Available: http://www.bibsonomy.org/bibtex/
2a914634f9302a8e9b54425ab149e0e5d/dblp[accessed2015-02-10]
[6]
P. Smith, D. Hutchison, J. P. Sterbenz, M. Sch¨oller, A. Fessi, M. Kar-
aliopoulos, C. Lac, and B. Plattner, “Network Resilience: A Systematic
Approach,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 49, no. 7, July 2011,
pp. 88–97.
[7]
“Measurement Frameworks and Metrics for Resilient Networks and
Services: Technical Report,” European Network and Information Security
Agency, Tech. Rep., Feb. 2011.
[8]
J. S. B. T. Evans, “In two minds: dual-process accounts of reasoning,”
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, vol. 7, no. 10, 2014/11/15, pp. 454–
459. [Online]. Available: http://www.cell.com/trends/cognitive-sciences/
abstract/S1364-6613(03)00225-0[accessed2015-02-10]
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

