Corpus Callosum Shape Changes in Early Alzheimer’s Disease: An MRI Study Using
the Automatic Deformable Model
Amira Ben Rabeh, Faouzi Benzarti, Hamid Amiri
Signal, image and technology information (LR-SITI)
National Engineering School of Tunis (ENIT), Manar,
Tunisia
Emails: amira.benrabeh@gmail.com
benzartif@yahoo.fr
hamidlamiri@yahoo.fr
Mouna Bouaziz
Radiology Service, Institut MT Kassab
Hospital Kassab, Ksar Said, Tunis,Tunisia
Email: bouaziz_mouna@yahoo.fr
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a solution to diagnose
Alzheimer's pathology; we are interested in changing the shape
of the Corpus Callosum (CC). It is the commissure of the brain
and Alzheimer diseases manifests by a significant reduction of its
volume. To do this, we used a classification method based on
decision trees and the Active Shape Model (ASM) to extract the
lesion study. For the deformable model, we added the following
contribution: integration of a priori knowledge to automate the
initialization of the average shape. For the pretreatment step, we
used the median filter. Our method is validated by a physician to
diagnose Alzheimer's disease.
Keywords—Alzheimer; Corpus Callosum (CC); active shape
model (ASM).
I.
INTRODUCTION
Medical images are now ubiquitous in the clinical portion
in brain imaging: anatomic imaging (Computed Tomography
(CT),
Magnetic
Resonance
Imaging
(MRI)),
vascular
(Magnetic Resonance Angiography (MRA)) and functional
(Positron
Emission
Tomography (PET),
Single
Photon
Emission
Computed
Tomography
(SPECT),
Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), electroencephalography
(EEG), magnetoencephalography (MEG)). The amount of
information increases even more when multiple images are
acquired on the same patient to exploit the complementarity of
different ways, or to follow a temporal evolution. Finally,
these images are often accompanied by metadata on the
patient's history and cerebral pathology. With all these images
and complexity, the doctor can usually visually extract it as
incomplete information [1]-[4].
In
this
work,
we
are
particularly
interested
in
the
description of the surfaces of the Corpus Callosum and their
classification
to
facilitate
the
diagnosis
of
Alzheimer’s
disease. The shape analysis and classification are part of an
indivisible digital compact processing chain and automatic (or
semiautomatic) Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD). Thus, a
good evaluation of the performance of such part of description
or classification requires the mastery of the entire chain of
diagnosis.
Our work is organized as follows:
first, we describe the
previous works. In the second section, we define the Corpus
Callosum. In the third section, we present our proposed
method. In the fourth section, we provide results and
discussion.
II. PREVIOUS WORK
There are many methods for diagnosing Alzheimer’s
diseases, such as:
A. VBM (Voxel Based Morphometry)
VBM is a method developed by Ashburner et al. [5] in
2000.
The
objective
of
VBM
is
to
detect
significant
differences in gray matter between two groups of subjects by
voxel to voxel tests. VBM comprises four steps: normalization
stereotactic
images
on
the
same
area,
followed
by
segmentation of the images, and then smoothing the maps of
gray matter obtained, and finally, the application of parametric
statistical tests voxel to voxel.
It is a performant method but it used just the sagittal section.
B. Method Proposed by Olfa Ben Ahmed
She used the Region of Interest (ROI) to extract the
hippocampus and cingulate cortex. For the classification step,
it uses the Bag of Visual World (BOVW) method. This
approach is applied separately on both ROI (hippocampus and
cingulate cortex). The role of this model is to combine the
extracted features of each ROI to build a visual vocabulary. In
addition, the region differs from one projection to another [6].
Thus, we choose to perform the procedure grouping three
times from different projections (sagittal, axial and coronal)
and generating a visual vocabulary by projection.
C. ASM+D(Active Shape Method + Distance)
In addition to the a priori knowledge about the shape and
deformation modes of the structures studied, this method
consists in another acquaintance on the change in the distance
between these structures. This new knowledge is estimated in
a learning phase which is to be deducted from a set of sample
images and based on principal component analysis, a model
describing a distance variation space allowed distance between
structures [7]. This controls the evolution of initial estimates
during the localization phase and ensures the maintenance of
the inter-pattern distance in the space allowed.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

III. CORPUS CALLOSUM AND ALZHEIMER DISEASE
The Corpus Callosum is a commissure (through union
between two parties) section of the brain. The axons beam
interconnects the two cerebral hemispheres. This is the largest
commissure of the brain because it connects the four lobes of
the brain between them (frontal lobes, temporal, parietal and
occipital left and right). The Corpus Callosum, therefore,
ensures
the
transfer
of
information
between
the
two
hemispheres and coordination [8]-[13]. Other commissures are
the fornix, the anterior cingulate and the commissure. The CC
has been a region examined extensively for indications of
Alzheimer various pathology [14]-[19]. This manifests by a
significant reduction of its volume.
IV. MATERIAL
Our
approach
is
applied
to
reference
MRI
based
BRAINWEB. The images are a grayscale and size of 500 *
500 pixels. These images are made by experts.
V. PROPOSED METHOD
Our system is presented in Figure 1.
Figure.1. Diagram of the proposed method
A. Median Filter
It is specifically effective against noise pepper and salt in
images to grayscale. The operation is to replace the value of a
pixel
with the
median
value of all the pixels in
its
neighborhood.
B. The Active Contour Model with Automatic Initialisation
Deformable models represent algorithms for segmentation
images by the contour. The introduction of these models in
image processing was done by Kass et al. [20] who proposed
the first known as "active contours" model. Then, the idea has
been widely adopted and developed to give rise to several
other models depending on the particular problems and the
nature of the processed images. We have grouped these
models into three main classes, namely (i) parametric models
whose curve is explicitly represented by a parametric function,
(ii) geometric models whose curve is represented implicitly
considered the border of level zero of a function, and
(iii) higher order statistical models that are based on a
preliminary statistical analysis of the variation structures. All
these models admit an interesting property, which is the
integration of a priori knowledge about the structures of
interest in the process of segmentation. They have proven their
performance in several application areas [20]-[23].
The ASM is a variation of deformable statistical models,
which is introduced by Cootes and al. [20] in order to extract
complex and non-rigid objects. The advantage of the ASM
compared to other variants of deformable models is that the
evolution of the curve is guided by a strong a priori knowledge
about the geometry and deformation modes of the structure
studied. This knowledge is represented by a statistical model
which describes the authorized deformation space. The
construction of such a model is done by applying a Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) on a training set, which includes
the various possible forms of the object [24]-[26].
The shape is defined by the following equation:
                            υ = ῡ + Pf bf
(1)
were ῡ the average shape, Pf matrix of the main modes of the
deformation’s shape and bf a weight matrix representing the
projection of the form υ in the database Pf.
The segmentation of dynamic structures in medical
imaging is one of the most difficult problems that continues to
preoccupy researchers. This problem arises especially in the
manual initiation of the mean shape. To address this problem,
we have integrated the concept of a priori knowledge to our
automatic
initialization
to
make
the
task
of automatic
segmentation and avoid manual initiation.
N feature points are positioned on the contour of the
region of interest. Each form will be modeled by a vector
constructed by concatenating the coordinates of points placed
on the contour:
Vi = (Xi1, Yi1, Xi2, Yi2, Xi3, Yi3,……...Xin,Yin)
(2)
where (Xij ,Yij) are the coordinates of point j in image i.
Our objective is to extract an average position;
so, we will
take a point of each vector:
Di= (Xi min, Yi min)
(3)
where (Xi min, Yi min) is a point in the vector Vi.
Xi min=min(Xij)
(4)
Applying an analysis PCA, we can deduce the modes and the
amplitudes of the change of position. This phase allows to
Image test
Median filter
Segmentation using
ASM with automatic
initialization
Extract area
Extract feature
Classification
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

build the model describing the position variation range of the
authorized position of the structure studied.
This model is defined by the following equation:
D=Dm+ Pdbd
(5)
where Dm is the average position, Pd the matrix of the variation
modes of position and bd the projection of the position D on
the base Pd.
C. Extract Feature
The notion of form is very important because it allows us
to identify the objects that surround us. The shape analysis is
considered successful if it is used to describe objects in a
manner similar to human perception of shapes. Color is used
as a descriptor. We put the area of the CC segmented on a
black background. After extracting the region of the CC, the
surface and the standard deviation of this area will be
calculated.
It is necessary to count the pixel number of a colored area.
Xij is the pixel coordinates i, j.
nbl: number of rows.
nbc: number of columns.
0
0
nbl
nbc
ij
i
j
Surface
X
=
=
= ∑ ∑
(6)
The standard deviation is defined in probability and applied
statistics. Statistically, it is a measure of spread data. It is
defined as the square root of the variance, or equivalently as
the quadratic mean of the deviations from the average. It has
the same size as the random variable or the statistical variable.
If X is a random variable square-integrable, so belonging to
the space L²(Ω,A,P), standard deviation, usually denoted, is 
defined as the square root of the expected value of (X-E [X]) ²:
[(X E[X])]2
X
E
σ
=
−
(7)
where E[x], the expected value of a real random variable is
intuitively the value you expect to find, on average, if the
same random experiment is repeated many times. It is written
E[X]. If the variable X has a countable infinity of values x1,
x2... with probabilities p1, p2,..., X expectancy is defined as:
1
[X]
i
i
i
E
X p
∞
=
=∑
(8)
The lower the standard deviation is, the more homogeneous
the study area is. Conversely, if it is more important, the area
is more heterogeneous.
D. Classification
Decision trees [27] are tools for decision support. They
consist of a set of rules for dividing a set of cases in
homogeneous groups. Each rule involves a combination of
tests on the descriptors of a case to a group. These rules are
organized as a tree whose structure has the following meaning:
-
Each node corresponds to the test.
-
Each arc corresponds to the response test.
More generally, decision trees can handle any type of
descriptor, provided a method available to group cases
according to the descriptor. Since each test is applied to a
single descriptor at a time, decision trees are well suited to
handle heterogeneous cases.
For classification, we propose the following method: our
database contains two types of images: reached and healthy.
Each image is recorded by the initial vector of the contour, the
surface and the standard deviation of the CC. The extraction of
the region of interest is achieved by placing 30 points on the
initial contour of the CC. If an image is to be tested one should
determine the maximum surface for reached images and fixed
as a threshold. For the standard deviation (std), we determine
the least std for reaches images and fixed as a threshold
deviation. For our database there were two thresholds, namely,
a threshold of surface Ssurf 3000 pixels and a threshold of
standard deviation is 23 Sdev.
The diagram in Figure 2 shows the stages of our classification.
Sobt: surface obtained
Stdobt : standard deviation obtained
Sobt<Ssurf
Sobt>Ssurf
Stdobt>Sdev
Stdobt<Sdev
Figure.2. Diagram of the Classification algorithm
For the classification of an image after the extraction of the
area of the CC, the surface of this area is determined.
- If the resulting surface is less than the threshold Ssurf area,
then the subject is directly classified as reached.
- Otherwise, the standard deviation (std) of the CC area is
determined.
- If the std exceeds the Sdev, then the subject is reached.
- Otherwise, the subject is classified as normal.
Calculate surface
Reaches
Healthy
Calculate standard
deviation
Area of the Corpus Callosum after
segmentation
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Classification Algorithm :
// Step 3: Step of classification
// the surface of the Corpus Callosum Sobt was determined
If (Sobt <Ssurf)
Text ('Topic reached');
else
// the standard deviation Stdobt is determined
If (Stdobt <Sdev)
Text (normal Subject);
else
Text ('Topic reached');
Figure 3. Classification Algorithm
VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Segmentation is considered as the initial stage in the
CAD, especially if one disregards the pretreatment stage
which, according to the previous section, is not essential
when processing masses. The segmentation phase is very
important because the subsequent treatments (description and
classification) are strongly related to the segmentation result.
Indeed, a good detection of the contour of the lesion yields a
true description of its characteristics. Thus, one can ensure a
classification minimizing false positive rate and maximizing
the rate of true negatives.
Our approach was tested on 50 images including 40
images have healthy subjects. We limit ourselves to show the
results obtained for a healthy image and an image for the case
reached.
Figures 4 and 5 show sample-result MRI localization
obtained from a healthy and reached subject.
The first row shows the image and the original contour
and the second line shows the results obtained with the
application of the ASM model.
After the execution of the classification algorithm, we
find the value 3000 pixels as the threshold surface and 23 as
the threshold deviation.
Table I gives the values for the two studied subjects as
well as the classification comparing the surface and standard
deviation by the thresholds.
Subject 1:
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 4. Examples of localization results on synthetic data: Subject healthy.
(a) Original image (b) Original contour (c) Final contour (d) region detected
Subject 2:
a)
b)
  
c)
d)
  
Figure 5. Examples of localization results on synthetic data: Subject reached.
(a) Original image (b) Original contour (c) Final contour (d) region detected
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. VALUES OF THE SURFACE AND THE STANDARD
DEVIATION
Surface CC
(pixel)
Standard
Deviation
Subject 1
Healthy Subject
3120
13.1
Subject 2
Reaches Subject
2450
-
The surface of the CC for subject 1 is equal to 3120 pixels;
this number is above the threshold surface so we move to
calculate the standard deviation, which is equal to 13.1, and
this is less than the standard deviation threshold therefore this
subject is classified as healthy. The CC surface for subject 2 is
equal to 2450 pixels is less than the threshold surface so this is
classified directly as reached.
Using the calculation of standard deviation, we can analyze
the region of the CC in a more robust manner. Our method can
be applied on both sides of the brain. If one of the two parties
does not satisfy the conditions, then we are in the case of the
reached subject. The advantage of ASM is that the evolution
of the curve is guided by a strong a priori knowledge about the
geometry and deformation modes of the studied structure. This
knowledge is represented by a statistical model which
describes the authorized deformation.The construction of such
model is done by applying a principal component analysis on
a training set, which includes the various possible forms of the
object. This model converges with the desired contours and
the classification method has given us effective results. The
results suggest that coprus callosum shape may be a more
sensitive marker than its size for monitoring the evolution of
Alzheimer disease.
We have appied the two supervised classification (k-
nearest neighbors KNN [28] and decision tree [29]) methods
with 50 images (40 normal and 10 AD). The KNN algorithm
is among the simplest machine learning algorithms.
TABLE 2. RESULT CLASSIFICATION USING THE 2 METHODS
TR
TFP
TFN
Decision Tree
39
5
6
KNN
35
6
9
We see that the decision tree is better than the KNN.
IV.
CONCULSION AND FUTURE WORK
We proposed an approach to detect Alzheimer’s diseases,
based on deformable model for segmentation of the Corpus
Callosum. In a first step, we used the median filter to avoid
noise in the image. Then, we added a priori knowledge to the
manual initialization of the mean shape to make this step
automatic. After extraction of the Corpus Callosum, we used a
classification
method
that
brings
in
a
decision
tree.
As perspective for this work, we propose to use a method of
supervised classification as SVM (Support Vector Method).
REFERENCES
[1]
Bosc, M., Heitz, F., Armspach, J.-P., Namer,
I.,
Gounot, D.
and Rumbach, L.: Automatic change detection in multimodal serial
MRI:
application
to
multiple
sclerosis
lesion
evolution,
2003,
NeuroImage 20, 643–656
[2]
Radke, R.J., Andra, S., Al-Kofahi, O. and Roysam, B.: Image change
detection algorithms: a systematic survey. IEEE Trans, 2005, Image
Process 14(3), 294–307
[3]
Bosc, M., Heitz, F., Armspach, J.-P., Namer, I.,
Gounot, D. and
Rumbach, L.: Automatic change detection in multimodal serial MRI:
application to multiple sclerosis lesion evolution. 2003, NeuroImage 20,
643–656
[4]
Rey, D., Subsol, G., Delingette, H. and Ayache, N.: Automatic detection
and segmentation of evolving processes in 3D medical images:
Application to multiple sclerosis. In: Kuba, A., S´amal, M., Todd-
Pokropek, A. (eds.) IPMI 1999. LNCS, Springer, Heidelberg 1999, vol.
1613, pp. 154–157.
[5]
Ashburner J and Friston KJ. Voxel-based morphometry the methods.
Neuroimage. 2000 Jun; 11(6 Pt 1):805-21.
[6]
O. Ben Ahmed, J. Benois-Pineau, C Ben Amar, M. Allard and G.
Catheline , Early Alzheimer disease detection with bag-of-visual-words
and hybrid fusion on structural brain mri, Content-Based Multimedia
Indexing'2013, Veszprêm: Hungary 2013.
[7]
S. Ettaieb, K. Hamrouni and S. Ruan. Statistical modelsof shape and
spatial
relation-application
to
hippocampus
segmentation.
9th
International Conference on Computer Vision Theory and Applications
(Visapp), Lisbon- Portugal, Janvier 2014.
[8]
Cabezas M, Oliver A, Llado´ X, Freixenet J and Cuadra MB (2011) A
review of atlas-based segmentation for magnetic resonance brain
images. Comput Methods Programs Biomed 104:e158–e177
[9]
Di Paola M, Di Iulio F, Cherubini A, Blundo C, Casini AR,Sancesario
G, Passafiume D, Caltagirone C and Spalletta G (2010) When, where,
and how the corpus callosum changes in MCI and AD: a multimodal
MRI study. Neurology 74:1136–1142
[10]
Di Paola M, Luders E, Di Iulio F, Cherubini A and Passafiume
D,Thompson
PM, Caltagirone C, Toga AW and Spalletta G (2010)
Callosal atrophy in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease:
different effects in different stages. Neuroimage 49:141–149
[11] Di Paola M, Spalletta G and Caltagirone C (2010) In vivo structural
neuroanatomy of corpus callosum in Alzheimer’s disease and mild
cognitive impairment using different MRI techniques: a review. J
Alzheimers Dis 20:67–95
[12] Frederiksen KS, Garde E, Skimminge A, Ryberg C, Rostrup E,
Baare´WF, Siebner HR, Hejl AM, Leffers AM and Waldemar G (2011)
Corpus callosum atrophy in patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease.
Neurodegener Dis 8:476–482
[13]
Hampel H, Teipel SJ, Alexander GE, Horwitz B, Teichberg D and
Schapiro MB, Rapoport SI (1998) Corpus callosum atrophy is a possible
indicator of region- and cell type-specific neuronal degeneration in
Alzheimer disease: a magnetic resonance imaging analysis. Arch Neurol
55:193–198
[14]
Hampel H, Teipel SJ, Alexander GE, Horwitz B, Teichberg D and
Schapiro MB, Rapoport SI (1998) Corpus callosum atrophy is a possible
indicator of region- and cell type-specific neuronal degeneration in
Alzheimer disease: a magnetic resonance imaging analysis. Arch Neurol
55:193–198
[15] Teipel SJ, Bayer W, Alexander GE, Bokde AL, Zebuhr Y, Teichberg
D, Mu¨ller-Spahn F, Schapiro MB, Mo¨ller HJ, Rapoport SI and Hampel
H (2003) Regional pattern of hippocampus and corpus callosum atrophy
in Alzheimer’s disease in relation to dementia severity: evidence for
early neocortical degeneration. Neurobiol Aging 24:85–94
[16] Thomann PA, Wustenberg T, Pantel J, Essig M and Schroder J (2006)
Structural changes of the corpus callosum in mild cognitive impairment
and Alzheimer’sdisease. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 21:215–220
[17] Wang PJ, Saykin AJ, Flashman LA, Wishart HA, Rabin LA, Santulli
RB, McHugh
TL and MacDonald
JW, Mamourian AC
(2006)
Regionally specific atrophy of the corpus callosum in AD, MCI and
cognitive complaints. Neurobiol Aging 27:1613–1617
[18] Weis S, Jellinger K and Wenger E (1991) Morphology of the corpus
callosum in normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease. J Neural Transm
Suppl 33:35–38
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[19] Zhu M, Gao W, Wang X, Shi C and Lin Z (2012) Progression of corpus
callosum atrophy in early stage of Alzheimer’s disease: MRI based
study. Acad Radiol 19:512–517.
[20] T. Cootes, C. Taylor, D. Cooper and J. Graham. Active Shape Models –
Their
Training
and
Application.
Computer
Vision
and
Image
Understanding, January 1995,vol. 61, No. 1, pp 38-59.
[21] S. Ettaieb, N. Khlifa and K. Hamrouni. Follow up of the left ventricle
movement in dynamic scintigraphic images based on a spatio-temporal
priori
knowledge.4th
International
Symposium
on
Image/Video
Communications over fixed and mobile networks. ISIVC 2008. Bilbao
Spain. July 9-11, 2008
[22] H. Ghassan and T Gustavsson. Combining Snakes and Active Shape
Models for Segmenting the Human Left Ventricle in Echocardiography
Images. IEEE Computers in Cardiology, 2000, Vol 27.
[23] P. He and J. Zheng. ‘Segmentation of tibia bone in Ultrasound images
using Active Shape Models’.23rd Annual Conference– IEEE/EMBS,
Istanbul,TURKEY. Oct 2001
[24] T. Cootes, A. Hill, C. Taylor, and J. Haslam. The use of active shape
models for locating structures in medical images. Image and Vision
Computing 12(6):355- 366. 1994
[25] Z. zheng and F. yang . Enhanced active shape model for facial feature
localization Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on
Machine Learning and Kunming, 12-15 July 2008.
[26] Matthias Seise, Stephen J. McKenna and Carlos A. Wigderowitz.
Learning Active Shape Models for Bifurcating Contours. IEEE
transactions on medical imaging, may 2007, vol. 26, no. 5.
[27] L. Breiman, J. Friedman, R. Olshen and C. Stone, Classification and
regression trees, Wadsworth & Brooks, 1984.
[28] Hechenbichler, K. and Schliep K. (2004) Weighted k-nearest-neighbor
techniques and ordinal classification. Sonderforschungsbereich 386,
paper 399.
[29] L. Breiman, J. Friedman, R. Olshen and C. Stone, Classification and
regression trees, Wadsworth & Brooks, 1984.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

