Driven by Caravaggio Through His Painting 
An Eye-Tracking Study 
 
Barbara Balbi, Federica Protti, Roberto Montanari 
Scienza Nuova Research Centre, Suor Orsola Benincasa University, Naples, Italy 
e-mail: barbara.balbi@centroscienzanuova.it, federica.protti@centroscienzanuova.it, 
roberto.montanari@centroscienzanuova.it 
 
 
Abstract— Thanks to eye-tracking technology, we observe and 
measure the eye behavior of two samples of volunteers 
interacting with two Caravaggio’s paintings in different 
contexts of use, in order to test the artist’s ability to guide the 
reader through a visual pathway. According to our 
preliminary results, the context strongly influences the fruition 
pathway designed by the author. It is the first time that art 
perception is investigated in an ecological environment. 
Keywords-eye-tracker; art; Caravaggio; visual perception. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Since ancient times, we wonder how the human brain 
acquires and processes images of the outside world. 
Aristotle, in "De Anima," said that the mind creates an 
inner world of images in which there is correspondence to 
the outer world [1]. Cognitive psychology explains the same 
phenomenon through embodied simulation: the ability to 
build a representation of the outside world to which our 
visual experiences is related [2].  
The experience of artistic fruition is so complex that the 
cognitive disciplines have begun to investigate it with 
growing interest. As art critics say, the viewer does not have 
the simple mechanical role of recording visual stimulation 
provided by the work of art, but the fundamental task of 
giving meaning to it [3]. For semiotics, the reader has in fact 
a cooperative role in the interpretation of any text, be it a 
painting, a story, etc. [4]. Some artists are clearly 
representative of this cooperation because they attempted to 
build spatial organization in their paintings, which are 
structures for both contemplation and interpretation, and are 
exploited by the viewer upon reception [5]. 
 The Italian painter Michelangelo Merisi, known as 
Caravaggio, creator of important paintings such as Sette 
Opere di Misericordia (Seven Acts of Mercy) and La 
Flagellazione di Cristo (The Flagellation of Christ), is one of 
the most representative painters in this sense. It says that he, 
at the end of the sixteenth century, probably skillfully 
manipulated an early but deep understanding of the field of 
optical sciences and visual perception to construct his 
paintings, thus guiding fruition through a specific path [5][6]. 
Research on the Galilean lenses, studies of Della Porta and 
Kepler on perception, feed the cultural patchwork around the 
painter [5].  
How these ideas were used by the artist to picture his 
subjects has been the focus of numerous studies, evidence of 
how interesting the manner is in which the painter translated 
the optical sciences into painting practice, using for example 
a hole in the ceiling of his studio as a prototype of the camera 
obscura [6]. Indeed, in the seventeenth century, science was 
investigating vision with particular attention. 
Eye tracking is a useful methodology for the 
experimental validation of the hypothesis that the pictorial 
technique of Caravaggio individuates in each painting a 
precise visual pathway passing through precise areas of 
interest. 
In this paper, we compare the ocular behaviors of two 
groups of volunteers dealing with two original works by 
Caravaggio: the first group observed the altarpiece Sette 
Opere di Misericordia (Fig.1) from the church of Pio Monte 
della Misericordia in Naples; the second group observed the 
painting La Flagellazione di Cristo (Fig.2), exhibited in the 
Museum of Capodimonte. 
The collected data show different fruition strategies: the 
visual scan path among the subjects belonging to the first 
group was almost always the same. Instead, among the 
subjects in the second group it was not possible to find any 
recurring pattern of fruition. 
The article is structured as follows: in Section II, we 
enumerate the studies related to artistic fruition performed to 
date. In Section III, we highlight the experimental hypothesis 
and in Section IV, we describe the experiment we carried 
out. The methodology used in compiling the data for the two 
samples of subjects is explained in Section V, and the 
procedures in Section VI. In Section VII, we compare the 
data collected and carry out a first analysis that leads us to 
the preliminary conclusion (Section VIII). 
II. 
PRIOR ART 
The eye-tracking devices for the analysis of the cognitive 
processes activated during artistic fruition have been used in 
several recent studies. The project started by the research 
group led by David Massaro of the Catholic University of 
Milan [7], like the study conducted by Rodrigo Quian 
Quiroga and Carlos Pedreira (respectively belonging to the 
University of Leicester and University of Magdeburg [8]), 
studied the perception of paintings using a digital version. 
Both studies investigated, through fixed eye-tracking 
devices, the neurocognitive processes that govern the way 
we see art.  
In these studies the paintings are measured primarily 
through their formal components. In addition, the study 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

performed by Quiroga and Pedreira addressed the topic that 
has always guided the studies on artistic perception: how to 
establish the judgment of a work of art, based on the question 
“is this beautiful?” Neither of the two studies focused on the 
visual pathway of observation. 
An example of a study of artistic fruition inside a 
museum itself, using the original painting, is that conducted 
at the Museum of Arts of Indianapolis in 2011 regarding the 
contemplation of Hotel Lobby by Edward Hopper. In this 
case, the eye-tracking device used was a fixed type which 
forced contemplation from a fixed position; distance and 
observation time were imposed by the conductors of the 
experiment and strongly influenced the viewing experience. 
For these reasons the experiment cannot be considered 
ecological. 
Another important experience is the one organized in 
2000 during the exhibition Telling Time at the National 
Gallery in London [9] in which museum visitors were invited 
to sit in a cubicle equipped with a fixed eye-tracker device 
inside and to watch some paintings on a screen. Participants’ 
visual scanning paths were projected outside the cubicle. The 
installation was aimed at enhancing the content of the 
museum with the use of new technologies. 
The experiments previously described aimed to validate 
the cognitive process of the subject and they did not take into 
consideration the painter’s perspective and intention. 
Moreover, they use paintings in a non-original context and 
often in a digital copy: these reasons have led us to initiate a 
series of new experiments on artistic fruition in ecological 
environments. 
III. 
THE EXPERIMENT 
Is there a narrative path in the works of Caravaggio that 
the painter consciously constructed and which has endured 
through the centuries? What are the elements that influence 
this visual pathway? Does the formant light, to which the art 
critic and historian Cesare Brandi refers, have a role in the 
revelation of Caravaggio’s paintings – either on the aesthetic 
level or on the level of the semiotics? [10]. In the following, 
we describe the experiments we performed. 
Two groups volunteered in the experiment. Group 1 
composed of 40 participants, with the same number of men 
and women, all aged between 17 and 70 years; Group 2 
composed of 28 participants randomly picked from the 
visitors of the museum, men and women of varying age 
between 18 and 65 years. They came from all over the 
world and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision; none 
of them received any remuneration. 
The painting Sette Opere di Misericordia portrays the 
Seven Acts of Mercy of the New Testament (Fig.1). The 
scenes on the painting are illuminated by a beam of light 
that follows the course of the scenes in the moment in which 
they take place: Pero on the right is nursing her father 
Cimone through the bars of the prison (corresponds to the 
two acts of mercy: to visit the imprisoned and to feed the 
hungry); behind her a bearer of the dead, called a “monatto” 
carries a deceased person (to bury the dead); at their feet 
Saint Martin gives half of his cloak to a sick, naked man (to 
care for the sick and to clothe the naked); a traveler (Saint 
James of Compostella) asks for hospitality (to shelter the 
homeless); in the shadow Samson is drinking from the 
jawbone of a donkey (to give drink to the thirsty). 
The painting looks crowded and very difficult to 
understand, however, it was painted in the century that gave 
rise to the Baroque style, characterized by multiple 
perspectives, both eccentric and oblique [11]. 
The painting is located in the church of Pio Monte della 
Misericordia in Naples, the original location planned by the 
painter, where the painting has been preserved since 1607. 
 
 
Figure 1. 
The painting Sette Opere di Misericordia by Caravaggio. 
 
La Flagellazione di Cristo is a less complex painting in 
terms of spatial organization (Fig.2). The center of the 
canvas is occupied by the figure of Christ suffering at the 
hands of two torturers intent on tying him to the column, the 
place of immolation. A third torturer, called “Scherano”, is 
bent down to pick up the branches they are going to use in 
the torture. As in the Sette Atti, a beam of light is striking 
the forms and the action, leaving large areas of the scene in 
the shadow.  
The painting is now located in the Museum of 
Capodimonte, in a little room where the visitor is forced to 
admire it from very close and from a different height than in 
the original location. However, it was commissioned for the 
De Franchis chapel in San Domenico Maggiore Church 
(Naples) where it was placed on the altar, about one meter 
above the ground and and viewed on a diagonal from two 
meters away. 
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 2. 
The painting La Flagellazione by Caravaggio. 
 
In both paintings, a light beam illuminates the most 
important areas of the scene to look at, and it seems to merge 
them into one path. Our study aims to confirm this insight in 
a scientific way. 
A. Methods 
Eye-tracking devices are able to record the movements of 
the eye and some behaviors of the eyes related to cognitive 
activity.  
In the two experiments described in this paper, we used 
the Tobii eye-tracker wearable glasses [12]. Tobii glasses are 
able to record data at a frequency of 30 HZ; the acquired data 
can be analyzed using the software Tobii Studio. The 
characteristics that make Tobii glasses a device particularly 
suited to our purpose are the following: the portability, i.e., 
the device is integral with the head of the observer, the 
observer can conduct its normal viewing experience without 
the feeling of participating in an experiment; the 
independence, i.e., the participant does not need to be 
accompanied by the researcher during the visit; the 
understandability of data, i.e., thanks to Tobii Studio 
software you can easy overlap the visual scan path with the 
corresponding stimulus.  
The methodology used was validated using a control 
group [13]. 
B. Procedure 
The experiment included two procedures, named A and B in 
the following: 
1) Procedure A 
The first phase of the experiment was conducted over a 
span of three days at the church of Pio Monte della 
Misericordia. Participants were randomly selected from 
among the visitors of the museum. All participants said that 
they had normal or corrected vision (with contact lenses or 
eyeglasses). Participants were asked if they had seen the 
painting before (from a picture or in real life). 
A calibration phase is necessary for the device to 
recognize the coordinates of convergence of the gaze unique 
to each test subject. Once calibrated, the subjects were able 
to start their visit. Each participant wore Tobii glasses for 
three minutes.  
2) Procedure B 
The second part of the experiment lasted a whole day at 
Capodimonte Museum. The procedure we used was the same 
described in Procedure A. Participants, chosen at random 
from among the visitors of the museum, were asked if they 
had seen the painting before (from a book or in real life) and 
to wear Tobii glasses during a three-minute visit. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
The following metrics are obtained through the Tobii 
glasses recordings (Visit duration: 3 minutes): Number of 
gazes: i.e., the number of times that the eye stops on the 
different parts of the work, and Number of fixations: the 
number of micro-movements of the fovea (part of the pupil) 
occurring during the path of fruition. This is a synthetic 
element, obtained through an algorithm to measure processes 
of attention. It can be considered an indicator of the intensity 
in which a visual stimulus is processed. Also measured are 
Time to first gaze and Time to first fixation (expressed in 
seconds): these measures allow us to know the exact moment 
when the eye of the subject stops on a precise region of the 
painting and the moment when the cognitive processes for 
the interpretation of the stimulus are activated.  
The Areas of interest (AOI) of the two images are defined 
with the program Tobii Studio. The AOI we activate are the 
regions with the highest number of visits (Visit Count). We 
obtain the visual pathway executed by each subject by 
extracting the Time to first fixation (expressed in seconds) of 
each participant in each of the AOI. 
1) Results for procedure A 
With the metrics described above, we are able to define 
the visual pathway of the subjects. In particular we discover 
that each participant focus their attention on the same AOI. 
In fact the data aggregation allow us to identify five areas of 
interest, namely the regions on which subjects’ attention is 
targeted on the basis of the Fixation Count and visualized by 
the program in a heatmap (Fig 3).  
We also notice that the AOI correspond to the 
illuminated areas: Pero nursing Cimone (a); The bare back 
of the sick man on the ground, (b); The torch (c); the Virgin 
and Child (d); Samson while drinking (e). 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 3. 
Heatmap by Tobii Studio software vizualizes in real time the 
intensity in the observation of the picture (Fixation Count). 
 
Moreover, the Time to first fixation, corresponding to the 
precise moment when the visitor observes actively each 
portion of the painting, allows us to recognize not only when 
the gaze is resting on each of the scenes of the composition, 
but also when the visitor starts the cognitive process of 
understanding.  
The GazePlot obtained with Tobii Studio (Fig.4) 
confirms that the visual pathway of the participants moves 
from the figure of the Virgin (or Pero sometimes), then goes 
to the torch, than Samson and the area occupied by the sick 
man at the end. 
 
 
Figure 4. 
GazePlot from Procedure A corresponding to Pattern 1. 
 
The two recurring visual patterns we find (Pattern A, B) 
are described in TABLE I. 
 
TABLE I. RECURRING VISUAL PATTERN IN PROCEDURE A. 
 
AOI 
 
Pattern 1 
d 
a 
c 
e 
b 
(for 18 subjects) 
Pattern 2 
a 
d 
c 
e 
b 
(for 4 subjects) 
No Common 
Pattern 
 
 
 
 
 
(for 18 subjects)  
 
The behavior of the subjects who participated in the 
experiment is not dependent on gender, age, country of 
origin, or prior knowledge of the painting.  
2) Results for procedure B 
The collected data allow us to define the AOI and the 
visual pathway of the visitors. Also in this case, we identify 
the bright regions of the painting corresponding to: The 
shoulder of Scherano (a); The hand of Scherano (b); The 
chest of Christ (c); The head of Christ (d); The face of the 
torturer on the right (e); The face of the torturer on the left 
(f); The calf muscle of the torturer on right (g). 
Using the Time to first fixation it is not possible to find a 
common pathway among the 22 participants in the 
experiment. In fact, 20 different patterns are identified. 
 
In order to compare the variability of the pathways in the 
two different scenes, we define a Pathway Variability Index 
(PVI): 
 
PVI = number of distinct pathways / number of subjects. 
 
This PVI tends to 0 when there are very few distinct 
pathways (i.e., low variability - several subjects performing 
the same pathway) and tends to 1 when the number of 
distinct pathways tends to the number of the subjects (i.e., 
high variability - each subject performing a different 
pathway). We obtain a PVI of 0.35 in the first scenario and a 
of 0.90 in the second one, much higher than the previous 
case. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE STEPS 
There is growing evidence that Caravaggio was aware of 
the phenomena of perception of images and optical studies in 
vogue between 1500 and 1600, and used this knowledge to 
direct the construction of his paintings so that this control is 
still valid after several centuries.  
The eye-tracking methodologies allowed us to verify the 
validity of this hypothesis observing the visual pathway of 
the visitors of Pio Monte della Misericordia, where the 
painting Sette Opere di Misericordia is preserved in original 
condition.  
Data collected from a group of 40 visitors allowed us to 
notice that people follows a consistent pattern when 
observing the painting. However, we could not find a 
common pattern among the visitors of the painting La 
Flagellazione di Cristo, on exhibit in different physical 
conditions from those originally foreseen when the work was 
created. Although the AOI were common to most visitors, 
the order (visual pathway) was different for each of the 
participants. 
Using a Pathway Variability Index of the patterns, ranged 
between 0 and 1 (0 is the minimum variation and 1 the 
maximum), in the case of the Sette Opere di Misericordia the 
index is 0.35 while in the case of La Flagellazione di Cristo 
the index is 0,90. 
The results of the two experiments have convinced us to 
go forward with the study, collecting and comparing the 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

fruition of other paintings by Caravaggio in the expected 
context or not in the original position. 
In the future we aim to identify the formal elements with 
the function of guiding the reader through the works of the 
painter. 
We intend to apply the technique of Caravaggio to other 
visual supports, with the aim of increasing the effectiveness 
of images. Furthermore, we hope to improve museum 
fruition and appreciation of works of art through the 
feedback from visitors. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We want to thank the Museum of Pio Monte della 
Misericordia for the opportunity to carry out our research, 
and the Museum of Capodimonte for hosting the experiment 
on the La Flagellazione painting on the occasion of 
Caravaggio’s birthday. 
Also: Roberta Presta for her valuable contribution, Rosa 
Strozzillo, Edvige Bruno, Vittorio Sarnelli, Virginia Santoro 
and Emanuele Garzia for the support, and all participants in 
the experiment for their willingness. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Movia, Aristotele, L'anima (The soul), Bompiani, Milano 
2001. 
[2] G. Rizzolatti and C. Sinigaglia, So quel che fai: il cervello che 
agisce e i neuroni specchio (I know what you do: the brain 
that acts and mirror neurons), R. Cortina ed., 2006. 
[3] R. Arnheim and G. Dorfles, Arte e percezione visiva (Art and 
visual perception: a psychology of the creative eye), Nuova 
versione. Vol. 23, Feltrinelli Editore, Milano, 2002. 
[4] U. Eco, I limiti dell’interpretazione (The limits of 
interpretation), Mondadori, Milano, 1990. 
[5] F. Bologna, L’incredulità di Caravaggio e l’esperienza delle 
cose naturali (The disbelief of Caravaggio and the experience 
of natural things), Vol. 29, Bollati Boringhieri, Torino, 2006.  
[6] R. Lapucci, Caravaggio e l’ottica (Caravaggio and optics), 
Privately published, Firenze, 2005. 
[7] D. Massaro et al., "When art moves the eyes: a behavioral and 
eye-tracking study." PloS one 7.5 (2012): e37285. 
[8] Q. Quiroga, R. Quian, and C. Pedreira, "How do we see art: 
an eye-tracker study." Frontiers in human neuroscience 5, 
2011. 
[9] S. Milekic, "The MoreYou Look the MoreYou Get: Intention-
based Interface using Gaze-tracking." AUTHOR Bearman, 
David, Ed.; Trant, Jennifer, Ed. TITLE Museums and the 
Web 2003: Selected Papers from an 2003: 61. 
[10] C. Brandi, “La Flagellazione di Caravaggio a Napoli” (The 
Flagellation of Caravaggio in Naples), C. Brandi, Scritti 
d’Arte, Bompiani, Milano, 2013. 
[11] J. Baltrusaitis, Anamorphic or Thaumaturgus Opticus, 
Adelphi, Milano, 1990. 
[12] Tobii srl, Tobii Studio. User Manual, Darderyd, Sweden: 
Tobii Technology AB, 2008. 
[13] B. Balbi and F. Protti, "Caravaggio: Track the dark light. 
Misurazione dell’esperienza di fruizione dell’opera d’arte." 
(Caravaggio: Track the dark light.  Measuring the experience 
of fruition of the work of art), Proc., Workshop LOSAI: 
Laboratori Open su Arte Scienza ed Innovazione, I, 
November 2015, ISBN 978 88 99130 20 6. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

