 
 
 
 
The Basis of Thinking from Behavior Elements 
 
 
Peter Pfeifer 
Sense Machine Project  
Berlin, Germany  
Email:  
peter.pfeifer@sense-machine.com 
Julian Pfeifer   
Sense Machine Project  
Berlin, Germany  
Email:  
julian.pfeifer@sense-machine.com 
Niko Pfeifer  
Sense Machine Project  
Berlin, Germany  
Email:  
pfeifer.niko@gmail.com  
 
 
Abstract—In brain decoding research, one thing in particular 
is neglected: basic drives and their relationship to behavior. 
Basic drives ‘drive’  to fulfill basic needs that are important for 
survival, the situation of life, reproduction, and good social 
relationships. The brain controls the behavior needed to attain 
these goals. This work shows that behavior is based on 
thousands of combinations of only 5 drive-related basic 
behavior elements. Since these behaviors vary in more than 
100 different areas of life, they add up to a large number of 
human behaviors. These 5 drive-related basic behavior 
elements are the components for thousands of behaviors and 
terms that describe behavior. They have representations in the 
brain that give thinking its basis. These elements are the basic 
building blocks for both behavior and thinking about that 
behavior. It is an approach to reduce the thinking processes in 
the brain from very many different to very few building 
blocks. It can be an approach that helps brain research to get 
closer to understanding thinking through this reduction of 
elements in the direction of think modules. 
Keywords-cognitive modeling; psycholinguistics; psychology; 
psychophysiology of cognition. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the science of the brain, considerations start with 
information 
processing 
and 
end 
with 
information 
processing. Psychophysiology of cognition examines the 
functionality of the brain in relation to sensory stimuli and 
thinking [1]. In contrast to this research, we do not start 
from single, stand-alone drives but from combinations of 
drives. With the combinations, it is possible to understand 
wide areas of human behavior. 
This work offers a model of thinking that divides 
behavior and thinking into elements. Behavior and thinking 
elements, all of which are drive-related. Drive goals and the 
methods used to achieve them are related to basic drives. 
Drive goals and methods are combined. These elements 
exist in a scenario of memories, and the memories are 
connected to these drives. 
One example is the feeling of hunger. When one sees 
delicious food, one feels the urge to eat it. The moment one 
sees it, memories of that food and how one ate it come to 
mind. But when there is no food available, one feels bad. 
However, if one has just eaten a good meal and filled one's 
stomach, the urge to eat will be less, and one will not feel 
bad.  
When a drive is addressed, a feeling of attraction to a 
specific object arises. This feeling is supplemented by 
another one that indicates the degree of drive satisfaction in 
relation to this drive. If a drive is not satisfied for a long 
time, one feels bad. 
A drive ‘drives’ in order to do something that leads to 
the achievement of the drive's goal. The associated feeling 
of the state of drive fulfillment has the task of accelerating 
the execution of the drive process if necessary. 
Another example is the sexual attraction that arises 
between a man and a woman. When two good friends 
(males) are talking to each other and one of them says: 
“Yesterday, I saw a very attractive woman!”  
The listener immediately has a picture in his head. He has 
‘drive-related 
memories’ 
of 
related 
situations. 
He 
remembers a moment when he has seen an attractive 
woman, and he remembers the feelings he has had. These 
feelings relate to basic drives that are important to the 
survival of animals and humans. 
The basic genital drive attracts a man to get closer to an 
attractive woman. There are other basic drives that oppose 
it. For example, if someone is married, he must not get too 
close to other women. It is also a basic drive to hold on to 
his partnership, and a conflict within one person between his 
drives is possible. 
In neurolinguistics, it has been shown that a speaker and 
a listener synchronize their brains in a conversation [2]. This 
is so easy because they have the same basic drives. 
Keywords addresses the same basic drive of the listener as 
of the speaker. Only scientific topics that are far from basic 
drives require more effort to be synchronized. 
The drives, more precisely the driving moments 
experienced, are the keywords for our memories and the 
basic building blocks for our behaviors and our language, 
which describe our behaviors. Linguists call it background 
knowledge. It is necessary to know many things about 
corresponding human behavior, so that it does not need 
more than a short sentence to create a whole scenario of 
circumstances in the listener's head. 
It was postulated that it is essential to have background 
knowledge in order to be able to understand statements 
correctly. In semantic frame theory [3], it is said that one 
can understand a word only if one knows all aspects of the 
situations related to that word. To define background 
knowledge, many texts are required for each scenario.  
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
In many researches, the importance of the objects for the 
drives is neglected. For example, in Semantic Components 
[4], there was an endeavor to classify objects.  For example, 
woman = human + female. However, the drive importance 
of a woman for a man (and vice versa) is not specified.  
The following shows a way that does not require a lot of 
text but takes into account the importance of drives. Section 
II explains the fundamentals of the basic drives. Section III 
shows the components of behavior (behavior described by 
predicates). Section IV shows the diversity of basic drives in 
different areas of life. Section V presents the role of objects 
in achieving drive goals through coding. Section VI shows 
the complex construction of objects by concatenating basic 
drives. Section VII. explains methods of this work. Section 
VIII contains the conclusions.  
II. 
DRIVE BASIS 
Today, the science of thinking deals with information, 
information processing, and language. Behaviors are 
neglected.  
In the human past, there was a struggle for survival. 
Today people in Western society no longer have to fight 
wild animals and do not have to work the field by hand to 
laboriously get a daily meal. So, one is usually not aware 
that fundamental drives determine our lives. 
Nevertheless, basic drives remain in our striving and 
behavior until today. Before language, only behavior was 
the point that made the difference between life and death. 
Drives have the task of ensuring the survival of the 
individual and - in the case of social beings - also of society. 
Without this function, humans would have died out millions 
of years ago.  
For social beings like humans, two things are extremely 
important: giving and getting.  
• When one gets nothing (for drive 1), no food, no money; 
one will die. 
• When one has no home, no safe place to sleep, nothing 
that belongs to one, nothing that is available (drive 2). In 
winter, one would die very soon 
• When someone not being able to achieve goals or move to 
destinations (drive 3). This person would only survive 
with help. 
• Giving (more generally, helping others with their drives, 
including teaching (drive 4) is very important for the 
society.  
• When one would be blind and deaf. One would not be 
able to get vital information (drive 5). 
Behaviors have the task of fulfilling drives. The behaviors 
and their associated drive goals are organized in a special 
combination system. This work shows it by coding with 
numbers.  
Each number represents a basic drive that relates to the 
entire drive scenario and the associated drive-related 
memories. With this system, it is possible to understand the 
logical 
connections 
between 
activities 
and 
objects. 
Identifying the drives within human behavior means 
understanding the behavior and the texts that describe the 
behavior.  
These basics can be found in different quantities and 
sequences as building blocks for thousands of behaviors and 
at least several thousand objects. The basic drives run 
through all areas of human life and dominate human 
thinking. 
In the following, the connections are to be grasped 
logically and to be understood logically. All rules and 
relations of the following were recognized and not created.  
III. 
THE CODING OF BEHAVIORS/PREDICATES 
Predicates are mainly used to describe behaviors. There 
are numerous predicates that contain two or more basic 
drives in combination. One single predicate contains one 
activity (of a human) that consists of two or more basic 
drives, which are executed simultaneously. 
A linguistic paper [5] uses the above 5 basic drives and 
shows that the most important predicates and objects are 
combinations of these 5 basic drives. Each drive is subject 
to variations depending on the current area of life, but they 
are always derived from the same drive root. (Areas of life 
are similar to domains.) 
In the physical area of life (one of around 100 known 
areas), these are: 
Drive 1. drinking, eating.  
Drive 2. holding back. 
Drive 3. moving.  
Drive 4. letting go. 
Drive 5. seeing, hearing, feeling - (perception). 
For example, in the material area of life, the predicates/ 
behaviors play the basic role:  
Drive 1. getting.  
Drive 2. determining*/controlling (exercise of power). 
Drive 3. striving/moving (for reaching goals). 
Drive 4. good performing with work for others (to get  
money). 
Drive 5. informing oneself (also curiosity). 
(*Always determining in the sense of deciding.) 
These predicates are ‘Basic Behavior Elements’ since they 
are elements of combinations, the building blocks, and key 
elements of the material area. 
One can get objects like: 
1. Food, meals (objects for drive 1). 
2. Owned objects such as a house or apartment, furniture  
         etc. (objects for drive 2). 
3. Mobility aids such as a car (objects for drive 3). 
4. Work equipment such as machines or hand tools  
  (Objects for drive 4). 
5. Information devices such as computers or TVs 
  (Objects for drive 5). 
• The food corresponds to basic drive number 1. 
• House or apartment belongs to basic drive number 2 
because this is where the owner has the most 
determination/control. 
• A car belongs to basic drive number 3 because it can be 
used to reach destinations with it. 
• The work equipment belongs to basic drive number 4, 
because it can be used to perform work particularly well 
and earn money. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
• A computer connected to the internet belongs to basic 
drive number 5, because it can be used to obtain 
information. 
Any of these five objects can be reused with the five base 
drives. Each of them can be: 
1. got, 
2. determined/controlled, 
3. strived/moved for this as a goal, 
4. good performed (and earned money) with it, 
5. or obtained information about it.  
Each drive object can be combined with each drive activity 
(5×5).  
An activity is a behavior that consists of a combination of 
Basic Behavior Elements. Activities are described by 
predicates. To understand the combinations within an 
activity, two more concepts are required: Goal and 
assistance. Each of the Basic Behavior Elements can be used 
as a goal or/and assistance. The following are some 
examples of activities with their basic behavior elements. 
The predicate -fetch- consists of two Basic Behavior 
Elements: The drive striving/moving (drive 3) and the drive 
getting (drive 1). It would be possible to explain: ‘I want to 
get something, and it is not close, so I have to move to the 
position where it is. When I reach the position, I take it 
(again moving).’  
This activity, reduced to its essentials, consists of moving 
and getting. The combination is drive 3 with goal 1. Both 
drives are combined with another. 
Because drive 1 is the objective, it is marked as goal. The 
other drive is the assistance to reach the goal. There are 
many things that can be strived for or moved for, but the goal 
selects and constricts the type of moving to a specific 
direction, in this case to get something.  
The predicate -bring about- consists of the drive 
striving/moving (drive 3) and the drive determining/ 
controlling a desired state (drive 2). It is related to striving. 
The goal is a thing, device or arrangement that functions as 
desired. (Example: Repair a device, build a device.) It is 
necessary to move and handle something so that the result 
reaches a desired state. The combination is drive 3 + goal 2.  
The predicate -go- consists of the drive striving/moving 
(drive 3) and reaching a destination (goal drive 3). The 
combination is drive 3 + goal 3.  
The predicate -manufacture- consists of the drive 
striving/moving (drive 3) and the drive (work) performing 
(drive 4). One has to make striving/moving to perform well 
(drive 3 + goal 4).  
The predicate -look something up- consists of the drive 
striving/moving (drive 3) and the drive informing (drive 5). It 
comprises to strive to a position or to move something to a 
position, from which it is possible to see something that 
leads to informing (drive 3 + goal 5).  
All examples above use the assistance drive 3 
(striving/moving) and the second are the goals: The goal 
adjusts the assistance (which contains many possibilities) to 
one activity. The principle is: A special assistance is used to 
reach a special goal. The term special means:  One of the 5 
Basic Behavior Elements with their numbering 1 to 5.  
Each drive can be used as assistance and the second 
complement (again each drive) is the goal. The goal selects 
the type of assistance activity. The meaning of a predicate 
can be indicated by 2 (or more) code numbers.  
In the same way, one can use any of the 5 elements as 
assistance: 
• The drive 3 striving/moving assists the other drives in 
Table I. 
• The drive 5 informing assists the other drives in Table II. 
• The drive 1 getting can also be assistance for the other 
drives in Table III. 
• The helping drive 4 assists drives of the other people in 
Table IV. 
• The drive 2 determining/controlling assists the other 
drives in Table V. 
TABLE I. EXAMPLES USING THE ASSISTANCE DRIVE 3 (STRIVING/MOVING)  
 AND DIFFERENT GOALS 
Activity 
            Goal     
Fetch 
is for 1 getting =3//Goal 1 
Bring about 
is for 2 determining/controlling desired state=3//Goal 2 
Go 
is for 3 striving / moving (to a destination) = 3//Goal 3 
Manufacture 
is for 4 (work) performing =3//Goal 4 
Look something up is for 5 informing (oneself) = 3//Goal 5 
 
TABLE II. EXAMPLES USING THE ASSISTANCE DRIVE 5 (INFORMING)  
AND DIFFERENT GOALS 
Activity 
            Goal     
Inquire supply 
is for 1 getting =5//Goal 1 
Weigh possibilities  is for 2 determining/controlling desired state=5//Goal 2 
Search connection is for 3 striving / moving (to a destination) = 5//Goal 3 
Search customer 
is for 4 (work) performing =5//Goal 4 
Read, watch, listen is for 5 informing (oneself) = 5//Goal 5 
 
TABLE III. EXAMPLES USING THE ASSISTANCE DRIVE 1 (GETTING)  
AND DIFFERENT GOALS 
Activity 
            Goal     
Get 
is for 1 have got = 1//Goal 1 
Acquire 
is for 2 determining/controlling (having) sth = 1/Goal 2 
Buy a ticket 
is for 3 striving / moving (to a destination) = 1//Goal 3 
Earn 
is for 4 (work) performing = 1//Goal 4 
Get a message 
is for 5 informing (oneself) = 1//Goal 5 
TABLE IV. EXAMPLES USING THE ASSISTANCE DRIVE 4 (WORK 
PERFORMING) AND DIFFERENT GOALS 
Activity 
  Goal     
Give 
is for 1 getting, for the other = 4//Goal 1 
Rent out is for 2 determining/contr. a. desired state of another = 4//Goal 2 
Bring sb is for 3 striving / moving to destination (for another) = 4//Goal 3 
Serve 
is for 4 (work) performing, service is for another = 4//Goal 4 
Report 
is for 5 informing others = 4//Goal 5 
 
TABLE V. EXAMPLES USING THE ASSISTANCE DRIVE 2 
(DETERMINING/CONTROLLING) AND DIFFERENT GOALS 
Activity 
            Goal     
Demand sth. 
is for 1 getting =2//Goal 1 
Determining/contr. is for 2 determining/control. a desired state=2//Goal 2 
Drive (vehicle) 
is for 3 striving/moving (to a destination) = 2//Goal 3 
Close a deal 
is for 4 (work) performing = 2//Goal 4 
Specify 
is for 5 informing = 2//Goal 5 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
Table V uses the assistance drive 2, and the second 
complements are the goals. Many things can be determined 
and controlled, but a specific goal constricts the behavior to 
a specific activity. The goal adjusts the assistance (which 
contains many possibilities) to one activity. 
• To -demand sth.- means to get something by determining/ 
controlling = 2//Goal 1. 
• By -determining/controlling-something/someone, a desired 
state can be achieved (goal drive 2) = 2//Goal 2. 
• To -drive-: From the many things that can be at one´s 
disposal (control), there is a special type of thing that is 
useful for reaching a destination: Vehicles. Driving is 
only possible by a vehicle. The driver must control a 
vehicle and determine it. The car makes the work. But for 
the classification, the vehicle is not necessary. 
It is enough determining/controlling (drive 2) something 
that is usable for goal 3 striving to destination = 2//Goal 3.  
With the help of the definition of the basic goal, one 
differentiates the assistance. 
Activity code reduces activities to handling. Synonymous 
is -to beam- with the transport device of the spaceship 
enterprise. It has the same combination: Controlling a 
transport device and determine it in order to reach a 
destination (striving/moving). Objects (vehicles, cars, 
bicycles, spaceships, etc.) are treated separately.  
• To -close a deal- means to determine/control (drive 2) a 
deal by agreement with another who accepts the work 
performing (drive 4) = 2//Goal 4. 
• To -specify- means determining/controlling information. 
(To determine something that affects information.) = 
2//Goal 5. 
The meaning of a predicate can be indicated by 2 (most 
more) code numbers. (In the matrix below, the assistances 
are indicated by the heading of the columns for each 
position.) 
TABLE VI. OVERVIEW BASIC BEHAVIOR ELEMENTS.  
THE COMBINING OF BASIC BEHAVIOR ELEMENTS WITH THEMSELVES 
        
Assistance: 
   Goal: 
1 
getting 
 
          2     
 determining 
 /controlling 
          3     
  striving/  
 moving 
         4 
  work perf. 
.(for others) 
          5 
  informing 
 oneself 
 1 getting 
    get 
  demand 
 something 
fetch 
   give 
 inquire  
supply 
 2 determining 
   /controlling  
   something 
acquire   determine/ 
 control 
     bring 
about 
 rent out 
weigh of 
 possibilities 
  3 striving 
     /moving 
 to destination 
buy a 
  ticket 
 drive (car)       go 
  bring  
 somebody 
 there 
  search for 
  traffic 
  connection 
  4 (work) 
    performing    earn 
 close a deal 
manu- 
facture 
   serve 
  search for 
  customers 
  5 informing 
    oneself 
  get a   
 message    specify 
 look some- 
   thing up 
   report 
read, watch, 
   listen 
 
 
 
Each of these drives can be combined with each other. 
One activity (behavior) represented by a predicate is mostly 
a combination of several basic drives. 
An example of a combination of three drives for one 
activity is the combination of ‘navigate’. (Consulting a map 
in order to find the right route to a destination by car). This 
activity consists of three basic drives that are combined with 
one another. 
1. Striving to reach a goal (basic drive 3) 
2. Informing (basic drive 5) 
3. Reaching a goal (basic drive 3 – final goal) 
Striving (3) to gain information (5) that is needed to reach a 
goal (3). The first drive number stands for the main 
assistant, the second for the second assistant, and the last 
one for the goal. Therefore, there are two assistant drives 
and one goal drive. The code for the drive combination is: 
3/5//Goal 3. In this example, the drive numbers 3 and 5 are 
assistance activities for the goal 3. (No one navigating is 
aware that one uses 3 times a basic drive.) 
The same drives (1 – 5) can be either assistance or goal 
or both. The drives are represented by the Basic Behavior 
Elements of an area – activities that are at the core of a 
drive and form building blocks. In the cross-point of the 
three drives lies one activity (behavior).  
The activity is defined by the 3 drives. Therefore, it is 
not necessary to use many words to describe an activity. 
The cross-point of the drives makes it. In addition, the 
defined goal indicates the purpose of an activity.  
The first assistance is striving for reaching a goal. From 
very many things that can be striven for, only things which 
give information have been selected. This mechanic 
constricts a large amount of strivings in one direction. From 
a lot of information, only those that are useful to find the 
right way to the destination are selected. Again, this 
mechanic restricts to a specific direction. At the crossing 
point is: navigation.  
The basis for drive 3 is the summary of drive-related 
memories on the topic: Striving/moving towards a goal/ 
destination. There are two variations: striving for a goal, 
used for the assistance 3, and moving towards a destination, 
used for the goal drive 3.  
In this way, activities (behaviors) are defined without 
words, only with numbers for identification of the drives. Of 
course, numbers do not run in the minds of people. The 
collected memories of drive-related situations run there. 
Each of these drives can be combined with each other, 
multiple times. If one combines them four times repeatedly 
in different ways, one gets: 5 × 5 × 5 × 5 = 625 variations of 
human activities (behavior describing predicates). This is 
the number for only one main area (the material area). This 
number multiplies with the number of areas. 
IV. 
THE AREAS OF LIFE 
The brain's ability to control the basic behaviors has 
been essential to human survival for millions of years and 
because of the importance, humans have special childhood 
phases to develop these basic behaviors: The oral, anal, 
genital, urethral [6], and intentional [7] basic behavior.  
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
These five basic behaviors are synchronous with the five 
Basic Behavior Elements described above which are related 
to survival. 
- The oral phase is about 1 getting. 
- The anal phase is about 2 determining/controlling. 
- The genital phase is about 3 striving/moving to a goal. 
- The urethral phase is about 4 work-performing. 
- The intentional development is about 5 informing. 
In order to find the components formed by the basic 
behavior elements in activities, the following 5 main 
questions arises: 
1. Does an activity involve the agent getting something 
useful? (Basic Drive 1). 
2. Does an activity of an agent involve power or the 
capability used to determine, control, keep, hold, direct, 
steer, or operate something or to have something at the 
disposal? (Basic Drive 2) 
3. Does an activity of an agent involve striving or movement 
to reach (the most diverse) goals?  (Basic Drive 3) 
4. Does an activity contain that an agent gives something 
useful or performs a service? (Basic Drive 4) 
5. Does an activity contain informing the agent about 
something? (Basic Drive 5) 
The basic behavior elements form the frame for the entire 
life:  
1. From getting milk as a baby to buying food as an adult 
(drive 1- oral).  
2. From self-control to control of one's own possessions. 
From the use of things at one's disposal to the orders for 
the employees (drive 2 - anal). 
3. From the moving in sexuality to the moving to reach 
something. From moving with a car to moving a weapon 
against an enemy (drive 3 - genital). 
4. From doing things for mother and father to helping others. 
From learning at school to working as an employee in a 
company (drive 4 - urethral). 
5. From advantageous knowledge to get things done to 
curiosity about everything (drive 5 - intentional).  
In childhood phases the development of activities can be 
observed: A baby gets milk from the mother. This is a 
passive receiving and  the pure getting of a child (drive 1). 
As an adult, one goes to a grocery and buys food. In 
addition, the adult has an assistant drive: paying, that means 
to have money at the disposal (basic drive 2) and to change 
it with the food. 
This extension of behaviors applies to all 5 basic drives. 
From the pure drive behavior, it develops into combined 
behaviors. The other drives (later developed in childhood) 
are used as assistance. The ratio of pure behavior to 
combined behavior is about 1 : 100. Because the skills are 
learned at different stages of childhood and therefore exists 
separately, there must exist combinations. For example, the 
baby is not able to use money. 
An older child who knows that possession means having 
control over it (basic drive 2) is then able to exchange 
money for a desired object. (Assistance 2// for goal 1.) 
The basic drives have special shapes to adapt to the 
different areas of life and are a great advantage for survival 
since all drives have the drive to fulfill them. The basic 
drives run through the various areas of human life.  
The transfer of the original drive to the scenery of an 
area leads to multiple adaptation processes. 
There are main areas (Material, Material/Feelings, 
Interpersonal, Interpersonal/Feelings, Physical) that include 
all 5 basics as a goal and there are sub-areas behind a main 
area especially behind the material area: Authorities, 
Contracts, Hobby, Leisure Time, Public Utilities, States, etc. 
And there are sectoral sub-areas that include only one basic 
as a goal (one sector, instead of all) but all basics as 
assistances (Animals, Animals/Hobby, Cleanliness, Contest, 
Criminal/Procurement, Financial/Transactions, Financial/ 
Using, IT, Law, Law/Court, Livelihood, Medical, Producer, 
Social Institutions, Supplier, Traffic, Protection). 
Behaviors have accompanying feelings. There are good, 
neutral, and bad feelings. When we achieve the fulfillment 
of drives, we feel good. When we try and do not achieve 
fulfillment, we feel bad. 
If we buy things, we get something (basic drive 1). We 
can get food (Goal 1). We can get possessions like a house, 
an apartment, furniture, etc. (Activity 1//Goal 2). 
We can get mobilities (Activity 1//Goal 3). We can get 
recognition (Activity 1//Goal 4). We can get information 
(Activity 1//Goal 5). Getting something usually makes us 
feel good. Somebody goes shopping and only the moment 
of getting something makes us feel good. There are two 
variations: To get something as assistance 1 and to have got 
something as goal drive 1. 
If we exercise power, it makes us feel good (basic 
drive 2). Not everyone can stand by it. If we have had bad 
experiences with it, we could refuse it.  
One issue for this is power in politics. Is there any doubt 
about how good a dictator feels when he exercises his power 
over an entire country? Or the senior manager of a large 
company giving orders to many people? There are two 
variations: The determination/control as assistance 2 and the 
attainment of a desired state as goal drive 2. 
There are different areas that show different views. In the 
material area, there is the determination of material things. 
Such as determining the circumstances for the manufacturing 
goods. In the interpersonal area, there is dominion over 
people: To command someone like their children or to 
command other people, as a king or patriarch. And, of 
course, having power or being in a position of power was an 
advantage for survival. 
When we achieve goals, it makes us feel good. If we 
strive for something, for example, we bring about something 
(Activity 3//Goal 2) and it works, it feels good when we 
reach the goal. 
The interpersonal area uses interpersonal relations 
instead of relationships with material things. Goal 3, to reach 
a material goal now refers to an interpersonal/sexual goal.  
There are two variations: striving for an interpersonal 
goal, used for assistance 3, and striving towards sexual 
intercourse, used for goal drive 3. As in every area, all 5 
basics are used as assistance. There is no need to mention the 
importance of sexual feelings and maternal/paternal feelings 
for reproduction.  
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
The Fight/Aggression area is a sectoral area. In this case, 
the basic drive 3 is defined as a combat-like goal. As in 
every case, all 5 basics are used as assistances but always 
related to only one goal: Goal 3 to win the fight. (In a serious 
fight there are two other options: Flee or submit. (These 
follow the survival instinct.) 
There are several different fight areas: aggression, brawl, 
dispute, election, games, hobby, litigation, sports, sports/ball 
games, stabbing, and war. All of them have the goal 3 to win 
the fight and are sectoral areas. The difference between ‘to 
shoot a goal’, in fight/ball games and ‘to shoot an enemy’ in 
fight/aggression is differentiated by the area and the various 
terms/situations within an area.  
There 
are 
further 
sectoral 
areas 
such 
as 
Criminal/Procurement directed only for goal 1 getting, 
Financial/Transactions directed only for goal 2 determining/ 
controlling money, IT only directed to 5 informing, etc. All 
sectoral areas have only one fixed goal, a goal that actually 
everyone knows. The code contains it with the goal number. 
A social species needs to help each other. Hence, it is 
useful that we do things for appreciation. Even without pay, 
we sometimes do things for recognition. Just for the good 
feeling. There are two variants: Doing something for others 
as assistance 4 and being appreciated as goal drive 4. In the 
case of basic drive 4 (good) performance, there are two 
different lines. In the interpersonal area, the goal is 
recognition for good performing. In the material area, the 
goal of (work) performance is money.  
One of the most important human inventions is to give 
money for the exchange of goods and services. Money is 
material recognition in the material area. The core is to get 
money for work and money makes businesses run. Work 
performing is a helping (drive 4), that benefits the other. It is 
always dependent on the other who decides whether or not it 
will help him/her. This is a reason to make services and 
goods well to satisfy customers. On the other hand, the 
customer is dependent on payment and price. 
If we submit a paper (Activity 3/5/2// Goal 4) and hope 
for publication and get confirmation, we feel good. If our 
mother/father says, “Well done”, we feel good.  
When we search for specific information for a long time 
(Activity 3/2// Goal 5) and find it, we feel good. In regard to 
informing, there are two variations: The search for specific 
information as assistance 5 and to satisfy the curiosity as 
goal drive 5. 
 These feelings are the driving force for our lives. Feeling 
good when we achieve goals and feeling bad when we do 
not. These feelings have been important for millions of 
years. There are other types of feelings. For example, the 
feeling of overload. If I must work for money but it is too 
much effort... That is another issue.   
V. 
CODING OF OBJECTS 
Assigning objects is similar to assigning activities. 
Objects are things, which are useful or necessary to support 
activities for the drives. For example, a car is a thing object 
that can be owned (determining/controlling, drive 2). A car is 
for striving/moving to a destination = drive 3. Therefore, the 
car is an object 2//for goal 3. 
Each object is interlocked with the corresponding basic 
behavior element. For example,  
1 getting with source objects from which one can get sth. 
2 determining/controlling of thing objects that can be owned. 
3 striving/moving with location objects that can be reached. 
4 good performing with profession objects. 
5 informing (oneself) with information objects. 
Each object number is interlocked with the goal drive 
number of the basic behavior element (Table VII). 
The goal number from a Basic Behavior Element (Old 
Goal) of an activity becomes the first number of an object 
(Object No. 1 - 5) (Table VII). This is the ‘goal to assistance 
regularity of the object’. This first number becomes the 
assistance for the object (followed by a new goal, the goal 
from the object) (Table VIII). The change from the goal of 
the basic behavior to the goal of the object means a transition 
from the old goal (behavior) to a new goal (object). (Goal 
transition).  
TABLE VII. BASIC BEHAVIOR ELEMENTS IN RELATION TO OBJECTS 
Basic Behavior Element (Old Goal) 
Object (Assistance)           
New Goal 
Getting - goal 1 from  
Determining/controlling sth. goal 2 with  
Striving/moving to a destination goal 3 to 
Performing (good work) goal 4 with 
Informing (oneself) - goal 5 -about 
 
Object 1 Sources 
Object 2 Things 
Object 3 Locations 
Object 4 Professions 
Object 5 Information 
 
 
 for a goal 
 
 
 
TABLE VIII. COMBINING OF OBJECTS 
Object                           has the 
Assistance drive for a New Goal  
Groceries, shops are 
Food, goods, etc. are  
Addresses of shops are  
Farmer, seller, etc. are 
Supply details are 
1 sources 
2 things 
3 locations          for 1 
4 professions 
5 information 
 
 
getting 
Apartment rental, furniture shops, are  
House, apartment, furniture, etc. are 
Home, location of a property is a 
Property management, lessors, etc. are 
Building details are 
1 sources 
2 things 
3 location            for 2 
4 professions 
5 information 
 
 
determining/ 
controlling 
sth. (having) 
Travel agencies, transport services are 
Vehicles are 
Train stations, bus stops, etc. are  
Bus drivers, travel agents, etc. are   
Route details are 
1 sources 
2 things 
3 locations          for 3 
4 professions 
5 information 
 
striving/ 
moving 
(to a 
destination) 
Demand for goods is a 
Equipment for work is a 
Workplace* is a 
Vocational teacher is a 
Work details are 
1 source 
2 thing 
3 location            for 4 
4 profession 
5 information 
 
 
performing 
(work) 
TV, internet, etc. is a  
Newspapers, journals, DVDs, etc. are 
Information events, theater, etc. are   
Reporter; actor, IT, etc. are     
Search engines, lexicons are 
1 source 
2 things 
3 locations          for 5  
4 professions 
5 information 
 
 
informing 
(oneself) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
* An example of assigning drive code numbers (Table VIII) 
for Workplace (location object) with:  
Assistance 3// Goal 4 or identical: Object 3// Goal 4. 
Just as the combining of Basic Behavior Elements, 
objects are combinable too. The first number (the object 
number) is the assistance, the second number is again a 
goal. In the next step, drive 4 is used as assistance and there 
is a transition to the goal of the work performing for example 
farming, selling: goal 1, property management: goal 2, bus 
driving: goal 3, vocational teaching: goal 4, reporting: goal 5 
(‘goal transition’). 
Each of the five objects can, again and again, be divided 
by the 5 basic drives for the goals. Again, with a higher 
number of elements, there are a more numerous, number of 
objects. Further differentiation depends on the area and the 
special direction. Up to 9 elements are known for one 
object. The basic drives can be seen in all these objects and 
there are many more objects with a higher number of 
elements of the combinations in the different areas. 
The drive number of an object becomes the assistance 
number for a new goal, the goal of the object (Table VII). 
A. Oral field 
In the oral phase, the baby receives milk from the 
mother. This is the core of basic drive 1. The mother is the 
source object for the milk. Later as an adult, there are 
different source objects from which one can get something 
for:  
• Drive 1 food: Groceries. They are the combination of 
source objects 1 = assistance 1 for goal drive 1. 
• Drive 2 possession: Apartment rental, furniture shops. 
They are the combination of source objects 1 = assistance 
1 for goal drive 2. 
• Drive 3 destinations: Travel agencies, transport services. 
They are the combination of source objects 1 = assistance 
1 for goal drive 3. 
• Drive 4 work: Goods demand. They are the combination 
of source objects 1 = assistance 1 for goal drive 4. 
• Drive 5 information: TV, internet, etc. They are the 
combination of source objects 1 = assistance 1 for goal 
drive 5. 
In short: Groceries, apartment rental, travel agencies, 
transport services, goods demand, TV, internet are the 
source objects (objects 1 = assistances 1) for the goal drives: 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 in all variations of the different areas of life. 
B. Anal field 
Things are objects for basic drive 2. They are usable for 
basic drive 2 because someone can own and 2 determine/ 
control them. They are in the power field of someone.  
• Things for the oral drive are food. They are the 
combination of thing objects 2 = assistance 2 with goal 
drive 1 getting. 
• Main thing objects are my house/apartment, furniture, and 
everything in my house. In my house, I can determine and 
decide most because it is mine. (Another important thing 
object is money.  
I can determine and control it and decide about its use.) 
They are the combination of thing objects 2 = assistance 2 
with goal drive 2 determing/controlling. 
• Things for my mobility: My car, my bike, my ticket for 
the train. They are the combination of thing objects 2 = 
assistance 2 with goal drive 3 striving/moving to a 
destination.  
• Things for my work. Work equipments are objects for 
drive 4 work-performing. They are the combination of 
thing objects 2 = assistance 2 with goal drive 4 work 
performing. 
• Things for my information. Newspapers, journals, DVDs, 
etc. They are the combination of thing objects 2 = 
assistance 2 with goal drive 5 informing oneself.  
In short: In the anal field, I can have thing objects (objects 2 
= assistance 2) for: 
Goal drive 1 (food) 
Goal drive 2 (possession) 
Goal drive 3 (vehicles) 
Goal drive 4 (equipment for work) 
Goal drive 5 (newspapers). 
(The things include not only the 5 basic drives in the 
material area, but also all variations of the different areas of 
life.) 
C. Genital field 
Destinations are location objects (assistance 3) for the basic 
drive 3. In this genital field, I can reach destinations by 3 
striving/ moving to a destination. They are the combination 
of location objects (objects 3 = assistance 3) with goal 
drive: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and locations in all variations of the 
different areas of life.  
D. Urethral field 
Professions are profession objects (assistance 4) in the 
urethral field. I can learn 4 professional work. It is the 
combination of profession objects (objects 4 = assistance 4) 
with goal drive 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and professions in all variations 
of the different areas of life. 
E. Intentional field  
Information is an object in the intentional field. It is the 
combination of 5 information objects (object 5 = assistance 
5) about everything in the world and about goal drive 1, 2, 
3, 4, 5 in all variations of the different areas of life. 
F. Summary 
Drives revolve around drives and generate a wide 
variety of behaviors and all of which serve a (drive) goal. 
This knowledge results from the drive-related analysis of 
human behavior. It turned out that only 5 basic drives are 
necessary for this breakdown into basic elements. This 
method is applied to thousands of predicates and objects and 
found that these consist of drive elements.  
For example, one can use the computer (5) to find out 
where best to get (1) a car (3) that is suitable for driving to 
work (4). If one goes through the sentence step by step, one 
will find that this is exactly the way people think. In this 
case, one needs a car mainly for going to work. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 In the mind, one has an idea of the work, and that one is 
paid for it (basic drive 4). The whole work complex is 
connected, among other things, with the place where one 
work, the target object, where one has to go, and what one 
need a car for (basic drive 3). One wants to get it (basic 
drive 1), and for that, one need information on the question: 
Where? In the information that one can obtain from the 
computer/internet (basic drive 5). 
Human behaviors consist of drive activities and relate to 
drive objects. The diversity of human behavior is based on 
the combination of a few basic drives. Each drive comprises 
several variations which depend on the current area of life. 
In many areas of life, there is a special variation of a basic 
drive. The result is a high diversity of human behavior with 
mainly only 5 basic drives. 
VI. 
THE CONCATENATING OF OBJECTS IN THE MATERIAL 
AREA 
In section V, subsection B, we have thing objects 2. 
They are things that can be owned by someone. The basic 
possessions are shown in Table IX. There are things for the 
goal drives 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 in the rows 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.  
The owned house or apartment with Code: Object 
2//Goal 2//2/ defines the stationary immobile core of posses-
sion (Goal drive 2). One can use it, one can change details 
within, one can sell it.  One has it at one´s disposal. It is the 
core Object of drive 2 determining/ controlling something. 
Further in the columns: The portable possessions can be 
moved -drive 3. Value-based ownership is limited by other 
people's conditions - drive 4. 
Table IX to Table XII are building a chain that leads 
deeper in the matter of house and apartment. Within the 
framework of drives, the content is defined by area and the 
chain of the diverse Basic Behavior Elements.  
The arrows between the tables show the chained 
connection between them. One position forms the 
connection point for the next one, as shown in Figures 1. 
See Table IX, the heading Object 2// (possession) plus 
label of the row Goal 2 (determining/controlling) plus 
heading of the column (Drive 2) is superordinate for Table 
X. ‘House; apartment’ 
TABLE IX. SUPER ORDINATE: POSSESSION: OBJECT 2// 
                 Assistant Drive: 
  For Goal: 
   Drive 2 
determining 
    Drive 3 
striv./moving 
    Drive 4 
 work performing 
      Oral 
   1 getting 
      food, 
 consumables 
 dine, 
  beverages 
 
      Anal  
   2 determining/controlling 
house, 
apartment 
  portable 
 possession 
    money, bank 
 balances, shares 
      Genital  
   3 striving/moving 
gasoline 
  vehicles 
  tickets 
      Urethral  
   4 work-performing 
contracts, 
design  
drawings 
 equipment 
  for work 
  work 
  performance 
      Intentional  
   5 informing 
home page 
 
 
TABLE X. HOUSE, APARTMENT: OBJECT 2// GOAL 2// 2 / 
 
The entire matrix of Table X includes the code above of 
house/apartment, as seen in the heading. This matrix shows 
connected thing objects:  
Line 1 shows how to get a house/apartment,  
Line 2 shows details,  
Line 3 shows elements of managing,  
Line 4 shows professional help, and  
Line 5 contains information about a house.  
This matrix is convergent, every position has the same goal  
(Goal 2), the rows are assistances. The columns are sub-
assistances. (In contrast, the other matrices are divergent and 
show the 5 basic drives as goals with the 5 rows.) 
Row assistant drive 2 and column sub-assistant drive 3 
means ‘equipment of apartment’. It includes the above 
heading and the beginning of the chain.  
In Table XI (equipment of apartment) is row goal 4 
electrical work, instead of 4 work-performing which is on 
the same drive position. A monetary payment may be made 
for work performance. Money is converted work 
performance. Electrical equipment runs only against 
payment for electricity. This monetary payment is converted 
work performance. (Alternative: Area electrical power.) 
The assistant drive is drive 3. The crossing point 
position means ‘electrical appliances’. It is again the 
heading for the next matrix (Table XII) and is extended 
twice again.  
TABLE XI. EQUIPMENT OF APARTMENT: OBJECT 2// GOAL 2// 2 /2 /3 // 
                 Assistant Drive: 
  For Goal: 
 Drive 2 
determining 
 Drive 3 
striving/moving 
 Drive 5  
 informing (self) 
      Oral drive 
   1 getting 
 
crockery, pans 
cutlery, pots,  
 
      Anal Drive 
 2 determining/controlling 
 
  furniture 
 
      Genital Drive 
   3 striving/moving 
 
 
 
       Urethral Drive 
   4 electrical work 
 
  electrical 
  appliances 
 
      Intentional Drive 
   5 informing 
 nameplate, 
    address 
 phone/internet 
connection 
lighting 
 
             Sub-assistant Drive: 
 Assistant drive: 
  Drive 2 
determining 
 Drive 3 
striving/moving 
      Drive 4 
 work performing 
      Oral drive 
   1 getting 
hire 
moving in 
  house buying 
      Anal Drive 
 2 determining/controlling 
room type  equipment of 
apartment 
    ownership 
    costs; rent 
      Genital Drive 
   3 striving/moving 
contract 
rules 
    
financing 
      Urethral Drive 
   4 work-performing 
rentals 
     repair,   
 renovation,  
 cleaning, craft 
 acceptance of 
  price, of rent 
      Intentional Drive 
   5 informing 
real estate 
knowledge 
knowledge of 
    building  
   problems 
     house,  
   apartment 
 price adequacy 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
TABLE XII. ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES:  
OBJECT 2// GOAL 2// 2 /2 /3 //GOAL 4 //3// 
                Assistant Drive:  
  For Goal: 
Drive 2 
determining 
   Drive 3 
striving/moving 
  Drive 5  
informing (self) 
     Oral drive 
  1 getting 
refrigerator 
stove,  
oven, 
microwave 
   
     Anal Drive 
  2 determining/controlling 
  
  
 
     Genital Drive 
  3 striving/moving 
washing 
machine 
 
 
     Urethral Drive 
  4 work-performing 
 
  
  
     Intentional Drive 
  5 informing 
 computer 
  phone 
 TV, streaming 
 service 
 
Table XII shows the final code. The refrigerator offers 
oral things: Drive 1 getting with core eating for the goal and 
column drive 2 for assistance. The assist drive 2 means: 
determine/control (have available) with the refrigerator that 
keeps food fresh with electricity and thus helps to keep it in 
usable control. That is the last extension of the chain.  
The closer to the core of a drive, the shorter the code. 
The further away from the core, the longer the code with 
more added drives. 
Coding for refrigerator: 
Object 2 //Goal 2 //2 /2 /3 //Goal 4 //3 //Goal 1 //2 
The concatenated matrices (tables) show with four levels: 
Refrigerator. The matrices add new drive elements with 
each step in every new combination. But they are always 
only one of the 5 basic drives. (Figure 1). The combinations 
form a chain that targets a final target drive. 
 
 
Figure 1. Concatenating of the matrices in four levels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Concatenating of neurons 
 
By reducing the matrices so that a matrix appears as a 
node and only the three-dimensional network can be seen, 
the result is an image that is similar, to the arrangement of 
neurons in the brain. (Figure 2). One matrix position 
(object) forms the connection point like synapses. They give 
the superordinate content during the next step and the next 
node adds more differentiating details.  
The thought suggests itself that it runs in the brain in 
principle in the same way.  The steps in the brain are 
certainly smaller and more numerous than in this example. 
The drive activities and objects described, which relate to 
the basic drives number 1 to 5, are used by humans to define 
activities and concepts in the mind. The drives are the key 
elements in which people think. Such a connection between 
drive related basic behavior elements and drive objects has 
not yet been explored [8].  
The 5 basic drives are dimensions like the dimensions in 
space. The areas are sub-ordinate. The transfer of the 
original drive to the scenery of an area leads to multiple 
adaptation processes. By transferring drive combinations 
from one area to another, there is also likely the possibility 
of problem-solving by association.  
The 5 basic drives are available in many variations in 
100 known different areas of life (probably much more), 
resulting in many thousands of variations with combinations 
that exist in each of the areas of life. Basic drives are either 
used in actions such as shopping, giving directions, walking 
or driving, working, or looking for information (examples 
from the material area). Or these activities are imagined in 
the head. Brief pictorial or word-related representations run 
through the mind. Each base drive contains many memories. 
Starting with childhood, where the drive arises. Basic drives 
continue to be fixed points in life. For a drive, experience is 
repeatedly gained with their execution, they form a 
complex, a whole scenery including the numerous variations 
in the different areas of life.  
Basic drives must be present in the brain in some way 
since they have made human survival possible from the 
evolutionary perspective.  
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
From an evolutionary perspective, behavior is the old 
foundation. Language and thinking in language came later. 
Both are built on the old behavioral foundations, and it is 
plausible that behavior and thought were originally 
synchronous. Also, along the lines of: think first, then act. 
This model shown here is not taxonomic. It is an 
ontology with 5 elements of relations that also still adapt 
themselves according to the area of life and which are 
combined with each other. Together, this results in a very 
complex ontology. Through ever greater differentiation, 
ever new branches are formed, with the consequence that 
the number of resulting objects increases exponentially: 
First level (Table IX) contains 12 objects. 
Second level (Table X) contains 14 objects. 
Third level (Table XI) contains 6 objects. 
Forth level (Table XII) contains 6 objects. 
This results in 12 x 14 x 6 x 6 = 6048 possible objects 
assuming that there is a comparable number of objects in 
neighboring levels. According to this model, a very complex 
structure is formed from only 5 basic drives. 
In early childhood, the drive regions are only present in 
primitive structures. Through physical development and 
experiences with the use of drives, an enormous complex of 
drive-related memories develops.  
This model assumes that the drives form the frames in 
which the complexity develops. Drive satisfactions that lie 
in the environment must form an incentive for an individual. 
This stimulus must arrive in the brain and trigger reactions. 
Nothing is more probable than that this happens with the 
drive apparatus. Only this guarantees survival. The drive 
apparatus receives restrictions from the social community 
during development. Social morality limits the drive 
apparatus. (This conglomerate of drive living and restriction 
often blurs the understanding of the drive origin.) 
Further differentiation of the branches increases the 
number of objects in this model enormously. It fits the 
exponential increase of knowledge in the brain.  
Unlike a normal network that only shows the 
connections of the objects, here the drive root of each 
element is tracked. Thus, each element gets a meaning and 
the total meaning of an object is the sum of the individual 
meanings of the elements. This circumstance also explains 
the depth of knowledge penetration of the human mind, 
which is far superior to the understanding of computer 
derivations. 
The above example refrigerator shows this knowledge 
penetration with 4 drive levels: Of all the things that are in 
my possession or at my disposal (drive 2), I think of my 
house/apartment as the core (Goal 2//2). I think of the 
movable equipment of the apartment (Drive 2/3).  
Part of this is electrical appliances that accomplish a 
service by moving something with an electric motor (Goal 
4//3). This includes a refrigerator that keeps food fresh 
(Goal 1//2). The human mind knows each drive level of an 
object and the sum of them. 
 
VII. METHODS OF THIS WORK 
All conclusions of this work are logically derived. They 
contradict current research methods, where evidence is 
required for everything. Evidence that behaviors in fact 
consist of combinations (for example, that fetch consists of 
move and get) cannot be shown statistically or by 
interviewing people. A proof of the combination system is 
possible with logic. It is shown that there are combinations 
of behavior elements. Since the brain controls all behavior, 
the brain also controls the combination. 
The proof that the basic drives are really the building 
blocks of behavior is done backwards by noting that so 
many important predicates (and hence the corresponding 
behaviors) can be broken down into these basic drive 
elements.  
So far, seven thousand drive-related behaviors and 
objects 
are 
known. 
500 
categorized 
important 
predicates/behaviors can be viewed on our homepage [10].  
Some basic parts of this model can be considered as 
secured by the following facts: 
It has been known since the middle of the last century 
that basic drives exist. Psychologists found the connection 
between childhood phases and basic drives. For example, 
Erik Erikson [6] wrote about 4 basic drives (oral, anal, 
genital, urethral) that develop in the first childhood stages. 
Schultz-Hencke [7] also wrote about these and about an 
intentional development in childhood in which information 
leads to intention.  
That the basic drives exist in the brain and not, for 
example, in the stomach can be considered certain. It is not 
necessary to prove whether basic drives are localized in the 
brain. Proving whether basic drives can be detected in an 
fMRI study or in EEG signals is not crucial, because the 
drives must exist in the brain. 
The question of whether there are only 5 basic drives or 
more has not been definitively established. This model is 
based on the basic childhood stages and the behavior 
necessary for survival. Both lead to the same basics. 
The logic of the general combinations is compelling: 
• I use getting (drive 1) to get something from sources (for 
example, stores that offer things for drive 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5). 
• I have things at my disposal (drive 2) that are usable for 
drive 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 
• I strive/move for goals (drive 3) for drive 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 
• I perform work services (drive 4) for drive 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 of 
the other people. 
• I inform myself (drive 5) for drive 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 
The rule is: a basic behavior element refers to a basic object. 
Basic behavior elements and basic objects refer to basic 
drives.  
Instead of a proof about the combination of elements 
within an activity or object, anyone can figure out the basic 
behavioral elements of a predicate/behavior or object by 
answering the following main questions: 
 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
• Does a behavior of an agent involve striving or movement 
to reach (the most diverse) goals?  (Basic Drive 3) 
• Does a behavior of an agent involve power or the 
capability used to determine, control, keep, hold, direct, 
steer, or operate something or to have something at the 
disposal? (Basic Drive 2) 
• Does a behavior involve the agent getting something 
useful? (Basic Drive 1). 
• Does a behavior contain that an agent gives something 
useful or performs a service? (Basic Drive 4) 
• Does a behavior contain informing the agent about 
something? (Basic Drive 5) 
Finding combinations in the brain by measurements with 
fMRI or EEG is very difficult because the combinations 
consist of 2, most more drive elements and forms a complex 
mixture in the mind just for one thought. 
There 
are 
other 
useful 
elements 
for 
further 
differentiation of behaviors and combinations (autonomous, 
heteronomous, 
eccentric, 
concentric). 
However, 
this 
introductory work is limited to elements that are essential 
for survival.  
VIII. CONCLUSION 
An important task of brain research is to bridge the gap 
between psychology and the electrical functionality of 
neurons. How does (drive-related) thinking arise from the 
firing of neurons?  
The present model is a step in this direction to narrow 
the gap by decomposing psychology into (small) elements 
(modules) that come somewhat closer to the smallest 
element of switching a bit in the neuron. The goal is to 
shrink the psychological elements until they reach the size 
of a switching neuron.  
Another way would be to find the anchoring of basic 
drive elements in the brain architecture. Of course, this 
anchoring is not easy to recognize. This model suggests that 
individual neurons that are relatively close to each other are 
anchored in different basic drives. Just the mixture results in 
the content of objects and activities by the combinations.  
An MRI study is not able to show single neurons. Only 
regions with large amounts of neurons can be identified. To 
find the anchoring of the drives in the neurons, new ways 
must be found. 
Focusing on the human brain, this work makes some 
concluding considerations: 
• It is unthinkable that the human basic drives (that made 
human survival possible and still make it possible today) 
are not represented in the mind. The basic drives must be 
contained in our brains. 
• Humans are able to imagine processes of behavior, which 
are used to fulfill basic drives. This imagination of the 
process is a thought. Thoughts are organized through long 
chains of combinations that are bundled together by a drive 
goal theme. A thought begins with a pulse from inside the 
body or a stimulus from outside, that touches one of the 
basic drives 
A reaction can be an activity aimed at achieving a 
goal/meeting a need or at least a thought about it. 
Additional combinations with assistance drives extend the 
thought. 
• The content of the thought is to follow the chain of drives 
through Basic Behavior Elements that are variations of 
basic drives. The combinations give the content of the 
thought. 
• Human thinking deals mainly with drive-important 
behaviors and drive-important occurrences and processes. 
• It is plausible that with increasing depth of the levels a 
complex mixture of assistance drives, which are necessary 
for the desired goal, is fed into the human activity process. 
The feed takes place through the added combinations with 
assistance drives. 
• These assistance drives are behaviors (often conditionally 
learned details of the activities) that have developed in a 
different drive field but are useful and necessary help to 
achieve the current goal. 
• Because these basic behaviors exist there must be a 
control of the behaviors by the brain.  
• Because the basics develop in different childhood phases 
and 
therefore 
exist 
separately, 
there 
must 
exist 
combinations. The combinations are represented in the 
brain by pictures or words. 
• The combination of the basic drives provides ‘background 
knowledge’ that all people have in the back of their minds 
regarding their activities, as each combination contains 
the purpose (goal) of a behavior or object and the 
means/methods (assistances by other drives) used. 
When viewed in a microscope, the basic drive anchoring of 
the individual neurons cannot be seen. One can only see the 
highly complex network of branches between the neurons. 
The drives are the ‘ghost in the machine’ to use that old 
phrase, in the human brain. Human emotions echo the 
degree that drives are satisfied under specific, acute 
conditions. Each finely differentiated action (and any 
conversation about it) is based on a complex mixture of 
basic drives, such that one can hardly see their base, because 
it has so many levels, in ever-changing mixtures.  Behind 
every action (or even part of an action) are specifically 
differentiated aspects of human drives. 
Learning is not the learning of anything. The learning of 
behaviors has the task of serving the fulfillment of drives. 
The behaviors are supported by the means of pattern 
recognition [9] and conditional learning.  
Language also serves to fulfill drives. Language is used 
to get recognition for social behavior or good performance 
(drive 4) or for the different variations of all drives in 100 
areas of life, which are carried out alone or often in 
cooperation with others. 
The fulfillment of the drives give the sense of human 
behavior. Most human behaviors are combinations of 
human drives. The numbering of these combinations can be 
viewed as a kind of genetic code for behavior and thinking. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Rössler, „Psychophysiology of Cognition: An Introduction 
to Cognitive Neuroscience.“, Spektrum Akademischer Verlag, 
2011. 
[2] U. Hasson,  A.A. Ghazanfar, B. Galantucci, S. Garrod, and C. 
Keysers, „Brain-to-brain coupling: mechanism for creating 
and sharing a social world“. Trends in Cognitive Science 
16(2), USA, 2012, pp 114-121. 
[3] C. J. Fillmore, C. F. Baker, and F. Collin, “Frame semantics 
for text understanding”. Proceedings of WordNet and Other 
Lexical Resources, Pittsburgh, USA: NAACL. 2001. 
[4] 
J. J. Katz and J. A. Fodor, “The structure of a Semantic 
Theory”,  Language, Vol. 39, No. 2. (Apr. – Jun.), 1963, pp. 
170-210,  
[5] P. H. Pfeifer, J. Pfeifer, and N. Pfeifer, “To Grasp the 
Meaning of Natural Language by a Code of Behaviors” the 
Sense Machine: IJKE 2016 Vol.2(1), 1–3.  
[6] Erikson, E., Childhood and Society, W. W. Norton & Co, 
New York 1950, pp. 70, 76, 80-86, 253. 
[7] Schultz-Hencke, H., Textbook of Analytical Psychotherapy, 
Thieme Verlag, Stuttgart 1951, pp. 24-25. 
[8] V. Schuring, „Selected biological foundations of critical 
psychology (I)“: Forum Kritische Psychologie 55, 2016, pp 
117-123. 
[9] R. Kurzweil, “How to create a mind: the secret of human 
thought revealed”, Viking, Penguin Group, USA, 2012. 
[10] P. H. Pfeifer, http://www.sense-machine.com/Gitter.html 
[retrieved: 5, 2023] 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

