The Significance of Verbal and Spatial Attentional Resources on Mental Workload 
and Performance  
 
Abdulrahman Basahel, Mark Young and Marco Ajovalasit 
Human-Centered Design Institute, School of Engineering and Design 
Brunel University 
 Uxbridge, Middlesex UB8 3PH, UK 
Abdulrahman.Basahel@brunel.ac.uk         M.young@brunel.ac.uk             Marco.ajovalasit@brunel.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— For decades, scientists have been studying the 
impact of task workload on individual performance. The 
purpose of this study was to examine and validate the difficulty 
levels of two visual tasks (verbal and spatial) to be used in a 
later experiment studying the interaction of physical and 
mental workload on attentional resources and performance. 
Additionally, the study was conducted to determine if a 
significance difference exists between how men and women 
perform these types of tasks. The verbal and spatial task 
workloads satisfied the difficulties levels. 
Keywords-mental; workload; attentional resources; verbal; 
spatial  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Workload has been identified as one of the main 
variables that impacts human performance [1][2]. Task 
workload can be divided into two types, i.e., mental demands 
and physical demands [2][3]. In fact, mental workload has 
increased more than physical workload in many jobs due to 
the rapid increase in technology in recent years [4]. 
However, most tasks still include physical and mental 
demands on the operators [1][ 2][5][ 6]. 
The mental workload concept does not have a 
conventional definition; however, mental workload can be 
defined as the resources (i.e., human capacity and skills) that 
are needed to complete the demanded tasks [2][7]. On the 
other hand, the concept of physical demand can be defined as 
the demand associated with tasks that require physical work 
from the operators, thereby utilizing the musculoskeletal 
system, the cardiorespiratory system, and the nervous system 
of the human body [8].  
The description of the interference of multi-task demands 
in terms of shrinkage of some energy for information 
processing is the goal of resource theory [9].  The attentional 
resources model includes three orthogonal components. 
These components are: processing stage (perception, 
working memory, and response), processing codes (spatial 
and verbal), and processing modalities (visual and auditory) 
[9]. 
The purpose of this study was to examine and validate 
the difficulty levels of two tasks visually resource (verbal 
and spatial) that will be used in a subsequent series of 
studies. Also, it aimed to identify whether there is a 
difference between male and female performance in both 
tasks. The gender factor is important since the second part of 
the future research programme will be the investigation of 
the effect of verbal and spatial through auditory resources on 
attentional resources and performance for both males and 
females. Therefore, the gender difference is necessary for 
both studies (visual and auditory tasks) to determine if any 
significant differences occur in completing the tasks before 
this study is implemented in the real domain. In addition, the 
last part of this programme of research will be conducted in 
the industrial field and will include tasks performed by male 
operators.  
II. 
MENTAL AND PHYSICAL WORKLOAD AGAINST 
PERFORMANCE 
In terms of the effects of workload, reference [10] 
reported that workload can affect and reduce the ability level 
of the user. In addition, an unexpected rise in the task 
demand level may lead to a decrease in performance 
accuracy and an increase in response time of the operator and 
the operating system [10]. In addition, most researchers 
agree that the optimum levels of mental load produce 
acceptable job performance and response; in other words, the 
job demands should not be too low or too high 
[1][2][11][12]. Moreover, mental workload includes two 
major parts; these parts are “stress (task demand) and strain 
(the resulting impact upon individual)” [7]. Furthermore, a 
balance must be reached between the physical load of the 
assigned tasks and user’s physical functional capacity in 
order to produce acceptable performance and reduce injuries 
and errors [13]. Accordingly, the interaction between the 
impacts from physical and mental workload on performance 
is not uniform.  
III. 
VERBAL AND SPATIAL TASKS AGAINST GENDER 
DIFFERENCES 
Variations in the ability of males and females to perform 
verbal or spatial tasks have been reported by researchers in 
several studies [14][15][16]. Research indicates that gender 
could affect operator performance in tasks that require spatial 
ability, such as the mental rotation test [15][16]. Researchers 
report that males do better than females in spatial ability 
tasks. According to [14], the differences between males and 
females in their ability to perform mathematical tasks are 
small and decreased in severity over the course of a year-
long study. Furthermore, the difference in the ability of 
males and females to perform well in the spatial ability task 
27
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

is dependent upon the type of spatial task [17]. Other 
researchers reported that women participants received a 
lower score than men when performing several tests of 
spatial ability, including Money’s Road Map Test, the 
Geometric Forms test, and the Mental Rotation Test [17]. 
However, in some types of cognitive tasks, females have 
faster response rates than males [17]. Therefore, differences 
of males and females in ability to perform cognitive tasks or 
tests are related with the type of the job.  
IV. 
WORKLOAD MEASUREMENTS TECHNIQUES 
Various techniques are used to measure mental workload, 
including performance measures, subjective assessment tools 
e.g., “NASA-TLX, SWAT” and physiological incidents 
[2][4][7][18]. Furthermore, subjective tools have been 
frequently implemented for measuring mental and physical 
workload in separate situations [18]. Although all of these 
techniques have advantages and disadvantages and have 
been widely examined in numerous studies [2][7], many 
researchers believe that physiological indicators, such as 
heart rate (HR), heart rate variability (HRV), blood pressure 
and eye blink, are more sensitive to mental demand and thus 
more reliable [2][4]. Reference  [19], found that when the 
HRV of individuals was high the appropriate responses 
increased and errors declined, whereas when the HRV was 
low the inappropriate responses increased. Furthermore, they 
believed that there is a relationship between HRV and mental 
task performance. 
V. 
METHODS 
A. Design 
This experiment was conducted to evaluate and validate 
the impact of three levels of mental workload for two tasks 
upon attentional resource performance of operators: an 
arithmetic task (verbal) and a spatial figures task (spatial); 
the experiment was a full factorial repeated measures design. 
Each study was implemented separately with a separate 
group of participants, so the counterbalancing between the 
types of tasks was not necessary in this research study. The 
arithmetic mental task included the following three different 
levels: 
 
1- The 
low 
level 
involves 
addition/subtraction 
problems with numbers between 1 and 10. 
2- The intermediate level involves addition/subtraction 
problems with two numbers between 3 and 35 for 
the subtraction operation and two numbers between 
6 and 35 for the addition operation. 
3- In the difficult level, participants are asked to 
complete high level addition/subtraction problems 
with two numbers between 20 and 150 for the 
subtraction operation and between 20 and 105 for 
the addition operation. 
 
The second task, i.e., the spatial figures task, also included 
the following three various levels: 
 
1- For the low level, participants are asked to compare 
three figures with an original figure. 
2- In the intermediate level, participants are asked to 
select two identical figures from six figures. 
3- In the difficult level, participants are presented with 
nine figures and are asked to choose two identical 
figures from the group. 
 
These types of tasks were chosen to represent the effect 
of typical workload levels upon the attentional resources 
performance of users [20]. The arithmetic task was used on 
three different levels to emulate the demand of a verbal task, 
according to some [21], who used the mathematical mental 
task as a verbal task that placed a load on attentional 
resource capacity and information processing. In addition, 
the arithmetic mental task is considered to be a verbal task 
that places a load on working memory capacity since 
individuals memorize the numbers as words in short-term 
memory [17]. Also, according to reference [17], mental 
rotation is considered to be a spatial task that relies on spatial 
resources; numerous studies have measured the spatial 
reasoning abilities of individuals. Moreover, several studies 
have employed mental rotation tasks (the figures were 
published by [22], in order to evaluate the load on the spatial 
ability resources of individuals (see, [16][23][ 24])). 
Overall, 
this 
research 
included 
two 
independent 
variables: the types of tasks (an arithmetic task and a spatial 
figures task), and the difficulty of each task. Furthermore, it 
contained three different dependent variables: performance 
(number of correct responses and time of correct responses); 
physiological indices (obtained by measuring the heart rate 
and heart rate variability); and subjective assessments of 
mental workload (observed by using the NASA-TLX scores) 
[25]. 
B. Materials 
All performance trials were conducted using an Acer-
compatible PC with a Pentium II 300 processor operating at 
266 MHz and a Tangent 17-inch monitor; it involved the 
MathsNet Mental Tests 1.5 Software [26], “see Figure 1”, 
and the Mental Rotation Test Software [27], “see Figure 2”. 
All participants were comfortable with and clearly 
understood how to present the task on the PC screen.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1.  Screenshot of the mental       
   math software. 
     
    The testing was conducted using Web-based software for 
two reasons: first, the programs met the experimental 
requirements in terms of recording the correct responses and 
Figure 2.  Screenshot of the 
spatial figures program. 
28
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

trial time. Secondly, there is other software (i.e., E-prime) 
that can do these same tasks, but it is expensive, whereas the 
software chosen is available online and is easy to use. Also, 
Polar CS600 chest-electrode was used in order to measure 
heart rate (HR) and heart rate variability (HRV). Polar 
ProTrainer 5 software (5.35.164) was used to analyze the 
heart rate and heart rate variability. In addition, the NASA-
TLX [25] was used to evaluate the mental workload of each 
task.  
C. Participants 
Twelve participants (ages 25–35) were selected randomly 
from Brunel University. This sample size included 6 males 
and 6 females who were chosen in order to find one standard 
deviation for the independent variables as well as normality. 
Also, the same sample was utilized for both studies. The task 
procedures were explained to all participants. Participants 
were invited by an announcement that was issued through 
the university Web site. In addition, the experiments met the 
ethical rules of the School of Engineering and Design at 
Brunel University.  
D. Procedures 
At the beginning, participants were given a brief 
introduction about the experiment in order to familiarize 
them with the steps. Also, the participants were provided 
instructions and advice on how to perform an arithmetic 
mental task and a spatial figures task. Then, the participants 
were asked to affix the chest electrodes for the heart rate 
monitor on their chest such that we could record the HR and 
the HRV for each participant as they completed the assigned 
tasks. In addition, the height, weight, age, and gender of each 
participant was recorded and used to set-up the heart rate 
monitor tool. 
Subsequently, the first experiment began with the 
presentation of the arithmetic mental tasks.  In addition, the 
participants were presented the levels of difficulty randomly 
in order to reduce the potential carryover effects and fatigue. 
Each volunteer completed 25 questions within each level as 
accurately and quickly as possible in the allotted 5 minutes. 
The number of correct responses and the actual time required 
to complete the correct responses and the section were 
recorded directly by the software. The HR and HRV were 
recorded at rest level and continuously throughout the 
completion of each condition using chest electrodes made by 
Polar. Also, immediately after completing each trial, the 
participants were asked to complete the NASA-TLX scale in 
the 2 to 3 minute interim between each level. After 
completing the first experiment, i.e., three levels of 
arithmetic problems, the subjects were given 5 minutes to 
complete the NASA-TLX and rest. 
Then, the second experiment (i.e., the spatial figures test) 
began. The participants were asked to continue wearing the 
chest electrodes for the HR monitor such that we could 
continue measuring HR and HRV. The Mental Rotation 
program generated different figures with various angles of 
rotation at three different levels (i.e., low, intermediate, and 
high). The program also recorded the number of correct 
choices and the time required to complete the task. Each 
condition level included 25 problems, and participants were 
given 5 minutes to complete each level. In addition, they 
took 2 to 3 minutes to rest and complete the NASA-TLX 
between each condition. 
VI. 
DATA ANALYSIS 
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to investigate 
the impact of the independent factors (i.e., the arithmetic and 
spatial figures mental tasks) on the dependent variables (i.e., 
performance, mental workload, and physiological arousal). 
Also, repeated contrast comparisons were used to determine 
whether or not homogeneous levels of arithmetic tasks were 
significantly different from that of the spatial figures tasks. 
Furthermore, independent t-tests were implemented in order 
to examine the significance of the mean differences of each 
type of task and their interaction. A 95 % confidence level 
(i.e., α = 0.05) was applied in these studies. 
 
VII. RESULTS 
A. Performance 
The descriptive statistics for the participants are 
illustrated in Table I. The participants’ performance was 
measured by recording the number of correct responses for 
the arithmetic tasks and the spatial figures tasks (i.e., the 
mental rotation test). In addition, the responses were related 
to the task workload levels for each task arithmetic and 
spatial figures tasks; “see Figure 3” and  “see Figure 4”, 
respectively. 
TABLE I.  
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR SAMPLE SIZE 
 
Male(n=6) 
Female (n=6) 
Variable                                     
Mean 
SD 
Mean 
SD 
Age 
28 
2.7 
27.8 
2.9 
Height (cm) 
165.7 
8.8 
161.7 
7.6 
Weight (kg) 
65.2 
11.3 
58.2 
4.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 
3. 
Arithmetic 
mental 
workload 
levels 
against 
correct 
responsesforboth male and female. 
High
Intermediate
Low
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
Mental Workload
Correct Responses
Male
Female
29
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.   Spatial mental workload against correct responses for both male         
and female 
The ANOVA technique showed that the level of 
difficulty of the arithmetic mental task significantly 
influenced the participants’ ability to provide correct 
responses (F(2,20) = 23.50, p=0.000). The ANOVA findings 
revealed that the effect of the interaction between gender and 
arithmetic difficulty level on the number of correct responses 
was not significant (F(2,20) = 0.118, p=0.889). Moreover, a 
significant difference was observed between the intermediate 
level and the high level of the arithmetic test (p<0.001), 
whereas the difference between the low and intermediate 
levels was not significant (p=0.136). According to an 
independent t-test, no significant differences were observed 
between the performance of the male and female participants 
at all levels (i.e., low, intermediate, and high) (p>0.05). 
Table II illustrated the descriptive statistics of participants’ 
correct responses at all tasks levels. 
TABLE II.  
CORRECT RESPONSES MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS 
ACROSS ALL PARTICIPANTS IN ARITHMETIC AND SPATIAL FIGURES TASKS. 
Task 
Low level 
Intermediate 
level 
High level 
Arithmetic 
Task 
Mean 
SD 
Mean 
SD 
Mean 
SD 
Male 
23.7 
1.40 
22.3 
1.80 
19.0 
2.80 
Female 
23.5 
1.52 
21.8 
2.86 
18.7 
2.50 
 
Spatial 
Figures 
Task 
Mean 
SD 
Mean 
SD 
Mean 
SD 
Male 
23.5 
1.5 
21.7 
1.6 
19.3 
2.4 
Female 
22.0 
0.9 
20.0 
2.4 
17.5 
2.4 
    On the other hand, the ANOVA analysis illustrated that 
the impact of spatial figures mental task conditions was 
significant (F(2,20) = 15.85, p= 0.001). In contrast, no 
significant effect of the interaction between gender and 
spatial figures levels on the participants’ performance 
(F(2,20) = 0.023, p=0.946). However, according to contrast 
tests, there was a significant difference between the low and 
intermediate levels and between the intermediate and high 
levels (p= 0.016 and p= 0.034, respectively).  
B.  Participants’ Accuracy and Time of Correct Responses 
The percentage of correct responses (accuracy) of 
participants and the average time of correct responses for 
both tasks (arithmetic and spatial figures tasks) were 
generally related with the task difficulty levels.  
The ANOVA showed that the levels of difficulty of the 
arithmetic mental task and spatial task significantly impacted 
the participants’ accuracy (F(2,20) = 40.909, p=0.000). The 
ANOVA findings revealed that the effect of the interaction 
between gender and task type on response accuracy was not 
significant (F(2,20) = 0.70, p=0.480). Moreover, a significant 
difference was observed between the intermediate level and 
the high level of the arithmetic test (p=0.001), as well as the 
difference between the low and intermediate levels 
(p=0.005). In addition, when the task level (arithmetic and 
spatial) increased the accuracy decreased “see Figure 5”. 
 
 





Figure 5. Response accuracy associated with the three levels of mental 
workload for  both arithmetic and spatial figures tasks.      
      In terms of response time, the repeated-measures 
ANOVA indicated that a significant impact was made by the 
task levels on participants’ average correct responses 
(F(2,20) = 606.46, p<0.001), and  when the task difficulty 
increased, the speed significantly decreased as shown in “see 
Figure 6”. On the other hand, the ANOVA findings revealed 
that the effect of the interaction between gender and tasks 
types on response accuracy was not significant (F(2,20) = 
0.25, p=0.778).. Moreover, a significant difference was 
observed between the intermediate level and the high level of 
the arithmetic test (p<0.001), also the difference between the 
low and intermediate levels was significant (p<0.001). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High
Intermediate
Low
100
95
90
85
80
75
Mental Task
Accuracy (%)
Arithmetic Task
Spatial Task
High
Intermediate
Low
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
Mental Workload
Correct Responses
Male
Female
30
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.    Average of correct response time (time in sec) associated with 
the three levels of mental workload for both arithmetic and spatial figures 
tasks. 
C. Physiological Parameters 
 
Heart Rate (HR) 
The HR and HRV parameters were measured in order to 
determine the impact of the mental workload on the arousal 
level of the participants. As in previous research, a 
correlation was observed between these parameters and the 
difficulty level of the task. Table III presents the mean HR 
for participants as they completed the low level, intermediate 
level, and high level mental workload (i.e., both the 
arithmetic and spatial figures tasks). The table reveals that on 
average, the participants’ HRs raised as the mental workload 
increased.However, the ANOVA indicated a significant 
effect of task type (i.e., arithmetic and spatial figures) on HR, 
(F(1,11) = 30.28, p<0.001). Also, the data analysis indicated 
that a significant impact was made by the task levels on 
participants’ HRs (F(2,22) = 50.07, p<0.001), and  when the 
task difficulty increased, the HR significantly increased as 
shown in “see Figure 7”.  
TABLE III. HAERT RATE OBSERVATION(BEATS/MIN) MEAN AND 
STANDARD DEVIATION ACROSS ALL PARTICIPANTS 
    On the other hand, no significant impact from task type 
interaction and their levels on HR was observed (F(2,22) = 
0.224, p=0.775). According to the ANOVA analysis, there 
was a significant difference between the tasks (p<0.001). 
The ANOVA results for the arithmetic task demonstrated 
that no significant influence was observed by gender and 
arithmetic levels interaction on participants’ HRs (F(2,20) = 
0.531, p=0.596) “see Figure 8“. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Heart rate (HR) variable associated with the three levels of 
mental workload for  both arithmetic and spatial figures mental tasks. 
In contrast, the difficulty level of the arithmetic task 
significantly affected the HRs of the participants (F(2,20) = 
31.15, 
p<0.001). 
According 
to 
repeated 
contrast 
comparisons, the mean HR increased significantly during the 
participants’ completion of the high level arithmetic task (p= 
0.001) as compared to that of the intermediate level. Also, 
the HRs of participants rose significantly (p= 0.007) during 
their completion of the intermediate level arithmetic task 
versus that of the low level arithmetic task. The independent 
t-test showed that no significant difference was observed 
between the mean HRs of both genders during completion of 
the low, intermediate, and high level task (p>0.05). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Heart rate (HR) variable associated with the three levels of mental 
workload of arithmetic mental task for male and female. 
Additionally, 
repeated-measures 
ANOVA 
results 
reported that the the spatial figures task workload affected 
the HRs of the subjects (F(2,10) = 28.54, p<0.001). 
Conversely, the difference of the impact of gender and 
spatial task level interaction on the participants’ HR was not 
significant (F(2,20) = 2.51, p=0.107) “see Figure 9”. 
According to repeated contrast comparisons, the HR 
significantly increased when participants completed the high 
level spatial figures tasks as compared to that of the 
intermediate and low levels (p< 0.05). Also, the HR of 
participants rose significantly (p< 0.05) when participants 
completed intermediate level spatial figures tasks versus low 
level spatial figures tasks. An independent t-test indicated 
 
Low level 
Intermediate 
level 
High level 
         Task                             
Mean 
SD 
Mean 
SD 
Mean 
SD 
Arithmetic 
Task 
72.8 
8.6 
78.3 
9.6 
86.2 
9.6 
Spatial Figures 
Task 
81.8 
8.7 
88.6 
10 
95.8 
12 
High
Intermediate
Low
20.0
17.5
15.0
12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0
Mental Workload
Average Time of Correct responses (sec)
Arithmetic Task
Spatial Task
High
Intermediate
Low
95
90
85
80
75
70
Mental Workload
Heart Rate (beats/min)
Arithmetic Tasks
Spatial Figures Tasks
High
Intermeditae
Low
90
85
80
75
70
Arithmetic Workload 
Heart Rate (beats/min)
Male
Female
31
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

that no significant difference was observed between the 
mean HRs for both genders when completing the low, 
intermediate, and high levels (p>0.05) of spatial figures 
tasks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Heart rate (HR) variable associated with the three levels of mental 
workload of spatial figures task for male and female.
 
Heart Rate Variability (HRV) 
 
ANOVA analysis indicated that task type (i.e., arithmetic 
versus spatial figures tasks) significantly affected the mean 
HRV (F(1,11) = 8.93, p=0.012). Also, the data analysis 
indicated that the task level significantly impacted the 
participants’ HRV (F(2,22) = 38.14, p<0.001); i.e., when the 
arithmetic and spatial figures task difficulty level increased, 
the HRV significantly decreased as shown in “see Figure 
10“. Contrast comparisons were used to explore the 
differences that occurred in HRV when participants 
completed tasks in different difficulty levels.  The HRV 
during completion of the difficult level was lower than that 
of the intermediate level (p<0.001), and the mean HRV was 
lower during completion of the intermediate level than that 
of the low level condition (p< 0.001).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Heart rate variability (HRV) variable associated with the three 
levels of mental workload for both arithmetic and spatial figures mental 
tasks. 
 
In contrast, no significant difference was observed 
between the interaction of both tasks and their levels (F(2,22) 
= 0.884, p=0.386). According to the ANOVA analysis, there 
was a significant difference between the tasks (p = 0.002). 
 However, according to the ANOVA analysis, the 
difficulty level of the arithmetic tasks significantly 
influenced the mean HRV (F(2,20) =20.13, p<0.001). In 
contrast, the effect of the interaction between gender and 
arithmetic levels on the HRV of participants was not 
significant (F(2,20) =3.85, p=0.065) “see Figure 11“. A 
significant difference was observed between the low and 
intermediate levels (p=0.003), as well as between the 
intermediate and high levels (p=0.004). An independent t-
test analysis indicated that a significant difference was 
observed between the HRV of males and that of female 
during the completion of low, intermediate, and high level of 
arithmetic tasks (p<0.05). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  Heart rate variability (HRV) variable associated with the 
three levels of mental workload of arithmetic mental task for male and 
female. 
 
Additionally, the analysis findings remarked that the 
level of difficulty for the spatial figures tasks significantly 
impacted the participants’ HRV (i.e., both male and female) 
(F(2,20) = 122.79, p<0.001). However, the interaction 
between gender and spatial figures task level did not impact 
the participants’ HRV (F(2,20) = 3.45, p=0.082) “see Figure 
12“. Contrast comparisons indicated that the HRV decreased 
significantly when participants completed the high level 
spatial figures task as compared to that of the intermediate 
level (p<0.001). Also, the mean HRV dropped significantly 
(p<0.001) when participants completed the intermediate 
level spatial figures task versus that of the low level spatial 
figures task. Furthermore, the independent t-test presented 
that a significant difference was observed between the HRV 
of males and females when completing low, intermediate, 
and high level spatial figures tasks (p=0.008, p=0.01 and 
p=0.01, respectively). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High
Intermediate
Low
98
96
94
92
90
88
86
84
82
80
Spatial Figures  Workload 
Heart Rate (beats/min)
Male
Female
High
Intermediate
Low
750
700
650
600
550
Mental Workload 
Heart Rate Variability (ms)
Arithmetic
Spatial Figures
High
Intermediate
Low
900
800
700
600
500
Arithmetic Mental Workload 
Heart Rate Variability
Male
Female
32
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Heart rate variability (HRV) variable associated with the three 
levels of mental workload of spatial figures task for male and female. 
 
 
NASA-TLX Assessment Tool 
 
The impact of the arithmetic task levels on overall 
NASA-TLX ratings was significant for both male and female 
participants (F(2,20) =182.79, p<0.001). As arithmetic task 
difficulty increased, the overall NASA-TLX scores also 
increased (p<0.001 from low to intermediate; p<0.001 from 
intermediate to high). According to the independent t-test 
results, no significant difference was observed between the 
male and female overall workload scores for intermediate 
and high level arithmetic tasks (p>0.05), whereas a 
difference in means was observed for the low level 
arithmetic tasks (p= 0.026) “see Figure 13“. However, the 
ANOVA results indicated that the impact from the 
interaction between gender and arithmetic levels on the 
NASA-TLX scores was not significant (F(2,20) =0.320, 
p=0.730). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13.  Mean NASA-TLX ratings assessment tool associated with three 
levels of arithmetic task for both gender 
 
Statistically significant differences were observed in the 
overall NASA-TLX ratings for the spatial figures tasks 
(F(2,20) =379.85, p<0.001). In addition, the overall 
workload from the NASA-TLX increased when the task 
level became more difficult (low to intermediate, p<0.001; 
intermediate to high, p<0.001). On the other hand, the 
ANOVA results did not reveal any significant effect from the 
interaction between gender and spatial mental task levels on 
overall NASA-TLX scores (F(1,5) =3.21, p>0.05) “see 
Figure14“. The independent t-test indicated that no 
significant difference was observed between the mean scores 
on the NASA-TLX for both genders in the intermediate and 
high levels (p>0.05), whereas a significant difference was 
observed between the mean scores on the NASA-TLX males 
and that of females when completing the low level task (p= 
0.017). However, the overall NASA-TLX scores were 
significantly related to the scores on the mental demand  
dimension for both the arithmetic and spatial figures tasks 
(r= 0.99, p<0.001 and r=0.99, p<0.001, respectively).  
In addition, all dimensions of the NASA-TLX increased 
except the physical dimension, which was not affected, since 
no physical effort was expended with either of these tasks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Mean NASA-TLX ratings assessment tool associated with 
three levels of spatial figures task for both gender 
VIII. DISCUSSION 
The number of correct responses indicated that the 
arithmetic and spatial figures tasks levels were varied in 
difficulty. In addition, it presents that the compatibility of 
mental workload of the tasks was satisfied from low level to 
high workload level. Moreover, the participants’ responses 
decreased in sequence as the mental demand from the 
arithmetic and spatial figures tasks increased. These findings 
are similar to that of previous research studies. Reference 
[18], found that performance decreased with increasing 
mathematical operation load. Regarding mental workload 
(i.e., monitoring and arithmetic tasks), Reference [2], pointed 
out that an increase in the monitoring and arithmetic process 
demand led to a degradation in the individual performance. 
Generally, the results showed that no significant difference 
has been observed between the genders when completing 
arithmetic task, whereas a considerable difference has been 
observed between the genders in terms of spatial ability. 
These findings are supported by [28], who reported no 
significant difference between the performance of men and 
women in arithmetic and language tasks.  Furthermore, the 
findings revealed that a significant difference was observed 
between the HRV of each gender in terms of both tasks. 
High
Intermediate
Low
800
750
700
650
600
550
500
Spatial Figures Workload
Heart Rate Variability (ms)
Male
Female
High
Intermediate
Low
60
50
40
30
20
10
Mental Workload
NASA-TLX Score
Male
Female
High
Intermediate
Low
60
50
40
30
20
10
Mental Workload 
NASA-TLX Rating
Male
Female
33
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

Also, the NASA-TLX analysis showed a significant gender 
difference in the mathematics and spatial tasks at low level, 
whereas there was no difference at intermediate or high 
levels in either task. 
In 
addition, 
a 
significant 
difference 
in 
gender 
performance appeared only in the spatial ability task. This 
may be because the female participants took more time than 
the male participants in order to be as accurate as possible on 
the arithmetic task, which leads to more performance stress 
and perception of strain. This resulted in significant 
differences in the NASA-TLX ratings and the HRV variable 
between genders, yet resulted in no significance difference in 
their performances. References [15][16], mentioned that 
many previous studies determined the differences between 
males and females in terms of spatial capability on the 
mental rotation test; i.e., men tend to outperform women on 
spatial tasks. These results support the finding from this 
study; i.e., males provided more correct responses on the 
spatial figures task than females. Furthermore, the present 
results indicate that the interaction between gender and task 
levels did not significantly impact the participants’ ability to 
provide 
correct responses. 
Finally, 
the participants’ 
performance analysis of the arithmetic task showed that there 
was no significant correct response difference between the 
low and intermediate level, whereas there was a significant 
performance difference between intermediate and high level. 
This may create a potential problem for subsequent research, 
but it might be related to the sample size (in other words, a 
more significant effect may be found with a larger group of 
participants). However, the physiological and NASA-TLX 
scores analyses revealed a significant performance difference 
between the low vs. intermediate and intermediate vs. high 
levels of arithmetic tasks. 
Physiological indices in this study were affected by the 
mental demand levels of the tasks (i.e., both arithmetic and 
spatial figures tasks). The physiological data analysis found a 
significant difference between the tasks, which appears to 
indicate that participants found the spatial task to be more 
difficult than the arithmetic task. That difference may be 
reduced by increasing the difficulty level of the arithmetic 
task, but this would produce a potential problem in the 
validation of these levels by pilot study. However, both tasks 
had a significant impact on physiological parameters, and 
these effects were parallel; therefore, this will not affect the 
study. However, the participants’ (male and female) HR 
parameter was positively related to the arithmetic and spatial 
task difficulty levels. Specifically, as the arithmetic task level 
increased, the HR also increased, and the HR increased as 
the complexity of the spatial figures task increased. This was 
consistent with previous experimental studies [2][4] who 
found that the HR of subjects was affected by the complexity 
levels of the mental workload in the form of arithmetic and 
monitoring tasks. Their results indicated that when the 
difficulty level of the mathematical and monitoring tasks 
increased, the HR of the participants also increased. On the 
contrary, this study presented that HRV declined as the 
difficulty level of the arithmetic and spatial figures tasks 
increased. Reference [2], found that HRV declined as the 
monitoring workload level increased. In addition, the 
findings showed that a significant difference was observed 
between the HRV of participants completing arithmetic tasks 
and the HRV of participants completing spatial figures tasks, 
whereas no significant difference was observed between the 
HR of subjects completing either task. According to [19], the 
increase in HRV leads to an increase in the acceptable 
responses; however, the decrease of HRV produces a 
decrease in the correct responses. 
The study results indicate that a significant relationship 
exists between the subjective mental assessment tool (i.e., 
the NASA-TLX) ratings and the arithmetic and spatial 
figures task levels. Specifically, the NASA-TLX score 
increased with the increase in task level for both types of 
tasks. In general, the experimental data analysis indicated 
that the NASA-TLX scores were sensitive to changes in 
mental demand levels. This finding is similar to that of 
numerous papers. For example, [2][18], concluded that 
increases in NASA-TLX ratings were related to an increase 
in mental workload. For most participants, the highest 
NASA-TLX rating was recorded after completing the most 
complex arithmetic and spatial figures tasks. On the other 
hand, the lowest score was recorded after completing the 
simplest level of both tasks. However, the interaction 
between gender and task levels did not significantly impact 
the NASA-TLX scores. Furthermore, the study analysis 
indicated that no significant differences were observed 
between the male and female performance on intermediate 
and difficult levels for both tasks. In contrast, a significant 
difference was observed between the genders on the low 
level for both the arithmetic and spatial figures tasks. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In conclusion, the level of difficulty for arithmetic and 
spatial figures tasks were validated, which was the target of 
this experiment. Indeed, all of the variables (i.e., 
performance, physiological variables, and NASA-TLX 
scores) that were measured in this study indicated that the 
design of both tasks achieved three intensity levels (i.e., low, 
intermediate, and high) of mental effort. Furthermore, the 
participants’ correct answers, HR, and NASA-TLX ratings 
increased when the arithmetic and spatial figures levels 
increased. In contrast, the HRV of the participants correlated 
negatively with the complexity level for both tasks; in other 
words, the HRV declined when the arithmetic and spatial 
task levels increased. Based on the findings of this study, 
each of these tasks appears to include three cognitive load 
conditions that are demanding enough to produce reliable 
differences between participants. Therefore, both tasks are 
seemingly suitable to use in the subsequent research 
programme. That future study aims to examine the effects of 
the combination of physical and mental demands on human 
attentional resources performance in dual occupations in a 
laboratory setting. The study will include visual resources 
(verbal and spatial resources), and the second study will 
include auditory resources (verbal and spatial), while future 
work is planned to investigate the overlaps between physical 
34
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

and mental workload in a real domain such as factory 
production lines. 
   In summary, this paper studied the impact of mental 
workload on verbal and spatial attentional resources in order 
to validate levels of difficulties of two mental tasks. The first 
task was an arithmetic mental task used to show verbal 
resource. The second task used spatial figures to reflect 
spatial resource. In addition,  gender difference was 
considered as a factor in this study because it will be looked 
at in a second, future experiment. Three parameters were 
used as dependent variables (performance, physiological 
parameters, and NASA-TLX score). The participants’ 
responses decreased in sequence as the mental demand from 
the 
arithmetic 
and 
spatial 
figures 
tasks 
increased. 
Physiological indices in this study were affected by the 
mental demand levels of the tasks. The HR parameter of the 
participants (male and female) was positively related to the 
arithmetic and spatial task difficulty levels. On the other 
hand, this study showed that HRV declined as the difficulty 
level of the arithmetic and spatial figures tasks increased. In 
addition, the NASA-TLX score increased with the increase 
in task level for both types of tasks. The three difficult levels 
of arithmetic and spatial figure tasks were validated 
according to the results of the study. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I am greatly indebted to my supervisor Dr. Mark Young for 
his valuable comments, advices and support during this 
experimental study.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Xie B. and Salvendy G, “Review and reappraisal of modeling and 
predicting mental workload in single- and multi-task environments,”. 
Work & Stress,vol. 14, 2000, pp. 74-99. 
[2] Hwang, S.L., Yau, Y.J., Lin,  Y.T., Chen, J.H., Huang, T.H., Yenn, 
T.C. and Hsu, C.C, “Predicting work performance in nuclear power 
plants,” Safety Science, vol.  46, 2008, pp. 1115-1124. 
[3] Macdonald, W.A, “Workload, performance, health and well-being: a 
conceptual framework,” In Karwowski, W. (Eds.). International 
Encyclopedia of Ergonomics and Human Factors, (Taylor and Francis 
Group, USA), 2001, pp2802-2807. 
[4] Fredericks, T. K., Choi, S.D., Hart, J., Butt, S.E. and Mital A,”An 
investigation of myocardial aerobic capacity as a measure of both 
physical and cognitive workloads,” International Journal of Industrial 
Ergonomics, vol. 35, 2005, pp. 1097-1107. 
[5] Megaw,  T. ”The definition and measurement of mental workload,”. 
In J. R. Wilson and N. Corlett (Eds.). Evaluation of Human Work, 
(Taylor and Francis Group, London), 2005, pp. 524-551. 
[6] Perry, C.M., Sheik-Nainar,  M.A., Segall, N., Ma R. and Kaber, D.B, 
“Effects of physical workload on cognitive task performance and 
situation awareness,” Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, vol. 
9, 2008, pp. 95-113. 
[7] Young,  M.S. and Stanton, N.A,”Mental Workload”. In N. A. Stanton 
, A. Hedge, K. Brookhuis and E. Salas (Eds.). Handbook of Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Methods, (Taylor and Francis Group, 
London), 2004, pp. 39.1-39.7. 
[8] Louhevaara,  V. and Kilbom, A, “Dynamic work assessment,” In 
Wilson, J.R. and Corlett, N. (Eds.). Evaluation of human work, 
(Taylor and Francis Group, US), 2005, pp. 429-451. 
[9] Matthews,  G., Davies, D.R., Westerman, S.J. and Stammers, 
R.B,”Divided attention and workload”. In. Human Performance 
Cogntion, Stress and Individual Differences, (Taylor and Francis 
Group, New York), 2000, pp. 87-106. 
[10] Cox-Fuenzalida, L.E, “Effect of workload history on task 
performance,” Human Factors vol..49, 2007, pp. 277-291. 
[11] Neerincx, M.A. and Griffioen, E, “Cognitive task analysis: 
harmonizing tasks to human capacities,” Ergonomics, vol. 39, 1996, 
pp. 543-561. 
[12] Young,  M.S. and Stanton, N.A,”Attention and automation: new 
prespectives on mental underload and performance,” Therotical 
Issues in Ergonomics Science, vol. 3, 2002, pp. 178-194. 
[13] De Zwart, B.C.H., Frings-Dresen, M.H.W. and Van Dijk, F.J.H, 
“Physical workload and the ageing worker: a review of the literature,” 
Int. Arch Occupation Environment Health, vol.  68, 1995, pp. 1-12. 
[14] Hyde, J.S., Fennema, E. and Lamon, S.J, “Gender differences in 
mathematics performance: A meta-analysis,” Psychological Bulletin, 
vol. 107,1990, pp. 139-155. 
[15] Voyer, D., Butler, T., Cordero, J., Brake, B., Silbersweing, D., Stern, 
E. and Imperato-McGinley, J, “The relation between computerized 
and paper-and-pencil mental rotation tasks: a validation study,” 
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, vol. 28, 
2006, pp. 928-939. 
[16] Peters, M. and Battista, C, “Application of mental figures of the 
Shepard and Metzler type and description of a mental rotation 
stimulus library,” Brain and Cognition,vol. 66, 2008, pp. 260-264. 
[17] Halpern, D.F, "Empirical evidence for cognitive sex differences,” In. 
Sex Differences in Cognitive Abilities (3rded), (Lawren Erlbaum 
Associates, USA), 2000, pp. 81-130. 
[18] Didomenico A. and Nussbaum M. A, “Interactive effects of physical 
and mental workload on subjective workload assessment,” 
International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, vol. 38, 2008, pp. 
977-983. 
[19] Hansen, A.L., Johnsen, B.H. and Thayer, J.F, “Vagal influence on 
working 
memory 
and 
attention,”International 
Journal 
of 
Psychophysiological, vol. 48, 2003, pp. 263-274. 
[20] Wickens, C. D, “Multiple resources and performance prediction,” 
Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, vol. 3, 2002, pp. 159-177. 
[21] Wickens,  C.D, ”The structure of attentional resources,”. In R. S. 
Nickerson (Ed.). Attention and performance VIII, (Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc., New Jersey), 1980, pp. 239-257. 
[22] Shepard,  S. and Metzler, D,”Mental rotation of three dimentional  
objects,” Science, vol. 171, 1971 , pp. 701-703. 
[23] Hooven, C.K., Chabris, C.F., Ellison, P.T. and Kosslyn, S.M, “The 
relationship of male testosterone to components of mental rotation,” 
Neuropsychologia, vol. 42, 2004, pp. 782-790. 
[24] Sanz de Acedo Lizarraga, M.L. and Garcia Ganuza, J.M, 
“Improvement of mental rotation in girls and boys,” Sex Roles, vol. 
49, 2003, pp. 277-286. 
[25] Hart, S. G. and Staveland, L. E,  “Development of NASA-TLX (Task 
Load Index): results of empirical and theoretical research,” In P. A. 
Hancock and N. Meshkati (Eds.), Human Mental Workload, (North-
Holland: Amsterdam),1988, pp. 138-183. 
[26] MathsNet, 
“Mental 
test,”. 
Available 
from:www.mathsnet.net/form_mental.html [Accessed 18.06.2010], 
2007. 
[27] Bjornson, 
“Mental 
rotation 
training,”. 
Available 
from:              
http://bjornson.inhb. de/?p=55 [Accessed 09.05. 2010], 2008. 
[28]  Skrandies, W., Reik, P. and Kunze, Ch, “Topography of evoked brain 
activity during mental arithmetic and language tasks: sex 
differences,” Neuropsychologia, vol. 37, 1999, pp. 421-430.
 
 
 
 
35
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

