Uncovering Major Age-Related Handwriting Changes by Unsupervised Learning 
 
Gabriel Marzinotto1, José C. Rosales1, Mounim A.  
El-Yacoubi1, Sonia Garcia-Salicetti1, Christian Kahindo1, 
1SAMOVAR, Telecom SudParis, CNRS 
University Paris Saclay, France 
e-mail: {gabriel.marzinotto_cos ; jose.rosales_nunez ; 
mounim.el_yacoubi ; sonia.garcia; 
christian.kahindo}@telecom-sudparis.eu 
Hélène Kerhervé2,3, Victoria Cristancho-Lacroix2,3,    Anne-
Sophie Rigaud2,3 
2AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Cochin Paris Centre, Hôpital 
Broca, Pôle Gérontologie, Paris, France 
3Université Paris Descartes, EA 4468, Paris, France 
e-mail: {helene.kerherve ; victoria.cristancho-lacroix ;              
anne-sophie.rigaud}@aphp.fr
 
Abstract— Understanding how handwriting (HW) style evolves 
as people get older may be key for assessing the health status of 
elder people. It can help, for instance, distinguishing HW 
change due to a normal aging process from change triggered 
by the early manifestation of a neurodegenerative pathology. 
We present, in this paper, an approach, based on a 2-layer 
clustering scheme that allows uncovering the main styles of 
online HW acquired on a digitized tablet, with a special 
emphasis on elder HW styles. The 1st level separates HW words 
into writer-independent clusters according to raw spatial-
dynamic HW information, such as slant, curvature, speed, 
acceleration and jerk. The 2nd level operates at the writer level 
by converting the set of words of each writer into a Bag of 1st 
Layer Clusters, that is augmented by a multidimensional 
description of his/her writing stability across words. This 2nd 
layer representation is input to another clustering algorithm 
that generates categories of writer styles along with their age 
distributions. We have carried out extensive experiments on a 
large public online HW database, augmented by HW samples 
acquired at Broca hospital in Paris from people mostly 
between 60 and 85 years old. Unlike previous works claiming 
that there is only one pattern of HW change with age, our 
study reveals basically three major HW styles associated with 
elder people, among which one is specific to elders while the 
two others are shared by other age groups. 
Keywords- Age Characterization; HW Styles; Unsupervised 
Learning; Two-Layer Clustering Scheme. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Handwriting (HW) is a high-level skill, requiring fine 
motor control and specific neuromuscular coordination. It is 
well-known that handwriting evolves during lifetime and 
declines with age [1]-[3]. Handwriting also gets degraded 
when cognitive decline appears, or in case of illness [4][5]. 
Characterizing age from handwriting is thus important for 
two reasons: first, it may allow distinguishing a normal 
evolution of handwriting from a pathological one; second, it 
may allow inferring different possible patterns of HW 
evolution due to age, especially in healthy elders.     
Several studies in the literature have tackled the problem 
of age characterization of healthy persons from both offline 
and online HW. Sometimes, this characterization is carried 
out by visual inspection [4]-[8] through observable features 
as for example letter size and width, slant, spacing, legibility 
or smoothness of execution, alignment of words w.r.t 
baseline, number of pen lifts, among others. On the other 
hand, sometimes it is carried out by extracting automatically 
features from the offline raw signal [9] or from the raw 
temporal functions of online handwriting acquired on a 
digitizer [1]-[3], [10]-[12]. 
All these works agree that age leads to a different 
behavior of the features extracted from handwriting: change 
in the distribution of velocity profiles [3], increase of in-air 
time [1] and of the number of pen lifts [5], lower writing 
speed [2][7][11], lower pen pressure [2][5][7], irregular 
writing rhythm, irregular shapes of characters and slope [5], 
and loss of smoothness in the trajectory [5].  
In most of such works, it is implicitly assumed that there 
is a unique pattern of handwriting evolution with age. Their 
analysis is mostly based on descriptive statistics (analysis of 
variance, linear regression). Walton, nonetheless, noted by 
visual inspection on Parkinsonian patients and healthy 
controls that, according to writing rhythm, there are two 
major subpopulations of elders: half have a regular rhythm 
while half show an irregular one [5]. 
We propose in this work to infer automatically the main 
writing profiles, and to study their correlation with age. Our 
aim is to understand how HW evolves through age in terms 
of low-level information, namely kinematic and spatial 
parameters extracted from HW words, and in terms of high-
level information, characterized by stability measures across 
words. Our approach is based on a 2-layer unsupervised 
clustering scheme that allows uncovering the main styles of 
online HW acquired on a digitized tablet, with a special 
emphasis on elder HW styles. The 1st level separates HW 
words into writer-independent clusters according to raw 
spatial-dynamic HW information, such as slant, curvature, 
speed, acceleration and jerk. The 2nd level operates at the 
writer level by converting the set of words of each writer into 
a Bag of 1st Layer Clusters, that is augmented by a 
multidimensional description of his/her writing stability 
across words. This 2nd layer representation is input to another 
clustering algorithm that generates categories of writer styles 
along with their age distributions. We have carried out 
extensive experiments on a large public online HW database, 
augmented by HW samples acquired at Broca hospital in 
Paris from people mostly between 60 and 85 years old, 
including several elders above 75, contrary to our previous 
works [13][14]. Thanks to this extended population, we go 
further than [13][14], as our study reveals extra patterns of 
handwriting evolution through age, contrary to the common 
assumption of a single pattern of evolution  in previous state 
of the art. One of the main findings of our study it that there 
are, basically, three major HW styles that emerge as people 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

age, among which one is specific to seniors and elders while 
the two others are shared by other age groups. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the 
proposed approach including feature extraction, the two-
level clustering scheme, and visualization techniques. 
Section III describes the experiments and gives qualitative 
and quantitative assessments of our HW-based age 
characterization. Finally, in Section IV, the main conclusions 
are drawn and future directions are pointed out. 
II. 
PROPOSED APPROACH 
In this section, we describe the feature extraction phase 
consisting of two stages, and we briefly describe the 
techniques we use to visualize HW features and the 
distribution of our multidimensional HW data. 
A. Feature Extraction 
Online HW acquisition provides 3 temporal sequences 
(x(t), y(t), p(t)) that correspond to the pen trajectory and 
pressure during the production of each word. At the 1st layer, 
33 dynamic features are extracted: the horizontal and vertical 
speed computed at each point n as Vx(n)=|Δx(n)/Δt(n)| and 
Vy(n)=|Δy(n)/Δt(n)| 
where 
Δx(n)=x(n+1)−x(n-1), 
Δy(n)=y(n+1)−y(n-1) and Δt(n)=t(n+1)−t(n-1), since the high 
temporal resolution (100 Hz) allows estimating the 
derivative at point n by considering its neighbors (n+1) and 
(n-1) as often done in the literature [15]. The Vx and Vy 
sequences are then converted each into a histogram of 4 bins 
determined through a quantification process. The same 
process is applied to extract horizontal and vertical 
acceleration and jerk histograms. Additionally, we include 
the pen-up duration ratio defined as in [1] by PR = (Pen-up 
Duration)/(Total Duration) and pen pressure and its 
variations quantized  in 4 bins each. To extract the spatial 
static parameters, we first apply a resampling process, in 
order to ensure that all consecutive points in the word are 
equidistant, thereby making parameter values at each point 
equally representative, regardless of word dynamics. 21 
spatial features are then extracted: the local direction θ and 
curvature φ computed at each point [15] and represented 
through histograms of 8 bins quantized in the range of 0º to 
180º degrees, the number of pen-ups, the number of strokes 
(a stroke is defined as a writing movement between 2 local 
minima of speed along the y-axis), the average stroke length, 
and the length of the stroke projection on X and Y directions.   
Overall, we obtain 54 global descriptors characterizing the 
dynamics and spatial static shape of each word. 
At the 2nd layer, a feature extraction process is carried out 
at the writer level to characterize people based on two kinds 
of information, raw spatiotemporal HW parameters, and intra 
writer word variability. First, using a Bag of Prototype 
Words (BPW) technique [16], we represent the HW samples 
by the clusters of words obtained at the first layer. This is 
done in order to generate the distribution of each writer’s 
words over the first layer clusters, and therefore the HW 
style of persons in terms of the first layer parameters. 
Furthermore, we compute the Euclidean distance between 
each pair of words of a writer (distance between the first 
layer feature vectors) and quantize them into a 5-bin 
histogram. This histogram measures the variability of a 
writer across the set of words, and thus, the stability of 
his/her HW style. The dimension of second layer feature 
vector, obtained in this way, is equal to 5 + the number of 
clusters considered in the 1st layer. 
B. Two Layer Clustering Scheme 
HW style characterization is often approached using 
unsupervised techniques, such as clustering [17]-[19]. The 
reason to do so is that no a priori knowledge of the styles to 
characterize is available. These techniques, therefore, seek to 
cluster HW patterns that are similar, into groups that appear 
naturally in the population and define the latter as styles. 
However, these HW styles characterizations are often carried 
out at the level of characters, strokes and words [18][20][21], 
leaving aside the fact that writers may present some sort of 
variability in their styles across words. We consider this 
variability important to characterize HW styles. Therefore, 
we propose a 2-level approach: the 1st layer takes as input the 
dynamic and spatial parameters (low level information 
extracted from the raw signal), while the 2nd layer studies the 
HW style variability of the writers (high level information). 
At the first layer, we perform a clustering of the set of words 
(using the 54 features from Section II-A) regardless of the 
identity of the writer, generating word clusters that 
characterize low level styles. In the 2nd layer, the clustering is 
performed at the writer level, where each person is 
represented by his/her cluster frequency histogram and 
pairwise word distance histogram, in order to generate HW 
style categories that take into account the spatial and 
dynamic characteristics along with the writer’s variability. 
We present the results carried out using K-means clustering 
on both layers (Hierarchical clustering was also tested, 
giving similar results). To automatically determine the 
number of HW categories (clusters), we used the Silhouette 
criterion [22] as we do not have any a priori knowledge on 
the actual number of HW styles.  
C. Visualization Techniques 
To visualize the quality of clustering, we use two 
dimensionality reduction techniques: Principal Component 
Analysis (PCA) and Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (SNE). 
PCA allows computing the correlations between features and 
the relevance of each for style characterization. SNE [23] is a 
non-linear method that projects the points from a high 
dimensional space onto a new space preserving distance 
relations between points as much as possible. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTS 
In this section, we describe our experiments including 
database description, the results obtained with the two 
clustering stages and the information theoretic measures we 
use to assess the effectiveness of our approach. 
A. Database Description 
For experiments, we use the IRONOFF database [24] of 
online HW word samples in English and French, acquired 
using a Wacom tablet (UltraPadA4) that records a sequence 
of tuples (x(t), y(t), p(t)) sampled at 100Hz with a resolution 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

of 300 ppi. Although this database consists of 880 writers, 
only few are more than 60 years old (concretely 11 are 
between 60 and 77 years old). For a more reliable study of 
HW change as people age, we collected HW samples at 
Broca Hospital in Paris from a population of 25 persons with 
no diagnosed pathology, 23 of which have between 58 and 
86 years old with an average of 72. These samples were also 
acquired on a Wacom Tablet (Intuos ProLarge) at the same 
sampling rate (100Hz) but at a higher resolution (5080 ppi); 
we thus decreased the resolution of the new samples to 
match the 300 ppi of the IRONOFF database. Combining 
both databases, we obtain 27,683 HW samples from 905 
writers aged from 11 to 86 years old (Y.O.). For age 
characterization, we split the obtained database into 6 age 
groups as shown in TABLE I.   
TABLE I. 
AGE GROUP DEFINITION 
Category 
Age Range 
Num. of Writers 
Teenagers (A1) 
11-17 Y.O. 
68 
Young Adults (A2) 
18-35 Y.O. 
639 
Mid Age Adults (A3) 
36-50 Y.O. 
133 
Old Adults (A4) 
51-65 Y.O. 
43 
Seniors (A5) 
66-75 Y.O. 
14 
Elders (A6) 
76-86 Y.O. 
8 
 
As seniors and elders are still underrepresented and age 
groups A2 and A3 are overrepresented, we balance, at the 2nd 
layer stage, the database in terms of age categories in order 
to ensure meaningful results: we divide the set of words 
written by a given person into groups from 10 to 15 words, 
and assign each resulting group to a virtual new writer, 
making sure that the generated writers do not share words. 
Finally, to properly evaluate the clustering and its correlation 
with age, we retain the same number of virtual writers for 
each age group. This number was set to 26 writers per age 
group (thus generating a total of 156 writers), which were 
selected through K-medoids clustering over each Ai in order 
to retain the most representative writers of each age group. 
B. Quality of the Clustering (Entropy Efficiency) 
In order to objectively analyze the effects of the clustering on 
age characterization, we introduce three entropy efficiency 
measures. The first one quantifies the predictability of a 
certain age group (Ai) distribution across the clusters, and is 
computed using (1).  
 
 
 
 
 
The second quantifies the degree of disorder of a cluster 
w.r.t the distribution of the ages of the writers assigned to 
this cluster. It is computed using (2). Finally, the third one 
gives a general measure of the quality of the whole clustering 
as a sum of the entropy efficiencies of each cluster, weighted 
by the size of the clusters as shown in (3). All the entropy 
efficiency measures are normalized between zero (maximum 
order  perfect age predictability) and one (maximum 
disorder  no possible distinction of age groups). In (1), (2) 
and (3), Ci stands for the ith cluster obtained in either the 1st 
or the 2nd layer; Ai corresponds to the ith age group (defined 
in Section III-A); NA is the number of age groups and NC is 
the number of clusters.  It is important to note that these 
measures are not used to select the optimal number of 
clusters (the Silhouette criterion [22] is used to this end), but 
to evaluate the quality of the clustering once it is carried out. 
C. First Layer Clustering 
Using the Silhouette method, we observe that 9 is the 
optimal number of clusters for the 1st layer.  Figure 1 shows 
the 9 word clusters obtained by the K-means algorithm run 
over all the HW word samples, projected on the PCA plan 
spanned by the first two eigenvectors. As these two axes 
represent only 37% of the variance, some clusters overlap. 
Figure 2 shows samples of words in each cluster, when 
characterized by speed, acceleration and jerk. Through PCA 
analysis, we can attribute to each cluster particular 
characteristics w.r.t the dynamic and spatial features. These 
characteristics are described in TABLE II and TABLE III 
below: 
 
 
 
Figure 1. 
PCA Projections of First Layer Clustering 
 
 
TABLE II. 
DYNAMICS IN FIRST LAYER CLUSTERS 
 
Dynamic Features 
Cluster 1 
Low Speed/Accel/Jerk 
Cluster 2 
Low Speed/Accel/Jerk 
Cluster 3 
High Speed/Accel/Jerk 
Cluster 4 
Average Speed/Accel/Jerk 
Cluster 5 
Average Speed/Accel/Jerk 
Cluster 6 
Average Speed/Accel/Jerk on Y; low on X 
Cluster 7 
Average Speed/Accel/Jerk 
Cluster 8 
High Speed/Accel/Jerk on Y; average on X 
Cluster 9 
Very high Speed/Accel/Jerk 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 2. 
HW Samples in each Cluster of the 1st Layer with a 
color scale quantifying the magnitude of speed (left 
column), Jerk (center), and acceleration(right) 
 
 
TABLE III. 
OTHER FEATURES 1ST  LAYER CLUSTERS 
 
Pressure  Inclination 
Curvature 
Cluster 1 
Average 
Straight 
Round  
Cluster 2 
Low 
Straight 
Round 
Cluster 3 
Average 
Inclined to right 
Straight 
Cluster 4 
High 
Inclined to right 
Straight 
Cluster 5 
Average 
Straight 
Average 
Cluster 6 
Average 
Straight 
Average 
Cluster 7 
Average 
Straight 
Round  
Cluster 8 
Average 
Straight 
Straight 
Cluster 9 
Average 
Inclined to right 
Straight 
 
D. Second Layer Clustering 
At the second layer, the Silhouette method reveals 8 
optimal categories. Figure 3 shows the SNE projections of 
the 8 categories obtained by K-means run on the set of 
writers’ 2nd layer descriptors, and Figure 5 shows some HW 
words of the most typical writer in each category (usually the  
writer whose representation is closest to the category center), 
when characterized by speed. In this layer, each point 
represents a writer, described by 14 features:  
 
9 features for the histogram of distribution of his/her 
words over the 1st layer clusters. 
 
5 features for his/her histogram of intra-writer word 
pairwise distances. 
 
 
Figure 3. 
SNE Projections of the 2nd Layer Categories 
 
Figure 4. 
Age distribution in each Category of the 2nd  layer 
 
TABLE IV. 2nd LAYER CATEGORIES SIZE W.R.T BALANCED 
DATABASE SHOWING THE PERCENTAGES OF  
SENIORS (A5) AND ELDERS (A6) CONTAINED 
 
Cat 
1 
Cat 
2 
Cat 
3 
Cat 
4 
Cat 
5 
Cat 
6 
Cat 
7 
Cat 
8 
Size 
18 
16 
10 
29 
10 
44 
16 
13 
Seniors 
11% 
0% 
0% 
21% 
0% 
39% 
0% 
8% 
Elders 
22% 
0% 
0% 
7% 
0% 
45% 
0% 
0% 
 
As we can see in Figure 4, Category 6 gathers mostly 
persons above 65 years old (this can be seen also in TABLE 
IV). This Category is the most stable, as writers maintain a 
relatively constant HW style across words. This Category is 
also represented by Cluster 2 in the 1st layer (as we can see in 
Figure 6) characterized by the lowest velocity, acceleration 
and jerk, as well as very round HW with the highest number 
of strokes and smallest stroke length (as shown in the first 
layer’s cluster characterization). Therefore, as Category 6 
contains the highest number of persons (44 writers), this 
could indicate that the most common evolution pattern of 
aged persons is to develop a slow and curved HW with a 
medium to high “time on pen-up” (time in air) probably 
produced by hesitations when writing. 
We also observe that Category 1 contains a considerable 
quantity of persons aged above 75 years, as well as middle-
aged individuals. This Category is the one with the highest 
instability and is highly correlated to cluster 9 in the 1st layer, 
which is characterized by the highest velocity, acceleration 
and jerk along with a low number of larger strokes. This 
could indicate the existence of a group of aged people that 
share with middle-aged people a more agile and fast HW, 
with tendency to produce long and straight strokes and a 
large style variation across words. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Category 7 is also interesting since its age distribution 
contains all the age groups except the persons above 65 years 
old. This category is correlated to cluster 8 in the 1st layer 
clustering stage. This group of people is characterized by 
high velocity, acceleration and jerk in the vertical direction 
but an average value of these parameters in the horizontal 
axis, as well as high pressure during writing. Thus, this could 
indicate that other features that separate teenagers and 
middle-aged adults from the persons above 65 years are a 
fast vertical HW with high y-axis velocities and jerk due to 
the upper and lower loops that represent high vertical stroke 
variance, but with an average velocity and jerk in the x-axis. 
Therefore, an average jerk and velocity in the horizontal axis 
could be an evidence of careful writing characterized by less 
variable strokes as the person writes in the horizontal sense, 
but at the same time, with high vertical velocity and 
acceleration to rapidly make the upper and lower loops.   
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. 
HW Samples from each Category of the 2nd Layer 
showing Speed on a color scale 
 
We also notice that the 3rd category in the 2nd layer, 
which has average instability, also contains all the age 
groups but the persons above 65 years. This category is 
correlated to Cluster 4 in the 1st layer, with the highest 
pressure and low jerk on the x-axis, as well as a lot of sharp 
HW turns. This could be an indicator, as we saw above in the 
analysis of Category 7, that a low jerk on the horizontal 
direction and a relatively high HW pressure could separate 
the old people from the rest of the population. 
Category 2 is another one that contains only persons from 
age groups A1 to A4, thus revealing other features that 
separate the elder persons from the teenagers and middle-
aged groups. This category is related to Cluster 1 and 6 in the 
1st layer. Cluster 1 is characterized by low velocity and 
acceleration with average number of small strokes, average 
pressure and average pressure variation. Cluster 6 consists of 
average velocities and accelerations as well as of an average 
number of pen-ups with short duration and an average 
number of strokes with average size. Both clusters share a 
very low horizontal jerk (that proved to be an important 
feature to separate elders from the rest of the population), an 
average pressure and an average pressure variation. 
 
 
Figure 6. Representation of the 2nd layer categories w.r.t. the 1st 
layer clusters and the histogram of distances between words 
 
Categories 4 and 8 are meaningful since they unveil 
differences between the eldest (A6) and the rest of the 
population. Category 4 consists of features that separate all 
the groups (A1-A5) from the eldest. On the other hand, 
Category 8 contains fewer elders. Such an age distribution 
could indicate that the HW style consisting of average 
velocity, acceleration and vertical jerk and low horizontal 
jerk is less frequent as age increases, thus characterizing the 
HW aging evolution. In other words, Category 8 uncovers a 
typical, albeit non-frequent, HW style of elders that consists 
of a low horizontal jerk even though speed, acceleration and 
vertical jerk have average values.  Categories 4 and 8 have 
very high and medium stability, and they are also correlated 
to Clusters 6 and 7 in the 1st layer, respectively. This means 
that both categories have relatively low jerk in x w.r.t 
velocity and acceleration, which is also the case for 
categories 2, 3 and 7 that do not contain none of the two 
elder groups (A5-A6). We also notice that category 4 has 
very low pressure variation and lower jerk on x than in 
category 8 (which also has high pressure variation); thus, 
these elements could explain a very high stability for 
category 4 but no for category 8. 
Overall, we see that three different types of aged persons 
emerge based on their HW styles and stability: 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

- 
Category 6: This is the most frequent in elders and 
seniors (71.2%) and is associated with slow velocity and 
acceleration and a stable HW style, high time on air and 
a large number of pen-ups. These characteristics are 
indicative of a slower and less fluent HW. 
- 
Category 1: It represents 11.5% of old people and it 
consists of a HW style closer to that of middle-aged 
persons in terms of dynamic features. People in this 
group show the highest velocity, acceleration and jerk, 
as well as a very high instability across words, which is 
the opposite behavior to Category 6. 
- 
Category 4: This is a new category of aged population 
emerging w.r.t our previous works [13][14]. It 
represents 15.4% of old writers and is characterized by a 
HW with average velocity, very low horizontal jerk, 
average pressure, low pressure variation and high 
instability across words. 
 
E. Entropy Efficiency Measures  
We measure the global entropy efficiency of the 
clustering as defined in (3) in terms of age distribution, on 
the balanced dataset with the same number of writers in the 
6 age groups as described in Section III-A. The reduction of 
entropy measures how efficient is the clustering across 
layers in detecting HW styles that describe age tendencies. 
The result is shown on TABLE V, where we can observe 
how the 2-layer approach reduces the entropy at each layer, 
which means that our clustering detects HW styles with 
different age distributions. Also, a lower entropy efficiency 
in Layer 2 than in Layer 1 demonstrates that the stability of 
each writer HW style across words gives additional 
information for characterizing HW evolution though age. 
 
TABLE V. 
TOTAL ENTROPY EFFICIENCY ACROSS LAYERS 
 
Layer 1 
Layer 2 
Entropy Efficiency E[η] 
0.8365 
0.7935 
 
TABLE VI shows the entropy efficiency inside each of 
the Categories of the 2nd layer as computed by (2). The lower 
the entropy efficiency, the more predictive is the category of 
the writer’s age. We observe that Category 6 (mostly 
composed by elders) shows the lowest entropy, followed by 
Categories 2, 3, 5 and 7, where no elders appear. This shows 
that these are the most interesting categories to analyze, in 
search for parameters which allow us to classify the elder 
population.  In particular, one of the main findings is the HW 
style uncovered by category 6 which is the one that best 
predicts if the writer is an elder person. Likewise, the HW 
styles uncovered by Categories 2, 3, 5 and 7 have good age 
prediction capabilities and in particular they rule out that the 
writer is an elder person. 
 
TABLE VI. ENTROPY EFFICIENCY AT EACH CATEGORY 
 
Cat 
1 
Cat 
2 
Cat 
3 
Cat 
4 
Cat 
5 
Cat 
6 
Cat 
7 
Cat 
8 
η(CK) 
0.92 
0.72 
0.74 
0.97 
0.71 
0.68 
0.76 
0.85 
 
Finally, we also compute, using (1), the entropy of each Age 
group w.r.t the clusters on both layers. This allows us to 
detect which age groups introduce an entropy reduction for 
the clustering. The lower the entropy, the more predictable 
the age group of the clusters it will fall into, i.e. the HW style 
or styles it will produce. The results of the cluster entropy 
efficiencies are shown in TABLE VII. We observe that the 
only age groups which introduce significant entropy 
reduction are A5 and A6, composed of people above 65 
years old.  
 
TABLE VII. 
ENTROPY EFFICIENCY AT EACH AGE GROUP 
 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
A6 
η(AK) 
Layer1 
0.91 
0.96 
0.96 
0.96 
0.56 
0.42 
η(AK) 
Layer2 
0.92 
0.98 
0.92 
0.94 
0.45 
0.33 
 
This entropy reduction proves our approach’s capacity to 
characterize the HW of the elder population through few 
categories of writers, and to discover a limited set of 
different evolution patterns that the HW style exhibits as 
people grow old. On the other hand, observing almost no 
entropy reduction for age groups A1 to A4 implies that the 
HW style for these age groups shows a great variability 
across the population. Each person from 11 to 65 Y.O. can 
develop any HW pattern with a similar likelihood; in other 
words, there is no clear way to separate these age groups.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES 
 
 
Our study has uncovered three different types of 
aged persons according to their HW styles and stability: 
- 
The most important writing pattern in elders and seniors 
(Category 6) is associated with slow dynamics and a 
stable HW style, consisting of high time on air and a 
large number of pen-ups, probably due to hesitations 
between strokes. This group, which is the most 
represented among the aged population (71.2%), has the 
highest number of strokes. Overall, these characteristics 
are indicative of a slower and less fluent HW. 
- 
Some old people (11.5%) represented by Category 1, 
have a HW style closer to that of a subset of middle-
aged persons in terms of dynamic features. People in 
this group show the highest velocity, acceleration and 
jerk, as well as a very high instability across words, 
which is the opposite behavior to the previously 
described writing pattern of Category 6. They also 
present few and long strokes, which indicates a high 
fluency when writing. It is worth noticing that this 
writing pattern is overrepresented among elders (A6) 
w.r.t seniors (A5). Indeed, there are some very aged 
persons that maintain handwriting skills. 
- 
Finally, a new category of elders emerges comparatively 
to our previous works [13][14]: These are the old writers 
(A5 and A6)  represented by Category 4, which are 
distinguished  from a large part of the rest of population 
by a HW with average velocity, very low horizontal 
jerk, average pressure, low pressure variation and high 
instability across words. It seems to be an intermediate 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

writing pattern compared to the two previous ones, and 
appears to represent 15.4% of the population. 
 
- 
There are about 28.8% of elders and seniors whose HW 
style cannot be distinguished from the average adult 
population. These aged writers are persons who 
maintained their skills as they aged, writing in a similar 
way than some parts of the adult population. From this 
skilled aged population, 60 % are senior writers (A5) 
and 40% are elder writers (A6). This corroborates the 
tendency that the older a person gets, the more likely 
he/she will lose HW skills and fall into the group 
represented by Category 6. 
 
Another interesting finding by our approach is the fact 
that categories 2, 3, 5 and 7 do not contain any old persons 
(A5 or A6). These categories disclose different HW styles of 
all the population except elders (A6) and seniors (A5). 
Categories 2 and 3 have average and low velocities and low 
and high stability, respectively, but they share a very-low 
horizontal jerk w.r.t speed and acceleration that is not present 
in old population HW (the latter often features low jerk but 
this is explained by the fact that speed and acceleration are 
also low). Category 3 also has the highest pressure and low 
pressure variation, which seems to be other discriminative 
features between old people and the rest of the writers. 
Category 7 has average horizontal velocity, acceleration and 
jerk and high vertical velocity, acceleration and jerk, and a 
low number of long strokes (high fluency) and high pressure. 
This HW fluency is another useful feature that discriminates 
part of the elders from the rest of the population. These 
results confirm our previous findings in [13][14]. 
Following this study, we are currently collecting a 
dataset of HW samples at Hospital Broca in Paris from elder 
people with Alzheimer and MCI cognitive disorders. Adding 
this population to the control population that served in this 
work, we will generalize our approach in order to assess its 
efficiency in automatically detecting HW styles associated 
with Alzheimer, MCI and Control persons. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially funded by Institut Mines-
Télécom & Fondation Télécom and by Fondation MAIF 
through 
project 
“Biométrie 
et 
santé 
sur 
tablette” 
(http://www.fondation-maif.fr/notre-
action.php?rub=1&sous_rub=3&id=269). 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Rosenblum, Batya Engel-Yeger, and Yael Fogel, “Age-related 
changes in executive control and their relationships with activity 
performance in handwriting”. Human Movement Science, Vol. 32, 
2013, pp. 1056–1069. 
[2] B. Engel-Yeger and S. Hus, S. Rosenblum, “Age effects on Sensory-
processing Abilities and their Impact on Handwriting. Canadian 
Journal of Occupational Therapy, Vol. 79(5), 2012, pp. 264-274. 
[3] R. Plamondon, C. O'Reilly, C. Rémi, and T. Duval, “The lognormal 
handwriter: learning, performing, and declining”. Frontiers in 
psychology, Vol. 4, 2013, pp. 248-255  
[4] O. Hilton, “Influence of Age and Illness on Handwriting: 
Identification Problems”. Forensic Science, Vol. 9, 1977, pp. 161-
172. 
[5] J. Walton, “Handwriting changes due to aging and Parkinson's 
syndrome”. Forensic Science International, Vol. 88(3), 1997, pp. 197-
214. 
[6] N. Van Drempt, A. McCluskey, and N.A. Lannin, “Handwriting in 
healthy people aged 65 years and over”. Australian Occupational 
Therapy Journal, Vol. 58(4), 2011, pp. 276-286. 
[7] F. Holekian, “Handwriting Analysis: The Role of Age and 
Education”. International Journal of Modern Management and 
Foresight, Vol. 1(6), 2014, pp. 208-221. 
[8] N.M. Ta, M.M.A. Sultanb, and K.Y. Wongc, “A Study on the Age 
Related Retention of Individual Characteristics in Hand Writings and 
Signatures for Application during Forensic Investigation”. A Message 
from the Editor-in-Chief 1 From Narcotics Case Files. 
[9] S. Al Maadeed, and A. Hassaine, “ Automatic Prediction of Age, 
Gender, and Nationality in Offline Handwriting”. EURASIP Journal 
on Image and Video Processing, Vol.1, 2014, pp. 1-10. 
[10] R. Camicioli et al., “Handwriting and pre-frailty in the Lausanne 
cohort 65+(Lc65+) study”. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 
2015. 
[11] R. Mergl, P. Tigges, A. Schröter, H.J. Möller, and U. Hegerl, 
“Digitized analysis of handwriting and drawing movements in healthy 
subjects: methods, results and perspectives”. Journal of neuroscience 
methods, Vol. 90(2), 1999, pp. 157-169. 
[12] M. J. Slavin, J. G. Phillips, and J. L. Bradshaw, “Visual cues and the 
handwriting of older adults: A kinematic analysis”. Psychology and 
aging, Vol. 11(3), 1996, pp. 521-526. 
[13] G. Marzinotto, J. C.  Rosales, M. A. El-Yacoubi, and S. Garcia-
Salicetti, “Age and Gender Characterization Through a Two Layer 
Clustering of Online Handwriting”. In Advanced Concepts for 
Intelligent Vision Systems(ACIVS). Springer International Publishing, 
2015, pp. 428-439. 
[14] J. C.  Rosales, G. Marzinotto M. A. El-Yacoubi, and S. Garcia-
Salicetti, “Age Characterization from Online Handwriting”. 5th EAI 
International Symposium on Pervasive Computing Paradigms for 
Mental Health, MindCare, Italy, Milan,  2015, pp. 
[15] I. Guyon, P. Albrecht, Y. Le Cun, J. Denker, and W. Hubbard, 
“Design of a neural network character recognizer for a touch 
terminal”. Pattern Recognition. Vol. 24 Issue 2, 1991, pp. 105-119.  
[16] J. Sivic, "Efﬁcient visual search of videos cast as text retrieval". IEEE 
Trans. on PAMI, Vol. 31(4), 2009, pp. 591–605. 
[17] P. Sarkar, and G. Nagy, “Style Consistent Classification of Isogenous 
Patterns”. IEEE PAMI, Vol. 27(1), 2005, pp. 88-98. 
[18] S.K. Chan, Y.H. Tay, and C. Viard-Gaudin, “Online Text 
Independent Writer Identification Using Character Prototypes 
Distribution”. SPIE Electronic Imaging, 2008. 
[19] V. Vuori, “Clustering Writing Styles with a Self-Organizing Map”, 
IWFHR 2002, pp. 345-350.  
[20] B.A. Deepu V. and S. Madhvanath, “An Approach to Identify Unique 
Styles in Online Handwriting Recognition”, ICDAR 2005, pp. 775-
778. 
[21] J-P Crettez, “A set of handwriting families: style recognition”, 
ICDAR 1995, pp. 489-494. 
[22] P. Rousseeuw, “Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and 
validation of cluster analysis”. J. of Computational and Applied 
Mathematics, 1987, pp. 53-65. 
[23] G. Hinton, and S. Roweis, “Stochastic Neighbor Embedding”, NIPS 
15, 2002, pp. 833-840. 
[24] C. Viard-Gaudin, P. M. Lallican, S. Knerr, and P. Binter, “The 
IRONOFF Dual Handwriting Database”, ICDAR 1999, pp 455-4   
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

