How Robust the Motor Imagery Induced EEG Sensorimotor Rhythm can be 
Extracted: A Test from a Cohort of Normal Subjects 
 
Jeng-Ren Duann1,2,3, Tien-Fu Chang4, Yung-Jiun Lin1, Jin-Chern Chiou1,4 
 
1Biomedical Engineering Research Center, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan 
2Institute of Clinical and Medical Science, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan 
3Institute for Neural Computation, University of California San Diego, CA 92093, USA 
4Institute of Electrics and Control Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 
 
duann@sccn.ucsd.edu, stevechang10000@yahoo.com.tw,  
t18628@mail.cmuh.org.tw, t17988@mail.cmuh.org.tw 
 
Abstract—This study tested the robustness of the sensorimotor 
rhythm (SMR) features induced by motor imagery task and 
compared the result to those of other motor tasks, such as 
motor 
execution 
and 
observation. 
Thirteen 
subjects 
participated in the study and performed 5 runs of motor tasks 
with three different motor conditions (imagery, execution, and 
observation). Each run consisted of 15 motor task trials (5 for 
each motor condition), cued in a random sequence. 64-ch EEG 
was recorded while subjects performed the motor tasks. The 
separate runs of EEG data were concatenated and processed 
using independent component analysis (ICA) to separate the 
motor components from other brain or non-brain sources 
(including artifacts).  Equivalent independent components 
from different subjects were selected using a K-means 
clustering method based on the features summarized from 
dipole location, time-frequency response, as well as scalp map. 
Finally, the average alpha (8-13 Hz) power changes were 
computed according to the motor conditions. The significance 
level of the event-related desynchronization (ERD) as 
compared to the baseline prior to the motor cue onset and the 
duration with significant ERD were compared across different 
motor conditions. Our result showed that no significant 
difference in terms of onset of motor induced ERD among the 
three motor conditions (around 370 ms after motor cue onset). 
However, the level of ERD was most pronounced for the motor 
execution condition (around -8 dB from the baseline). Both 
motor imagery and motor observation had similar level of the 
motor induced ERD. For the onset duration of the motor 
induced ERD, motor execution also showed the longest 
duration of alpha power decrease as compared to two other 
motor conditions. Both motor imagery and motor observation 
had much shorter duration of alpha power decrease; however, 
motor imagery elicited slightly longer ERD. As a result, the 
SMR-based BCI-controlled neurorehabilitation using a motor 
imagery should be quite challenging, if not impossible, for 
extracting SMR feature in real time given such a limited 
duration of the alpha ERD induced by the motor imagery.  
Keywords-sensorimotor rhythm (SMR); motor imagery; EEG; 
brain-computer interface (BCI); neurorehabilitation; event-
related desynchronization (ERD); independent component 
analysis (ICA)  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
BCI based neurorehabilitation process has been reported 
beneficial for the stroke patients in helping them to recover 
their motor control, which was damaged after stroke attack 
[1, 2]. Among the BCI neurorehabilitation protocol, 
sensorimotor rhythm (SMR) based BCI has been widely 
adopted in a variety of neurorehabilitation to restore the 
motor control function of stroke patients [3]. However, the 
effectiveness of the SMR-based BCI being used for 
controlling a rehabilitation device has yet been rigorously 
evaluated in the past. As a result, the outcomes of SMR-
based neurorehabilitation seemed quite inconclusive in the 
literature [4, 5]. In this study, we empirically compared the 
SMR induced by motor imagery to those induced by real 
motor execution (grasping) as well as watching the video 
clip of someone grasping. The result should lend itself 
guidance for devising an SMR-based neurorehabilitation 
apparatus. 
This article is organized as follows: The next section, 
Methods, gives the details regarding the subject population, 
experimental protocol, data acquisition, and data analysis. 
The third section presents the details of the result of the data 
analysis, including the ICA component selection as well as 
the grand average of the semsorimotor responses induced by 
motor imagery as compared to the other types of motor tasks. 
Finally, we project the future work based on our findings for 
devising an SMR-based BMC-controlled neurorehabilitation 
apparatus to improve the progress of rehabilitation for the 
patients after stroke attack and/or brain injury.  
II. 
METHODS 
A. Subjects 
Thirteen normal healthy right-handed subjects (with 
mean age of 24±3 years old) participated in this study. All 
subjects were recruited on the campus of National Chiao 
Tung University, Hsinchu Taiwan and with neither history of 
neurological diseases nor central and peripheral nervous 
system injury prior to the experiment. None of them had 
experience with BCI neural feedback before. All subjects 
gave signed written consent before experiment. The 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Institutional Review Board (IRB) of China Medical 
University and Hospital, Taichung Taiwan, approved the 
experimental protocol. 
B. Experimental Design 
To compare the differences in the SMR induced by 
different motor tasks, an EEG experiment consisted of three 
types motor tasks, namely, motor execution, motor imagery, 
and motor observation was used. During motor execution 
trials, subjects were requested to physically grasp with their 
left (nondominant) hand slowly within a 3-sec window. 
During motor imagery trials, subjects were supposed to 
imagine they are grasping slowly with their left hand, 
without physical movement, in a 3-sec window. Likewise, 
during motor observation trials, a video clip of someone 
grasping slowly with his left hand in a 3-sec window was 
played and subjects were requested to watch carefully the 
video clip without any physical movement. The video 
showed only a left hand portion with no other body parts. 
Each EEG bout consisted of 15 trials, five for each of the 
three motor conditions. Each trial started with 1 sec resting 
period as baseline and a white cross was displayed at the 
center of computer screen for subjects to fixate. Then, a 
visual cue with one of the three conditions (“grasp”, 
“imagine grasping”, and “watch grasping”) was displayed at 
the center of a computer screen for 3 sec for subject to 
perform the motor tasks (motor execution and imagery) 
accordingly, except for motor observation condition, in 
which a 3-sec grasping video was played instead and 
subjects were requested to watch the video clip attentively. 
Finally, 2-sec OFF-period followed by a 1-3 s interstimulus 
interval (ISI) was appended to form an 8-sec window for 
each trial. This resulted in a 120-sec long EEG bout. Four 
EEG bouts comprised an EEG session and 60 trials (15 trials 
x 4 bouts, 20 trials for each motor condition) were collected 
in total. 
C. EEG Acquisition 
The EEG data were acquired using a Neuroscan 
SynAmp2 (Compumedics Ltd., Victoria, Australia) with 64 
channels, including two EOG channels. To monitor eye 
movements, the horizontal EOG was recorded from 
electrodes at the outer canthi of both eyes; the vertical EOG 
was recorded from the electrodes above and below the left 
eye. All electrodes were referenced to the linked mastoids 
and the ground electrode was placed at the location AFz. 
Electrode impedances were maintained below 5 KΩ before 
recordings. The EEG was recorded with a pass-band of 0.1 - 
250 Hz and digitized at 1000 Hz sampling rate. 
D. Data Preprocessing 
An experienced EEG experimenter first inspected the 
acquired EEG signals from each individual subject and 
removed bad channels and the EEG portions that are highly 
contaminated. After being band-pass filtered with pass band 
of 0.1 – 50 Hz, data from the four EEG bouts were 
downsampled to 100 Hz and concatenated into one unified 
EEG data. The preprocessed EEG data were then segmented 
into 4-sec epochs, -1 sec prior to and 3 sec after motor cue 
onsets. 
E. ICA and Clustering 
For each of the individual subjects, all 60 motor event-
related EEG epochs were concatenated and the two eye 
channels were excluded from the further independent 
component analysis (ICA). The ICA decomposition was 
conducted using an infomax ICA algorithm as implemented 
in EEGLAB (http://sccn.ucsd.edu/EEGLAB) [6]. It was to 
separate the independent brain EEG processes from those of 
artifactual components, such as eye artifacts (blinking and 
lateral eye movements), muscle activities, environmental 
noises, etc. The EEG data of 12 out of the 13 subjects were 
decomposed into 62 independent components (ICs) and one 
with 61 channels, due to one bad EEG channel having been 
removed prior to ICA decomposition. 
After ICA decomposition, source localization process 
using the DIPFIT2 toolbox in the EEGLAB was used to 
select the SMR components [7]. Given that the independent 
EEG components are mostly dipolar, the ICs with residual 
variance larger than 15% using a single dipole fit were 
removed from the further data analysis [8]. This process 
removed 525 ICs from the original 805. The removed ICs 
were those with single-channel activation topography or 
EEG topography could not be accounted for by single 
dipoles. It should not affect the identification of right SMR 
components because, in general, the SMR component can be 
well explained by a single dipole. 
The remaining 280 ICs from all 13 subjects were then 
clustered into equivalent component clusters to investigate 
the common EEG processes from the group of subjects. Here, 
we mainly used the feature of cluster analysis in EEGLAB 
study function. First, the feature variables (FVs), consisted of 
component topography, component event-related time-
frequency (TF) plot (defined as event-related spectral 
perturbation, ERSP, in EEGLAB), and x-, y-, and z-
coordinates of dipole location, were computed. Among the 
FVs, the component map was the inverse of the unmixing 
matrix obtained in ICA decomposition; the ERSP was 
computed by wavelet transformation with 3-cycle window 
lengths and 50% window overlap to convert the time-domain 
signals to a time-frequency plot. The FVs of component 
topography and ERSP were then summarized using principal 
component analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimension to 10 
principal components for each FV. Finally, K-mean 
clustering algorithm was used to categorize, based on the 23-
dimension feature space (10 each for component topography 
and ERSP and 3 for dipole location), the ICs into 15 clusters 
with an additional outlier cluster to put those ICs without 
being assigned into any of the 15 clusters [9]. 
The 15 clusters were visually inspected to find the cluster 
with average component topography mainly covering the 
right motor areas. Then, average component ERSPs across 
all the ICs within the same clusters were computed such that 
to determine the main frequency band for SMR components. 
As a result, one cluster best represented the right SMR 
activity was selected. In the selected right SMR cluster, some 
subjects may contribute more than one component. Thus, a 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

final adjustment was performed by comparing the mean 
ERD profiles in the alpha band (8-13 Hz) derived from the 
component ERSP of each component. The purpose was to 
ensure each subject only contributed one equivalent IC to the 
selected cluster. 
F. Statistical Analysis 
After SMR component cluster had been identified, the 
conditional ERDs in the alpha frequency were computed 
according to the types of motor tasks for each individual 
subject. Then, the grand mean conditional ERDs were 
averaged across all 13 subjects. The level and duration of 
alpha power decrease from the baseline before the cue onset 
of the right SMR EEG components were compared across 
different motor conditions. Further, the onset timings of the 
alpha power decrease were computed for the conditional 
ERDs of each individual subject by finding the time (in ms) 
at which the ERD reach half of the amplitude of alpha power 
decrease from the baseline. The significance of the 
differences in onsets of alpha power decrease between any 
two of the motor conditions was estimated using a paired 
two-sample t-test. 
III. 
RESULT 
After ICA decomposition and component clustering, one 
of the 62 ICs (one of the 13 subjects came only with 61 
components because one bad channel had been removed 
before ICA decomposition) was selected into the right SMR 
cluster from all 13 subjects. Finally, the average power 
changes of all three motor conditions within the alpha 
frequency band (8-13 Hz) were computed for each subject.  
The results showed that all three motor conditions 
elicited significant alpha power decrease (event-related 
desynchronization, ERD) starting around 370 ms as 
compared to the baseline. The onset timings of alpha power 
ERD for all three motor conditions were comparable. 
However, motor execution condition elicited the largest ERD 
(around -8 dB from baseline) and the ERD lasted for up to 
few seconds. On the other hand, the ERD elicited by the 
motor imagery and motor observation conditions were quite 
comparable with the ERD induced by the motor imagery 
slightly larger and longer than that by the motor observation.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
 To our knowledge, this is the first study rigorously 
testing the robustness of the ERD in alpha frequency band 
elicited by the motor imagery task as compared to the motor 
execution and motor observation. More importantly, it is also 
the first study using ICA to separate the sensorimotor rhythm 
(SMR) from other brain and non-brain sources/artifacts, so 
that we would be able to look into the pure SMR activity 
elicited by different motor conditions without interference 
from other unrelated components. As a result, this study 
lends itself a standard to test how robust the motor imagery 
induced alpha ERD as being used for BCI control.  
In our preliminary result, it showed that all three motor 
conditions could successfully elicit ERD in the alpha 
frequency band with similar onset timings from the motor 
cue. At the first glance, the alpha ERD elicited by motor 
imagery was quite limited with much lower level of suppress 
(almost half the amplitude) as compared to the motor 
execution condition. In addition, the onset duration of alpha 
ERD induced by motor imagery was also much shorter than 
that of motor execution. This means that the translation 
module to extract the SMR features elicited by motor 
imagery process will need to be sensitive enough to find the 
small amplitude changes within the alpha frequency band, 
and fast enough to determine the presence of alpha ERD 
after motor imagery. This should raise some difficulties over 
devising an SMR-based BCI-controlled neurorehabilitation 
apparatus.  
However, the result is currently yet conclusive, as we 
will still need to complete the data analysis on all 13 subjects. 
As we expected that the result of this study gives the best 
scenario of SMR changes elicited by motor imagery, which 
is the most commonly used brain signal features for 
neurological rehabilitation process currently. Therefore, the 
result presented here should be able to provide a guideline 
for 
devising 
an 
SMR-based 
BCI 
controlled 
neurorehabilitation apparatus.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported in part by the “Aim for the Top 
University Plan” of National Chiao Tung University and 
Ministry of Education of Taiwan and NSC 100-2218-E-039 -
001. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Buch, C. Weber, L.G. Cohen, C. Braun, M.A. Dimyan, J. 
Mellinger., A. Caria, S. Soekadar, A. Fourkas, and N. 
Birbaumer, Think to move: Neuromagnetic brain-computer 
interface (BCI) system for chronic stroke, Stroke, 39:910-917, 
2011.  
[2] J.J. Daly and J.R. Wolpaw,  Brain-computer interfaces in 
neurological rehabilitation, Lancet Neurol. 7:1032-1043, 2008. 
[3] G. Pfurtscheller, C. Neuper, G. R. Muller, Graz-BCI: state of 
the art and clinical applications, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. 
Rehabil. Eng., vol. 11, pp. 177-180, 2003. 
[4] G. Pfurtscheller, C. Neuper, C. Brunner, and F. Lopes da 
Silva, Beta rebound after different types of motor imagery in 
man, Neurosci. Let., vol. 378, pp. 156-159, 2005. 
[5] A. Solodkin, P. Hlustik, E. E. Chen, and S. L. Small, Fine 
modulation in network activation during moroe execution and 
motor imagery, Cerebral Cortex, vol. 14, pp. 1246-1255, 
2004. 
[6] A. Delorme and S. Makeig, EEGLAB: An open source 
toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including 
independent component analysis, J. Neurosci. Method, 134:9-
21, 2004. 
[7] R. Oostenveld and P. Praamstra. The five percent electrode 
system for high-resolution EEG and ERP measurements. Clin 
Neurophysiol, 112:713-719, 2001. 
[8] A. Delorme, J. Palmer, J. Onton, R. Oostenveld, and S. 
Makeig, Independent EEG sources are dipolar, PLoS One, vol. 
7, e30135, 2012. 
[9] D. Lelic, M. Gratkowski, K. Hennings, and A. M. Drewes, 
Multichannel matching pursuit validation and clustering – A 
simulation and empirical study, J. Neurosci. Method, vol. 196, 
pp. 190-200, 2011. 
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

