The Relationship between Human Brain Activity and Movement  
on the Spatial Cognitive Task 
Shunji Shimizu / Tokyo University of Science, Suwa 
Department of Electric Systems Engineering 
Chino-city, Japan 
shun@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp 
Hiroaki Inoue/ Tokyo University of Science, Suwa 
Research course of Engineering/Management  
Chino-city, Japan 
jgh12701@ed.suwa.tus.ac.jp
Hiroyuki Nara/ Hokkaido University 
Graduate School of Information Science and 
Technology 
Sapporo-city, Japan 
nara@ssc.ssi.ist.hokudai.ac.jp  
Fumikazu Miwakeichi/ The Institute of Statistical 
Mathematics 
Spatial and Time Series Modeling Group 
Tachikawa-city, Japan 
miwake1@ism.ac.jp 
Noboru Takahashi/ Tokyo University of Science, Suwa 
Research course of Engineering/Management 
Chino-city, Japan 
srl@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp 
 
 Nobuhide Hirai / Jichi Medical University 
Department of Psychiatry 
Shimotsuke-city, Japan City 
nobu@nobu.com
Senichiro Kikuchi / Jichi Medical University 
Department of Psychiatry 
Shimotsuke-city, Japan  
skikuchi@jichi.ac.jp 
Eiju Watanabe/ Jichi Medical University 
Department of Neurosrugery 
Shimotsuke-city, Japan  
eiju-ind@umin.ac.jp
Satoshi Kato/ Jichi Medical University 
Department of Psychiatry 
Shimotsuke-city, Japan  
psykato@jichi.ac.jp 
 
Abstract—Final purpose in this research is to contribute to 
developing of assistive robot and apparatus. Recently, there is 
a pressing need to develop a new system which assists and acts 
for car driving and wheelchair for the elderly as the population 
grows older. In terms of developing a new system, it is thought 
that it is important to examine behaviors as well as spatial 
recognition. Therefore, experiments have been performed for 
an examination of human spatial perceptions, especially right 
and left recognition, during car driving using NIRS. In 
previous research, it has been documented that there were 
significant differences at dorsolateral prefrontal cortex at left 
hemisphere during virtual driving task and actual driving.                                                                                               
   In this paper, brain activity during car driving was 
measured 
and 
detailed 
analysis 
was 
performed 
by 
segmentalizing brain activity during car driving on the basis of 
subjects’ motion. So, we report the relationship between brain 
activity and movement concerned with perception during 
driving in this paper.  
Keywords-brain information processing during driving task; 
spatial cognitive task;determining direction; NIRS. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Human movements change relative to his environment. 
Nevertheless, he/she recognizes a new location and decides 
what behavior to take. It is important to analyze the human 
spatial perception for developing autonomous robots or 
automatic driving. 
The relation of the theta brain waves to the human spatial 
perception was discussed in [1][2]. When humans perceive 
space, for example, try to decide the next action in a maze, 
the theta brain waves saliently appear. This means we have a 
searching behavior to find a goal at an unknown maze. From 
the side of human navigation Maguire et al. measured the 
brain activations using complex virtual reality town [3]. But 
every task is notional and the particulars about the 
mechanism that enables humans to perceive space and 
direction are yet unknown. Also, Brain activities concerned 
with cognitive tasks during car driving have been examined. 
For example, there was a report about brain activity when 
disturbances were given to subjects who manipulated driving 
simulator. Also, power spectrums increased in beta and theta 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

bands [4]. However, there is little report on the relationship 
among right and left perception and driving task. 
So, we performed experiments in which perception tasks 
were required during virtual car driving using NIRS(Near 
Infrared Spectroscopy). From experimental results, there 
were significant differences at dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
in left hemisphere via one-sample t-test when subjects 
watched driving movie and moving their hand in circles as if 
handling a steering wheel [5].  
In addition, we conducted experiments in real space, 
which were performed by taking f-NIRS in the car, and 
measured the brain activity during actual driving. A purpose 
in this experiment was to measure and analyze the brain 
activity during actual driving to compare results between 
virtual and actual results. As a result, there were significant 
differences at similar region [6][7]. In addition, we measured 
the brain activity of frontal lobe, which is related to 
behavioral decision-making, during car driving in different 
experimental design from previous one to verify previous 
results [8][9]. 
It is well known that higher order processing is done such 
as memory, judgment, reasoning, etc in the frontal lobe [10]. 
We tried to grasp the mechanism of information processing 
of the brain by analyzing data about human brain activity 
during car driving.  Also, the goal of this study is to find a 
way to apply this result to new assist system.  
So, with the aim of increasing number of subjects and 
examining more closely the brain activity  concerned with 
spatial perception and direction determination during car 
driving, we performed additional experiments.   
In this time, the brain activity of same lobe with human 
spatial perception and direction determination was discussed 
on the basis on changing direction of the gaze and starting to 
turn the steering wheel.  Furthermore, we examined the 
mechanism of information processing of the brain and 
human spatial perception during car driving. 
II. 
EXPERIMENT 
A. Brain activity on virtual driving 
1) Brain activity on driving movie is shown 
The subjects for this experiment were eight males who 
were right handed. They were asked to read and sign an 
informed consent regarding the experiment. 
An NIRS (Hitachi Medical Corp ETG-100) with 24 
channels (sampling frequency 10 Hz) was used to record the 
density of oxygenated hemoglobin (oxy hemoglobin) and 
deoxygenated hemoglobin (de-oxy hemoglobin) in the 
frontal cortex area. 
The movie is included two scenes at a T-junction in 
which it must be decided either to turn to the right or left. In 
the second scene, there is a road sign with directions. We 
used nine kinds of movies in about one minutes.Before 
showing the movie, subjects were given directions to turn to 
the right or left at the first T-junction. They were also taught 
the place which was on the road sign at the second T-
Junction. They had to decide the direction when they looked  
 
 
Fig. 1. Recorded movie during measurement 
 
at the road sign. They were asked to push a button when they 
realized the direction in which they were to turn. 
2) 
Brain activity on handling motion 
In this experiment, measuring was performed by f-
NIRS(Functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy ), made by 
SHIMADZU Co. Ltd with 44ch. Five subjects were healthy 
males in their 20s, right handed with a good driving history. 
They were asked to read and sign an informed consent 
regarding the experiment. 
The subject was asked to perform simulated car driving, 
moving their hand in circles as if using a steering wheel. A 
PC mouse on the table was used to simulate handling a 
wheel, and NIRS (near-infrared spectroscopy) to monitor 
oxygen content change in the subjects’ brain. NIRS 
irradiation was performed to measure brain activities when 
the subject sitting on a chair make a drawing circle line of 
the right/left hand 1) clockwise, and 2) counterclockwise. 
The part of measurement was the frontal lobe. The subject 
was asked to draw on the table a circle 30 cm in diameter 
five times consecutively, spending four seconds per a circle. 
The time design was rest (10 seconds at least) – task (20 
seconds) – rest (10 seconds) - close rest. 
B. Brain activity during actual car driving 
1) Brain activity during actual car driving 
In general roads, experiments were performed by taking 
f-NIRS in the car, and measuring the brain activity when car 
driven by subjects was went through two different 
intersections. Six subjects were a healthy male in their 20s, 
right handed with a good driving history. They were asked to 
read and sign an informed consent regarding the experiment. 
In all experiments, measuring was performed by f-NIRS 
(Functional 
Near 
Infrared 
Spectroscopy), 
made 
by 
SHIMADZU Co. Ltd [11]. 
Subjects took a rest during 10 seconds at least with their 
eye close before driving task and they drove a car during 
about 600 seconds. Finally, subject closed their eyes for 10 
seconds again after task. Then, the brain activity was 
recorded from the first eyes-closed rest to the last eyes 
Subjects were given directions to turn to the right or left 
at the first T-junction during driving task. They were also 
taught the place which was on the road sign at the second T-
junction. And, they were given the place where they have to  
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Fig. 2. Sample of first T-Junction 
 
 
Fig. 3. Sample of second T-Junction 
 
go to. So, they had to decide the direction when they looked 
at the road sign. 
A trigger pulse was emitted on stop lines at T-Junctions 
to use as a measuring stick for the analysis. Also, we 
recorded movie during the experiment from a car with a 
video camera aimed toward the direction of movement (Fig. 
1). Recorded movies were used to exempt measurement 
result including disturbances, such as foot passengers and 
oncoming cars, from analysis. Figure.2 and figure.3 shows 
one sample of T-junction. 
2) Verification Experiment 
To conduct verification for experimental results in 
previous experiment, we performed additional experiment 
which was achieved in a similar way.  
In this experiment, experimental course was different 
from previous one. While previous one was included two T-
junctions in which there was road sign at second one and not 
at first one per a measurement, there were multiple T-
junctions. Three were 5 T-junction without road sign and 4 
T-junctions with road sing.  
Subjects were twelve males who were all right-handed. 
They drove a car during about 20 minutes after a rest during 
10 seconds at least with their eyes close. Subjects were 
enlightened about turning direction and the place on which 
road signs was at T-junction during measurement. And, they 
arbitrarily decided the direction to turn when they confirmed 
road signs. Also, a trigger pulse was emitted in the same way. 
3) Detailed analysis based on driving behavior 
In this analysis, movies aimed toward the direction of 
movement as well as ones aimed subject movement like 
ocular motion and arm movement were recorded.  This is to 
analyze brain activity using ocular motion in looking at road 
signs as a trigger. In previous research we performed, stop 
line at T-junction was used as a trigger. But, brain activity in 
T-junction involved movement task such as turning steering 
wheel, changing neck direction, hitting the brake. So, it is 
thought that brain activity derived from cognitive tasks was 
overwritten with brain activity due to movement tasks. 
Therefore, we tried to analyze brain activity on the basis of 
ocular motions to examine significant differences with 
cognitive tasks. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULT 
A. Brain activity on virtual driving 
1) Brain activity on driving movie is shown 
On the whole, the variation in de-oxy hemoglobin was 
smaller than in the oxy hemoglobin. However, there was a 
great increase in channel 18(around #10 area of the 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of the right hemisphere). This 
might be the variation based on the spatial perceptions  
Next, differences were investigated concerning the 
subject’s brain activity. As the first case, it was when the 
vision was directed after having been told the direction. As 
the Second, it was when the vision was directed after having 
been decided the direction under the road sign. 
Here, d1 and d2 were defined to analyze measurement 
data. d1 is the variation of hemoglobin turning of one second 
at the first T-junction. And d2 is variation of hemoglobin at 
the second one. From the measurement result, d1 and d2, all 
of the 269 times of each subject, there were significant 
differences in oxy hemoglobin 3ch. (p<0.02: paired t test) 
and 20ch. (p<0.03) using NIRS. These regions were 
corresponded to around #46 area of the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex of the left hemisphere and around #10 area 
of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of the right hemisphere, 
respectively. 
 
 
Fig. 4. Brain activity (clockwise) 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subjects pushed a button before turning at the second T-
junction, so it influenced brain activities. The possibility of a 
correlation between d2 and the time until the movie was 
turned at the second T-junction after each subject pushed a 
button was investigated. Each correlation coefficient of 
hemoglobin channel was calculated. There was significant 
difference at only de-oxy hemoglobin 10ch(around #10 area 
of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of the right hemisphere) 
using paired t test. In only this result, the relationship 
between pushing a button and d2 cannot be judged. 
2) 
Brain activity on handling motion 
During the motion, the increase of oxy hemoglobin 
density of the brain was found in all subjects. The different 
regions of the brain were observed to be active, depending 
on the individual. The subjects were to be observed 1) on 
starting, and 2) 3-5 seconds after starting moving their 3) 
right hand 4) left hand 5)clockwise 6)counterclockwise. 
Although some individual variation existed, the result 
showed the significant differences and some characteristic 
patterns. The obtained patterns are shown as follows. 
Regardless of 1), 2), 3) and 4) above, the change in the oxy 
hemoglobin density of the brain was seen within the 
significant difference level 5% or less in the three individuals  
out of all five subjects. The part was the adjacent part both of 
left pre-motor area and of left prefrontal cortex. Especially, 
in the adjacent part of prefrontal cortex a number of 
significant differences were seen among in four out of five 
subjects. Next more emphasis was put on the rotation 
direction: 5) clockwise or 6) counterclockwise. No large 
density change was found in the brain with all the subjects 
employing 6). But, the significant difference was seen in four 
out of five subjects employing 5) (Fig.4). It is well known 
that in the outside prefrontal cortex higher order processing 
is done such as of behavior control. It is inferred that the pre-
motor area was activated when the subjects moved the hand 
in the way stated above because the pre-motor area is 
responsible for behavior control, for transforming visual 
information, and for generating neural impulses controlling. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 Significant differences at the turn left 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. Significant differences at the turn right 
 
 
Fig. 5 Analysis method 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

B. 
Brain activity during actual car driving 
1) Brain activity during actual car driving 
At the first, Hb-oxy was increased in overall frontal lobe 
after start of operation. This tendency was common among 
subjects. After that, Hb-oxy was decreased as subjects 
adjusted to driving the car. This meant that the brain activity 
changed from collective to local activities.  
In this experiment, being considered time as zero when 
experimental vehicle reached stop line at T-junction. The 
analysis was performed one-sample t-test using a and b 
within the significant difference level 5% or less between 
zero and about four seconds (Fig.5). Here, a is the variation 
of hemoglobin turning of one second at the first T-junction. 
And b is variation of hemoglobin at the second one. As the 
results, there were significant differences around  #46 area of 
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the premotor area of 
the left hemisphere brain  in turning left(Fig. 6:red). Also,   
there were significant differences #9 of the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex of the left hemisphere brain at the turn right 
(Fig. 7: red). 
2) Verification Experiment 
Various tendencies among individuals were observed in 
comparison with results in B. However, there were tendency 
that oxy-Hb was increased when car turned left or right at T-
junctions and oxy-Hb was decreased during going straight 
Analysis method was the same as previous one. Though 
Gaps were shown regions at which there were significant 
differences, there were significant differences in common 
region, too (Fig. 6,7: black). In the analysis, measurement 
results including disturbance at T-junctions were excluded as 
analysis object. 
3) Detailed analysis based on driving behavior 
The analysis was performed one-sample t-test within the 
significant difference level 5% or less between brain activity 
before and after looking at road sign.  Each of sample data 
for analysis was 1 second.  Also, analysis was performed 
with respect to each direction which subject had to go at next 
T-junction. As a consequence of analysis, there were 
significant differences at interior front gyrus of flontal lobe 
of left  hemisphere without reference of direction (Fig. 8 and 
Fig. 9). 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The hemoglobin density change of the human subjects’ 
frontal lobe was partly observed in the experiments we 
designed, where three kinds of tasks were performed to 
analyze human brain activity from the view point of spatial 
perception. 
The NIRS measures of hemoglobin variation in the 
channels suggested that human behavioral decision-making 
of different types could cause different brain activities as we 
saw in the tasks:  1)  taking a given direction at the first T-
junction,  2) taking a self-chosen direction on a road sign at 
the second T-junction and 3) turning the wheel or not. Some 
significant differences (paired t test) on NIRS’s oxy-
hemoglobin and less interrelated results between “pushing a 
button” and brain activity at the second T-junction are 
obtained.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8. Significant difference at left direction of road sign 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9. Significant difference at right direction of road sign 
 
 
Furthermore, experimental results indicated that with the 
subjects moving their hand in circle, regardless of right or 
left, 1) the same response was observed in the prefrontal 
cortex and premotor area, and 2) different patterns of brain 
activities generated by moving either hand clockwise or 
counterclockwise.  
The regions observed were only those with the 5% and 
less significance level. Possible extensions could be applied 
to other regions with the 10% and less significance level for 
the future study. With a larger number of subjects, brain 
activity patterns need to be made clear. In addition, it is 
thought to take particular note of participation concerning 
working memory when car is driven.  
Furthermore, it was found that there were significant 
differences around #44-45 area. It is well known that this 
region is corresponding to language area. So, it is thought 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

that subjects look at road map to determine direction that 
they have to go according to word described in road sign. 
From results of these experiments, there was significant 
difference around working memory. So, experiments 
focusing on relationship turning wheel and working memory 
will be performed. On the other hand, experiments as to 
actual driving were required a broad range of perception and 
information processing. Especially, subjects had to determine  
behaves depending on various information at T-junctions, 
that is, the color of the traffic light, presence or absence foot 
passengers and so on. And so, we plan to perform more static 
experiments. we attention to differences on the basis of 
turning direction and dominant hand. In addition, we will 
conduct the experiments in which subjects were narrowed 
down to left-handedness. Furthermore, researches into other 
human brain activities than spatial perception are to be 
necessary with accumulated data from fMRI (functional 
magnetic resonance imaging), EEG (Electroencephalogram), 
etc. 
When compared virtual result to actual ones, there were 
significant differences around #46 area in both experiments, 
which were performed in virtual and actual condition, as a 
common result. It is thought that this result is due to 
activities of working memory because subjects must to recall 
memories of movements required for car driving and turning 
steering 
wheel. 
Conversely, 
there 
were 
significant 
differences around #10 in virtual experiments and around 
premotor area in actual driving, respectively.  In the virtual 
case, it is thought to result from inhabitation of task without 
movement. In the actual case, subjects had to perceive space 
information in real time. So, it is considered that there were 
significant differences around premotor area because they 
always ready up to manipulate steering wheel. 
As a future plan, we aim to apply these results to 
assistive human interface. As a matter of course, we plan to 
performed additional experiments including the verification 
of these results. And final purpose is to develop a new 
system for manipulating wheelchair and information 
presentation system to assist recognition of information 
including spatial one during car driving. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M.J. Kahana, R. Sekuler, J.B. Caplan, M. Kirschen, and J.R. 
Madsen: “Human theta oscillations exhibit task dependence 
during virtual maze navigation.”, Nature, 1999, 399, pp. 781-
784. 
[2] N. Nishiyama and Y. Yamaguchi: "Human EEG theta in the 
spatial recognition task", Proceedings of 5th World Multiconf. 
On Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (SCI 2001), Proc. 
7th Int. Conf. on Information Systems, Analysis and 
Synthesis (ISAS 2001), pp. 497-500 (2001). 
[3] E.A. Maguire, N. Burgess, J.G. Donnett, R.S.J. Frackowiak, 
C.D. Frith, and J.O’ Keefe: "Knowing Where and Getting 
There: A Human Navigation Network," vol. 280 Science 
8/may/1998. 
[4] Chin-Teng Lin, Shi-An Chen, Tien-Ting Chiu, Hong-Zhang 
Lin, and Li-Wei Ko: "Spatial and temporal EEG dynamics of 
dual-task driving performance." Journal of NeuroEngineering 
and Rehabilitation,  vol. 8-11, 2011 
[5] S. Shimizu, N. Hirai, F. Miwakeichi, and et al: "Fundamental 
Study for Relationship between Cognitive task and Brain 
Activity during Car Driving," Proc. the 13th International 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, (San Diego, CA, 
USA, 2009), Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 434-440. 
[6] N. Takahashi, S. Shimizu,Y. Hirata, H. Nara, F. Miwakeichi, 
N. Hirai, S. Kikuchi, E. Watanabe, and S. Kato: 
"Fundamental Study for a New Assistive System during Car 
Driving," Proc. International Conference on Robotics and 
Biomimetics, 2010, China. 
[7] N. Takahashi, S. Shimizu, Y. Hirata, H. Nara, H. Inoue, N. 
Hirai, S.  Kikuchi, E. Watanabe, and S. Kato,“Basic study of 
Analysis of Human Brain Activities during Car Driving,” the 
14th 
International 
Conferrence 
on 
Human-Computer 
Interaction, 2011, Orlando, Florida, USA.  
[8] S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, H. Nara, H. Inoue, and Y. 
Hirata ,“Fundamental Study for Human Brain Activity Based 
on the Spatial Cognitive Task,” the 2011 Internatinal 
Conference on Brain Informatics-BI 2011, China. 
[9] S. Shimizu, H. Nara, N. Takahashi, H. Inoue and, Y. 
Hirata,“Basic Study for Human Brain Activity Based on the 
Spatial Cognitive Task,” The Third International Conference 
on Advanced Cognitive Techonologies and Applications, 
2011, Italy. 
[10] J. Cockburn: "Task interruption in prospective memory: “A 
frontal lobe function?." Cortex, vol. 31, 1995, pp. 87- 97. 
[11] E. Watanabe, Y. Yamashita, Y. Ito and, H. Koizumi, ”Non-
invasive functional mapping with multi-channel near infra-red 
spectroscopic topography in humans,” Heurosci Lett 1996, 
Feb 16, 205(1), 41-4.  
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

