The Hippocampus According to the Ouroboros Model,  
the "Expanding Memory Index Hypothesis" 
Knud Thomsen PSI 
Paul Scherrer Institut 
NUM Forschung mit Neutronen und Muonen 
CH-5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland 
e-mail: knud.thomsen@psi.ch 
 
 
Abstract—Understanding information processing in the brain 
demands more than one approach or method. Combining well-
established and diverse novel experimental findings from 
neuroscience, 
connectionist 
approaches, 
and 
artificial 
intelligence, the perspective of the recently proposed cognitive 
architecture of the Ouroboros Model offers an integrative view 
on the functional role of the mammalian hippocampus: it is 
hypothesized to implement a rapidly laid down index, first 
establishing, contributing to binding, and then retrieving 
together memory entries, thus iteratively expanding the overall 
cognitive system in an autocatalytic process.  
Keywords - Cognition; schema; iterative processing; 
discrepancy monitoring; hypercycle; hash table; extreme 
learning machine. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The hippocampus is a central neural structure on top of 
the processing hierarchy in mammalian brains. Homologous 
structures have been found in reptiles and birds. Widely and 
reciprocally connected to cortical areas, in mammals the 
hippocampus is comprised of several distinct main regions: 
Dentate Gyrus (DG), CA3, and CA1; see Fig. 1. These 
appear to implement successive stages of processing: DG as 
the input stage has been implicated in pattern separation 
whereas CA3 is best understood as a content-addressable 
auto-association memory providing pattern completion, as 
explained in some detail below [1]. A hippocampal memory 
indexing theory has been proposed 30 years ago, and it has 
fared quite well over time [2][3].  
The paper is structured as follows. In section II, the gist 
of the Ouroboros Model is presented in just a few words, and 
in section III, a coarse conceptual sketch of an expanded 
dynamic indexing view is outlined. Conclusions and future 
work are indicated in Section IV. 
II. 
TH E OUROBOROS MODEL IN TWO WORDS 
The Ouroboros Model offers a cognitive architecture 
aiming at an encompassing account [4]. Cognition in general 
is explained as resulting from two fundamental building 
blocks: a memory structured into cohesive chunks called 
schemata, and a cyclic process termed 'consumption 
analysis', which "cultivates" consistency by monitoring for 
discrepancies and thereupon directing attention and also 
triggering memory storage according to demand.  
A key tenet of the Ouroboros Model, in particular, is that 
novel memory entries are laid down as kind of "snapshots" 
linking all prevalent cortical activations at occasions marked 
as important by the outcome of consumption analysis [5]; 
this most efficiently includes distinct index records.  
III. 
THE EXPANDING MEMORY INDEX HYPOTHESIS 
Mapping structures of the Ouroboros Model to living 
brains, it has been hypothesized in various previous accounts 
that the hippocampus embodies an index to features in 
distributed representations over widely spread specialized 
cerebral cortex areas [2][3][6].  
Arguing that there are diverse requirements on different 
forms of human memory it has been proposed that these can 
best be addressed with two memory systems: a limited fast, 
one-shot, component based in the hippocampus, and another 
with vast capacity and with some essential features slower 
but gradually improving, in the cerebral cortex [7]. 
Memorizing new episodes in the form of complete 
activation-images, demands fast and encompassing storage, 
exactly as has been described for the hippocampus [5][7]. 
(Almost) all activity in the entire brain is effectively bound 
together because the hippocampus sits on top of many 
diverse processing areas [8].  
 
Figure 1. Principal stages for the hippocampus, with dark 
arrows indicating the links mentioned in the text [8]. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Later, during remembering, when trying to reestablish an 
overall activation in the cortex, hippocampus acts as driver 
providing effective index-entries and bringing to bear 
efficient pointers to the distributed cortical representations.  
The hippocampus thus can be understood as a top 
"convergence-divergence zone", which receives convergent 
projections from the sites whose activity is to be recorded, 
and which sends divergent projections to these same areas, 
similar to a proposal by Damasio [9]. The here proposed 
account is distinct from more standard conceptualizations of 
memory stressing clearly separated components, i.e., short- 
and long-term stores or more constricted situation-specific 
control processes like in the Atkinson–Shiffrin model [10].  
Following the ideas of [2] and [7], memories according 
to the Ouroboros Model are stored in a partly redundant way: 
linked via the hippocampus and also, definitively after some 
consolidation over time (and slow wave sleep), permanently 
bound cortical representations. No ‘transfer’, in the sense of 
completely erasing hippocampal traces, normally takes 
place; cortex entries just become more independent with use.  
Some type of two-pronged memory implementation 
appears indispensable for meta-cognition and meta-memory, 
which naturally enable an agent to assess her status of 
memory (-retrieval). Prominent examples in this context are 
the tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon and dèjá vu.  
The hippocampal complex is hypothesized to work as an 
effective hash-table; index values are established from the 
activity distributions they code for in a given context, and, in 
turn, their activation later allows addressing and combining 
the detailed entries spread over widely dispersed cortex 
areas. At both storage sites, pattern completion is effective, 
enabling full retrieval from only a fraction of the features, 
efficiently implementing content-addressable memory. 
During encoding, as well as for retrieval, the two 
repositories reinforce each other mutually. This constellation 
can be described as a minimum-hypercycle comprising only 
two main sub-stages [11][12]. These are distributed over the 
cerebral cortex and, on the other end, the CA3 section of the 
hippocampus. (For very important memories, e.g., ones 
containing strong (aversive) emotions, an additional structure 
is regularly involved, i.e., the amygdala, which allows for 
particularly fast reactions in already encoded contexts.)  
Entries in the hippocampus, like in local neocortex areas, 
are laid down in patches of orderly maps. Sufficiently 
different contexts have been shown to lead to remapping in 
the hippocampus [13]. Specificity is taken to be ensured by 
well-separated attractor states in CA3 due to its prominent 
recurrent connections, while CA1 recoding for the output can 
preserve matched correspondence with cortical areas; see 
Fig.1. Different schemata as generalizations of place-cell 
maps would correspond to specific hippocampal mappings. 
Dynamically, these associations are seen as manifest in theta 
oscillations, which originate mainly in the hippocampus and 
cingulate cortex, and phase-locked high gamma oscillations 
in neocortex [14].  
Due to the auto-association capabilities of the CA3 
region, full activations can be provoked already when only 
part of their constituents are available first. In order to avoid 
disturbing overlap between distinct memories, a random 
component in the assignment from the DG, which effects 
very powerful input to CA3 storage, has been proposed [1].  
An efficient additional way of minimizing collisions, i.e., 
preventing the overloading of a neural associative network, 
would be to add new neurons in the distributing stage as new 
(index) entries are required. After decades, in which the 
dogma “no new neurons in the adult brain” was accepted as 
valid, it has been found that the dentate gyrus in the 
hippocampal formation is one of two regions in the adult 
human brain where new neurons are continually developing 
and functionally integrated into working brain circuitry [15]. 
Contributions to better pattern separation and memory 
resolution have been suggested as main function of these 
added neurons [16][17]. There is ample evidence for their 
enhanced generation and survival when demand for new 
representational resources is presumably high, i.e., they are 
boosted by physical exercise in enriched environments, 
accompanied by significant improvement of previously 
impaired hippocampal long-term potentiation and cognitive 
performance in a mouse model [18].  
It is important to note that index values are most useful if 
distinct. "Continuous" versions seem adequate within limits, 
but requirements for very fine-scaled representations and 
smooth transitions might more efficiently be taken care of by 
some general-purpose interpolator as has been argued to be 
the function of the cerebellum [19].  
For the hippocampus, it is further proposed to investigate 
the idea how the observed addition of newborn neurons in 
living brains can be understood as a version of an extreme 
learning machine (ELM), a recent neural network lay-out 
featuring the random addition of hidden neurons, which 
yields spectacular improvements in learning rate compared 
to standard learning routines [20]. It has been shown that 
randomly introducing neurons and then selecting the ones 
which work best can further enhance the efficiency of ELMs 
compared to versions without pruning [21].  
Following the Ouroboros Model, newborn neurons are 
inserted in living brains in a manner “better than random”, 
i.e., their number and timing being controlled by the demand 
for finer differentiation in the already existing network of 
schemata [5][18]. This would actually fit nicely with 
hopscotch hashing, where additional entries are added 
demand-oriented for resolving hash collisions and inserted 
locally in the relevant neighborhood ensuring quick retrieval.  
New and uncommitted neurons are most useful in the 
separation stage (DG) with initial high and rather localized 
sensitivity, and their weights constrained by neighbors, 
possibly not only for better discriminating and stabilizing but 
later also for condensing and compactifying (sparse) activity, 
which was before distributed more widely and implementing 
some type of population-code, all in tight interaction with the 
linked cortex representations and also inducing similar 
tuning, and likely also including pruning, there.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
It is claimed that the Ouroboros Model sheds some light 
on the requirement and implementation of a continually 
expanding index to representations distributed over the 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

cortex in mammalian brains: new entries are rapidly laid 
down as "snapshots" concatenating all concurrent activity 
upon a trigger by consumption analysis. The mammalian 
hippocampus is thus hypothesized to serve a fundamental 
role for relatively quickly establishing and also reliably 
retrieving distinct entries in episodic memory as well as for 
episodic simulation employing exactly that schema-type, 
which is claimed to form the ever-expanding basis for 
efficient cognition. Request-oriented storage of index entries 
in tight interplay with detailed cortical records thus 
efficiently implements autocatalytic learning and growth. 
This appears to be a significant step towards explaining how 
information is processed in vertebrate brains.  
 
The Expanding Memory Index Hypothesis of the 
Hippocampus: 
 
The hippocampus provides an index to wide-spread 
cortical representations. 
 
Content-addressable at both repositories, memories 
can most efficiently be retrieved from partial keys. 
 
Entries in the hippocampus and in the cerebral 
cortex mutually endorse each other and thus form a 
hypercycle.  
 
Memory separation/orthogonalization capability for 
the unique indexing of novel episodes is greatly 
enhanced by adding adult-born neurons in the DG. 
 
This is somewhat similar to the addition of hidden 
units in Extreme Learning Machines (ELMs). 
 
All of this fits nicely with the Ouroboros Model. 
 
A further piece of the puzzle will be to elucidate the link 
of the hippocampus with another central (control) structure, 
i.e., anterior cingulate cortex, ACC, which has been shown 
recently to possess direct monosynaptic connections to CA3 
and CA1 regions [22]. With the hippocampus and the ACC 
in the center together, and including general cerebral cortex 
as well as subcortical structures, the neuronal basis for 
extensive cyclic iterative processing can be outlined.  
Work on the Ouroboros Model in general and also on the 
role of the hippocampus and its connections is in progress. 
Following a fundamental self-reflective and self-consistent 
approach, a first schematic sketch will be filled-in with more 
fine-grained and quantitative details in subsequent iterations; 
collaborations to this end are most welcome.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
A number of insightful comments and very helpful 
suggestions for improvements by several reviewers are 
gratefully acknowledged.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. T. Rolls, "The mechanisms for pattern completion and 
pattern separation in the hippocampus," Frontiers in Systems 
Neuroscience, vol. 7, pp. 1-21, 2013. 
[2] T. J. Teyler and P. DiScenna, "The hippocampal memory 
indexing theory," Behavioral Neuroscience, vol 100(2), pp. 
147-154, 1986.  
[3] T. J. Teyler and J. W. Rudy, "The hippocampal indexing 
theory 
and 
episodic 
memory: 
updating 
the 
index," 
Hippocampus, vol. 17, pp. 1158-1169, 2007. 
[4] K. Thomsen, "The Ouroboros Model in the light of venerable 
criteria," Neurocomputing, vol. 74, pp. 121-128, 2010. 
[5] K. Thomsen, "Concept formation in the Ouroboros Model," 
Third Conference on Artificial General Intelligence,  Lugano, 
Switzerland, Proceedings of AGI 2010, pp. 194-195. 
[6] K. Thomsen, "Ouroboros Model mapped to Brain," 8th IBRO 
World Congress of Neuroscience, Florence, Italy, 2011. 
[7] J. L. McClelland,  B. L. McNaughton, and R. C. O’Reilly, 
"Why there are Complementary Learning Systems in the 
Hippocampus and Neocortex: Insights from the Successes and 
Failures of Connectionist Models of Learning and Memory," 
Psychological Review 102, pp. 419-457,1995.   
[8] T. Nakashiba, J. Z. Young, T. J. McHugh, D. L. Buhl, and S. 
Tonegawa, “Transgenic Inhibition of Synaptic Transmission 
Reveals Role of CA3 Output in Hippocampal Learning,” 
Science vol. 319, 1260-1264, 2008. 
[9] A. Damasio, "Time-locked multiregional retroactivation: A 
systems-level proposal for the neural substrates of recall and 
recognition," Cognition 33, pp. 25-62, 1989.  
[10] R. C. Atkinson and R. M. Shiffrin, "Human memory: A 
proposed system and its control processes," in K. W. Spence 
and J. T Spence, The psychology of learning and motivation 
(Volume 2). New York: Academic Press, pp. 89-195, 1968. 
[11] M. Eigen and P. Schuster, "The Hypercycle, A Principle of 
Natural Self-Organization, Part A, Emergence of the Hyper-
cycle," Naturwissenschaften, vol. 64, pp. 541-565, 1977. 
[12] M. Eigen and P. Schuster, "The Hypercycle, A Principle of 
Natural Self-Organization, Part B, The Abstract Hypercycle," 
Naturwissenschaften, vol. 65, pp. 7-41, 1978. 
[13] J. K. Leutgeb, S. Leutgeb, M.-B. Moser, and E. I. Moser, 
"Pattern Separation in the Dentate Gyrus and DCA3 of the 
Hippocampus," Science, vol. 315, pp. 961-966, 2007. 
[14] R. T. Canolty et al., "High Gamma Power is Phase-Locked to 
Theta Oscillations in Human Neocortex," Science, vol. 313, 
pp. 1626-1628, 2006. 
[15] P. S. Eriksson et al., "Neurogenesis in the adult human hippo-
campus," Nature Medicine, vol. 11, pp. 1313-1317, 1998.    
[16] A. Sahay, D. A. Wilson, and R. Hen, “Pattern separation: a 
common function for new neuros in hippocampus and 
olfactory bulb,” Neuron, vol. 70, pp. 582-588, 2011. 
[17] J. B. Aimone, W. Deng, and F. H. Gage, “Resolving new 
memories: a critical look at the dentate gyrus, adult 
neurogenesis, and pattern separation,” Neuron, vol. 70, pp. 
589-596, 2011. 
[18] M. E. Sakalem et al., "Environmental Enrichment and 
Physical Exercise Revert Behavioral and Electrophysiological 
Impairments Caused by Reduced Adult Neurogenesis," 
Hippocampus 27, pp. 36-51, 2017. 
[19] K. Thomsen, "The Cerebellum according to the Ouroboros 
Model, 
the 
'Interpolator 
Hypothesis'," 
Journal 
of 
Communication and Computer, vol.11, pp. 239-254, 2014. 
[20] G. B. Huang, Q. Y. Zhu, and C. K. Siew, "Extreme learning 
machine: theory and applications," Neurocomputing, vol. 70, 
pp. 489-501, 2006.    
[21] G. B. Huang and L. Chen, "Enhanced random search based 
incremental extreme learning machine," Neurocomputing, 
vol. 71, pp. 3460-3468, 2008.  
[22] P. Rajasethupathy et al., "Projections from the neocortex 
mediate top-down control of memory retrieval," Nature 526, 
653-659, 2015.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

