Cognitive Information in Business Process - Decision-Making Results 
 
 
Andreia C. T. D. Pereira 
NP2Tec -PPGI - Departamento de Informática Aplicada 
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO) 
Rio de Janeiro, Brasil 
andreia.pereira@uniriotec.br 
 
Flávia M. Santoro 
NP2Tec -PPGI - Departamento de Informática Aplicada 
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO) 
Rio de Janeiro, Brasil 
flavia.santoro@uniriotec.br 
 
 
Abstract — The performed work in business processes in 
organizations 
can 
be 
defined 
as 
situated 
activity, 
fundamentally, 
surrounded 
by 
a 
context. 
Contextual 
knowledge resides not only in the activities, conditions, facts 
and situations, which occur during a task performance. 
Contextual knowledge also resides in people’s mental activities 
of thinking, reasoning and judging.  In other words, contextual 
knowledge also resides in people’s cognitive processes. We 
argue that the cognitive process of decision-making can be 
considered a contextual element, since it could explain how a 
decision was made and how its outcomes were reached. We 
presented an approach for capturing and representing 
individual cognitive decision-making process as contextual 
knowledge in decisions activities of business process. This 
paper presents an approach for using decision results as 
contextual information for new decisions within business 
process. 
Keywords - Decision-making result; Context; Business 
Process; Knowledge Management; Organisational Learning 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The work performed by people can be defined as situated 
activity, fundamentally, surrounded by a context [2]. 
Business processes, which represent the way organizations 
work, consist of sets of activities through which information 
and knowledge are generated, transferred and converted. In 
this sense, for business process actions and events total 
understanding, all relevant contextual information involved 
in particular situations should be available. Besides, learning 
with past tasks and how to deal with changes that arise might 
create opportunities for reusing content produced in previous 
circumstances [7][20]. 
A formal definition for context is provided by [1]: 
context is a set of circumstances which surrounds an event or 
subject and the structures of mental models which represent 
knowledge. Contextual elements may refer to group 
members, task planning, interactions which led to a 
conclusion and the environment where a task was carried 
out. Thus, the contextual knowledge resides not only in the 
activities’ conditions, but also in people’s cognitive 
processes as thinking, reasoning and judging, for instance. 
We argue that decision-making cognitive process can be 
considered a contextual element, since it could explain how 
an activity was performed as well as the outcomes reached. 
We presented [13][15] a meta-model and a set of guidelines 
to support meta-model instances creation. This proposal goal 
was to capture and to represent individual cognitive decision-
making process as contextual knowledge in business process 
activities. 
This paper proposes to extend [13] meta-model including 
other important information related to the decision 
consequences and moreover about the process goals 
achievement. The goal of this paper is to discuss the 
approach of using decision results records as contextual 
information. Besides, we also discuss how retrieving 
registered decisions results would help making new 
decisions. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes 
the concept of cognitive information and context in business 
process and how decision results could be argued as part of 
contextual information. Section 3 presents related work. 
Section 4 describes the improved model proposed. Section 5 
discusses new results obtained. Section 6 concludes the 
paper. 
II. 
COGNITIVE INFORMATION AS CONTEXT IN BUSINESS 
PROCESS 
According to Rowlands [19], cognitive processes are 
those essential to performing information acquisition and 
usage. Lima and Borém [8] affirm that cognitive processes 
include the mental activities of thinking, imagining, 
remembering, problem-solving, perceiving, recognizing, 
conceiving, judging, reasoning, etc., occurring differently for 
each individual, depending on his skills. Thus, the outcome 
of each process is different, depending on experiences, 
abilities and knowledge of whoever carries it out. 
This emphasizes the relevance of describing cognitive 
processes information and making them available. For Lima 
and Borém [8] and Maximiano [9], mental activities 
recognition is important for understanding a situation, since 
each person has a particular perception about a problem. 
Contextual knowledge is the experience of each worker, 
device, as well as activities, conditions, events and situations 
which occur during a job performance [1]. So, we regard 
cognitive processes as contextual information. Besides that, 
context cannot be disjointed from its use (business 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

processes). The information about the context of past 
activities performed by an individual can help other people 
to understand current situation. So, we aim to promote OL 
(Organizational Learning) by completing knowledge spiral 
model [14] alternating between tacit and explicit knowledge. 
Our research focuses on problem-solving cognitive 
process description, i.e., decision-making. We emphasize the 
decision-making cognitive process, because we believe that 
making this information explicit allows people to learn from 
it, helping them making new decisions. 
According to Brézillon [1], context only exists in a given 
focus, for instance, when someone performs a task or any 
problem solving activity. At this moment, three types of 
knowledge related to context [18] emerge: proceduralized 
context, context knowledge and external knowledge. 
Proceduralized context is directly related to the focus and is 
used to carry a task out. Contextual knowledge is not directly 
used but it covers all available information that remains. 
External knowledge covers all other knowledge that is not 
relevant to the current focus. Since context is directly related 
to focus, in our case, business process activities, it changes 
dynamically through time. 
For example, context identification of a task performance 
or an artifact generation can answer questions like: “Why did 
we do that?”, “What would happen if we stopped doing this 
and that?”, “Has this problem been solved before?”, “Did 
anyone considered using a different approach?”. These are 
questions that make people deal with subjects that have been 
already addressed before. The analysis of social, cultural and 
organizational issues should be done, since they are all 
related to the context and provides greater meaning to the 
action taken, increasing learning chances. We include 
cognitive processes, such as decision-making, among those 
issues, which can answer questions like: “Which belief or 
feeling influenced the decision?”, “Any past experience 
influenced the decision?”. 
In the decision-making process, for instance, we evaluate 
every alternative and the weight of each criterion carefully 
when we are not used to making such decision. On the other 
hand, we carry out this process automatically, upon this 
situation becoming commonplace, without stopping to think 
how we have reached a conclusion, or why we have started 
from a premise [16]. In spite of how automation of these 
processes happens, it is important to identify decision 
components, in order to understand its result and the 
cognitive process used to achieve it. 
In previous papers [13][15], we described a model to 
represent the cognitive decision process. We extended this 
model including decision consequences. We argue that it 
would improve its characterization as process contextual 
information. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
Some proposals aim to make explicit the decision-
making process [5]. Others focus on helping people making 
better decisions by defining criteria [18]. Others try to help 
people by applying methods [12] or providing Computer-
based systems [11][3]. 
Montibeller et al. [5] propose to explain decision-making 
process by using Causal maps. McMurray [12] proposes 
some methods to expand people decision-making skills. The 
proposed methods are brainstorming, nominal group 
technique and the Delphi technique. These techniques are 
pointed out because they provide a structured format that 
helps increasing the quantity and quality of participant 
responses. The author believes that these methods can be 
important resources for tasks such as developing courses, 
setting departmental goals and forecasting trends for 
planning purposes. This proposal was applied for nursing 
staff development educators. 
According to Roy [18], multiple criteria decision-making 
proposals aim to enable people to enhance conformity degree 
and coherence between the decision-making process 
evolution and the value systems and objectives of those 
involved in this process. The author states that the purpose of 
decision-aid is, therefore, to help people make their way 
even with ambiguity, uncertainty and bifurcations. Multiple 
criteria decision-making proposals aim to help people to 
make better decisions. However it focuses on objectivity, 
neglecting subjective factors. 
As stated by Menzel et al. [11], it’s necessary to identify 
the most appropriate IT solutions for Cloud Computing. So, 
their proposal comprises a generic, multi-criteria-based 
decision 
framework 
and 
an 
application 
for 
Cloud 
Computing, the Multi-Criteria Comparison Method for 
Cloud Computing ((MC2)2). Their framework and method 
allow organizations to determine what infrastructure best 
suits their needs by evaluating and ranking infrastructure 
alternatives using multiple criteria. Their proposal includes a 
way to distinguish infrastructures not only by costs, but also 
in terms of benefits, opportunities and risks. 
Yigitcanlar [3] affirms that the computing tools and 
technologies are designed to enhance the planners’ capability 
to deal with complex environments and to plan for 
prosperous and livable communities. So, he examines the 
role of IT (Information Technologies) and particularly 
Internet GIS (Internet Based Geographic Information 
Systems) as spatial decision support systems to aid 
community based local decision-making. The paper also 
covers the advantages and challenges of these internet based 
mapping applications and tools for collaborative decision-
making on the environment. 
According to Steiger and Steiger [17], the decision-maker 
first determines values for key factors and then applies 
his/her mental model to evaluate the alternatives based on 
them, estimate potential output and make the best decision. 
They propose a mining architecture based on cognitive 
instances (ICM - Instance-based Cognitive Mining), which 
integrates several technologies to capture and express 
decision maker mental model. However, Steiger and Steiger 
[17] do not investigate the decision in the person’s mind and 
do not try to find what causes or influences it. 
To maximize the total reward people receive over a fixed 
number of trials, Steyvers et al. [4] argue that they must 
choose between a set of alternatives, each with different 
unknown reward rates. So, with the aim of helping people 
maximize the number of rewards, Steyvers et al. [4] use a 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Bayesian model of optimal decision-making on the task, in 
which the way people balance exploration with exploitation 
depends on their assumptions about the distribution of 
reward rates. They do not consider the individual’s way of 
thinking. 
Some researches on systems are already customized for a 
specific domain while others are too generic and difficult to 
customize. There are researches focusing on supporting 
decision-making. However, they do not care about past 
decisions neither decision’s context. 
Other important aspects to be considered are the 
decision-making components. Some elements of decision-
making that should be informed are indicated by Montibeller 
et al. [5], but they do not set up how each piece of 
information is related to each other. Similarly, Steiger and 
Steiger [17] ask only for the key factors in decision-making 
and their respective weight, they do not even describe what 
they are. Steiger and Steiger [17] are interested in 
representing the decision-making process, however, they do 
not discuss which individual’s values are considered. They 
do not care about cognitive processes. 
IV. 
REVISED DECISION-MAKING META-MODEL  
A. Meta-Model Source and Goal 
Nunes´s knowledge management (KM) model [10] 
proposes four macro steps, as following: 1) capture context 
information; 2) associate this information with activities in a 
business process; 3) store this information in a repository - 
Organizational Memory (OM); and 4) retrieve information 
anytime, filtering by similar contexts. They argue that it is 
possible to make inferences from a model, identifying new 
information and supporting the understanding of process 
activities instances. 
Pereira and Santoro [13][15] approach extended [10] KM 
model considering executor context, highlighting the 
decision-making cognitive process [5]. Pereira and Santoro 
[13][15] proposal focus on steps one and two: information 
capture and association with business process. It did not 
cover storage nor retrieve in OM (steps three and four). 
Pereira and Santoro [13][15] proposal was a meta-model 
for capturing and representing individual cognitive decision-
making process as contextual knowledge in business process 
activities. The meta-model proposed was structured by the 
development of an ontology, which provides structure for the 
OM [21]. Pereira and Santoro [13][15] also proposed a set of 
guidelines to support meta-model instances creation. 
The meta-model goal is to explicit how a work process 
activity executor thought while making a decision. This can 
be done by instantiating [13][15] context meta-model. This 
provides a basis for a work process activity executor to 
describe how his own decision was made; thus the meta-
model should draw together all relevant cognitive decision-
making process elements and their relationships, which are 
stored in the OM. The benefits to the decision making 
process occurs every time someone has to make a new 
decision, because he will be able to retrieve past decisions 
with similar context information. This retrieve is done by a 
reasoner, but is not scope of this research. 
B. Meta-Model New Classes 
We analyzed Pereira and Santoro´s survey results on 
decision reuse [13], which was carried out among people of 
managerial level who are used to make decisions. All 
interviewees stated that what happens after a decision is very 
important and makes difference when he wants to retrieve 
decisions recorded, with the purpose of helping him to make 
new decisions. We realized that it was not possible to 
register what happened after the decision by creating an 
instance of [13] meta-model because it didn’t cover decision 
consequence as context information. 
In order to make it possible to record decision result and 
to make it available for new decisions, we identified new 
classes and we extended [13] decision-making meta-model 
underlining decision consequences, aiming make explicit 
what happened after that decision. We added the classes 
Result and Consequence, as pointed out by a rectangle in 
Fig. 1. 
 
Figure 1.  Extended Cognitive Decision-Making Meta-Model – 
Highlighting Decision Results  
The Result class represents how the decision results were 
regarded by those who made the decision, for example: an 
executive director decided to reward some employees by 
giving them a car. He believes that it was a successful 
decision because it brought more comfort on employees’ 
way to work. It was above his expectation and he is really 
satisfied, because those employees had better performance, 
since they were not so tired because of the traffic jam. 
There is also a relationship called Results_in between the 
Decision class and the Result class. This new relationship 
represents what the decision made resulted. Result class 
properties 
are: 
Rating, 
Reason_Rating, 
Expectation, 
Satisfaction_Degree and Reason_Satisfaction. 
The Rating property indicates how successful the 
decision was. It may take the following values: Successful, 
Neutral or Unsuccessful. The Reason_Rating property 
describes the cause for that success or lack of it. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

The Expectation property reports how decision result met 
what the decision maker looked forward while making the 
decision. It may assume the following values: Above, Met, 
Below; representing if decision result exceeded all 
expectations, if it met expectations or if it was below 
expectations, respectively. 
The property Satisfation_Degree indicates how pleased 
the decision maker was with decision result. It may take the 
following values: Satisfied, Neutral or Dissatisfied. The 
Reason_Satisfation describes the cause for this feeling. 
Decision result brings consequences, which led to 
Consequence class creation and to the relationship Brings 
between them, which represents what happened due to the 
decision results. The Consequence class represents what 
happened after the decision. There may have an instance for 
each consequence identified, continuing the example above: 
the decision of giving a car had a positive impact of saving 
employees’ time in traffic jam, however it had a negative 
impact of wasting more money with reward. Consequence 
class properties are: Impact and Description. 
The Impact property reports if the consequence was 
Positive or Negative. The Description property explains the 
benefits achieved or the undesired effects. There is also a 
new relationship between Result and Consequence classes. It 
is called Brings. There is no new relationship between 
Consequence class and others. 
Table 1 shows a brief description of new classes and 
Table 2 shows new classes summary presenting their 
properties and the range of some properties can assume. 
TABLE I.  
NEW CLASSES’ DESCRIPTION 
Class Name 
Description 
Result 
What results from decision 
Consequence 
Good or bad effects obtained with the decision 
TABLE II.  
NEW CLASSES’ SUMMARY 
Class Name 
Properties 
Range 
Result 
Rating 
Successful 
/ 
Neutral 
/ 
Unsuccessful 
Reason_Rating 
- 
Expectation 
Above / Met / Below 
Satisfaction_Degree 
Satisfied / Neutral / Dissatisfied 
Reason_Satisfaction 
- 
Consequence 
Impact 
Positive / Negative 
Description 
- 
V. 
TOWARDS RE-USING THE DECISION-MAKING 
We performed 4 cases studies to assess whether new 
classes, their properties and relationships were enough to 
explain 
decision-making 
consequences 
details. 
All 
participants occupied a leadership position. 
The case study focused on identifying what happened 
after a decision and identifying decision result relevance for 
making new decisions. Besides we applied a survey that 
aimed at identifying decisions context similarities comparing 
them. 
These cases studies were based on cases studies results 
performed by [15]. We asked participants to report decision 
result reported in the previous case study, which led to the 
creation of an instance of the cognitive decision-making 
process meta-model. The decision result was recorded, in 
order to complement the meta-model instance. 
Besides that we carried out a survey recording other 
context information needs. Moreover, this survey also 
assessed new decisions of the same context made by that 
person, in order to identify context similarities and to discuss 
the approach of using recorded decision results as contextual 
information for new decisions within business process. 
A. Ontology New Instances 
In this subsection we describe and assess new instances 
obtained from participants’ responses. To better convey our 
explanation, we refer to participants as A, B and C. 
Participant A reported that the decision recorded in the 
previous study case happened again. He pointed out that the 
following classes were presented in both decision instances: 
Experience, Feeling and Consequence. 
Participant A said that decision’s context is very 
important because it makes the difference while identifying 
alternatives. However, in his opinion, context is never the 
same. Only some pieces of information are repeated from 
one decision to another. He informed that there are some 
things that would lead the decision to a different way. Some 
of these things are related to his mood. Depending on how he 
feels, his decision may be different. 
Participant A also stated that he could learn from other 
decisions things that should not be done, because they led to 
an unsuccessful situation or did not achieve the goal. He 
reported that having access to his previous recorded decision 
would change just a little bit his new decision. He also 
reported that having access to recorded decision of similar 
context would help him just a little bit to make new decision. 
Participant B decision result is shown in Fig. 2. He 
reported that the decision recorded in the previous study case 
is recurrent. He pointed out that the following classes were 
present in both instances: Advantage, Consequence, Feeling, 
Objective and Risk. He states that accessing his registered 
decision would not change the new one, because his 
judgment criteria have been refined through experience. 
He believes the context in which he makes decision is 
essential, despite his wide expertise on making decisions or 
his judgment criteria. He also believes that those criteria are 
usually permanent, because they come from people ethical 
and moral values. However, he stated that having access to 
recorded decisions of similar contexts would help him to 
make new decision. He highlighted that these records would 
help him only because they have similar context to the one 
he is experiencing. 
Participant C reported that the issue of the decision 
recorded in the previous study case is recurrent, as well as 
the following classes: Experience, Consequence, Criterion, 
Objective, Result and Risk. He believes that accessing his 
recorded decision or any other recorded decision with similar 
context would change just a little bit his new decision. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 2.  Detailed Recording Activity (focusing on decision’s results) 
Analyzing those answers we could realize that being 
aware about other people failure may avoid our own failure, 
because we can learn by observing someone else experience 
or by our own experience. This kind of information is 
provided by Result and Consequence classes. Participants 
also highlighted the importance of context information. They 
stated that a historic decision is only valuable if it is 
contextualized, otherwise it would be useless. 
B. Recording Activity 
This proposal should be applied at companies that seek to 
improve their practices in decision-making, sharing 
information and knowledge. Our research suggests an 
approach that enables companies to accomplish it through 
the analysis of historic decisions that were recorded during 
the process perform. 
According to Pereira and Santoro [15], process manager 
should identify in which work process important decisions 
activities are made. Once these activities are identified, 
process manager reviews work process where these activities 
are, in order to add a further step related to reflection activity 
and another to decision-making cognitive process recording, 
for example, the executive manager of the example above is 
also “Recognition and reward” process manager. Revising 
this process he realized that rewarding is a very important 
activity for the company. As he would like to have past 
decisions registered to learn with them and to help him at the 
present time to make his own decision, he believes it’s a 
good idea to register his own decision about it to help next 
“Recognition and reward” manager process to make 
decisions about it, when he leaves office. So, he reviews 
“Recognition and reward” process adding the step “Reflect 
about award” before the activity “Select an award” and after 
it he adds the step “Register decision about award”. 
Pereira and Santoro [15] argued to add the activity in the 
work process focused only on the decision’s record. 
Regarding the scenario above, we extended the concept of 
this new activity by splitting it into 4 tasks, as shown in Fig. 
3. 
 
Figure 3.  Detailed Recording Activity 
The first task is to search for decisions in the OM which 
context is similar to the one he is experiencing at that 
moment. To support this task there should be a recovery 
mechanism able to identify actual context, to mine similar 
recorded contexts and to compare them, in order to bring out 
similar context decisions. Contextual information about 
decision’s consequences may also be recovered. 
The second task is to make the decision. This task is 
going to be performed based on similar context decisions 
recovered in the previous step. 
Then, the third task is to record the cognitive process that 
occurred while making the decision. Record it means to store 
context information, associated with the business process 
activities, in OM, in order to be available for future research. 
The fourth and last task occurs some time later because it 
records decision’s result. As decision consequences are also 
context information, they will be stored in OM, so it might 
be recovered later. 
C. Application Scenario 
A model was built with some classes focusing on 
decision’s result, as shown in Fig. 4. These classes came 
from responses from a case study participant, in order to 
illustrate how recording activity steps must be performed. 
Whenever the worker carries out a decision-making 
activity, a reasoner (search engine) would compare recorded 
scenarios (in OM) with the one the worker is reporting or he 
is living at that time. The worker could choose from which 
context information the search engine would mine data. 
Regarding the example shown in Fig. 4, he could choose to 
retrieve information from OM using criterion "lowest price" 
or issues related to suppliers’ selection and hiring. However, 
as decision result he reported was unsuccessful and he was 
dissatisfied with it, he would prefer to recover decisions 
which result was successful or even where Expectation was 
“Above” or Satisfaction_Degree was “Satisfied”. Then, the 
reasoner would recover decisions records where the scenario 
matches. 
Then, based on the information about past decisions 
recovered, the worker would carry out the second task of this 
activity. By recovering the OM, the worker would be able to 
analyze recorded events which context information is similar 
to the one he lives or he reported. It is going to support him 
to make his own decision. He would analyze these events 
and realize that the criterion chosen was not good. The 
research result would indicate that the selection and 
contracting of suppliers must be based on technical, 
professional and ethical criteria, but not only on price. 
However, in this case, he would not be able to use another 
criterion because this one was a legal requirement. Even so 
he could look for decisions that have used this same criterion 
to learn how they avoided or even eliminated the risk of 
getting a poor quality service or product. He could realize 
that some people bypassed this risk by specifying a technical 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

requirement. Afterwards finishing his analysis he would 
finally make the decision. 
Immediately after, he would accomplish the third task 
registering how he thought to make that decision. He would 
provide information about the issue to be decided, such as its 
goal, the fact or indication that led to the need to make that 
decision and the constraint imposed to its resolution. Next, 
he would report the alternative selected, as well as the 
advantages and disadvantages of performing such an option 
and the risk of carrying this option out. He would also report 
how this alternative influenced on the decision, the resources 
used and its goal. Afterwards, he would report each one 
considered, but rejected alternatives, reporting the same type 
of information reported in the alternative chosen. Afterwards 
these pieces of information would be stored in OM. 
After a while the worker could report context information 
about the result of his decision. He could classify if the result 
was successful or not, how it met his expectations and how 
pleased he was with it. He could also report its consequences 
and indicate if it was positive or negative. These are 
important information because there could be cases where 
only good results matter. Or even, there could be a working 
group interested in unsuccessful events results, in order to 
identify theirs reasons to avoid theirs recurrence. The model 
shown in Fig. 4 illustrates an example of unsuccessful 
decision. By analyzing its decision’s result, we could realize 
that legal requirement hindered suppliers’ selection and 
hiring process. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In our research, we have discussed that decision-making 
process description can be considered an important context 
information 
to 
support 
future 
decision-making, 
and 
consequently to improve business process. We proposed a 
meta-model to represent cognitive decision-making process 
and a set of guidelines to support workers creating instances 
of it. 
This paper presents an extension of this model that 
improves the results obtained before, after the instantiated 
decisions. The goal was to show how this information could 
be used in practice. In this sense, new case studies have 
provided information about decision consequences within 
the process. This result worked as basis to build a scenario 
that described contextual information possible usage. 
We concluded that ontology instances associated with the 
business process activities might allow the identification of 
correlation between a decision made and a process outcome. 
This is a first step towards the effective use of this 
information as context to promote learning among 
participants and process improvement. However, the 
decision-making cognitive meta-model as a whole is quite 
complex and in many cases reflects subjectivity and 
individuality. This is an important issue to be deepened, so 
that it can be addressed in our proposal more effectively. 
This paper contribution is the possibility to concentrate 
all related information about decision-making cognitive 
process at a unique meta-model, which can be instantiated 
anytime to register decisions, transforming tacit into explicit 
knowledge, exteriorization. Once meta-model’s instances 
were crated it can also be used to promote OL by 
transforming explicit into tacit knowledge, internalization.  
Knowledge spiral model [14] can be completed even if there 
is no computational support to automatize recording and 
retrieving. 
We can also observe that a clear limitation of this 
proposal is the computational support requirement to help 
identifying similarities among the ontology instances. This 
feature would make possible to deal with processes that have 
a big number of cases to be analyzed. 
In our future work, we are going perform more case 
studies at companies where the most relevant decisions-
making processes are mapped, and evaluate the models 
generated in real situations where we presume people will 
learn with them. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Brézillon, P., Context in problem solving: a survey Source, 
The Knowledge Engineering Review, vol. 14, no. 1 (1999), 
pp. 47-80. 
[2] Suchman, L.A., Plans and Situated Actions: The Problems of 
Human 
Machine 
Interaction. 
Cambridge: 
Cambridge 
University Press, 1987. 
[3] Yigitcanlar, T., Research Monograph: Constructing online 
collaborative environmental decision making systems. QUT 
Digital 
Repository: 
http://eprints.qut.edu.au/26262/. 
[retrieved: June, 2012]. 
[4] Steyvers, M., Lee, M.D. and Wagenmakers, E., A Bayesian 
analysis of human decision-making in bandit problems, 
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, vol. 53, Issue 3 (2009), 
pp. 168-179. 
[5] Montibeller, G.N., Belton, V., Ackermann, F. and Ensslin, L., 
Reasoning maps for decision aid: an integrated approach for 
problem-structuring and multi-criteria evaluation, Journal of 
the Operational Research Society, vol. 59, no. 5 (2007) , pp. 
575-589. 
[6] Kingston, R., Carver, S., Evans, A. and Turton, I., Web-Based 
Public Participation Geographical Information Systems: An 
Aid To Local Environmental Decision-Making. Computers, 
Environment and Urban Systems. vol. 24, no.2 (2000), pp. 
109-125. 
[7] Kwan, M. and Balasubramanian, P., Knowledge Scope: 
managing knowledge in context. Decision Support Systems, 
vol.35 no.4 (2003), pp.467-486. 
[8] Lima G., and Borém A., Interfaces between information 
science and cognitive science. Ci. Inf. vol.32, no.1 (2003), 
pp.77-87. 
[9] Maximiano 
A.C.A., 
Introduction 
to 
administration 
- 
Introdução à administração (in Portuguese), Atlas, São Paulo, 
1995. 
[10] Nunes V.T., Santoro F.M. and Borges R.B., A Context-based 
Model for Knowledge Management embodied in Work 
Processes. Information Sciences vol.179, no. 15 (2009), pp. 
2538-2554. 
[11] Menzel, M., Schönherr, M., Nimis, J., and Tai, St., (MC²)²: A 
Generic Decision-Making Framework and its Application to 
Cloud Computing, In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Cloud Computing and Virtualization (CCV 
2010), Singapore, vol. 1, pp. 287-296, 2010. 
[12] McMurray, 
A.R., 
Three 
Decision-making 
Aids: 
Brainstorming, Nominal Group, and Delphi Technique. Jr. of 
Nursing Staff Development, 1994. vol. 10, no.2, pp. 62-65. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[13] Pereira A.C.T.D. and Santoro F.M., Cognitive Decision-
Making Process as Context Information, In Proceedings of the 
2010 Conference on Bridging the Socio-technical Gap in 
Decision Support Systems: Challenges for the Next Decade, 
Ana Respício, Frédéric Adam, Gloria Phillips-Wren, Carlos 
Teixeira, and João Telhada (Eds.). IOS Press, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands, The Netherlands, pp 346-357 (2010a). 
[14] Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, H., The knowledge-creating 
company, New York: Oxford University Press, 1995. 
[15] Pereira, A.C.T.D. and Santoro, F.M., A Case Study on the 
Representation 
of 
Cognitive 
Decision-Making 
within 
Business Process, In Proceedings of the EWG-DSS Workshop 
on Descison Systems, F.Dargam, B.Delibasic, J.E.Hernández, 
S.Liu, R.Ribeiro, P.Zaraté (editors), pp. 25, London, 2011. 
[16] Sternberg, R.J., Cognitive psychology, 6th Edition, Belmont: 
Cengage Learning, 2011. 
[17] Steiger, D.M. and, Steiger, N.M., Discovering a Decision 
Maker’s Mental Model with Instance-Based Cognitive 
Mining: A Theoretical Justification and Implementation, 
Interdisciplinary Journal of Information, Knowledge, and 
Management, vol. 4, no.5 (2009), pp-1-22. 
[18] Roy, B., Decision science or decision-aid science?, European 
Journal of Operational Research, vol. 64, no. 66 (1993), pp. 
184-203. 
[19] Rowlands, M.. The body in mind: understanding cognitive 
processes, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999. 
[20] Santoro, F.M., Brézillon, P. and Araujo, R.M., Management 
of shared context dynamics in software design. Proceedings 
of 9th International Conference on CSCW in Design 
(CSCWD-2005), Coventry University, IEEE, vol. 1, pp. 134-
139, 2005. 
[21] Simon, H.A. and Newell, A., Human Problem Solving, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ., Prentice Hall, 1972. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Instance Cognitive Meta-Model Decision-Making Result 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

