Refining Receptive Field Estimates using Natural Images for Retinal Ganglion Cells 
Philip Vance, Gautham P. Das, Dermot Kerr and 
Sonya A. Coleman 
School of Computing and Intelligent Systems, 
University of Ulster at Magee, 
Londonderry, N. Ireland. 
email: {p.vance, g.das, d.kerr, sa.coleman}@ulster.ac.uk 
Thomas M. McGinnity 
School of Science and Technology 
Nottingham Trent University, 
Nottingham, United Kingdom. 
email: martin.mcginnity@ntu.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract—Determining the structure and size of a retinal 
ganglion cell’s receptive field is critically important when 
formulating a computational model to describe the relationship 
between stimulus and response. This is commonly achieved 
using a process of reverse correlation through stimulation of the 
retinal ganglion cell with artificial stimuli (for example bars or 
gratings) in a controlled environment. It has been argued 
however, that artificial stimuli are generally not complex 
enough to encapsulate the full complexity of a visual scene’s 
stimuli and thus any model formulated under these conditions 
can only be considered to emulate a subset of the biological 
model. In this paper, we present an investigation into the use of 
natural images to refine the size of the receptive fields, where 
their initial location and shape have been pre-determined 
through reverse correlation. We present findings that show the 
use of natural images to determine the receptive field size 
provides a significant improvement over the standard approach 
for determining the receptive field. 
Keywords- receptive field; retinal ganglion cell; retina; vision 
system; natural images. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Vision begins when light is projected onto the retina at the 
back of the eye. It filters down through a complex layered 
organisation of cells consisting of photoreceptors, horizontal 
cells, bipolar-cells, amacrine cells and finally retinal ganglion 
cells. The Retinal Ganglion Cell (RGC) is the last point of 
contact within the retina before information is transferred to the 
visual cortex for higher processing. This makes the retina an 
ideal biological system to model, as visual stimuli that impact 
on the brain’s signal processing   may be controlled while 
physiological information can be recorded simultaneously 
from multiple ganglion cells through the use of a multi-
electrode array [1]. 
Each RGC has a Receptive Field (RF) that is defined as the 
area of sensory space (photo-receptors), which when 
stimulated, elicits a response. In reality, the general shape of a 
RF is irregular [2] though it is commonly approximated to be 
either circular [3] or elliptical with a 2D Gaussian spatial 
profile [4][5].  
Identifying a RF in terms of its shape, size and location is 
critical in retinal modelling, as it is the first step in formulating 
a model that describes the relationship between stimulus and 
response. Mapping the RF is commonly carried out using a 
technique known as reverse correlation [5]–[9]. This method 
determines the size, location and shape of the RF by 
stimulating the retina with artificial stimuli and analysing the 
correlation between the stimulus and output response. For 
instance, in [3], spot, annulus, and grating patterns are used to 
determine the size and location of the receptive field while 
other techniques use spatio-temporal checkerboard data [10], 
[11].  
The drawback of determining the receptive field in this way 
is that artificial stimuli are generally not complex enough to 
describe natural visual scenes [12]–[15]. As the RGC cells are 
accustomed to the natural environment, natural images may be 
a more effective source of stimulation for characterising the RF 
[12]. The use of natural images has arguably become more 
popular within the last decade and has been shown to 
emphasize responses that were not as noticeable when using 
artificial stimuli [12]. In other work, it has been demonstrated 
that RFs derived from natural image stimuli are more robust in 
generalising novel stimuli not used in their estimation [9], as 
compared to RFs derived from artificial checkerboard and 
sparsely structured short bars. 
In this paper, we present an investigation into the use of 
natural images to refine the size of a receptive field where the 
initial location and shape have been pre-determined through 
reverse correlation. The work presented uses the method 
detailed in [13], which investigates the responses of RGCs, in 
terms of their centres and surrounds, to natural images within 
rabbit RGCs. Here, we apply this method to salamander retinas 
and measure its performance with the popular Linear-
Nonlinear (LN) cascade approach. We report on the effect of 
the determined surround area and provide supporting 
quantitative evidence of the benefits of using natural images as 
opposed to artificial stimuli.  
Section II provides an overview of the experimental 
procedure used for the physiological experiments for both the 
artificial and natural image presentations. The receptive field 
estimation following data collection is outlined in Section III 
with an overview of how the spatial size is determined for the 
centre and surround. Results stemming from the use of this 
method are presented in Section IV with a conclusion and 
future work in Section V.  
II. 
PHYSIOLOGICAL EXPERIMENT OVERVIEW 
Retinas were isolated from dark adapted adult axolotl tiger 
salamanders similar to the approach in [1][16], where the retina 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

is cut in half, with each half placed, cell-side down, onto a 
multi-electrode array to record cell activations in response to 
presentation of varying stimulus inputs. The stimulus was 
projected onto the isolated retina using a miniature display 
coupled with a lens that de-magnifies the image and focuses it 
onto the photoreceptor layer. Sampled at 10 KHz, the recorded 
spikes were sorted off-line and spike times were measured 
relative to the beginning of the stimulus presentation. 
Both artificial and natural image stimulation were utilised in 
these experiments. The artificial stimuli consisted of spatially 
arranged checkerboard patterns with no spatial or temporal 
order. The stimulus display ran at 60Hz whilst each 
checkerboard was updated at half this rate (30Hz) meaning a 
new checkerboard pattern was presented at approximately 
33
1
3ms intervals. The dataset contained a large set of non-
repeated stimuli (258,000 samples) that are suitable to 
ascertain characteristics, such as the Spike-Triggered Average 
(STA, see below) and to ensure that a sufficient number of 
varied stimuli are presented in order to evoke cell responses. 
Natural image stimuli were obtained from the McGill 
Calibrated Colour Image Database, which includes a wide 
range of visual scenes, each with a resolution of 256 x 256 
pixels. Three hundred images were selected and arranged in a 
pseudo-random sequence and presented to the retina for 
200ms, with an inter-stimulus interval of 800ms to allow each 
cell to recover from the previous stimulus update. A total of 13 
presentations per image were carried out, with the mean 
response (per image) used for further calculations in this work. 
III. 
RECEPTIVE FIELD ESTIMATION 
In all, recordings for 49 RGCs were considered for 
determining the size and location of the receptive field (RF) for 
each RGC. Of these, 5 were classified as ON type cells by 
examining the shape of their temporal profiles [8][17][18], 
whilst the remaining exhibited temporal profiles similar to 
OFF type cells. Typically, the standard approach to estimating 
the size, shape and location of the RF is carried out using 
artificial checkerboard stimuli through a process of reverse 
correlation which is unsuitable for use with natural images 
[13][15].  
A. Receptive-Field Estimation using Checkerboard Stimuli 
Reverse correlation (also known as spike-triggered 
averaging) is the process of determining how cell activation is 
elicited through the study of how a sensory neuron sums 
stimuli that it receives at different times. The retina is 
stimulated with the spatio-temporal checkerboard stimuli; cell 
activations are recorded and used to calculate the average 
stimulus preceding a spike known as the STA [8]. Singular 
Value Decomposition (SVD) is then used to isolate the spatial 
component of the STA across time [19]. The process of 
defining the centre, size and shape of the RF is then 
accomplished by fitting a two-dimensional Gaussian function 
to the separated spatial component. 
B. Refining RF Estimation using Natural Images 
The use of natural images to determine the size of the RF 
is based on a technique detailed in [13] as the physiological 
experiments are similar to the experimental procedure outlined 
in Section II. Alternative methods involve data manipulation 
during the experimental procedure [9][14], which doesn’t align 
well with the presented approach. The aim is to utilise this 
approach to refine the predefined size of the 2D fitted Gaussian 
function. The method outlines a two-stage process that first 
determines the centre of the RF followed by the estimation of 
the surround with natural image stimuli.  
1) Centre Estimation 
In [13], centre estimation is performed through a series of 
estimated centre sizes and their cross-correlation with the cell’s 
response. Here, a range of assumed centre sizes are projected 
while retaining the original shape of the 2D Gaussian fitted 
function. 
 
Figure 1. Series of guessed centre sizes for the RF. 
Figure 1 depicts this process where a small subsample of 
estimates is demonstrated. In this example, the white disc 
represents the estimated centre size whilst the grey disc (in 
respect to this work) represents the original determined size of 
the RF through the reverse correlation technique. The black 
disc relates to the actual surround size, which will be further 
explained in the next section. For each estimated centre size, 
the mean contrast is calculated as: 
 
 
(1) 
where 𝑀𝑐 is the mean intensity of the centre region and 𝑀𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑦 
is the mean intensity of the entire image. A cross-correlation 
coefficient for each centre size is determined by: 
 
 
(2) 
where 𝐶𝑐 and 
 are the centre mean contrast for an individual 
image and mean of centre mean contrasts for all images 
respectively. A cell’s response to an image is denoted by 𝑟 
(which is the cell’s recorded neural response as defined in the 
experimental setup, Section II) whilst  is the mean of a cell’s 
response to all images. The cross-correlation coefficient 
essentially looks for a relationship between the centre mean 
contrast and the output response. As ON type cells respond to 
high contrast values [20] this coefficient should rise in 
proportion to the increase in the estimated centre size, until a 
point where the centre starts to be influenced by what should 
be the beginning of the surround area that adds inhibition. 
Conversely, OFF type cells are influenced by low contrast. 
This defines an inverse relationship between the cross-
correlation 
coefficient 
and 
centre 
mean 
contrast. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Consequently, the resulting shape of the curves can be a U or 
inverted U shape for OFF and ON cells respectively as shown 
in Figure 2. The three coefficients plotted (for both OFF and 
ON type cells) represent the calculated values for the example 
three centre sizes estimated depicted in Figure 1. The estimated 
centre size is determined as the size that provides the maximum 
correlation for the ON-cell and maximum inverse correlation 
for the OFF-cell. 
 
Figure 2. Example plot of the cross-correlation coefficient against the assumed 
centre size for both an a) ON and b) OFF cell.  
2) Surround Estimation 
Similarly to calculating the centre size, the approach to 
calculating the surround size begins with a series of estimated 
surrounds in the form of annuluses. The first estimate begins at 
the edge of the calculated centre size from the previous 
example as shown in Figure 3 where the grey disc represents 
the newly defined centre size, the black disc represents the 
perceived surround size whilst the white annulus represents a 
positional estimate for the surround architecture. 
 
Figure 3. Example of positional estimates for the surround architecture starting 
closest to the newly defined centre region (A) and expanding to the perceived 
outer region (C). 
The surround mean contrast is calculated as in Eq.1 with one 
amendment that replaces the mean centre intensity (𝑀𝑐) with 
the surround mean intensity (𝑀𝑠). Given that the response for 
a cell is predominantly attributed to the stimulation of the 
centre region [8][19][21], a different approach is required to 
determine the effect of each surround annulus. Computing the 
effect of each annulus requires that a selection of images is 
found that contain very similar centre mean contrast values. 
For this selection, it can be assumed that the variance in 
response, upon subtracting the mean, can be attributed to the 
surround. Fitting this response as a function of the surround 
mean contrast and taking the slope of the best fit line is 
considered to represent the effect of the annulus. Upon 
calculating the effect for several different annuluses, it is 
plotted and fitted against the position of the surround annulus. 
Figure 4 indicates the type of curves evident for a well behaved 
ON type cell and OFF type cell, respectively. 
Not all cells conform to this characteristic curve and in 
such cases, this technique in determining the size of the 
surround annulus cannot be performed with confidence. For 
cells that do conform, the first position that shows weak 
inhibition (A) determines where the surround begins. A 
further increase in inhibition is then perceived for every 
concurrent estimated annulus until it reaches a turning point 
(B) where maximum inhibition is evident. Inhibition to the 
cell’s response is then gradually decreased for further 
positional estimations until it reaches the point of providing 
no inhibition to the cell’s response (C). 
 
Figure 4. Characteristic curve fitted through the estimated annulus positions for 
an a) ON type cell and b) OFF type cell. The size of the annulus is determined 
by the distance from A to C.  
As the effect of the surround has no longer any contribution, 
this is considered the end of the surround. Thus, the size of 
the surround is determined by the distance from position A – 
C. Where there is a differential between the end of the centre 
region and the beginning of the surround (as happens in some 
cases), the stimuli in this area are not considered to be 
contributory to either the cell’s activation or inhibition and 
are ignored. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
To benchmark each model’s performance, a standard LN 
cascade model is implemented, which uses stimulus values 
from each approach in turn. The LN model is a popular method 
of estimating the output firing rate of a neuron by applying the 
input to a linear temporal filter followed by a static non-linear 
transformation [8][22]. For the results presented in this section, 
we perform a number of different experiments that first 
determine the effect of the surround (if any) followed by a 
comparison between the newly defined centres and the 
predefined centres (using reverse correlation) considering the 
effectiveness of the model fit. In the case of the predefined 
centres, a Gaussian smoothing function is also applied to the 
input stimulus, which accentuates the contrast levels within the 
visual scene [23] representing the processing that occurs 
between photo-receptors and RGCs. The specific parameters 
for this method are obtained through the reverse correlation 
technique thus they are dependent on the predefined centre 
size. As a result, this technique was not directly transferable to 
the natural image method.  
A. Estimated Centres 
The pre-defined size and shape is estimated as a 2D Gaussian 
distribution and given by: 
 
 
 
          (3) 
where 𝐳 is the 2D spatial coordinates,   is the centre of the RF  
and 
is the covariance matrix that defines the RF [7]. 
Manipulating this function allowed scaling of the RF while 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

retaining the centre and shape. For this study, RGCs close to 
the edge of the image whose predefined RF area extended past 
the 256 x 256 confines of the visual scene were ignored.  
Figure 5 shows a subsample of the resulting curves for two 
OFF and ON type cells. We found that just over half of all cells 
conformed to this characteristic ‘U’ shape. Cells that did not 
exhibit this irregular bell shaped description of the effect of the 
centre were considered unclassifiable as the correct centre size 
could not be determined with certainty. 
 
Figure 5. Subsample of characteristic curves for both ON and OFF type cells 
where the cross correlation coefficient is plotted vs. the assumed centre size for 
four different cells. 
B. Estimated Surrounds 
For the calculated centres of each cell considered, a number 
of annuluses of defined widths were formed for the surround 
estimation. We found that in most cases, the surround extended 
far beyond what we had initially estimated with a good 
proportion of the expected sizes extending beyond the visual 
scene. An example curve fit (3rd order polynomial), shown for 
cell 43, is displayed in Figure 6 where the maximum positional 
estimation failed to cross the zero threshold again. In these 
cases, we extrapolated the point at which the surround ends by 
computing the roots of the fitted polynomial.  
To illustrate the extent by which the surround occupies the 
visual scene, consider Figure 7 where both the centre and 
surround are indicated for both techniques. It is noticeable that 
the RF centre calculated via the reverse correlation method (red 
ellipse) is smaller than the defined centre using natural images. 
The surround (enclosed by blue ellipses) is quite large and 
expands close to the border of the visual scene. In many cases, 
the surround extended past the border and as a result, cells of 
this nature were excluded from the investigation.  
C. Effect of Surround 
In the literature, the surround is considered to have a weak 
to non-existent effect on a cell’s response [13][21]. Testing this 
theory for the axolotl tiger salamander RGC involved the use 
of the LN model with an input stimulus consisting of a 
combination of the centre values and varying contributions of 
the surround. We also evaluated the model with both the mean 
intensity and mean contrast values. Table 1 shows results for 
the RF presented in Figure 7 displaying the Root Mean 
Squared Error (RMSE) evaluation of the model fit. It is evident 
from these results that the RGC takes no contribution from the 
surround area given the proportional relationship between the 
RMSE and surround contribution, as is noted in the literature. 
Also apparent is the improvement in RMSE using the mean 
contrast values over the mean intensity. We found this to be the 
case for all cells evaluated with respect to the surround 
contribution. 
 
Figure 6. Characteristic curve of the effect of the surround for cell 43. 
 
Figure 7. Depiction of newly defined centre and surround for cell 43. Original 
spatial RF is enclosed with red ellipse whilst the newly defined surround is 
denoted with two blue ellipses. 
TABLE 1. EFFECT OF SURROUND FOR CELL 43 
Surround 
Contribution 
% 
Mean 
Intensity 
Mean 
Contrast 
RMSE 
RMSE 
0 
2.40 
2.37 
20 
2.41 
2.39 
40 
2.43 
2.41 
60 
2.45 
2.41 
D. Natural Image vs. Artificial Stimuli 
Given that the surround makes a very limited contribution 
to the modelling process, only the calculated centres using the 
mean contrast values were used as a direct comparison to those 
RFs calculated through reverse correlation. In contrast to the 
results already shown for the example cell (cell 43), two cells 
that respond frequently to stimulus presentation are shown in 
Figure 8. Here, the difference is illustrated between the 
calculated and predefined centres of these two cells that were 
previously omitted due to the surround areas expanding past 
the limits of the visual scene. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 8. Calculated centres for cells 7 (left) and 14 (right). Red ellipse 
represents original spatial RF that is almost double in size of their calculated 
counterparts. 
Encircled in red, the predefined RF in both cases is almost 
twice the size of the newly calculated centres via natural image 
stimulation. In Table 2, MC represents the stimulus associated 
with the mean contrast values determined through the natural 
image approach whilst GW denotes the Gaussian weighted 
pixels associated with RFs determined through reverse 
correlation using artificial stimulus. Using MC values of newly 
defined RFs demonstrates a considerable improvement in 
terms of both the R2 and RMSE compared with the standard 
approach (GW).    
TABLE 2. RESULTS FOR LN ESTIMATES VS. REAL RESPONSE  
Cell 
Method 
R2 
RMSE 
7 
MC 
0.90 
0.88 
GW 
0.80 
1.23 
14 
MC 
0.72 
0.96 
GW 
0.68 
1.04 
41 
MC 
0.01 
2.46 
GW 
0.00 
2.58 
43 
MC 
0.20 
2.40 
GW 
0.20 
2.41 
The method used for the standard approach utilised a Gaussian 
smoothing function to pre-process the pixel values as it 
simulates 
the 
processing 
that 
occurs 
between 
the 
photoreceptors and RGC by accentuating the contrast levels of 
the visual scene. Applying this method improved the results 
somewhat for the RFs determined through artificial stimulus, 
although still not enough to have better performance than the 
newly defined centres via natural images. Cell 7, in particular, 
shows a significant increase in performance for the newly 
defined centres (MC) over the standard approach (GW). To 
this end, Figure 9 shows the error between the LN estimate and 
the real response where a discernible difference can be visually 
identified between the newly estimated RFs in Figure 9(a) and 
the standard approach Figure 9(b). Further to this, Figure 10(a) 
shows the predicted vs actual spike count for the estimated 
centres whilst Figure 10(b) refers to the original RF centres. 
The newly defined centres (Figure 10(a)) show tighter 
clustered alignment along the line of expected fit that show a 
better correlation between the real and predicted response. This 
is specifically evident for a predicted spike counts greater than 
4 when comparing both plots. 
 
Figure 9. Error plot of the difference between the LN estimate and real response 
for cell 7 that compares a) the natural image approach to refining the RF to b) 
the originally defined spatial RF determined through artificial stimuli. 
 
Figure 10. Plot showing the predicted vs. actual response for cell 7 that 
compares a) the natural image approach to refining the RF to b) the originally 
defined spatial RF determined through artificial stimuli. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this work, an investigation into the use of natural 
images to refine the size of a RF has been presented, where 
their initial location and shape have been pre-estimated 
through reverse correlation. The precision of newly estimated 
centres is quantified by analysing a standard LN cascade 
model’s ability to describe the relationship between stimulus 
and response using the newly extracted stimulus as input. 
Results from this investigation provide supporting evidence to 
preliminary results in the literature that show the use of natural 
images, to improve the estimated size, provides a significant 
improvement over spatial profiles of RFs that have been 
derived entirely from artificial stimuli. An analysis of the effect 
of the calculated surround area was performed and found to 
have little to no contribution to the overall effect on the centre 
in terms of a cell’s response. 
Due to the significant performance increase through 
modification of only the size of the RF, further study is merited 
to extend this investigation into the shape and location of the 
RF. In terms of the shape, recent studies have shown that 
focusing on sub-receptive fields (bipolar cell RFs [24]) 
provides a more accurate description of a cell’s response to 
stimulus by improving the ability to define with greater 
precision the actual shape of the  RGC RFs and this will form 
the basis of our future research. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The research leading to these results has received funding from 
the European Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7-
ICT-2011.9.11) 
under 
grant 
number 
[600954] 
(“VISUALISE”). The experimental data contributing to this 
study have been supplied by the “Sensory Processing in the 
Retina” research group at the Department of Ophthalmology, 
University of Gӧttingen as part of the VISUALISE project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Gollisch and M. Meister, “Rapid neural coding in the retina 
with relative spike latencies,” Science (80-. )., vol. 319, no. 5866, 
pp. 1108–1111, 2008. 
[2] C. Fisher and W. A. Freiwald, “Whole-agent selectivity within 
the macaque face-processing system,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A., pp. 14717-14722, 2015. 
[3] W. F. Heine and C. L. Passaglia, “Spatial receptive field 
properties of rat retinal ganglion cells,” Visual neuroscience, vol. 
28, no. 05, pp. 403–417, 2011. 
[4] J. W. Pillow et al., “Spatio-temporal correlations and visual 
signalling in a complete neuronal population,” Nature, vol. 454, 
no. 7207, pp. 995–9, 2008. 
[5] B. P. Olveczky, S. A. Baccus, and M. Meister, “Segregation of 
object and background motion in the retina.,” Nature, vol. 423, 
no. 6938, pp. 401–8, 2003. 
[6] D. Ringach and R. Shapley, “Reverse correlation in 
neurophysiology,” Cognitive Science, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 147–
166, 2004. 
[7] T. Gollisch, “Estimating receptive fields in the presence of 
spike-time jitter.,” Network, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 103–29, 2006. 
[8] E. J. Chichilnisky, “A simple white noise analysis of neuronal 
light responses.,” Network, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 199–213, 2001. 
[9] V. Talebi and C. L. Baker, “Natural versus synthetic stimuli for 
estimating receptive field models: a comparison of predictive 
robustness,” The Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 
1560–1576, 2012. 
[10] D. Bölinger and T. Gollisch, “Closed-loop measurements of iso-
response stimuli reveal dynamic nonlinear stimulus integration 
in the retina.,” Neuron, vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 333–46, 2012. 
[11] D. Takeshita and T. Gollisch, “Nonlinear spatial integration in 
the receptive field surround of retinal ganglion cells,” The 
Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 34, no. 22, pp. 7548–7561, 2014. 
[12] J. Touryan, G. Felsen, and Y. Dan, “Spatial structure of complex 
cell receptive fields measured with natural images.,” Neuron, 
vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 781–91, 2005. 
[13] X. Cao, D. K. Merwine, and N. M. Grzywacz, “Dependence of 
Retinal Ganglion Cells’ Responses to Natural Images on the 
Mean Contrasts of the Receptive-Field Center and Surround,” 
2009. 
[14] J. Rapela, J. M. Mendel, and N. M. Grzywacz, “Estimating 
nonlinear receptive fields from natural images.,” J Vis, vol. 6, no. 
4, pp. 441–74, 2006. 
[15] C. Kayser, K. P. Kӧrding, and P. Kӧnig, “Processing of complex 
stimuli and natural scenes in the visual cortex,” Current opinion 
in neurobiology, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 468–473, 2004. 
[16] J. K. Liu and T. Gollisch, “Spike-Triggered Covariance Analysis 
Reveals Phenomenological Diversity of Contrast Adaptation in 
the Retina,” PLoS Comput Biol, vol. 11, no. 7, p. e1004425, 
2015. 
[17] R. Segev, J. Puchalla, and M. J. Berry, “Functional organization 
of ganglion cells in the salamander retina.,” J. Neurophysiol., 
vol. 95, no. 4, pp. 2277–92, 2006. 
[18] D. R. Cantrell, J. Cang, J. B. Troy, and X. Liu, “Non-centered 
spike-triggered covariance analysis reveals neurotrophin-3 as a 
developmental regulator of receptive field properties of ON-
OFF retinal ganglion cells,” PLoS Comput Biol, vol. 6, no. 10, 
pp. e1000967–e1000967, 2010. 
[19] J. L. Gauthier et al., “Receptive fields in primate retina are 
coordinated to sample visual space more uniformly,” PLoS 
biology, vol. 7, no. 4, p. 747, 2009. 
[20] D. H. Hubel, Eye, brain, and vision, vol. 22. Scientific American 
Library New York, 1988. 
[21] D. K. Merwine, F. R. Amthor, and N. M. Grzywacz, “Interaction 
between center and surround in rabbit retinal ganglion cells,” 
Journal of Neurophysiology, vol. 73, no. 4, pp. 1547–1567, 
1995. 
[22] S. Ostojic and N. Brunel, “From spiking neuron models to linear-
nonlinear models,” PLoS Comput. Biol, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 
e1001056, 2011. 
[23] D. Kerr, T. McGinnity, S. Coleman, and M. Clogenson, “A 
biologically inspired spiking model of visual processing for 
image feature detection,” Neurocomputing, vol. 158, pp. 268–
280, 2015. 
[24] G. W. Schwartz et al., “The spatial structure of a nonlinear 
receptive field,” Nat. Neurosci., vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 1572–80, 
2012. 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

