Informed Virtual Geographic Environments for Knowledge Representation and
Reasoning in Multiagent Geosimulations
Mehdi Mekni
Institut National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque (INRS)
Eau Terre Environnement
Quebec city (Quebec) G1K 9A9, Canada
mmekni@gmail.com
Bernard Moulin
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering
Laval University
Quebec city (Quebec) G1V 0A6, Canada
bernard.moulin@ift.ulaval.ca
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a novel approach that
extends our Informed Virtual Geographic Environment (IVGE)
model in order to effectively manage knowledge about the
environment and support agents’ cognitive capabilities and
spatial behaviours. Our approach relies on previous well
established theories on human spatial behaviours and the
way people apprehend the spatial characteristics of their
surroundings in order to navigate and to interact with the
physical world. The main contribution of our approach is to
provide cognitive situated agents with: (1) knowledge about the
environment represented using Conceptual Graphs (CG); (2)
tools and mechanisms that allow them to acquire knowledge
about the environment; and (3) capabilities to reason about
this knowledge and to autonomously make decisions and to act
with respect to both their own and the virtual environment’s
characteristics.
Keywords-Informed
Virtual
Geographic
Environments,
Knowledge Management, Agent and Action Archetypes, Agen-
tiﬁcation of Geographic Features, Spatial Situation.
INTRODUCTION
During the last decade, the Multi-Agent Geo-Simulation
(MAGS) approach has attracted a growing interest from
researchers and practitioners to simulate phenomena in a
variety of domains including trafﬁc simulation, crowd simu-
lation, urban dynamics, and changes of land use and cover,
to name a few [3]. Such approaches are used to study
various phenomena involving a large number of simulated
actors (implemented as software agents) of various kinds
evolving in, and interacting with, an explicit description
of the geographic environment called Virtual Geographic
Environment (VGE).
A critical step towards the development of a MAGS is the
creation of a VGE, using appropriate representations of the
geographic space and of the objects contained in it, in order
to efﬁciently support the agents’ situated reasoning. Since
a geographic environment may be complex and large scale,
the creation of a VGE is difﬁcult and needs large quantities
of geometrical data that characterise the environment as well
as semantic information that qualiﬁes space.
In order to yield realistic MAGSs, a VGE must precisely
represent the geometrical information which corresponds
to geographic features. It must also integrate several se-
mantic notions about various geographic features. To this
end, we propose to enrich the VGE data structure with
semantic information that is associated with the geographic
features [13], [14], [17]. This semantic information is struc-
tured using a standard knowledge representation formalism.
Finally, we leverage such a structured knowledge represen-
tation using a novel model for knowledge management to
enhance the support of spatial behaviours of agents in multi-
agent geo-simulations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section I
provides a short survey of works on geographic environment
representation as well as on agents’ spatial behaviours,
introduces the affordance concept, presents the notion of
knowledge about the environment, and outlines its impor-
tance for spatial agents in order to let them make decisions
that take into account the characteristics of the virtual
geographic environment in which they evolve. Section II
brieﬂy summarises our IVGE computation model. Section
III introduces the concept of Environment Knowledge (EK)
and details the method that we propose to deﬁne it using
Conceptual Graphs (CGs) [22]. It also presents the envi-
ronment knowledge base along with the associated decision
making process which involves an inference engine. Section
IV provides a description of the proposed agent model and
presents patterns of spatial behaviours. To conclude, Sec-
tions V and VI illustrate and discuss, through a case study,
how environment knowledge management supports situated
agents’s spatial behaviours in virtual urban environments.
I. RELATED WORKS
A. Environment Representation
Virtual environments and spatial representations have
been used in several application domains. For example,
Thalmann et al. proposed a virtual scene for virtual hu-
mans representing a part of a city for graphic animation
84
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

purposes [4]. Donikian et al. proposed a modelling system
which is able to produce a multi-level data-base of virtual
urban environments devoted to driving simulations [25].
More recently, Shao et al. proposed a virtual environment
representing the New York City’s Pennsylvania Train Station
populated by autonomous virtual pedestrians in order to
simulate the movement of people [21]. However, since the
focus of these approaches is computer animation and virtual
reality, the virtual environment usually plays the role of a
simple background scene in which agents mainly deal with
geometric characteristics.
Despite the multiple designs and implementations of
virtual environments frameworks and systems, the creation
of geometrically-accurate and semantically-enriched geo-
graphic content is still an open issue. Indeed, research has
focused almost exclusively on the geometric and topologic
characteristics of the virtual geographic environment. How-
ever, the structure of the virtual environment description,
the optimization of this description to support large-scale
and complex geographic environments, the meaning of the
geographic features contained in the environment as well as
the ways to interact with them have received less attention.
B. Spatial Behaviours and Knowledge Management
Research on spatial behaviours investigates the processes
that take place when spatial agents representing people
or other dynamic actors orient themselves and navigate
through complex and large-scale virtual geographic environ-
ments [18]. In order to build agents that exhibit plausible
spatial behaviours with respect to their capabilities and
to the virtual environment characteristics in which they
evolve, we need to analyse humans’ spatial behaviours in the
physical world [29]. We also need to determine how spatial
agents can make decisions using knowledge provided by the
virtual environment. In this section, we present several works
related to spatial behaviours and affordances and outline
the importance of knowledge about the environment for the
support of agents’ spatial behaviours.
Several theories in the ﬁeld of human spatial behaviours
have been proposed in order to explain how people nav-
igate in the physical world, what people need to ﬁnd
their ways, and how people’s visual abilities inﬂuence their
decisions [5]. Actually, these theories point out the use
of various spatial and cognitive abilities to apprehend the
physical world in which people evolve and with which they
interact [7]. Weisman identiﬁed four classes of environmen-
tal variables that inﬂuence spatial behaviours in physical
worlds: visual access; architectural differentiation; signs to
provide identiﬁcation or directional information; and plan
conﬁguration [26]. Seidel’s study at the Dallas/Fort Worth
Airport showed that the spatial structure of the physical
environment has a strong inﬂuence on people’s spatial
behaviours [20]. Arthur and Passini introduced the term
environmental communication, arguing that the built envi-
ronment and its parts should function as a communication
device [1]. Information about the geographic environment
along with the spatial and cognitive capabilities are fun-
damental inputs to the spatial decision-making process [7].
This knowledge include information collected using percep-
tion capabilities, memorised information resulting from past
experiences, and information provided by the environment
it self [8].
Knowledge is an important asset for agents because it
allows them to reason about it and to autonomously make
informed decisions [28]. By its very nature, knowledge
is disparate and heterogeneous and can be represented in
various ways (qualitatively and quantitatively), and can be
either structured or unstructured. Knowledge usually in-
cludes information about the agent’s characteristics, as well
as about the description of the geographic environment in
which it is situated. Thus, spatial agents require knowledge
about their environment in order to reason about it, to infer
facts, and to draw conclusions which will guide them to
make decisions and to act. A number of challenges arise
when creating knowledge about the environment for spatial
agents’ decision-making, among which we mention: 1) to
represent knowledge using a standard formalism; 2) to pro-
vide agents with tools and mechanisms to allow them acquire
knowledge about the environment; and 3) to infer and to
draw conclusions and facts using premises that characterise
the geographic environment. The main reason why virtual
environments have received less interest from practitioners is
that geographic environments may be complex, large-scale,
and densely populated with a variety of geographic features.
As a consequence, formally representing knowledge about
geographic environments is usually complex and time con-
suming [27]. Another issue which needs to be addressed is
the way to allow spatial agents to acquire this knowledge
in order to autonomously make decisions. There is a need
for a knowledge management approach: (1) to represent
knowledge about geographic environments using a standard
formalism; (2) to allow spatial agents to acquire knowledge
about the environment; (3) to allow agents to reason using
knowledge about geographic environments.
II. COMPUTATION OF IVGE
In this section, we brieﬂy present our automated approach
to compute the IVGE data using vector GIS data. This ap-
proach is based on four stages: input data selection, spatial
decomposition, maps uniﬁcation, and ﬁnally the generation
of the informed topologic graph [14]. A detailed description
of the spatial decomposition and layers integration tech-
niques is provided in [12], [13], [17].
GIS Input Data Selection: The ﬁrst step of our approach
85
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

consists of selecting the different vector data sets which are
used to build the IVGE. The input data can be organized into
two categories. First, elevation layers contain geographical
marks indicating absolute terrain elevations
[14]. Second,
semantic layers are used to qualify various types of data
in space. Each layer indicates the physical or virtual limits
of a given set of features with identical semantics in the
geographic environment, such as roads or buildings.
Spatial Decomposition: The second step consists of ob-
taining an exact spatial decomposition of the input data
into cells. First, an elevation map is computed using the
Constrained Delaunay Triangulation (CDT) technique. All
the elevation points of the layers are injected into a 2D
triangulation, the elevation being considered as an attribute
of each node. Second, a merged semantics map is computed,
corresponding to a constrained triangulation of the semantic
layers. Indeed, each segment of a semantic layer is injected
as a constraint which keeps track of the original semantic
data by using an additional attribute for each semantic layer.
Map Uniﬁcation: The third step to obtain our IVGE consists
of unifying the two maps previously obtained. This phase
can be depicted as mapping the 2D merged semantic map
onto the 2.5D elevation map in order to obtain the ﬁnal
2.5D elevated merged semantics map. First, preprocessing
is carried out on the merged semantics map in order to
preserve the elevation precision inside the uniﬁed map.
Indeed, all the points of the elevation map are injected into
the merged semantics triangulation, creating new triangles.
Then, a second process elevates the merged semantics map.
Informed Topologic Graph: The resulting uniﬁed map now
contains all the semantic information of the input layers,
along with the elevation information. This map can be used
as an Informed Topologic Graph (ITG), where each node
corresponds to the map’s triangles, and each arc corresponds
to the adjacency relations between these triangles. Then,
common graph algorithms can be applied to this topological
graph, and graph traversal algorithms in particular [13].
III. FROM SEMANTIC INFORMATION TO ENVIRONMENT
KNOWLEDGE
In [15], we proposed a novel model along with a complete
methodology for the automated generation of informed
VGEs. Then, we presented our abstraction approach which
enriches and structures the description of the IVGE, us-
ing geometric, topologic and semantic characteristics of
the geographic environment. In order to represent seman-
tic information which characterises our informed virtual
environment model, we also proposed to use Conceptual
Graphs (CGs) [22]. Our aim now is to evolve the semantic
information to the level of knowledge and hence to build
a knowledge-oriented virtual geographic environment in
which spatial agents autonomously make informed deci-
sions.
Figure 1: The proposed knowledge management ap-
proach; on the left hand side, the pyramid data [11];
on the right hand side, the knowledge management
approach relying on our IVGE model and involving
a knowledge base coupled with an inference engine
to support agents’ spatial behaviours.
The process of making an informed decision has been
modelled as a pyramid built on data [11] as shown on
the left hand side of Figure 1. Data corresponds to the
transactional, incremental physical records [11]. In our
IVGE model, this data corresponds to the geometric and
geographic data provided by GIS. In and of itself this data
is not sufﬁcient to support spatial agents’ decision-making.
This data must be organized into information in order to
be useful. Information is data that has been contextualized,
categorized, often calculated (from initial data), corrected,
and usually condensed [19]. In our IVGE model, information
corresponds to the description of the IVGE resulting from
the exact spatial decomposition of the geographic environ-
ment and enhanced with semantic information. Information
often contains patterns within it and is sometimes useful for
simple spatial behaviours such as motion planning. However,
the context of these spatial behaviours can only be formed
using some knowledge. Knowledge provides the next step
of data organisation. For information to become knowledge,
the context of the information needs to include predictive
capabilities. Using predictive capabilities of knowledge, spa-
tial agents can autonomously make informed decisions. The
more complex and voluminous the underlying data sets are,
the more effort is required to progressively organise it so that
it becomes knowledge useful to the agents’ decision-making.
However, since our IVGE description is structured as a
hierarchical topologic graph resulting from the geometric,
topologic, and semantic abstraction processes, and since the
semantic information is expressed using conceptual graphs,
we are able to build knowledge about the environment to
support agents’ spatial behaviours.
A. Environment Knowledge
We deﬁne the notion of Environment Knowledge (EK)
as a speciﬁcation of a conceptualization of the environment
characteristics: the objects, agents, and other entities that
86
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

are assumed to exist in the informed virtual geographic
environment and the relationships that hold among them.
Hence, EK is a description (like a formal speciﬁcation of a
program) of the spatial concepts (geographic features) and
relationships (topologic, semantic) that may exist in a geo-
graphic environment. This description is provided by users
in order to enrich the qualiﬁcation of the geographic features
which characterise the environment. It is expressed using a
standard formalism which is close to natural language and
computer tractable.
Let us emphasize that enhancing a multi-agent geo-
simulation with EK, allows spatial agents to reason about
the characteristics of the virtual geographic environment.
Practically, EK is composed of spatial concepts (i.e., ask
queries and make assertions) and spatial relationships (i.e.,
describe actions and behaviours). Our aim is to improve
the perception-decision-action loop on which rely most
agent models. Considering Newell’s pyramid [16] which
comprises the reactive, cognitive, rational and social levels
of agent behaviours, we mainly focus on the knowledge
acquisition process in order to support the decision-making
capabilities of spatial agents. Figure 2 illustrates two ele-
ments: (1) the knowledge acquisition process, and (2) the
action archetype process, that we introduced in order to
extend Newell’s initial pyramid.
Figure 2: The enhanced perception-decision-action
loop.
The management of the environment knowledge is com-
posed of two main parts: (1) an Environment Knowledge
Base (EKB) which relies on spatial semantics represented
using the CG formalism; and (2) an Inference Engine (IE)
which allows to manipulate and to acquire environment
knowledge in order to provide spatial agents with the ca-
pability of reasoning about it.
Conceptual graphs are widely used to represent knowl-
edge [22], [23]. Actually, CGs enable us to formally repre-
sent spatial semantics characterizing our IVGE model and
allow us to build a structured Environment Knowledge Base
(EKB) based on a ﬁnite bipartite graph [24]. The EKB
allows MAGS users to represent, using a standard formalism,
the information characterizing the virtual environment as
well as the objects and agents it contains. Moreover, the
EKB enables us to explicitly specify affordances [6] in
order to support the agents spatial interactions with the
informed virtual geographic environment in which they
evolve. The environment knowledge base, which is part of
this process relies on the notion of spatial semantics. Spatial
Semantics (SS) consists of a structured, conceptualised, and
organised representation of geographic features, agents, and
objects that an informed virtual geographic environment may
contain. Spatial semantics relies on two types of nodes: se-
mantic concepts and semantic relations. Semantic concepts
represent entities such as agents, objects and zones as well
as attributes, states and events. Semantic relations represent
the relationships that hold among semantic concepts.
The environment knowledge can be constructed by assem-
bling percepts. In the process of assembly, semantic relations
specify the role that each percept plays and semantic con-
cepts represent the percepts themselves. Semantic concepts
involve two types of functions; referent and type. The
function referent maps semantic concepts to generic markers
denoted by names starting with an asterisk * or individual
markers usually denoted by numbers. For example, if the
referent is just an asterisk, as in [HOUSE : ∗], the concept
is called a generic semantic concept, which may be read as
a house or some house. The function type maps concepts to
a set of type labels. A semantic concept sc with type (sc)=
t and reference (sc)= f is displayed as [t:f]. The function
type can also be applied to relations. For example, if the
referent is a number [HOUSE:#80972], the ﬁeld to the left
of the colon contains the type label HOUSE, the ﬁeld to
the right of the colon contains the referent #80972 which
designates a particular house.
To sum up, the EKB contains knowledge about the
informed virtual geographic environment that an agent may
use. This knowledge is provided basically by users to enrich
the qualiﬁcation of the geographic features which charac-
terise the IVGE. Finally, this knowledge is structured using
semantic concepts and relations expressed using conceptual
graphs.
B. Inference Engine
Now that we have deﬁned the environment knowledge
base as a structure which contains explicit descriptions of
geographic features using CGs, let us describe the Inference
Engine (IE) which is part of our knowledge management
approach. The IE is a computer program that derives answers
from our environment knowledge base. Therefore, the IE
must be able to logically manipulate symbolic CGs using
formulas in the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus. In order to
87
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

acquire knowledge about the virtual environment, agents use
the IE and formulate queries using a semantic speciﬁcation
that is compatible with CGs. Agents interpret the answers
provided by the IE and act on the environment. They can
also enrich the EKB by adding new facts that result from
their observation of the virtual environment (Figure 3).
In this sub-section, we ﬁrst present how CGs allow us
to map knowledge about the environment into ﬁrst-order
logic formulas. Then, we provide a short survey of existing
tools that support the manipulation of CGs. We also discuss
the capabilities of these tools to provide a programming
language with CGs, related operations, and inference engine.
Finally, we present the Amine platform [9], a platform to
manipulate CGs using an inference engine embedded in
PROLOG+CG language.
Figure 3: The inference engine uses the EKB for the
purpose to answer queries formulated by agents.
Conceptual graphs offer the opportunity to map knowl-
edge about the environment into formulas in the ﬁrst-order
predicate calculus.
Using formulas in the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus, it is
possible to build tools that allow spatial agents to manipulate
knowledge about virtual environments represented using
CGs. Moreover, it is possible to build tools that allow for
logic and symbolic manipulations of environment knowledge
and provide the opportunity to infer and to predict facts or
assumptions about virtual environments. Several tools can
be used to manipulate CGs (Amine, CGWorld, CoGITaNT,
CPE, Notio, WebKB). These tools can be classiﬁed under
at least 8 categories of tools: CG editors, executable CG
tools, algebraic tools (tools that provides CG operations),
KB/ontology tools, ontology server tools, CG-based pro-
gramming languages, IDE tools for CG applications and,
agents/MAS tools. The category ”‘CG-based programming
language”’ concerns any CG tool that provides a program-
ming language with CG, related operations, and inference
engine. Only Amine belongs to this category, with its
programming language: Prolog+CG. Therefore, we propose
to use the Amine platform and Prolog+CG in order to
logically manipulate symbolic CGs and to provide spatial
agents with an inference engine that allows them to query the
environment knowledge, to acquire environment knowledge
and reason about it.
Using Amine platform, users can build an environment
knowledge base (EKB) using CGs and query the Amine’s
inference engine (IE) to derive new knowledge from the
content of the EKB using queries. The Amine platform
provides a graphic user interface to support the manipulation
of the EKB. Agents are able to send queries, during the
simulation process, in order to acquire the knowledge they
need to make a decision, using the Prolog+CG language
which is provided by the Amine platform. These queries
are processed by the IE which interrogates the EKB and
sends back the response to agents.
In order to illustrate such a querying process, let us
consider the following simple environment knowledge, com-
posed of a set of two facts which provide an idea of the use
of conceptual structures as a Prolog+CG data structure:
cg([Man:Mehdi]←agnt-[Study]-loc→[University]).
cg([Man:Mehdi]←agnt-[Play]-obj→[Soccer]).
And the following request: ”‘Which actions are done by Man
Mehdi ?”’
?- cg([Man:Mehdi]←agnt-[x]).
The answer provided by the Amine platform using its
Prolog+CG inference engine is:
x = Study;
x = Play;
Now that we introduced the main parts of our environment
knowledge management approach, namely EKB and IE, we
detail in the following section the notions of agent and
action archetypes and the way we use them to build spatial
behaviours.
IV. FROM ENVIRONMENT KNOWLEDGE TO SPATIAL
BEHAVIOURS
When dealing with MAGS involving a large number of
spatial agents of various kinds, the speciﬁcation of their
attributes and associated spatial behaviours might be com-
plex and time and effort consuming. In order to characterise
our spatial agents, we propose to specify: (1) the agent
archetype, its super-types and sub-types according to the
semantic type hierarchy; (2) the agent category (such as
actor, object, and spatial area); and (3) the agent spatial
behavioural capabilities, including moving within the IVGE
content, perception of the IVGE and of other spatial agents.
In the following subsections we discuss these elements.
A. Agent Archetypes
In our environment knowledge management approach, the
description of agents as well as objects and geographic
features (spatial areas and zones) is enriched with semantic
information. This means that these spatial agents belong to a
semantic type hierarchy. Using the semantic type hierarchy
allows us to take advantage of inheritance mechanisms.
Hence, when modelling a MAGS involving a large number
88
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

of agents, we only need to specify the attributes that are
associated with the highest-level types of agents that we
call agent archetypes rather than repeatedly specifying them
for each lower-level agents. Let us deﬁne the Prolog+CG
rule used to build a semantic type-hierarchy as follows:
Supertype > Subtype1, Subtype2, ..., SubtypeN.
Below is an example of a portion of semantic type-lattice
expressed in Prolog+CG whose graphical representation is
provided in Figure 4. Note how each line conforms to the
rule given above: Entity > Physical, Abstract.
Physical > Object, Process, Property.
Object > Animate, Inanimate.
Animate > Human, Animal, Plant.
We now explain this example. The example starts at the top
of the lattice with Entity. This super-type is then declared
to have two immediate sub-types: Physical, and Abstract.
The Abstract node is not associated with any subtype, and
so remains a leaf node. The Physical node is given three
immediate subtypes: Object, Process, Property, each of them
being associated with subtypes. These subtypes may also
have subtypes, and so on down the lattice.
Another important characteristic of agent archetypes is
the multi-inheritance property which allows an agent type
to belong to two (or several) different agent archetypes and
hence to inherit from their characteristics. Let us consider
the following example:
Adult > Woman, Man.
Young > Girl, Boy.
Female > Woman, Girl.
Male > Man, Boy.
Let us notice that Woman occurs at several places. This
is allowed, as long as there is no circularity (i.e., as long
as a type is not speciﬁed to be a subtype of itself) whether
immediately or indirectly.
There is a fundamental difference between an archetype
on the one hand, and instances of that type on the other hand.
For example, while SchoolBus is an archetype, SchoolBus1
and SchoolBus2 are instances of that archetype. Instances
are members of the group of entities which is named by the
archetype. The archetype is the name of the group.
In Prolog+CG, we have two ways of saying that a type has
an instance: (1) we can simply declare it as an individual
in the referent of some CG; (2) we can declare it at the
top of the program in a catalog of individuals. A catalog of
individuals for a given type is written as follows:
Archeype = Instance1, Instance2, ..., InstanceN.
B. Action Archetypes
Since our research addresses the simulation of spatial
behaviours, it has been inﬂuenced by some basic tenets of
Figure 4: A graph of Semantic Type Lattice with in-
stances attached to agents archetypes (circle shapes).
activity theory [2]. In particular, our approach to manage
environment knowledge rests on the commitments in activity
theory that: (1) activities are directed toward objects, zones,
or actors [10]; (2) activities are hierarchically structured;
and (3) activities capture some context-dependence of the
meaning of information [2];
Theoretically, the common philosophy between our ap-
proach and activity theory is a view of the environment from
the perspective of an agent interacting with it. Practically,
we borrowed from activity theory two main ideas: (1) the
semantics of activities and objects are inseparable [10]; and
(2) activities, objects as well as agents are hierarchically
structured [2].
We deﬁne an action archetype as a pattern of activities
which are associated with agent archetypes. Hence, an action
archetype describes a situation which involves one or several
agent archetypes. We deﬁne an action archetype as a lattice
of actions.
V. CASE STUDY: HUMAN AGENTS TAKING BUSES
In this section, we present a case study that illustrates how
the IVGE model and the proposed knowledge management
approach are used in practice. This case study aims to illus-
trate how spatial agents representing humans leverage the
environment knowledge management approach that we pro-
pose. In order to acquire knowledge about the environment
and to reason about it, spatial agents apprehend the virtual
environment and make decisions according to their types
and capabilities and taking into account its characteristics.
In this example, a few human agents representing students
and workers interact with the IVGE and our EKB in order to
plan their path using a bus to get to their ﬁnal destinations
(university and ofﬁce). This case study also involves a few
agents representing bus stations.
89
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

Figure 5: The IVGE representing a part of Quebec
city where the spatial behaviour simulation takes
place with ﬁve geo-referenced locations.
Let us consider three agent archetypes: Bus, Student, and
Worker and several action archetypes including STOP, GO,
GETIN, WALK and ROLL. The Bus archetype represents
the different kinds of buses including city buses, school
buses, etc. The Student archetype includes schoolchildness,
pupils, students, etc. The Worker archetype represents work-
ing persons. This case study involves an informed vir-
tual geographic environment representing a part of Quebec
City (Figure 5). An environment knowledge base (EKB) is
created using the Amine platform. In this EKB, we ﬁrst
speciﬁed the different semantic information that qualify our
virtual urban environment. Second, we speciﬁed the above
introduced agent archetypes namely, BUS, STUDENT, and
WORKER. Two IVGE instances are speciﬁed: (1) HUMAN-
NAV representing a view of the IVGE including the different
geographic zones on which an agent of type human can
move;(2) VEHICLENAV representing a view of the IVGE
including the different geographic zones on which an agent
of type vehicle can move. Besides, we specify the following
facts: students and workers use buses to respectively reach
universities and work places; humans walk on human navi-
gable zones; vehicles roll on vehicle navigable zones; buses
stop at stations.
In addition, two instances of buses, two instances of
stations, and two instances of destinations are deﬁned: Bus1,
Bus2, Station1, Station2, w, and u . Bus1 which stops at
station1 goes to the workplace w. Bus2 which stops at
station2 goes to the university u.
cg([BUS: Bus1]←agnt-[GO]-loc→[WORKPLACE:w]).
cg([BUS: Bus2]←agnt-[GO]-loc→[UNIVERSITY: u]).
cg([BUS: Bus1]←agnt-[Stop]-loc→[STATION: Station1]).
cg([BUS: Bus2]←agnt-[Stop]-loc→[STATION: Station2]).
Now that the agent archetypes are speciﬁed, and the facts
which characterise their instances are deﬁned, we carry out
the simulation in which two agents of type student and three
agents of type worker interact with the IVGE in which they
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: Stations, student and worker passengers,
and buses: (a) 3 students and 2 workers agents (green
icon); (b) 4 agents of type Bus approaching the
stations. Agents either students, workers, or buses
are associated with their respective perception ﬁelds
which are highlighted in blue.
evolve in order to localise the appropriate station from which
they can catch the right bus to reach their ﬁnal destinations.
For simpliﬁcation purposes, agents of type bus follow a
pre-deﬁned computed paths (Figure 6(b)). Agents of type
student and worker start by identifying their own locations
within the IVGE. Next, they interrogate the EKB in order
to know which bus they should take in order to reach their
ﬁnal destinations (Figure 6(a)). The student agent asks the
following query: which bus goes to the university?
?- cg([?]←agnt-[GO]-loc→[UNIVERSITY]).
90
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

The answer provided by the Amine platform is: x = Bus2;
Then, the student agent asks the following query: where
does Bus2 stop at?
?- cg([BUS: Bus2]←agnt-[STOP]-loc→[?]).
The answer provided by the Amine platform is: x =
Station2;
Once the answer is provided by the Amine platform,
agents plan paths using this semantic description. Agents
move towards the appropriate bus station, then wait for
the bus (Figure 6(b)). Since our agents are endowed with
perception capabilities, they are able to detect when a bus
arrives at the station. The agent bus is also endowed with
the same spatial capabilities and waits at the station until all
the agents get in it.
VI. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, we presented a knowledge management ap-
proach which aims to provide spatial agents with knowledge
about the environment in order to support their autonomous
decision making process. Our approach is inﬂuenced by
some basic tenets of activity theory [2] as well as by the
notion of affordance [6]. It is based on our IVGE model
to represent complex and large-scale geographic environ-
ments. It uses the Conceptual Graphs formalism to represent
knowledge about the environment(Environment Knowledge)
structured as an Environment Knowledge Base (EKB). This
approach also includes an inference engine which uses
the Prolog+GC language to interrogate, infer and make
deductions based on facts, cases, situations, and rules stored
within the EKB.
Our environment knowledge management approach is
original in various aspects. First, a multi-agent geo-
simulation model which integrates an informed virtual geo-
graphic environment populated with spatial agents capable
of acquiring and reasoning about environment knowledge
did not exist. Second, a formal representation of knowl-
edge about the environment using CGs which leverages a
semantically-enriched description of the virtual geographic
environment has not yet been proposed. Third, providing
agents with the capability to reason about a contextualised
description of their virtual environment during the simula-
tion is also an innovation that characterises our approach.
Nevertheless, some limits which characterise our envi-
ronment knowledge management approach still need to be
addressed. This approach, in its current version, is a proof
of concept which demonstrates the capability of our IVGE
model to : 1) integrate knowledge about the environment; 2)
to allow agents to reason about it using an inference engine.
Although the provided scenario is simpliﬁed, it illustrates
the advantages of extending our IVGE model by: 1) using
a standard knowledge representation formalism (Conceptual
Graphs) and; 2) integrating an inference engine such as the
Amine platform.
When the agent is acting, it uses the environment knowl-
edge base, its observations of the virtual environment, and
its goals and abilities to choose what to do and to update its
own knowledge. Hence, the environment knowledge base
corresponds to the agent’s long-term memory, where it
keeps the knowledge that is needed to act in the future.
This knowledge comes from prior knowledge (provided
by MAGS users) and is combined with what is learned
from data and past experiences. The beliefs, intentions and
desires of the agent correspond to its short-term memory.
Although a clear distinction does not always exist between
long-term memory and short-term memory, this issue might
be addressed as part of the extension of our knowledge
management approach. Moreover, there is feedback from
the inference engine to the environment knowledge base,
because observing and acting in the world provide more data
from which the agents can learn. Evolving and allowing the
agent model to learn from such data is another challenging
task.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
M. Mekni beneﬁted from a PDF scholarship granted by
FQRNT (Fonds Quebecois de la Recherche sur la Nature et les
Technologies) as well as from the 2011 William L. Garrison award
granted by the American Association of Geography (AAG).
REFERENCES
[1] P. Arthur and R. Passini.
Wayﬁnding: People, Signs, and
Architecture. McGraw-Hill Companies, 1998.
[2] R. Bellamy, S. Bødker, E. Christiansen, Y. Engestr¨om, V. Es-
calante, D. Holland, V. Kaptelinin, K. Kuutti, B. A. Nardi,
A. Raeithel, J. Reeves, B. Velichkovksy, and V. P. Zinchenko.
Context and Consciousness: Activity Theory and Human-
Computer Interaction. The MIT Press, ﬁrst edition, November
1996.
[3] I. Benenson and P. Torrens. Geosimulation: Automata-Based
Modeling of Urban Phenomena. John Wiley and Sons Inc.,
2004.
[4] N. Farenc, R. Boulic, and D. Thalmann.
An informed
environment dedicated to the simulation of virtual humans
in urban context.
In P. Brunet and R. Scopigno, editors,
Computer Graphics Forum (Eurographics ’99), volume 18(3),
pages 309–318. The Eurographics Association and Blackwell
Publishers, 1999.
[5] A. Frank, S. Bittner, and M. Raubal. Spatial and cognitive
simulation with multi-agent systems. In D. Montello, editor,
Spatial Information Theory - Foundations of Geographic
Information Science, Proceedings of COSIT 2001, Morro Bay,
CA, USA, September 2001, volume 2205 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 124–139, Berlin, Heidelberg, New
York, 2001. Springer.
91
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

[6] J. J. Gibson. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception.
London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1979.
[7] D. Guo, B. Ren, and C. Wang. Advances in Computation and
Intelligence, volume 5370/2008, chapter Integrated Agent-
Based Modeling with GIS for Large Scale Emergency Sim-
ulation, pages 618– 625. 2008.
[8] P. Jansen-Osmann and M. Heil.
The process of spatial
knowledge acquisition in a square and a circular virtual
environment. Advances in Cognitive Psychology, 3(3):389–
397, 2007.
[9] A. Kabbaj. Development of intelligent systems and multi-
agents systems with Amine platform. In H. Sch¨arfe, P. Hitzler,
and P. Øhrstrøm, editors, ICCS’06: Proceedings of the 14th
International Conference on Conceptual Structures, volume
4068 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 286–299.
Springer, 2006.
[10] V. Kaptelinin, B. Nardi, and C. Macaulay.
The activity
checklist: a tool for representing the ”‘space”’ of context.
Interactions Magazine, 6(4):27–39, 1999.
[11] D. Lenat and R. Guha.
Building Large Knowledge-Based
Systems; Representation and Inference in the Cyc Project.
Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA,
USA, 1989.
[12] M. Mekni. Hierarchical path planning for situated agents in
informed virtual geographic environments. In SIMUTools10:
Third International Conference on Simulation Tools and Tech-
niques, pages 15–19, Torremolinos, Malaga, Spain, March
2010.
[13] M. Mekni.
Abstraction of informed virtual geographic
environments for the modeling of large-scale and complex
geographic environments.
In The 3rd International Con-
ference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Manage-
ment (eKnow11), volume 1, pages 1–10, Gosier, Guadeloupe,
February 23-28 2011. IEEE Computer Society Press.
[14] M. Mekni and B. Moulin. Holonic modelling of large scale
geographic environments.
In HOLOMAS’09: 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Industrial Applications of Holonic and
Multi-Agent Systems, Linz, Austria, September 2007.
[15] M. Mekni and B. Moulin.
Hierarchical path planning for
multi-agent systems situated in informed virtual geographic
environments.
In eKnow10: 2nd International Conference
on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management, vol-
ume 1, pages 48–55, Sint-Marteen, Netherlands Antilles,
February 10-16, 2010. IEEE Computer Society.
[16] A. Newell. Uniﬁed theories of cognition. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1990.
[17] S. Paris, M. Mekni, and B. Moulin.
Informed virtual
geographic environments: an accurate topological approach.
In The International Conference on Advanced Geographic
Information Systems & Web Services (GEOWS), pages 1 –
6. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2009.
[18] M. Raubal.
Ontology and epistemology for agent-based
wayﬁnding simulation.
In S. Winter, editor, Geographical
Domain and Geographical Information Systems - EuroCon-
ference on Ontology and Epistemology for Spatial Data Stan-
dards, volume 19 of GeoInfo Series, pages 85–87, France,
September 2001. La Londe-les-Maures.
[19] P. S. Sajja. Multi-agent system for knowledge-based access
to distributed databases. Interdisciplinary Journal of Infor-
mation, Knowledge, and Management, 3:1–9, 2008.
[20] A. Seidel.
Way-ﬁnding in public spaces: The dallas/fort
worth, usa airport. In Proceedings of the 20th International
Congress of Applied Psychology, Edinburgh, Scotland, 1982.
[21] W. Shao and D. Terzopoulos. Environmental modeling for
autonomous virtual pedestrians. Digital Human Modeling for
Design and Engineering Symposium, 2005.
[22] J. Sowa. Knowledge Representation: Logical, Philosophical,
and Computational Foundations. Course Technology, August
1999.
[23] J. Sowa and E. Way. Implementing a semantic interpreter
using conceptual graphs.
IBM J. Res. Dev., 30(1):57–69,
1986.
[24] J. F. Sowa. Conceptual Structures: Information Processing
in Mind and Machine. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing
Co., Inc., Boston, MA, USA, 1984.
[25] R. Thomas and S. Donikian.
A model of hierarchical
cognitive map and human memory designed for reactive and
planned navigation. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Space Syntax Symposium, volume 1, pages 72–100, Londres,
2003.
[26] J. Weisman. Evaluating architectural legibility: Way-ﬁnding
in the built environment.
Environment and Behavior,
13(2):189–204, March 1981.
[27] D. Weyns, K. Schelfthout, and T. Holvoet. Exploiting a virtual
environment in a real-world application. Environments for
Multi-Agent Systems II, february 2005.
[28] M. Wooldridge and N. Jennings. Intelligent agents: Theory
and practice. Knowledge Engineering Review, 10(2), 1995.
[29] J. Zacharias. Exploratory spatial behaviour in real and virtual
environments. Landscape and Urban Planning, 78(1-2):1–13,
2006.
92
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

