Neural Computation of Perceived Relative Size and Depth in Complex 2D Image 
Configurations 
Birgitta Dresp-Langley  
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) 
UMR 7357 ICube Lab Strasbourg University 
Strasbourg, France 
e-mail: birgitta.dresp@icube.unistra.fr 
Adam Reeves 
Department of Psychology 
Northeastern University 
Boston, USA 
e-mail: a.reeves@northeastern.edu
 
 
Abstract—The neural networks of the human visual brain are 
capable of extracting 3D structure from specific 2D cues 
available in planar images. Many of the functional principles 
governing this ability are still not fully understood. Neural 
models backed by psychophysical data predict how local 
differences in either luminance contrast or physical size of 
local boundaries in 2D images may determine the perception of 
3D structure, but do not generate predictions relative to the 
role of color in this process. To further clarify the potential 
contribution of color to 3D perceptual organization, we created 
2D image configurations with multiple surface representations 
where the relative physical size of local boundaries between 
contrast regions was held constant. The only potential cues to 
3D available in the images were specific local combinations of 
color and luminance contrast. Psychophysical experiments 
with human observers were run to test for selective local effects 
on the subjective relative depth and the subjective relative size 
of image regions. It was found that response probabilities for 
subjective depth and subjective size are systematically and 
consistently determined by local surface colors and their 
immediate backgrounds. The results show consistently varying 
perceptual judgments with a statistically significant correlation 
between subjective depth and subjective size. Moreover, there 
is a color specific effect on both dependent variables, and this 
effect depends on the polarity of the immediate surround of the 
reference surface rather than local center-surround contrast 
intensity. These findings are not predicted by any of the 
current neural models and suggest that the perceptual 
mechanisms generating 3D effects from 2D visual input 
selectively exploit specific color and background cues to enable 
the intrinsically coherent 3D perceptual organization of 
otherwise ambiguous 2D images with multiple surface 
representations. 
Keywords - colour; local contrast; background intensity; 
complex images; 2D image parts; subjective size; relative depth. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Leonardo da Vinci [1] was the first to report on the 
importance of local luminance contrast as a perceptual cue to 
3D in 2D images. Contemporary neural models and 
psychophysical data predict that contrast variations across 
image parts directly determine which parts of a planar image 
will be seen as "nearer" or "further away from" the human 
observer [1] - [10]. Previous studies on functional aspects of 
mechanisms for depth perception from neural computation of 
local image contrast properties have not yet fully explored all 
the complex interactions between color, luminance, and 
general background field intensities. In the absence of other 
spatial cues to depth, it appears that specific colors in 
combination with specific contrast intensities may produce 
more powerful 3D effects than others, as suggested by results 
on perceptual figure-ground organization, for example [10] 
[1] - [14]. Moreover, variations in brightness or luminance 
displayed across two or more different surface layers in 
complex 2D multiple-surface configurations may alter these 
perceptual effects significantly [7] [14] [15], or even reverse 
them [16] [17]. This study was designed to explore some of 
such possible interactions more systematically. Complex 2D 
image configurations with carefully controlled physical 
variations in local color, luminance, general background 
intensity, and constant spatial parameters were generated for 
this purpose. The local physical size of the test and reference 
surfaces submitted to perceptual judgments was not varied 
across comparisons. Center-surround surface combinations 
within image configurations were displayed on a high 
resolution monitor in a computer controlled psychophysical 
study with human subjects completing four Two-Alternative 
spatial Forced Choice (2AFC) judgment tasks. The subjects 
had to judge which of two comparison surfaces in the 
configurations appeared "bigger" (task 1) or "nearer" (task 
3), and which of all the possible reference surfaces in a given 
configuration appeared "the biggest" (task 3) or "the nearest" 
(task 4) of all.  
In Section 2, the materials and methods used to generate 
the image configurations for this study, some of the 
characteristics of the study population, and the experimental 
task procedures are explained. Section 3 summarizes the 
principal results and discusses their implications for our 
current understanding of perceptual 3D organization from 
2D image input. Section 4 provides a conclusion in terms of 
the consistency and/or discrepancy of the findings with 
regard to current neural models of 3D perception from planar 
image input. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Image configurations were computer generated and 
displayed on a high resolution color monitor (EIZO COLOR 
EDGE CG 275W, 2560x1440 pixel resolution) connected to 
a DELL computer equipped with a high performance 
graphics card (NVIDIA). Color and luminance calibration of 
the RGB channels of the monitor was performed using the 
appropriate Color Navigator self-calibration software, which 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

was delivered with the screen and runs under Windows 7. 
RGB values here correspond to ADOBE RGB. All 
luminance levels were cross-checked with an external 
photometer (OPTICAL, Cambridge Research Systems). 
RGB coordinates, luminance parameters (cd/m2), and color 
coordinates (X, Y, Z) of the different reference surfaces in 
the image configurations from this study are given in Table 
1. 
The size of each of the square surfaces in the center of 
each of the twelve local configurations in the images was 
160x160 pixels and the size of each of the square surrounds 
was 400x400 pixels. The twelve local configurations were 
equally spaced, with 50 pixels between their surrounds, 
along the horizontal and vertical dimensions. They were 
displayed centrally on the dark and light general background 
of the 2560x1440 pixel screen. The size of a single pixel on 
the screen is 0.023 cm. 
Grey, red, and blue-green center squares on their light 
and dark immediate surrounds were presented in pairs, as 
shown in Figure 1. Their position (left, right) in a pair was 
counterbalanced between trials and subjects. Presentation on 
light and dark general backgrounds was also counterbalanced 
between trials and subjects. The subject pool consisted of 
mostly undergraduate medical students, with normal or 
corrected-to-normal vision. All of them were naïve to the 
purpose of the experiment and run in individual sessions. 
They were comfortably seated in a semi-dark room, in front 
of the EIZO monitor at  a viewing distance of about 1 meter. 
Each individual received the same standard instructions for 
the psychophysical tasks.  
In the first task, the subject had to decide which of the 
two central squares in a paired configuration (paired 
comparison) appeared to be the "bigger" one of the two. In 
the second task, the subject had to pick the central square 
from all of the twelve configurations that appeared the 
"biggest" of all (single pick). In the third task, the subject 
was instructed to judge which of the two central squares in a 
paired configuration (paired comparison) appeared to be 
"nearer" to them, and in the fourth task he/she had to pick the 
central square from all of the twelve configurations that 
appeared the "nearest" of all (single pick) to the observer. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Center-surround surface configurations on dark and light 
general backgrounds.  
The twelve local configurations shown in Figure 1 
produce subjective differences in the relative size and depth 
of the centrally displayed squares. Grey, red, and blue-green 
center squares displayed on dark and light surrounds were 
paired for the relative psychophysical judgments. Trials were 
sequenced in counterbalanced sessions producing eight 
psychophysical judgments for each paired comparison and 
single pick task, general background condition, and subject. 
Therefore, a total of 80 data was generated for each of the 
four tasks and for each of the two general background 
conditions 
The subjects who participated in this study were adult 
volunteers all naïve to the purpose of the study. We selected 
seven men and three women with normal or corrected-to-
normal vision. The experiments were non-invasive and 
conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki 
(1964) and with full approval of the corresponding author's 
host institution's (CNRS) ethical standards committee. 
Informed consent was obtained from each of the participants.   
TABLE I. COLOR AND LUMINANCE PARAMETERS 
Reference 
Surface 
 Image Luminance (L) And Color Coordinates 
R        G         B 
L 
(cd/m2) 
X        Y         Z 
Grey Center 
190    190    190 
58.6 
49.8       52.3      57.0 
Red Center 
255    0        0 
35.8 
57.7       29.7        2.7 
Blue Center 
0        205    205 
52.3 
23.1      43.5      65.7 
Dark-Grey 
Surround 
25      25      25 
2.0 
  0.6        0.6        0.6 
Light-Grey 
Surround 
240    240    240 
95.3 
83.2      87.5      95.3 
Dark-Green 
Surround 
0        50      0 
2 
0.5        1.7       0.2 
Light-Green 
Surround 
0        255    0 
78.5 
18.5       62.7      7.1 
Dark-Blue 
Surround 
0        0        70 
0.5 
1.1        0.4         5.8 
Light-Blue 
Surround 
10      10      220 
5 
13.7      5.52      71.6 
Dark General 
Background 
0        0        0 
0.5 
0        0        0 
Light General  
Background 
255    255    255 
120.0 
13.7      5.52      71.6 
 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Response probabilities for "bigger" and "nearer" 
The response probabilities (p) from the two paired 
comparison tasks (task 1, task 3) were calculated for each of 
the twelve local center-surround configurations in the order 
in which they are displayed in the first of the four general 
display-panels shown in Figure 1. A p of 1 would correspond 
to the case where a local configuration of a given pair 
produces a total number of 80 observed/80 possible 
responses for  "bigger" or for "nearer". In this case, the p 
associated with the other configuration from that pair would 
be 0. In the case a given pair produces random perceptual 
responses for "bigger" or for "nearer", the response 
probability associated with each of the two paired 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

configurations would be 0.50. In a first analysis, the twelve 
configurations were sorted as a function of the magnitude of 
the response probabilities they produced for "bigger" and 
"nearer" and plotted in ascending order for each of the two 
"general background intensity" conditions. These plots are 
shown in Figure 2. The two graphs reveal consistent p 
distributions for "bigger" and nearer" ranging from 0.10 to 
0.90 in each of the two general background conditions.  
B. Correlation between response probability 
distributions from the paired comparison tasks 
The response probability distributions from the paired 
comparison tasks were submitted to statistical correlation 
analyses (Pearson's product moment), returning statistically 
significant correlation coefficients (P), with 0.98 (p<.001) 
for "bigger" and "nearer" in the "dark general background" 
condition, and 0.99 (p<.001)  for the probability distributions 
for "bigger" and "nearer" in the "light general background" 
condition. These analyses show that the center-surround 
configurations produced a wide range of significantly 
correlated perceptual differences in relative size and depth of 
their local center surfaces.   
C. Response probabilities for "bigger" and "nearer" as a 
function of luminance contrast 
In a second analysis, the configurations were sorted as a 
function of their local contrast intensity. The luminance 
contrasts (LumC) are expressed here in terms of Weber 
Ratios, which are calculated using  
 
 
LumC= Lumcenter - Lumsurround /Lumsurround                     (1) 
 
 
The response probabilities for "bigger" and "nearer" were 
then plotted as a function of the twelve different  Weber 
contrasts of the configurations and the two general 
background conditions, shown in Figure 2. Graphs in the top 
panel show significantly correlated magnitudes of p for 
"bigger" and "nearer" produced by the twelve configurations 
on the two general backgrounds, plotted in ascending order. 
The graphs in the middle panel show p distributions as a 
function of the luminance contrast intensity (Weber ratios) of 
the twelve configurations and the general background 
conditions. The graphs in the bottom panel show p as a 
function of the local color contrast of the configurations with 
positive (+) Weber contrasts, which produced greater 
magnitudes of p for "bigger" and "nearer" in the paired 
comparison tasks. 
The data reveal that there is no simple function linking 
the p for relative size and depth to the luminance contrast of 
the local configurations. There is a systematic effect of the 
general background condition on all the p: the lighter general 
background produced systematically stronger response 
probabilities for "bigger" and "nearer". The configurations 
with the positive local contrast signs all produced greater 
magnitudes of p in comparison with their negative-contrast-
sign pairs, however, the configurations with the strongest 
positive contrasts did not produce the highest response 
probabilities, neither for "bigger" (relative size), nor for 
"nearer" (relative depth) in the paired comparison tasks.  
This is clarified further by the graphs shown in the panel 
at the bottom of Figure 2, where p for "bigger" and "nearer" 
are shown as a function of the local color contrast of the 
configurations which produced the stronger p magnitudes, 
and as a function of the general background condition. The 
highest p for "bigger" (relative size) and "nearer" (relative 
depth) are produced by the RED central squares on the dark-
grey surround displayed on the light general background, and 
by the GREY central squares on the dark grey surrounds 
displayed on the general background. The BLUE central 
squares on dark surrounds produced noticeably lower p for 
"bigger" and "nearer" in comparison with the RED centers, 
yet, the blue on dark surrounds has a much stronger 
luminance contrast (25.5) than the red on dark surrounds 
(16.9). For the blue centers on dark surrounds we observe the 
strongest effect of general display background condition: the 
p for "bigger" and "nearer" are well above a certain positive 
probability 
threshold 
(>=0.75) 
for 
the 
blue-on-dark 
configurations  displayed on a light general background, but 
approach the chance level (~0.50) in the condition where 
they were displayed on a  dark general background. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Response probability (p) distributions for relative size ("bigger 
of two") and relative depth ("nearer of two") judgments from the paired 
comparison tasks. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

D. Response probabilities for "biggest of all" and 
"nearest of all " as a function of luminance contrast 
In the final analysis, we plotted the p distributions from 
the two single pick tasks as a function of the contrast 
intensity of the twelve local configurations and the general 
display background condition. These results, shown in 
Figure 3, consistently indicate that the highest response 
probabilities for "biggest" and "nearest" are produced by 
RED centers on dark GREEN or GREY local surrounds. 
This result is consistent with earlier observations [9] and 
further highlights the hitherto not shown dependency of this 
selective color effect on physical parameters relative to the 
immediate and the general background intensities. 
 
Figure 3.  Response probability distributions for "biggest of all" and 
"nearest of all" as a function of local Weber contrasts (Weber Ratios) and 
general background condition from the single pick tasks. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The results highlight complex interactions between color, 
local luminance contrast and global display background in 
the production of perceptual effects of subjective relative 
size and depth. Some of them, but not all, are predicted by 
current neural theories [6] [10] [15] [17] [18]. The subjective 
relative size of surface boundaries is significantly correlated 
with subjective depth, generating a perceptual 2D cue to 3D 
structure functionally equivalent to the "real", physically 
grounded, monocular depth cue. Although not explicitly 
predicted by any of the neural models, this observation 
supports a specific class of computational models of relative 
surface depth from ambiguous contrast input generated by 
2D contrast surfaces and their boundaries [7] [11] [15] [17]. 
The perceptual judgments from this study support the idea 
that the human brain is  capable of producing functional 
perceptual representations of figure and ground by using a 
multitude of different local and global cues in the 2D image. 
Ambiguous image input is dealt with by effectively 
exploiting whatever cue to structure is available in the 
display. Absence of a specific physically grounded depth cue 
may be compensated for by perceptually generated cues that 
allow the brain to compute coherent depth representations on 
the basis of global perceptual sensation rather than merely 
the direct or strictly local visual processing of an existing 
stimulus parameter such as a physical difference in the size 
of 2D surface boundaries, for example. Also, the way in 
which contrast is computed to achieve perceptual 3D 
structure reaches well beyond local processing. As shown 
here, the lighter general backgrounds of the configurations, 
resulting in image representations with more than two 2D 
surface layers, systematically produced stronger subjective 
depth effects, irrespective of the local color or contrast of the 
reference surfaces and their immediate surrounds. This has 
potentially important implications for the development of 
effective visual interface technology for image-guided 
systems designed to assist human operators in precision tasks 
[16]. The results from this study are consistent with previous 
findings that the color red is the most likely to produce depth 
effects in simple figure-ground displays with only two 2D 
surface representations [3] [9]. Red surface color on an 
achromatic background, for example, possesses a clear 
competitive advantage over other colors such as green [9] or 
blue [12] in the likelihood to be perceived as closer to the 
human observer. As shown here, when more than two 
surface layers are present in an image configuration, the 
advantage of the surface color red for perceptual 
organization appears to depend on the contrast polarities of 
all the image regions surrounding the reference surface, not 
on the local reference-surround luminance contrast. This 
result is new and may seem surprising, yet, it is fully 
consistent with experimental evidence from other studies 
showing that many different cues may cooperate adaptively 
and non-locally in  figure–ground segregation from 2D cues 
[19]. Physiologically inspired model approaches which 
simulate how figure–ground segregation may be computed 
by neural mechanisms "beyond the classic receptive field", 
involving long-range feedback interactions between cells 
with increasingly larger receptive fields in higher visual 
cortical areas beyond V1, V2, or even V4 [15] [19] [20], are 
in  principle suitable to account for the non-local processing 
of figure-ground. However, it is not clear how these models 
would account for selective color effects, as those shown 
here. It is possible that these effects may be linked to 
psychological effects of selective attention to specific colors 
and/or color cognition in a more general sense [21] [22]. 
These are still poorly understood and need to be investigated 
further. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are grateful to Anne KELLY and Keith 
LANGLEY for helpful discussions.  
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Da Vinci, Trattato della Pittura di Leonardo da Vinci. 
Scritta da Raffaelle du Fresne, Langlois, Paris, 1651. 
[2] G. E. Mount, H. W. Case, J. W. Sanderson, and R. Brenner, 
"Distance judgment of colored objects",  Journal of General 
Psychology, vol. 55, pp. 207-214, 1956. 
[3] H. Egusa, "On the color stereoscopic phenomenon", Japanese 
Psychological Review, vol. 20, pp. 369-386, 1977. 
[4] M. Farnè "Brightness as an indicator to distance: relative 
brightness per se or contrast with the background?", 
Perception, vol. 6, pp. 287-293, 1977. 
[5] H. Egusa, "Effects of brightness, hue, and saturation on the 
perceived depth between adjacent regions in the visual field.", 
Perception, vol. 12, pp. 167-175, 1983. 
[6] S. Grossberg, "3D vision and figure-ground separation by 
visual cortex", Perception and Psychophysics, vol. 55, pp. 48-
120, 1994. 
[7] B. Dresp, "On illusory contours and their functional 
significance", Current Psychology of Cognition, vol. 16(4), 
pp. 489–518, 1997. 
[8] B. Dresp, S. Durand, and S. Grossberg, "Depth perception 
from pairs of overlapping cues in pictorial displays", Spatial 
Vision, vol. 15, pp. 255–276, 2002. 
[9] C. R. C. Guibal and B. Dresp, "Interaction of color and 
geometric cues in depth perception: When does “red” mean 
“near”?" Psychological Research, vol. 10, pp. 167-178, 2004. 
[10] F. Qiu, T. Sugihara, and R. von der Heydt, "Figure-ground 
mechanisms provide structure for selective attention", Nature 
Neuroscience, vol. 11, pp. 1492-9 , 2007. 
[11] B. Dresp and S. Fischer, "Asymmetrical contrast effects 
induced by luminance and colour configurations", Perception 
& Psychophysics, vol. 63, pp. 1262-1270, 2001. 
 
[12] B. Dresp-Langley and A. Reeves, "Simultaneous brightness 
and apparent depth from true colors on grey: Chevreul 
revisited", Seeing and Perceiving, vol. 25, pp. 597-618, 2012. 
[13] B. Dresp-Langley and A. Reeves, "Color and figure-ground: 
From signals to qualia", In S. Magnussen, M. Greenlee, J. 
Werner, A. Geremek (Eds.): Perception beyond Gestalt: 
Progress in Vision Research. Psychology Press, Abingdon 
(UK), pp. 159-71, 2014. 
[14] B. Dresp-Langley and A. Reeves, "Effects of saturation and 
contrast polarity on the figure-ground organization of color on 
gray", Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 5, pp. 1136, 2014. 
[15] S. Grossberg, "Cortical dynamics of figure-ground separation 
in response to 2D pictures and 3D scenes: How V2 combines 
border ownership, stereoscopic cues, and Gestalt grouping 
rules", Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 6, pp. 02054, 2015. 
[16] B. Dresp-Langley, "Principles of perceptual grouping: 
implications for image-guided surgery", Frontiers in 
Psychology, vol. 6, pp. 1565, 2015. 
[17] B. Dresp-Langley and S. Grossberg "Neural Computation of 
Surface Border Ownership and Relative Surface Depth from 
Ambiguous Contrast Inputs", Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 7, 
pp. 1102, 2016. 
[18] R. von der Heydt, "Figure–ground and the emergence of 
proto-objects in the visual cortex", Frontiers in Psychology, 
vol. 6, pp. 1695, 2015. 
[19] M. Dimicolli, "Figure-ground segregation: a fully non-local 
approach. Vision Research, vol. 126, pp.308-317, 2016. 
[20] L. Spillmann, B. Dresp-Langley, and C. H. Tseng, "Beyond 
the classic receptive field: The effect of contextual stimuli", 
Journal of Vision, vol. 15, pp. 7, 2015. 
[21] T. Xia, L. Song, T. Wang, L. Tan, and L. Mo, "Exploring the 
effect of red and blue on cognitive task performances", 
Frontiers in Psychology, vol.7, pp. 784, 2016. 
[22] B. Dresp-Langley and A. Reeves, "Colour for behavioural 
success", i-Perception, vol. 9(2), pp. 1–23, 2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

