Design of an Innovative Simulation Device Dedicated to the Learning of Biomechanics
Applied to Orthodontics
Aurelie Mailloux
Reims hospital, URCA
Reims, France
Email: aurelie.mailloux@univ-reims.fr
2LPN UR 7489
Abstract—Health simulation devices offer the possibility of
improving practitioners’ knowledge, skills, and behaviors. The
current biomechanics simulation tools in the orthodontics field
are technically and pedagogically limited. The need to develop
an innovative simulation device in this area is commonly shared
by orthodontics students. This article aims at identifying (i) the
learning objectives, (ii) the technical specifications, and (iii) the
constraints to design a innovative device.
Keywords—Simulation; device; orthodontics; biomechanics.
I. INTRODUCTION
Previous studies on the training expectations of orthodontics
practitioners revealed (i) the limitations of the current biome-
chanics simulation tools, (ii) their need to develop an innova-
tive simulation device in this field [7]. After a presentation of
the context (Section I), section II describes the data gathered
to identify the priority fields of application for developing
a biomechanics simulation tool. Section III and IV outlines
the educational goals and elements of further studies to be
conducted on the subject.
A. Biomechanics applied to orthodontics
Whatever the appliance used, orthodontic movements re-
spond to biomechanical notions. To understand the dental
displacements, it is necessary to represent the equivalence of
the forces system at the center of resistance (CR) of the tooth
[4]. The CR is a theoretical point on the tooth. When a force is
applied to it, the tooth is displaced in translation (i.e., without
causing rotation). The CR is on the long axis of tooth. Location
of the CR depends on the alveolar bone height, the root length
and the number of roots (Figure 1). In orthodontics, forces
cannot pass through the CR (i.e., forces are applied on the
orthodontic bracket, bonded on the crown). Thus, the distance
between the CR and the point of application of force varies.
Figure 1. Different locations of a canine CR,depending on the root length
and the alveolar bone height.
So, there is a moment (rotational movement) in addition to
translation (linear movement). The force system will depend
on (i) the clinical situation, (ii) the chosen appliance, and tech-
nique (e.g., segmented, continued). Learning biomechanics can
be challenging as the concepts are difficult to grasp in a static
context [6].
B. Interest of an innovative biomechanics’ simulation device
for orthodontists
Simulations devices in the health field aim at securing
patients care. They are based on the concepts of (i) “never
the first time on a patient”, and also (ii) ”mastering gestures
before treating patients”. Simulation allows training in semi-
real conditions which makes the learner more involved than
during lectures (i.e., with a top-down teacher-learner scheme).
A meta-analysis conducted in 2011 highlighted the possibility
of improving practitioners’ knowledge, skills, and behaviors
through health simulation [3]. Moreover, animations could
help practitioners to understand complex dynamic processes
in a simple and realistic way [6].
C. Current and future simulation device
In the orthodontics field, clinical skills are currently taught
through demonstrations on patients (by trial and error). The
use of technology is currently limited and poorly designed
[5]. Orthodontics novices learn biomechanics (i.e., theoretical
knowledge and practical skills) using an occlusor, made of
metal teeth embedded in a sticky wax (Figure 2). Sticky wax
is a mixture that dissolves in water at the temperature of
60–65°C (i.e., by heating, it allows the dental movements).
However, this system (i) does not reproduce faithfully the bone
remodeling, and anchorage (e.g., mini screw), (ii) does not
make it possible to visualize the root displacements, nor the
successive stages from the initial to the final clinical situation.
Figure 2. Orthodontic occlusor
Technological advances (e.g., imagery/ 3D radiography
and computer image processing) enable to obtain specific
anatomical models of a patient, meshable and usable by finite
element software [1]. Thanks to the monitoring, it’s possible
to correlate the finite element analysis with the clinically
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

observed movements. However, the finite element approach
still has some limitations:
1-Long-term tooth movement could not be predicted from
the initial force system.
2-Tooth movement depends on (i) the characteristics of the
patient (e.g., drugs, dental morphology, alveolar bone, masti-
catory forces, tongue), (ii) the force system (e.g., continuous
or segmented archwire, alloy, friction)
In addition, computational modelling remains complex and
time-consuming [8]. In the literature, studies conducted on
finite elements applied to orthodontics aimed to improve :
1- the treatment planning optimization and individualization
(i.e., choice of the archwire) [8].
2- the anticipation of iatrogenic damages (i.e., caused by
orthodontic treatments)
3- the accuracy of the forecasts of the treatment results
Thus, the implementation of an optimal orthodontic force
system modelling that meets all these requirements is chal-
lenging. New studies are underway to improve digital mod-
elling precision [8]. Some studies have already combined
experimentation (i.e., to quantify forces and moments, using
test beds), and digital modelling [8]. Furthermore,the scan
of different stages of orthodontic treatments could improve
the management of similar clinical situations (i.e. machine
learning is already used for treatment planning by aligners).
Along with these, we believe that from a learning and training
perspective, the current technologies are sufficient to design
new simulation-based learning activities in biomechanics.
These should allow orthodontics students to (i) improve their
manual skills, (ii) anticipate the effects of the appliances, (iii)
be able to choose the most suitable device(s) according to the
initial clinical situation.
II. PRIORITY FIELDS FOR A FUTURE SIMULATION DEVICE
From the literature, we have carried out the following
classification. It summarizes sub dimensions of bio mechanics
applied to orthodontics:
1-Physiology of tooth movement (Physiological periodontal
and bone response related to orthodontic strength...)
2-Tooth movement (the three orders, theory, indications)
3-Force systems (Moment/force, equilibrium...)
4-Anchorage (Anchorage and its control, mini-implants...)
5-Fixed devices (treatment mechanics, vectors, forces, mo-
ments applied, arches deformations and constraints)
6-Biomaterials related to tooth movement (biomaterials and
production of orthodontic forces...)
7-Removable Device (interception and prevention...)
8-Factors affecting tooth movement (patient factor, growth)
9-Iatrogenic effect of tooth movement
We therefore interviewed the Reims Hospital students (N=6)
to identify the priority fields for developing simulation tools,
among this classification. They have considered the following
sections as priorities : force system (9 points), anchorage (7
points), and fixed appliance (6 points). Points were assigned to
each response based on their rank of importance. This survey
should be extended to a wider pool of students in orthodontics,
in order to ensure that this order suits them.
III. EDUCATIONAL GOALS
According to the identified priority fields and the current
occlusor objectives, an effective simulation device should
allow students to:
- scan a patient’s malocclusion and virtually position the
brackets on the teeth crown.
- improve manual skills: (i) scan archwires bent by students,
and integrate them in the simulator to evaluate the dental
movements they generate (i.e., but that could be technically
challenging), or (2) to compare the ideal archwire with the
scan of the archwire prepared by the student.
- visualize the dental movements according to the clinical
initial situation and the chosen fixed appliance. The dental
displacements should be split into successive steps (i.e., from
the initial to final situation) by showing and quantify the forces
and the moments on each tooth (i.e., including roots).
IV. FURTHER THOUGHTS
The superiority of a dynamic over a static presentation
for learners’ understanding and learning is debated in the
literature. However, the animations and/or interactive medium
could improve the understanding of the relationships between
force application and tooth movement. Animations are not
sufficient, simulations’ aims are to foster learning through
immersion, reflection, feedback, and practice minus the risks
inherent in a real-life experience (i.e., to safer patient care)
[2], [3], [5].
To assess the effectiveness of an innovative simulation
device (in terms of understanding, gesture mastering and
memorization), further studies on this subject should combine
(i) an ergonomic approach, through a user-centered design
to identify the practitioners’ needs and characteristics, (ii) an
instructional engineering/educational psychology approach to
design efficient learning activities.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Schicho G. Undt O. Ploder R. Ewers A. Wagner, W. Krach.
A
3-dimensional finite-element analysis investigating the biomechanical
behavior of the mandible and plate osteosynthesis in cases of fractures
of the condylar process. Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine, Oral Pathology,
Oral Radiology, and Endodontics, 94(6):678–686, December 2002.
[2] M. Betrancourt. Chapter 18. The Animation and Interactivity Principles
in Multimedia Learning. Multimedia Learning.
[3] R. Brydges B. Zendejas J. Szostek J. W. Jason T. Amy D. A. Cook,
R. Hatala and S. J. Hamstra P. J. Erwin. Technology-enhanced simulation
for health professions education: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
JAMA, 306(9):978–988, September 2011.
[4] J. Faure. orthodontic biomechanics. The fundamentals. Sid edition, 2013.
[5] R. M. A. Wahab M. M. Dasor N. Mokhtar F.Ridzuan, G. K. L. Rao.
Enabling Virtual Learning for Biomechanics of Tooth Movement: A Mod-
ified Nominal Group Technique. Dentistry Journal, 11(2):53, February
2023.
[6] J. F. Rouet J. M. Boucheix.
Are multimedia interactive animations
effective for learning? French journal of pedagogy. Educational research,
(160):133–156, September 2007. ISBN: 9782734210962 Number: 160
Publisher: ENS ´Editions.
[7] A. Mailloux. Psycho-ergonomic analysis of the needs to design an inno-
vative device for distance continuing education for the use of practitioners
in Orthopedics Dento-Facial : Contribution of a community of practice
analysis. Doctoral thesis, Universit´e de Lorraine, 2023.
[8] D. Wagner. Quantification and modeling of forces and moments applied
inside orthodontic brackets placed on a dental arch in the three dimen-
sions of space. Doctoral thesis, Strasbourg.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

