The GATM Computer Assisted Reasoning Framework
in a Security Policy Reasoning Context
Johan Garcia
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
Karlstad University
Karlstad, Sweden
Email: johan.garcia@kau.se
Abstract—Humans are often faced with the need to make de-
cisions regarding complex issues where multiple interests need
to be balanced, and where there are a number of complex
arguments weighing in opposite directions. The ability of humans
to understand and internalize the underlying argumentation
structure resulting from reasoning about complex issues is limited
by the human cognitive ability. The cognitive limit can manifest
itself both in relation to an inappropriate level and amount
of detail in the presentation of information, as well as in the
structuring of the information and the representation of the
interrelationships between constituting arguments. The GATM
model provides a structured way to represent reasoning, and
can be useful both in the decision-making process as well as
when communicating a decision. In this work a component-
based overview of the GATM model is provided in the context
of security policy reasoning, where previous work has shown
that decision-making transparency and improved understanding
of the reasoning behind a security policy may lead to a beneﬁcial
impact on policy compliance.
Keywords–Security policies; GATM; Reasoning; Argumenta-
tion.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper presents the General Argumentation, Type, and
Modiﬁer (GATM) model as a way to structure reasoning of
complex issues in scalable way. The objective is to provide a
foundation for reasoning representation and visualization in
a manner that can make the most of the human cognitive
abilities. The GATM model aims to provide a framework
for representing, storing, and presenting reasoning involving a
complex set of argumentative statements, where the statements
in turn can have multiple levels of statements that are either
supportive or dismissive. One deﬁning aspect of the GATM
model is that it, unlike the well-known Toulmin approach,
does not have multiple argument statement classes. Classes
such as grounds, warrant, and backing as found in the Toulmin
approach means that the exact same statement can belong
to different classes, depending on the context in which a
statement is used when reasoning about a particular claim.
By avoiding the class approach, GATM simpliﬁes the use of
statements as well as the construction of joint repositories
of reusable statements. Instead of classes, the GATM model
uses a statement typology in which type represent an inherent
characteristic of an argument statement. The type is invariant
regardless of which issue is reasoned about, or where in the
hierarchy a statement occurs. Further, the GATM model uses
the concept of modiﬁers to capture the instance-speciﬁc aspects
of the use of a particular statement in relation to a speciﬁc
issue.
While the sketched framework can be applied across many
domains, in this particular paper, we consider it in the con-
text of security policy creation and effective dissemination.
In the context of computer security policies, previous work
have identiﬁed that information security awareness positively
affects both attitude and outcome with regards to policy
compliance [5], and concluded that security awareness should
be the principal focus of a systematic approach to policy
management [13]. It is presumed that an improved ability to
communicate the reasoning behind security policy measures
can increase security awareness and policy acceptance. This
ties in to the well-known tradeoff between the strictness of
computer security measures on one side and the willingness
and capability of the end-users to successfully follow the
measures while providing appropriate effectiveness in their
regular activities. Consider, as an example, the case of forced
password change. From a strictly security related point of
view, it is of beneﬁt to force the users to change passwords
frequently, for example once every month, and require long
passwords that fulﬁll criteria such as having characters from
multiple groups (a-z, A-Z, 0-9, etc.). Here, there exists a
tradeoff between an ideal level of security, and usability and
user acceptance.
Furthermore, it is not a straightforward matter to decide
what is an appropriate security level and furthermore the
appropriate security level might vary between the different
domains in one company which potentially leads to further
complications. Security policies are typically elaborated and
decided upon at the upper management level. Conﬂicting
interests between different areas represented by the individual
managers may lead to differences in views on the need for
security, the potential criticality of security breaches, the mon-
etary value of security incidents, and other associated factors.
Also in this context, a security policy reasoning framework and
an associated visualization tool may prove beneﬁcial. Further
discussion of the visualization aspects are left for future work,
and the focus of this paper is on structural aspects of the
GATM model.
The paper is structured as follows. The next section dis-
cusses related work, followed by a section that outlines the
GATM model. Finally, conclusions are provided.
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

II.
RELATED WORK
There are several approaches for reasoning support in the
general context and a comprehensive overview and taxonomy
is provided by Benathar et al. [3]. The conceptual model of
argumentation proposed by Toulmin [15] is one early example
of a reasoning model that has been used to guide computer rea-
soning efforts. An overview of the Toulmin argument structure
is provided in Figure 1, where the relationship of the different
classes are shown.
Figure 1. Generic Toulmin-form argument, from [9]
The Toulmin model has also resulted in several extensions
such as the one proposed by Bench-Capon [2], which added
a presupposition component which adds the ability to add
statements which are not under dispute and not core to the
claim made, but do represent assumptions that are necessary
for the argument. In the GATM model, the same underlying
information as in the presupposition component is provided by
the recursive statement approach coupled with the statement
typology as discussed in the next section. Also related to
GATM is the work by Freeman [7], which identiﬁes four
central argument structures. The information provided by these
argument structures are similar to what is represented in the
GATM model, although the GATM model does not consider
them in the same explicit manner.
Speciﬁcally with regards to security policies, previous
research by Bulgurucu et al. [5] has investigated the rationality-
based factors that drive an employee to comply with require-
ments of an Information Security Policy (ISP). The results
show that an employee’s intention to comply with the ISP
is signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by attitude, normative beliefs, and
self-efﬁcacy to comply. A similar result is reported is re-
ported by Knapp and Ferrante [13], where 297 information
security professionals were surveyed, and the conclusions
stress the importance of awareness. An improved ability to
convey the reasoning for particular security policy measures,
such as provided the proposed GATM model and associated
visualization front-ends, is posited to contribute to improved
Information Security Awareness (ISA). An improved ISA is is
coupled to positive effects on attitude and outcome of policy
compliance [5]. Other aspects of security policy design, such
as ﬁrewall conﬁguration has been elaborated in the context
of reasoning and argumentation by Applebaum et al. [1]. A
more formal logic for reasoning about security and security
policies is discussed by Glasgow et al. [8]. In other work,
Haley et al. [9] aims to to validate security requirements by
using propositional logic to construct outer arguments, and
informal reasoning is then used to support those with a basis
in the Toulmin model of reasoning.
In this paper, password policy is used as an example for
GATM. The issue of ﬁnding an appropriate tradeoff between
security and convenience in a password policy is discussed by
Florêncio and Herley [6], where the need for transparency is
also highlighted:
While most of us understand and accept that
there is a tradeoff between security and convenience,
how and by whom is this tradeoff decided? Few
would argue with getting a lot more security for
a little inconvenience. But, if the decision-making
process is obscure how can we be sure we’re not
getting lots of inconvenience for little improvement
in security?
Along similar lines, Myyry et al. [14], in an empirical study
with 163 persons reports ﬁndings suggesting that information
security policies should be better rationalized, so that the
importance of these policies to the organization and the work
community is clariﬁed. The GATM model provides one ap-
proach to make the decision-making process more transparent
and make explicit the consideration that have, or have not, been
taken into consideration when arriving at a particular security
versus convenience tradeoff.
III.
SKETCHING THE GATM MODEL
One novelty of this work is the statement typology ap-
proach, which is based on the realization that the Toulmin
basic model is cumbersome when considering complex is-
sues with long chains of statements. Whereas the Toulmin
classes differentiates between how statements relate to each
other using categories such as data, warrant, and backing,
the typology approach instead focuses on the basic content
of the statement itself and not its relation to the claim. As
has been observed by Haley et al. [9], a backing argument
can itself be considered a goal which is then supported by
additional supportive data, warrants and backing. Given that
this recursiveness often occurs when building more elaborate
reasoning hierarchies an argumentation model that assigns
the argument statements to different classes depending of the
vantage point might be problematic. Instead of focusing on the
interrelationship between the different arguments the GATM
model use an alternative typology abstraction which focuses
not on the relative position of the statement to some other
claim or statement, but rather on the intrinsic nature of the
statement in itself. This intrinsic nature will not change if the
statement is viewed as a support for a claim or if it is viewed
as a claim for which there are other supporting statements.
A. A password policy GATM example
Figure 2 illustrates the structure of the GATM model
using a simpliﬁed argumentation for a password policy. The
ﬁgure shows the claim, which regards the mandated use of
a password policy that requires users to change passwords
every 60 days, as well as selecting passwords with a minimum
length and composition requirements. In addition to the claim,
the ﬁgure also contains a number of statements. Statements
that work in support of the claim have arrows pointing right
out from them, while statements that work in contradiction to
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

60 days change & 
complex 8 should 
be enforced
Forgotten 
passwords create 
extra admin 
overhead
Supportive
Contradictory
Modifier
Increased fraction 
of users will forget 
passwords
Forgotten 
passwords have 
been  observed
Creates additional 
security risks
Forced changes 
leads to easier 
passwords being 
selected
Dictionary tests 
can be performed 
on passwords
More users
 will write down 
password on 
paper
Security 
awareness 
training can be 
intensified
Passwords written 
down have been  
observed
Password 
recovery 
procedures can be 
automated
(Claim)
(Fact) – S7
(Fact) – S13
(Assumption) – S6
(Assumption) – S10
(Assumption) – S11
(Assumption) – S8
(Fact) – S9
(Assumption) – S5
(Fact) – S4
Authentication 
measures are 
necessary
Benefits of policy 
outweighs 
disadvantages
Simple passwords 
may be 
bruteforced
(Value judgement) – S2
(Fact) – S3
(Axiom) – S1
(Fact) – S12
Timed lockout 
after failed 
attemps can be 
employed
(Fact) – S3
Lockout does
not protect if 
password file is 
compromised
(Fact) – S3
Figure 2. An simpliﬁed GATM reasoning graph example for a password policy
the claim have arrows pointing to the left. As an example,
statement S5 works in contradiction to the claim, thus having
an arrow pointing left. Statement S4 works in contradiction
in relation to S5, but in the supportive direction in relation
to the claim, and thus have a right pointing arrow. For every
statement, the relative effect of the support or contradiction
for that statement is captured by a modiﬁer. The modiﬁers
contains attributes such as statement applicability and strength.
The properties of the modiﬁer varies between each occurrence
of a statement, i.e., the modiﬁer is speciﬁc to the instance of a
statement that occurs in a particular graph. Statements on the
other hand, are in many cases general in the sense that the exact
same statements can be used in a several unrelated reasoning
graphs. So, while statements often have general applicability
also outside a particular reasoning graph, modiﬁers are coupled
to a particular graph. Different reasoning graphs have different
claims, thus affecting the contextual aspects of the attributes
in the modiﬁer, such as applicability.
Although not discussed here, a feature of the GATM model
is that it supports a hierarchical representation and presentation
of information. Shown in Figure 2 are only information at
the highest abstraction layer, which is the short statement
description. In addition to this, there is also a long statement
text, and and multi-part slideset that can be used to provide
relevant additional information for a particular node. This
allows a user to ﬁrst at a glance get a view of the statements
involved with regards to a particular claim. The user can then
differentiate between statements which are familiar or new.
Statements that are new to the user, or which the user does not
agree with, can be examined closer by requesting the additional
information contained in the long statement text and/or slide
set. This approach lessens the cognitive load, as compared to
if all statement information would have been presented at the
same level of detail.
As it can be seen in Figure 2, there are several different
statement types in the reasoning graph. In the idealized rep-
resentation used in the ﬁgure, the types of the statement is
explicitly written below each node. Also provided is a node
identiﬁer used in the discussion. In the initial prototype visu-
alization frontend, statement types are instead represented by
different geometric shapes of the nodes. A further discussion
of the types used in this example are provided in the next
subsection.
Considering the password policy reasoning in the ﬁgure,
it can be seen that the representation allows for an overview
representation of the considerations that have been taken into
account with regards to this particular claim. As have been
discussed in Section 2, transparency and rationalization of
policy decisions have a positive impact of security policy
compliance. Thus, the communicative properties is one poten-
tial beneﬁt of using the GATM model. The GATM approach
might also be useful during the policy elaboration and decision
phase. Representing the advantages and disadvantages in a
structured manner can simplify communication and enhance
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. GATM TYPOLOGY FOR TYPES USED IN THE EXAMPLE
Type
Statement Preﬁx
Terminal
Temporally Stable
Axiom
"Unless it is accepted that ..."
Yes
Yes
Fact
"There is a (scientiﬁc) consensus that ..."
No
Yes, mostly
Current assumption
"The best current (scientiﬁc) understanding is that ..."
No
No
Value judgment
"My personal belief is that ..."
Yes
Yes, mostly
understanding during a decision process involving multiple in-
dividuals. Although not discussed here, the versioning control
integrated in the GATM model supports dialectic evolution
of reasoning which might be useful during policy elaboration.
While the reasoning graph in Figure 2 works as an illustrative,
albeit simpliﬁed, example of the GATM model, it can also
be extended with further reasoning around additional aspects
that inﬂuence the design and decision making for password
policies.
By allowing the reasoning to become more explicit, GATM
can also be helpful in avoiding fallacious reasoning results
with regards to policies. The effects of such reasoning fallacies
are observed by Florêncio and Herley [6], which based on
an examination of 75 websites somewhat surprisingly report
that a more stringent password policy is not coupled to a
site having greater security concerns. Rather, more stringent
policies are found when the site provides functionality which
has little sensitivity to the added user inconvenience of a
stricter policy, for example when the use of a particular site
is mandated by an employer. Other research useful when
elaborating the reasoning around password policies include
work by Zhang et al. [16] which questions the continued use
of password expiration based on the observed predictability
of the new passwords chosen after password expiration. The
unsuitability of many password policies are also discussed by
Inglesant and Sasse [11], which studied password use in two
organizations and states that the focus need to be on using
Human-Computer Interaction principles to set an appropriately
strong password policy, and not strictly focusing on password
length and expiration frequency. In fact, they report that for
one of the studied organizations the password policy greatly
increases the threat from passwords left written down, an
observation that is illustrated by the S13-S11-S8 reasoning
chain in the example. Herley [10] uses cost-beneﬁt analysis
of security advice with regards to passwords and note that
much of the current policies do not fully take user costs into
account.
B. GATM statement types
This subsection provides a ﬁrst brief sketch of the statement
types in the GATM model. Due to space constraints, this
presentation focuses on the statement types present in the
example in Figure 2, and does not cover all statement types
of the GATM model.
“Axiom”
Axiomatic statements are the base on which the reasoning
chain in many cases will end if the links of statements and
supporting statements are recursively followed until the end.
However, it is expected to often be uncalled for to follow the
reasoning links all the way to the axioms. The axioms can
be universally accepted statements regarding physical entities
or statements expected to be universally accepted. When an
statement is classiﬁed as an axiom it is apparent that if another
party is not accepting a statement as an axiom it is not
meaningful to have a further discussion in relation to the claim
at hand. In relation to security policy, an axiomatic statement
could be: "Organizations may deny its employees access to
parts of the information within the company”. Such axioms
work as a basic security policy foundation for most companies,
and if a party does not accept that axiom it is not meaningful
to reason about security policies.
“Fact”
As the GATM model is a general model, the fact statement
type eludes a simple deﬁnition. When GATM is applied
where scientiﬁcally based reasoning is appropriate, fact can be
seen as meaning “statements that are veriﬁable by repeatable
experiments”. However, in contexts where such a deﬁnition is
not appropriate fact can be considered as “the state of affairs”.
This correspond to deﬁnitional facts such as “Stockholm is
the capital of Sweden”, which is a fact resulting from social
convention. It is important to not mistakenly consider non-
deﬁnitional phenomena as deﬁnitional as illustrated by the
observation that although a large fraction of people 600 years
ago believed the earth to be ﬂat, the earth still, in fact, was
not ﬂat.
“Current assumption”
Current assumption is something that explicitly signals that
there is a degree of uncertainty related to the statement. The
uncertainty can be related to different causes. In an engineering
context, it may be an effect of imprecise measurements, where
the tools used to measure a metric of interest have inherent
imprecision. Another case is where the underlying values vary
considerably due to random factors that cannot be controlled.
With regards to what can be done to reduce uncertainty, there
is a difference between uncertainty dependent on inherent
variability (also called aleatory uncertainty) and uncertainty
due to lack of appropriate information (also called epistemic
uncertainty) [12]. Whereas the epistemic uncertainty can be
reduced by spending resources to gather more information,
aleatory uncertainty is inherent and cannot be readily reduced.
"Value judgment"
In this context, a value judgment is a statement that reﬂects
an individual persons inner beliefs which is considered to be
largely outside the realm of rational deliberation, and as such
being statements for which there exists no obvious way to
objectively ascertain a "true or false” or “better or worse”. A
trivial example of a value judgment is the favorite color of an
individual. It is not possible to say that one individual’s choice
of color is better than another individuals in any objective
sense. Neither is it meaningful to argue about an individual’s
choice of color. On a higher level, value judgments tend to
be individualistic and reﬂect the belief systems and moral
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

conditioning of individuals. In regards to computer security
policy, value judgments can come into play for example with
regards to tradeoffs involving privacy, as discussed by Brey [4].
An overview presentation of the discussed types are shown
in Table I. The table contains a statement preﬁx that can
function as a guide in deciding what type a given statement
should belong to. It should be noted it is unlikely that there
exists a single set of generally applicable guidelines on how to
classify statements into types. There is no general and clear-cut
boundary between axiom and fact, or between fact and current
assumption. Also provided in the table is a column indicating
whether the type is terminal or not. Terminal types form a
deﬁnitive end in the statement chain and will not have any
underlying supporting or contradicting statements. The ﬁnal
column in the table relates to temporal stability, which signiﬁes
the tendency of statements of a particular type to change in
the validity as time passes.
Although not elaborated in this paper, the software frame-
work for storing, representing, and presenting GATM reason-
ing graphs allows multiple individual representations of the
same underlying reasoning graph. This makes it possible for
multiple users to change the type of the particular statement in
case they consider another type to be more appropriate, while
the system still maintains relational links between the two
individual representations. The proposed system enhances an
individual’s ability to represent his or hers individual reasoning
which regards to a particular claim, and put his reasoning in
relation to other people’s reasoning on the same subject matter.
From the basic observation that reasonable individuals reach
multiple divergent standpoints on a given nontrivial matter, it
follows that there also exists a multitude of reasoning chains
that have been explicitly or implicitly followed to arrive at
each individual’s particular standpoint.
C. Modiﬁers
There are two types of modiﬁers in the GATM model,
unipolar modiﬁers and multipolar modiﬁers. Unipolar modi-
ﬁers are related to a single statement and can convey attributes
relating to a particular instantiation of an statement, i.e., the use
of an statement in reasoning about a speciﬁc claim. Similarly,
a multipolar modiﬁer conveys attributes but also ties together
statements which are functionally dependent. For example, a
statement S23 might only work as a support for a statement
S18 if a statement S22 is also valid. Such dependencies are
captured by the multipolar modiﬁer.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have provided an alternative model to
the classical Toulmin model which can be challenging to use
with hierarchical reasoning given the relative relations of data,
warrant, and backing. The GATM model considers a typology
of statements where the type of statement is inherent to the
statement itself and not relative to its position in a reasoning
hierarchy. We have used the domain of security policies to
provide an example for the new model, noting that the model
is primarily intended for computer supported human reasoning.
While illustrating the GATM concepts with a password policy
reasoning graph, the possibility to provide more transparent
decision-making is also discussed. In the particular domain of
security policy reasoning, it is hypothesized that the use of the
GATM framework along with a visualization front-end will
be beneﬁcial to information security awareness and security
policy compliance. Greater decision-making transparency and
improved understanding of the underlying rationale can be
important factors in inﬂuencing attitudes and normative beliefs
of the users so that they strive for increased security awareness
and policy compliance.
Although the focus of the GATM model is to provide
support for human-centered reasoning, since the data used to
represented the reasoning graph is formally structured with
typology classes, statement links, etc., GATM data can also
be useful for building up more formalized knowledge manage-
ment systems as well as agent-based reasoning approaches.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Applebaum, K. N. Levitt, J. Rowe, and S. Parsons, “Arguing about
ﬁrewall policy.” in COMMA, 2012, pp. 91–102.
[2]
T. J. M. Bench-Capon, “Deep models, normative reasoning and legal
expert systems,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Law, ser. ICAIL ’89, 1989, pp. 37–45.
[3]
J. Bentahar, B. Moulin, and M. Bélanger, “A taxonomy of argumenta-
tion models used for knowledge representation,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Review, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 211–259, 2010.
[4]
P. Brey, “Ethical aspects of information security and privacy,” in
Security, Privacy, and Trust in Modern Data Management, ser. Data-
Centric Systems and Applications, M. Petkovi´c and W. Jonker, Eds.,
2007, pp. 21–36.
[5]
B. Bulgurcu, H. Cavusoglu, and I. Benbasat, “Information security
policy compliance: An empirical study of rationality-based beliefs
and information security awareness,” Management Information Systems
Quarterly, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 523–548, Sep. 2010.
[6]
D. Florêncio and C. Herley, “Where do security policies come from?”
in Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security.
ACM, 2010, pp. 10:1–10:14.
[7]
J. B. Freeman, Dialectics and the macrostructure of arguments: A theory
of argument structure.
Walter de Gruyter, 1991, vol. 10.
[8]
J. Glasgow, G. MacEwen, and P. Panangaden, “A logic for reasoning
about security,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS),
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 226–264, 1992.
[9]
C. B. Haley, J. D. Moffett, R. Laney, and B. Nuseibeh, “Arguing secu-
rity: Validating security requirements using structured argumentation,”
in in Proceedings of the Third Symposium on Requirements Engineering
for Information Security (SREIS’05), 2005.
[10]
C. Herley, “So long, and no thanks for the externalities: the rational
rejection of security advice by users,” in Proceedings of the 2009
workshop on New security paradigms workshop.
ACM, 2009, pp.
133–144.
[11]
P. G. Inglesant and M. A. Sasse, “The true cost of unusable password
policies: password use in the wild,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2010,
pp. 383–392.
[12]
A. D. Kiureghian and O. Ditlevsen, “Aleatory or epistemic? does it
matter?” Structural Safety, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 105–112, 2009.
[13]
K. J. Knapp and C. J. Ferrante, “Policy awareness, enforcement and
maintenance: Critical to information security effectiveness in organiza-
tions.” Journal of Management Policy & Practice, vol. 13, no. 5, pp.
66–80, 2012.
[14]
L. Myyry, M. Siponen, S. Pahnila, T. Vartiainen, and A. Vance, “What
levels of moral reasoning and values explain adherence to information
security rules? An empirical study,” European Journal of Information
Systems, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 126–139, 2009.
[15]
S. E. Toulmin, The uses of argument.
Cambridge University Press,
1958.
[16]
Y. Zhang, F. Monrose, and M. K. Reiter, “The security of modern
password expiration: an algorithmic framework and empirical analy-
sis,” in Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer and
communications security.
ACM, 2010, pp. 176–186.
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

