                                                                                                                                                                                    
New Findings in Education: 
Primary Data Entry in Shaping Intentionality and Cognition 
Igor Val Danilov 
Academic Center for Coherent Intelligence 
ACCI 
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: igor_val.danilov@acci.center 
Sandra Mihailova 
Rīga Stradiņš University 
RSU 
Riga, Latvia 
e-mail: sandra.mihailova@rsu.lv 
Abstract— One of the most intriguing questions in cognitive 
science is the Primary Data Entry (PDE) problem: where does 
social knowledge come from? After birth, an organism meets 
with reality, which is transcendental, staying beyond any 
experience and understanding of this pure reason. Basic 
approaches to the study of cognition are cognitivism, 
connectionism, and embodied dynamicism, The weakness of 
cognitivism and connectionism is the need to introduce an 
initial set of social phenomena of the specific community to 
trigger this system: the PDE problem. There is also a same gap 
in knowledge in embodied dynamicism approach, this 
interpretation of a dynamic system is not accurate. The current 
paper presents the Model of Coherent Intelligence (MCI) and 
its neural foundation. The analysis of recent empirical data 
proposes new insights on the origin of intentionality: (i) 
cognition begins from separating sensory stimuli: Long-Term 
Potentiation can be induced in neurons of particular Modality-
Specific gateways (ignoring other stimuli)–selective induction 
promotes selective sensitivity to the chaos of stimuli. (ii) 
Neurons can learn spike-timing-dependent plasticity in social 
interaction: immature neurons learn the timing code to 
modulate certain synaptic strength, which triggers either 
Long-Term Potentiation or Long-Term Depression. The 
hypothesis of the MCI argues that social interaction shapes 
organisms' intentionality, promoting similar categorization of 
stimuli in intimately related individuals with shared social 
routine and interests. This approach provides a wide range of 
possibilities for developing a human-computer interface.  
Keywords-coherent intelligence; emotional contagion; 
interactional synchrony; social entrainment; embodied cognition 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
The academic knowledge on the study of mind 
historically and conceptually has settled three main 
approaches within cognitive science: cognitivism, 
connectionism, and embodied dynamicism [1]. Many 
theories of mind combine all three approaches, where they 
co-exist in various hybrid forms. The more interesting of 
them are the Embodied dynamic system [1], the theory of 
innate intersubjectiivity and innate foundations of neonatal 
imitation [2], the theory of natural pedagogy [3], and the 
theory of sensitivities and expectations [4]. All these theories 
are plausible; the current paper observes different views to 
engage a gap in knowledge. 
According to Thompson [1], cognitivism (the metaphor 
is the mind as digital computer) and connectionism (the mind 
as neural network), in different ways, appeal to the same 
computational principle of cognition. This principle based 
upon processing a signal within neural networks. This 
computational principle certainly requires the primary data 
entry as a necessary initial condition to launch processing. 
None algorithm and/or a sequence of instructions may 
perform the computation of any process without 
corresponding to the specific situation inputs, that should 
substitute variables and parameters of the formulas. The 
algorithm remains just a set of mathematical variables 
without this input. This argument may mean the necessity to 
input an initial set of social phenomena of the specific 
community to trigger this system – the Primary Data Entry 
(PDE) problem [5].  
According to embodied cognitivists, the mind is an 
autonomous system by its self-organizing and self-
controlling dynamics, which does not have inputs and 
outputs in the usual sense, and determines the cognitive 
domain in which it operates [1][6][7]. This approach is 
grounded on the dynamical hypothesis [8]. However, this 
interpretation of a dynamic system is not accurate. Why does 
the dynamic system need PDE: 
Argument A. According this approach embodied features 
of cognition deeply depend upon characteristics of the 
physical body. If the agent's beyond-the-brain body plays a 
significant causal role, then the primary data yet makes 
sense. 
Argument B. In mathematics, a dynamic systems model 
is a set of evolution equations. It means that entering primary 
data is required. The dynamic system may not begin its life 
cycle without introducing initial conditions corresponding to 
specific situation inputs and parameters. 
Argument C. The dynamical system hypothesis [8] have 
not claimed the lack of initial conditions. Dynamicists track 
primary data less than dynamic changes inside. However, it 
does not mean that primary data do not exist and do not 
necessary.  
Given these above arguments, the PDE problem must be 
considered in the onset of cognition. The embodied dynamic 
system approach tends to solve the above-noted gap by 
introducing the notion of dynamically embodied information 
[1]. Although, to introduce this concept, it is necessary to 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

                                                                                                                                                                                    
explain the categorization of reality through intentionality. 
According to embodied cognition approach, symbols encode 
the local topological properties of neuronal maps [1], a 
dynamic action pattern. The sensorimotor motor network 
yields pairing of the binary cue stimulus with the particular 
symbol saved in the structures and processes that embody 
meanings. 'Representational “vehicles” are temporally 
extended patterns of activity that can crisscross the brain-
body-world boundaries, and the meanings or contents they 
embody are brought forth or enacted in the context of the 
system’s structural coupling with its environment [1, p.36].' 
This idea requires introducing the nature of intentionality. In 
a multi-stimuli environment, the stimulus-consequence pair 
is unpredictable due to the many stimuli claiming to be 
associated with the embodied dynamic information 
randomly. The bond of stimulus-consequence pair of a social 
phenomenon in the sensorimotor network requires 
categorizing reality by the nervous system before applying 
the innate reflex about this social phenomenon to a specific 
case. Therefore, dynamically embodied information can be 
useful if intentionality is already in place. Meanwhile, the 
embodied dynamic system introduces intentionality without 
a biological and / or physical basis. The theory of natural 
pedagogy [3], and the theory of sensitivities and expectations 
[4], as well as many others may not solve the problem of 
PDE [9].  
According to Trevarthen and Delafield-Butt [10], primary 
consciousness develops in embryogenesis and is the first 
operative in early fetal life. 'Consciousness as "acting with 
knowledge" requires a nervous system that regulates 
prospective perception in intentional engagement with the 
world [10, p. 22]’. In the first trimester, patterns of sensory 
regulation of movements of the fetus' body and limbs gain 
affective evaluation and sensitivity for sounds and rhythms 
of other human presence [10]. It means that the pure nervous 
system should already possess intentionality as well as initial 
knowledge about social reality: human sounds and rhythms 
also yield meanings. Even if fetuses can hear different 
sounds and feel rhythms from outside of the womb, this does 
not mean that they alone (independently) can process their 
meanings. 
Searle et al. [11] argued that intentionality is the mental 
power of minds to represent or symbolize things, properties, 
and states of affairs. According to Crane [12], mental states 
or events or processes which have objects in this sense are 
traditionally called 'intentional,' and 'intentionality' is, for this 
reason, the general term for this defining characteristic of 
thought. The meaning of directed action implies the purpose 
of the action, which first requires the categorization of 
reality. It's a dichotomy of what happens first. Current 
knowledge does not solve it. 
Tomasello [13], through the study on ontogenesis and 
phylogenesis, introduced the hypothesis of gradually 
increasing social bond development in children referred to 
time slices: (1) emotion sharing from the birth, (2) joint 
intentionality from the nine-month revolution, (3) collective 
intentionality at around three years of age, (4) reason and 
responsibility. Tomasello [13] introduced the beginning of 
cognition  through the newborns' basic motive force of 
sharing intentionality. However, the mechanism of such 
emotion coordination is not clear because it is grounded on 
emotion sharing [13]. Whether or not protoconversations 
imply understanding emotional states. Many researchers, 
including the authors, believe that the hypothesis about the 
universality of emotional expressions is formed by limited 
experimental methods, since other research designs show the 
opposite outcome [14]-[18]. There is no evidence of a 
genetic mechanism that can link meaning in mind with 
certain social reality to apply an appropriate emotional 
pattern to a specific situation. Even if one assumes that the 
hypothesis of universal emotional expressions proves innate 
emotional patterns together with their meanings; even if 
newborns may alone recognize the basic facial expressions 
of caregivers and the specific situation to apply them; but in 
this case, newborns do not have time for such a "training 
course", because they demonstrate their achievements 
already in the first hours of life [19]. If there is no innate 
mechanism, then, apparently, emotional contagion can occur 
between individuals without their awareness [9][19][21]; it 
can happen even without awareness of the emotional stimuli 
existence [21]. Section II discusses the hyperscanning and 
near-infrared spectroscopy studies' outcome, showing brain-
to-brain synchronization. Section III presents, for the first 
time,  the hypothesis of the neural foundation of shared 
intentionality. Section IV elaborates all findings, describing 
their meanings.  
II.
PROBLEM: HOW DOES SOCIAL INTERACTION 
ENCOURAGE COGNITION 
Brain-to-brain relationships shape the mind during 
moment-to-moment interactions [22]. The dichotomy of 
newborns' succeed in beginning knowing and their 
communicative disability challenges our knowledge on 
social interaction modalities [19]. We believe that 
understanding the problem of the intentionality emergence in 
an organism at the beginning can explain the problem of 
PDE and the onset of consciousness. This knowledge can 
contribute to the study of cognition because obviously if and 
as soon as this implicit modality occurs it continues the 
whole rest of life. We believe that the caregivers' 
intentionality forms the intentionality in newborns. Fetuses 
and newborns are not able to behave intentionally on their 
own due to the lack of meaningful (informative) sensory 
interaction at the beginning [5][19][23]. We predict an 
implicit modality of social interaction that provides shared 
intentionality at the beginning. Cooperation in a group 
enhances intentionality, providing categorization. 
According to Valencia and Froese [22], their review of 
studies based on EEG- and fNIRS hyperscanning 
methodologies shows evidence of inter-brain 
synchronization in the fastest frequency bands, supporting 
the possibility of extended consciousness. Among 
hyperscanning studies, we have chosen 4 studies conducted 
without explicit interaction between subjects. These studies 
compared differences of brain-to-brain synchronization in 
subjects when participants solved tasks together as 
confronting to the condition in which: (i) the subjects solved 
them individually [24][25]; (ii) the same task when 
interacting with a machine [26]; (iii) the individuals from 
another team solved the same problem [27]. These studies 
declared an exclusion of sensory interaction between 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

                                                                                                                                                                                    
subjects. However, it should be noted that the subjects of all 
these studies knew about social encounters during the 
experiments. Therefore, instead of mental collaboration their 
results may simply mean an increase of brain activity due to 
similar emotional arousal in participants stimulated by the 
social encounter. 
The near-infrared spectroscopy study (non-
hyperscanning) on asleep newborns shows an increase of the 
neural response to a familiar (English language) versus 
unfamiliar language (Tagalog, a Filipino language) spoken 
by strangers in both conditions [28]. The language stimuli 
(the identical low-pass filtered sentences) were played 
through two speakers approximately 1.5 m from the infants’ 
head. According to May et al., [28], this findings show that 
the newborn’s neural processing of language is influenced by 
early language experience due to neonate brain responds to 
familiar versus unfamiliar language. To our mind, this 
outcome may lead to evidence of another inference. This 
experiment was not a hyperscanning technique. However, 
subjects were in pairs with their caregivers. Neonates 
classified these sound stimuli without the ability to perceive 
them. Sleeping newborns' brains reacted to sound stimuli that 
their sensing could not provide due to their brains' sensory 
isolation to meaningless and unfamiliar sounds. Sleepers 
seem to enter a standby mode, allowing them to balance the 
monitoring of their surroundings with sensory isolation [29]. 
Sleepers are sensitive to the semantic content of an auditory 
stream [29]-[31] and amplify relevant, meaningful stimuli 
[29][31]. The sleeping brain retains some residual 
information processing capacity, which, however, does not 
form enduring memories [32]. Neonates are not able to 
understand even Mother's speech although her sound is 
familiar. Given all these, any speech for neonates is 
meaningless, and asleep newborns may not be sensitive to 
the sounds even their native tongue (the language spoken by 
the mother during pregnancy) in experiments when these 
sounds were pronounced by outsiders. However, they were 
sensitive to them. Sleeping newborns' brains reacted to sound 
stimuli that their sensing could not provide due to their 
brains' sensory isolation to meaningless and unfamiliar 
sounds. We believe that this outcome may mean the implicit 
modality of newborns' interaction with caregivers since any 
other explanation of this outcome is excluded.  
Whether or not social interaction contributes to the 
increase in results of a group mental activity? Whether or not 
dyads maintain non-perceptual interaction? What are the 
neurobiological grounds of intentionality? 
III.
NEURAL  FOUNDATION OF COHERENT INTELLIGENCE 
A. Experiments on Problem-Solving in Groups 
Recent research of 24 online experiments presented that 
unprimed participants show a more significant accuracy level 
when they complete the thought task simultaneously with 
confederates who are primed with the correct answer; if they 
were emotionally stimulated and completed the tasks without 
communication [9]. Primary groups [33] show empirical 
evidence of a more significant accuracy in problem-solving 
in the coherent intelligence state. In specific, we conducted 
13 experiments in dyads (116 subjects) with P-value < 0,001 
(probability-value in null hypothesis significance testing), 
and 7 experiments in primary group adults (41 subjects) with 
the P-value < 0,002. Experiments with 43 secondary group 
subjects (unfamiliar adults, M=20) show the effect only with 
the task of unfamiliar language translation. Non-semantic 
tasks–with synthetic language and two-color round symbols–
did not stimulate the effect in 2 experiments with 207 
secondary group subjects (unfamiliar). These results are 
consistent with research Danilov et al. [34]. 
B. The Model of Coherent Intelligence 
According to Danilov and Mihailova [23], a supranormal 
environmental case–e.g., first hours after birth–stimulates 
supranormal sensation in dyads. This can push the inherited 
mechanism of social entrainment of infants to the rhythm of 
the mother. Both the supranormal sensation and social 
entrainment may stimulate the common emotional arousal. 
The latter is increased by the ongoing supranormal sensation 
and the occurring rhythm of arbitrary movements of the 
infant. The continuing supranormal sensation and ever-
increasing arousal of the infant and the mother along with the 
rhythm of the infant’s unintentional movements stimulate 
early imitation and emotional contagion. The problem is how 
the infant capture and reproduce the kinematic of 
movements.  
The MCI proposes that common emotional arousal 
together with the identical rhythm create coherent mental 
processes in dyads–Coherent Intelligence (Figure 1). At 
Sensorimotor Stage (by Piaget, or Stage 3 of the Model of 
Hierarchical Complexity MHC [35]), organisms do not 
maintain bilateral communication. According to Danilov and 
Mihailova [23], individuals are able to interact by 
distinguishing perceptual signals of identical modality by 
their significance. This ability can contribute to ostensive 
cues. After all, this meaningless interaction modifies into 
communication when individuals imbue perceptual impulses 
with mutually implied meanings, cascading their signals in 
response to the history of relations between them [23]. 
Figure 1. The Model of Coherent Intelligence. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

                                                                                                                                                                                    
C. Neural Foundation of this MCI 
Leaving aside semantic constraints, it seems consistent to 
say that intentionality manifests itself in intention. Specific 
brain regions may be engaged in shared sensory/cognitive 
processes irrespective of the feedback's valence and in 
encoding the subjective relevance of the feedback [36][37]. 
Outside areas involved in this processing, additional 
brain areas are specifically engaged according to the 
particular communicative modality [38]. According to 
Tettamanti et al. [39], Intention Processing Network (IPN) 
involves the medial prefrontal cortex, precuneus, bilateral 
posterior superior temporal sulcus, and temporoparietal 
junctions. Depending on different social interaction 
modalities, the IPN is complemented by activation of 
additional brain areas, reflecting different Modality-Specific 
(M-S) input gateways to the IPN [39]. The M-S gateways 
mediate the structural and semantic decoding of stimuli and 
provide M-S information [39]. Sensory inputs of a specific 
modality can activate the precise association of certain 
sensorimotor networks with specific brain emotion circuits 
[40].  
We believe that this emotion-motion coherence can 
involve the particular cognitive process of a high order. 
When two or more organisms are in common emotional 
arousal and simultaneously in the interactional synchrony, 
then these two different experiences may meet each other in 
high-order cognitive processing. Emotional arousal can 
trigger evolutionarily old brain circuits, which interact with 
high-order cognitive and linguistic processing [40]. It seems 
uncontroversial to say that infants' pure nervous system may 
experience emotions, but only primitive ones related to 
survival, such as those associated with hunger and pain. 
However, newborns cannot express emotions themselves 
appropriately to a specific social case on their own, even 
though they possess inherited neuronal patterns of primitive 
emotional impressions. They also cannot understand the 
expression of others' emotions (as is discussed above). They 
are only able of experiencing primitive emotions. Research 
on insects–organisms in stage 3 of MHC [35] like human 
newborns–assumes that they also experience emotions [41]. 
Researchers argued that agitated honeybees exhibit 
pessimistic cognitive biases: 'Whether animals experience 
human-like emotions is controversial and of immense 
societal concern. The next reason is that animals cannot 
provide subjective reports of how they feel, emotional state 
can only be inferred using physiological, cognitive, and 
behavioral measures. In humans, negative feelings are 
reliably correlated with pessimistic cognitive biases, defined 
as the increased expectation of bad outcomes. Recently, 
mammals and birds with poor welfare have also been found 
to display pessimistic-like decision making, but cognitive 
biases have not thus far been explored in invertebrates [41].' 
In parallel, interactional synchrony stimulates a 
sensorimotor network engaging neural networks responsible 
for communicative intention processing (including high-
order cognitive and linguistic processing)[38]. Neural 
networks of emotional excitation and the sensorimotor 
networks are separately connected to many different M-S 
gateways. Meanwhile their coherence intersects in certain 
M-S gateways of each organism depending on (i) pattern of 
neural circuit engaged through emotional excitation and (ii) 
pattern of the sensorimotor network [38].  
We propose a rough hypothesis of how Long-Term 
Potentiation (LTP) can be induced only in particular M-S 
gateways, retaining information about the certain received 
stimulus. Different areas of the brain exhibit different forms 
of LTP, their types depend on a number of factors, such as 
age and the neuron's anatomic location. However, the 
common processes are the same for all. The simple nature of 
Hebbian learning, based only on the coincidence of pre- and 
post-synaptic activity, LTP is persistent, lasting from several 
minutes to many months, and it is this persistence that 
separates LTP from other forms of synaptic plasticity [42]. 
Spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP)–that involves the 
pairing of pre- and postsynaptic action potentials (APs)–
causes a variation of LTP or Long-Term Depression (LTD) 
[43]. The timing between pre- and postsynaptic APs 
modulates synaptic strength, triggering LTP or LTD [43]. 
The sign and magnitude of the change in synaptic strength 
depend on the relative timing between spikes of two 
connected neurons (the pre- and postsynaptic neuron) [43]. 
The structural organization of excitatory inputs supporting 
STDP remains unknown [43]. Even though the ensemble of 
emotion-motion integrated networks weakly stimulates the 
intersected neurons in their junction with M-S gateways. If 
all M-S gateways also simultaneously receive weak 
stimulation from the receptors (due to the chaos of stimuli 
received by the pure nervous system), then this multi-signal 
contributes to LTP in the neurons of particular M-S gateway 
at the junction of this emotion-motion ensemble due to the 
effect of the synaptic cooperativity, because of the following. 
LTP can be induced either by strong tetanic stimulation of a 
single pathway to a synapse, or cooperatively via the weaker 
stimulation of many. Neurons from the gateways in the 
connections of these networks receive cooperative 
stimulation. Induction of cooperativity can ensure LTP.  
According to Tazerart et al. [43], the synaptic 
cooperativity of only two neighboring synaptic inputs onto 
spines in the basal dendrites of L5 pyramidal neurons 
extends the pre–post timing window that can trigger 
potentiation. The engaged M-S gateways retain a certain 
stimulus, while other M-S gateways (also of the same 
sensory modality) remain depressed without keeping 
information of other stimuli. Therefore, specific M-S 
gateways are sensitive, and all these organisms respond to 
specific sensory modalities. Figure 2 shows a schematic 
picture of this process. The induced emotion and 
sensorimotor networks (they are red in the picture) together 
activate certain M-S gateway even with weak stimulation of 
sensory input. The different colors of M-S gateways refer to 
different sensory modalities. At this point, the analysis 
encounters the ground of the PDE problem of how immature 
neurons learn the timing code to modulate certain synaptic 
strength, which triggers either LTP or LTD. Because the 
structural organization of excitatory inputs supporting STDP 
remains unknown [43]. 
The study of the PDE problem leads to the analysis of the 
axiomatic foundations of Psychology, Sociology, and 
Neuroscience–the basic notions that form these sciences–
from the perspectives of the actual scientific paradigm.  
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

                                                                                                                                                                                    
Figure 2. The Scheme of  M-S Gateway Activation. 
The question of "how can the blank mind begin to learn 
from social interaction" is reduced to "how immature 
neurons learn the timing code to modulate certain synaptic 
strength, that triggers either LTP or LTD". The sign and 
magnitude of the change in synaptic strength depend on the 
relative timing between spikes of two connected neurons (the 
pre- and postsynaptic neuron). How can neurons of an 
immature organism (even a newborn) learn the structural 
organization of excitatory inputs that support STDP? The 
further arguments show why we believe that the 
entanglement state of neurons can contribute to simultaneous 
LTP in neurons. 
The daily routine develops neural patterns of primitive 
emotions and sensorimotor neural patterns in infants. Their 
everyday coherence with the social world forms various 
integrated neural patterns of different emotions from the 
existing ensemble of emotion scripts in their community. We 
believe that caregivers contribute to the formation of emotion 
scripts and, consequently, shaping of specific neural patterns 
in infants. Obviously, adults experienced intentionality 
before their coherent mental process began with newborns. 
Life experience taught them particular emotion scripts and 
defined their precise motion kinematics, that formed more 
elaborated sensorimotor patterns. In routine cooperation with 
newborns, a caregiver enters in interactional synchrony with 
a newborn, under the influence of supranormal stimuli, being 
in social entrainment. Therefore, the similar M-S gateways 
are excited in the dyad. Meanwhile, the adult's current 
intentionality has already triggered a particular network that 
includes current emotion patterns and sensorimotor patterns. 
Part of it corresponds to a primitive complex emotion-
sensorimotor network in the newborn with similar M-S 
gateways. This newborn's primitive network is less 
developed, although it is similar to the part of the adult's 
integrated complex network. It can be assumed that the 
neurons in the connections of different excited emotion 
patterns and sensorimotor patterns go into the entangled state 
because they receive LTP, being induced cooperatively via 
many stimulations. In such a manner, the adult and infant 
neurons behave as a single unit. Therefore, specific M-S 
gateways are sensitive in dyads, and these organisms equally 
respond to specific sensory modalities. The induction of t-
LTP and t-LTD in single spines follows a bidirectional 
Hebbian STDP learning rule [43]. Hebbian theory claims 
that an increase in synaptic efficacy arises from the learning 
process. The PDE problem in a chaos of stimuli requires a 
teaching mechanism from the beginning. The entanglement 
state of neurons is a possible option of how infants' neurons 
learn spike-timing-dependent plasticity. In the entanglement 
state, the behavior of the neurons of a mature organism 
determines and trains the neurons of a newborn. 
Emotion sharing indicates implicit modality of social 
interaction. The entanglement state of neurons in the certain 
M-S gateways is a possible option of how infants' neurons 
learn STDP. This involvement of similar networks and the 
sensibility of the certain M-S gateways lasts as long as is 
necessary to teach the immature nervous system. The 
entanglement state of these neurons ensures their immediate 
response to the specific stimulus, regardless of the spatial 
division of organisms. Therefore, specific M-S gateways are 
sensitive, and these organisms equally respond to specific 
sensory modalities. 
Knowledge about consciousness is being developed by 
studying the interaction of neurons, whose dimensions are 
similar to objects studied from the perspective of quantum 
mechanics scale. Knowledge about their behavior may 
complement the set of social interaction modalities. The 
generation of entanglement between increasingly 
macroscopic and disparate systems is an ongoing effort in 
quantum science [44]. Recent studies have shown that the 
behavior of objects 15 micrometers in size is consistent with 
the quantum world's laws, such as the phenomenon of 
quantum entanglement [45]-[47]. An entangled state was 
generated even between a millimeter-sized dielectric 
membrane and an ensemble of 109 atoms [44]. In 
comparison, a neuron's nucleus has a diameter of 3 to 18 
micrometers, and a neuron has a size of 4 to 100 
micrometers. The quantum entanglement state of particles is 
not something rare in Nature. Quantum systems can become 
entangled through various types of interactions, for the 
moment we know: (a) light's polarization. One of the most 
commonly used methods is spontaneous parametric down-
conversion to generate a pair of photons entangled in 
polarization; (b) decay cascade of the bi-exciton. Fiber 
coupler to confine and mix photons, photons emitted from 
decay cascade of the bi-exciton in a quantum dot; (c) Hong-
Ou-Mandel effect; (d) in the earliest tests of Bell's theorem, 
the entangled particles were generated using atomic 
cascades. An exciting question is how to create a quantum 
entanglement state of living cells. According to Marletto et 
al. [46], experiments show entanglement between living 
sulfur bacteria with quantized light. Whether or not neurons 
of different organisms become entangled through similar 
stimulation of their emotion networks? 
Entanglement is an essential property of multipartite 
quantum systems, characterized by the inseparability of 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

                                                                                                                                                                                    
quantum states of objects regardless of their spatial 
separation [44]. Recent study tested quantum entanglement 
over unprecedented distances, beaming entangled pairs of 
photons to three ground stations across China—each 
separated by more than 1200 kilometers. 'Yin et al. used the 
Micius satellite, which was launched last year and is 
equipped with a specialized quantum optical payload. They 
successfully demonstrated the satellite-based entanglement 
distribution to receiver stations separated by more than 1200 
km [45]'. 
We believe that these findings may contribute to an 
advanced curriculum, specifically in facilitating the teaching 
of young children. 
IV.
CONCLUSIONS 
The analysis of recent empirical data yields a hypothesis 
of beginning cognition–the Model of Coherent Intelligence 
and its neural foundation of how the pure nervous system 
distinguishes sensory stimuli. This hypothesis postulates two 
new ideas of the PDE basis: (1) cognition begins from a 
separation of sensory stimuli: LTP can only be induced in 
neurons of particular M-S gateways (not all)–selective 
induction promotes selective sensitivity to the chaos of 
stimuli. (2) Neurons can learn STDP in social interaction by 
repeating the timing code of other organisms' mature neurons 
to modulate certain synaptic strength, which triggers either 
LTP or LTD. We believe that the MCI shapes intentionality 
in intimately related individuals. Coherent Intelligence is the 
integration of M-S gateways of particular brain areas, which 
contributes to different organisms' sensibility to similar 
sensory inputs. The 24 online experiments show empirical 
evidence of the MCI. We believe that this approach may 
contribute to study the mind and, in specific, to 
understanding the appearance of intentionality and the 
Primary Data Entry problem. We believe that these findings 
may contribute to an advanced curriculum, specifically in 
teaching 2- to 3-year-old children. Further research should 
also examine whether the MCI can provide a contactless 
interaction of the computer with neuronal circuits, in which 
the computer would become a part of extended mind. This 
approach provides a wide range of possibilities for 
developing a human-computer interface. 
AUTHORS CONTRIBUTION 
Igor Val Danilov formulated the hypothesis and wrote the 
first draft of the manuscript. Igor Val Danilov and Sandra 
Mihailova improved the text over several iterations.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors express their gratitude to Iegor Reznikoff, 
Emeritus Professor Université de Paris Ouest Nanterre, 
France, for commenting this paper. 
REFERENCES 
1.
E. Thompson, Mind in Life : biology, phenomenology, and the 
sciences of mind. The Belknap press of Harvard University 
press. Cambridge, Massachusetts London, England. 1st 
Harvard University Press paperback edition. 2010. 
2.
J. Delafield-Butt and C. Trevarthen, Theories of the 
development of human communication. 2012. [Online]. 
Available from: https://strathprints.strath.ac.uk/39831/1/ 
Delafield_Butt_Trevarthen_2012_Theories_of_the_developm 
ent_of_human_communication_final_edit_060312.pdf 
[retrieved: March, 2021].  
3.
G. Csibra and G. Gergely, "Natural Pedagogy," Trends Cogn. 
Sci., vol. 13, pp. 148–153, 2009. 
4.
S. R. Waxman and E. M. Leddon, "Early Word-Learning and 
Conceptual Development". The Wiley-Blackwell Handbook of 
Childhood Cognitive Development. 2010. [Online] Available 
from: https://www.academia.edu/12821552/Early_Word- 
Learning_and_Conceptual_Development [retrieved: March, 
2021]. 
5.
I. Val. Danilov, "Imitation or Early Imitation: Towards the 
Problem of Primary Data Entry." The Journal of Higher 
Education Theory and Practice (JHETP). In press. 
6.
F. J. Varela, Principles of Biological Autonomy. 
ISBN-10:0135009502, ISBN-13:978-0135009505. 1979. 
7.
F. J. Varela and P. Bourgine, "Towards a practice of 
autonomous systems. In Towards a Practice of Autonomous 
Systems." The first European conference on Artificial Life, ed. 
F. J. Varela and P. Bourgine, pp. xi–xviii. Cambridge: MIT 
Press. 1992. 
8.
T. Van Gelder, "The dynamical hypothesis in cognitive 
science." Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 21 (5), pp.
615-628. 1998. DOI: 10.1017/s0140525x98001733.   
9.
I. Val. Danilov and S. Mihailova, "Knowledge Sharing through 
Social Interaction: Towards the Problem of Primary Data 
Entry." The 11th Eurasian Conference on Language & Social 
Sciences which is held in Gjakova University, Kosovo. p.226. 
2021. [Online] Available from http://eclss.org/
publicationsfordoi/ abst11act8boo8k2021a.pdf. [retrieved: 
March, 2021]. 
10. J. Delafield-Butt and C. Trevarthen, Development of human 
consciousness. 2016. [Online]. Available from: https:// 
strathprints.strath.ac.uk/id/eprint/57845. [retrieved: March, 
2021]. 
11. J. R. Searle, W. S. Slusser, and M. Slusser, Intentionality: An 
Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge University Press. 
1983. 
12. T. Crane, "Intentionalism." The Oxford Handbook to the 
Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 
474–493. 2009. 
13. M. Tomasello, Becoming human: A theory of ontogeny. 
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 2019. https:// 
doi.org/10.4159/9780674988651.  
14. R. E. Jack, "Culture and facial expressions of emotion". Visual 
Cognition vol. 21, pp. 1248–1286, 2013, https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/13506285.2013.8353.  
15. C. Crivelli and M. Gendron, In e Science of Facial Expression 
(eds José-Miguel Fernández-Dols & James A. Russell) Oxford 
University Press, 2017.  
16. L. F. Barrett, R. Adolphs, S. Marsella, A. Martinez, and S. 
Pollak, "Emotional Expressions Reconsidered: Challenges to 
Inferring Emotion in Human Facial Movements." 
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, vol. 20, pp. 1–68. 
2019. https:// doi.org/10.1177/1529100619832930.  
17. K. Hoemann et al., "Context facilitates performance on a 
classic cross-cultural emotion perception task". Emotion. 
(Washington, DC). vol. 19, pp. 1292–1313. 2019. 
18. M. Gendron, K. Hoemann, A. N. Crittenden, S. M. Mangola, 
G. A. Ruark, and L. F. Barret, "Emotion Perception in Hadza 
Hunter-Gatherers". Scientific reports, vol. 10, pp. 3867 , 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-60257-2. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

                                                                                                                                                                                    
19. I. Val. Danilov, "Social Interaction in Knowledge Acquisition: 
Advanced Curriculum. Critical Review of Studies Relevant to 
Social Behavior of Infants". The Twelfth International 
Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and 
Applications COGNITIVE2020. 2020. 
20. J. Decety and P. L. Jackson, "The functional architecture of 
human empathy". Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience 
Reviews, vol. 3, pp. 71-100. 2004. 
21. M. Tamietto et al., "Unseen facial and bodily expressions 
trigger fast emotional reactions". PNAS, vol. 106: pp. 
17661-17666, 2009. 
22. A. L. Valencia and T. Froese, "What binds us? Inter-brain 
neural synchronization and its implications for theories of 
human consciousness". Neuroscience of Consciousness, vol. 
6(1), 2020. doi: 10.1093/nc/niaa010. 
23. I. Val. Danilov and S. Mihailova, "Emotions in e-Learning: 
The Review Promotes Advanced Curriculum by Studying 
Social Interaction". The International Conference on Lifelong 
Education and Leadership for All (ICLEL). pp.8-17. ERIC 
Number: ED606507. 2020. [Online] Available from: https://
faf348ef-5904-4b29-9cf9-98b675786628.filesusr.com/ugd/
d546b1_2d77ecc9e07f4b0fb2cccce23af201f7.pdf. [retrieved: 
March, 2021]. 
24. C. Szymanski et al., "Teams on the same wavelength perform 
better: Inter-brain phase synchronization constitutes a neural 
substrate for social facilitation". Neuroimage, vol. 15, pp. 
425–436, 2017. 
25. F. A. Fishburn et al., "Putting our heads together: interpersonal 
neural synchronization as a biological mechanism for shared 
intentionality". Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci, vol. 13, pp. 841–
849, 2018. 
26. Y. Hu et al., "Inter-brain synchrony and cooperation context in 
interactive decision making". Biol Psychol, vol. 133, pp. 54–
62, 2018. 
27. L. Astolfi et al., "Neuroelectrical hyperscanning measures 
simultaneous brain activity in humans". Brain Topogr, vol. 23, 
pp. 243–256, 2010. 
28. L. May, K. Byers-Heinlein, J. Gervain, and J. F. Werker, 
"Language and the newborn brain: does prenatal language 
experience shape the neonate neural response to speech?" 
Front. Psychology, vol. 2, pp. 222, 2011, doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2011.00222.  
29. T. Andrillon and S. Kouider, "The vigilant sleeper: neural 
mechanisms of sensory (de)coupling during sleep." Current 
Opinion in Physiology,  vol. 15, pp. 47–59, 2020. 
30. A. Ibanez, V. Lopez, and C. Cornejo, "ERPs and contextual 
semantic discrimination: degrees of congruence in 
wakefulness and sleep." Brain Lang, vol. 98, pp. 264-275, 
2006. 
31. G. Legendre, T. Andrillon, M. Koroma, and S. Kouider, 
"Sleepers track informative speech in a multitalker 
environment." Nat Hum Behav, vol. 3, pp. 274-283, 2019. 
32. R. Cox, I. Korjoukov, M. de Boer, and L. M. Talamini, "Sound 
Asleep: Processing and Retention of Slow Oscillation Phase-
Targeted Stimuli." PLoS ONE, vol. 9(7), pp. e101567. 2014, 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0101567. 
33. C. H. Cooley, Social organization: A study of the larger mind , 
(pp. 23-31). New York, NY: Charles Scribner's Sons, xvii, pp. 
426, 1909. 
34. I. Val. Danilov, S. Mihailova, and V. Perepjolkina, 
"Unconscious social interaction, coherent intelligence in 
learning." The 12th annual conference. ICERI 2019. doi: 
10.21125/iceri.2019.0606.  
35. M. L. Commons, "The fundamental issues with behavioral 
development." Behavioral Development Bulletin, vol. 21(1), 
pp. 1-12, 2016, http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/bdb0000022. 
36. S. Oldham, C. Murawski, A. Fornito, G. Youssef, M. Yucel, 
and V. Lorenzetti,  "The anticipation and outcome phases of 
reward and loss processing: A neuroimaging meta-analysis of 
the monetary incentive delay task." Human Brain Mapping, 
vol. 39, pp. 3398-3418, 2018. 
37. D. Martinsa et al., "Mapping social reward and punishment 
processing in the human brain: A voxel-based meta-analysis of 
neuroimaging findings using the Social Incentive Delay task." 
2 0 2 1 , b i o R x i v p r e p r i n t d o i : h t t p s : / / d o i . o rg / 
10.1101/2020.05.28.121475.  
38. I. Enrici, M. Adenzato, S. Cappa, B. G. Bara, and M. 
Tettamanti, "Intention Processing in Communication: A 
Common Brain Network for Language and Gestures." Journal 
of Cognitive Neuroscience, volume 23, issue 9, pp. 
2415-2431, 2011, https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2010.21594.  
39. M. Tettamanti, M. M. Vaghi, B. G. Bara, S. F. Cappa, I. Enrici, 
and M. Adenzato, "Effective connectivity gateways to the 
Theory of Mind network in processing communicative 
intention." NeuroImage, vol. 155, pp. 169-176, 2017, doi:
10.1016/ j.neuroimage.2017.04.050.  
40. L. Nummenmaa et al., "Emotional speech synchronizes brains 
across listeners and engages large-scale dynamic brain 
networks." NeuroImage, vol. 102, pp. 498-509, 2014. 
41. M. Bateson et al., "Agitated honeybees exhibit pessimistic 
cognitive biases." Curr Biol., vol. 21;21(12), pp. 1070-1073, 
2011, doi:10.1016/ j.cub.2011.05.017.  
42. W. C. Abraham, "How long will long-term potentiation last?". 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. 
Series B, Biological Sciences. vol. 358 (1432), pp. 735–744, 
2003, doi:10.1098/rstb.2002.1222.  
43. S. Tazerart et al., "A spike-timing-dependent plasticity rule for 
dendritic spines." Nat Commun vol. 11, pp. 4276, 2020, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41467-020-17861-7.  
44. R. A. Thomas et al., "Entanglement between distant 
macroscopic mechanical and spin systems." Nat. Phys., 2020, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41567-020-1031-5.  
45. J. Yin et al., "Satellite-based entanglement distribution over 
1200 kilometers" [Online] Science: vol. 356, issue 6343, pp. 
1140-1144, doi:10.1126/science.aan3211, 2017. [retrieved: 
March, 2021]. 
46. C. Marletto, D. M. Coles, T. Farrow, and V. Vedral, 
"Entanglement between living bacteria and quantized light 
witnessed by Rabi splitting." Journal of Physics 
Communications, vol. 2(10). [Online] Available from: http://
iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/2399-6528/aae224/ meta. 
[retrieved: March, 2021]. 
47. M. Sillanpää and S. Hong, "Spooky quantum entanglement 
goes big in new experiments." [Online] Science News 25 April 
2018. Available from: https:// www.sciencenews.org/article/
spooky-quantum-entanglement-goes-big-new-experiments. 
[retrieved: March, 2021]. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

