Multimodal Interactions Viewed as
Dual Process on Multi-Dimensional Memory Frames under Weak Synchronization
Muneo Kitajima
Information and
Management Systems Engineering
Nagaoka University of Technology
1603-1 Kamitomioka,
Nagaoka, Niigata 940-2188, JAPAN
Email: mkitajima
@kjs.nagaokaut.ac.jp
J´erˆome Dinet
Psychology and Neuroscience Laboratory
University of Lorraine
54021 Nancy Cedex, France
Email: jerome.dinet
@univ-lorraine.fr
Makoto Toyota
T-Method
Chiba Japan
Email: pubmtoyota@me.com
Abstract—Behavior of users interacting with multimodal inter-
faces looks complex because the degrees of freedom of sensory
input and motor output is large. This paper suggests that
this complexity can be alleviated by applying the Simon’s ant
metaphor to the multimodal interaction situations, i.e., “What
users do is simple. 1) they use perceptual input to generate
a mirror image of the real world surrounding the self to be
shared in conscious and unconscious processes, 2) they select next
actions by consciously planning ahead and unconsciously tuning
motor movements for the event to happen, and after performing
the action, they unconsciously modify the participated neural
network and consciously reﬂect on the result of action, and 3) they
perform 1 and 2 in synchronous with the ever-changing external
environment, which this paper calls “weak synchronization.” A
cognitive architecture, Model Human Processor with Realtime
Constraints (MHP/RT) and its associated memory structure,
Multi-Dimensional Memory Frames, developed by the authors is
brieﬂy introduced considering the situation of users interacting
with multimodal environment. Then, the above three items are
derived as the essential principles for organizing user’s behavior
in multimodal interaction environment. Future work on designing
mixed reality multimodal interaction environment is introduced
that has its basis on the perspectives for multimodal interactions
this paper claims.
Keywords–Dual process; Multimodal interaction, Two Minds,
Multi-dimensional memory frames; Weak synchronization; Time
scale of human action.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Multimodal interaction provides multiple communication
channels between users and automated systems. Speeches, ﬁn-
ger movements, hand movements, eye movements, and so on,
can be used for transmitting messages from users to systems.
Synthesized voices, sounds, vibrations, texts and graphics ren-
dered on visual display can be used for sending messages from
systems to users. What happens at the multimodal interface be-
tween users and systems looks vey complex because the degrees
of freedom of both sides is large. Multimodal interaction using
virtual reality technologies to realize immersive environments
is an emerging and continuously evolving domain, in which
development of a theoretical framework to reduce the inherent
complexity is required for advancing principled design of
multimodal interaction [1].
This paper suggests an approach for alleviating this com-
plexity by applying the metaphor of Simon’s ant to the
situation where users are engaging in multimodal interaction to
use automated systems. Simon describes in the book entitled
“The Sciences of Artiﬁcial” [2, pp.51–53] as follows:
An ant [A man], viewed as a behaving system, is
quite simple. The apparent complexity of its behavior
over time is largely a reﬂection of the complexity of
the environment in which it ﬁnds itself.
In these sentences, he described a situation where an ant
produced a very complex path across the terrain of a beach
while making decisions on which direction to go at each
moment when it encounters an obstacle. A person observing
only the path itself might be inclined to ascribe a great deal of
intelligence of ant. However, it turned out that the complexity
of the path is really produced by the complexity of the terrain
over which the ant was navigating. The ant only selected
the optimal operator from doable simple alternatives for the
speciﬁc situation where it was needed to reduce the distance
from the current location to its nest. The speciﬁc trajectory was
the result of successive decisions of selecting locally optimal
simple operators.
Simon [2] claims that decision making in problem solving
situations, which looks complex and intractable, is in real-
ity governed by two principles, i.e., satsﬁcing principle and
bounded rationality. The role of these behavioral principles
for understanding a variety of decision making behaviors in
problem solving situations is the same as that of the Newtonian
equation of motion for predicting conﬁgurations of the planets
of the solar system at speciﬁc times in the future. They should
provide a ﬁrm basis for considering behaviors of decision
makers; any models for explaining and predicting behaviors of
decision makers in speciﬁc situations have to be constructed
on them.
Users interacting with multimodal interfaces are placed in
the situation where they have to select next actions and execute
them by acting to the external environment through their body
parts, e.g., limbs, eye balls, and so on, via motor neurons
as serial processing, and receive signals from not only the
external systems but also themselves (i.e., seeing their ﬁnger
movements and hearing their voices) through the ﬁve senses,
i.e., taste, sight, touch, smell, and sound, via sensory neurons as
parallel processing. The received signals traverse the networks
of intermediate neurons to select next actions. This is a circular
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Environmental Changes
Autonomic Nervous 
System
Sensory Nervous 
System 
Five Senses
Perception of 
Changes
Adaptive 
Movements
Somatic Nervous 
System 
Hands, Mouth, etc.
interneurons
Figure 1. Continuous cyclic loop of perception and movement (adapted from
[3, Figure 1]).
process as shown by Figure 1. After s/he perceives the results
of movements of his/her body parts, as well as the changes
of the external environment, a next Perceptual–Motor cycle
occurs. Interneurons in-between the sensory neurons and motor
neurons convert the input patterns to the output patterns –
these constitute a Perceptual–Cognitive–Motor (PCM) process.
Memories associated with the respective activities of sensory,
motor, and intermediate neurons continuously accumulate and
change as the PCM cycle runs. In multimodal interaction situ-
ations, the PCM cycle equipped with the memories associated
with the respective processes runs in synchronous with the
ever-changing multimodal environment, otherwise the user and
the system are not able to establish “interaction.” Given the
very basic architecture of PCM cycle shown by Figure 1 and its
associated memories, how synchronization between a user and
a multimodal system could be established? This paper suggests
a form of synchronization, “weak synchronization”, should
serve as the operational principle for the PCM architecture,
as the satisﬁcinig principle and bounded rationality do for
decision making in a problem space.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces a
theory of action selection and memory that the authors have
developed [4][5][6], which essentially elaborates the basic idea
of endless cycle of PCM as depicted in Figure 1, and deﬁnes
a cognitive architecture that would be most suitable for under-
standing people interacting with ever-changing environment.
Section II-A introduces the Model Human Processor with
Realtime Constraints (MHP/RT) that deﬁnes the PCM cycle,
and Section II-B shows the memory system that accompa-
nies with MHP/RT. Section III starts with explanations how
MHP/RT interacts with multimodal environment, then, derives
an operation principle “weak synchronization” as a critical
means for a user as modeled by MHP/RT to interact smoothly
with multimodal environment. Finally, Section IV provides a
summary of the paper with future work focusing on how the
insight of this paper could be used to better understand users
interacting with multimodal environment.
II.
THEORY OF ACTION SELECTION AND MEMORY
Starting from the basic cycle of PCM processes depicted by
Figure 1, Kitajima and Toyota [5][6] have constructed a com-
prehensive theory of action selection and memory, MHP/RT,
that should provide a basis for constructing any models for
users interacting with multimodal environment. The theory
integrates the fundamental characteristics of human beings
interacting with ever-changing environments. This section in-
troduces brieﬂy MHP/RT that deﬁnes the PCM processes and
its associated memory, Multidimensional Memory Frames, that
is used and modiﬁed while MHP/RT works.
A. MHP/RT
MHP/RT is an extension of Model Human Processor
(MHP) developed by Card, Moran and Newell in 1983 [7].
MHP is a cognitive architecture to simulate users interacting
with then-available information devices, such as The Star
workstation, ofﬁcially named Xerox 8010 Information System.
MHP/RT aims at simulating users who interact with richer in
contents and more dynamic modern information environment,
such as multimodal interaction environment. MHP/RT has to
deal with more information-rich situations than MHP was
supposed to do.
MHP/RT implements at a higher level the following three
facts concerning processing with an assumption. The facts are
as follows:
1)
The fundamental processing mechanism of brain is
Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP) [8],
2)
Human behavior emerges as the results of compe-
tition of the dual processes of System 2, a slow
conscious process for deliberate reasoning with feed-
back control, and System 1, fast unconscious pro-
cess for intuitive reaction with feedforward control
for connecting perception and motor, called Two
Minds [9][10], and
3)
Behavior is organized under happiness goals [11],
e.g., target happiness, competitive happiness, coop-
erative happiness, etc.
The assumption is that the endless PCM cycle continues from
his or her birth to death in the ecological system, consisting
of a person and his/her environments, as a periodic circulation
system, called autopoiesis [12]. The system is truly dynamic
and evolves in the irreversible time dimension.
In summary, MHP/RT essentially deﬁnes a speciﬁcation
for an organic version of PDP by incorporating Two Minds
and happiness goals in the original version of PDP. The term,
“Organic Parallel Distributed Processing (O-PDP)”, was ﬁrst
introduced by [13]. O-PDP develops cross-networks of neurons
in the brain as it accumulates experience of interactions in
the environment. The neural network development process
is circular, which means that any experience at a particular
moment should reﬂect somehow the experience of the past
interactions that have been recorded in the shape of current
neural networks. In this way, an O-PDP system is organized
evolutionally, and realized as a neural network system, includ-
ing the brain, the spinal nerves, and the peripheral nerves to
construct an O-PDP system.
MHP/RT, illustrated in the left portion of Figure 2, de-
scribes the cyclic PCM processes. It consists of four major au-
tonomous systems: Perceptual Information Processing for per-
ception, Autonomous Automatic Behavior Control Processing
(System 1) and Conscious Information Processing (System 2)
for cognition, and Behavioral Action Processing for motor
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Behavioral Action
Asynchronous
Band
Asynchronous Band
Bodily Coordination
Monitoring
Autonomous System
・ Circadian Rhythm
・ Bodily Activity Monitor
Information from
Environment
Synchronous Band
With Real Time Constraints
Memorization of
Behavioral Actions
and their Results
Two Minds
Available memory for decision making includes:
1) Memory activated by resonance reaction
2) Residually active memory 
Memory Processing Time
TIME
Memory Processing (Resonance Reaction)
Autonomous System
Long-Term
Memory
Motor Memory
Short-Term Memory
Working Memory
Autonomous System
Perceptual
Information Processing
Autonomous System
Behavioral Action
Processing
Autonomous System
Autonomous Automatic
Behavior Control 
Processing
Autonomous System
Conscious
Information Processing
Model Human Processor 
with Real-Time Constraints
WMD-Frame
RMD-Frame
BMD-Frame
MMD-Frame
PMD-Frame
Perception
Distributed Memory System
Conscious
Activities
Somatic Marker
Situation Awareness
Bodily
Activities
Cerebellum
bulb, spinal
Perception
Workspace 
for Integration
Language-LINK
Perception for System 1
Autonomous Automatic
Behavior Control Processing
Perception for System 2
Conscious Information Processing
Perception for
System 1 & 2
Perception
Figure 2. MHP/RT ([6, Figure 3]) and the distributed memory system.
movement. These processes work in synchronous with the
ever-changing external environment, which effectively imposes
real time constraints on the PCM processes. In addition, these
processes connect with Memory Processing autonomous sys-
tem to make use of stored contents in memories via resonance
reaction, which happens not synchronously but asynchronously
with the environmental changes.
The cyclic PCM processes are implemented in O-PDP as
hierarchically organized bands having their respective charac-
teristic times for operations, i.e., Biological, Cognitive, Ratio-
nal, and Social bands deﬁned as Newell’s time scale of human
action (Figure 3). Respective bands have their characteristic
times. A number of phenomena that occur in a certain single
band would be related with each other and therefore they could
have linear relationships. On the other hand, they should have
non-linear relationships with those phenomena that happen in
a different band. For example, conscious activities in Rational
Band, System 2, cannot have linear relationship with uncon-
scious activities in Biological Band, System 1, but have non-
linear relationships.
The existence of gaps between bands indicates that a
phenomenon in one band evolves quasi-independently with
another in a different band. However, one side would have
some effect on the other in order to organize the activities
of the O-PDP system coherently in the environment. Sys-
tem 1 runs quasi-independently with System 2 with occasional
exchanges over the gap, e.g., conscious process, System 2,
intervenes unconscious process, System 1, before unconscious
feedforward process would derail. In many cases in our
daily life, application of irrational cognitive bias could be
avoided by deliberate thinking by System 2. This is a kind
of synchronization between System 2 and System 1 when
action selection is done by MHP/RT. This interaction is
shown in the left portion of Figure 2 as “Two Minds” that
connects Autonomous Automatic Behavior Control Processing
(System 1) and Conscious Information Processing (System 2).
As described, synchronization is an important mechanism to
make the behavior of O-PDP system stable. This issue will be
further discussed later in Section III-C.
MHP/RT is a real brain model comprising of System 1’s
unconscious processes and System 2’s conscious processes at
the same level as shown in Figure 2, in which both System 1
and System 2 receive input from the Perceptual Information
Processing autonomous system in one way, and from the Mem-
ory Processing autonomous system in another way. System 1
and System 2 work autonomously without any superordinate-
subordinate hierarchical relationships but interact with each
other when necessary [6].
This feature of MHP/RT should be contrasted with the
goal-oriented cognitive architectures such as ACT-R [14][15]
in which the conscious processes are considered as the
processes to control people’s behavior and the unconscious
processes are considered subordinate to the conscious or
intentional processes [6]. What ACT-R tries to do is to show
how System 2 can be implemented on top of System 1. The
procedural memory system is very similar to System 1, and
then ACT-R models tend to consist of a set of production rules
that give rise to the slower, deliberative planning behaviors
seen in System 2. This is a very different conceptualization
for autonomously behaving creatures in the ever-changing
environment from that given in this paper. However, ACT-
R models are totally adequate for simulating stable human
activities with weak time constraint in which deliberate de-
cision making would work effectively, but might be hard for
the situations with strong time constraint where the environ-
mental condition changes chaotically and deliberate decision
making implemented on System 2 might not work as effective.
Multimodal interaction is one of those human activities that
goal-oriented cognitive architectures would not be suitable.
B. Multidimensional Memory Frames
As illustrated in the right portion of Figure 2, each au-
tonomous system for carrying out PCM processes in the syn-
chronous band of MHP/RT is associated with its correspond-
ing memory, which is implemented as a distributed memory
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Time Sale of Human Action
Time Units
hours
months
weeks
days
10 min
minutes
10 sec
1 sec
100 ms
10 ms
1 ms
100 µs
System
Task
Task
Task
Unit Task
Operations
Deliberate Act
Neural Circuit
Neuron
Organelle
World (Theory)
Social
Band
Rational
Band
Cognitive
Band
Biological
Band
Scale (sec)
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
Figure 3. Newell’s time scale of human action (adapted from [16]).
system. The contents of memory is structured as speciﬁed
by the Structured Meme Theory [17]. A brief explanation
of the respective multi-dimensional memory frames is as
follows [18]:
•
PMD (Perceptual Multi-Dimensional)-frame con-
stitutes perceptual memory as a relational matrix
structure. It collects information from external objects
followed by separating it into a variety of perceptual
information, and re-collects the same information in
the other situations, accumulating the information
from the objects via a variety of different processes.
PMD-frame incrementally grows as it creates memory
from the input information and matches it against the
past memory in parallel.
•
MMD (Motion Multi-Dimensional)-frame consti-
tutes behavioral memory as a matrix structure. The
behavioral action processing starts when unconscious
autonomous behavior shows after one’s birth. It gath-
ers a variety of perceptual information as well to con-
nect muscles with nerves using spinals as a reﬂection
point. In accordance with one’s physical growth, it
widens the range of activities the behavioral action
processing can cover autonomously.
•
BMD (Behavior Multi-Dimensional)-frame is the
memory structure associated with the autonomous
automatic behavior control processing. It combines a
set of MMD-frames into a manipulable unit.
•
RMD (Relation Multi-Dimensional)-frame is the
memory structure associated with the conscious infor-
mation processing. It combines a set of BMD-frames
into a manipulable unit.
•
WMD
(Word
Multi-Dimensional)-frame is the
memory structure for language. It is constructed on
a very simple one-dimensional array.
PMD-Frame
PMD-Frame
PMD-Frame WMD-Frame
RMD-Frame
BMD-Frame MMD-Frame
Evolving Cyclic Network Structure
Functional Flow Structure
Layered Structure
Figure 4. Multi-dimensional memory frames characterized by functional
ﬂow structure, layered structure, and evolving cyclic network structure [19,
Figure 4]
Figure 4 provides a topological representation of the
distributed memory system depicted in the right portion of
Figure 2. It can be viewed from three perspectives:
1)
The distributed memory is structurally organized in
three layers. The top layer is controlled by words,
consisting of simple one-dimensional array of sym-
bols, logically constructed language, grammars that
specify language use, etc. The middle layer resides
on the behavioral eco-network for the individual to
generate consciousness. In this layer, one acquires
the meaning of behavior in the social ecology. The
bottom layer creates unconsciously controlled be-
havioral eco-networks for the individual. This is a
cyclic network starting from PMD, towards MMD via
BMD, and returning to PMD. The results of activities
of motor neurons, that reﬂect the activation of MMD,
are perceived by sensory neurons to cause activation
of PMD, which constitutes a closed network of PMD,
BMD, and MMD.
2)
Activation in the memory network spreads according
to the Functional Flow Structure in the order of PMD,
WMD, RMD, BMD, and MMD. An activated portion
of RMD corresponds to consciousness. The ﬂow can
stay at the same layer for a while. For example,
a certain word activates a set of words, and then,
they activate another set of words. Consciousness
formed at RMD at some moment shifts to another
consciousness. No action can be associated for these
System 2 activities.
3)
The memories are cyclic and evolve in a cumula-
tive and irreversible way, characterized by Evolving
Cyclic Network Structure. The activated state of
MMD is reﬂected on the activities of motor neurons,
followed by updated input via sensory neurons to
cause activation of PMD. PMD is shared by the three
layers and serves as a common source of activation.
Repetitive use of speciﬁc combinations of memory
frames would strengthen the connections between
them, and evolve.
It is important to note that memory serves as a mechanism
to establish synchronization. A rough sketch concerning how
synchronization between the external world and the internal
world, i.e., successive PCM processes, could be done can
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

be drawn by combining MHP/RT and Distributed Memory
System in Figure 2. When sensory neurons are activated
by external stimuli, Perceptual Information Processing ﬁres
relevant portions of memory followed by ﬁring of connected
networks in the current memory structure, and the activated
portions of memory are available for Conscious Information
Processing (System 2) and Autonomous Automatic Behavior
Control (System 1) via resonance reaction for some amount of
time, then, ﬁnally the output of System 1 is input to Behavioral
Action Processing to carry out behavior by sending signals to
the associated motor neurons to act in the real world. The
movement of one’s body part will initiate the next cycle of
PCM processes. What is going on in the external world and
what the self is behaving are internalized through perception,
and the perceived world goes through a PCM process by
activating relevant portions of memory and utilizing it via
resonance mechanism. In this way, memory processes play an
important role to bridge the gap between the perceived external
world and the internal world of PCM cycles to have them go
coherently, i.e., keeping them synchronized.
III.
COGNITIVE AND BEHAVIORAL PRINCIPLE IN
MULTIMODAL INTERACTIONS
The cyclic connection is critical to understand the rela-
tionship between behavior and memory. The three features
shown in Figure 4 enable pipelining the processes. However,
it has to be scheduled in such a way that the PCM processes
work smoothly as the external environments change at their
pace. This section derives cognitive and behavioral principles
in multimodal interactions that should organize the pipelining
processes. They would provide a ﬁrm perspective to understand
otherwise complex multimodal interaction processes.
A. Four Processing Modes: Conscious/Unconscious Processes
Before/After an Event
Experience associated with a person’s activities is char-
acterized by a series of events, each of which is recognized
by a person consciously. When one looks at the cognitive
architecture MHP/RT from a particular event that occurred
at the absolute time T in order to answer the question what it
is doing for the event, MHP/RT’s behavior looks as if it works
in one of four modes [6][20] at one time before and after the
event at T as shown by Figure 5.
Two of the four modes concern the processes carried out
before the event:
-
System 2 Before Mode: In the time range of T −β ≤
t < T − β′, where β′ ∼ 500msec and β ranges a
few seconds to hours, and even to months, MHP/RT
uses memory, WMD and/or RMD, for consciously
preparing for what would happen in the future.
-
System 1 Before Mode: In the time range of T −
β′ ≤ t < T, it unconsciously coordinate motor
activities to the interacting environment. This mode
uses PMD, BMD, and MMD.
The other two modes concern the processes carried out
after the event:
-
System 1 After Mode: In the time range of T < t ≤
T +α′, where α′ ∼ 500msec, MHP/RT unconsciously
tunes the connections between sensory inputs and
motor outputs for better performance for the same
event in the future. This mode updates the connections
at the bottom layer of Figure 4.
-
System 2 After Mode: In the time range of T +
α′ < t ≤ T + α, it consciously recognizes what has
happened, and then, modiﬁes memory concerning the
event, where α ranges a few seconds to minutes, and
even to hours. This mode modiﬁes the connections at
the middle layer of Figure 4. Note that, since language
(knowledge concerning words) is not directly related
with multimodal interaction, the top layer of Figure 4
remains intact in the situations this paper deals with.
It is important to note, however, that an experience repre-
sented as a series of consciously identiﬁed events by a person
has to be regarded as the results of unrecognized unconscious
activities: metaphorically speaking, consciousness in System 2
is one of tips of icebergs that appear above the sea level,
and the tips are interrelated with each other via the unseen
relationships established below the sea level in System 1.
A system of icebergs develops in the natural condition of
seawater (temperature, tidal currents, etc.) and atmosphere,
which may not be trivial for all people. Apparently, congruent
conﬁgurations of the tips of two iceberg systems at a certain
moment do not assure that they are entirely congruent. They
may evolve differently as time goes by even if the surrounding
environment is identical.
In summary, this subsection suggests that an understanding
of the phenomena, that users are interacting with multimodal
environment, could be obtained by regarding the phenomena
as a series of conscious events, which could be further de-
composed into four processing modes of MHP/RT concerning
each event.
B. Representing Multimodal Interaction Event by Using the
Four Processing Modes
Any event in multimodal interaction can be viewed from
a user as an event that has happened in the time range of
[T −β, T +α], and this should be an appropriate representation
for the system event that occurs at T, accompanied with
the portions of multi-dimensional memory frames that have
participated in the processes in the time range of [T −β, T +α].
It would be useful to consider a situation where a multimodal
interface is expected to have the user integrate positive past ex-
periences that are activated by provision of appropriate external
cues at T from the system. The integrated memory formed in
System 2 After Mode for the particular system event that
happened at T would be activated in the future in System 2
Before Mode while preparing for the identical system events
to happen repeatedly. The event appears recursively in the
PCM processes, and is likely to extend the relevant time range
longer, i..e., β and α would become larger. The larger β
becomes, the farther the person can foresee. The larger α
becomes, the wider the person can elaborate on the event.
These should make the person smarter in living.
It is important to notice the fact that consciousness con-
cerning the event comes to play in System 2 After Mode
after the event at T + α′ implies that consciousness lags
at least by the amount of time, α′, behind the real world.
More speciﬁcally, the user is consciously blind during the
period of [T − β′, T + α′] but would integrate consciously
the blind period into conscious activities during the time
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

BEFORE
AFTER
System 2 - After
Realtime Support 
Boundary Event (BE)
n-th event, En, happens at t=T
Intuition
Heuristics
Preparation for Possible Events
Reflection of the Event
T << t < ∞
Behavior at T,  Bn(t=T)
T ≤ t ≤ T + ∆
Space of Certainty
Space of Uncertainty
Estimation of 
Effectiveness of Actions
Estimation of 
Reliability of Actions
Collection of 
Useful Actions
Collection of 
Possible Actions 
Time Constraints: Strong
Time Constraints: None or Weak
Reflection of Bn(T)
i
f
System 2 - Before
Anticipation
System 1 - Before
Anticipation
System 1 - After
Realtime Support
Newell’s Time Scale
~ COGNITIVE BAND
≥ RATIONAL BAND
≥ RATIONAL BAND
Figure 5. How the Four Processing Modes work (adapted from [20])
Figure 6. Successive functions are connected within the adjustable band in the spatio-time dimension.
range of [T − β, T + α]. Therefore, consciously retrievable
multimodal interaction experience has to be considered as
memory structure concerning the event at T in the extended
time range of [T − β, T + α] with consciously inaccessible
but integrated memory region corresponding to the consciously
blind time range of [T − β′, T + α′].
C. Weak Synchronization
Normally,
the
term
“synchronization”
refers
to
co-
occurrence of two events on two distinct streams at the same
time. In the case of multimodal interaction, the one side is a
multimodal system and the other side is a user. It is said this
way: a system and a user is synchronized if every system event
at Tsys occurs as a user event at Tuser with some amount of
time allowance of ∆, |Tuser − Tsys| < ∆, where the actual
values of ∆ depend on the nature of interactions.
An example is as follows: a system sounds auditory cues,
then, it shows text messages on a secondary display for 10
seconds with the expectation that its user hears the sound,
comprehends it as the indication of something important to
be shown on the secondary display for about 10 seconds, and
moves his/her eyeballs to the target within, say, 2 ∼ 3 seconds.
In this way, the system event and its corresponding user event
are combined together to form a synchronized event at the
overt information exchange level.
However, as depicted in Figure 5, a person’s activity related
with an event has to be considered from the four processing
modes, which ranges relatively long time before and after the
actual time the event happens. Therefore, “synchronization”
has to be considered alternatively as the phenomena a person’s
activities during the time range of [T − β, T + α], which are
linked with the speciﬁc recognizable system event at time T
through a sequence of processes carried out in either of the
four processing modes: all the processes have some link with
the system event at T. When this is satisﬁed, the event is
considered synchronized with a person’s activities, which is
called weak synchronization [21].
A smooth ﬂow of the four processing modes can break
when a person has to adjust his/her activity while s/he is in
System 1 Before Mode in such a way that his/her movement
goes in synchronous with the current environment. When this
happens, the condition for weak synchronization is not satisﬁed
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

but s/he has to make efforts to establish weak synchronization
by adjusting his/her movement. When s/he reﬂects on this
event in System 2 After Mode, he/she would have a feeling
associated with anticipation-violated [21].
D. How MHP/RT Works under Weak Synchronization
In order for an O-PDP system, which is a higher level
concept of MHP/RT, to engage in a particular system event
at T during the time range of [T − β, T + α], the MHP/RT
processes have to be chained (combined each other) to form
a procedure, which include those to be performed during
the respective time ranges of [T − β, T − β′), [T − β′, T),
(T, T + α′], (T + α′, T + α] for accomplishing appropriate
functions in the ecological system composed of the multimodal
system and the user. A mechanism is needed for establishing
chains between functions that exist quasi-independently and
discretely.
An O-PDP system is composed of autonomous elements
in a band-structure, i.e., Biological, Cognitive, Rational, and
Social Bands as suggested by Newell [16], and the processes
carried out in the respective bands are combined each other to
form a function. For example, in the Rational Band, a person
could perform a series of inferences by logical deduction. Each
inference is regarded as an element to obtain a logical result
starting from an initial premise.
Autonomous elements are weakly synchronized with the
external world, and the way how actually they work indi-
rectly reﬂects the circularity of the existing environment –
autopoiesis [12], and ﬂuctuations inherent in the environment.
This situation is schematically shown by Figure 6. Function
C is connected with Function D using the region of the
overlapping edge for maintaining continuity of the activities.
Function C could be a series of conscious activities performed
in the Rational Band to plan ahead a sequence of actions for
controlling the car by consulting the contents of RMD (see Fig-
ure 4) followed by Function D, which could be an unconscious
activity for tuning the planned activities for the particular road
conditions by using the bottom layer of the memory structure,
PMD, BMD and MMD, for which activations come from the
middle layer following the Functional Flow Structure depicted
in Figure 4. Function C is carried out in System 2 Before
Mode in the time range of [T − β, T − β′) and Function D in
System 1 Before Mode in the time range of [T − β′, T).
Note that elements in Biological, Cognitive, Rational, and
Social Bands work autonomously. Conscious processes carried
out in the upper bands run in parallel with unconscious
processes performed in the lower band within the time range
of ≤ 500msec. In Figure 6, Function C is a segment of an
entire series of working of conscious elements that happens to
establish connections with Function B, a segment from another
conscious elements that was carried out before Function C, and
with Function D, which is part of unconscious activities carried
out by using the cycle of PMD, BMD, and MMD. The red
curved line symbolically shows a trajectory of network ﬁring in
the O-PDP system, that is structured as Figure 4 by indicating
the regions to connect to elements in different bands or those
used for different processing modes. Various combinations of
functional chains between parallel processes can occur, causing
path proliferation of the network. This is possible because
there exists time relativity among a variety of functions due
to network circularity and ﬂuctuation in processing in the
behavioral ecology network of the O-PDP system. When the
recall rates of speciﬁc paths become higher, proliferation along
these paths are suppressed to centralize the activations on these
paths thereafter.
An O-PDP system is created as a developed form of
naturally formed energy circulation. Weak synchronization is
the mechanism, or the principle, for a cognitive architecture,
O-PDP system, to survive in the environment. Each element
of the O-PDP system plays a certain role in achieving the
overall goal of the whole O-PDP system. However, its role
is not determined from the beginning but it exists only as
the result of each element’s own efforts to survive since
it started its activity. The way of synchronization between
elements is incidentally determined, and the synchronization
itself is not deterministic but incomplete and ﬂexible weak
synchronization.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Whatever multimodal interaction environments users are in,
what they would do for selecting next actions is simple: users
just perform the dual-process of unconscious and conscious
processes for every consciously recognizable event in certain
time ranges before and after the event. Then, why is reasonable
stability maintained in the uncertain procedure dependent
on the autonomous reaction of the O-PDP system? In the
situation of multimodal interaction, “stability” connotes the
situations where the interactions between the system and the
user continues smoothly without any breakdowns. The reasons
are as follows:
-
Perceptual input is used to generate a mirror image
of the real world surrounding the self and shared in
three bands, which are related with each other through
the Functional Flow Structure and the Evolving Cyclic
Network Structure (Figure 4).
-
An O-PDP system is formed in the nonlinear hierar-
chically structured bands [16] to select next actions by
applying four processes described in Section III-A as
a means to survive in the ever-changing environment
(Figure 5).
-
Time constraints from the external environment is
satisﬁed by ﬂuctuations in the characteristic times of
autonomous activities in respective bands through the
mechanism of weak synchronization (Figure 6).
The ﬁrst two items in the above list show the important
characteristics derived from the architectural deﬁnition of O-
PDP system, and the last item, weak synchronization, deﬁnes
the principle for coordinating O-PDP in the ever-changing real
environment. These three items jointly deﬁne the cognitive and
behavioral principles necessary to understand users interacting
with multimodal environment.
A. Future Work
The actual values of β and α, which deﬁne the time
range of weak synchronization, can vary depending on the
particular event at T, the contents of memory of the user,
and the amount of time the user is allowed to allocate for
the event. However, they can be estimated by simulating user
behavior by MHP/RT. The purpose of simulation is to derive
initial hypotheses concerning distinguishable users’ behaviors
caused by qualitatively different workings of MHP/RT, and the
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

structure and contents of memory in the multimodal interaction
environment. The hypotheses will be ﬁeld-tested by having
selected users representing the different segments in terms of
characteristic behaviors in the particular multimodal interaction
environment carry out the interactions. This approach, called
Cognitive-Chrono Ethnography (CCE), has been successfully
applied to a variety of ﬁelds [4][5][22][23].
On the theoretical basis of the principles this paper de-
scribed, some case studies are on-going to understand users’
activities in multimodal interactions. Two of them are brieﬂy
described as future work that will come next to this work.
1) Designing Memorable Events: People live in the envi-
ronment ﬁlled with artifacts, part of which is real and the rest
is virtual. An initial theoretical simulations have been con-
ducted to understand how the PCM processes along with the
memory process result in memorable experiences [24]. Prelim-
inary experiments were conducted to see how omnidirectional
movies in virtual reality augmented with audio-guide made
the experience memorable by timely weak synchronization and
integration of multi-modal information. The contents of audio-
guide for giving explanations to the visual contents to come
after a few seconds have to be consciously processed by the
usr in System 2 Before Mode. Some visual cues may be
used to have the user unconsciously moves his/her eyeballs
to the visual contents just having been given explanations,
which is done in System 1 Before Mode. If this process
happens while the memory is active, there is a good chance of
strengthening the memory in System 2 After Mode, to cause
the event memorable.
2) Designing Immersive Events: Immersive virtual envi-
ronments are distinct from other types of multimedia learning
environments. Initial theoretical considerations were reported
that focused on the conditions necessary to produce “immer-
sive experience” for the user [21]. Immersive feeling eliciting
condition for an artiﬁcial environment to have the user feel
immersive-ness is 1) it must be new to him/her, i.e., the
range of memory activation is limited, 2) s/he is able to
carry out actions with an anticipation activated by the artiﬁcial
environment without any breakdown in performing motor-
level actions System 2 Before Mode followed by no serious
adjustment requited in System 1 Before Mode), 3) s/he is
able to consciously recognize an event associated with the
series of just-ﬁnished actions, and 4) s/he is able to reﬂect on
the event to integrate it with the recognized feeling associated
with the event (in System 2 After Mode). The study will
continue in the context of developing a multimodal interface
to help young pedestrians acquire necessary skills for safe
navigation in dangerous trafﬁc environments.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. L. Rubio-Tamayo, M. Gertrudix Barrio, and F. Garc´ıa Garc´ıa,
“Environments and virtual reality: Systematic review and advances in
communication, interaction and simulation,” Multimodal Technologies
and Interaction, vol. 1, no. 4, 2017.
[2]
H. A. Simon, The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial, 3rd ed.
Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press, 1996.
[3]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Hierarchical Structure of Human Action
Selections – An Update of Newell’s Time Scale of Human Action,”
in Procedia Computer Science, BICA 2014. 5th Annual International
Conference on Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, vol. 41,
2014, pp. 321–325.
[4]
——, “Simulating navigation behaviour based on the architecture model
Model Human Processor with Real-Time Constraints (MHP/RT),” Be-
haviour & Information Technology, vol. 31, no. 1, 2012, pp. 41–58.
[5]
M. Kitajima, Memory and Action Selection in Human-Machine Inter-
action.
Wiley-ISTE, 2016.
[6]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Decision-making and action selection
in Two Minds: An analysis based on Model Human Processor with
Realtime Constraints (MHP/RT),” Biologically Inspired Cognitive Ar-
chitectures, vol. 5, 2013, pp. 82–93.
[7]
S. K. Card, T. P. Moran, and A. Newell, The Psychology of Human-
Computer Interaction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
1983.
[8]
J. L. McClelland and D. E. Rumelhart, Parallel Distributed Processing:
Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition : Psychological and
Biological Models.
The MIT Press, 6 1986.
[9]
D. Kahneman, “A perspective on judgment and choice,” American
Psychologist, vol. 58, no. 9, 2003, pp. 697–720.
[10]
——, Thinking, Fast and Slow.
New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 2011.
[11]
D. Morris, The nature of happiness.
London: Little Books Ltd., 2006.
[12]
H. Maturana and F. Varela, Autopoiesis and Cognition (Boston Studies
in the Philosophy and History of Science), softcover reprint of the
original 1st ed. 1980 ed.
D. Reidel Publishing Company, 8 1991.
[13]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Two Minds and Emotion,” in COG-
NITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced
Cognitive Technologies and Applications, 2015, pp. 8–16.
[14]
J. R. Anderson and C. Lebiere, The Atomic Components of Thought.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1998.
[15]
J. R. Anderson, How can the Human Mind Occur in the Physical
Universe?
New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2007.
[16]
A. Newell, Uniﬁed Theories of Cognition (The William James Lectures,
1987).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990, page 122,
Fig. 3-3.
[17]
M. Toyota, M. Kitajima, and H. Shimada, “Structured Meme Theory:
How is informational inheritance maintained?” in Proceedings of the
30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, B. C. Love,
K. McRae, and V. M. Sloutsky, Eds.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society, 2008, p. 2288.
[18]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Distributed Memory System Architecture
based on the Analyses of Human Brain Memory,” in Proceedings of the
35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, M. Knauff,
M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, and I. Wachsmuth, Eds.
Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society, 2013, p. 4002.
[19]
——, “Topological Considerations of Memory Structure,” in Procedia
Computer Science, BICA 2014. 5th Annual International Conference on
Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, vol. 41, 2014, pp. 45–50.
[20]
——, “Four Processing Modes of in situ Human Behavior,” in Bio-
logically Inspired Cognitive Architectures 2011 - Proceedings of the
Second Annual Meeting of the BICA Society, A. V. Samsonovich and
K. R. J´ohannsd´ottir, Eds.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: IOS Press,
2011, pp. 194–199.
[21]
J. Dinet and M. Kitajima, “Immersive interfaces for engagement
and learning: Cognitive implications,” in Proceedings of the 2015
Virtual Reality International Conference, ser. VRIC ’18.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2018, pp. 18/04:1–18/04:8. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3234253.3234301
[22]
M. Kitajima, H. Tahira, S. Takahashi, and T. Midorikawa, “Understand-
ing tourist’s in situ behavior: a Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography study
of visitors to a hot spring resort,” Journal of Quality Assurance in
Hospitality and Tourism, vol. 12, 2012, pp. 247–270.
[23]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography: A
Methodology for Understanding Users for Designing Interactions Based
on User Simulation with Cognitive Architectures,” in Biologically In-
spired Cognitive Architectures 2012 - Proceedings of the Third Annual
Meeting of the BICA Society, 2012, pp. 193–198.
[24]
M. Kitajima, S. Shimizu, and K. T. Nakahira, “Creating memorable
experiences in virtual reality: Theory of its processes and preliminary
eye-tracking study using omnidirectional movies with audio-guide,” in
2017 3rd IEEE International Conference on Cybernetics (CYBCONF),
June 2017, pp. 1–8.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

