Importance of Coordination and Cultural Diversity for an Efﬁcient and Flexible
Manufacturing System
Kashif Zia
Faculty of Computing and IT
Sohar University, Oman
Email: kzia@su.edu.om
Alois Ferscha
Institute of Pervasive Computing
Johannes Kepler University, Austria
Email: ferscha@pervasive.jku.at
Dari Trendaﬁlov
Institute of Pervasive Computing
Johannes Kepler University, Austria
Email: dari.trendaﬁlov@pervasive.jku.at
Abstract—Manufacturing systems of the future need to have
ﬂexible resources and ﬂexible routing to produce extremely
personalized products, even of lot size equal to one. In this paper,
we have proposed a framework, which is designed to achieve this
goal. Towards this, we have integrated an established cultural
evolution model to achieve desired ﬂexibility of resources and
acceptable routing time. Promising results are evidenced through
a simple proof-of-concept simulation.
Keywords–Industry 4.0; resource ﬂexibility; routing ﬂexibility;
personalized production; cultural dissemination; group coherence.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The industrial manufacturing paradigm has already evolved
from mass production to mass customization. Fueled by initia-
tives like Industry 4.0 [1], we foresee a further improvement
in the coming years, namely the paradigm of personalized pro-
duction. Personalized production targets an extremely ﬂexible
manufacturing system which could respond to predicted and
unpredicted changes in the production environment.
According to [2], this ﬂexibility should be a collection of
three aspects, at least:
•
Resource
Flexibility:
ﬂexibility
of
ma-
chines/processing stations to make multiple parts.
•
Routing Flexibility: ﬂexibility to execute the same
operation/function using multiple processing stations.
•
Lot Size Flexibility: ability to produce a very small
customized/personalized lot size in a non-batch mode.
Historically, many research efforts have focused on speciﬁc
features of these aspects. Many scheduling [3] [4], resource
optimization [2] [5], and constraint satisfaction [6] solutions
have been presented. However, all these mechanisms either
consider a mathematical abstraction or imitate a real-world
situation as their manufacturing environment. The problem
is that this results in a static conﬁguration, and the solution
proposed only works in these boundaries.
For modeling of a dynamical system, it is imperative to
use a computational approach. For example, a more recent
work uses an agent-based model while considering mobile
processing stations as a mean to achieve ﬂexibility in the
manufacturing process [2]. The idea is to make resources
available when and where these are required. Although their
approach addresses the challenge of routing ﬂexibility to an
extent, the capabilities of resources still remain static.
In our research, we are mostly focusing on resource
ﬂexibility, which means that the processing units are able to
dynamically change their capabilities and therefore a resource
is able to perform several tasks. The goal is to keep resources
stationary (and avoid expensive process of mobility) and
arrange resources in groups of complementing capabilities.
Ideally, a resource would designate itself for a capability
that would optimize the manufacturing process in several
dimensions, such as production rate, lead-time per order and
reactivity index [2].
In this context, our mechanism exploits the cultural nature
of the scenario; i.e. groups of complementing capabilities; and
we are convinced that cultural diversity (complementation) has
a lot of potentials to explore about. We argue that ﬂexibility
in resources, routing and personalizing closely relate to the
evolution of culture, particularly cultural groups and diversi-
ﬁcation. This would provide an entirely new perspective for
future research in this domain.
A culture is a multi-featured system evolving in time.
One characteristic of culture is its coherence when seen from
outside. Deﬁnitely, this coherence results due to a majority of
people trying to acquire a similar behavior (often termed as a
trait) in a certain context (often termed as a feature). Hence, a
conceptual framework comprising of resources and products,
driven by related features and traits can be formulated. A
resource is a processing unit in the production line, whereas
a product is obviously a product under production. Although
a product can also be considered as a cultural entity, it is not
the case for now. Only a resource is a cultural entity. The
framework particularly focuses on limited coherence between
cultural groups.
Resources are ﬂexible, initially having some randomly
chosen features and a randomly chosen trait against a feature.
For example, a processing unit may have ability to perform
one, two or more tasks T1, T2, ... with certain levels of
precision P1, P2, .... Here, a tuple consisting of n values is a
set describing capabilities of a resource. For example, the set
{P2, P1, P3} can be interpreted as: this resource can perform
task 1 with precision 2, task 2 with precision 1 and task 3 with
precision 3. Furthermore, it cannot perform any other task.
Such a scheme is naturally compatible with the requirement
of a ﬂexible manufacturing system stated above, namely,
ﬂexibility in resources, routing and personalizing. Axelrod
provides evidence in his seminal work [7] for such a simple
conﬁguration of cultural descriptions which can result in a lo-
cally coherent, but globally polarized culture as a consequence
of localized interactions of participating entities.
However, in this paper, we argue that such a limitless co-
herence has no control over where the boundaries of the global
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

polarization would occur, which turned out to be harmful to a
system which usually seeks for the economy of resources and
optimizations in several dimensions. That is the reason, we try
to ﬁnd conditions which end up in approximately acceptable
structuring in terms of coherence (termed as limited coherence)
vs. polarization. To achieve this, we have used and reﬁned
Axelrod’s model of cultural dissemination [7].
Axelrod’s model provides evidence of observation that the
more time we provide for cultural dissemination, the cultural
groups become increasingly coherent due to homophily. For
scenarios, which require diversiﬁcation of resources, we need
to ﬁnd a balance between coherence and diversiﬁcation. This
paper provides ﬁrst insights into these aspects for a production
shop ﬂoor. The paper presents an agent-based model, abstract-
ing and simplifying the production process at a hypothetical
shop ﬂoor.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section II, a
detailed description of the methods of modeling and simulation
is given, followed by a discussion on initial ﬁndings in section
III. We end the paper with an elaborate outlook of future work
given in section IV.
II.
METHODS
In the following, a detailed description of the models is
given. Starting from desperation of Axelrod’s model of cultural
dissemination, next the motivation of the proposed model is
given, followed by the details of the proposed method itself.
A. Axelrod’s Model of Cultural Dissemination
Axelrod’s model [7] thrived for cultural homogeneity [8],
where adjacent cultures gets inﬂuence from each other. The
model is based on cultural components deﬁned by three
factors; features, traits, and persons. Culture has many features,
such as habits of eating, recreation, and leisure. These features
may not be identical across different cultures. Each of these
features has several traits, which may differ across cultures.
A person is a placeholder of a culture described by one of
f features and t traits. Axelrod proposed a model seeking
for cultural homogeneity proclaiming that different cultures
are destined to cohere together so that they appear as a
cultural unity, but at the same time, there exists a clear-cut
differentiation between cultures.
Axelrod model was able to demonstrate that the above
two (rather contradictory) goals can be achieved by a simple
interaction model (realized through N coordination games)
between neighboring persons. Axelrod showed that N coor-
dination games are necessary for a broader scale evolution
of culture. Furthermore, groups’ consistency across different
aspects of societal norms makes a group culturally coherent
and different from others. In the following, a hypothetical case
study representing Axelrod’s model of cultural diversiﬁcation
is presented.
In Figure 1, a grid of 10 × 10 cells is shown. Each cell
is represented by a person or a culture depicted by color (one
unique combination out of f × t possible combinations). Each
cell’s color has a meaning; for example, all green cells have
the capability to perform task 1 with precision value 0, which
is followed by precision values of task 2 (0, 1 or 2); last value
is not path dependent and represented by z. A product has a
Figure 1. Initial distribution of a 10×10 grid constituted by blocks of culture;
each block a tuple of 3, representing three features (green, blue, yellow) having
three traits (3 shades of a color) each. Average diversity index of random
setting is around 0.660.
Figure 2.
Axelrod’s Model: Evolution of cultures shown in Figure 1. (a)
at simulation iteration 6055 showing clusters of cultures starting to form.
(b) at simulation iteration 12207 showing further consolidation of clusters of
cultures. The evolution is destined to end up in very few cultures (1 or 2).
unique sequence of the task to perform represented with an
arrow shape (at the center of the space).
Axelrod model calculated similarity s between neighboring
cultures. If s is not 1 (100%), with a probability p, the
value of a different column of a person is replaced by the
corresponding value of the neighboring person. This simple
mechanism is able to generate clusters of coherent cultures
as shown in Figure 2. If we deﬁne diversity index as the
mean diversiﬁcation of cultures of all persons when compared
to their neighbors, the Axelrod model would converge into a
single culture most of the time with diversity index equal
to 0. This is not desirable in the context in which we want to
use this model. Therefore, the model was extended as detailed
in the following.
B. The Motivation: Constrained, N-Coordination Games for
Cultural Diversity
Before the description of the model, we formalize the
scenario given in Figure 1 as a manufacturing process. Give
that a processing unit is able to perform three possible tasks
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 3.
Extended Axelrod’s Model: Cultural Diversity at iteration 50000.
Three random outcomes shown in (a), (b) and (c) having a diversity index
of around 0.320.
with three possible precision values, we can see a clear capa-
bility matching through colors. Further, a product is introduced
which need to complete a sequence of three tasks offered by
different resources. We hypothesize that using the constraint,
N coordination games, we can achieve cultural diversity, which
is closer to what is desirable. This would directly impact
products’ traversing efforts in a positive way. A comparison
of Figure 2 with Figure 3 shows less diversiﬁcation from prior
to the later. We hypothesize that this would help in reducing
the traversing efforts of the products.
An Example Walkthrough: Referring to Figure 1 again, each
resource (black agent at the center of a cell) is randomly
populated with vector [x y z], where x, y, and z may have
three possible values 0, 1 and 2. The product has to perform
three tasks in a sequence. Task 1 with precision 0, task 2 with
precision 1 and task 3 with precision 2. It starts at the shown
position. First, it will perform task 1 with precision 0. That is
right away available at the cell the product is situated. Next, it
has to perform task 2 with precision 1. The nearest resource,
which has ﬁrst column equal to 0 (assuming a connection
between task 1 and 2) and second column equal to 1 is the
resource on immediate top-left; hence the product would move
there. Next task is task 3 with precision 2. Assuming that it is
an independent task, the product would try to ﬁnd the nearest
resource that has the third column equal to 2 (any color). This
can be any resource (two valid possibilities are shown with
dotted lines).
It seems that random conﬁgurations would be the best, but
this cannot be the case in a structured environment, particularly
in case of an assembly line type of manufacturing. The Axelrod
model is too skewed towards coherence and would end up
in too few cultures. Hence we propose to reﬁne the Axelrod
model in the following way.
C. The Proposed Diversity Dissemination Mechanism
Axelrod model sought for similarity s between neighboring
cultures. If s is not 1 (100%), with a probability p, the
value of a different column of culture is replaced by the
corresponding value of the neighboring culture. We extend this
model by applying an extra constraint. That is, the replacement
is only possible if s is also less than a threshold th, which is
for now given a static value of 0.5. This is expected to increase
overall diversity index of the system. Before analyzing the
impact of this reﬁnement the mechanism of product traversing
is explained.
Figure 4.
Comparison of time series of diversity index.
D. Traversing Mechanism
All products have a sequence of tasks to perform in the
form [x, y, z]. A product ﬁrst gets the value x, and maps it
onto resources with an identical capability and residing close to
its position. Let’s denote the resource at r. After visiting r, the
product seeks for the next nearest resource corresponding to y.
It is assumed that y has a relationship with x. This means that,
in terms of colors, this cell (and the resource residing on top of
it) should have the same color. The last task z is independent
and just show the range of ﬂexibility that the system may have.
III.
ANALYSIS OF INITIAL FINDINGS
Deﬁnitely,
the
introduction
of
threshold
th
retains
diversity index in case of extension of Axelrod’s model, as
shown in Figure 4. This helps in task completion capability of
the system due to the provisioning of a more diverse array
of complementing capabilities. The graph shown in Figure
4 evidences this fact. The diversity index of the proposed
model is much higher than the Axelrod’s model throughout
the simulation and it never dies out no matter how long the
system evolves, unlike Axelrod’s model.This can be veriﬁed
by analyzing the mobility of products in case of random
conﬁgurations. In Figure 5, we can see ﬁve products which
start from the center of the space. Products 100 and 101
needed to perform task 1, so they did it as the ﬁrst step using
the resource where product 102 is stationed now. Next, they
move to the right and performed task 2. That means that both
completed the ﬁrst two task of their schedule successfully. The
similar is true for the other three products. The system could
acquire a mobility index equal to 2 on average for the ﬁrst two
tasks, which it did without any problem. As we mentioned
already, a random conﬁguration is most ﬂexible and would
always be best in its task completion capability. However, this
conﬁguration is unrealistic. In reality, we need to plan the
placement of resources and put them in order.
In case of Axelrod’s model, we have analyzed the results
for diversity index 0.5, 0.25 and 0.1. These three situations
are represented in Figure 6. With increasing polarization and
decreasing diversity index, the average mobility index drops.
After running the simulation several times, it was observed
that mobility index is 1.8 (diversity index = 0.5), 1.4
(diversity index = 0.25) and 0.03 (diversity index = 0.10).
As shown in Figure 6, this decrease is due to nonavailability
of resources indicated by products turning into black color.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 5.
Traversing behavior in random conﬁguration of resource capability.
Figure 6.
Traversing behavior in Axelord’s Model.
Lastly, the extended models solve the above issue. We can
see a smooth performance of tasks for all the products, which
is evident from Figure 7. For even minimum possible diversity
(0.33), in the majority of the cases, the mobility index achieved
is 2 (the possible maximum).
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Manufacturing systems of the future need to have ﬂexible
resources and routing to produce an extremely personalized
product, even of lot size equal to one. What we have seen
is that ﬂexible manufacturing system can be realized without
moving the resources (processing units) by enabling reconﬁg-
Figure 7.
Traversing behavior in Extended Axelrod’s Model.
uration of capabilities of resources based on dissemination of
culture concept proposed by Axelrod. However, the Axelrod
model has a focus on the coherence of cultural groups, which
most of the times end up in one or very few cultures. If we
equate such an instance of a culture with a single capability of
a resource, we are left with extremely limited resources and
products cannot complete their production life cycle.
Hence, we proposed to have a constrained cultural coher-
ence mechanism by introducing a threshold. This tiny develop-
ment has a signiﬁcant impact on the increase in diversity of the
culture along with related resources being in close vicinity to
each other on average. This did not only ensure an increase in
resource availability as a whole, but also managed to decrease
the mobility of products in search of suitable resources.
However, the real contribution of the paper is the integra-
tion of manufacturing processes with cultural considerations,
which naturally ﬁts into the problem. In our view, this is
a novel approach of real signiﬁcance. However, the work
reported in this paper is just a proof-of-concept. We need to
have more thorough experiments to measure the efﬁciency of
the model in challenging environments such as environments
having inﬂow and outﬂow points, more in-depth capabilities
and richer relationships between tasks.
In the next phase of the project, we will induct models
of dynamics, which will include timing of tasks, conﬂict
and deadlock resolution between products seeking identical
resources, and more realistic analytics such as production rate,
lead-time per order and reactivity index. Lastly, we would also
include an autonomous learning system, which would help
resources learn and change their conﬁgurations on the ﬂy based
on product types, requirements, and trajectories.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge support by FFG
funded Pro2Future under contract No. 6112792.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Lee, B. Bagheri, and H.-A. Kao, “A cyber-physical systems archi-
tecture for industry 4.0-based manufacturing systems,” Manufacturing
Letters, vol. 3, 2015, pp. 18–23.
[2]
R. Ogunsakin, N. Mehandjiev, and C. A. Mar´ın, “Bee-inspired self-
organizing ﬂexible manufacturing system for mass personalization,” in
International Conference on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior. Springer,
2018, pp. 250–264.
[3]
M. Wang, R. Y. Zhong, Q. Dai, and G. Q. Huang, “A mpn-based
scheduling model for iot-enabled hybrid ﬂow shop manufacturing,”
Advanced Engineering Informatics, vol. 30, no. 4, 2016, pp. 728–736.
[4]
M. K. Marichelvam, T. Prabaharan, and X. S. Yang, “A discrete ﬁreﬂy
algorithm for the multi-objective hybrid ﬂowshop scheduling problems,”
IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation, vol. 18, no. 2, 2014, pp.
301–305.
[5]
G. Beruvides, Artiﬁcial Cognitive Architecture with Self-Learning and
Self-Optimization Capabilities: Case Studies in Micromachining Pro-
cesses.
Springer, 2018.
[6]
J. Ezpeleta, J. M. Colom, and J. Martinez, “A petri net based deadlock
prevention policy for ﬂexible manufacturing systems,” IEEE transactions
on robotics and automation, vol. 11, no. 2, 1995, pp. 173–184.
[7]
R. Axelrod, “The dissemination of culture: A model with local conver-
gence and global polarization,” Journal of conﬂict resolution, vol. 41,
no. 2, 1997, pp. 203–226.
[8]
J. Bednar, A. Bramson, A. Jones-Rooy, and S. Page, “Emergent cultural
signatures and persistent diversity: A model of conformity and consis-
tency,” Rationality and Society, vol. 22, no. 4, 2010, pp. 407–444.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

