Temporal Coding Model of Spiking Output for Retinal Ganglion Cells 
Philip Vance, Gautham P. Das, Dermot Kerr and 
Sonya A. Coleman 
School of Computing and Intelligent Systems, 
University of Ulster at Magee, 
Londonderry, N. Ireland. 
email: {p.vance, g.das, d.kerr, sa.coleman}@ulster.ac.uk 
 
Thomas  M. McGinnity 
School of Science and Technology 
Nottingham Trent University, 
Nottingham, United Kingdom. 
email: martin.mcginnity@ntu.ac.uk 
 
Abstract—Traditionally, it has been assumed that the 
important information from a visual scene is encoded within 
the average firing rate of a retinal ganglion cell. Many 
modelling techniques thus focus solely on estimating a firing 
rate rather than a cells temporal response. It has been argued 
however that the latter is more important, as intricate details 
of the visual scene are stored within the temporal nature of the 
code. In this paper, we present a model that accurately 
describes the input/output response of a retinal ganglion cell in 
terms of its temporal coding. The approach borrows a concept 
of layout from popular implementations, such as the linear-
nonlinear Poisson method that produces an estimated spike 
rate prior to generating a spiking output. Using the well-
known Izhikevich neuron as the spike generator and various 
approaches for spike rate estimation, we show that the 
resulting overall system predicts a retinal ganglion cells 
response to novel stimuli in terms of bursting and periods of 
silence with reasonable accuracy. 
Keywords-Temporal coding; Spiking; Retinal Ganglion Cell; 
ANN; NARMAX. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Visual processing begins within the retina, which is a 
complex, networked organisation of cells comprising of 
photoreceptors, horizontal cells, bipolar cells, amacrine cells 
and retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). The retina contains 
approximately 1 million RGCs, each pooling a signal from 
multiple photoreceptors that define a spatial area known as a 
receptive field (RF). Light, upon entering the eye, is focused 
onto the photoreceptor layer effecting a change in each 
cell’s potential and forming a signal that is communicated 
through the various inter-processing layers to the RGCs. 
Here, the signal is changed into what are known as action 
potentials (spikes) and transmitted via synaptic connections 
to the visual cortex for higher processing. Modelling this 
input/output relationship has been a topic of interest over the 
years as studies have shown that strategies that utilise this 
biological aspect to visual processing outperform various 
machine vision techniques [1] in terms of power, speed and 
performance. 
The biological configuration of the retina makes it an 
ideal system for study as visual information (stimuli) can be 
controlled whilst physiological signals (response) can be 
recorded via a multi-electrode array from multiple RGCs 
before further processing begins [2]. The response for each 
cell is represented by a series of temporal spikes known as a 
spike train, in which the processed information from the 
visual scene is considered to be encoded. Traditionally, it 
has been assumed that the important aspect of this coding is 
the rate at which the neuron fires on average [3] though 
others have argued that it is the temporal nature of the 
spikes, which carry the important information [4]. Evidence 
in support of the latter has been presented in various studies 
at multiple levels of the visual system [3]–[7] though 
depending on the stage of the visual processing, either one 
or a mixture of the two encoding representations may be 
relevant [2][5]. 
In [7], it is however reported that methods based on the 
mean firing rate in RGCs of a Poisson generated spike train, 
fail to account for the efficiency of information transfer 
between the retina and the brain. The emphasis is instead on 
the timing of the first spike across a population of RGCs to 
accurately describe the visual scene. In other work, brief 
bursts of spikes, post saccade (rapid eye movement), are 
thought likely to encode information pertaining to the 
encountered stimulus [2] and that the number of spikes 
within the burst are not necessarily as important as the time 
to the first spike. This would suggest that the importance in 
modelling the relationship between stimulus and response 
lies within matching bursts of spikes with particular 
emphasis on the first spike within the burst. 
Mathematical models of the relationship between 
stimulus and response in terms of the temporal code come in 
many variations with the simplest and most popular method 
stemming from a linear-nonlinear (LN) cascade approach 
using a Poisson process to generate a spiking output [8][9]. 
This method works on the premise that a spike rate 
estimation is generated first, followed by a temporal spiking 
output using a spike generating mechanism. Other variations 
propose the use of a leaky integrate and fire (I&F) neuron 
(or equivalent simplified model) at the latter stage of the 
model as it induces a more realistic comparison of the spike 
count variability, using a free firing rate, in cat and 
salamander RGCs, than that of the Poisson process, which is 
time-varying controlled [6].  
In this work, extending from a previous comparison 
involving the I&F neuron [10], we propose to use the 
Izhikevich (IZK) neuron as the spike generating mechanism 
as it is more suited to reproducing spiking and bursting type 
behaviours [11], which can be finely tuned using a number 
of parameters. It differs from the I&F model in that the IZK 
model does not contain a constant firing threshold. This 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

infers a behaviour that is closer to real neurons; therefore 
the IZK model is better equipped, than the I&F model, to 
incorporate the critical regime of spike generation. 
Moreover, parameters in this model are tuned with a genetic 
algorithm ensures that the spiking behaviour of the IZK 
neuron is as close as possible to the RGCs behaviour. This 
is supported by an investigation into various methods for the 
estimated spike rate computation beginning with the 
standard LN cascade approach [12]. Results from the overall 
system show good performance in predicting the temporal 
code of a RGC, when presented with novel stimuli, in terms 
of bursts of spikes and periods of silence. 
In Section II, an overview of the experimental procedure 
used for the physiological experiments is provided along 
with data pre-processing techniques used to create an input-
output dataset suitable for modelling. Methods used for 
spike rate estimation, spike generation, parameter tuning 
and temporal code analysis are presented in Section III with 
results for each phase presented in Section IV. Finally, 
Section V summarises the findings with a concluding 
statement. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL OVERVIEW 
A. Data Collection 
Physiological data were collected experimentally (in vitro) 
from adult axolotl tiger salamanders. Preparation involved 
isolating the dark-adapted retina, splitting into two halves 
and placing cell-side down onto a multi-electrode array, 
submersed in a chemical solution to prolong activity. 
Varying types of image stimulus inputs from a small OLED 
display were then focused onto the retina. Cell activations 
(via the multi-electrode array) were sampled at 10 KHz with 
spike times quantified with respect to the beginning of the 
stimulus presentation. Further details on the experimental 
setup and procedures can be found in [13][14]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Spatio-temporal checkerboard pattern. 
In this work, artificial spatio-temporal stimuli (Figure 1) 
were used to determine the size, shape and location of each 
RGCs’ receptive-field through reverse correlation. The 
spatially arranged checkerboard patterns contain no spatial 
or temporal order and were presented to the retina at 
approximately 33
ms intervals. In total, the stimulus 
presentations numbered 258000 non-repeated samples to 
assemble a dataset large enough to ascertain characteristics, 
such as the Spike-Triggered Average (STA) and to ensure 
that a sufficient number of varied stimuli are presented in 
order to evoke cell responses. Furthermore, an additional 
dataset comprised of 1200 samples was presented to the 
same cell for testing purposes once initial characteristics had 
been formulated. This smaller dataset was presented 
repeatedly to the retina 43 times and could be used to 
observe the typical variance in neural responses from trial to 
trial. Both the physiological preparation and data collection 
were carried out at University Medical Center Gӧttingen, 
from which 36 RGCs were supplied with the identified size, 
shape and location of each RF.  
B. Data pre-processing 
As a pre-processing stage the stimulus values must first be 
extracted from each checkerboard pattern, illustrated in a 
stepwise procedure in Figure 2. To approximate the 
processing that occurs between the photoreceptors and 
RGCs, each checkerboard (Figure 2(a)) is fitted with a 2D 
Gaussian filter (Figure 2(b)), which accentuates the contrast 
levels within the visual scene [15]. Only pertinent values 
located either inside or on the border of the RF are extracted 
(Figure 2(c)) and summed to form an input dataset for 
modelling purposes. 
 
Figure 2. Pre-processing step that shows how the local stimulus pertaining 
to a cell’s receptive field is weighted with a 2D Gaussian filter. (a) Local 
stimulus for a cells receptive field. (b) 2D Gaussian used to weight the 
stimulus intensities. (c) Weighted image of the local stimulus intensities.  
The sampled neural response for each RGC is binned to 
match the frequency at which the stimulus is updated. For 
the non-repeated dataset, this formed the basis for model 
targets and output comparisons while for the smaller dataset 
the average of 43 trials was utilised as the output. 
III. 
SPIKE GENERATION MODELLING 
The aim of the work is to develop a biologically plausible 
spike generation model, i.e., one that will generate spikes at 
the same times as the actual RGC for the same stimulus. 
 
 
Figure 3. Overview of spike generation model. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

In the widely used linear-nonlinear-Poisson (LNP) cascade 
model, spike generation is normally represented by a 
Poisson process [8][12][16], which is driven by the 
estimated spike rate. To this end, a cascade-type model 
(Figure 3) is developed to process the spatio-temporal 
stimulus and produce a spiking output in a two-stage 
process where initially an estimated spike rate is computed, 
which is then used to drive a spiking neuron. However, in 
this work instead of the Poisson process, a spiking neuron 
model is explored to further develop a biologically plausible 
spike generation model. Extending from previous work [25], 
we explore two well-known black-box methods and two 
transparent methods as a means for spike rate estimation.  
A. Spike Rate Modelling 
This section summarises the computational methods 
explored to model the estimated spike rate that drives the 
spike generation phase of the overall system.  
1) Linear-Nonlinear: The linear-nonlinear (LN) model 
is one of the most popular methods for estimating a 
neuron’s spike rate as it is simple and efficient to implement 
[17]. It is computed by applying a linear filter to the input 
followed by a static nonlinear transform. Calculating the 
linear filter is typically achieved by computing STA, which 
is simply the average stimulus preceding each spike [12]. 
The main drawback is that the computed parameters of the 
model have no direct relationship to the underlying 
biophysics.  
2) Artificial 
Neural 
Networks: 
Artificial 
Neural 
Networks (ANN) have been used extensively in the field of 
image processing, computer vision and similarly in the field 
of the biological vision system [15][18]. Designed as a 
network of artificial neurons to model task related properties 
of the cognitive process [19], they excel in pattern 
recognition and classification problems. An important goal 
of an ANN is to have good generalisation over its input-
output mapping so that it can easily manage data that are 
slightly different to those upon which the network was 
trained [19]. One of the main drawbacks however is that, 
with too many training examples, the network may over fit 
the training data, meaning it can memorise specific traits of 
the training dataset, which are otherwise absent from further 
examples 
presented 
for 
testing 
resulting 
in 
poor 
performance. Bayesian Regularised Neural Networks 
(BRNNs), on the other hand, attempt to limit this inhibiting 
feature by restricting the magnitude of the weights to 
provide structural stabilisation [20][21]. Overly complex 
networks 
are 
thus 
reduced 
by 
effectively 
driving 
unnecessary weights to zero and calculating an effective 
number of parameters [21].     
3) Self-Organising Fuzzy Neural Network: Another way 
of reducing overfitting is to use less neurons within the 
network. This can further complicate matters by introducing 
the need to regulate the network size, as well as the number 
of effective parameters unless the network is self-
organising. In this work, we utilise the Self-Organising 
Fuzzy Neural Network (SOFNN) described in [22], which is 
a flexible, data driven model. This SOFNN was first 
introduced in [23], extended in [24], and is capable of self-
organising its architecture by automatically adding and 
pruning neurons as required depending on the complexity of 
the 
dataset. 
This 
alleviates 
the 
requirement 
for 
predetermining the model structure and estimation of the 
model parameters as the SOFNN can accomplish this 
without any in-depth knowledge of neural networks or fuzzy 
systems. 
X1
X2
Xr
 1 
 2 
 u 
ᴨ2 
N1
N2
Nu
ᴨ1 
ᴨu 
  
Input 
Layer
EBF 
Layer
Normalised 
Layer
Weighted 
Layer
Output 
Layer
Bias
A1
A2
Au
 
Figure 4. SOFNN Architecture 
The architecture of the SOFNN is comprised of five 
layers (Figure 4) that include an input layer, ellipsoidal basis 
function (EBF) layer, normalised layer, weighted layer and 
output layer. The EBF layer neurons do not need to be pre-
configured as they are organised by the network 
automatically. In this layer, neurons are added or pruned 
during the learning process to achieve an economical 
network size. With each EBF neuron being a T-norm of 
Gaussian membership function (MF) attributed to the 
networks inputs, the if-part of the fuzzy rule is observed. 
Also, MFs found to share the same centre during the 
learning process can be combined into a single function, 
which allows the network to reduce the overall number of 
rules created. The consequent then-part, upon being 
normalised in the third layer, is processed by the weighted 
layer. The weighted layer is fed by two inputs: one from the 
previous layer and the other from a weighted bias. The 
product of these layers translates as the output to the final 
layer that contains a single neuron representing a summation 
of all incoming signals. Further detailed information on the 
SOFNN’s online learning capability can be reviewed in 
[23]–[25]. 
4)  Nonlinear Autoregressive Moving Average with 
Exogenous Inputs: Another popular method used when 
attempting to model the nonlinear relationship between 
input and output (stimulus and response) is the Nonlinear 
Autoregressive Moving Average with Exogenous Inputs 
(NARMAX) approach. The modelling is achieved by 
representing the problem as a set of nonlinear difference 
equations and is an expansion of past inputs, outputs and 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

noise. Since its conception in 1981, the NARMAX 
modelling approach has come to represent a philosophy for 
nonlinear system identification consisting of the following 
steps [26]: 
1) Structure Detection: determine the terms within the 
model. 
2) Parameter Estimation: tune the coefﬁcients.  
3) Model Validation: analyse model to avoid overfitting. 
4) Prediction: output of the model at a future point in time.  
5) Analysis: analyse model performance and determine the 
underlying dynamics of the system. 
Determining the structure of the model is critical and 
there exists a range of possibilities to approximate the 
function including polynomial, rational and various ANN 
implementations [27]. The polynomial models offer the 
most attractive implementation concerning visual systems 
modelling, as they allow for the underlying dynamical 
properties of the system to be revealed and analysed. 
Further details on the NARMAX approach and how it is 
implemented with respect to biological vision data can be 
found in [18][25] 
B. Spike Timing Model 
1) Izhikevich Neuron: The Izhikevich (IZK) neuron 
model [11], which is both computationally efficient and 
variable in terms of response patterns, is used in this work 
as a method of spike generation. Variable response patterns 
can be initiated by configuring the parameters (𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐 and 
𝑑) of the IZK neuron, which can be set to obtain different 
types of neuronal responses, such as bursting, chattering or 
fast-spiking (Figure 5) that have been observed in real 
neurons [28].  
 
Figure 5. Small sample of spiking behaviours capable with the IZK neuron 
We envisage that such a range of behaviours will be 
useful for modelling RGCs and we find that a combination 
of Intrinsically Bursting and Regular Spiking behaviours 
performs best based on the visual inspection of the neuronal 
recordings from the electrophysiological experiments [29]. 
A full review of the biological behaviour of single neuron 
can be found in [3]. 
2) Parameter Tuning (Genetic Algorithm): A further 
improvement to the spike generation model was achieved 
through configuring the parameters of the model to best 
match the response patterns of the RGC. Given the range of 
possible combinations for each of the parameters in the IZK 
neuron, a genetic algorithm (GA) implemented from the 
DEAP toolbox [30] was utilised to search for the optimum 
parameters on the training data. As this method aims to tune 
a single IZK neuron as a one-time process, the GA is well 
suited as it is simple to implement and removes the need for 
manually tuning the parameters.  
To form the input of the GA, the real response was binned 
to form a spike rate and used to drive the IZK neuron. For 
one generation, the parameters for the neuron were drawn 
from a population size of 500 individuals using the 
tournament selection method, which involves running a 
tournament for several individuals and selecting the one 
with the best fitness for crossover or mutation. Each 
individual comprises the four parameters (a – d), which are 
randomly generated within the confines of each parameters 
limit as described by [11]. 
Finally, the evaluation of the neurons output is carried 
out using Dspike as the fitness function. Dspike [31] is a metric 
used as a numerical estimator of the similarity between the 
target (real) and estimated neural response. This algorithm 
essentially penalises a non-overlapping spike and/or 
penalises the necessity to insert a spike where if none exist 
in the estimated trace but does in the target response. Thus, 
Dspike is sensitive to the timing of the individual spikes and 
is calculated using a two-step process. The first step consists 
of inserting or deleting a spike to match the estimated spike 
train to the real spike train and involves a cost=1. The 
second step consists of moving a single spike and defines 
the sensitivity to spike timing. The cost associated with 
moving the spike is proportional to the time period by which 
the spike is moved. For example, if two spike trains A and B 
are identical except for a single spike that occurs at tA in A 
and tB in B, then c(A,B) = q|tA – tB| where c is the cost and q 
is a parameter specifying the cost per unit of time to move a 
spike. The Dspike can then be calculated as the total cost 
associated with the transformation path from A to B. If 
moving a spike by a time period 
 has the same cost 
as deleting it completely, it can be seen that the value of q 
determines the relative sensitivity of the metric to spike 
count and spike timing. In the implementation, a value of 
0.25 is selected for q corresponding to the size of time bins 
(four).  
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Spike Rate Estimation 
We present results for two cells from the data collected; one 
OFF type and one ON type. Table1 and Table 2 outline the 
results for the OFF and ON type respectively, which were 
obtained for the spike rate estimation, which constitutes the 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

first stage of the overall model. Results from machine 
learning methods were validated using 5-fold cross 
validation, with parameters selected using a grid search 
approach. Model accuracy is presented in terms of the 
RMSE between the predicted and actual binned spike rate. 
As observed, the BRNN and LN perform similarly with the 
BRNN presenting better training results for the ON type cell 
and both training and testing for the OFF type cell. 
Although the NARMAX and SOFNN do not perform quite 
as well as these two methods, they do provide the capability 
of analysing the underlying system dynamics to gain a better 
understanding of what is actually happening. This is because 
one can interpret both the fuzzy rules of the SOFNN [25] 
and the estimated polynomial function of the NARMAX 
[18] method. An overall performance increase in RMSE for 
all methods is observable for the novel dataset. As the dataset 
is comprised of the average of 43 trials, this increase can be 
attributed to the removal of noise in terms of naturally 
occurring spontaneous spikes [28]. Further analysis on these 
results are shown in Table 3, as an example, where a 
statistical t-test has been performed between the various 
methods employed to show that the difference between the 
BRNN and LN methods, when compared to the SOFNN and 
NARMAX methods is significant for the OFF type cell. The 
test is based on the errors observed between estimated spike 
rate versus the actual spike rate. A small p-value in this case, 
below 0.05 indicates that the difference in performance is 
significant. As observed, the p-values from this statistical test 
when comparing the LN and BRNN methods are high, 
indicating that both methods are similar thus the null 
hypothesis, that the errors observed in both are similar, cannot 
be rejected. However, when comparing either the LN or 
BRNN methods with the SOFNN or NARMAX, the p-values 
are below 0.05 indicating that the null hypothesis can be 
rejected as the difference in performance is significant.  
B. Spike Count Estimation 
The purpose of the spike count estimation within this 
work is to evaluate the performance of the GA in tuning the 
parameters of the IZK neuron. Each model (for both ON and 
OFF type cells) had the parameters tuned using 100 
generations of a population size of 500 using both crossover 
and mutation as forms of manipulation of the individuals. 
The resulting spike counts produced by both models are 
shown in Table 4. 
 
TABLE 1. SPIKE RATE ESTIMATION RESULTS FOR OFF TYPE CELL 
RMSE for OFF type cell 
Model 
Model Training/Testing on 
Non-repeated dataset 
Novel 
Dataset 
Training 
Testing 
Testing 
LN 
0.35 
0.35 
0.27 
BRNN 
0.34 
0.35 
0.27 
SOFNN 
0.36 
0.37 
0.30 
NARMAX 
0.35 
0.36 
0.28 
 
TABLE 2. SPIKE RATE ESTIMATION RESULTS FOR ON TYPE CELL 
RMSE for ON type cell 
Model 
Model Training/Testing on 
Non-repeated dataset 
Novel 
Dataset 
Training 
Testing 
Testing 
LN 
0.38 
0.38 
0.24 
BRNN 
0.37 
0.36 
0.23 
SOFNN 
0.39 
0.38 
0.27 
NARMAX 
0.39 
0.38 
0.25 
 
TABLE 3. COMPUTED P-VALUES FOR THE NOVEL DATASET FOR THE OFF 
TYPE CELL (TABLE 1). 
Model 
LN 
BRNN 
SOFNN 
NARMAX 
LN 
-- 
0.85 
0.0057 
0.00024 
BRNN 
0.85 
-- 
0.012 
0.0079 
SOFNN 
0.0057 
0.012 
-- 
0.70 
NARMAX 
0.00024 
0.0079 
0.70 
-- 
 
TABLE 4. SPIKE COUNT OF EACH RATE ESTIMATION METHOD AS A MEASURE 
OF THE GA’S PERFORMANCE. 
Model 
Spike Count 
 
OFF type cell 
ON type cell 
Actual Experimental 
(Average of 43 trials) 
41.16 
65.56 
LN 
37 
68 
BRNN 
41 
69 
SOFNN 
46 
77 
NARMAX 
47 
69 
As illustrated in Table 4, the spike counts for both the 
ON and OFF type cells are similar to the average spike 
count of 43 trials pertaining to the real response for the LN 
and BRNN approaches. Resulting spike counts for the 
SOFNN and NARMAX approaches are not as accurate 
however; they provide better transparency in terms 
underlying model dynamics [25].  
 
TABLE 5. DSPIKE PERFORMANCE MEASURE OF THE TEMPORAL OUTPUT FOR 
EACH RATE ESTIMATION MODEL. 
Model 
OFF type cell 
ON type cell 
LN 
42.23 
63.38 
BRNN 
45.17 
62.14 
SOFNN 
51.33 
67.73 
NARMAX 
49.45 
66.03 
C. Temporal Coding 
The novel testing dataset, with the 43 repeated trials was 
used to test the spike generation performance. TABLE 55 
outlines the main results in terms of the Dspike metric, which 
indicate that the IZK neurons driven by both the BRNN and 
LN methods are the top performers with the LN driven 
neuron performing better for the ON type cell and the BRNN 
driven neuron performing better for the OFF type cell. Figure 6 
shows the predicted response plotted, for these two methods, 
in combination with a raster plot of all 43 individual trials for 
the OFF type cell.  
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 6. Raster plot of real neural response shown alongside the outputs of 
the LN and BRNN driven IZK neurons. 
Visual analysis indicates the predicted spikes correlate well to 
the overall real neural response in terms of periods of non-
activity and periods of burst activity. Both methods perform 
almost identically except for the initial spikes that were 
missed by the LN approach and picked up by the BRNN 
approach. This negligible difference, which was absent within 
the spike rate estimation results, could be attributed to the 
Dspike configuration where the moving of a spike is only 
allowed if the spike, to be moved, resides within 4 time steps 
of its intended location, otherwise it must be deleted and 
reinserted. In terms of cost, this means that the deletion and 
reinsertion of a spike for the BRNN approach equates to 2 
points whilst with the LN approach, there is only the need for 
a spike insertion. Also worth noting is that the IZK neurons 
driven by any method will retain repeatability in terms of 
producing the same spike trains each time. Since the IZK 
model is deterministic in nature, it lacks the ability to 
accurately reflect the random variability inherent in real 
biological systems, often observed as variations in spike times 
from trial to trial [3]. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, an investigation into the creation of a two-
stage temporal coding model has been presented where first a 
spike rate is estimated followed by a spike generation stage. 
The computational models reported for spike rate estimation 
were used to explore the development of a biologically 
plausible spike generation technique for spatio-temporal 
visual stimulus where the BRNN and LN methods were 
found to perform best though as the methods are opaque, 
further analysis of the underlying system dynamics is not 
possible. We evaluated the performance of the IZK neuron 
model cascaded with the spike rate estimation models and 
used both the spike count and Dspike metric as a measure of 
performance. The resulting temporal code, again for the 
BRNN and LN methods, compared well against the real 
output though it is noticeable that the performance of the 
spike generation method is directly related to the performance 
of the machine learning approaches in predicting the spike 
rate, as they are cascaded. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The research leading to these results has received funding 
from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme 
(FP7-ICT-2011.9.11) 
under 
grant 
number 
[600954] 
(“VISUALISE”). The experimental data contributing to this 
study have been supplied by the “Sensory Processing in the 
Retina” research group at the Department of Ophthalmology, 
University of Gӧttingen as part of the VISUALISE project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Shah and M. D. Levine, “Visual information processing in 
primate cone pathways. I. A model,” Sys., Man, and Cybern., 
vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 259–274, 1996. 
[2] T. Gollisch, “Throwing a glance at the neural code: rapid 
information transmission in the visual system.,” HFSP J, vol. 3, 
no. 1, pp. 36–46, 2009. 
[3] W. Gerstner and W. Kistler, Spiking neuron models: Single 
neurons, populations, plasticity. Cambridge Uni. press, 2002. 
[4] J. D. Victor and K. P. Purpura, “Nature and precision of 
temporal coding in visual cortex: a metric-space analysis,” J. of 
neurophysiology, vol. 76, no. 2, pp. 1310–1326, 1996. 
[5] J. Keat, P. Reinagel, R. C. Reid, and M. Meister, “Predicting 
every spike: a model for the responses of visual neurons,” 
Neuron, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 803–817, 2001. 
[6] V. Uzzell and E. Chichilnisky, “Precision of spike trains in 
primate retinal ganglion cells,” J. of Neurophysiology, vol. 92, 
no. 2, pp. 780–789, 2004. 
[7] R. Van Rullen and S. J. Thorpe, “Rate coding versus temporal 
order coding: what the retinal ganglion cells tell the visual 
cortex.,” Neural Comput, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 1255–83, 2001. 
[8] J. W. Pillow, L. Paninski, V. J. Uzzell, E. P. Simoncelli, and E. 
Chichilnisky, “Prediction and decoding of retinal ganglion cell 
responses with a probabilistic spiking model,” J. of 
Neuroscience, vol. 25, no. 47, pp. 11003–11013, 2005. 
[9] T. Gollisch, “Estimating receptive fields in the presence of 
spike-time jitter.,” Network, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 103–29, 2006. 
[10] P. Vance, S. Coleman, D. Kerr, G. Das, and T. McGinnity, 
“Modelling of a retinal ganglion cell with simple spiking 
models,” IJCNN, 2015, pp. 1–8. 
[11] E. M. Izhikevich, “Simple model of spiking neurons,” IEEE 
Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1569–1572, 2003. 
[12] E. J. Chichilnisky, “A simple white noise analysis of neuronal 
light responses.,” Netw., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 199–213, 2001. 
[13] J. Liu and T. Gollisch, “Spike-Triggered Covariance Analysis 
Reveals Phenomenological Diversity of Contrast Adaptation in 
the Retina,” PLoS Comput Biol, vol. 11, no. 7, 2015. 
[14] T. Gollisch and M. Meister, “Rapid neural coding in the retina 
with relative spike latencies,” Science (80-. )., vol. 319, no. 
5866, pp. 1108–1111, 2008. 
[15] D. Kerr et al., “A biologically inspired spiking model of visual 
processing for image feature detection,” Neurocomputing, vol. 
158, pp. 268–280, 2015. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[16] O. Schwartz et al. “Spike-triggered neural characterization,” J. 
Vision, vol. 6, no. 4, p. 13, 2006. 
[17] S. Ostojic and N. Brunel, “From spiking neuron models to 
linear-nonlinear models,” PLoS Comput. Biol, vol. 7, no. 1, 
2011. 
[18] D. Kerr, M. McGinnity, and S. Coleman, “Modelling and 
Analysis of Retinal Ganglion Cells Through System 
Identification,” NCTA, 2014. 
[19] S. Haykin, “Neural Networks, A comprehensive Foundation 
Second Edition by Prentice-Hall,” 1999. 
[20] F. D. Foresee and M. T. Hagan, “Gauss-Newton approximation 
to Bayesian learning,” in Neural Netw., 1997., International 
Conference on, 1997, vol. 3, pp. 1930–1935. 
[21] D. J. Livingstone, Artificial Neural Networks: Methods and 
Applications. Humana Press, 2008. 
[22] E. Lughofer, Evolving fuzzy systems-methodologies, advanced 
concepts and applications, vol. 53. Springer, 2011. 
[23] G. Leng, G. Prasad, and T. McGinnity, “A new approach to 
generate a self-organizing fuzzy neural network model,” in 
Sys., Man and Cybern., 2002, vol. 4, p. 6–pp. 
[24] G. Leng, G. Prasad, and T. M. McGinnity, “An on-line 
algorithm for creating self-organizing fuzzy neural networks,” 
Neural Netw., vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 1477–1493, 2004. 
[25] S. McDonald et al. “Modelling retinal ganglion cells using self-
organising fuzzy neural networks,” IJCNN, 2015, pp. 1–8. 
[26] S. A. Billings, Nonlinear system identification: NARMAX 
methods in the time, frequency, and spatio-temporal domains. 
John Wiley \& Sons, 2013. 
[27] S. A. Billings and D. Coca, “Identification of NARMAX and 
related models,” Research Report, Uni. Sheffield, 2001. 
[28] T. Trappenberg, Fundamentals of computational neuroscience. 
OUP Oxford, 2009. 
[29] S. Mittman et al. “Concomitant activation of two types of 
glutamate receptor mediates excitation of salamander retinal 
ganglion cells.,” J. of Physiology, vol. 428, p. 175, 1990. 
[30] F. Fortin et al. “DEAP: Evolutionary algorithms made easy,” J. 
Mach. Learn. Research, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 2171–2175, 2012. 
[31] J. D. Victor and K. P. Purpura, “Metric-space analysis of spike 
trains: 
theory, 
algorithms 
and 
application,” 
Network: 
computation in neural systems, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 127–164, 
1997. 
  
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

