Basic Study for Human Brain Activity Based on the Spatial Cognitive Task 
Shunji Shimizu / Tokyo University of Science, Suwa 
Department of Electric Systems Engineering 
Chino-city, Japan 
shun@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp 
Noboru Takahashi/ Tokyo University of Science, Suwa 
Research course of Engineering/Management 
Chino-city, Japan 
jgh10614@ed.suwa.tus.ac.jp 
Hiroyuki Nara/ Hokkaido University 
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology 
Sapporo-city, Japan 
nara@ssc.ssi.ist.hokudai.ac.jp  
Hiroaki Inoue/ Tokyo University of Science, Suwa 
Research course of Engineering/Management  
Chino-city, Japan 
jgh10603@ed.suwa.tus.ac.jp
Yukihiro Hirata/ Tokyo University of Science, Suwa 
Department of Electric Systems Engineering 
Chino-city, Japan 
yhirata@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp 
 
Abstract—    Recently, there is a need to develop a new assist 
system which acts for car driving and wheelchair for the 
elderly and disability person as the population grows older. In 
terms of developing a new system, examining human spatial 
recognition has important implications. And so, we pay 
attention to spatial perception, especially left and right ones    
and differences in brain activity between right and left 
perception. The final goal of our research measuring brain 
activity is to contribute to developing of welfare robots with 
functions that are responsive like human. So, we have 
performed experiments for investigating human spatial 
perception by measuring brain blood flow when subjects 
perform driving tasks. In previous experiment, we measured 
brain activity when T-junctions were shown to subjects using 
driving movies. In this time, we performed experiment in 
which brain activities were measured during actual car driving. 
We    are reporting on these analysis result and comparison 
result between virtual one and actual one. 
Keywords- spatial cognitive task; NIRS; determing direction 
during car driving 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Human can determine his movements and behaviors 
relative to his environment. In addition, he recognizes a new 
location and decides what behavior to take. It is important to 
examine the human spatial perception for developing 
autonomous robots or automatic driving. 
The relation of the theta brain waves to the human spatial 
perception was discussed in [1][2]. For example, when 
human perceives space that surrounds him, he tries to decide 
the next action in a maze and the theta brain waves saliently 
appear. This means we have a searching behavior to find a 
goal at an unknown maze. From the side of human 
navigation, Maguire et al. measured the brain activations 
using complex virtual reality town [3]. But, each task was 
notional and the particulars about the mechanism that 
enables humans to perceive space and determine direction is 
yet unknown. From researches we performed, there were 
significant differences at dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in left 
hemisphere in turning a steering wheel at T-junction 
[4][5][6]. 
Brain activities concerned with cognitive tasks during car 
driving have been documented [7]. For example, there was a 
report about brain activity when disturbances were given to 
subjects who manipulated driving simulator. Then power 
spectra were increased in beta and theta bands. However, 
there is little report on the relationship between right and left 
perception and driving task. It is well known that higher 
order processing is done such as of memory, judgment, 
reasoning, etc in the frontal lobe [8].  
We try to grasp mechanism of information processing of 
the brain by analyzing data on human brain activity during 
car driving. The goal of this study is to find a way to apply 
this result to new assist system with human motions. To 
achieve the goal, we try to examine the brain activity of 
frontal lobe, which related to behavioral decision-making, 
from the viewpoint of human spatial perception. As a first 
step, we measured the brain activity of frontal lobe relevant 
to right and left perceptions during car driving. Furthermore, 
the brain activity is to be measured and discussed about the 
mechanism of information processing of the brain by 
analyzing experimental data concerning human brain activity 
during car driving using NIRS (Near Infrared Spectroscopy). 
II. 
EXPERIMENTS 
A. Brain activity on driving movie is shown 
The subjects for this experiment were eight males aged 
22 to 24. The average age was 22.7 and the age of standard 
deviation was 0.74. All of the subjects were right handed. 
They were asked to read and sign an informed consent 
regarding the experiment. 
NIRS (Hitachi Medical Corp ETG-100) with 24 channels 
(sampling frequency 10 Hz) was used to record the density 
148
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

of 
oxygenated 
hemoglobin 
(oxy 
hemoglobin) 
and 
deoxygenated hemoglobin (de oxy hemoglobin) in the 
frontal cortex area. 
Driving movie for the experiment was recorded from a 
moving car, in which two T-junctions were included. In 
addition, there was a road sign with directions in the second 
scene. We used nine kinds of movies in about one minutes. 
Before showing the movie, subjects were taught directions 
turning to the right or left at the first T-junction. They were 
also taught the place which was on the road sign at the 
second T-junction. They had to decide the direction when 
they looked at the road sign. They were asked to push a 
button when they realized the direction in which they were to 
turn. Subjects took a rest during 10 seconds at least with their 
eyes close before movies were shown and they viewed the 
image after that. Finally, subjects took a rest again. The brain 
activity was recorded from the first eyes-closed rest to the 
last eyes- close rest. 
Here, we defined Tasks A, B, and C; Tasks A and C were 
proposed as the same experiment tasks and subjects had to 
push the button. In tasks B, other operation was added. It was 
the operation that the steering wheel was turned in the 
direction of destination when subjects realized it. 
For this experiment, driving movies were displayed on a 
HMD (Head Mounted Display). The PC emitted a trigger 
pulse at the start of the eyes-closed rest and driving movie. 
Then, NIRS was recorded the brain activity, the trigger pulse 
from PC and the pulse from the button pushed at the second 
T-junction. 
Subjects were seated in car seat. Then they were fitted 
with the NIRS probe and the HMD. They were covered with 
black cloth to shut out the light from outside. 
B. Brain activity on handling motion 
In this experiments, measurements were performed by f-
NIRS (Functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy ) made by 
SHIMADZE Co. Ltd with 44ch. Five subjects were a healthy 
male in their 20s, right handed with a good driving history. 
The subject was asked to perform simulated car driving, 
moving their hand in circles as if handling a steering wheel. 
A PC mouse on the table was used to simulate handling a 
wheel, and NIRS (near-infrared spectroscopy) was used to 
monitor oxygen density changes in the subjects’ brain.  
NIRS irradiation was performed to measure brain 
activities when the subject sitting on a chair drew a circle 
line of the right/left hand 1) clockwise, and 2) 
counterclockwise. The part of measurement was the frontal 
lobe. The subject was asked to draw on the table a circle 30 
cm in diameter five times consecutively, spending four 
seconds per a circle. The time design was rest (10 seconds at 
least), task (20 seconds), rest (10 seconds). 
C.  Brain activity on car driving 
In general roads, experiments were performed by taking 
f-NIRS in the car, and measured the brain activity when 
subjects drove on designed road including intersections.  
In this experiment, two kinds of measurements were 
performed. At first experiment, there were two intersections. 
And subjects were told to turn the right or left in first 
intersection. In addition, they were told to read the road map 
and judge the turning direction in the second intersection. 
And subjects were enlightened about turning direction before 
measurement. They were also taught the place on which the 
road sign was at the second T-junction. And, they were given 
the place where they have to go. So, they had to decide the 
direction when they looked at the road sign. Six subjects 
were a healthy male in their 20s, right handed with a good 
driving history.  Subjects close their eyes for 10 seconds at 
least, and drove the car for 600 seconds. Three patterns were 
prepared for the task pattern.  
Next, we performed second experiment to conduct 
verification about above experiment and increase number of 
subjects. We performed additional experiment which was 
achieved in a similar way. In this experiment, measuring and 
analyzing method was performed in same way, but 
experimental courses were different. Subjects were twelve 
males who were all right-handed. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULT 
A. Brain activity on driving movie is shown 
For task A and C, the subjects were informed direction 
by suggested movie, and they let decided which way to turn 
under the road sign. After first T-junction, they were to push 
the button when they realized the direction at second 
direction. In task B, they performed other task, turning the 
steering wheel actually in concert with suggested movie. 
The hemoglobin variation was compared in the results of 
Tasks A and B, A and C to see the brain activity pertaining 
to spatial perception during the same movie. 
Equation (1) was used to compare the data. τ1 was set 
the time as its length was 1 second before being pushed the 
button. Similarly, τ2 was set in a way similar to τ1. And xi 
(t) indicates variation of i channel oxy hemoglobin or deoxy 
hemoglobin. We then took a average of xi(t) through τ1 and 
τ2. In this situation, i of the defined c (i) was the channel for 
the brain activity. Because of the sampling frequency was 
set on 10 Hz, we calculated 10 times per sec. 
∑
∑
−
=
1
2
)
(
)
(
( )
1
2
τ
τ
τ
τ
i
i
x
x
c i
          (1) 
A comparison was made between the situations in which 
the steering wheel was turned and when it was not. Figure 1 
is the calculation result of oxy-Hb.  
 The next step was to calculate the average of all 
subjects. Figure 2 shows the results. This might have 
occurred when they realized direction from a road sign. In 
addition, the results indicated a greater increase when the 
subjects turned the steering wheel. That indicated 
observation of brain activity has been made during 
movement based on spatial perceptions. 
On the whole, the variation in de-oxy hemoglobin was 
smaller than in the oxy hemoglobin. However, there was a 
great increase in Channel 18. This might be the variation 
based on the spatial perceptions. 
Next, differences were investigated concerning the 
subject’s brain activity. The First case was when the vision 
was directed after having been told the direction.  
149
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Channel
deoxy Hb[mmol・mm]
Task AB
Task AC
Figure 2.  Compared between turrning the steering wheel and not (oxy Hb of subject A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Second case was when the vision was directed after 
having been told the direction gone to the direction which 
the subjects decided where to go from a road sign. d1 and d2 
shown in Fig. 3 are defined as below. d1 is the variation of 
hemoglobin turning at the first T-junction. And d2 is 
variation of hemoglobin at the second one. From the 
measurement result, d1 and d2, all of the 269 times of each 
subject, 
there 
were 
significant 
differences 
in 
oxy 
hemoglobin 3ch. (p < 0.02: paired t test) and 20ch (p < 0.03) 
using NIRS. 
Subjects pushed a button before turning at the second T-
junction, so it influenced brain activities. The possibility of a 
correlation between d2 and the time until the movie was 
turned at the second T-junction after each subject pushed a 
button was investigated. Each correlation coefficient of 
hemoglobin channel was calculated. There was significant 
difference at only de-oxy hemoglobin 10ch. (p < 0.07) using 
paired t-test. In only this result, the relationship between 
pushing a button and d2 cannot be judged. 
B. Brain activity on and handling motion 
During the motion, the increase of oxy hemoglobin 
density of the brain was found in all subjects. The different 
regions of the brain were observed to be active, depending 
on the individual. The subjects were to be observed 1) on  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
starting, and 2) 3-5 seconds after starting moving their 3) 
right hand 4) left hand 5) clockwise 6) counterclockwise. 
Although some individual variation existed, the result 
showed the significant differences and some characteristic 
patterns.  
The obtained patterns were shown as follows. Regardless 
of 1), 2), 3) and 4) above, the change in the oxy hemoglobin 
density of the brain was seen within the significant 
difference level 5% or less in the three individuals out of all 
five subjects. The part was the adjacent part both of left pre-
motor area and of left prefrontal cortex. Especially, in the 
adjacent parts of prefrontal cortex, a number of significant 
difference was seen among in four out of five subjects. 
Next more emphasis was put on the rotation direction: 5) 
clockwise or 6) counterclockwise. No large density change 
was found in the brain with all the subjects employing 6). 
But the significant difference was seen in four out of five 
subjects employing 5) (Fig. 4). It is well known that in the 
outside prefrontal cortex higher order processing is done 
such as of behavior control. It was inferred that the pre-
motor area was activated when the subjects moved the hand 
in the way stated above because the pre-motor area was 
responsible for behavior control, for transforming visual 
information, and for generating neural impulses controlling. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Channel
oxy Hb[mmol・mm]
Task AB
Task AC
Figure 1.  Result from subject A of task A 
Turn at 1st T-junction
Turn at 2nd T-junction
d1
d2
0.5s
0.5s
0.5s
0.5s
Time
Hb
Figure 3.  Define variation of hemoglobin d1 and d2 
150
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.  Brain activity on car driving 
At the first, Hb-oxy was increased in overall frontal lobe 
after start of operation. This tendency was common among 
subjects. After that, Hb-oxy was decreased as subjects 
adjusted to driving the car. This meant that the brain activity 
changed from collective to local activities.  
In this experiment, being considered time as zero when 
subjects turned a steering wheel. The analysis was performed 
one-sample t-test within the significant difference level 5% 
or less between zero and about four seconds after turning. 
As the results, there were significant differences around  
#46 area of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the 
premotor area of the left hemisphere brain at the turn left 
(Figure 5: red circles).     
Around #46 area was corresponded to working memory. 
In additional experiment, analysis was conducted using same 
method, too. In this regard, we analyzed in both orders for 
confirming to be sequence-independent on the presence or 
absence of road sign (Figure 5: pink circles). 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The hemoglobin density change of the human subjects’ 
frontal lobe was partly observed in the experiments we 
designed, where three kinds of tasks were performed to 
analyze human brain activity from the view point of spatial 
perception. 
The NIRS measures of hemoglobin variation in the 
channels suggested that human behavioral decision-making 
of different types could cause different brain activities as we 
saw in the tasks:  1)  taking a given direction at the first T-
junction,  2) taking a self-chosen direction on a road sign at 
the second T-junction and 3) turning the wheel or not. Some 
significant differences (paired t test) on NIRS’s oxy-
hemoglobin and less interrelated results between “pushing a 
button” and brain activity at the second T-junction are 
obtained.  
Furthermore, experimental results indicated that with the 
subjects moving their hand in circle, regardless of right or 
left, 1) the same response was observed in the prefrontal 
cortex and premotor area, and 2) different patterns of brain 
activities generated by moving either hand clockwise or 
counterclockwise.  
The regions observed were only those with the 5% and 
less significance level. Possible extensions could be applied 
to other regions with the 10% and less significance level for 
the future study. With a larger number of subjects, brain 
activity patterns need to be made clear. In addition, it is 
thought to take particular note of participation concerning 
working memory when car is driven.  
From results of these experiments, there was significant 
difference around working memory. So, experiments 
focusing on relationship turning wheel and working memory 
will be performed. On the other hand, experiments as to 
actual driving were required a broad range of perception and 
information processing. Especially, subjects had to determine  
behaves depending on various information at T-junctions, 
that is, the color of the traffic light, presence or absence foot 
passengers and so on. And so, we plan to perform more static 
experiments. we attention to differences on the basis of 
turning direction and dominant hand. In addition, we will 
conduct the experiments in which subjects were narrowed 
down to left-handedness. Furthermore, researches into other 
human brain activities than spatial perception are to be 
necessary with accumulated data from fMRI, EEG, etc. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M.J. Kahana, R. Sekuler, J.B. Caplan, M. Kirschen, and J.R. Madsen: 
“Human theta oscillations exhibit task dependence during virtual 
maze navigation.” Nature, vol. 399, 1999, pp. 781-784. 
[2] N. Nishiyama and Y. Yamaguchi: "Human EEG theta in the spatial 
recognition task", Proceedings of 5th World Multiconf. On Systemics, 
Cybernetics and Informatics (SCI 2001), Proc. 7th Int. Conf. on 
Information Systems, Analysis and Synthesis (ISAS 2001), pp. 497-
500 (2001). 
[3] E.A. Maguire, N. Burgess, J.G. Donnett, R.S.J. Frackowiak, C.D. 
Frith, and J.O. Keefe: "Knowing Where and Getting There: A Human 
Navigation Network," Science, vol. 280, 1998, pp. 921-924. 
[4] S. Shimizu, N. Hirai, and F. Miwakeichi: "Fundamental Study for 
Relationship between Cognitive task and Brain Activity during Car 
Driving," Proc. the 13th International Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction, (San Diego, CA, USA, 2009), Springer Berlin / 
Heidelberg, pp. 434-440. 
[5] N. Takahashi, S. Shimizu,Y. Hirata, H. Nara, F. Miwakeichi, N. Hirai, 
S. Kikuchi, E. Watanabe, and S. Kato: "Fundamental Study for a New 
Assistive System during Car Driving," Proc. International Conference 
on Robotics and Biomimetics, 2010, China. 
[6] N. Takahashi, S. Shimizu, Y. Hirata, H. Nara, F. Miwakeichi, N. 
Hirai, S. Kikuchi, E. Watanabe, and S. Kato: "Fundamental Study for 
a New Assistive System during Car Driving," The 28th Annual 
Conference of Robotics Society of Japan, 2011 
[7] Chin-Teng Lin, Shi-An Chen, Tien-Ting Chiu, Hong-Zhang Lin, and 
Li-Wei Ko: "Spatial and temporal EEG dynamics of dual-task driving 
performance." Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation,  vol. 
8-11, 2011. 
[8] J. Cockburn: "Task interruption in prospective memory: “A frontal 
lobe function?." Cortex, vol. 31, 1995, pp. 87- 97. 
Figure 5.  Significant differences at T-junctions in left direction 
Figure 4.   Brain activity (clockwise) 
151
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

